AN ARROW Against the Separation OF THE Brownists. Also an ADMONITION TOUCHING
Talmudique and Rabbinical allegations.

By JOHN PAGET.

Printed at Amsterdam,

By GEORGE VESELER, dwelling by the South-Church, at the sign of the HOPE.
ANNO M.DC.XVIII.

To the Christian Reader.
OF those that separate from the Church of God, there are many sorts: Though
the Brownists assume unto themselves the title of Separation, and call
themselves the Ioh. Smyth, Differences, Title. Hen. Ainsvv. Defense against Mr.
Sm. p. 1.
Churches of the Separation, yet is not this title sufficient to distinguish
them; Separation being common to so many.

Of the Brownists also there are sundry sects: Some Christian plea, pa. 216.
217.
separate from the Church of England for corruptions; and yet confess both it
and Room also to be a true Church, as the followers of Mr. Johnson: Some
Iustific. p. 339. 340. 247.
renounce the Church of England as a false Church; and yet allow Relig. com. p.
1, etc.
private communion with the godly therein, as Mr. Robinson and his followers:
Some Counterpoy. page 197.
renounce all Religious communion both public and private with any member of
that Church whosoever, as Mr. Ainsworth and such as hearken unto him, being
deepest and stiffest in their Schism. The evil of this separation is great:
First, the minds of many are troubled and distracted hereby; even of such as
do not separate, but have some liking thereof; especially if it be true which
Mr. Robinson writes of them, to wit; that they Relig. comm. prefac. *iij.
seeing it not to be for their purposes, that the world should so esteem of
them, do undoubtedly streyn and wring the neck of their consciences and
courses, to look the contrary way, etc. What can be more miserable then to
have the necks of consciences thus broken by the doctrine of separation?
Secondly, for those that separate but do not yet join unto the^, or being
joined do withhold from actual communion, living alone and hearing the word of
God in no Church, as some do; how great is their misery also? Mr. Robinson
himself Ibid. page 36. -- 39.
shows it at large, noting them to be Idol-members, such as break the
commandment of Christ, loose the fruit of his ascension, and fayl their own
edification and salvation many ways, etc. Thirdly, for those that being joined
unto them do also live with them, seeing they have in effect excommunicate
themselves from all other Churches of Christ, and consequently from the
fellowship of Christ Jesus himself and from the participation of his grace and
glory so far as he reveals the same by dwelling in those Churches: It is
therefore no wonder to hear Mr. Johnson Treat. on Mat. 18. prefac. A. 2.
complaining of the evilles among them, as Emulation, debate and other sins
which daily arise and spread themselves to the great dishonor of God, etc.
Fourthly, for further and greater evilles into which they are given up; it is
apparent that three or four hundred of the Brownists have brought forth more
Apostate Anabaptists and Arians sometimes in one year then ten thousand
members of the Reformed Dutch Church in this city, have done in ten years or
more, though tempted and compassed about with seducers as much as any other.
And this I may justly witness for the time of my abode in this Amsterda^.
place, where I have ordinarily been present in the Classical assemblies, and
seen the number of such as have fallen away, so far as is known unto the
ministers hereof. And many other are the scandalles of this schism, both
toward them without and against the Reformed Churches whose communion they
disclayme. My purpose at this time is to defend the lawful communion of that
particular congregation, whereof I am a minister: Reason and Religion 1. These.
4.11 Act. 20.28. 2 Pet. 5.2.
require that we should first look unto our own estate, and to the flock that
depends upon us. This controversy being first discussed, I doubt not but the
lawfulnes of communion with the Church of England, will in great measure be
manifested hereby, and a way prepared for them that are yet in error to
discern the same. Mr. Ainsworth in his writings against me does very often
appeal unto and call for the Judgment of the Reader; herein I agree with him
and do therefore also publish and present these things unto the view of
Christian Readers: and have divided his last writing into Sections, not leaving
out (to my knowledge) any one of his words; for their help that would compare
things together, and so judge the more perfectly. The God of all grace bless
these weak endeavors to the praise of his holy name and comfort of his people.
Amen.

J. P.

AN ARROW AGAINST THE Separation of the Brovvnistes.
THe Occasion of this writing: whereas N. N. coming lately out of England into
the Low countries, desired to receive the Lords supper with us: she was upon
just occasion wished, first to procure a testimony of her conversation out of
England. And while she refused so to do, it was signified unto her, that she
could not be admitted for a member of the Church with us. After this also
falling into speech of marriage with one of the separation, she then began to
leave our assembly and went unto the meeting of the Brownistes, pretending
scruple of conscience about our use of the Lords prayer, as also about the
truth of our Church and ministry: and requested me both by her self and others
to deal with Mr. Ainsworth about these things. Here upon partly through her
request, and partly through other provocations, I wrote unto Mr. Ainsworth, as
follows.

Salutations in the Lord.
Mr. Ainsworth, I understand by diverse witnesses that I am often and odiously
provoked to confer with you, and in special by M. Baker who boasts much
against me, that I will not be brought to reason with you, that I dare not, that
that day will never be seen, etc. but for your self I think you have reason to
judge otherwise. This provocation is (as I hear) vehemently again renewed
this week by the same Mr, B. and this upon occasion of a certain maid who
pretends that she is troubled to join with our Church because of the use of
the Lords prayer among us; because of my calling unto this Church, whereof I am
a Minister, which calling he tells her is unlawful; and because there is no
difference betwixt us and the Church of England: concerning these particulars,
not mentioning as yet any other unto me she says that she desires satisfaction
by a conference betwixt you and me; If therefore you will take upon you to
prove that she has just cause to refuse the communion of our Church, either
for any of these 3 causes or afterward for any other if these will not serve,
I am ready by the grace of God to defend the contrary against you. And this I
am content to do, not for any desire that I have to bring her into the
communion of our Church, unless I could hear better testimony of her, then as
yet I have found; but to remoove offense, and to stop the mouths of such as
causelessly do insult against me and against the Church of God. To this end, if
either you require a more private conference and will take unto you, two or
three persons for witness, I am willing either to come unto you at your own
house or to wait for you at mine, taking also as many witnesses unto me. Or if
you please to set down in writing any arguments concerning these points above
mentioned, I am willing by writing also to give you an answer. Or if you desire
a more solemn and public disputation touching these things, I will not
refuse the same upon equal conditions, viz. that the arguments and answers may
be written; that some grave and judicious men may be present, who may both be
able to judge of things spoken and by their authority may better keep in order
the multitude that shall be present; that this meeting may be in convenient time
and place, etc.

July 12 N. st. 1617. JOHN PAGET.


Resalutations in the Lord.
Mr. Paget, I know not of any such provocation to conference as you write of,
neither know I the Woman that would join unto you. Wherefore if any thing pass
between you and me, your self shall unto me be the first provoker of it. And if
you desire it, I will not refuse: and it shall be at your own choice, whether by
word or writing, and what point or points you will confer about. As I love not
to begin controversy, so neither will I be wanting to do any good I can, to
you or any other: or to defend any point of truth which God has given me to
see and witness, when I am duly called thereunto. So rest I

yours in all Christian duty. The 12. of the 7. Month, 1617. Henr. Ainsworth.


Peace and truth from the Prince of Peace.
Mr. Ains. besides the provocation of your people, which you hold not to be a
sufficient cause of any thing passing between you and me, I take it that I am
by your self also much provoked, and that diverse ways; not only by your
general doctrine of separation, which is in it self a common provocation unto
all the Churches of Christ, and a beginning of controversy, but in special by
your particular mentioning of my name in your public congregation and
speaking against my calling, as formerly so also this last week again as I
hear: by speaking against the particular congregation whereof I am a Minister,
and condemning communion therewith by name: by causing such members of your
Church as have heard a Sermon in ours, to make public confession of their
fault, and to repent openly for the same: and further even by this your large
offer of conference either by word or writing, about what points I would, and
this to do me good, though for the present we take it, you have done us no good
but much evil and wrong in the particulars above mentioned.

Hereupon I am moved to desire you, according to your offer to set down in
writing your reasons to prove that the use of the Lords prayer among us; that
the unlawfulness of my calling; that our agreement with England: and that the
Temple where we meet for the worship of God are any just causes of refusing
communion with us. Since my last writing unto you, I hear that you alleged
the place of our assembling togather as a bar of communion unto that man,
against whom you presently threaten your censure for coming unto us; And
therefore I desire you to set down your reasons concerning this 4th matter
also, or any other of our wants which might keep you from communicating with
us. And having receyved your reasons I will also endevor by mine answer to do
you good, and if the Lord will to bring you unto the comfortable communion with
the Churches of Christ from all which you are yet a stranger: Then might you be
in truth, mine in all Christian duties, as you write, whereas now in many of
the Ps. 55.13.14. Act. 2.1.46 and. 3.1.
cheifest of them, you are not: Then should I also rejoice to be, in a greater
measure then I am, your loving brother in the Lord

July 18. 1617. John Paget.


The high way of the upright, is to depart from evil: He that keeps his way,
preserves his soul. Pro. 16.17.


I Have no reason, Mr. Paget, to hold that a sufficient provocation unto me,
which never was: none have ever solicited me to controvert with you, but now
your self. By our general doctrine of separation, you may freely (I confess)
take occasion to deal, if you can disprove it: but our doctrine and proofs are
in public: so you might have had reasons from thence, to reply upon as you saw
good, you needed not have called upon me for more. My particulier mentioning of
your Church and you, was necessary: being pleaded for by him that is now
falling from us. If you think you have cause to be moved herewith, you cannot
but think there was like cause offered us by you: whiles you debarr aged Mr. P.
from the Lords supper, (the greatest censure that you can lay upon him,)
because he, being no member of your particular congregation but of the church
of England, comes sometime to hear Gods word in our church. Yea more, whiles
you keep that Religious young man I. S. from your communion, as is said, because
he holds it in his judgment that he may hear us: though he told you he had
never done it, neither purposed to do it: yet for not promising absolutely not
to do it, he is said to be repelled. I suppose a man shall scarcely find such
measure at the hands of any Bishop, minister or court in England.

Whereas you take it I have done you no good, but much evil and wrong: I have
learned to bear such imputations with comfort, because they are unjust. It is
the best good, if men would so accept it, to have their aberrations manifested.
Your church continues one with the church of England: for proof, (besides the
public doctrine among you, which proclaims us for schismatiks, and the daily
profession which your members make), I report me to that charitable libell
which C. Lawn, I. Fowler and others, with their penman, have printed amongst
you. There, in the title, they profess to be returned into the bosom of the
Church of England their true mother. Now they suck the breasts of your church,
and in the bosom thereof they most of them rest, and some of them have stood in
election to ^eare office among you: so there will be found an unity between the
Daughter and Mother. And if we may blame men for returning to the one, (as our
public writings yet unanswered do prove:) then for the other, I assure my
self they will not be found innocent. And we in reproving the man who falling
back unto you, professed to do the like in the assemblies of England if he
were there: have done no wrong to you or them.

Whereas you desire me, according to my offer (as you say) to set down in
writing my reasons, etc. I answer, such offer I made you none, that I would set
down my reasons either in word or writing. It is you that call me into this
field, and in reason you should therefore give the first onsett. You had your
choice to do it by word or writing, I being ready to defend by either. Now you
choose writing; I accept it: if you had set down your reasons, I would have
given you an aswer unto them. But when we have published so many reasons, in
that one book of our Apology (besides others) yet unanswered: it is strange
that you call for more. You need not want matter to work upon, out of that
little book: and our other imployme^ts, little need to be called away, to write
again reasons unto particular persons, when we have set forth so many in
public. Yet now to satisfy your desire, I set you down this. That separation
which is only from syn, and communion therewith, is of God, and is al good
men's duty: But our separation is only from syn, and communion with syn:
wherein we were entangled in your mother church: Therefore our separation is of
God, etc.
The first proposition is proved by the ten Commandments, which forbid all
syn, Exodus 20. and by the Apostles doctrine, which forbids all communion with
syn: Ephesians. 5.11. 2. Cor. 6.14.15.16. The second is proved thus. The things which
we have separated from, are;

1. An humane Leitourgie, translated out of the Popes masse-book, a read and
dead service which we were constreyned to offer unto God, in sted of his
spiritual worship: wherein also we were bound to observe many other Romish
traditions: to keep holy days which God never sanctified: to have the sign of
the cross, gossips, etc. with Baptism: to kneel before bread and wine: to
hear vain, lying and apocryphal Jewish fables, read in the church in stead of
Gods word: with many other particular impieties. Against which Leitourgie, we
have set down many reasons in our Apology page 64. Posit. 9. and proofs of
the several branches thereof, by scripture.

2. The matter of that church; which was not taken of Saints only, (which
every Christian Church ought to be, as is proved in our Apolog. p. 44. posit 3.
and confirmed by reasons from the scriptures,) but was first gathered and still
continues of a mixed multitude and their seed: whereof the most part was
Popish, profane and wicked: who with the rest, were by humane laws forced to
be members of that church: as the public Acts and moniments show: and is
further proved and manifested to be sinful, in Iustific. of Separat. page 89.
90. 91. and 459. 460.

3. The form and order of that church, which is not the order set of God, (as
we show in our Apolog. page 60. Posit. 8. and the reasons annexed to the first
branch thereof,) but the order left by the Pope, in parishes, dioceses,
provinces, and all conjoined in a national church, with courts and governors
according. Disproved in Iustif. of Separ. p. 195. 196. 197.

4. The ministry of that church, both superior or governing, with their
courts and canons: and inferior or servile: which is not the ministry
appointed by Christ in Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. but a strange hierarchy
and ministry derived from Rome. Against which we have produced many
scriptures and reasons yet unanswered, in our Apol. Conf. art. 29. 30. 31. 32.
and after in page 46. pos. 5. and proofs of the later branches of the same.
Treat. of the Minist. against Mr. Hild. p. 98. -- 105.

From these and the like evils in that church, have we separated: not from any
truth or good thing that is in the same. With these synns we were defiled, and
could not but be defiled when we walked with that Church. Whereupon the
conclusion follows, that our separation was necessary, is of God, and the
duty of every one that would obey God.

These things, Mr. Paget, have been long since by us published, and by none
hitherto disproved: I allege them now as my proofs unto you to warrant our
separation, and do exspect your answer to the particular reasons in the places
cited, if you think good to controvert the cause with me, and would have me to
reply upon you. It is needless to set down any other, or more, til those be
refuted.

Now to your particulars.

1. You require my reasons, against the use of the Lords prayer among you.

I answer, I have not laid this as a cause of refusing communion with you: so
you have no reason to require this of me. We hold it good and holy, to use a
right any of the Lords prayers, or any words of scripture, or those or any of
those petitions taught us in Mat. 6. or Luke 11. in the words of either
Evangelist, or other words, as the Spirit of God (which helps us to pray,
Romans 8.) leads us to any of them. If thus you do, I blame you not. But if
after prayer by the Spirit, you read that part of scripture for a prayer, or
say it over by rote, as is the fashion of many: that I approve not, it being
neither the intendement of Christ, nor practice of his Apostles, that I can
find: and I desire your proofs from Gods word for so using it. What our
reasons are against that abuse, are to be seen in our Apology in Posit. 9.
thither I referr you. The chiefest thing that I mislike in you about prayer,
is: that whereas in December last, Mr. H. your fellow minister taught you and
your Church the truth openly, and condemned praying on books, as is reported:
you received not the truth, but opposed it, and do yet oppose it unto some
among you, that are troubled therabout. It had been your own duty to have
taught the people how to serve God aright: but to resist the truth when God
offreth it by your own brethren, is an heavy syn. The discussing hereof, will
fall out upon your answer given to the reasons which before I referred you
unto, in our Apology, concerning prayer.

2. About the lawfulnes of your ministry, that which I spoke (as occasion
then called me) was by way of inquiry: asking the man who is now declining
unto you, whether you do administer here, by virtue of that calling which you
had of the Bishops of England or have renounced it. And seeing he could not
tell, I pray your self to say, whether you still have or approve of that
ministry which the Bishop gave you, and the oath or promise which you made to
him, and do now administer wholly or in part by virtue thereof: and upon your
answer, I will show you in my next, what I mislike in your ministry, and upon
what ground. Secondly, the man supposing you had a new ordination here by the
Eldership of an other Church: we asked him warrant for it from God, which he
could not show. If therefore it be so with you, I desire your defense thereof by
the book of God: for I am yet ignorant, what authority the Eldership of one
Church has to make or ordeyn ministers in another: now that Apostels and all
extraordinary functions are ceased.

3. For your agreement with England, I have before showed from the work printed
among your selves, that the bosom of your church and of the Church of England
is one: so the reasons before noted, which warrant our separation from England
are a sufficient ground to keep us from you, til you bring a difference, and
show how you separate also.

4. For the Temple wherein you worship, which is as I take it, the Nuns
chapel, built for the worship of their breaden God and other idols: my reasons
against your use of it, I referr you to see in our Apology p. 75. Pos 12. and
the grounds from scriptures there alleged.

Other things there are, wherein you know we differ from you: as your keeping of
holy days besides the Lords days, and yet not half the holy days of the
Church of England. Marriage a civil duty, is performed by your ministry in
your Church. Your Eldership sits and judges matters apart from the
congregation: and this your court I suppose will find no better allowance by
the church or courts of England then does our church, which you count
schismatical. Of these things you may see your selves reproved and convicted in
our Apology aforesaid.

Finally, you shape your Church according to the time and place wherein you
live. In England your people use the communion Book, keep such holy days, have
such ceremonies, officers, courts, etc. as the law there commands: here you
are of an other seeming form, and use not the things which your mother church
requires. Now I hold, that the constitution, worship, ministry, government,
holy days of the Church should be uniforme, and not variable in every coast.
But to the things by you propounded, I have given answer, and directed you to
our reasons, which you may reply upon if you see cause. And if so you do: as
my leisure serves me, (who am for the present, employed in other affairs,
which I have undertaken with Gods help to perform with my most convenient
speed,) I will through Christ's assistance mainteyn them against you. God guide
you into the way of truth and peace.

The 25. of the 7. Month. 1617. Henr. Ainsworth.


Peace and truth from the Prince of Peace.
FOr answer unto your preface, I pray you consider, that The provocation I
spoke of, was of your people to me, and not to your self: Their provocation of
me, togather with the signification of my readiness thereupon to maintain the
lawfulnes of our communion against you, I supposed to have been a sufficient
cause of some thing passing between you and me though you thought otherwise as
appears in your first writing: so that you needed not now in this second
writing to have excused your self by such a provocation and soliciting of you,
as I never mentioned nor employed in my writing. But yet if provocations made
unto you, and earnest solicitations of you be sufficient cause and calling for
you to controvert, then have you cause and calling enough, being as I hear, so
earnestly and so publicly by the people of your own Church moved, and
solicited to defend your own opinion and practice against Mr. Robinson who
has in print reproved and condemned the same.

VVheras you confess that by your general doctrine of separation we may freely
take occasion to deal, etc. you do therein also confess that you are the
provoker and beginner of controversy, which yet in your first writing you say
you love not, and would still so feign remove the suspicion thereof from you.
And if thus your general doctrine give such free occasion, how much more does
your special condemning of particular churches by name, occasion and provoke
them to deal with you, though you think you had just reason so to do? I have
not denied neither do I deny but that our not admitting of such for members of
our congregation as would have liberty to hear in your Church as well as ours,
might be some occasion also to moove and provoke you to desire to deal with us
likewise hereabouts; but yet so, that still you are to be held the first
provokers who have first censured your people for coming to us and by name
openly condemned our Church and ministry, long before we refused Mr. P. and I.
Sh. upon this late occasion.

As for I. Sh. that unquiet and unstable young man he is not kept from our
communion, because he holds it in his judgeme^t that he may hear you: his
private judgment we would have allowed unto him, so that he would have walked
peaceably therein: but for his unpeaceable walking and breach of promise he was
refused by us: Besides conference with him for his conviction at diverse times,
there is also warrant and proof of this our dealing with him, given unto him
in writing and sent unto Mr. Brewer the special patron of this halting
practice and conversation, at whose urgent and importunate provocation, the
writing hereof was first granted, and since that time he has also a reply unto
the answer which he wrote: If either they or you which cry out so loud against
our dealing, can refute the same, you have occasion enough and liberty to do it.

In the meame time I do only ask this of you, whether you can with good
conscience admit them for members of your Church, who do profess they will hold
their liberty to hear those whom they and you acknowledge to be in schism,
and unjustly separate from the Church of Christ whereof they were members: for
so do both aged Mr. P. and I. Sh. judge of you. If you answer, no: Then how can
you with any equity exclame against us for that thing wherein your self agree
with us: as though such measure was offered by us as is scarcely to be found at
the hands of any Bp. minister or court in England, when as yet the same measure
is to be expected at your own hand? If you answer, yea: that you would admit
such: I doubt not but that your own writings may justly be brought against you
for your reproof, and conviction herein.

As for the commendation of your own patience, as having learned to bear with
comfort such imputations of wrong as we complain of; me thinks you make too
much have unto your own praise: whether our patience in bearing with comfort
your imputations of false Church, ministry and unlawful communion, etc. or
your patience in bearing with comfort our complaints of wrong herein, be
greater: let him that reads judge upon the issue of your writing, when it
appears how that best good of manifesting our aberrations unto us is performed
by you.

For proof that our Church continues one with the church of England, you
report your self to the charitable libel which C. La, I. Fowler and others with
their penman have printed, etc. For answer hereunto I would have you to
understand, 1. Mr. Clifton teacher in Mr. John's. his company.
The principal penman or scribe of the separation that has written most and
purposely against the book which you call a libel, has long since
acknowledged his fault for the same, and that under his hand in writing,
acknowledging the great fruit, that comes by publishing the personal sins of
them that continue in error: And thus by his repentance has made some
satisfaction for his offense, as in due time is further to be manifested. 2. As
for the other penmen which in their writings here and there have snatched at
the same book: there is for them an answer in readiness, to show that they the^
selves are extreemely guilty of that which they unjustly impute unto others:
and that the writings for their separation in respect of the manifold and
horrible slanders contained therein, may indeed justly be noted, as most
uncharitable Libels. 3. That part of the title objected by you, viz of
returning into the bosom of the church of England their true Mother with the
words going before, as also those that go immediately before their names, are
an addition foysted into the title by some falsifyer with out their consent or
knowledge: and thus your maine hint and ground of proving our Church to be one
with England, and consequently your devise to turn away the question from the
state of our congregation unto the Church of England and so to derive and
direct all your arguments thitherward is but a weak shift and stands upon a
mere forgery and therefore not to be admitted: If any ask how you should know
of this falsification: I answer, thus much was signified heretofore unto you in
that Declaration prefixed before the book written in defense of Mr. Brightma^
against the vain collections of Io. de Cluse your Elder. Besides other
falsifications there noted, they show that the title of their Book is doubly
increased by the publisher: and suppose it were doubtful unto you, which part
of the title was added, yet what godly wise man with out sinning against his
conscience could build such a pernicious consequence tending to the overthrow
of a Church upon so doubtful a conjecture? 4. Suppose those words had been
their own, yea suppose they had in plain words affirmed that which you would
infer from thence, viz. that our Church continues one with the Church of
England, and that there is an unity betwixt us, yet does not this hinder, but
that our Church is a distinct body from the Church of England: we are one with
them in the doctrine of faith and salvation, and the members of our Church do
not renounce the communion thereof but communicate with them as occasion is
given: And thus much is also done by other Reformed Churches who disallow your
course of separation, and embrace the bosom of the church of England, by
entertayning communion there with as fully as we do, when occasion is give^:
though both of us do testify against the corruptions thereof. They refuse not
to suck the breasts of the Church of England, but profess to do the like in the
assemblies of England, as that man does whom you reprove for declining to us.

Whereas you deny your offer of setting down your reasons either in word or
writing, etc: I have these reasons out of your first writing to make me think
otherwise. 1. I having signified my willingness to confer with you if you would
set down your reasons, etc. the sum of your answer is. Nothing shall pass
betwixt us except I be the first provoker, except I desire it, that then you
would not refuse: In my second writing I desired it, and so persuaded my self
you would have set down your reasons. 2ly., you wrote and promised at first
also that you would not be wanting to do any good you could unto me: therefore
seeing the setting down of reasons is a means of doing some good, I persuaded
my self you would do it if you could, when I desired the same. 3ly. You
professed at first, that you were mine in all Christian duty: therefore seeing
it is one Christian duty to set down our reasons for that which we hold the
truth being desired of them whose we are, I did thence also persuade my self of
this your kind offer. You object now, it is I that called you into this field
and should therefore in reason give the first onsett. I answer 1. It was I
indeed that first desired the same, but being first provoked by your people and
your self had just occasion so to do, as is showed before: 2ly. My calling you
into the field was not absolute and indefinite, but conditional and limited
after this manner if you will take upon you to prove, etc. If you please to set
down in writing any arguments, etc. upon your large offer I am moved to
desire, etc. Having received your reasons I will endeavor by my answer, etc.
Such a desire of conference as this is yields a quite contrary conclusion to
that which you would draw from the same.

You complain yet further, and think it strange, that when you have published
so many reasons in that one book of your Apology (besides others) yet
unanswered, we should call for more, etc. Hereunto I answer: 1. A great number
of the doctrines and reasons thereof contained in that book of your Apology are
revoked by Mr. Johnson himself the cheef Author thereof, as is by your self
acknowledged and by Profane Schis. of Bro. p. 79. 80.
others recorded: and is it not the^ a favor unto you to give you liberty and
occasion to set down your reasons again more warily and circumspectly as you
might see it expedient, that you should not need to recant and refute them your
self as the Author of this Apology has done? For this I deserved rather thanks
at your hands, then any blame. 2ly. many of those reasons in this Apology are
also set down very breefely and obscurely, not showing clearly wherein stands
the force of your collection from the Scriptures there alleged, so that in this
respect also, I had cause sufficient to desire you to set them down again to
avoid mistaking and trouble afterward in the examination thereof. 3ly. The
reasons written in your Apology are directed against the Church of England and
the ministry thereof: the reasons that I desired of you are such as you have
for your separation from our particular Church and the ministry thereof. And
who sees not then that for this regard especially I had reason to ask you for
new reasons.

TO come now unto your Syllogism, I deny your 2d. proposition, viz. that your
separation is only from sin, etc. For proof of this you do allege 4 things
that you separate from, viz. an humane leiturgie, translated out of the Popes
Masse-booke, etc. a mixed multitude forced to be members, etc. a Popish order
in Parishes, dioceses, etc. and a strange hierarchy, etc. Hereunto I answer;
First, suppose you did justly in separating from these 4. things, yet is not
your minor proved, viz that your separation is only from sin, and communion
with sin: you do not separate only from these things, but as you separate from
these Dutch and French reformed Churches, as appears both by the Example of
John de Cluse your Elder separating from the French Church, and by your
doctrine in defense of him: Answ. to Th. wh. p. 59. 26.
so also do you separate from our Congregation, and censure those of your
people that come unto us: this separation is not only from sin, and therefore
not of God, nor the duty of any good man, though you affirm it. As you are
bound by your own promise and express offer to deal with me about what point
or points I will: So are you again here bound by the cords of your own
syllogism, to prove your minor, that you separate from sin only. If therefore
you will deal either honestly and truly in respect of your promise, or
soundly and directly in respect of your argument, you must show us those sins
which are just causes of forsaking our Church: For those 4. things above
mentioned are not to be found in our Church.

Secondly, it is manifested unto you by Mr. Robinson, Relig. Comm. from pa. 1.
to page 17.
that your separation is not only from evil: but also from many good things
in that you separate from private communion with the godly in England: For this
cause he does justly rebuke and reprove you as wanting page 6.
Christian discretion; For confusion of judgment. For page 12.
unequal dealing to the godly; page 15.
For page 16.
looking at them only with the left eye: For ill-advisednes in throwing away
all at a venture for some evilles: For destroying the unity of the Spirit: For
your debarring men from their Christian liberty: and in sum for a dissembling
and hypocritical course denying that indeed, which in word is professed by
you: as if one should deem their friend a very honest man, but yet would
neither trust him, nor have otherwise to deal with him for a farthing. This
separation is not only from sin, and therefore not of God, nor the duty of any
good men. Thus he shows you how weak your second proposition is. For this he
brings many arguments and refutes your reasons to the contrary. You profess in
your first writing to me, that you will not be wanting to defend any point of
truth which God has given you to see and witness, etc. But what truth is in
your profession? If you hold it for truth, why do you not labor to defend it
being so justly called thereunto? If you see your error why do not you
acknowledge it, and give satisfaction unto Mr. Bernard against whom you have
witnessed Counterpoy. p. 197.
this point of private separation? But it appears, that as you have confessed
and affirmed, if private communion with the godly in England should be granted,
the public would also follow, Nota.
so you do yet still esteem it the greatest policy that you can use, to
devour and swallow up the rebuke that Mr. Robinson has laid upon you, and to
smother the matter, rather then by raking into it to raze the principles of
your separation, and so to endanger your whole cause. But as your self do
insult against Mr. John's. for his tergiversation in one point: so and much more
justly may Mr. Robinson. triumph over you for your tergiversation in this
matter, and say unto you in your own words: Animadvers. to Mr. Cl. advert. p.
60.
you wink and will not see it, you are mute and will not defend it, but wind
away to other things, etc.

Thirdly, as for your separation from the public estate and Communion with
the Church of England: because you do so often boast of your books and reasons
unanswered, even 4. or 5. times repeating it in this one leaf, I can not omit
to tell you, and to bring to your remembrance, that your error about this
public communion also has been by sundry men refuted and this in diverse
treatises both written and printed with yet remain unanswered: and as of old
heretofore, so of later time, you may see, by the Second Manuduction for Mr.
Robinson: by the unreasonableness of the separation: where whiles Mr. John's.
(whom it most concerns) does hold his peace, it lies next upon you who have
so often sent us unto the treatise refuted, and are by name called upon to defend
the same if you could. Also by A treatise written in defense of Communion with
the Church of England, one part whereof was so imperfectly published by Mr. B.
and has been long in the hands of your Elder Mr. Th. These with sundry other
both written and printed do remain unanswered. And by these it is manifested
that your separation is not only from sin, and communion therewith, and
therefore not of God.



Whereas you add, if after prayer by the Spirit, you read that part of
Scripture for a prayer or say it over by rote, as is the fashion of many: that
you approve not, etc. First, I desire you to explane what you mean by saying
it over by rote: if you mean, saying of it without understanding and feeling,
this we also condemn as well as you: But if your meaning be according to H.
Barow his slanderous and ungodly assertion, where speaking of concluding our
prayers with the Lords prayer, he dema^deth thus: Discov. page 73.
What can be more gross, Popish, Idolatrous, superstitious then this? Inquiry
page 23. 30. 31. 85.
Or if your meaning be the same with the erroneous answer to Mr. White
concerning this question where the use of the Lords Prayer as a prayer is so
often impugned by you: Then all the reasons alleged unto that purpose in your
Apology are insufficient. Our manner is as you cannot be ignorant ordinarily
before or after every Sermon or both to conclude our prayers with the Lord
prayer; after we have prayed by the help of the Spirit we persuade our selves
that we also conclude by the help of the same Spirit in this use of the Lord
prayer: If you call this, saying it by rote and hold it to be sin and a worship
not to be communicated with all, I pray you tell me plainly, and then I will
(godwilling) in my next writing give answer unto those Page 69. 70.
9 reasons in your Apology whereunto you refer me: for there is no soundnes or
truth in any of them.

Secondly, suppose we should say over the Lord prayer by rote even in that
worst sense, with out understanding and feeling, so as none can without injury
imagine of us: though this should be our greevous sin, so to utter it, yet
should it not be the sin of the people that join with us and therefore no just
cause of refusing communion with us: about this point only is our question,
and what you say beside the same is here impertinent.

You add yet further; The cheifest thing that I mislike about prayer in you
is: that whereas in December last, Mr. H. your fellow minister taught you and
your Church the truth openly and condemned praying on books: as is reported;
you receyved not the truth but opposed it, etc. Hereunto I answer: 1. The
report you heard is untrue in respect of the time of Mr. Hu. his preaching with
us; it was not in December last, but a whole twelve-moneth before. 2. Whereas
he spoke some things ambiguously in his Sermon touching set forms of prayer,
being spoken unto thereof by me before witnesses, he explaned himself thus,
that he did not condemn public set forms of prayer, but those only that
did content themselves therewith using no other prayer in private unto God; he
acknowledged that he had used the book of common prayer in England; and further
that he had offered still to read prayers out of the same book so that he might
enjoy his liberty to preach: when he perceyved how some understood his Sermon
as has been reported to you he complained that he was mistaken. 3. For the
use which you draw from this false ground, I may justly apply it unto your
self in your own words: It had been your own duty to have taught the people
the doctrine of religious communion both public and private; But to resist
the truth when God offreth it by your own brethren partly by them of your own
congregation who have protested openly against your Separation and forsaken
the same, partly by Mr. Robinson, who has written against it, this is an
heavy sin.

it is a snare for a man to devour that which is holy: and after the vows to
make inquiry. Prove. 20.25. So is it folly and sin in you first to condemn
that which is lawful, as it has been still reported, that you dealt with my
calling and ministry from time to time, and now after so many censures and
sentences of condemnation which you have passed upon your people that heard
me, that you now at last come to make inquiry. 2. I answer you, that I do not
at all administer, neither in whole nor part, by virtue of that calling which I
had in England, though not of the Bishops: neither yet have I renounced the
same. But as through out these Reformed Churches, he that is called from one
congregation to an other does administer by virtue of his new calling and his
former calling ceasseth, though with out renunciation: So is it with me. And
this my calling I may well avouch to be much more free and lavvfull, then that
your entrance of old or creeping into this office which you now execute.

Touching my ordination wherein our Church used the help of the Dutch reformed
Church of this City, you desire my defense thereof by the book of God,
professing that you are yet ignorant what authority the Eldership of one Church
has to make or ordeyne ministers in another: now that Apostles and all
extraordinary functions are ceased. I answer first, suppose that there had
been such an error in my ordination, as you pretend, yet does it not follovv
that it is unlawful for any to hear me: I require your proofs for such a
separation: for concerning this separation is our maine controversy, and see
that you vvinde not away from it.

Secondly, if you be yet ignorant concerning this point, then I exhort you eve^
in respect of your ignorance to take heed how you allege either this or any
other the like doubtful matters for a ground of separation from us: least you
and your people be found to be of their number that 2. Pet. 2.12.
speak evil of the things which they do not understand.

Thirdly, to help your ignorance which you confess herein, I propound unto
you these reasons from the book of God.

1 (...) her ordination is not simply necessary: or else the help of o^ Churches
and Elderships may be sought for and lavvfully used therein: for otherwise
Christ should not faithfully and sufficiently provide for the necessities of
his Churches, seeing many of them do want fit and able persons to perform that
work of ordination which consists Exo. 29.1 35. Levit. 8.1.2. etc. Nub.
27.18.19.23. Deuteronomy. 31.7 Act. 6.6. and 13.2.3.
principally in public prayers and exhortations to be made both to officers
and people touching their mutual duetyes, imposition of hands being but the
outvvard sign of the charge imposed by exhortation, and of the blessing
imposed by prayer* this for example may be seen in many Churches which are in
the Dorpes or villages here in these Netherlandes, where though they be the
true Churches of Chapter yet are there not fit and able persons thus to consecrate
or ordeyne their ministers as by ample testimony may be confirmed unto you in
sundry particulars. The wisdom and Heb. 3.2 Esa. 5.3,4.
faithfullnes of Chapter in his Fathers house will not stand with so strait an
order as you plead for.

2. If the Eldership of one congregation may help an other for the discerning
and convincing of errors and heresies in cases of controversy, as is both
manifest by the Act. 15.2 etc.
Scriptures; and also by your own practice and confession in Animad. page 107.
109.
seeking and procuring the Eldership of that separate company at Leyden to come
and help you in your controversy with Mr. Johnson: then why may not also one
Church desire the help of th'Eldership in an other for the consecration of
their minister, whiles they want fit persons for the solemn and public
performing of that work: seeing both these actions are a like holy and religious
works, the service of God, and services of his Church one as well as the
other? Is not this 1. Tim. 5.21.
a partiality to prefer one commandment before an other without any warrant?

3. The Deacons and widows of one Church are to perform service unto an
other, when need requires in Romans 16 1. 1. Cor. 16.3 and 2. Cor. 8.19.22.24.
ministration unto their outward wants and necessities: why may not the
pastors and teachers of one Church administer the word of exhortation and
doctrine in an other also, and as well in the business of ordination as of any
other? or why may any Church receyve help from the hand of a Deacon, rather
then from the mouth of a teacher, that is in an other congregation?

4. If those that have the gift of Prophecy being out of office may interpret
the Scriptures by occasion in diverse Churches as your self do Confess. Art. 34.
acknowledge from Act. 13.15. Why may not such men upon occasion of ordination
in the necessity of any Church apply their doctrines and exhortations to that
purpose, and likewise call upon the name of God at the same time for the
sanctification of the person ordained unto that work whereunto he is called,
and for a blessing of his ministry unto that people.

5. If the members of one Church may lawfully receyve the Lords supper in an
other upon occasion, as by your own practice you do acknowledge: then why may
not the pastors and teachers of one Church administer he same also in an other
when need requires, seeing the Heb. 13.17. 1. These. 5.12. Act. 20.28
state of people and ministers does consist in an equal relation one to an
other, and their actions of receyving and administering are mutual betwixt them?
And if the Lords supper may thus be administered some time by the help of
neighbour-ministers, why not ordination also?

6. To conclude, for as much as particular Churches, though in respect of their
particular covenants, they be distinct bodies, yet in respect of Tit. 1.4. 2.
Pet. 1.1.
their common faith are all members of the same Ephesians. 1.23 and 4.4.
body, of the same Ephesians. 2.19. and. 3.15
city, and the same Ephesians. 2.19. and. 3.15
family and household of God: this general bond directs them to perform al
possible help to one an other in all the works of Jude 20. etc.
aedification, so far as they are not restrained by some special commandment
of God. Now this act of ordeyning, consecrating or sanctifying a minister unto
his office being a work of edification, and no restraint being showed out of
the Scriptures to hinder a neighbour-minister from performing the same; it
follows that the Churches which want persons apt to teach, like the Cant. 8.8
9.
little sisters that have no breasts, may in this business use the help of the
ministers in other Churches, who in like manner being entreated thereunto may
perform the same in the name of the Church that desires their help.

of our Church, before the forged addition in the title of that book so
misprinted (not among us but in England,) was published: And therefore your
former injury cannot be justified by that which is done afterward. 3. You would
have us show how far we separate: I answer, we profess separation from known
evilles, but not from the Churches of Chapter for evilles among them: and for our
selves, our covenant has been from the first establishment of our Church unto
this present to serve the Lord in the Gospel of his Son, so far as is
revealed unto us.

the Nuns Chapel built for the worship of their breaden God and other
Idolles: I answer, first I cannot find by enquiry that this is so as you take
it: Those which keep the evidences and charter of the foundation of this
building affirm the contrary. And it is probable, considering that the
ordinary devotions performed in many Monasteries and Cloisters, were not the
worship of the breaden God, but other songs and prayers, it being unlawful
for those women that lived alone to execute the Priests office in making a
breaden God. Secondly, though it be uncertain, whether this Chapel was built
for the worship of the breaden God, yet doubt I not but that much
Idol-vvorship has been performed therein, and therefore I come to examine your
reasons against the use of such places, having now the true worship of God
exercised in them.

Apol. pa. 76.
because the reteyning thereof in such use is a breach of the second
commandment. Exodus 20.4.5.6. with Deuteronomy. 12.2.3. As for Esaias. 30.22. I suppose
you allege it for an other particular which is not our question.

Hereunto I answer: first, that commandment, Deuteronomy. 12. is as I take it a
temporary ordinance, part of Moses Polity that is now abrogate and therefore
not perpetual not binding us in these times: For howsoever the equity thereof
continue, teaching us to detest Idolatry, yet does it not bind us in such
manner and by such means to signify our detestation thereof, as it did them in
Moses time? For example: as God here commands to abolish Idolatrous places, so
in the next chapter Deuteronomy. 13.12. -- 15.16.17. God commands to abolish not only
their places of worship, but also all their goods, their cattle and all the
spoil of the Idolatrous apostates and to burn the same with fire. The equity
of this commandment leads us to a great detestation of Idolatry and apostasy:
but who will say that it is to be declared by the very same means and manner of
judgment in destroying such things as are of necessary use? And yet according
to your reasoning from this place: the goods, cattle and treasures of silver
and Gold, even of thousand thousands of peoples at this day should be avoided
as execrable things, and neither by changing, buying, selling, borowing or any
other dealing to be meddled with all.

Secondly, as God commands to destroy idolatrous places, so he commands to
abolish their names, and not to reteyne them Deuteronomy. 12.3. This commandment
appears hereby to be temporary and ceremonial, because now in the new
Testament, we see that the names of diverse Idolles have been retained in the
persons thereupon denominate: as the name of Mercury, Venus, Phebe, Jupiter,
Apollo, Fortuna, that were heathnish Idolles worshipped for Gods and Goddesses
and yet their names not abolished in the Saints mentioned by the Apostle, Romans
16.14. Phil. 2.25. Romans 16.1. Tit. 3.13. 2 Cor. 16.17.

Thirdly, this commandment for destroying Idolatrous places as it is not
perpetual for time, so also not universal for the place, but expressly
determined and restreyned to the Land of Canaan, to the Idolles of those
nations which Israel should possess; from that place they were to be cut off,
as is thrice noted, in 3. verses togather, Deu. 12.1.2.3. Even as God would
have greater severity and detestation to be manifested toward the Idolatours
themselves in Canaan, then to those of other countries a far off, Deuteronomy. 20.10.
-- 15.16.17. Josh. 9.6.7, etc.

Fourthly, seeing meats sacrificed to Idolles were as much polluted as the
places of their worship, and yet notwithstanding may now lawfully be retained
for our necessary use, Ps. 24.1. with 1. Cor. 10.25.26.27. etc. Why not the
temples also, conttrary to the ceremony of old?

Fifthly, as God commands to abolish the high places of Canaan, so he does as
well command to abolish and consume his own holy things, when the Religious
use of them ceased; for example he commands to burn the remainder of the
Paschal Lamb which they could not eat the same night, Exodus 12.10. as also the
flesh of the Ram of consecration with the bread thereof that remained to the
morning, Exodus 29.34. And the like commandment was given for the flesh of the
peace offering, Levit. 7,15.19. The equity of these ordinances continues for
ever, teaching us how to regard the holy things of God, not according to the
common use of other things, but with a more high and precious estimation of
them: but we may not according to the letter of the ceremony and according to
your reasoning abolish them: for then the bread and wine that remains over
after the administration of the Lords supper should still be burnt, or
otherwise abolished.

Lastly, there is not the like reason to abolish the buildings abused unto
Idolatry now, as the high places of old, because God having then appointed one
only place for sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 12.5.6, etc. Levit. 17.3.4. Those high places
being for sacrifice were to be destroyed, though no Idolatry had been committed
in them: but being polluted with the service of Idolles, there was then double
cause of their destruction, which is not now in these, while difference of
place is taken away Ioh. 4 21

Thus you may see though. Deuteronomy. 12.2.3. be compared with Exodus 20.4.5.6. Yet is
there no strength therein for the purpose intended.

because so long as they are continued, Antichrist with his abominations is
not wholly banished out of the land: as the Lord has appointed and will effect
in his time. Rev. 17.16. and 18.11.12.13. etc. and 2 These. 2.8. with 2. Kin.
10.26.27.28.

Ans. This argument is denied: The three first allegations show that
Antichriste shall be consumed, but they show not that our temples are any of his
abominations: the 4th. allegation is taken from the policy of Moses that is now
abrogate.

because the consecrating of them peculiarly to the worship of God, now in the
time of the Gospel, has no warrant in the word of God.

Ans. I grant this: but yet deny, that for the error of their consecration in
former time, they must therefore of necessity be abolished now.

Heb. 7.12. The scriptures alleged do not prove the consequence; they are of
like nature, and are already answered.

because the godly Princes are commended in the scriptures for being careful
to abolish false worship and the monuments thereof. 2. Chro. 17.6. 2 Kin. 18.4.
and 23.12.13.14.15.

Ans. Those Princes being under the policy of Moses are commended for their
obedience and practice agreeing therewith, but the Godly Princes of our times
not being under the same rudiments, are not bound to imitate them herein,
further then the equity beforementioned does require.

Because this being done, the people are more easily persuaded and drawn to
the true worship of God in Spirit and truth: whereas otherwise they are still
nourished in superstition, and have means to be entised daily to more
corruption. Genesis 35.2.3.4. 2 Kin. 18.4. 2 Chronicles. 34. Chap. Act. 17.23. and
19.26.27. Levit. 13. and 14. Chap. with Jude, 23.

Answ. That which belonged unto the temporary dispensation under Moses being
set apart, the general equity of these Scriptures leads us no further then to
abolish such monuments of superstition and corruption as have no necessary use,
which may thus further appear unto us.

1. If all monuments of superstition should be abolished like those Idolles and
earerings that were in Iaakobs private household, Genesis 35.2. etc. Then an
infinite number of private houses should have been and still ought to be rased
and demolished, which yet we never read to have been either commanded of God or
practiced of the Godly. Among the Israelites, their private houses were
polluted with Idolatry, and were nurseryes of superstition as well as their
public high places: Josh. 24.23. Judge. 17.4. Zeph. 1.5. with Deuteronomy. 27.15. The
private houses of the Moschovites at this day, as those that have seen do
testify, are full of images, and the manner of those that enter daily into one
an others houses, is first to worship and bow down unto those Idolles, before
they may salute any man in the house. The private houses of Papists without
number are daily hallowed and consecrate after their manner for Idol-service and
private masses: And all these Idol-houses are memo^alles of Idolatry, serving
to nourish supestition, and means to entise thereunto, are they therefore all
to be plucked down?

2. As for the brazen serpent, 2 King. 18.4. It was of no necessary use, and
therefore might well be abolished.

3. The high places, the groves, altars, images destroyed by Josias, 2 Chro.
34. were also of no necessary use: It does not appear that the high places
were houses meet to be co^verted unto Synagogues for the people to meet in: but
were altars in high mountains and hills: And therefore not unfitly is Bamah,
an high place, expounded by Bomos, an Altar.

4. The Altar at Athens Act. 17. and the Silver temples of Diana made by
Demetrius and his fellows Act. 19. were likewise things of no necessary use.
But whiles I examine those places that you refer me unto, I there find that an
Idolatrous place is converted by the Apostle unto the service of God: Act.
19.9.10. The School of Tyrannus being as the rest of the heathnish schools,
the nurseries of superstition, Idolatry, false worship, and pernicious
opinions, concerning God, his worship, and the sovereign happiness of man, was
yet after this used by Paul for a place of Gods worship, for a school of
Religion to preach the Gospel of Christ in the same. In such schools the
Philosophers and Poets, the Tit. 1.12
Prophets of the Heathens did teach their Religions, and called upon the names of
their false Gods: The Ephesians in special were infamous for their curious and
magical arts taught among them, who now Act. 19.19.
burnt their books being better instructed, and some of their Idolatrous
Asiarchai Beza Annot. on Act 19.31.
Priests (so deemed by some) became friends unto Paul: with such fruit and
blessing of God was the Gospel preached daily in this place for two years
togather.

5. Your allegation of Levitic. 13. and 14. does also lead me to remember the
equity of of that Law of God, whereby he ordained that things polluted being
of less price should be broken, but being of more worth were to be purged and
so retained, Levit. 11.32.33. and 6.28. As the merciful care of God for his
people appeared herein even under the law: so much more under the Gospel, this
type is fulfilled unto us, and the bountifulnes of God in Christ is now
enlarged abundantly by granting us the necessary use both of things polluted
with Idolatry, as also of such things as were otherwise ceremonially unclean.

6. If you will have memorialles of superstition though of necessary use to be
abolished, as being persuasions and entisements to Idolatry, then how will you
excuse your self that do not only not abolish them, but erect them a new: and
those also of no necessary use: and not the monuments of them only, but the
very Idols themselves: and such Antichristian Idols also as have dishonored
God as much if not more then over any did? You will ask me what and where they
be: I answer, in your Animadvers. Page 61.
book against Mr. Johnson, where with your Pen as with a pencill you have
painted that Popish Image of the Cross, and set it up for Religious use four
times in one page, while you describe out of Bellarmine the manner of Popish
Ordination, to teach men the evil thereof. If now an ignorant Papist in
reading and seeing these Idolles in your book shall come to bless an Idol in
his heart: either to adore any one of those Idols that you have formed, or some
other sign of the cross which he remembers upon this occasion; (for often do
such things come to pass, and men stumble at the Gospel it self, and through
their corruption are hardened by error by reading sound reasons against the
same:) how could you now clear your self in this case from the guiltimes of
drawing men to Idolatry? when men stumble at the word of God or sound reason
brought from the same, their sin is upon their own head only: But if men
stumble at those devised ^ndes of instruction which have no warrant from God,
then comes their sin upon the head of their instructours also. And thus is it
with your kind of instruction here; it has no warrant from the Lord: When he
in his word co^demnes the abominations of Molech, Chemosh, Ashtaroth, Baal,
etc. he does not cause the Shapes and figures of these Idolles to be pourtrayed
or painted before the eyes of men, as you have done with this Popish Idol of
the Cross: And therefore here is no excuse left for you herein. Though some may
have done this before you, yet will it help you little, who neglecting the
example of all the Churches of Christ in that which is good, do yet follow a
few in that error, which you, would seem most to condemn.

Because the Lord has promised a blessing to them which do reject and abolish
them, and threatened a curse to the contrary: And so also has performed indeed,
Esa. 30.22.23, etc. Exodus 20,5.6. 2 Chronicles. 17 Chap. and 31 20.21. with 2 Chronicles.
21.13.14, and 24.17-25. and 28. Chap.

Answ. Suppose that every one of these Scriptures did speak more peremtorily
then they do for the rejecting and rasing the houses polluted with Idolatry,
yet seeing they are all to be understood partly according to the state and
condition of the old Testament, and partly according to the equity mentioned
before with exception of necessary use, they do not therefore reprove that use
of temples which we now have.

THus far for answer unto the reasons in your Apology. Hereunto I have thought
it meet to annex three or four reasons taken from your own practice, that you
might be further convinced and judged even of your own selves:

First, whereas the blind and obstinate Jews are at this day a false Church
without Christ and without true God, and their worship false and blasphemous:
yet have you not refused, after your division and rent from Mr. Johnson to
meet togather for the service of God in the Idol-temple of the Jews, where
they had exercised their Idol-service before you. How comes it to be lawful
for you to assemble where the Jews have served their God, and not for us where
the Papists have been before us?

Secondly, whereas you have rejected the ministry of Mr. Iohnsons company, as
Animadvers. p. 38.
a new established Hierarchy, and do else where condemn such ministers as
Counterpo. page 196.
Idols: from hence it follows that the place where they meet togather to
fulfill their ministry was an Idol-temple; And yet even in that same place
where those Idol-ministers met, you are now content to come and assemble
togather, they being dispossessed. Why may not that place 2. Kin. 18.4. be now
urged against you, as well as against others by you? Why is not that
Idol-house broken down as well as the brazen Serpent, etc.

Thirdly, in that you allow your people, the members of your Church to receyve
the alms of the Dutch, which is a sacrifice Phil. 4.18. and this in the same
place which you condemn as an Idol-temple; If you will also allow them, at the
same time to bless in the name of God those that distribute so mercifully unto
the^, according to the Phil. 4.19.20. 2 Timothy 1.16. 2 Cor. 9,12 13,
duty of the godly poor: do ye not hereby allow the worship of God in
Idol-temples as you call them?

The answers which you give unto Mr. White concerning this matter are
insufficient for

1. Where you would have us to Inquiry, page 56.
put difference between the ordinary public worship of the Church in such
places, and the occasional receyving of alms therein by the poor: This
difference cannot without manifest untruth be affirmed or applied unto the
matter in hand: for the distribution of this alms here spoken of is not
occasional, but an ordinary public work of mercy performed at certain set
times; and as is the distribution so is the receyving thereof.

2. You put difference between the benevolence of a Church to the ministers or
Saints of Christ (which is the sacrifice spoken of Phil. 4.18.) and the
releef of a city given to the poor that dwell among them, be they of any
Religion whatsoever, one or other. But neither will this distinction help you,
for not only the benevolence given to the ministers or Saints of Christ, but
that also which is give^ to the poor of any Religion whatsoever, one or other
is a service and Heb. 13.16. Gal. 6.10. 2 Cor. 9.13.
sacrifice of sweet odor pleasant and acceptable to God: and further this
alms that we speak of, is not the releef of a City but cheefely the
benevolence of a Church collected publicly every Lords day in the
congregation of the Saints, with whom you communicate in their public alms
though not in public prayers.

3. You put difference between the solemn appointed worship of God by the
Church so assembled togather, and the private duties of thankfulness, of
salutation, or the like. But this distinction also cannot truly be applied
unto this matter in hand, for the duties of godly thankfullnes and blessing in
the name of the Lord, which are and ought to be here performed, are not private
duties but public even as is this alms that is always publicly
administered in the presence of a great multitude assembled togather.

4. This question is asked by you; does he think we hold it not lawful to walk
up and down in the Idol temples, as they use in Pawles at London, etc. I
answer, that in in Idol-temples, where Idol-service is still ordinarily
performed, you cannot lawfully walk up and down, as men use to do in Powles.
Mat. 18.7.
For woe is denounced to the man by whom scandalles do come. And I demand of
you, whether you hold it lawful for men so to have walked up and down in the
house of Baal, and there to have receyved alms as your people do in these
temples whereof we speak:

Fourthly, your own staggering and waverings about this matter are worthy to
be observed:

1. The doubting of H. Barow, who had written so pere^ptorily hereof, is
recorded in that piece of paper which is pasted upon the Discov. page 133.
marge^t of his book over against the place where he had maintained such a
vehement detestation of them. And that is there in part diminished touching the
civil use of them.

2. Mr. Iohnsons wavering is recorded in his book against Mr. White: His
confession there noted by himself concerning the lawful hearing in these
temples, was that Inquiry. page 66.
it should not trouble himself and for others he would therein persuade them
the best he could. And yet in the very same book both page 57.
before and page 79.
after he does again write against them: In the very same page 66.
page before noted, he blames Mr. White for changing and rechanging his faith
and profession as if he thought he might dally with Religion at his pleasure:
with what honesty and modesty is this done, while the same book testifyes his
own changing, rechanging and changing again ofter then he could impute to Mr.
White? And since that also;, he has of late tolerated sundry of his people to
hear in those places.

3. Mr. Robinson, though he have written in such high words against these
temples: that Iustific. page 443.
they are by lawful authority to be demolished and overthrown: and in the
mean while as execrable things to be avoided by them which have none authority
to deface or demolish them: though he plead against them, as being Page 444.
Idolles, unclean things not to be touched: the mark of the beast not to be
receyved: and a Babylon to be gone out of, etc. Yet has he for this long time
tolerated Mr. Br. to hear the word of God in such places: and so according to
his own writing suffered one of his people to go in to Babylon, to carry the
mark of the beast, and to be defiled with an Idol and an execrable thing, like
an other Achan among them And not only this, but now of late this last month
as is witnessed unto me, he seeing (as it appears) how rashly and unsoundly he
has written against Mr. Bernard in this point, begins openly in the mids of
his congregation to plead for the lawful use of these temples; and so to
repair and build them up again, which before he would so feign have had to
been plucked down.

4. For your self and your own congregation; do you not know, and is it not
confessed unto you, that there is of your own people that sometimes hear the
Dutch-ministers even in these temples which you do so much condemn? does not
VV. S. profess that he vvil continue also thus to do? And if this practice be
a breach of the 2d. commandment, and a transgression of so many Scriptures as
you alledg against it in your Apology: and if so heavy a curse be threatened
against it as you there affirm, with what love of your brother or conscience
of Christ's ordinance, do you suffer that person to walk on in such an accursed
course as you make it? or how can you without partiality make this a ground of
refusing communion with us, and yet tolerate it among your selves? Is this that
Highway of the upright man which you point at with your finger in the Prove.
16.17.
sentence which you prefix before this your writing? Is this to keep your way
and so to preserve your soul and the souls of those that you take charge of?
Besides this, there are of your people that have helped to repair our temple
and to make it fit for our use, by mending and making new seats for the people
and new pulpit for the minister in the same: and do they not hereby seem to
contradict your profession? I have here again just cause to speak unto you, as
you did unjustly unto me upon occasion of Mr. H. his Sermon: The cheifest thing
that I mislike in you about this matter, is: that whereas Mr. Johnson and Mr.
Robinson your fellow ministers have openly witnessed the truth unto you by
their practice, yet you do not receive the same, but oppose it still. It had
been your duty to have laid aside this error of your self, but to resist the
truth when God offreth it by your own brethren, is an heavy sin.

After these 4. particulars, you say, Other things there are where in we know
you differ from us: as our keeping of holy days besides the Lords days, etc.
Marriage a civil duty performed by our ministry in our Church: Our Eldership
sitting and judging matters apart from the congregations, etc. Hereunto I
answer.

First, the question betwixt us, is not about all things wherein you differ
from us, but only about those differences which you hold to be just causes of
renouncing our communion. Other great or greater differences then these, there
are also betwixt us: as that you allow not your people to mary with the members
of the reformed Churches as we do, but make such Marriages to be a cause of
excommunicating your people, as though the godly members of these true Churches
were like the abominable Canaanites in your sight: That you allow marriages
made among your selves without consent and authority of the Magistrates: and
this both in England and here also, where the laws do hold the Children of
such as are so married to be illegitimate: That you also allow divorces among
your selves without the authority of the Magistrate: That you turn the Lords
day into a session or Court-day, omitting and thrusting out in part sometimes
the administration of the word and Sacraments, by spending so much time in
controversies and contentions: That you condemn the set maintenance of
ministers; with sundry other differences, which I know not whether you
maintain as causes of separation from us. These are yet in Comparison your
single errors, whereas your separation or schism is a double iniquity and an
error of errors: If in defense hereof you can prove our Church and ministry
to be false, as has been often avouched by you: you may then lay the axe of your
separation unto the root of our Religion and hew us down at once: If you can
show our worship or place of worship to be unlawful, it would be something to
the purpose: If you allege other differences, and do not prove them to be
causes of separation, you wander from the question.

Secondly, we know also that there are differences among your selves, both
about some of these same, and other greater matters: and not only betwixt you
and Mr. Robinson, but in your own congregation also: as that some of your
people upon the holy days by you mentioned, shut up their shops: others not,
as is Inquiry. p. 59. 60.
acknowledged by your selves unto Mr. White: That some of you hold an enforced
divorce, and that the Ibid. p. 32 33.
parties innocent either husband or wife which forgive one an other being
guilty of adultery and live still togather are to be excommunicated; others
holding the contrary: That some of your people are of your mind in denying
private communion with the godly in England and yet some even of your own
congregation do allow such communion, holding rather with Mr. Robinson then
with you, that refuse to answer him: So that if notwithstanding these and the
like differences, you can yet hold communion among your selves, and with Mr.
Robinson, it may seem that these three last differences above noted by you,
are not intended as causes of separation, and so belong not to our question.

Thirdly, our differing in those 3 points nominated by you, is duly to be
weighed of you: 1, for keeping of holy days: we hold all days (except the
Lords day) to be alike holy: If our people at the Magistrates appointment do
shut up their shops without putting holiness in the day, it is confessed that
your people do the same also: That ordinary day of the week which we have for a
sermon is sometimes changed unto one of those holy days (as they are called)
and we preach on the same, to redeem time for men's labor, and to win
opportunity to preach the word unto many in season or out of season; and this
also, as I hear is done by you, and that by a memorable token at one time
especially; the time of your rending from Mr. Johnson being on a Christmas day
so called, unto which day you had changed the ordinary time of your assembling
in the week. Thus far you agree with us: and this being granted lawful, the
rest if it be any thing will follow. 2. For Marriages: we do not hold it as a
thing of necessity, that they should be celebrated by ministers in the Church;
we judge them lawful marriages that are made by the Magistrates without
ministers: but yet we hold it lawful, more convenient, and comfortable that
they be accomplished in the Church by the Ministers, both for showing the
duties of the persons married and for obteyning a special blessing by the
prayers of the congregation. 3. For our Eldership sitting and judging matters,
etc. though our Eldership for the examination of parties and witnesses, and for
their consultations thereabout do sit a part, as is meet; yet do we not exclude
or debar any from hearing and seeing the conviction of any sin that is either
public of it self or persisted in, when they desire the same; yea we our
selves have often desired their presence to behold the convictions, admonitions
and rebukes of offenders: and further, before any sentence be given for the
cutting off of any offendour, we do first propound the matter unto the whole
Church, requiring their prayers, advise and consent without which never yet any
judgment of excommunication has been executed against any amongst us: And
this also is propounded unto them by diverse degrees, long and often before any
pronouncing of sentence, that so our brethren may have sufficient time, both to
inform themselves of the matter and to deliberate ripely thereof. And even
this sitting of our Eldership a part from the congregation, seems to have been
allowed by your self, for as much as in a matter of controversy, you and your
Elder Mr. Th. have not refused to come and appear before this our Eldership,
and there to give what light and evidence you could unto the matter in
question; and thus also have others of your people at other times voluntarily
come and appeared as witnesses before us: and have so far communicated with our
government.

You say, you suppose that this our court shall find no better allowance by
the Church or Courts of England then does your Church which we count
schismatic. A vain supposition: for 1. though our eldership should find no
favor nor allowance from the prelates or courts of England, yet have we comfort
in Gods allowance: we depend on Christ and not upon prelates. 2. The allowance
of the reformed Churches which give us the right hand of fellowship, being laid
in balance with the disallowance of prelates is enough to countervaile the
same: A comfort that you are far from. 3. Even the cheef defendours of the
prelacy can not but give allowance unto our eldership, confessing that this
government D. Downam, sermon at lambeth page 95.
may be admitted, and that it is as silver, good; though they prefer their own
as Gold before the same.

You add further, that of these things we may see our selves reproved and
convicted in your Apology aforesaid. But this is also a vain speech: first,
there is no such conviction to be seen in your Apology; but this we rather
see, that Mr. Johnson the Author of your Apology is in his conscience reproved
and convicted of diverse of these errors that he has written: we see some of
his people coming unto our Sermons, even on those holy days you speak of: we
see others of them willing and desirous to have their marriages celebrated in
our congregation, even whiles they remain with him still: we see his
government changed, but who knows what it now is? we see him broken and
confounded in his courses but without such true repentance, as should bring him
plainly to confess, to revoke and to refute his errors wherewith he has
been a means to ensnare so many. And the sight of this confusion in him might
be sufficient to serve for your just reproof also, if you consider it a right.

Secondly, suppose you had sufficiently convicted us by your Apology in those
differences betwixt us, yet is not your refusal of our communion for the same
justified thereby; that is the question that remains vnproved. When I receyve
any arguments from you to that purpose, I will then godwilling give answer both
to those arguments for separation from us, as also to so many reasons as I can
find in your Apology touching those three particulars them selves.

In fine, you tell us, that we shape our Church according to the time and place
wherein we live, etc. Touching this imputation of variablenes, I answer for my
self, that when I lived in England, I testified against the evilles which I
conceyved to be in the order of that Chureh: and when I was called hither I
rejoiced to find those things that I had desired before and this with out
variablenes. And the communion which we still upon occasion hold with the
Church of England, can no more destroy the truth of our Church, then it does
other reformed Churches which practice in like manner. But if you come to speak
of variablenes, and shaping a man's self to the time and place, you give us
occasion to remember your own levity and scandal in this behalf: But I spare
you for this time.

To conclude, seeing that besides the common and general motives which may
bind us to deal faithfully and conscionably in all our ways, we have at this
present also the hand of God lying upon the City where we live, and his
destroying angel is come into our streets: so that many fall both on the right
hand and on the left, through the noisome pestilence that walks in the dark
and wastes at noone day: let us therefore so write as if the arrows of
the almighty did stick fast in us: Let us with all our might seek those things
that may serve for the aedification of the Church of God, with his praise and
our peace therein: even so as if each of our writings were to be sealed with our
present dissolution. He whose name is counselor and the mighty God guide us
hereunto: Farewell in the Lord.

August. 21. 1617. John Paget:


CHAP. I. Love the truth, and peace. Zach. 8.19.
Hen. Ains.
I Like well of your counsel (Mr. Paget) in the conclusion of your writing,
that we should so menage our causes, as may most tend to the edification of
Gods Church, with his praise and our peace therein: and through his grace (which
I humbly crave,) I shall indedevour my self hereunto. One means to further
this, I take to be the abridging and if it may be, the quite cutting off of all
less needful matters, and holding to the mayn differences: an other, that we
discuss things by the word of God, not of man.

So first to end the strife about the provocation to this controversy: for as
much as sundry works are published on your side and ours, I held them
sufficient to show unto judicious Readers, that would examine the scriptures
and reasons brought on either part, where the truth lies, and purposed
therefore to write no more this way, unless further and more probable
objections were publicly brought against us. And I turned the course of my
studies an other way, as is openly to be seen. Neither would I take occasion to
meddle, though provoked by you and yours, more then by any other: as I showed
you in part, by instances of some that could not be admitted to the Lords
supper with you, for that they heard the doctrine of our Church, or thought it
lawful only (as was said,) though they never did it. This I yet think to be
more severity on your part against us, then any Bishop in England would show:
how justly you may do it, remains to be judged, when the differences between
us are discussed. And as for the provocation of our people, whereon you insist:
I know it not: the man whom you named, denied it to me before witnesses, and
said: some of yours were the beginners of it, as he could prove. But now that
you have taken such an occasion, and we are entered into these lists, let us
proceed.

For the order of our process, whereas you beginning with me, would yet urge me
to set down my reasons, when as you saw them in print: I leav it unto judgment,
how meet this was. As you knew that the chief Author of our Apology, had
revoked some doctrines and reasons therein: so you might have known that I and
others, interessed in that book, held to the things therein published. My large
offer to yield to any kind of conference with you, at your request; was not
intended, neither should be streyned to any other then an orderly course. Yet I
set you down a mayn ground, as you desired, and that I am content to follow.

But you except against my argument and reasons confirming it in our Apology,
that those reasons are directed against the Church of England and the
ministry thereof: the reasons that you desired of me, were such as I had for
our separation from your particular Church, and the ministry thereof.

To which I answer: In that they are directed against the Church of England
they are also against yours: for you were members of that Church, and guilty
of the synns reproved in my argument, as we our selves also were, whiles we
continued among them. Now the removing of your dwelling into an other land,
removes not your synns from you, nor you from them: it is your repentance
only, and faith in Christ, that can purge away your synns, Luke 13.3.5. Mar.
1.15. Papists that dwell here, in England or other where, belong to the Church
of Rome, til they break off themselves by repentance. Neither does the
absteyning from the practice clear the sinner: for the guilt of Cains murder,
cleaved unto him all his days, because he was not cleansed by repentance and
faith; although he never killed man more, after Abel. So though you here
practice not the idolatries done in England yet in that you have practiced
them, and not repented, your guiltines is upon you. How much more then do your
synns remain, which oppose and speak evil of us, privately, publicly and in
print, for departing from the evils, wherein we sometimes walked among them.
Moreover I manifested your union with the Church of England by the very title
of that book published by your own proselytes, which says, they are returned
into the bosom of the Church of England their true Mother. These words, with
some other in the title, you disclaim, as being foisted in by some falsifier.
Be it so, though I knew not of it: yet the thing it self you disclaim not: so
it may be true, though they wrote not those words. I pray you tell me in your
next, in the name of your chur. whether you deny that you continue in the
bosom of the church of England
And Chr. Lawn, the first pretended Author of that book, is known to live in
the bosom of that Church, according to the title. And what will you answer to
other words contained in the pamphlet: as in Page 1. Where they say, they
sought to make a public renunciation of their unchristian separation, which
with us they had undertaken from all the Churches of Christ. Meant they not the
Church of England here for one? Let the 3 Page testify, where they say. These
things being proved, their separation from England would hereupon appear to be
unlawful. Let the 7. p. speak, where one of the causes of their
excommunication, is for charging us to be Schismatics for our separation from
tbe Church of England. And in their answer to this article, p. 8, they deny it
not, but refer to their proofs in the copy of their charge. Finally, let us
see what they say in page 2. We did openly renounce our covenant and profession
of separation, which at our first entrance among them, we had made with them:
we renounced it as being a most abominable and profane thing. Will you say that
all these words were also foisted in by some falsifier? If not, why seek you
now to turn away the discussing of the reasons of our separation from that
Church of England, especially considering what profession we make in the
preface to the Confession of our faith, (printed with our Apology) of our
agreeing with other Christian reformed Churches round about us, (some of which
we there name,) and of our separation only from the Antichristian Church of
England for the causes there manifested. The covenant and profession of
separation which they made with us at their first entrance, was from the Church
of England whereof we had been; not from any of the Reformed churches whereof
we had not been. Wherefore they returning unto you, with this renunciation of
their covenant: who would not now expect at your hands, a justification of the
Church of England?

But you desired reasons for our separation from your particular Church. Whereas
we rather might desire the reasons of your separation from our particular
Church. For, besides that some of your members, were first members of us: our
Church is before yours, being through Gods mercy, seated and stablished here
first: and you coming after gathered a people, and erected a ministry in this
City by us; never communicating your purpose or procedings with us; nor
demanding of us the reasons of our separation; nor showing wherein you agreed
with us, or dissented from us. If now one of us must needs be counted
separators from an other: I think indifferent men will judge, the separation
must lie upon your selves.

An answer to Preface-matters. Peace and truth from the Prince of Peace.
Ioh. Page
Mr. Ainsworth, Had you observed your own directions for performing the
counsel which you so well liked of, then would you not have brought in such
store of humane testimonies, and those of the worst sort, and them also in the
worst manner, as you have done: then would you not have inserted so many less
needful matters, but have kept more closely unto the maine differences. When
you speak of of ending the strife about the provocation to this controversy,
you begin it a fresh by bringing such a reason of your silence, as serves for a
strong provocation to deal against you: the sum of it is: there was so much
written on both sides, as you held sufficient to show unto judicious Readers
where the truth lay, and therefore purposed to write no more this way, unless
more probable objections were brought against you: as if you should have said
in triumph: All is won: Separation has gotten the victory: all of judgment
may see it: there is nothing of weight or worth, nothing so probably written
against us, that deserves any more answer, therefore I will rest. Who is it
that sees the separation clapping her wings and crowing on this manner, boasting
against all the Churches of Christ, and against all the godly and learned
Ministers and members of the same, but they may justly be moved by such a
provocation as this? Whereas you tell us of turning the course of your studies
an other way: and that it may openly be seen: we see indeed that you are about
a new translation of the Bible with annotations upon the same, but it were
much better for you to turn back the course of your studies, to stay this work
a while, and in the fear of God first to examine your separation more soundly
then you have done, and so to free and clear yourself of that error and
scandal which you have give^ to the hurt and grief of many a soul. Unless
you take this course, one of these two things will follow: Either you must make
an unclean work, or have an unclean conscience: for if in your annotations
you expound the scriptures all along as you go, according to that which you
have done in your other former writings for the maintenance of separation, then
shall you give many unclean notes, and defile the holy scriptures and lead
unto schism: if in all your annotations for winning credit unto them you do
conceal your meaning, and hide your opinion notwithstanding all opportunities
given, what do you else but betray the supposed truth, when as in your account
it is generally and unjustly oppugned, and pollute your own conscience with
this unfaithful dealing?

As for your provocation by us, in that we admit not such for members of our
Church as would have liberty to hear your Sermons, I gave you answer in my
former writing, which here you take no knowledge of. This is no good way, to
abridge less needful matters, by repeating and renewing unjust complaints of
hard dealing and omitting the answers given already thereunto. You refer the
matter unto judgment of the Readers, and ten times you appeal unto them in
this writing: I agree with you herein, only I entreat the Readers to see what
is written before, and still to compare our vvritings diligently togather that
they may see what is answered, and what is omitted and passed by: And therefore
also have I caused these writings to be published, that the reader might have
them to judge by. As for the man by whom I was provoked; If he deny it now,
yet that impeacheth not the truth of my assertion, vvhiles I have sundry
vvitnesses to confirm the same. And it skilles not so much, what he now
says of himself before witness, as what the former vvitnesses do testify of
him and his speeches.

That I had cause enough to desire you to set down your reasons for separating
from us notvvithsta^ding those reasons already printed in your Apology, is
plain: for first, though I knew you and some of your people had not yet openly
revoked them, yet seeing Mr. Johnson the chief Author thereof had begun to
recall them and refute them also himself, it was no blame worthy matter in me
hereupon to give you occasion to think more seriously of them, and to give you
liberty of setting them down more advisedly. My second reason noted also in my
former writing, you touch not at all. You speak of streyning your offer beyond
an orderly course, but you cannot affirm, much less prove that I have done so
by you. Unto my third defense of requiring your reasons for your separation
from our particular Church and Ministry, because those in your Apology are
directed against the Church of England and the ministry thereof and not
against us: you reply that because we have not repented for being members of
the Church of England, therefore our sins remain, and therefore the reasons
directed against the Church of England, are against ours also. This want of
repentance you do also allege sundry times again in the heart of your
treatise, as your maine ground to prove the vnlawfullnes both of our Church and
ministry and to maintain your separation from the same: And there may you
find a full and large answer hereunto, chap. 4. and 6. to show that you have
cause to repent your self for such manner of reasoning against the Church of God.

When as to make way for the turning of your argument from us to the Church of
England, you alleged the title of a book published against your schism and
the proselytes thereof, I showed you that your allegation was a forgery, your
excuse now is that you knew not of it: But I prevented this excuse before in my
former writing and showed you the insufficiency thereof, seeing the matter was
published unto you that you might have known it, see before p. 8. and 9.
Again, you do here cite many places of that Profane schism of Brow.
book, to show that the publishers thereof did renounce their separation from
the Church of England, etc. But what an idle and lost labor is this to keep
such a do for proof of that which we all do so freely and daily confess and
profess before all, and I did also acknowledge in my former writing? Is this
dealing agreeable to your pretense of abridging or quite cutting off all less
needful matters? what is less needful then to be so large in proof of that
which is not denied? Nay yourself do here acknowledge for us that we do not
disclayme an union with the Church of England. Yet are you not content with
this, but in the margent of your writing you pray me to tell you in the name of
our Church whether we deny that we continue in the bosom of the Church of
England. Though I told you plainly enough before in my See before page 9.
former writing, if you had had ears to hear, yet to satisfy your needless
importunity, I answer you again in the behalf of our church, that if you
mean by living in the bosom of the Church to live under the ecclesiastical
censure and government of the Church, then do we not live in the bosom of the
Church of England; but are here in these low countries a distinct body and
Church from them: if you mean a reteyning of Christian communion with them, in
this sense we do remain in the bosom of that Church of Christ, practicing
communion upon all good occasion, and hold them guilty of schism that refuse
to do the like. But then you demand further hereupon, why do I now seek to
turn away the discussing of the reasons of your separation from the Church of
England? who would not now expect at my hands a justification of the Church of
England? I answer, 1. There is no reason to expect at my hands in this present
controversy, a discussing of all that I hold and practice; so might I enter
into an hundred controversies at once, touching all the artickles of my faith
and profession. 2. For the defense of the Church of England, there are many
learned men that have already written sundry treatises and justified the
lawfullnes of the communion therein against you, whereas there is none that
has written any book in defense of this particular Church whereof I am a
minister: neither is any man so much bound hereunto as I am. 3. Even this
question which I undertake against you is not a turning away, but a leading of
you by degrees unto communion with the Church of England: you know the plainest
method of teaching is to proceed a notioribus ad minus nota, and I doubt not
but you being co^vinced of your etrour in separating from this particular
congregation, will thereby be prepared and helped to discern the error of
separation from the Church of England also.

Here you insert yet a new reason why I should rather discuss the reasons of
your separation from England namely, considering what profession you make in
the preface to the confession of your faith (printed with your Apology) of
your agreeing with other Christian reformed Churches round about us (some of
which you there name) and of your separation only from the Antichristian
Church of England, etc. But, oh Mr. Ainsworth, what truth is there in these
words? This your profession here mentioned by you is a counterfaite profession
and most untrue; If you separate only from the Antichristian Church of
England, why do you even in this very writing maintain the separation of your
Elder Decluse from the French Church? why are not such of your people as
understand their language allowed to hear in their Churches? Yea why do you
publish in print concerning the Dutch and French Churches in these countries,
that for the members of your Church they cannot partake with rhem, no not in
hearing the word without declining and apostasy from the truth which you have
receyved. Inquiry of Th. wh. Page 26.
In the beginning of your writing you prefix the saying of the Prophet, Love
the truth and peace: but by this dealing you seem to love falsehood and
dissembling more then truth; And now for this deceitful dealing there is so
much the more reason to lay out your separation from other Churches as well as
from England, that simple men may no more be beguiled by you.

One other needful and weighty matter you will yet have to be considered,
before you come to your argument, namely, that you rather might have desired
the reasons of our separation from your particular church, for besides that
some of our members were first members of you, your Church is before ours, etc.
and we coming after, gathered. a prople and erected a ministry in this city
by you never communicating our purpose or proceedings with you, nor demanding
of you reasons of, etc Answ. 1. The reason why we consulted not with you at our
first coming unto this city, was because you had already before my coming
declared your selves to be open adversaries of the truth by disclayming and
renouncing the communion of all the Churches of Christ, to the great offense of
the godly in our own country, as also of the godly Magistrates Ministers and
people in this city, I saw by your writings what evil counsailours you were,
and what perverse reasonings you used therein and how you contemned the advice
of such as had dealt with you and therefore thought it not meet to communicate
our proceedings with you. 2. Our purpose and proceedings were communicated with
many learned ministers English, Scottish, Dutch and French who gave us
counsel and help in our endeavors, so that we needed not to communicate our
affairs with you. The hand of God was with us: the Reformed churches gave us
the right hand of fellowship: the hand of the Christian Magistrates was with us
through the mercy of God that gave us favor in their eyes and put it into
their hearts to further our enterprise, so that at my coming hither, there was
then first established in this city a lawful congregation of the English, and
then diverse which had before left your Church and gone unto the Dutch did from
thence come and join themselves to us: and since that time many other of your
people leaving your schism have come unto us, the Lord still increasing his
blessing upon our labors. 3. Suppose here had been in this city a lawful
English church before our coming hither, and that we had offended in not
communicating our proceedings with the same, yet had not this fault been like
unto your separation; it is one thing to neglect the counsel of some godly
men, an other to renounce communion of all true Churches. And yet see how you
please and flatter yourself with opinion of other men's opinion touching you, in
that you say; If now one of us, must needs be counted separatours from an
other, you think, indifferent men will judge, the separation must ly upon us.

CHAP. II. Touching the Argument, of Separating from sin only.
Hen. Ains.
NOw therefore I come to my argument which was this.

That separation which is only from syn and communion therewith, is of God, and
is all good men's duty. But our separation only from syn and communion with
syn, wherewith we were entangled in your mother Church. Therefore our separation
is of God, etc. The first proposition confirmed by Exodus 20. Ephesians. 5.11. 2 Cor.
6.14.15.16. You except not against. The second I proved by showing the four
chief heads of synns, for and from which we separated: and referred you to the
scriptures and reasons in our public writings, for further manifestation.

You answer: First suppose we did justly in separating from these four things,
yet is not our minor proved. Your reason is, 1. We separate from the Dutch and
French Churches. 2. We separate also from your congregation: and this
separation (you say) is not only from syn, and therefore not of God, etc.
Herevpo^ you labor to bind me by the coards of mine own syllogism (as you
speak) to prove my Minor: and you urge my promise, and press me, If I will
deal honestly and truly, or soundly and directly, etc. as if you thought the
very naming of these Churches would make me afraid. But the Lord is with us,
and we will not fear what man can do unto us.

First, consider I pray you, how soundly and directly yourself do answer unto
those 4. heads of transgressio^, which I named: when you neither ingenuously
grant them, nor take upon you to convince them, but put a supposition only:
that if any inconvenience follow, you may hereafter turn the tenor of your
speech, and say we did unjustly in separating. Thus you will walk at large, and
I must be bound in coards: I must prove directly, you may answer indirectly. It
was exspected not only by me, but by some even of your own flock, that you
would try your strength to prove us schismatiks from the church of England; but
lo, how you withdraw at the first. Well, seeing you say no more, we will take
your supposition for a certain truth: and let him that reads, judge in
discretion, whether of us deals more soundly and directly.

Secondly, to ensnare our separation in syn, you bring no one word of the Law
of God, whereby syn is to be Ro^. 3.20
known; but allege the congregations of men. Which may, I grant, be a
stombling block to the weak: but cannot persuade any wise conscience. It has
been the Papists common practice, when scriptures fail them, to dazel men's
eyes with names of Church, councils, fathers, etc. But I would not have you to
learn their ways. To the Law and to the Testimony, says the Lord: if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them,
Esai. 8.20.

Thirdly, you have no more reason, (if so much) to say that we have separated
from the Dutch Churches, then that they have separated from us. For we being
called of God, whiles we dwelt in England entered into covenant there, and
became his Church and people: and so had equal right in Christ, his Gospel and
ordinances, with all other Churches in the world. For came the word of God to
Dutch men only came it not to the English also? We being thus established in
Christ, Cou^terp. p. 49. Answer to Th. While. Page 25.
acknowledged the reformed Churches, (upon the sight of their Co^fessions,) to
be true Churches, and our brethren in the Lord: and to their Universities we
dedicate the Confession of our faith. And how do they accept of us? To let
pass other things which I could mention, behold what your Disciples have
published in their foresaid libell, page 21. thus.

The testimony of the Dutch Church concerning the Brownists. When as they sent
their messengers with some questions unto the Dutch Eldership, they received
this answer from them: That they did not acknowledge their assembly, to be an
ecclesiastical assembly, or a lawful Church. And when Mr. Johnson and others
of them, were instant to hear reasons of this answer from them: it was further
answered: They would do it, if they saw it needful, or if they found any
thing that was worthy of answer.

Now let these things testify before any equal judges, whether the separation
be most on us, or on them.

Fourthly, the instance of that one man that came unto us from the French
Church, convinces us no more of sinful separation; then the Dutch Churches
receiving sundry of such as had been our members, convinces them.

Fifthly, the cause why Mr. Cluse left the French Church, being their synns in
their publik worship of God, and administration to the church; as praying out
of humane prescribed Leitourgies, and preaching from humane apocryphal
Catechismes: Baptising such as are not in the covenant of Christ, and the like;
which are condemned by Exodus 20.4.5. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Esa. 29.13 Mat. 15.9. Genesis
17. It follows necessarily upon my former mayn argument (which you have not
yet infringed) that he left them lawfully: and so as yet, you have proved no
syn in our separation.

Sixthly, there is in him and us no other blame to be found then in you and
yours: who professing (in your last writing) to separate from known evils:
have gathered here an other Church, and do receive such as separate from some
evils in the Church of England. And why then condemn you us, for receiving him
that separated from known evils in the French Church?

Your second exception is, that we separate also from your congregation, and
censure those of our people that come unto you. I answer: first it is you that
have made the separation, by gathering a new Church apart from us, who were
here a Church before you, as while are I showed. Secondly, we have just cause
to censure such of ours as come unto you, both for their schism, in leaving
the true Church whereof they were: and for their falling back into great evils,
as the renouncing of their holy covenant and profession of separation which at
their first entrance amongst us they made with us: they renounce it as most
abominable, as the Libellers amongst you (which sometime in profession were of
us) have printed in their infamous book aforesaid, p. 2. and 7. Unless
therefore you can disprove our Church, and separation from the synns in the
Church of England the censuring of them is just.

Your 3. exception is, that we separate also from the private communion of the
Godly in England. To convince us of syn herein, you bring no one word of God,
but would press us with the writings of men. How unworthy this is, of a man
professing to teach religion, let the godly judge. In sted of proving this to
be syn upon us, you would urge me to answer that book written for private
communion: thus you endeavor to set us at variance amongst our selves, whiles
you may look on for advantage. And why I pray you, might not I as well urge you
to answer the things written in that book against public communion, which you
maintain? or to answer D. Bilsons book of perpetual government, bent
directly against your presbyteries and Church government, which has been many
more years in public then this which you mention to me. Or Mr. Hookers 8. books
of ecclesiastical polity, written to overthrow yours? Those last books have
turned many from your side to the Prelate: and where there is one of us, there
are a 1000. of you and more, to make answer. As for me, if I would answer it,
you and others take a course to hinder me, by such private controversies as you
begin and prosequute with me. And having in hand another necessary work (as is
partly known in public) besides my private writings to you and sundry others,
you yet would lode me with more: showing your self like an hard task-Maister,
to lay so much work on me, and do so little your self.

But what need you urge this, seeing it is not to the matter in hand. For your
former writings to me, were about Church communion* mine argument is also
concerning the same. Now to ease your self, you come in with private communion:
which the Author of the book you mention, plainly distinguishes from Church
communion: which he disproveth evidently in the same book, as you may see. And
whereas you say I have affirmed, if private communion be granted, public will
also follow: you are mistaken if you apply it to the Church of England: This I
hold, that public communion of such persons with us will follow: but not our
public communion with their Church where so many gross evils are practiced.
You insult therefore in vain, as if this (if it were granted) would raze the
principles of our separation, and as if I therefore refused to deal therewith.
It is not possible that our principles of separation, which is from syn only,
and communion therewith, as I have showed you, should ever be shaken, so long as
Gods word endures.

Now though I need say no more of this matter, seeing you have said nothing from
the scriptures against us: yet I will show you what I judge of this doctrine.
All private communion with the godly in England I deny not: such as are come to
that measure of grace, as that they are worthy in Christ, to be received into
the true visible Church, in that estate: with them I hold it lawful to have
private communion, even before they be joined to the Church. But such as for
their Antichristian estate and walking, are by the rules of Gods word, debarred
from admission into the Church of Christ til they repent and leave their syn:
with them I hold it not lawful to have private communion, though some good
things appear to be in them, which I will labor to cherish. And this is that
which I intend in my answer to M. Bernard, in that place of my Book which you
cite, and I never held otherwise. If you can prove syn in this doctrine, I will
hear you, speaking from the word of God: other authority I refuse to be
pressed with. And when you have proved us to syn herein, (if ever you be able:)
then are you to begin a new with your Church estate, which will not at all be
justified hereby.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
THese things being thus dispatched, you com now to your argument and repeat
it. I denied your minor, which was, that you separated from sin only, etc. I
showed the weakness of your proof of it from the insufficie^t enumeratio^ of
those things that you professed to separate from: My first exception was, that
as you separated from the Dutch and French Churches so from ours also:
me^tioning your separation from the Dutch and French only to illustrate your
fact and your dealing with ours: This exception you devide into two, and reply
many things with little reason: And first, you pray me to consider how soundly
and directly I answer unto those 4. heads of transgression, which you named:
when I neither ingenuously grant the^, nor take upon me to convince them, etc.
Hereunto I answer.

First, my answer unto your argument is sound and direct though I meddle not
with those 4. transgressions at all: It is enough to show the falsehood of any
argument, if we show any part of the first or second proposition to be false:
and it is in the answerers choice to deny what he will: But you, as if you
regarded not the laws of learning and the rules of right reasoning, do grudge
this liberty unto me and expostulate with me as if the opponent might prescribe
the answerer what to grant and what to deny. Does not your argument of
separating from sin only fall manifestly unto the ground, and the honor of it
ly in the dust, when I give you some instances wherein you cannot prove that
you separate from sin only? why do you then trifle about surmises of I know
not what inconveniences? Oh, but you complain, that I will walk at liberty and
you must be bound in cords: you must prove directly, and I may answer
indirectly. But you are herein a very unjust murmurer: and you are herein like
unto a Nigardly person who desiring to seem liberal makes proffer of some
kindenes, where he thinks it will not be accepted: but seeing it accepted
contrary to his expectation, then he repents and frets in himself and grumbles
against the person that has accepted his offer: did not you offer me to reason
with me of Fol. 2. a
what point or points I would? why do you now grudge to perform it? have not
you framed and fashioned your argument your self? why do you with such an
ill-wil prosequute it in order? If it be a pain unto you that you are bound:
it is but in the cords of your own offer and of your own argument: you must
blame your self for it. If I walk at liberty it is but in the plain pathway of
direct reasoning: let men of learning judge. And why do you trifle about the
expectation of it may be two or three of our people (which yet I know not of)
that supposed the question betwixt us was otherwise then it is; as if I should
alter the state of the question laid down betwixt us, upon such a pretense?
How unjustly do you complain that I with draw at the first? I withdraw not one
inch from the question laid down plainly of purpose by my self to avoid such
cavils as these: But lo, it is you which speaking of our Page 35.
entering into lists, which were described by me and approved by your self do
yet at the very first encounter start aside from these lists or bounds into an
other field, and at one skip leap out of Germany into England.

Secondly, to salve or to mitigate a little the pain of your coffeehouse, if
it may be, I do plainly signify unto you that my resolution and purpose is
(the Lord assisting me with life and strength) to deal with you about your
separation from the Church of England, and to manifest your error and schism
therein also, when once this controversy about our particular congregation
shall be finished and sufficiently discussed. In the mean time I think to hold
unto this, being so fit a preparation unto the other.

In the next place you reply further, that to ensnare your separation in sin, I
bring no one word of the Law of God, whereby sin is to be known, but allege
the congregations of men. That this may be a stumbling block to the weak, etc.
a common practice of the Papists to dazel men's eyes, etc. To the law and to the
testimony, etc. I answer.

First, it is a great wrong and an vrter perverting of my answer to say I
allege the congregations of men to ensnare you in sin, as though I drew an
argument from the authority of men to convince your error. I make no argument
there at all, but give answer unto you, and there again only in a matter of
fact I declare the manner of your separation to be otherwise then you pretended
in speaking of your separation from those 4. heads of transgression: there I
show that your separation is not only from those 4. things, but also that as
you separate from the Dutch and French, so do you from ours, thereby to give
you occasion to make good your argument for the rejecting of our congregation,
and so to come unto the particulars concerning the same, in defense whereof I
hope to manifest how much you have abused the scriptures.

Secondly, the blame which you impute unto me for the allegation of humane
testimonies to dazel the eyes of men, etc. is justly to be returned upon your
own head, who do so often cite them and call for them to be your witnesses,
even all sorts of them, heathnish, Popish, Jewish Authors, yea the very witches
themselves and the Spirits of divination. For example

1. For the allegations of heathens, see how needlessly you allege them; when
you show unto Mr. Johnson the disproportion betwixt the common wealth and
ministers in the church, you content not yourself with the scriptures, but you
Animad. verse. p. 15.
call for the testimony of Cato to reprove him. When you tell him of
aequivocating, and show it to be a common practice of such as would deceive,
you Ibid. page 35.
call for the witness of Aristotle against him, etc.

For allegation of Popish witnesses, you produce many of them in this writing,
as Pope Sylvester, Helmoldus, Geroldus and Vnwannus, and other fabulous writers
to reprove our opinion and practice; you that so little regard Rev. 14.1.2.
the harpers of mount Sion, the harmonious voice of the reformed Churches that
witness against you, do not yet refuse to allege and bring against us those
Rev. 16.13.
croaking frogs, and unclean Spirits that come out of the mouth of the beast.

3. For Jewish writers, you produce them so often, both Animadvers. p. 16. 17.
etc.
against Mr. Johnson and also in this your writing, that all men may see, you
do not only go to the law and to the testimony, but to the Talmud and to the
Rabbines, to the Infidel Jews: though the 1. These. 2 16.
curse of God be come upon them to the full, their Romans 11.10.
eyes being blinded, the Mat. 21.43.
Kingdom of God taken from them, and they Mat. 8.12.
cast into utter darkness, yet would you light our candle at them that sit in
the shadow of death: yea you follow and imitate the vainest sort of them, the
Cabalists in their curious speculations as in your translation of the Psalms,
where you show that Israel is a name of power and principality, you note
further that Annotations on Ps. 14.7.
it may also be observed, how in this word ISRAEL are contained the first
letters of the names of Abraham and of Sarah his wife; of Isaak and Rebekah his
wife: of Iaakob and of both his Wives Leah and Rachel, etc. If this were a
lawful or tolerable observation, you might as well for the counte^ancing of
your schism, make the like observation upon the name of Separation, for in
this word, SEPARATION are also contained the first letters of the names of
Abraham and of Sarah his Wife: of Isaak and Rebekah his wife: of Iaakob and
of Rachel his wife: you might likewise observe how in this word SEPARATION are
also contained the initiall or first letters of the names of those Act. 5.6.
7. Saints Stephen, Philip, Prochorns, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas,
that had the honor to be the first Deacons of the new planted Christian Church
in Jerusalem: yea you might yet further observe that not only the first
letters of the names of those 3. ancient patriarchs Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob,
but also the first letters of the names of the 4. later patriarchs of new
Churches Mr. Johnson, Mr. Smith, Mr. Ainsworth, Mr. Robinson are in like manner
contained in this word SEPARATION, with many other mysteries that by such kind
of collections might be drawn from the same. But Ier. 23.28.
what is the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord? what is 1 Cor. 3.12.
hay and stubble of such observations to the Gold, Silver and precious stones
of faithful doctrine? And what have the sincere ministers of Christ to do with
such unsound, Jewish and Cabalistical observations and annotations?

4. For your allegation of the testimony of witches or Spirits of divination,
your fault herein also appears to be very great. 1. In that you Cou^terp. Page
47. Animad. verse. p. 95.
allege the Oracles of the Sibylles, women possessed and inspired by the
Devil: herein you offend against your own Esa. 8.20
allegation, to the law and to the testimony; and consider the Ibid. 19.
verse going before in the same chapter: Should not a people enquire at their
God, should they go from the living to the dead? A man might as well and as
lawfully 2 Kin. 1.2.3 4-16
with Ahaziah that wicked King of Israel have sent to enquire at the Oracle of
Baalzebub the God of Ekron, as have gone to the orackle of Baalah. Sibylla:
whose testimony you bring unto us. Our Savior in the days of his flesh on
earth Luk 4.35 41.
rebuked the wicked Spirits for their testimony of him, and commanded them to
hold their peace: Paul also was Act. 16.17.18.
greeved at the testimony of the maid that had the Spirit of divination: but
you on the contrary require the Spirit of divination to speak unto us, and call
unto Sibyll that she may cry after us with her testimony. 2. This allegation is
so much the more vile, then the testimony of many other witches that wicked men
seek unto, in respect of the most filthy and abominable manner whereby this
wretched wight did both receive and utter again the inspiration of the
unclean Spirit, namely not by her mouth only, but her belly being swollen,
and she sitting upon the sacred stool or Tripos, then came the stinking Oracle
from under or out of the stool below. This kind of impure divination is noted
both in the Ob, and Oboth. Lev. 19.31 and 20.27.
title which the scripture gives, unto these miscreants, which signifies a
bottle or bladder in respect of that inspiratio^ which makes their bellies as a
blown bladder: and by the Engastrimuthoi. ventriloqui. The 70 intepreters in
Levit. 19.31, etc. Bar-schuma, the son of Swelling The Syriac translat. in Act.
13.6. See Iunius there, and Anal. on Deuteronomy. 18.11.
titles which other writers give them to signify their speaking out of their
bellies: And this monstrous impurity is more largely described by sundry other
witnesses and by some that are printed togather with that book, from whence
you allege those oracles of Sibylla. Wherefore then should such unclean
stuff be brought unto Christian ears: and why do you Mr. Ainsworth adorn
your writings with such excrements of unclean and wicked Spirits? 3. It is sin
to go unto witches for any Silver or cattle or such like earthly goods when
they are lost or stolen, but to go unto a Spirit of divination to enquire for
the truth of Religion when it is hidden, lost or obscured by the adversaries
thereof, who do by their controversies as it were steal the same: this is yet
a greater iniquity, this is to make the father of lies a guide unto the truth,
and to set Satan in Gods seat. 4. Many in their necessities, dangers and
temptations go unto vvisardes: for as you tell Mr. Johnson when he alleges
the opinion of Mr. Iunius for his cause: Animad. verse. p. 98.
What will not men do for help in time of need? Yet are not such excused
thereby: for God is Genesis 17.1.
al sufficient unto his people. But how much more are they to blame that
needlessly for wantonness, pleasure or vain ostentation do run unto them, as you
do unto Sibylla? what needed you to run to the Spirit of divination to prove
Animad. verse. p. 95.
Antichriste to be Belial, as though the scriptures did not show it
sufficiently? How frivolous and idle a flourish do you make with the testimony
of Sibylla in the Counterpoy. p. 47.
other place to give some color unto such an exposition of scripture, as even
your self in the next page do reject as uncertain if not false? How just is
the Refutatio^ of Giff. page 120.
reproof of H. Barow upon you, when he inveigheth against those that fetch the
ornaments of their style and of their books from profane Writers though it
were but to exemplify and illustrate that which the said? what would he have
said think you, if he had seen you paint and varnish the margent of your
books with such allegations as these? 5. Those vvritings, from whence you
allege the testimonies of Sibylla are even by the publisher of that book
himself in his preface manifested to be forged and counterfeit things for the
most part: Now it is sin to ly of the Devil, why do you then allege in the
name of Sibylla, you know not what? How greedy are you of vain allegations,
that thus lick up the crummes and fragments of Sibyll, and grasp after the
shadow of a sorceresse? Though some ancient writers have heretofore used the
testimony of the Sibyls, against the pagans that worshipped the devil, to
convince them by their own oracles, which then were not so counterfeit and
forged as now they are, yet have not you the like excuse, that want the like
occasion for the use of them. These things I have thought good to note the more
largely (though many other evils might further be observed in these your
allegations) because your manner still is through out your writings to upbraid
us so much with that which your self are more guilty of.

In the third place, you reply that we have no more reason (if so much to say
that you have separated from the Dutch Churches, then that they have separated
from you, etc. I answer.

1. This does not diminish the truth of my former answer; if you have separated
from the Dutch, then have you not separated only from those 4. heads,
mentioned in your argument.

2. Neither does this diminish your sin, but increase the same: for if the
Dutch have also separated from you, this might be an occasion of repentance
unto you by making you to consider your ways more seriously, and so to find
out your scandal condemned by the word of God. And the Papists, Arians and
Anabaptists may say as well as you, that the Dutch Churches have separated from
them as well as they have separated from the Dutch. And this serves for a
further witness against them.

3. If the word of God came not to Dutch men only, as you say: then are you
for this chiefly to be humbled that have made a separation contrary to that
word that came unto you also. And though you acknowledged the Reformed Churches
to be true Churches and did dedicate your Confession unto their universities,
yet when they saw your schism published therein, namely that Confess. Art. 32.
all that will be saved are bound by Gods Commandment, with speed to come forth
of their Antichristian estate in the Church of England, etc. Whereby you
condemned all the godly therein as being in a damnable estate, and excluded
from salvation in that estate: when they saw many of your exceptio^s against
the Church of England to be such as did also necessarily lead unto separation
from them, as well as from England, had they not reason to avoid and beware of
the new Disciples of such a separation, as being an unlawful assembly
established in Schism and not in Christ.

4. For that which you allege concerning their answering of your reasons:
namely, that they would do it, if they saw it needful, or if they found any
thing that was worthy of answer. Might they not have their reasons so to
answer? did they not discern your contentious disposition in other dealings
before, as well as afterward, when the deputies both of Dutch and French
churches dealing with your Eldership about the cause of Mr. John Johnson to
have stayed your pastor from the excommunication of his Father if it might have
been, do yet Profane Schism of Bro. p. 60.
testify that they could not get a Categoricum tespo^sum.
plain or direct answer from you? And if there were nothing else, had they not
some reason to cease reasoning with them that would not answer plainly and
directly?

Lastly, as Mr. Johnson himself writes that Preface to D. B. sect. 6. Before
answer to Mr. Jacob.
experience the mistress of fools teaches many things, so might the Dutch
Eldership consider that the same schoole-mistresse might teach you that, which
you would not learn of others; as they may also see it come to pass in Mr.
Johnson and the greatest part of your congregation who have now of themselves
let fall many of those things for which they stood so eagerly against the Dutch
heretofore.

Your fourth reply is, that the instance of that one man that came unto you
from the French Church, convinces you no more of sinful Separation; then the
Dutch Churches receyving sundry of such as had been your members convinces
them. I answer, this instance was not alleged as an argument to convince the
unlawfulness and sin of your separation, but as an answer for matter of fact
unto your argument, to illustrate your fact in separating from our congregation
as you do from the French: and thus it shows as much as it was brought for:
namely, that you do not separate only from the 4. things mentioned by you.

In your fifth reply, you tell us 3 of the causes for which Mr. Cluse your Elder
left the French Church, viz. their use of humane leitourgies, Cathechisme, and
baptising such as are not in the covenant of Christ, etc. That for these sins
according to your maine argument he left them lawfully, etc. I answer.

1. This story of your Elders separation is imperfectly set down: In the
examination of his fact, it were expedient the Reader should know the
circumstances thereof, and how it began in a most pregnant and remarkable
discontment how it was concluded with shameful and false boasting: of these
things I have ample testimony from Mr. La vigne the ancient and reverend
pastor of that French Church delivered unto me in the presence of their
Eldership which in due time is further to be manifested.

2. For the causes of his separation, he alleged also the set maintenance of
their ministers: their meeting in Idol-temples* their suffering of the innocent
party to forgive the offendant that had committed adultery, and to live
togather again: their manner of exercising their discipline, etc. Touching
Idol-te^ples, he may learn by this writing in defense of our particular
congregation that he had no cause to separate upon such a pretense: and as for
the rest of the points suppose they were all sins as you would have them: yet
does it not follow according to your maine or mean argument, that therefore he
should leave their Church: for he did not according to your argument separate
from sin only, but from all that was good amongst them? and left their whole
communion. That being true which follows in the defense of our Church,
Decluse may hereby perceive that he has cause to humble himself for his
offense given unto the French.

Lastly, you reply, that there is in him and you, no other blame to be found
then in me and ours, who profess to separate from known evilles, etc. I
answer, that there be two maine differences betwixt us, which do make our
estates to differ as far as East is from the West: 1, he and you in justifying
of him, will have such things to be known evilles, as are not evil at all: to
wit, set maintenance of ministers: use of our temples: the innocent persons
reteyning of the repentant adulterer, etc. These we maintain to be lawful. 2.
he and you in justifying of him, for pretended corruptions do utterly renounce
communion, and quite leave a true Church as de has done: but we on the
contrary do not leave communion of true Churches for corruptions and sins,
according to his example, but only abstain from the practice of evil in our
own persons, and witness against it in others, still holding communion with
the Churches of Christ.

Unto my second exception (as you call it; though it be my first answer only
illustrated with your separation from the French Church mentioned before) you
reply two things. 1. You say, it is we that have made the separation by
gathering a new Church apart from you, who were here a Church before us. I
answer, though it be true that we renounce your schism and communion, yet does
not our gathering of a new Church apart from you, prove the same: for it may
yet come to pass that there shall be an other new English Church in this city
gathered apart from us, and yet no separation, but a loving communion
occasionally miainteyned betwixt us, though we be here a church before them By
such a reason as this you might prove that Mr. Robinson and his company
separated from you at his first coming into this land, because they gathered a
new church apart from you in the same city, you being here a Church before
them. 2. you say, you have just cause to censure such of yours as come unto us
both for their schism in leaving you: and for their falling into great
evilles, as the renouncing of their holy covenant and profession of separation,
etc. I answer, 1. You censure your people sometimes not only for separating
from you: and for renouncing their covenant with you, but even for hearing one
Sermon with us, and cut them off if they make not public repentance: yea
though they hear us at such a time when you have no exercise: And this is a
full proof of that point whereunto I brought it, namely to show the lamenes of
your argument, in that you did not separate only from those 4. things noted by
you: but this fault you will not see nor acknowledge, though it be most
palpable. 2. That your people ought to renounce their covenant made among you
with profession of separation from the Church of England, it is already showed
in those treatises which I have nominated unto you, which if they were duly
weighed, the abomination of your schism might well be discerned
notwithstanding all the libelles which you have spread abroad against the
Church of God.

To my third exception, as you reckon it, touching your separation from the
private communion of the godly in England, you reply many things in a heap:
that to convince you of sin, I bring no one word of God, but would press you
with the writings of men, etc. Hereunto I answer.

First, touching your misreckoning: you deal with me as the Church of Rome in
their Catechismes does with the decalogue or 10, Commandments: when they leave
out the second commandment which is against their Idolatry, yet to keep the
number of ten, they divide the last commandment and make two of it: so when I
gave you 3. answers to your argument, you leave out the last and omit it
altogather, and yet keep the number by dividing the first and making two of it.

Secondly, when I sent you here to the writings of Mr. Robinson refuting your
private schism, do not I send you to the word of God and scriptures which he
has alleged, as is largely to be Relig. Com. from p. 7. to 17.
seen? How often do you your self in your books send us unto the writings of
H. Barow, and Mr. Johnson, vpbrayding us for not answering of them? yea and
furthet to show your blind partiality in this complaint, do not you your self
in your former Page 4.
writing send me unto Mr. Robinsons book to answer it: and why may not I as
well send you to the very same Author? Nay, not only so, but you send me unto
such a book of Mr. Robinson as himself does begin to revoke publicly as
being unsound in diverse things, whereas I refer you unto a later book of his,
made with riper deliberation, and in no part that I hear of, publicly
revoked. His book which you send me unto, being his Justification of
separation, is sick of King Chro. 21.15.18.19.
Iehorams incurable disease, the guts of it fall out day by day, yea he
openly pluckes out some of the bowelles thereof with his own hands: unto this
rotten book you refer me, and yet blame me that refer you unto that which is
more sound. What equity or honesty is there, in this dealing?

Thirdly, for the setting of you at variance, it is your selves that have done
it, yea the Lord in his judgment has done it: I only wish that you would not
smother the matter, but search conscionably for the truth: and so I doubt not
but it would redound to the advantage of the truth, and of many poor souls
ensnared in your error, yea and to your own advantage at the last, by being
made an occasion to find out the evil of your schism.

Fourthly, for your now urging of me to answer the things that concern
public communion in this foresaid book, do you not consider that upon the
coming forth of this book, there was presently published a Manuduction for Mr.
Robinson to lead him unto public communion, and this by the same person that
had convinced his private separation to be unlawful? Those that do justly
weigh those Manuductions may thereby discern his doctrine about public
communion laid down in that book, to be already refuted.

Fifthly, for your urging of me to answer D. Bilsons and Mr. Hookers books, as
well as I urge you to answer Mr. Robinson: I answer, there is not the like
reason. 1. There is no minister or learned man to answer Mr. Robinson but only
you, Mr. Johnson being against you also in this and no protestant minister in
the world that holds such an unchristian error against private communion with
the godly besides your self that I can hear of: whereas for the answer of D.B.
and Mr. H. there are many more fit and meet then I am. 2. I were never provoked
to answer these men, as you have been openly in your own congregation by your
own people desired and urged to answer Mr. Robinson. 3. The substance of that
which is in those two men's books has been answered already in many writings:
the substance of that which Mr. Robinson has printed against your private
Schism, has not been refuted by any that I ever heard of.

Sixthly, to that you say, there be for on of you, a 1000. of us and more, to
make answer, etc. I answer, 1. Though we be more then you, yet seeing you be
such men of might, and we but grasshoppers in your sight: seeing your people do
so often take into their mouths that saying of Moses and apply it to
themselves against us: Deuteronomy. 32.30.
one shall chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight: according to
this account your excellency is equivalent unto our multitude. 2. If we be a
1000. to one of you, yet it appears that one of you have heretofore been as
ready to contend for the separation, as a 1000. of us have been to strive
against it: one of you has stird up as much contention as a 1000. of us.
Heretofore when Mr. B. wrote a book against your schism, each of you strove to
be on his back. Mr. Smith and Mr. Robinson pleaded that they had special right
in the quarrel, and yet you prevented them both and rushed into the battle
before them: Though then you three came against one, yet now when 3. of you are
by name called upon to defend the unreasonableness of your separation, in the In
the preface:
book so entitled: there is not one of you appears: heretofore you were wont
to snatch up private letters, broken notes of Sermons and other writings and
made several books against them, still complaining (as even in your former
writing) that you were not answered: why do you now begin to make a contrary
complaint against me? It is your self they lay lode upon your own broad
shoulders, by setting your hand with Genesis 16.12.
Ismael against every man in every Church of Christ.

Seventhly, though my writings to you were about Church communion, and your
argument also concern the same, yet if in this your argument you bring such a
proposition, the falsehood whereof may be manifested by consideration of your
private communion, is there not just occasion to note the same? And howsoever
you intended your speech touching the inference of public communion from
private, (if it were so as you now interpret your self) the discussing thereof
betwixt you would undoubtedly help to pluck down the tower of your separation.
As for your presumptuous affirmation, that it is not possible that the
principles of your separation which is from sin only and communion therewith
should ever be shaken, so long as Gods word endures, it is but a puff of the
flesh: and I would counsel you to beware of such vain confidence, which might
moove the Lord to Iam. 4.6.
smite you with hardness of heart: yea such presumption is not only a mooving
cause, but also a means whereby that judgment of obduration is executed: for
many times when corrupt flesh has spoken or written vainly and co^fidently,
there is a veil of prejudice and frowardnes spread over the heart thereby: a
greater unwillingness to retract error is wrought in the heart thereby, and me^
come to say as Pilate did in an other case, Ioh. 19.22.
That which I have written, I have written. The word of God is infallible and
endures for ever, but your knowledge of that word is fallible: Those two may
not be compared togather: Your separation is built upon the misunderstanding of
that word. Whether you err and pervert the word of God in making that to be
sin which is not: and in making that to be separation from sin only, which is
also separation from good things, we are to consider by the examination of the
particulars following for which you separate from us.

Lastly, when you profess to show us your judgment touching communion with the
godly in England, you do wrap up the matter so, that simple men may easily
mistake you and be deceyved by you: you tell us that you hold private communion
with such as are come to that measure of grace, as that they are worthy in
Christ, to be receyved into the true visible Church: but who be they, Mr.
Ainsworth? is there any one person, man, woman, or Child, high or low, that is
a member of the Church of England, and uses to hear the Sermons of the
sincerest Minister of that Church whosoever, whom you judge to be worthy in
Christ to be receyved into the true visible Church? name any one if you can:
Nay I know you can not according to your profession name one; for according to
the whole tenor of your vvritings, they are all and every one of them
Antichristians, yea gross Idolatours, carrying the mark of the beast, and
therefore all of them by you debarred from the Church of Christ, until they
renounce that Church and every Minister thereof, separating as you have done.
But yet you say, you will labor to cherish the good things that appear to be
in them: Now what is your cherishing of them? you allow them not to hear the
faithfullest Minister of the Land, which might cherish them: your self deny all
religious communion unto them even in private: you pronounce them all to be the
Children of wrath and of the curse: and teach throughout your vvritings that
there is no promise of Christ in his Gospel, no hope of salvation that
belongs unto them in this their estate: This is your cherishing of them? This
your private schism is confuted by Mr. Robinson: he presses you with the
word of God, with the scriptures and with divine authority, though you
would feign have the reader to imagine otherwise, by calling for the word of
God, etc. Until you have answered the scriptures and the reasons alleged by
him, it is needless for me to bring any more. In the mean time I will endeavor
to maintain our Church Estate against you.

CHAP. III. Touching the use of the Lords prayer.
THE mayn argument for our Separation being thus established: I now come to the
particulars. For the use or abuse of the Lords prayer (so called) first I
mentioned the reading of that part of scripture for a prayer: and with this you
meddle not. Secondly I misliked the saying it over by rote, as is the fashion
of many. To this you say, if I mean without understanding and feeling, you
condemn that also. I answer, I mean not that only: for men may also read it,
yea may read humane leitourgies with understanding and feeling, and yet offend
in so praying: other things are requisite to true prayer besides understanding
and feeling. I mean therefore by rote, after the common manner, without book:
when men having committed it to memory, say it over for their prayer, after
they have prayed by the spirit; as God enabled them.

Thirdly I granted a lawful and holy use of that or any other part of
scripture in our prayers, as the Spirit of God leads us to any of them. You
say, your manner is ordinarily before or after every Sermon, to conclude your
prayers with the Lords prayer: after you have prayed by the help of the Spirit,
you persuade your selves that you also conclude by the help of the same Spirit.

This your practice and persuasion I approve not: being persuaded that our Lord
intended not such an use of that scripture. My reasons I will show, when you
have given answer to those things set down in our Apology, as you promise.

For Mr. H. his doctrine among you, that it should be ambiguous, and his
meaning to be against those only that contented themselves with a set form,
and used no other in private, etc. I can go no further then by report: others
that heard him, say otherwise then you do. I hear also that he continues like
doctrine still where he teaches, and privately disswadeth from reading prayers
in praying to God: and other reasons (which I spare now to mention) move me to
think otherwise then you write of him. And in speech with my self, about the
same time, before two that came with him, he signified his dislike of reading
prayers, without any such limitation as you allege. But if he taught as I heard
it related, it was but the truth: from which your contrary judgment swarveth.
Which in one of the proofs of my former argument, if you had fallen into it,
would have come to the trial.

Answer.
Your maine argument for separation from sin only will then be established
when you have proved all those particular things which you blame in us, to be
sin: and that you separate from them only: until such time, you do here in
vain flatter your self that your maine argument is established: The truth and
force of that general reason depends upon the particulars which we now come
to examine. Touching our question about the use or abuse of the Lords prayer,
you observe in the first place, how you mentioned the reading of that part of
scripture for a prayer: and thereupon you note, that with this I meddle not. I
answer, 1. The reason why I spoke not of reading that prayer out of the book,
was because we do not in our Church so use to read it on a book, but utter it
without a book as we do the other part of our prayers going before: Now the
question laid down before betwixt you and me at this time is touching the
practice of our particular congregation: and therefore it is you rather that go
beside the question in this your mentioning of it. 2. Seeing the reading of it
upon a book and vttring of it for our prayer without a book are both of them
actions of like nature: seeing the reasons in your apology against our use of
this prayer are expressly and indifferently directed as well against the
reading of this prayer, as against the saying of it by rote, (as you call it:)
and there is no thing that is there distinctly spoken more against the one then
the other: when I then undertook to refute those reasons in your Apology, did
I not therein also undertake to maintain the reading of that prayer against
you? who sees not now, that your first note in this place is but a trifeling
observation. 3 I desire the readers to look back into the former part of our
writings touching this point, both mine and yours: to compare them togather:
and then to judge who it is that has winked and passed by the evils objected
about this matter, and namely, beside other things the slanderous and ungodly
assertion of H. Barow touching our use of the Lords prayer.

In the second place, you explane your meaning of that phrase of saying by
rote, contrary to the common acception of the word, of saying it not only
without understanding and feeling, but of saying it after the common manner,
without book, etc. you grant that men may also read it, yea and other humane
leitourgies with understanding and feeling, and yet offend in so praying: your
reason is; other things are requisite to true prayer besides understanding and
feeling. But what are those other things which cannot be reduced unto these
two? understanding conteyneth under it the knowledge of God, his wisdom,
power, love, truth and other attributes: his gracious covenant in Christ, his
law, his works, etc. Likewise the knowledge both of our neighbors estate and
our own, our sins, miseries, deliverances, etc. Under feeling joined with
knowledge, are comprehended the feeling of Gods mercy in Christ by a lively
faith: the sense of his glorious comforts by a lively hope: the feeling of our
neighbors estate by true love and compassion and joy for him: the feeling of
our own sins, miseries, baseness, by true and godly sorrow, humility, etc.
Hereupon I do thus reason against you from your own grant: That prayer which
is vttred with knowledge, faith, hope, love, humility, etc. is acceptable unto
God, and ought to be approved of Men. But the Lords prayer is by us vttred with
knowledge, faith, hope, love, humility, etc. Therefore it is acceptable to God,
and ought to be approved. The first proposition is manifest from the Ps.
25.1.2. Mark. 11.24.25. Ioh. 14.13. Heb. 11.4. Iam. 5.15. 1 Timothy 1.5. Ps.
145.18.
scriptures, that do allow such use of prayer: The second proposition is
granted by your self, in that you yield the Lords prayer may be said of us with
understanding and feeling, seeing those two graces do comprehend under them the
rest above named which are required for the acceptance of our prayers.

In the third place, whereas speaking of the Lords prayer, you grant a lawful
and holy use of that or of any other part of scripture in our prayers, as the
spirit of God leads us unto any of them: you do here again yield us the
whole question and as much as we desire: for we require no other use of the
Lords prayer, then as the spirit of God leads us unto it. A Christian man
ought to be Romans 8.1 Gal. 5.16. -- 25.
led by the Spirit of God in all his other actions and conversation, as well as
in prayer: we hold also that as a Christian man of weak memory and unable to
read having but two or three psalms without book, may yet daily and ordinarily
sing the same unto God early and late, as his prayers, praises and
thanksgivings and herein worship God in the Spirit: that even so the Lords
prayer may also be daily used for our prayer and worship of God in the Spirit:
seeing we are no otherwise taught to 1. Cor. 14 15.
pray with the Spirit and with understanding, then as we are taught to sing
with the Spirit and with understanding, which singing I think you will not deny
but that it may be done in set words ordinarily.

In the fourth place it is here to be observed that whereas in my former
vvriting, I desired you to tell me plainly, whether you held our use of the
Lord prayer to be sin and a worship to be communicated with all: to this you
answer not. Whereas again I answered you distinctly in the Page 14.
same place, that the saying of this prayer by rote even in the worst sense
without feeling and understanding could be no warrant for the people to
separate from us, though it should be our sin so to use it: to this also you
give no reply but pass by it as if it had not been written, though I was
instant with you, and showed that about this point only our question was, etc.
further whereas in your fotmer Page 4.
writing you confess that for the use of the Lords prayer among us, you have
not laid it down as a cause of refusing communion with us, etc. If you be
still of the same mind (as you have not yet declared the contrary though you
have been so earnestly moved to declare your meaning herein) then may you
plainly discern your separation overthrown hereby in respect of many of
those causes that you do pretend for the same: for if our use of the Lords
prayers be unlawful: if it be a transgression contrary to the word of God and
to so many scriptures as you do allege to impugn the same: then why do you
not separate for it, as well as for other sin which you impute unto us? as you
approve not other things among us, so neither do you approve this; how can you
without partiality give your self a dispensation to hold communion with us
notwithstanding this sin, rather then others? as for example, when you do
maintain your Elder John Decluse separating from the French Church for their
baptising some Children which you hold ought not to be baptized, how could you
have allowed him to have held communion with them using the Lords prayer in
your judgment contrary to the scriptures as well as the former? so for other
read prayers: for celebration of Marriages in the Church, and the like, how can
you allege them as causes of separation, rather then this saying of the Lords
prayer by rote, as you speak? Suppose you hold the other to be greater sins
then this, yet will not that clear you: for 1, a good conscience will take
heed of being defiled Mat. 5.19 and 23.23. Ps. 119.6.128.
with lesser known sins, and not with greater only: if there be such an
vnevitable pollution by communicating with that worship where any known sin
is committed as your vvritings for separation do persuade men: how comes it
that this abuse of the Lords prayer does not pollute as well as the rest? 2,
seeing the abuse of the more Exo. 20.7 Numb. 4.15.
holy thing is the greater sin: if our use of the Lords prayer be a sin, then
must it needs in this regard be a greater sin, then the use of other set
forms of prayer written by men: in as much as it is a greater sin to abuse the
words of Christ then the words of other men. 3, seeing this abuse of the Lords
prayer (as you account it) is far more frequent then that baptising, and
celebration of marriages which you allege as causes of refusing communion with
the Reformed Churches, and seeing that evilles Esa. 59.12. Hos. 12.1.
often committed do the more pollute: how can you but refuse communion for this
abuse as well as for the other? 4, seeing in your maine argument laid down
before, you plead that separation to be of God, which is from sin only and
communion therewith, and yet will not separate for this sin of abusing the
Lords prayer, had you not need to acquit your self vvisely herein, unless you
vvil have your maine foundation of separation to be shaken in pieces?

As for my promise which you mention, namely to answer your 9. reasons in your
Apology, although my promise was made upon such a condition as is not by you
performed, yet because the answer thereunto may serve for further defense of
our Church in the use of the Lords prayer, I have not refused the labor to set
down a refutation thereof, as follovveth.



Apology.
Apol. p. 69.
You plead that our use of the Lord prayer is unlawful. 1. Because Christ's
doctrine there is, to teach us to pray after this manner: Math. 6.9. and is not,
for our prayer, to read or say ever those words by rote, etc.

Answer.
First, this reason is inconsequent: because, though the manner and form of
true prayer be there taught by Christ, that hinders not, but the same words
may be our prayer also: One and the same pattern or form of a thing does
often serve both for present use in the work whereunto it is intended, and for
imitation to make the like: As a just weight or balance serves both for our
present use to weigh with all, and also for a pattern to make an other like
the same by it. So the Lords prayer serves for a pattern of true prayer, and
also for our present use at any time to call upon the name of the Lord with
those words.

Secondly, consider well your own practice in singing of Psalms, and you
shall thereby discern your error in this kind of reasoning here used by you:
In the 8. the 100, the 117. Psalms and other such like, the holy Ghost does
teach us after what manner we are to praise and glorify God: In the doctrine of
them we have a pattern and form of spiritual songs and Hymns: and yet this
hinders you not but that you use to read or say over by rote (as you call it)
the very same words for your own spiritual songs in the worship of God. See
you not now hereby, that the same words may serve both for a rule and pattern
after what manner we are to worship, and also for our worship of God in the use
of the very same words without any change?

Thirdly, seeing the Mat. 6.9. Luke 11.2.
phrases used by our Savior are such as serve sufficiently to express the
minds of fathers and Schoole-maisters, even then when they allow their
Children and Scholars to rehearse their lessons verbatim, either in some
forms of salutation, petition or the like: what reason have you to deny the
common and ordinary signification of the phrases, there being nothing either in
these texts or any other to enforce a change of this sense and meaning wherein
they are used?

Apology.
2. Because both Matthew and Luke recording that form of prayer given by
Christ, they have not the same words, nor the same number of words every where,
etc.

Answer.
We do not contend that the same words and number of words in the Lords prayer
are always precisely and of necessity to be used, but we hold that it is
lawful to use them as our prayer, either with or without such changes as are
to be noted in the Evangelists recording them. If we precisely follow Matthew,
it is no offense to Luke: If we use the words as they are in Luke, it is no
offense against Matthew: If we vary in phrase from both of them, it may be
without offense to either: our tenent is, that either the same words or to the
same purpose may lawfully be used of us. And therefore this reason is wholly
beside the question.

Apology.
3. Because all the circumstances in both the Evangelists do lead us thus to
understand it. As namely, that Christ there shows the right manner how to use
prayer, like as he does for the right use of alms and fasting: how to avoid
ambition, hypocrisy, babbling, and the like therein: how also to come to God in
prayer, as Children do to their parents, asking bread, an egg, fish, or the
like: that is, making requests unto God according to our particular wants, in
faith, hope, love, etc. Math. 6.1-18. Luke 11.1-13.

Answer.
This argument is a mere assertion and most false, without any proof. There is
no circumstance in either of the Evangelists that leads us to think we may not
use the Lords prayer as a prayer. It can not be showed that this use of it,
does make us guilty of ambition, hypocrisy or babbling: or that in this use we
can not come unto God with feeling of our particular wants as Children do to
their parents: or that in this use of it there can not be the practice of
faith, hope, love, etc. All this remains to be proved, until which time this
argument might well for shame have hidden his head, and plucked in these horns
of slander by which it pusheth at all the Saints in the Reformed Churches for
their daily public and private use of this prayer, shutting them up under the
condemnation of Ambitious persons, hypocrites, Bablers; as being without
feeling of their particular wants: without faith, hope and love in their use of
this prayer. Such arguments as this agree fitly with the slanders of H. Barow,
but cannot become any modest Christians.

Apology.
4. Because the Apostles (who both knew and carefully followed the true meaning
of Christ herein) did neither bynd themselves to these words, but prayed still
as they had several occasions, according to this rule ( Act. 1.24.25. and
4.24-30, etc.

Answer.
First, though the Apostles did not bind themselves to these words, yet does
not this prove, that they never used the same as their prayer: they might pray
according to their several occasions, according to this rule, and yet with the
words of the rule. The ministers of Christ do here use to pray according to
their several occasions, and yet with the words of this prayer also.

Secondly, though we read not in their writings, that they did in express
words teach men to say over the Lords prayer, yet we read that by their
example in their writings they did as much in teaching men other set forms of
prayer in their salutations and valedictions: as appears, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor.
1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These.
1.2. Romans 16.23. 1 Cor. 16.23. Phil. 4.23. 1 These. 5.28. 2 These. 3.18. At
several times vvriting upon diverse occasions and unto diverse people, Paul yet
(we see) used the same form of prayer, and the same words: And this is al one
as if he had so many times used the Lords prayer: for wherefore should it be
more unlawful to use the Lords prayer often, then to use these forms of words
so often for his prayer.

Thirdly, though the Apostles taught men according to their necessities and
occasions to show their requests unto God in all manner prayer and supplication
in the spirit with giving of thanks, with watchfullnes and perseverance, yet
this hinders not but that they might use the Lords prayer and other like set
forms of prayer also: for the use of the Lords prayer as a prayer does not
destroy supplication in the Spirit, nor overthrow perseverance in prayer. Think
you not, that there are many servants of Christ using to conclude their prayers
with the Lords prayer, that yet watch with all perseverance to show their
requests unto God in all manner prayer, as well as your self, or any of your
separated people? Answer me plainly according to that light and feeling which
is in your conscience.

Apology.
5. Else also how says the Apostle (speaking of prayer in a strange tongue)
when thou blessest, how shall he that occupies the place of the unlearned say
Amen, at thy giving of thanks seeing he knows not what thou speak? 1 Cor.
14.16. For if they say over the words of this form of prayer, might not some
have answered: yes we know what he says, it is the Pater noster, the Lords
prayer which we know aforehand, and therefore we can say Amen unto it, though it
be spoken in a strange tongue.

Answer.
First, the Lords prayer might be used often as a prayer in the Church of
Corinth, and yet the unlearned among them not be able to say Amen unto these
that spoke strange languages of whom the Apostle here speaks: because these
men were extraordinary Prophets and did at some times by a special gift speak
other tongues and strange languages. And therefore the Apostle might have
replied again to any unlearned that should have answered as you suppose and
feign: Nay, though the Lords prayer be used ordinarily among you, in your own
speech, yet you know not what these extraordinary Prophets say, which come with
new revelations in a strange tongue unto you and therefore you can not say Amen
unto their prayers: so that I have still just cause to speak against their
prayers in a strange tongue.

Secondly, suppose the Corinthian Prophets had sometimes used the Lords prayer
in a strange tongue, yet this might have been so seldom and at such times that
the unlearned could not perceyve or understand the same: This seldom and rare
use of it, though it might be a sufficient testimony how lawful they held it
to be for their prayer, yet could it not be sufficient to enable the unlearned
to say Amen unto it.

Thirdly, suppose these extraordinary Prophets had so often and ordinarily used
the Lords prayer in a strange tongue, that all the unlearned could have
discerned when the Prophets repeated the same yet does it not follow that they
could in lawful manner have said Amen unto it: Because the lawful and right
saying of Amen, whereof the Apostle speaks requires not only a confused
knowledge, that the Lords prayer is said over at such a time: but also a
distinct understanding of the several words therein, that their hearts and
affections might go along with him that used the same, and so at length in the
conclusion signify and witness their consent by saying Amen unto it.

Fourthly, it is to be observed how H. Barow though upon a most absurd pretense
does yet in a contrary extremity contradict this your Apology: whiles he
affirms touching our use of the Lords prayer, even in our mother tongue: that
it does not edify the whole congregation, so that they may all mind one thing,
or say Amen. Discov. p. 70.73.
If it be true which he says, that men using it in their vulgar tongue, can
not yet say Amen unto it: how can it be true which your Apology says, that
they which occupy the place of the unlearned may say Amen unto it; eve^ when it
is used in a strange tongue?

Fifthly, if the people can say Amen unto the Lords prayer, when the words
thereof are usually said over, as your Apology here affirms: do you not
hereby overthrow your own assertion in denying our use of it? for can we say
Amen unto an unlawful prayer, which is not supplication in the Spirit; which
is not made with feeling of our wants, in faith, hope, etc? Or if it be lawful
for the people to follow us with their consent, and with their Amen, in the use
of this prayer, is it not as lawful for us to go before them in the use
thereof? Thus may you see how your own reasonings return upon your own head.

Apology.
6. If Christ have commanded to use those words in that number and order, then
all such do sin as pray at any time and use not those words, for he says, when
ye pray, say, etc. Luke 11.2. And the words when ye pray show that this
commandment is to be observed at all times: And then the Apostles sinned which
prayed and used not these words. Mat. 14.30. etc.

Answer.
This argument, which is so much and so often stood upon in Discov. p. 70. 71.
Inquir. page 85. Answer to M. Carp. page 24. Iustif. of Separ. p. 471. Answer
to Mr. Hild. page 140.
your writings, at least in six several books, is also with the rest most
weak and frivolous, for

First, though Christ's commandment of this prayer do include an allowa^ce of
the use of those very words and in the same number and order that either
Matthew or Luke have recorded: yet does it not follow, that we are therefore tied
to the^ alone, and that all other prayers are excluded thereby. Common use of
speech teaches us to make an other construction of his words: for as a man
that sends his Servant on a message, and commandes him when he comes unto his
friend to speak on this manner and to say, etc. does thereby ordinarily warrant
him either to deliver the same words verbatim, or else the same matter and
substance of the message though with some change and variety of words and
phrases. And as it were then a strange thing that he should be accounted a
disobedient and unfaithful servant that should use the very words of his
master without any change at all: so is it with the commandments of Christ.
For example: Christ sending his Apostles and commanding them a form of prayer
for salutation, when they came into any house, to say, Luke 10.5.
Peace be to this house, does thereby warrant them either to use the same words
verbatim, or the same in substance: And either way his commandment was
fulfilled. The holy Ghost prescribing a form of praise to say always, Psa.
40.16.
The Lord be praised, does allow us either the very same words or such as are
equivalent unto them. And even so for the use of the Lords prayer, our Savior
appoynts either the same words for our prayer, or such as tend to the same
purpose: and both ways is his commandment fulfilled.

Secondly, as for that partickle hotan, when, which you do so much urge against
us; it is not in the use thereof so general, nor so absolutely and largely
extended unto all times, as you would persuade us: for example, Christ says
Luk 11.24.25.26.
when the unclean Spirit goes forth, etc. when he comes again, he finds the
house empty, etc. Luk 12,54.
when ye see a cloud rising out of the west, straight way ye say a shower
comes and so it is. Luke 14,12.13.
when thou make a feast call not thy friends, etc. But when thou make a
feast call the poor, the maimed, etc. Now sometimes the unclean Spirits were
cast out and returned not: sometimes there are clouds out of the west without
rain: sometimes men may invite to feasts their friends, brethren and rich
neighbors. And therefore though our Savior had also said, when ye pray, use
these phrases and these very words for your prayers: etc. yet had he not
thereby absolutely tied us unto them alone, and excluded all other: for the
word hotan does often note unto us as much as sometimes or for the most part as
is evident in these instances and might also be showed in many more such like.

This answer may also suffice for that other part of your objection, touching
the excluding of all prayer in the Spirit alone that is without words or
distinct voice.

Apology.
7. Because that form of prayer does plainly and fully direct and restrain
our ignorant and inordinate desires, unto certain heads: in which whatsoever
is needful and lawful to ask, etc.

Answer.
I may say of these your reasons and consequences as your self once Defenc. of
Script. page 92.
wrote to Mr. Smith: The prayer of David seems to have prevayled against you,
for Ps. 58.7.
when you shoot arrows they are as broken: or like unto strawes: so weak and
vain they are, for.

First though all things needful or lawful to be asked, be contained in the
heads of this prayer: though thousands of petitions are and may be derived by
the Children of God according to their several wants, times and occasions from
each of these heads: yet does it not follow that the words of this prayer
themselves may not be used by us for our prayer: here is no proof of this
consequence.

Secondly, whereas you say: The heads themselves are so general as no man can
well for himself or others use them aright without some special relation or
application to his or their particular estate or occasions: This is both false
and inconsequent: 1. This is false, for even in a general respect and love of
Gods name, kingdom and will, we may well and lawfully use the words of this
prayer, though for the present our thoughts do not light and settle upon the
consideration of the particular means and ways, whereby his name is
sanctified, his will accomplished, etc. Mat. 18.10 Dan. 7.10.
As the elect Angels do evermore behold the face of God and present
themselves before him, waiting with reverence and with a general respect unto
his will before they receive any particular or special commandments or
commissions from him: so do the godly in the use of this prayer offer
themselves to God: and so are they taught to do even by the words of this
prayer it self, Mat. 6.10. again we may well and comfortably use the words of
this prayer with a general respect of our sins to be forgiven, and with a
general respect of temptations and afflictions that we desire to be delivered
from, though for the instant we do not think upon any of our particular sins
temptations or afflictions; where are the proofs that condemn us for so
doing? 2. This is inconsequent: for suppose it were unlawful to use this
prayer without some special relation or application thereof to our particular
occasions, yet what hinders but that in the use of the very words of this
prayer, we may also sometimes upon occasion have relation to our particular
sins and temptations, and to the particular means of glorifying God, though
the words be general which we use.

Thirdly, whereas you say: Neither can any man's or Churches case and
understanding reach unto all things needful for all occasions, times and
persons, as those heads do comprehend, this is also doubly inconsequent. 1. In
respect of our estate and condition; for suppose no man's case reach unto all
things comprehended in this prayer: yet seeing there is no word of this prayer
but it does evermore in a great measure and in the main alvvayes concern
every Christian man's estate, what forbids us to use the same as our prayer? 2.
In respect of our understanding; though no man can reach unto all the things
comprehended in this prayer, yet is it most senseless to argue from hence
against the lavvfull use of this prayer: for by this kind of reasoning we
might reject almost all prayers, all blessings and all salutations: for
example, we are taught to pray thus in our salutations, Luk 10.5. Ruth. 2.4.
peace be unto you: The Lord be with you: The Lord bless thee: And who can
reach unto the things that are comprehended in these short sentences while he
uses the same? The whole sum of Gods covenant with the innumerable fruits
and benefits thereof are certainly comprised herein.

Apology.
8. Else why should not the ministers be as well bound at the end of their
Sermons, and all Magistrates and people at their instructions and exhortations
given unto others, to say over the ten Commandments, because they do fully and
shortly comprise all duties.

Answer.
First, our question is about the lawfulnes, not about the necessity of using
this prayer: we do not say that ministers are bound to say over the Lords
prayer at the end of every Sermon: much less do we say that all Magistrates
and people are bound to use it at the end of their instructions and
exhortations: and thus this argument fails in the ground of that comparison
from whence it is taken.

Secondly, what law of God forbids ministers to repeat the 10. Commandments
at the end of their Sermons? For the Ministers of these Reformed Churches,
there are diverse of them which do ordinarily upon the Lords day before their
exercise of Catechizing, repeat the 10. Commandments, and what is their sin
in this? If judges and Magistrates who are appointed to be keepers of the
Decalogue should with the repetition hereof, either begin or conclude their
public and solemn charges and exhortations which at certain times they give
unto people, who can condemn them for it? If Masters of families should
every day begin or conclude their family instructions with rehearsal of the
10. Commandments, should not this be a testimony of their obedience to Gods
Deuteronomy. 6.7 8.9.
law, rather then a transgression thereof?

Thirdly, there is no equality nor just proportion in this comparison: The
wisdom of God in his word teaches us short forms of prayer for salutation
in 2 or 3 words, because we have every day and hour occasion to use them:
And seeing in like manner there is daily and hovverly occasion of mutual
exhortation, though it were an absurd and unreasonable thing contrary to the
wisdom of God, to conclude each salutation and exhortation with the Lords
prayer and 10. Commandments, more then an 100. times in a week, yet does it
not follow that it is unlawful or inconvenient once or twice in a week so to
begin or conclude a solemn exercise in the Church of God.

Apology.
9. Seeing it is a most perfect form of prayer, wherein is no want or
superfluity, if it were Christ's meaning to enjoyne the saying over of those
words for our prayer to God, then ought we to use these only and no other.
Because it should be but babbling or presumption to join or put other prayers
in stead of that which is so absolute and sufficient. For the Lord will be
worshipped with the best we have, and he is accursed that having a male for
sacrifice, does offer a corrupt thing to the Lord. Mal. 1.14.

Answer.
First, touching the type and ceremony wherein this argument is grounded: God
does not by Malachie denou^ce the curse against those which refused to offer
the best sacrifice which they had, but against those that offered corrupt
contrary to the law which required a sacrifice Lev. 1.3.10. and 3.1. and 4.3.23.
without blemish: against those especially which were hypocrites and deceyvers,
pretending love of God and yet brought corrupt things, Mal. 1.13 14.
torn, lame and sick, etc. A man that had a Kow and 2 Sheep was not bound to
offer his Kow, but might lawfully reteyne the same and enjoy the blessing Esa.
7.21 22.
promised of God unto his people. A poor man that had 10. Sheep, and some of
them thrice so good as the rest, was not bound to offer the best: the law only
required he should offer that which was not corrupt. Yea in some kind of
services, as in tithes, God would not have the best to be chosen out for him,
but Levit. 27.32.33.
would have that which passed under the rod, the 10th as it came by tale, and
this without change, the better might not be given to God in stead of the worse.

Secondly, beside your error in the story of this ceremony, consider also how
you err in the application of this type unto the question in hand. If you will
have it to serve your turn, you must prove that all prayers besides the Lords
prayer are corrupt things, like the lame and torn sacrifices: for this place
does not prove that the excellency of one sacrifice did exclude an other which
has not the same degree and measure of goodness, but only the corrupt and no
other.

Thirdly, mark the contradiction of this argument with the 3d. 4th. and 7th.
reasons going before: here you will have the Lords prayer being commanded to be
without superfluity: and all others joined with it to be but babbling: before
you complained and pleaded against the use of it, because no man's or Churches
case and understanding could reach unto so many things as were comprised in it:
And is not this to condemn it of superfluity? Here you argue that no other but
it alone must be used, because it is so absolute and sufficient, having no want
in it: before you pleaded against the use of it because it did not serve to
express our particular wants and necessities: And is not this to condemn it
for the defects thereof? Thus is it apparent, that these your reasons do
neither agree with the truth, nor with themselves.

TOuching Mr. Hu. his doctrine among us about the condemning of read prayer,
having showed you the error of that report which you objected unto me, both
for the time thereof, and the matter thereof: as also for the erroneous use you
collected thence: you omit to speak of the first and last of these points: and
touching the matter thereof you reply diverse things: 1, that you can go no
further then report, etc. but you had done well not to have gone so far, as it
seems the false report has done: That which I have written unto you is upon
my own knowledge that heard him: and likewise upon his own explanation of
himself unto me before witnesses, as I shevved you before. 2. You now tell me
of an other report, you hear also that he continues like doctrine still where
he teaches, etc. But where does he teach? is it not in the Church of England?
you do wisely not to name the place; the very naming thereof might well have
helped to bring this report into suspicion of falsehood. Behold your partiality
herein also: In this very page, where you write this of Mr. H. you would
collect against me that because I was a public minister in one of their
Parishes in England I did by their ordinary calling there administer by an
other leitourgie then Christ's Testament, even by their book of common prayer,
imposed upon all the Parishes. The error of this collection I am to show you,
when I come unto it. But in the mean time, I pray you tell me Mr. Ainsworth:
Is not Mr. H. as public a minister in one of the Parishes of England, as ever
I was? was my public ministry there a sufficient proof that I used the book
of common prayer, and is not his public ministry there as sufficient a
proof that he allows praying on books, even the book of common prayer? who
sees not your corrupt and partial reasoning against me? 3. You tell me further
of his speech with your self before two that came with him, how he signified
his dislike of reading prayers without any such limitation, etc. But I answer,
limitations are not always expressed, but oftentimes to be understood never
the less. And if he had spoken any thing unto you contrary to that which he
did to me, you might then lay some blame upon him, but not on me that have
sufficient witnesses to confirm that I say. 4. Suppose Mr. H. had openly and
absolutely condemned all read prayer as sin, yet what would this avayle you?
you tell me in your former writing that because I receyved not the truth from
him but opposed it, Fol. 4. B.
this is the cheifest thing that you mislike in me about prayer: May we not
herein mark your disposition? howsoever you blame others for alleging the
names of men and of Churches against you, yet when there is but a shadow or
half a testimony of one man that seems to make for your cause, how greedily do
you snatch at it, to make use of it for your advantage and our reproof, even
to make it the cheifest thing that you mislike in me that I receive not such a
testimony? How much more justly might I bring against you a cloud of witnesses
and this upon certain knowledge and not uncertain reports, and of true
ministers in the Reformed churches, whereas Mr. H. in your account is a false
minister, a hireling a deceyver, and make it a cheef matter of dislike in you
that you despise the testimony of them all? Here also we have just cause to
complain for want of sincere and upright dealing in you allowing that unto
your self which most partially you condemn in others.

CHAP. IIII. Of communion with such a minister as has not renounced his
ministry in he Church of England.
TOuching the second matter of your ministry: as I have not condemned that
which is lawful: so neither is it folly or syn, to inquire further of
particulars, in things known to be unlawful. I condemn the Romish ministry,
and I hope you do so to: yet of some things about their calling and orders, I
supppose we may without folly inquire. Moreover I think you are not ignorant,
that questions may be asked, not only to inform our selves, but to convince
others by their own answers: which also was my purpose in my foresaid inquiry.
For could the man have answered on your behalf, he had then heard further: and
in that he could not, he showed his own folly and syn, in leaving the truth,
and going to join himself he knew not to what.

Whereas you profess that you have not renounced the calling which you had in
England, you therein bewray the unlawfulness of your present estate: for having
been a public minister there in one of their parishes, you did by the
ordinary calling there, administer by an other leitourgie then Christ's
Testament, even by their book of common prayer imposed on all the parishes.
Which being forbidden by the 2. Commandment, and largely disproved in some of
the reasons whereto I referred you in my former argument, which you have let
pass: you ought to repent of that, as of other synns wherein there you walked.
God allows not such to declare his statutes, as continue in their idolatry:
no man can serve two masters: the Temple of God, has no agreement with idols:
nor Gods true spiritual worship, with humane idolatrous leitourgies. 2 Cor.
6.16.


That you had no calling to the work of your ministry by the Bisshops in
England is not easy for me to believe. It is known, that the public ministers
of the word and Sacraments there, are not admitted to their places, unless
they have the Bisshops license upon his ordination. If you had it not, I
suppose the Church of England, which you account to be Christ's, will esteem of
you as a creeper into the office you executed: whereof you would entwite me.

Answer.
Whereas I had showed your folly and sin in rash condemning of that thing,
which afterward you begin at last to enquire of; for this you bring an excuse
or two in vain: First, you say, we condemn the Romish ministry, and yet of
some things about their calling and orders, you suppose we may lawfully
enquire. But I answer if we rashly condemn the Romish Ministry, in such
particular points as are partly untrue and partly lawful: we do both sin
against them, and cause the truth to be evil spoken of: and that so you have
dealt with me, I hope the sequel will manifest. Again, you say, that questions
may be asked not only to inform our selves, but to convince others by their
own answers, which also was your purpose, etc. But I answer, there is a
further matter to be observed in your dealing, who make inquiry about such
things as you are ignorant of both for matter of right and of the fact it self,
and yet affirm so much concerning the same, as that you make your self guilty
of great error and slander, as appears in the next Chapter where you plead
against the manner of my ordination and do most fasly allege the acts of Synods
touching the same matter.

The maine reason you bring to prove the unlawfulness of my present estate and
of my ministry, is this, that having been a public minister in one of their
Parishes in England, I did by the ordinary calling there, administer by an
other leitourgie then Christ's Testament, even by their book of common prayer,
imposed on all the Parishes, etc. that I ought to repent of that, as of other
sins wherein there I walked. God allows not such to declare his statutes,
etc. I answer.

First, your reason from my being a public minister there, to show my
administration by the book of common prayer is insufficient: for there have
been many public ministers in the Church of England that have not been urged
to read the book of common prayer: though it be imposed on all the Parishes,
yet has it not heretofore been imposed on all the Ministers in every parish.
There be in many Parishes two Ministers, and formerly it has been required no
further, then that one of them should use the same: And so was it in the parish
from whence I came into these countries, where an other minister did ordinarily
use the same, so that it was not imposed on me. Though you may except that I
was partaker of that worship, or did upon occasion use that book, yet always
this shows the unsoundness and untruth of your collection touching my
particular administration by the same.

Secondly, whereas you write here how I have let pass the reasons whereunto
you referred me in your former argument, disprooving the administration by that
leitourgie, etc. It is enough that I show the falsehood of your argument in that
you separate from our congregation, and therefore not from sin only as you
pretend in your argument: This I show by manifesting the weakness of your
reasons touching those pretended corruptions and want of repentance which you
impute unto us for a ground of your separation from us. And therefore though you
tell me ten times oftener of letting pass those reasons which you referd me
unto as a devise to draw me from the present question laid down betwixt us,
yet shall you be disappoynted of your purpose herein.

Thirdly, suppose I had sinned either in the use of the book of common prayer
in my own administration or by allowing it in others, yet so long as this sin
is only of ignorance, and I know it not to be sin: the want of particular
repentance in this case does not make my present ministry unlawful. By this
reason of yours there should be no lawful ministry upon earth, seeing there is
no minister whosoever but he has some sins which are unknown unto him, even
as Ps. 19.12 and 40.12. and 139.24.
David, Ier. 17.9.
Jeremy, 1 Cor. 4.4
Paul, with other Prophets and Apostles: If they knew them not, then could they
not have particular repentance for them they could not bring a particular
sacrifice for their particular trespasses till they were Lev. 4.14 23.28.
known unto them: Now by your reasoning they were all of them in an unlawful
estate, and were not allowed of God to declare his statutes. If you tell me
that my sin of unlawful ministry in the Church of England is made known
unto me by your writings, that I deny: I may as well and better tell you of
your sinful schism and slander of that Church made known unto you by diverse
treatises which I named before unto you.

Fourthly, suppose I had been convicted of an unlawful administration in
England, and would not repent of the sin proved unto me, though this would
provoke the Lord against me, yet could not this be a sufficient warrant for you
to disclaim our communion as unlawful and polluted. The holy scriptures teach
us otherwise: though the Sons of Eli were wicked and 1 Samuel 3.12-25.
unrepentant Ministers of the tabernackle in Shiloh, yet were not the godly
taught to refuse communion with them, but still Ibid. Chap. 1.3. and 3.1.
frequented the place of public worship where they administered. The Ministers
of the temple in Christ's time were Luk 7.30 Ioh 7.32.
wicked persons refusing to repent of those sins whereof they were convinced by
Christ, and yet he taught not his Servants to forsake or disclayme their
communion but both Luk 17.14. Mat. 8.4.
sent others and Luk 22 8 joh. 18.20
went himself to join in the public worship of God with them.

Fifthly, if the not renouncing of my former calling in England do make me a
false and unlawful Minister here, then are the ministers of these Reformed
Churches unlawful Ministers also being accessory and partakers with me of that
pretended sin which you impute unto me, because themselves occasionally do
communicate with the ministry of England when they travel thither, and allow
of my present estate without any renunciation thereof, giving me the right hand
of fellowship herein. Now then seeing those that Act. 22.20.
consent unto other men's sins, that Esa. 5.14.
rejoice with them, that ps. 50.18.
see a thief and run with him, that judge. 20.12.13.14, etc.
see adulterers and maintain them, that josh. 22.16 17.18.
see Idolatours and favor them, do hereby enwrap themselves in the same
condemnation: how comes it that you do not upon this ground also renounce and
disclaim the communion of these unrepentant Ministers of the Reformed
Churches? If this ground of renunciation be good why do you not also use it as
a motive to stay such of your people as do from time to time leave you and come
unto them and us? How can you approve them for true Ministers more then me, if
thus they partake with me? I write not these things to justify my estate by
theirs as you use to deprave me, but to reprove and convince your partial
judgment.

Sixthly, by this reasoning you do yet further show your nakedness unto us. If
communion with unrepentant Ministers is to be forsaken: then these Ministers of
the Reformed Churches being by you admonished of jnquir. of Th. white p. 78.79.
eleven several transgressions wherein they continue without repentance, and
in special in the use of such read prayers as are in your account a humane
Idolatrous leitourgie, ought by their people to be avoided for fear of
polluting their souls with sin. If this be so, then you holding these people
yet for your brethren, are bound by the law of God to warn them of this their
unclean communion. According to your own doctrine you must be the only pure
and unpolluted Angel in all the Churches of Christ, and of all the Angels of
the Churches besides, not one that may be lawfully communicated withal: name,
if you can, any one minister either pastor or teacher in the whole world with
whom you dare communicate in the Lords supper, or hear a Sermon from them, and
also can do it without transgression of your own doctrine. You being then such
a rare and extraordinary Angel, does it not become you, to Rev. 14.6.
fly in the mids of Heaven, or to Rev. 19.17.
stand in the Sun, and openly with a loud voice to cry unto the Christians in
every nation, and kindred and tongue and people that they beware and take heed
of their polluted and unlawful ministers least they be defiled by them? There
was a promise or a show made some Catal. Francof. An^o. 1608. Tractatus de
communione. Ambsterodami apud Cornelium Nicolai in 8.
years since, that your book of the Communion of saints should have come
forth in Latin at Franckfurdt Mart: but it was a false show and a mockery of
the world: it is not yet come forth: But had it then been printed, your
doctrine is couched therein so closely and obscurely, that none who knew you
not before, could have found out your meaning thereby. If you will keep a good
conscience in the profession of that truth which you think is revealed unto
you, you are then Levit. 19.17.
plainly to admonish your brethren: to Esa. 8.1.
take a great roll and write in it with a man's pen, make speed to separate,
make have to renounce all your ministers: you are to Hab. 2.2.
write the vision of your separation, and to make it plain upon tables, that
he may run, that reads it. At least wise, you ought to admonish these many
members of the Dutch and French Churches herein the same city with you and to
prove unto them plainly and clearly this maine point that they ought to
refuse communion with their unrepentant Ministers. We accuse the pope of great
cruelty in that he professes he has power to deliver all the Souls out of
Purgatory, if he would: and yet will not do it: And we accuse you likewise of
great cruelty, as wanting bowelles of compassion and brotherly love in that you
profess to see a holy and undefiled path of Christian communion: and yet seeing
so many thousands of your brethren daily before your eyes to walk in an
unclean path that pollutes their Souls, will not for all this show them the
good way and set up marks unto them that they may walk in it. As you found
means to publish your confession both in Latin and Dutch, so if you had zeal
and conscience of this doctrine that you profess, you could soon find means
to publish a few arguments in Dutch and Latin also to call away the faithful
people in this city where you live from their unlawful Ministers. Judgment,
mercy and fidelity are the Mat. 23.23.
cheef matters of Gods law, which ought chiefly to be done: but either you want
assurance of the truth in that you profess, or else you want Christian love and
compassion, which will not show the way of truth and peace unto those that go
astray: especially when there is none to do it but your self: considering also
that you can find time to publish sundry other things, which in all reason
should not so much touch your conscience. Think on these things in the fear of
God.

Seventhly, this your doctrine of schism leads us to see more of your
partiality: for if communion with unrepentant ministers is to be refused: then
how could you hitherto allow your people to hold communion with Mr. Robinson
who repents not of that sin which you impute unto him. In your judgment he is
a teacher of false doctrine, and a practiser of the same, holding private
communion with Antichristian Idolatours, and members of a false Church as you
esteem them: he openly persisteth herein and draws many with him to this
practice; and this also when as he had once condemned this course he takes and
written against the same, so that he is also an Apostate and a decliner from
the truth formerly professed as you take it: and yet you have not renounced his
communion. Behold then the balances of deceit and partiality in your hand: even
the false balances that are an Prove. 11.1, and. 20,10
abomination to the Lord: as a deceitful merchant you use one weight and
measure in dealing with him, an other when you have to do with us even about
the same matter; he though an unrepentant minister is not disclaymed and
rejected by you, as others are, Is this to walk with a right foot unto the
truth of the Gospel, or rather to halt down right in the paths of hypocrisy
and dissimulation? Your separation is a sin great enough of it self, though it
were maintained of mere ignorance, but when such partiality is added unto it,
your sin becomes more sinful, and the burden of it more greevous.

Eighthly, as in the former answers, your sins of false doctrine cruelty and
partiality were manifested, so in this place you are for them to hea^e the
sentence of condemnation belonging unto your self with as much reason as you
have pronounced it against others: It appears by your dealing above noted,
that you are not as Nathan^el an Ioh. 1.47.
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile: you are not a sincere and upright
professor even of your own separation; but an open perverter of righteousness;
what then is the sentence? your ministry is unlawful and to be rejected
until you repent: As you thought to do unto others, so may you expect that
others should do unto you. This is the fruit of your own arguing, God allows
not such to declare his statutes as continue in sin, and therefore your
communion is to be refused: Thus does your foot slide into the pit that you
digd for others.

Ninthly, according to this your reasoning is the ministry of John Decluse
your elder to be avoided also. His injurious and false dealing in the Shield of
defense p. 6. and 7.
printing of Mr. Brightmans book is a public scandal: so are his manifold
erroneous collections which he printed in his own book against Mr. Brightman
whereof he is also convinced in that book which was shortly after written for
the refutation and reproof of him: likewise his false boasting not only unto
the Eldership of the French Church, but also unto the Magistrates of this city
touching a public testification to be made by him in the body of the French
congregation, where at last his heart failed him contrary to his word: Seeing he
has not testified any due repentance for any of these open sins, therefore by
your rule is his ministry unlawful not only unto himself, but unto you and
all that do communicate with him.

And note here Mr. Ainsworth, that you cannot help your self in this strait by
any distinction of sins that you can make. For when as Page 44. and Fol. 3. B.
before to prove the first proposition of your maine argument, namely that the
separation which is only from sin and communion therewith is of God and all
good men's duty: you there allege all the the ten Commandments at once Exo.
20. Ephesians. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. You do hereby cut of your self from any
refuge or evasion by putting difference betwixt sin. For whether they be sins
of constitution, or sins of public worship, or administration, or whether
they be other personal particular sins whatsoever, yet are they all forbidden
in the 10. Commandments: they are all unprofitable works of darkness: they
are all an unclean thing not to be touched: and therefore making those places
the ground of your separation from a Church or from the ministers thereof: you
do alike without exception make any sin of what kind soever, little or great to
be a warrant for separation when as it is openly known and tolerated without
redress. Consider what a large separation you do make hereby: even such a one
as will lead you to separate from all Churches: such an one as you are never
like to keep a good conscience in the profession thereof: such an one as leads
all your people to separate both from you and your elder Decluse both in
respect of the former sins here noted, and in respect of many more public
offenses which I could manifest in you both.

Tenthly, you may hereby discern what just cause there is to publish the
personal sins of such as maintain your doctrines of schism, seeing one
known sin of one particular person among them not repented of is sufficient to
overthrow their ministry and Church it self, and so enough to stay any person
from joining unto such a separation. H. Barow writes, that H. Barow discov.
page 34.
the known and suffered sin of any one member is contagious unto all such as
communicate with him in that estate and makes them all which communicate in
prayers and Sacraments with such an obstinate offendour, as guilty in Gods
sight, as he himself is. And again the contrary doctrines of Mr. Calvine and
others, that the open sins of unrepentant offenders do hurt neither the
Sacraments nor the godly receyvers, etc. he calls the jbid. P. 35.36.
smoaky errors of Mr. Calvine and his disciples, he calls them blasphemous
hellish doctrine, which take away at once the whole Testament of Christ and
word of God, or tolerate the open breach of them: which take away all Christian
liberty, duty and communion. If these things be so as he writes and as you
plead against me, to show the vnlawfullnes of my ministry for want of
repentance touching my calling in England, then is it a just thing to take this
compendious course for the manifesting of your unlawful estate, Church,
Ministry and communion, as being contrary to the whole Testament of Christ and
word of God, as being a blasphemous hellish profession, if any can declare and
show the known and suffered sin of any one member among you. If these things be
so, then have you no cause to complain and condemn the writings which bear
witness of such sins among you, to be libelles, but rather to yield that they
are wholesome and necessary warnings to keep every Christian man from such a
contagious and polluted communion.

In the xi. place, it is not unmeet to observe and remember here, that you who
are so hard and unrighteous a judge and censurer of all true Churches and
ministers, are yet further guilty of such sins as though they were repented
of, yet do they according to your own profession leave so deep a blott and
stain upon you as that they make you incapable of the ministry, and unlawful
to be chosen by any people unto so holy a work. For if the Church of England be
such a false church, such a Babylon and Egypt as you would make it: if their
worship be such gross and abominable Idolatry, as Counterpoy. from page 127.
to 152.
you yourself do describe the same, then are you for your diverse Apostasies and
declininges unto the same to be excluded and kept out of the ministry. They
that Esa. 52.11
bear the vessels of the Lord ought to be clean and holy in special manner:
It is required that his ministers should be 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.5.7. and 2.15. 1 Timothy 4.12.
vnreproveable as the stewards of God; that so they might the better speak,
exhort and convince with all authority, and see that no man despise them. But
as those that have been blotted with the shame of murder, adulteries, or
Theftes after they have professed the Gospel, are unmeet to be chosen
ministers for the rebuking of lesser sins, when themselves are so scandalously
guilty of greater; so those Apostates and backsliders which after they have
receyved the knowledge of the truth, and forsaken the false Church do again
fall back unto Idolatry and this diverse times, do in like manner deprive
themselves of the honor of being called unto the public ministry of the
Gospel. Now you being such an Apostata as according to your present profession
have sundry times turned back unto the Idolatrous false Church, as has been by
diverse persons witnessed, neither could Mr. Johnson deny the same, when he
Inquir. of Th. wh. p. 41.42.
was most desirous to excuse you therein: though it was objected that you had
turned your coat as often if not oftener then D. Perne: the unlawfulness of your
calling and ministry does then appear hereby. Let it be well observed that
you are thus noted to have turned your coat and changed your religion five
several times, namely, first being of our religion and a member of the church
of England you forsook that Church and separated: Secondly, that being
separated, you did again in London being in the hands of authority yield to
join with the worship and ministry of the Church of England: Thirdly, that
after this you did again slide back unto the separation and renounce the
Church of England: Fourthly, that after this when you were in Ireland and in
some danger of punishment for your scandal, you did again return unto the
communion renounced by you, whether fainedly or unfeignedly, I leave unto your
self to consider: Fifthly, after this you change your profession again and fall
back unto separation, and stick now presently in this Schism: and thus whiles
by this often revolting you dishonor and disable your self and your ministry,
you will yet exalt your self above all the Ministers of Christ in the world,
and by your profession maintain that your self only may be joined unto, and
that no other Minister may lawfully be heard: and if this be not so, I pray you
name who and how many there be that you durst allow your people to communicate
with all. Is it not a rare and an extraordinary thing that such a scandalous
and unstable apostata should yet notwithstanding maintain such a separation
from all the faithful Ministers of the Lord, and therein boast of your own
only lawful estate? Think not that I write these things in any hatred of your
person which I love: but for your good, for your humbling and the warning of
others: I think verily that it should be my sin if upon so just occasion I
should conceal this work of God upon you in judging and punishing your schism
by giving you up unto these offensive and strange revolts, when as himself
would have such Jude. 13.
wandering stars to be noted, observed and taken heed of.

XII, not to insist upon many other things that might aggravate this your
scandal, when as you were thus stained with apostasy* when as at this same
time it was the profession of your Church not to admit such apostates into
office among you: when as others among you had for the like apostasy been
debarred from the inferior offices of Elder and Deacon among you, and many
reasons had been written by Mr. Johnson and others among you for the defense of
this course, as I could show at large by the copy of those reasons which I have
by me: yet notwithstanding even then contrary to the profession of your Church,
you creep in deceitfully into the office of your teacher, your apostasy being
hidden for the present from the eyes of your people that called you. As the
deceitful woman that has played the harlot before marriage and joyneth her self
unto a man that supposes her to be a virgin, does herein greevously Deuteronomy. 22
20.21.
offend by taking upon her unlawfully the estate of marriage whereof she was
incapable while her sin was kept close: even so you being polluted with
spiritual whordome and fornication, with gross Idolatry and apostasy as your
Church esteems it, do yet take upon you deceitfully such an estate, and such
an office as by the present and public profession of your Church you were not
capable of; and showed your self to be far from plain and simple dealing. But
further if that deceitful and dishonest harlot being by her husband pardoned
and her deserved punishment by the judges remitted: If after all this I say,
this scandalous woman should boast her self against all other honest women, as
if she alone were the only lawful wife with whom a godly husband might safely
live in conjugal society: might not this well be accounted a wonderful and
strange insolency; and might we not justly say with the Prophet concerning
such an impudent person, that she had a Ier. 3.3.
whores forehead, and that would not be ashamed? And yet this is your very case
and want of humility who after such scandal and unlawful creeping into
office, after that the signs and tokens of your virginity were lost, do yet
in like manner boast your self and profess such a separation, that according to
it no minister in the world but your self alone may lawfully be heard and
joined unto.

Touching my calling in the Church of England notwithstanding the license and
allowance which I had from the Bishop, yet did the substance of my callling
consist in the free and general consent of the people who being publicly
assembled togather, did then choose me to be a teacher unto them: If some in
the Church of England do judge otherwise concerning the calling of Ministers,
there are others again even in the same Church that are of the same judgment
with me and with the Reformed Churches: But let the reader here observe that
you who do so often use to blame others for alleging the judgments of other
Churches and persons even then when they do it not, are yet ready upon the
least occasion to do the same thing that you condemn, if with any color you
can.

XIII. Besides this, you being deposed from the office of a teacher by Mr.
Johnson and his company for your schism and rending from them, as they
testify, having Advert. of R. Clift. page 58.
a sinful usurpation of all the holy things of God used among you: and
standing in this heavy estate, as he calls it; it were now more meet you
should look unto your own usurped office, then to seek to seduce the people of
God from their lawful ministers wheresoever they are: For if Mr. Johnson and
his people were a true Church and their communion lawful, during the time of
your continuance among them: then were they so likewise at your departure from
them. And suppose they erred in the change of their government, and in some
other matters which you impute unto them, yet was that no sufficient warrant
for you to separate from a tiue Church. Godly men may keep their garments and
Rev. 3.4.
walk in white, even there where others continue in open sin. And therefore your
separation from them being unjust, your deposition by them is just upon you,
and your present estate and ministry unlawful.

Lastly, as for the scriptures which you allege to show the unlawful estate
of vnrepenta^t ministers: viz, that God allows not such to declare his
statutes, etc. that no man can serve two Masters: 2 Cor. 6.16.
that the temple of God has no agreement with Idols, etc. I answer, that
although these scriptures serve to condemn vnrepenta^t Ministers, yet do they
not serve to condemn all such as communicate with them, which is the point in
hand: our question being about separation, and the lawfulnes of communion with
unrepentant persons. The Jewish ministers were such as hated Mat. 21.45.46.
to be reformed, and in that respect had no right to declare the statutes of
the Lord: yet had others Mat. 23.1.2.3.
right to hear them. Against them did our Savior apply that saying: No Luke
16.13.14.
man can serve two Masters: and they skoffed at him. And yet in the next
Chapter he Luke 17.14.
sends men to communicate with them. Of such as they were, the Prophet speaks
when he denounces woe unto the Zach. 11 15 16.17 with Luke 11.52.
Idol shepherds: Though for their wickedness they had no right unto the temple
of God, yet did not our Savior separate from that temple wherein these Idols
ministered and remained: others lost not their right unto the temple of God,
because of their unrighteousness in the same.

CHAP. V. Touching ordination of Ministers.
Hen. Ains.
FOr your calling here, if there were that error only in your ordination
which I intend, and no other fault to be found with you, in respect of your
former estate in England before mentioned, or otherwise: I grant that therefore
it is not unlawful for any to hear you, yet ought this error, as all other to
be acknowledged and forsaken: and they are to be blamed, which leave the church
and ministry erected according to God, to go unto corruptions.

Whereas to help mine ignorance, you propound reasons from the book of God: had
they been to the point in controversy, I would have thanked you for so doing:
and the rather because in the former things, you pressed me with the names of
churches. But your reasons do not satisfy the question, which was about
Authority of the Eldership of one Church, to make or ordeine ministers in
another. As for mutual advise, counsel, help and the like: I account them
good and lawful.

To your 1. reason therefore I answer, the help of other churches may be sought
for and used, if there be need, for counsel, instruction, exhortation, in all
holy duties. But not to do those actions which are peculiar for every Church
to do in it self: neither do any of the scriptures which you cite prove
otherweise. Moses and the Apostles had extraordinary callings of God, to do
things which ordinary Ministers may not do. If Churches at their first
gathering, want knowledge to do their duty: let neighbor Churches direct them
by the law of God, how to do it: but not vsurp their power. Elders were to be
ordained in every City, if any were found fit for the charge, Tit. 1.5.6.
otherwise it were better to stay the work, (as the Apostle stayed and did it
not himself,) then to have it done amysse. So if the Church be unfit to do the
works thereof, they should stay til they be better informed: and not put it over
to others, whom God has not appointed thereto. The Churches in the villages of
Netherland, may not be urged for our pattern, unless they cannot err in
their practice: but the Churches in Gods book, obeying him, are to 1 These.
1.6.7.
be our example.

The same things I answer to your second reason.

To your third: It appears not by Romans 16.1. that Phaebe the Diaconcsse of
the Church at Cenchrea, should execute her office in the Church at Rome: it
follows not because she had business there, and needed their assistance, that
therefore she went to do the work of her ministry there. Neither because the
Church at Corinth sent messengers to carry their liberality to Jerusalem. 1 Cor
16.3. does it follow that their ordinary Deacons were their messengers: much
less that they should do their Deacons office in Jerusalem, to gather and
distribute the benevolence. Who would not rather think that they delivered
their gift to the Church or Officers, and left them to dispose of it? And the
same answer serves unto 2 Cor. 8.19.22.24. which you allege: it proves not
those messengers were Deacons of one Church, and did the Deacons office in an
other.

To your 4. I grant that the Prophets of one Church, may prophecy in an other,
Act. 13.15 and may apply their doctrines, exhortations and prayers, to any
actions of the Churches where they speak: but this only by way of doctrine,
etc. not to do the work which belongs to the Church. It is holden by the
Hebrews, and I think rightly, that Thalmud in Negaghnim, c. 2
any wise man might see the plague of leprosy, and advise the Priest to
pronounce it unclean or clean, or to shut up: yet none but the Priest himself,
might pronounce it unclean or clean, Lev. 13.3.4. Deuteronomy. 24.8.

To your 5. I confess, and it is our practice, that the members of one Church,
may receive the Lords supper in another, coming thither occasionally, yet will
it not hereupon follow, that the ministers of one church should administer the
Sacraments, or ordeine ministers by virtue of their office, in another Church.
My reasons are: The Ministers have a peculiar relation to their particular
flocks only, Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17. 1 Pet. 5.1.2. Apostles, and all
universal Ministers, are now ceased. As an husband is no husband but to his
own wife: a Father, to none but his own children, etc. so a sheepherd or
minister, to none but his own flock. But for the seals of the covenant the
case is otherwise. For a baptized person is baptized not to that particular
Church only, but to all churches: and in every particular Church where he
comes, he has all the Privileges of a Baptized person, in respect of his
Baptism, and is so to be esteemed of by them. Now all circumcised persons, had
right thereby Exodus 12.4.48. Deuteronomy. 16,1.2.
to eat the Passover in any society, in the place which God should choose to
put his name there: so all baptized persons have right to the Lords supper, in
every true church where God has set his name. But the rulers of particular
synagogues had not the same authority in all synagogues, nor pastors now in
all, flocks. So when a Christian comes to a flock where their Pastor feeds
them, he joyneth himself to them for that time and action, and is fed with them
as one of Christ's sheep. Show you the like warrant for Elderships to do the
works peculiar to their office, in other Elderships or Churches: show that any
eldership may ordeine ministers in their consistories, and send them as
ministers to other churches: (though those churches, upon trial of their gifts,
be content to accept them for their ministers,) as I have heard the practice is
of some consistories, unto the Dorpes or Villages of Netherland, whose example
you alleged.

To your 6 I answer, that the Ministers now, being over Rev. chapter 2. and 3.
particular churches only, which in respect of their particular covenants are
distinct bodies, as you acknowledge: herein lies the restreynt of their
ministry, by the special ordinance of God, Act. 20.28. No man may take the
honor of ministration of holy things, but he that is called Heb. 5.4.
of God as Aaron: but God has given them no office to administer in other
churches. And if The Apostles, who had a large ministry over all, yet would
not boast of things without their 2. Cor. 10 13.16.
measure, in an other man's line: much less may the ministers of particular
churches. Although in the general bo^d of Christianity, they may afford any
help, not passing the bounds of their calling, as before I granted. But the
ordination or making of ministers, is a work of power or authority, Mat.
28.18.19. Heb. 5.1.4. which power is not given to one Church or minister over
an other: and therefore cannot, by virtue of the common faith, be by them
performed. And whereas you intimate, as if your Church entreated the ministers
of an other church, to perform it in their name, etc. I have cause to doubt
that the thing was not so carried: both for that I have not heard that the
ministers of the other church, (being also of an other language,) ever came
into your public congregation, (according to the laws in your first reason
alleged, Exodus 29.4. Levit. 8.3.4.) to make public prayers, and to give
exhortations to your Officers and people touching their mutual duties, and so
to ordeyn your ministers: as also because it is not their manner to ordeyn
ministers publicly in their own churches, it being by their Synod in Graven
Haghe anno. 1586 art. 4. and Synod in Midleburgh. anno. 1581 art. 4.
canons, to be done in the classical assemblies or consistories. I have heard
it also testified by some that have been long members both of the Dutch and
French: that they never did see the ordination of the ministers, though sundry
were taken into office in their time. Finally, in this your plea, how do you
disable your own church, and the 3. other Elders that with you were authorized
to feed your flock: as if there were not one amongst you, which could perform
this work of ordination, or show the minister and people their mutual duties.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
AS I observed in my former writing and in my first answer touching this point,
so you do here yield and grant, that it is not unlawful for any to hear me,
namely in respect of the supposed error of my ordination if that were all: yet
you add with all, that this error as all other ought to be acknowledged and
forsaken, etc. Now in this your grant, you yield me the cause and overthrow
your self in the maine question betwixt us touching the lawfulnes of communion
with our Church and ministry: for whereas before and after again you do
object our want of repentance as the maine ground of your separation from us,
you do here notwithstanding confess that this praetended error of my
ordination does not destroy communion with us, and yet you know we neither
acknowledge it nor forsake it, nor repent for it any more then for the rest of
the errors which you impute unto us. Thus you do plainly yield against your
self, that there may be public corruptions and sins unrepented of, and yet a
lawful communion with such impenitent persons. You alleged for your
separation from sin the 10. commandments, Exodus 20. If the error of my
ordination be a corruption to be acknowledged, and forsaken, the^ must it
needs be a transgressio^ of some of the ten commandments: and how comes it
then that this error unrepented of has a privilege not to be separated from,
rather then other errors and corruptions? you alleged also Ephesians. 5.11. and 2
Cor. 6.14.15.16. for a proof of your separation from sin and communion
therewith: if the manner of my ordination be an error to be repented of as you
say, then must it needs be a work of darkness: and tell me then I pray you how
this work of darkness unrepented of gets a dispensation not to be separated
from rather then other works of darkness. Surely your separation is not unlike
the Pope in his dispensative, exemptive and transcende^t power that can give at
pleasure such special indulgence for special sins, errors and works of
darkness unrepented of. You affirm hereafter that this work of ordination
executed and done by the Elders of an other congregation is an usurpation
contrary to the scriptures Act. 20.28. Mat. 28.18.19. Heb. 5.4. do you not
herein then acknowledge that it is lawful to hold communion with such as do
submit unto usurpers, and do administer the word and Sacraments by virtue of an
ordination received and derived from an usurped power? Mr. Ainsworth, I do
earnestly desire and require both you and your people in the name of Christ
that you will consider of these things without prejudice and partiality, and so
doing I doubt not but upon this your grant, you will be led forward to entertayne
more Christian communion with us: and that other supposed errors among us
shall not be a stumbling block unto you any more then this is. The Lord give
you ears to hear and a heart to understand.

Furthermore whereas I urged you so earnestly in my former writing to hold unto
the matters of separation and you also professed to do the same: how comes it
that you insist upon this dispute about my ordination, and yet acknowledge that
for this error it is not unlawful for any to hear me? Had you confessed so
much, or had I known so much at the first. I would not have propounded any
arguments concerning this point, but would have held only to the pretended
causes of your separation from us. Whereas you complain further that my
reasons are not to the point in controversy, etc. I take it they touch the
point sufficiently when as they both serve to justify the manner of my
ordination, and to refute your contrary opinion: when as I show against you
that the mutual counsel and help of neighbor churches are not only good and
lawful in general, as you grant: but also in executing and performing this
particular work of ordination one for another as need is, and as they are
entreated thereunto.

MY first argument to warrant the help of neighbor ministers for performing
the work of ordination in other Churches, was taken from the necessity of many
churches that often want fit persons among themselves for the performance
thereof, etc. In your answer hereunto there are many faults:

1. You pervert my allegation of scriptures from Moses and the Apostles, as if
I had cited them to prove that ordinary ministers might imitate them or do as
much as they in their extraordinary power which I neither wrote nor thought:
But as appears by my former Page 16.
writing togather with the note of reference unto the Margent, I alleged them
only to show that the work of ordination did consist principally in such
public prayers and exhortations as that many Churches did want fit and able
persons to perform the same. And so much the Exodus 29.1-35. Levt. 8.1.2. etc.
Numb. 27.18.19.23. Deuteronomy. 31.7. Act. 6.6. and 13.2.3.
scriptures thereunto applied do prove unto us, neither can you justly deny the
same.

2. Whereas you say, that Elders were to be ordained in every city, if any
were found fit for the charge, Tit. 1.5.6. otherwise it were better to stay the
work, etc. And then further infer by way of simitude, that So if the Church be
unfit to do the works thereof, they should stay till they be better informed,
etc. I answer, that your comparison herein is very unequal: for of ministers
and Elders God has expressly and precisely required sundry special graces
and endowments of his spirit, necessary for their public administration,
without which they may not be ordained or chosen: It is reason their election
should be stayed, until those graces that God requires be in some measure
discerned in them: But as for the other members of the Church, God never exacts
of them such abilities of public exhorting and praying in the congregation;
It is sufficient for them if they have true faith and repentance, though in
weak measure; And therefore there is no reason that they should be deprived of a
minister so long, until themselves be able to preach unto their preacher at
his solemn ordination.

3. Whereas I alleged, Heb. 3.2. and Esa. 5.3.4. to show that the wisdom
and faithfulness of Christ in his Fathers house would not stand with so strait
an order as you plead for. To these scriptures you answer never a word, but
smoothly pass by them, and so avoid the force of my argument comprised
therein. According to your opinion it will follow that Israel of old were in
better estate for obteyning of ministers in temple and synagogue by the order
that Moses set down, then we are in the new Testament by the order that Christ
has left us: you will have that Christ cannot sing of his vineyard now as he
did of old what could I have done more unto my vineyard that I have not done
unto it? Of old there was away under Moses to call laborers into the vineyard,
though the persons in several synagogues, could not preach for their
ordination: this way is now stopped up by your doctrine.

4. Rather then all the churches be deprived of ministers by staying till some
among themselves were able to preach at their ordination according to your
counsel, I would think it meet that ministers being lawfully chosen should
proceed unto their administration without any solemn confirmation at all,
according to the distinction which I propounded in the beginning of this first
argument, viz, Either ordination is not simply necessary: or else, etc. For
where is there any proof from the scriptures for such a necessity of ordination
that the work of ministry is to be stayed for want thereof?

5. As for the Churches in the villages of these Netherlands I did not allege
their example for a rule of right that we are bound to imitate, as you would
make the reader believe: and therefore you have needlessly alleged 1 Thessalonians. 6.7.
against me: but I only alleged their necessity and their want for an
instance of that which I had said before to show what evil would follow upon
your doctrine, to the desolation of many Churches by withholding ministers
from them, till they were able to perform the great and weighty duties of
that solemn ordination whereof I spoke.

6. That which is here said concerning ordination may further appear if we
consider an other work of examination which is as 1 Timothy 3.10. and 5.22.
requisite (if not more) in the calling of a minister, as is ordination: and
does also as much belong to the power of the Church, as ordination: yet
experience shows that many godly and simple Christians are not able to
perform this work considering the subtilty of many deceitful and learned
heretics which creep into churches. And therefore help to do the same from the
Ministers of other churches is often most necessary, and not only to inform the
churches herein but to perform this action for them.

Unto my second reason which was taken from the like necessity of help in
discerning and convincing of errors and heresies, you say that you answer the
same things, which you did unto my former reason. Then will it follow hereupon

1. That when your people sent unto Mr. Robinson and Animad. verse. p. 133.
entreated him to come and help the Lord against the mighty, against Mr.
Johnson: according to your former answer unto me, he ought also to have
answered your people, and said: I will give you the best help, counsel and
advise that I can, I will direct and inform you how to convince Mr. Johnson,
but to do it my self I may not least I should vsurp the power of the Church.
For the conviction of error is an Ecclesiastical action, and it is a work of
power belonging to the church, and laid upon the Church, as well as is the
pronouncing of the censure and sentence against sin convicted. But because he
did not use this answer, but came to do the thing it self, it will follow by
your answer that therefore he was an usurper herein, and you also guilty of his
usurpation in seeking the same.

2. It will follow hence also, that either some learned and subtle heretics
shall be tolerated in the Church: or else that they must be rejected without
sufficient conviction going before: for daily experience shows that some
heretics are so learned, and the godly members of some congregations are so
weak that they are not able sufficiently to convince such great deceivers.
Neither is it in this case sufficient for neighbor ministers to help them with
counsel and to inform them with arguments unless they come and do the deed
themselves, unless they perform the work of conviction for them: even as it is
not sufficient to put a sword into a Heb. 5.11.14. with judge. 8.20.
Childs hand and to tell him how he shall use it to overcome a strong and
expert warrior. If Vorstius had been minister in some of the weakest
congregations in this country, which yet I think you acknowledge true
churches, and should have seduced the wisest and greatest part of the Church to
his manifold errors, what appearance is there that the rest could by their
disputations have convinced him? If you would allow others in this case to come
and undertake the disputation for their help, then is the Ecclesiastical
action of convicting a sinner to be performed and done by the help of other
Churches.

MY third reason was taken from a like duty of the Deacons and widows of one
church which are to perform service unto an other when need requires, etc. In
your answer hereunto you pervert that I said, and touch not the point of my
argument at all. As for Phaebe, I said not that she went to do the work of her
ministry at Rome, but the commendation that Paul gives of her Romans 16.1.
compared with the verse following proves as much as I said, and that diverse
ways. 1, upon that commendation of Paul, if she had been in need, the Deacons
and widows of the Church of Rome. were bound to minister unto her though none
of their Church. 2, if being at Rome she had desired help of that Church for
the poor in Corinth; the Deacons of the Roman Church, upon that commendation
of Paul were bound to have contributed and so by her to have performed service
unto the Corinthian Church. 3, by the commendation that Paul gives her it
appears that she had given hospitality unto many, and consequently, that the
widows of one Church were to perform service unto an other in entertayning
the strangers that came from them. Touching the messengers that were to carry
the Corinthian alms unto Jerusalem 1 Cor. 16,3. I said not that they were
their ordinary Deacons as your answer imports: but seeing Paul promises to send
whomsoever they should allow by their letters, this shows that if they had
entrusted their Deacons with this business, he would also have sent them: and
so this proves that the Deacons might lawfully have been sent and consequently
this shows as much as I said: For.1. if the Deacons might have been sent, then
though they had neither made any gathering nor further distribution at
Jerusalem, but only delivered their present unto the Officers there, as you
say, yet this their labor in traveling so long and dangerous a journey even
about a 1000. miles from Corinth to Jerusalem might be a sufficient testimony,
that the Deacons of one Church might perform service to an other, yea happily
more service and labor of love, then they should have done at home in a whole
twelve month togather if they had not gone. 2, for as much as in the primitive
Church there were many Jude, 12. Act. 6.2. and 2.46.
love Feasts and tables provided, where the godly and the poor did eat their
meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart, admit now that the Deacons
of the Corinthian Church having delivered some alms unto the Officers of the
Church at Jerusalem, should yet further in the name of those that sent them
have made a love feast unto some afflicted members of that Church and girding
them selves should have come forth and ministered chearefully and lovingly unto
them; what fault would you find in this service and ministration performed
unto an other Church? 3, the afflictions, bands and imprisonment of the
ministers and people in those days being great, admit that the Deacons of the
Church of Corinth, should also by the appointment of the church have taken
pains to seek them out in their prisons, and stayed some time both to
distribute some particular gifts unto some by name and further also to minister
unto them for their comfort, as Philip. 2.25-30.
Epaphroditus 2 Timothy 1.16.17.18.
, Onesiphorus and Philem. 11.13.
Onesimus did unto Paul, what blame could you impute unto these Deacons that
thus should perform service unto an other Church? And this same reply serves
also to take away your answer made unto 2. Cor. 8.19.22.24. which I had
alleged to the same purpose with the former place.

IN answer to my 4th argument, you yield me the cause: for while you grant that
the Prophets of one Church, may prophecy in an other and apply their
doctrines, exhortations and prayers to any actions of the church where they
speak; you do also grant that the act of ordination which consists in these
things is then performed. When you distinguish that he may thus pray and
Prophesy, by way of doctrine, etc. but not to do the work which belongs to
the Church, you do herein contradict your self: for when doctrine, exhortations
and prayers are solemnly applied to the person elected and to the church
electing touching their mutual duty, etc. then is the act of ordination
performed and done. If you had thought otherwise, you ought to have named the
other particulars which are of necessity further required: as for the ceremony
of imposition of hands. 1, there is no commandment that binds so strictly
thereunto, that the act of ordination should be condemned for the want of it.
2, by your own confession this has been heretofore the practice of your own
church, Animad-vers. p. 65.
the outward sign being omitted at the ordination of the minister among you,
when you had no Elders; and still you show your opinion in the case spoken of
that for the Ibid. p. 66.
outward sign only you would not contend. 3. If the Prophets of one
congregation may approve the act of an other Church in their ordination, by
word in doctrine and prayers, why may they not also by their hand declare the
same approbation? we see that the Act. 13.1.2.3.
Prophets in the Church of Antioch, though they were no universal ministers,
did yet lay hands on Paul and Barnabas for their confirmation in that work of
ministry which was to be exercised in other places.

But for your help in this matter, you run unto the Thalmud and from thence
you tell me, It is holden by the Hebrews and you think rightly, that any wise
man might see the plague of Leprosy and advise the Priest to pronounce it
unclean or clean, or to shut it up* Hereunto I answer.

First, you give too much honor unto these authors alleged when you call them
Hebrews, whereas you should rather have called them Thalmudists, whose
language is Schind. pentaglot. tit.
noted as a distinct speech from the Hebrew; their saying is, Aben Ezra in
Eccle. cap. 5. i
leschon mikra lechod, leschon Thalmud lechod; their language through their
dispersion being degenerate and changed, like unto them Nehem. 13.24.
that spoke half in the speech of Ashdod: A man that understood the Hebrew
perfectly might yet be ignorant of this Thalmudicall barbarous speech. And
these Thalmudists (as you your self do defenc. against. Mr. Sm. p. 73. to 76
acknowledge concerning the Hellenists) could not say with the Apostle that
they were 2 Cor. 11.22. Phil. 3.5.
Ebrewes, or Ebrewes of Ebrues.

Secondly, what have we to do with the opinions of these fabulous and
blasphemous Thalmudists, whose dotages and blasphemies are innumerable? Cannot
the controversy betwixt us be decided by the word of God, and by the voice of
the holy scriptures, unless the voice of this unholy Thalmud be also called
for and admitted to speak betwixt us?

Thirdly, for this allegation in particular, your forgerie or mistaking herein
is very notable; for in the place of the Thalmud quoted by you, there is no
such thing to be found as you mention. There is no such general mention of any
wise man as you speak: There is not a word mentioned for the advising of the
Priest to pronounce clean or unclean or to shut up any. Equity requires,
that we corrupt not nor falsify the sayings of the worst men. He that depends
upon the Thalmud for his direction shall be fed with the wind and follow after
the east wind as Hos. 12.1
Ephraim did: But he that gives credit unto your allegations of the Thalmud,
being like unto this, shall be doubly deceyved.

Fourthly, when as I searched for your allegation in the Thalmud, in stead of
that which you say, I find in the same place such idle and vain traditions of
the Rabbines as might justly serve to discredit the testimonies of such
witnesses: as namely, their appoynting of certain Canonical hours when the
plague of leprosy is to be seen: Thalmud in Negagh. c. 2. sec. 2.
not in the morning, nor in the evening, nor yet at noone tide, etc. also their
traditionall rule for the position both of the man and woman's body when their
lepry is to be seen, viz. Ibid. sec. 4.
that the man must be seen as a man that holds the plow or shakes the olives,
meaning with the hands and feet spread forth, etc. that the woman must be seen
as one that dresseth or gives such to her child, as one that weaves, etc.

Fifthly, beside these and other vain traditions, there be also such
contradictions among them even in the same place, as may yet further show what
little credit is to be given unto the allegations brought from such disagreeing
witnesses: as first upon a Thalmudicall case propounded in the beginning of
that Ibid. sec. 1.
Chapter, concerning a strong spot appearing as the german contract, and as the
Ethiopian contract, Rabbi Ismael expoundes it of a middle color neither white
nor black but betwixt both; R. Akiba expoundes it of diverse figures appearing
about the spot both white and black, and of middle color, etc. R. Iehudah has
yet an other exposition, and their chacamim an other different from them all.
Again in the same Sec. 2.
place, touching the canonical hours before mentioned, Rabbi Meir notes them
to be the third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, the eight and the
ninth hours; Rabbi Judah notes them to be the fourth, the fifth, the eight and
the ninth; R. Schimeon in his gloss upon the Thalmud in the same place notes
the exposition of R. Iose different from the former, namely that these hours
were the fourth, the fifth, the ninth and the tenth: and diverse others such like
vanities and contradictions might be noted out of the same short chapter.

Lastly, for the thing that you would teach us out of the Thalmud, and first
for any wise man seeing the plague of leprosy, if you mean occasionally as he
meets a leper, or as it is showed unto him, I deny it not; but if you mean
that any wise man had authority to require an other to show him his spot or
plague suspected, and to discover unto him his nakedness wheresoever the spot
was, especially with such a position of Body as the Thalmudists describe, that
remains to be proved; and 2, for the advising of the Priest upon occasion to
shut up, or to pronounce clean or unclean, I would easily have consented unto
you therein, though you had not called for witness unto this Lying Thalmud.

Now whereas you add: yet none but the Priest himself might pronounce it
unclean or clean, Lev. 13.3.4. Deuteronomy. 24.8. I answer.

First, this is not altogather true, for though the scriptures alleged do show
that the Priests might do this thing and with more authority to be submitted
unto, then other men ordinarily could do: yet do not these places show that the
Priest alone might pronounce a leper clean or unclean. For what law of God
binds a man from declaring the truth and pronouncing that to be clean or
unclean, which he certainly knows by the word of God to be so? The high
Priest and other Priests are commanded to do many things which yet others might
do also. And if the Priests wrested the law, might not others declare and
pronounce and practice otherwise? either you must grant this or else you must in
part destroy again that Animad-vers. p. 19.20.
proportion which yourself have made betwixt the Priests and Ministers, Israel
of old and the people of Christ now, for remooving the leper and putting away
the wicked from among them.

Secondly, for the application of this your assertion unto the question in
hand, you show it not at all: for what though none but the Priest might
pronounce clean or unclean? yourself confess and teach that the work of
ordination may be performed by such as are no Ministers and so you practice:
how then do you draw this argument from the special ministerial power of the
Priesthood unto such an action as by your doctrine might be performed without
either Priest or minister.

MY fifth reason was taken from the mutual and equal relation that is between
ministers and their people togather with your confession that the members of
one Church may lawfully upon occasion receive the Lords supper in an other
Church from the ministers thereof. This argument you deny. Your reasons are:
The ministers have a peculiar relation to their particular flocks only, Act.
20.28. Heb. 13.13 17. 1 Pet. 5.1 2. I answer, 1. The people have a peculiar
relation to their particular ministers only in like manner, and the places here
alleged do show a peculiar bond of submission whereby the people are in
special manner tied unto their own overseers that care for them and must give
an account for their Souls more then for others. 2, as this peculiar relation
of the people does not hinder them from receyving the Lords supper at the hands
of an other minister, so neither does the peculiar relation of a minister unto
his flock hinder him from administering unto others being upon occasion
entreated thereunto. You say; Apostles and all universal ministers are
ceased. I answer that also an universal people or members of an universal
visible Church are ceased; and yet as the combining of the people unto their
own peculiar minister does not quite cut off their communion with other
ministers, so neither does the restreyning of a minister unto his peculiar
flock quite cut him off from administering upon occasion unto an other people.
Your similitudes from a husband and a father are against your self: for as a
husband notwithstanding his relation and bond unto his own wife, may yet
become a Job. 31.16.17.18. and 29.12.16.
protector and guide of the poor widow, that wants a husband to perform
these duties: and as a Father notwitstanding his relation unto his own
Children and family, may yet perform the work of a father unto the poor and
fatherless: so likewise a shepherd or minister notwithstanding the peculiar
relation unto his own flock, may and ought upon occasion to perform the work
of a minister unto an other neighbor flock that have lost their shepherd.

You say, all circumcised persons, had right thereby Exodus 12.4.48. Deuteronomy.
16.1.2.
to eat the passover in any society, in the place which God should choose to
put his name there: so all baptized persons have right to the Lords supper, in
every true church where God has set his name. I answer, 1. The scriptures
alleged by you show that circumcised persons had right to eat the passover,
but show not that they had right to eat the same in any society: nay the place
quoted by you shows the contrary, for seeing the lamb was to be eaten of the
same household, or if they were too few to eat it, the only others were to be
taken unto them, and those also of their next neighbors, Exodus 12 4. and seeing
also that the passover prepared was by order to be distributed 2 Chronicles.
35.11.12.13.
according to the divisions of the families of the Children of the people:
therefore each person was bound to keep himself unto his own family, and could
not without disturbance of this order intrude himself into any society. 2.
This your comparing of the societies where the passover was eaten, with every
true Church where the Lords supper is now administered, is very unequal, and
yet against your self in the point of our controversy: for these societies had
not each of them their distinct and peculiar ministers or Priests to administer
and prepare the paschal-lambe for them, as each true Church has now their own
distinct officers: any Priest might indifferently prepare the passover for
many or any societies, as well for one as an other: if then this type is to be
our direction in the point of our difference, any minister may now administer
the Lords supper unto baptized persons in any church.

Whereas you add: But the rulers of particular synagogues, had not the same
authority in all synagogues, nor pastors now in all flocks, etc. I answer, 1.
Though pastors have not the same authority in all flocks yet this hinders
not but upon occasion in time of need they being requested may help to perform
some works of a minister in an other congregation. 2, you make here an unequal
proportion betwixt rulers of the synagogues and pastors of the churches now:
for many rulers of the synagogues had not power of administering the passover
even to any of their own synagogue, for as much as we do not read that all the
rulers of the synagogues were Priests who only might sprinckle the blood of
the paschall-lamb according to the manner. 3, on the other side some of the
rulers of particular synagogues being Priests to teach and govern the people
therein, had power also to administer the Sacrament unto them of other
synagogues at the time and place apppoynted. 4, what know you but that the
rulers of one synagogue had a hand in the government of other synagogues also
by the combination which was in that Church of the Jews? How know you that
either the Priests, Levites or other teachets were restreyned and bound to one
synagogue and excluded from the government of the rest? If you will dravv
proportions and patterns for us from the rulers of the synagogues, show us
from the scriptures if you can, what calling, election and ordination they
had, whereby they were so strictly tied and restreyned unto their several
synagogues. The vvarrant which I have already brought to show that the
Eldership of one Church may upon occasion perform the work of ordination in
an other, is not yet infringed by you: But whereas you require me to show that
any eldership may ordeine ministers in their consistories and send them as
ministers to other churches, etc. You ask that which is quite beside our
question, and your gross error therein with your false allegations for
proof of the same is to be shevved straightvvay in that which follovveth.

VVnto my 6t argument taken from the common faith binding all churches,
ministers and people to perform all possible help for their mutual
aedification so far as they are not restreyned by some special commandment of
God: you give answer by shevving restreint from the special ordinance of God,
Rev. chapter 2. and 3. with Act. 20.28. Heb. 5.4, etc. Hereunto I reply:

1. As for Rev. 2. and 3. with Act. 20.28. though the angels of the Churches be
in special manner bound to take heed unto their own flocks and particular
Churches, yet does not that charge restreyne them from taking heed unto others
upon occasion for a time of need. The taking heed unto their flocks which
Paul requires in this place does comprehend under it not only, the
administration of Sacraments, ordeyning of ministers and such like actions, but
also the administration of the word and prayers, godly counsel in private,
etc: if then this taking heed must be restreyned unto their own particular
Churches only you may from hence as well conclude that it is unlawful for a
minister to make a Sermon or to call upon the name of God in any congregation
save his own: seeing both these kinds of duties are in like manner included in
this exhortation of Paul.

2. For Heb. 5.4. This condemns not those that are desired to help their
neighbors in distress, but those that intrude themselves without desiring:
Those Churches that call or entreat a neighbor minister to help them upon
occasion for a time, they give the honor unto him, he takes it not unto
himself.

3. For both these places togather, Act. 20. Heb. 5. The Apostle speaks in
both of a ministerial charge and of an office, which every minister is to take
heed unto, and not to vsurp the same without a calling: But now yourself both
by Animadvers. p. 51.52.53, etc.
writing and practice do confess that this act of ordination may be executed
and performed by such as have no office or ministry in the Church, how then
do you reason for a restraint from these places that concern Officers, as
though men usurped an office and took honor unto themselves in performing such
a work as you grant may be done without any office?

4. As for 2 Cor. 10.13.16. it shows that men may not boast of things without
their measure, etc. But, 1. it shows not that those which perform the work of
ordination in a neighbor church desired thereunto, are guilty of such boasting
without their measure, in an other man's line, when as there is no other man in
that congregation which is fit to perform the same, or willing to undertake
that work. 2, this place does rather reprove them as boasters of things
without their measure which being private men and also wanting the gifts of
public doctrine, exhortation and prayer do yet take the same upon them, so as
of necessity they must do for the ordination of their minister or else have no
minister at all ordained among them, whiles by your order you will not allow
them to use the help of any other neighbour-minister or learned man. 3, seeing
the Apostle does further declare his meaning in the same place: namely, that
such do stretch themselves beyond their measure, which boast 2 Cor. 10.15.
of other men's labors, and Ibid. verse 16.
of the things that are prepared already: I wish you to consider that those
which by their erroneous doctrine do seduce many simple people and draw them
into their schism from those that have been the means of their conversion, if
they be at all converted: those I say boast of things without their measure and
enter into the line of other men: those are they that steal the Children out
of the cradles, the Children for whose new birth they never traveled with
pain: like unto that 1 Kin. 3.19.20.
wicked woman that having overlayd her own, did steal away an other son
from the bosom of the true and right mother. Think seriously with your self
Mr. Ainsworth, whether this be not your sin.

5. Whereas you plead from Mat 28.18.19. Heb. 5.1.4. that ordination is a work
of power or authority, not given to one Church or minister over an other and
therefore cannot by virtue of the common faith, be by them performed. This is
not contrary to that which I hold, for I said not that ordination might be
performed by virtue of the common faith alone, I noted it to be a work of power
and authority in the end of this 6t. reason before, when as I said it was to be
performed in the name of the Church that desires help. But a neighbor
minister receyving power and authority from the desire of those that seek his
help, is then further bound by the common faith and general bond of
Christianity to perfotme this service unto those that need it. If you would
have reasoned to the point, you should have shevved some reason why a Church
cannot communicate this power unto a minister or Prophet in an other
congregation, as well as unto a common member of their own Church; especially
when they want fit members among themselves to perform this work.

6. As it was before in general observed, so here again it is more
particularly to be noted, that although so many transgressions be committed in
the ordination of a minister: though he be ordained by such as are not
appointed thereunto of the Holy Ghost; though he be made a minister by such
usurpers as take this honor unto themselves, when they are not called of God
thereunto, as Aaron was: though he be ordained by them that want authority and
power to do it; by them that boast of things without their measure, in an other
man's line: yet do you notwithstanding this unlawful ordination, (as you
yourself reason against it) grant that it is not unlawful for any to hear
such a minister so ordained. This being well considered will serve to
overthrow many grounds of your separation. For as the Maimony comment. in
Thalmud tract. Negag. cap. 1. sec. 2 and R. Moses Kotsens. in SMG. Asin. 234.
Rabbines from Thorath Cohanim describing the 4. sorts or degrees of that
leprosy, which is called Lebanah adamdemeth, wherein the red color is mixed
with the white, do note one to be greater then an other, comparing the first
kind to a Cup of milk wherein are 2. drops of blood: the second to a Cup of
milk wherein are 4. drops of blood; the third to a Cup of milk, wherein are 8.
drops of blood; the fourth to a Cup of milk wherein are 16. drops of blood: and
yet in the discerning of these do account them all as one, and Thalmud Ibid.
sec. 3.
give one judgment of them all, for the shutting up, for the pronouncing of
them unclean, and for the purging of them: even so the unlawful ordination of
ministers being in your account a sinful transgression of Gods commandment,
and consequently an unclean leprosy; if you were not now more partial then the
Rabbines themselves, you would judge that one kind of unlawful ordinatio^ in
the cup of any church should be a cause of separation as well as an other,
though differing in degree, some Churches having more spots in their
ordination, then some others have: especially considering that large pretense
of sin unrepented, which you allege for a ground of your separation from us,
as I noted before. But for the present I will insist no further, reserving
this observation until further occasion be given of applying it against your
schism and the grounds thereof.

AFter these reasonings against the right of ordination performed by the
ministers of an other congregation, you come to speak of the fact it self as it
was performed among us in my ordination: and here you tell us of your surmises
and suspicions, as though our Church did not entreat the ministers of an other
Church to perform it in their name, as I had intimated unto you, etc. you say,
you have cause to doubt that the thing was not so carried: both for that you
have not heard that the ministers of the other Church, (being also of an other
language) ever came into our public congregation, (according to the laws in
your first reason alleged Exodus 29.4. Lev. 8.3.4) to make public prayers and
to give exhortations, etc. But to deliver you (if it may be) from your vain
conjectures and doubts, I will show you a little more plainly and expressly
the manner of my ordination, which was this: Being elected to be pastor of
this congregation by the free and voluntary consent and choice of the members
thereof that had united themselves and agreed togather in the Lord for his
service and their own aedification, some of them were then appointed by the
rest to go unto the Dutch Eldership in this city and to desire both their
counsel and help for my ordina^ion. Hereupon, three reverend and learned
ministers were deputed by the rest of their brethren to assist us in this
business, namely Mr. Plancius Mr. Helmychius of blessed memory who now rests
in the Lord, and Mr. Lamere, all which did also understand the English tongue
these three took unto them also by our desire a minister of the church of
Scotland, Mr. Dowglasse, who being more able to speak in our language then
they, did publicly preach concerning the mutual duties both of people and
Pastor, and accordingly applied his prayers unto the action in hand. And
herewithall did the ministers of the Dutch reformed Church at the same time
give unto me their right hands of fellowship in the mids of our people, and
in the body of our public congregation then assembled and prayed also for the
blessing of God upon this my calling. And this they did at that time of the
first gathering and establishing of our church, not assuming authority unto
themselves over us, but in our name and by our request: being now established
when as of late an other minister was called unto this our congregation, we
used not their help herein as before, but his ordination was performed by our
own ministry and Eldership without them.

After this surmise, you bring a notorious untruth, and proceed from evil to
worse, from a vain conjecture unto manifest falsehood: when under color of
reason for your former guess, you say, as also because it is not their manner
to ordeyn ministers publicly in their own Churches, it being by their Synod
in Graven-Haghe An^o 1586. Art. 4. and Synod in Midleburgh. An^o 1581. Art. 4.
canons to be done in the Classical assemblies or consistories. Answer.

First, it is an evident and open untruth which you affirm touching their
manner of ordination: And daily experience bears witness against you: Their
manner is to ordeyne ministers publicly in their own Churches.

Secondly, as for the canons of the two Synods which you suborne like two
false vvitnesses to prove your assertion, they are very injuriously perverted
and falsified by you. That 4th. article of the Synod holden in the Haghe Anno
1586 is directly against you, and in express words shows that the ordination
of a minister lawfully called must be an opentlijcke bevestinghe voor der
Ghemeynte / that is to say: an open or public confirmation of him before the
Congregation: it shows further how it is to be performed with convenient
stipulation, questions, exhortations, prayer, etc. and again it shows that
this ordination must be done, naer het Formulier daer van zijnde; that is,
according to the form which is prescribed for that purpose, which shows more
largely in what manner it is to be performed before the Church. In the end of
that article, there is an exception touching the ministers which are to be sent
out of their country into the enemies land, inde Kercken onder t'Crupce / unto
the persequuted Churches, dispersed among the Papists in Colen, Antwerp,
Brussels and such like places, where they have not such liberty for their
solemn assemblies: but this concerns not the Churches in their own country.
As for the Synod in Midleburgh, Anno 1581. art. 4. neither does it impugn
their manner of ordeyning ministers publicly in their own Churches, but only
leaves it free: the words of the artickle are, het zy in de Kercke opentlijck
often nae dat het gheleghen is inden Kercken Raet often Class / doch altijdt met
openbaere ghebeden / that is to say: either in the Church openly, or according
as convenience is, in the Consistory or Classis, but always with public
prayer. Besides, this Synod at Midleburgh being holden five years before that
of Gravenhaghe, as the date shows, is to be determined according to the later
Synod, and therefore does in no sort deny the public manner of ordeyning
ministers in the congregation. And further as appears in the same book of
their Synods, there was yet an other Synod holden at Midleburgh ten years
after the former, agreeing with that of the Haghe also, wherein it is agreed
that the Synod in Midleburgh. An^o 1591. Art. 5.
ministers after that they have been propounded fourteen days unto the
congregation without any special contradiction shall then publicly be
confirmed in their ministry, and this naer her Formulier daer van zijnde /
which formulier, shows the manner thereof more largely. And thus it may easily
appear how unworthily you abuse the testimonies of Synods, by wresting them
quite contrary to their meaning, and contrary to the truth. In the forefront of
this your last Page 35.
writing, you prefixe the saying of the Prophet Zachary, Love the truth, etc.
Zach. 8.19. Hereby, Truth seems to be as it were engraven upon the lintell or
vpper-door-poste of your house, so that unto those which pass by your porch,
or draw near to enter in, your building at the first sight seems to be the
House of truth; but unto them that enter further to view what deceitful work
is in it, your building may then quickly be discerned to be the House of
falsehood and forgerie. Fie for shame, Mr. Answorth, that you will thus write
either you cannot tell what, or you care not what. It is one of the foulest
faults that we do justly complain of in Bellarmine and Baronius, the Popish
champions, that they do unconscionably and falsely allege many testimonies and
matters of fact, and so join falsehood with their error; why fear you not to
follow their crooked steps? It is great sin for any to speak untruth in their
own name; but to make others guilty of untruth, by perverting their testimony
to evil, is double iniquity.

Yet you insist still, and tell us, that you have heard it also testified, by
some that have been long members both of the Dutch and French: that they never
did see the ordination of the ministers, though sundry were taken into office
in their times. But 1. I pray you who be those apocryphal witnesses that have
thus testified unto you? If they be such as dwell in this city or in the
country adjoining these may well bring upon themselves the blame of being
negligent and careless persons, who have no better observed the practice of
their own Churches: especially considering that before the ordination of their
ministers, their names are always propounded unto the congregation two or
three Lords days before, that so each member of the Church may take knowledge
of that which is done. 2. Do you but look into the end of many Dutch Bibles
where their form of prayers and administration of the Sacraments is described,
there may you find the Form van bevestinghe der Dienaren.
form of ordination according to the meaning of the Synods before mentioned*
there may you see what their manner is, and that by the whole tenor of the
words, as also by the titles or directions before them, the ordination of their
ministers is performed in the mids of their whole congregation. How comes it
that you who have lived more then 20. years as a neighbor unto the Reformed
Churches in these countries should yet be such a stranger unto them and so
ignorant of their estate and practice? 3. as for the French Churches here also,
it is their manner likewise to ordeyne their ministers, Elders and Deacons in
the public congregation of the people: The deputies of their Churches were
present at the general Synod above mentioned holden in the Haghe Anno 1586, in
the time of the earl of Leycester, by whose authority that Synod was also
approved and confirmed: from thence they receyved the formalier of ordination
before spoken of: and though they have not a form printed with their Bibles as
they Dutch have, yet do they keep it in writing and use the same every year in
the ordinatio^ of their Elders and Deacons: and of their ministers when they
choose them, as in particular of Monsieur Goulart, Morois, Bassecourt, all
which have been publicly confirmed in their offices before the people. And if
this be not enough, I can yet bring you more plentiful witness, both to help
and heal your incredulity in respect of my estate, and to convince your false
assertion, and false allegations in respect of the Reformed Churches.

Finally, for conclusion of this matter, you infer against us from this plea,
and ask, how do you disable your own church, and the the 3 other Elders that
with you were authorized to feed your flock, as if there were not (...) amongst
you, which could perform this work of ordination, or show the minister and
people their mutual duties? I answer.

1. Our Elders and people are not abased nor disabled, when they profess
themselves unmeet to perform that work which God has in no place exacted or
laid upon them. The work of ordination performed with public preaching and
prayer in the solemn congregation (as it ought to be) requires a special gift
of understanding and utterance, as well as any other ministerial work that is
to be executed in the Church of God. 2. Our Elders also and their gifts at that
time were not so known and discerned, as since; they were not at that time
chosen into office, neither were they ordained or authorized with me, (as your
answer imports) but a good while after. 3. It had been better also for your
people, if they had not exalted themselves so much as they have don, nor Ps.
131.1.2.
exercised themselves in things that are too hard for them: for example, your
ancientest and busiest Elder John Decluse being once a member of the French
church, affecting the office of the ministry, comes unto the Eldership of
that Church, and earnestly desires to have his gifts tried his desire therein
is granted, he is heard diverse times and allowed to make propositions in their
consistory for trial; but in fine after trial, he is not allowed by them
(though among you he is allowed to preach and Prophecy) they judge him unmeet
for so holy a work and that in diverse respects; hereupon, and not before his
coffeehouse appears: he begins now to quarrel with the Church, and so in
fine falls into schism, and renounces the communion of that Church and is
receyved of you. How much better had it been for him, to have kept himself
within his measure, then thus to have been disabled by the Church of God? Every
man that exalts himself, shall be brought low. Luke 18.14


CHAP. VI. Touching separation from such as hold communion with the Church of
England.
Hen. Ains.
FOr your agreement with the Church of England I have showed it to be more then
you would pretend. Your members with you, disclaim separation from it: some of
them have publicly renounced as most abominable, the covenant which we have
made, in separating from the synns of that Church, showed in my former
argument. As for your covenant which you mention, to separate from known
evils, and to serve the Lord in the Gospel of his Son, so far as is revealed
unto you: they are but generals, such as Arians, Anabaptists Papists, (and who
not that profess Christ?) will make also: that there can be no discerning,
much less approbation of your Church hereby. We have in our Confession and
Apology, showed the particular evils which we separate from, and order in the
Gospel of Christ which we submit unto: till you do the like, we have no reason
to approve of your Church: especially knowing your opposition against us, for
the truth which we profess. Neither separate you from all known evils: for
you have not repented of, and separated from the false worship by humane
leitourgies, or communion with the unlawful ministry and Church estate of
the Parishes and Dioceses in England, though they have so many years been
convinced to be evil, before your eyes. Yea you, in this your plea, disclaim
not the authority and government of the prelates as sinful simply, but in
comparison, as do the Dutch and French churches as if the arm of flesh could
not fayl you, or be faulty in approving that which is to be condemned. Yet is
your comparison unfit: for you were in your persons, members of that church,
and under the prelates rule, from which your abiding for the present in an
other la^d, freeth you not: seeing all our synns remayn upon us, and we are tied
in their coards, til we break them off by Act. 20.21. and 26.18.
repentance and faith in Christ, unto forgivenes, as I showed before.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
I Expected here some arguments to confirm the third main cause alleged to
prove our Church false and our communion unlawful* In stead thereof you still
quarrel about the matter of fact how far we agree with the Church of England,
but bring not one sound reason to conclude a separation from us in respect of
that agreement. And even about the matter of fact it self, you deal very
evilly in diverse regards. 1. Whereas I gave you 3 distinct answers touching
the same: one part thereof you do quite omit, namely my second answer, and say
not a word unto that wherein you were justly reproved: and the rest you do
confusedly shuffle togather. 2. That your separation, and covenant therein
should be disclaymed as a most abominable thing, I have always professed; and
you have not (as you affirm) showed our agreement with England, to be more
then I would pretend: Therein you speak not truly 3. whereas you say of our
profession to separate from known evilles, but not from the Churches of Christ
for evilles among them, etc. that they are but generals such as Arians,
Anabaptists, (and who not that profess Christ?) will make also; you offend
diverse ways: for on the one side both you in your schism and many Anabaptists
also will not make the like but the contrary profession: you profess that
Apolog. page 45. comm. of Saints, chapter 23.
by communion with open wicked retained among them all are defiled: The
Anabaptists hold the same, and being refuted by Mr. Calvine, are herein
defended by Discov. p. 33.34.
H. Barow. The like profession is made by Lemar the Arian, as is testified by
diverse: This being so, you did cunningly, but not honestly in the repetition of
my words to leave out that part of them which might manifest this difference of
our profession, viz. but not from the Churches of Christ for evilles among
them* On the other side there are some kind of Arians, Socinians, Familists,
Anabaptists, Libertines, Church-Papists who do not profess separation from
known evilles, but are content to hold communion with known evilles so deemed
of them: so untruly and inconsiderately you write in each respect. 4, whereas
you require us to show the particular evilles we separate from, as you have
done in your confession and apology, etc. you do but trifle and hold off from
the question; for know you not that we are one with the Dutch Church, that we
are a member of their Classis kept in this city: that we hold the same faith
described in the Belgique confession printed long since: and that we submit
unto the same order of government with them? Does it not hereby appear unto
you, what particular evilles we separate from? And what need we then to print
any new confessions as you have done? If you object any difference in matters
of less moment, you know them to be such, as that you approve us therein,
rather then them. If you did not behold us with a squint eye, these things
would be plain enough unto you* but it is not without cause, which Mr.
Robinson in the refutation of your private schism, writes of you, concerning
your looking at others Relig. com. p. 12.
only with the left eye. 5. That which you say of the worship, ministry and
Church estate in England so many years convinced, etc is but a false boasting
and flattring of your self in vain: I have before nominated unto you diverse
treatises wherein your errors about these matters are refuted. 6. You do
notoriously pervert my words, when you speak of my disclayming but in
comparison, as do the Dutch and French Churches: as if the arm of flesh could
not fail me, or be faulty in approving that which is to be condemned: upon
these your words the reader which had not seen what I wrote, might be made to
believe, that I had alleged the example of these Reformed Churches as an
argument to justify our estate: but it is far otherwise* I showed their
practice to be the same with ours* only to this end: that it might appear how
inexcusably partial you are that condemn us as a false church, for that very
thing which those whom you do confess to be true Churches, do hold as well as
we. My words were plain and I desire the reader to mark them, and with all to
judge how well you clear your self of that partiality imputed: and whether my
words have not been wrongfully wrested by you. 7. Where you say, my
comparison is unfit, for that we were in our persons, members of that Church
and under the Prelates rule, etc. I answer, sundry people of our Church were
never members of the Church of England, but came out of Scotland and from other
places. Many members of the Dutch Church, have in their persons been members of
the Church of England and under the prelates rule: yea some of them have been
ministers unto English congregations and under the prelates. Many yea and the
greatest part of our Church at the first gathering were such as in their
persons were then members of the Dutch Church, and were from them translated
unto us with testimony of their sound faith and godly conversation. Many that
in their persons were never members of the church of England may be as much and
more guilty in approving the corruptions of that Church, then such as have
there lived under the rule of the prelates. How vain then is that which you
except against my comparison?

In the last place, you bring some color of an argument against the lawfulnes
of our communion: but it is far too light to prove us a false Church. You say,
our abiding for the present in an other land, freeth us not [from the sins
committed in England] seeing all our synns remayn upon us, and we are tied in
their cords, till we break them off Act. 20.21. and 26.18.
by repentance and faith, etc. This is that which you objected Page 36.
before, to prove that the reasons directed against the Church of England, are
against ours also: you say, unto us, The remooving of our dwelling into an
other land, remooveth not your sins from you, nor you from them: it is your
repentance only and faith in Christ, that can purge away your sins, Luk
13.3.5. Mark. 1.15 Papists that dwell here, in England or other where belong to
the church of Rome, till they break off themselves by repentance. Neither does
the absteyning from the practice clear the sinner: for the guilt of Cayns
Murder, cleaved unto him all his days, because he was not cleansed by
repentance and faith, although he never killed man more, after Abel. So though
you here practice not the idolatries done in England, yet in that you have
practiced them and not repented, your guiltines is upon you, etc. I answer,

1. It is not our sin in communion with, but your sin in separating from the
church of England that is to be repented of. As you are refuted and called unto
repentance by Mr. Robinson, for one main part thereof, while he has
convinced your more private schism: so are you by sundry others for your
public schism. When your separation from our particular congregation has
been well examined, I doubt not but your separation from England also will
thereby appear in a great measure to be vnvvarrantable: and then the way
being so prepared, my resolution is (the Lord assisting) if need be, to proceed
further with you in shevving your schism from ^ngla^d. In the mean time it
would but draw us from the present controversy.

2. If our communion with the Church of England were a sin, yet is it not
known so to us; we assure our selves of the contrary: all your objections we
judge to be unsound. We repent us of our known sins: our secret sins we
know to be innumerable, and we endeavor to be humbled for them: and believe
that in Christ they are done away; So that if our communion with England were a
sin, yet are we not tied in the cords thereof, as you teach. Nay your doctrine
as it is applied and maynteyned against us, to the contrary, is a manifest and
a maine heresy, overthrowing the Gospel, and the foundation of Christian
Religion both concerning faith and repentance in us, and concerning the Merit
of Christ's death and obedience. Upon your reasoning it follows; that no
Repentance and faith is accepted unto satvation unless there be a particular
acknowledgment of all sins disputed against, as you have done against us; that
the Blood of Christ does not cleanse us from al sin: but that we are still
tied in the cords thereof, until there be a particular discerning and
acknowledging of the same. This is contrary to the whole tenor of the Gospel,
declared in the holy Lev. 9.7. and 16.5-30 Job 9.3. with chapter 33 27.28. Esa.
44.22. Ps. 103.3. Ioh. 1.29. and 8.12. 1 Ioh. 1.7. 2 Pet. 1.3. with 1. Cor.
13.9. and 3.1.2.3. Philip. 1.5.9.
scriptures: all which do show that through faith in Christ we get remission of
al our sins, even of those which through the great corruption of the flesh
remaining even in the most faithful, we cannot discern often times, though
the Lord for his part have given sufficient means to reveal and manifest the
same unto us. What avayleth it to say, that Christ dyed for sinners: while you
propound such a condition, and require such a repentance as no man can attain
unto? God has decreed to magnify the perfection of his grace in the
imperfection of our faith and repentance: The infinite virtue and dignity of
Christ's divine nature appears most gloriously, as in others so in this
particular of giving merit unto the sufferings of his manhood, to satisfy even
for unknown sins that are not particulerly and distinctly confessed and
repented of. What mean you then to maintain such a fundamental and
pernicious error as darkens the glory both of Christ's person and office, and
defaceth the new testament? with what conscience can you say that we are
tied in the cords of our sins, and are consequently to be rejected as a false
Church, because we repent not of an unknown sin, unknown to us, and so
controversall, that no minister of Chtiste on earth can discern the same: you
being the only teacher that dare affirm such a thing?

3. Suppose we were tied in the cords of our sin, for want of this
particular repentance, which you require: yet does it not follovv that
communion with us is unlawful: for the truth which we profess; for the
true worship which we practice at this present; and at least for their sakes
among us, which never were members of the Church of England, some favor and
felllovvship should be yielded unto us by you. Our Savior has taught us to
hold communion with wicked men, for the godly sake that were among them: yea
with such as were tied in the cords of their sin, with such as did
manifestly Ioh. 8.21 59. with Luke 22.7.8.
live and die in their sins, without repentance. Why do you then seek to
lead men into the crooked path of schism contrary to the example of Christ?
As in the former answer the height of your heresy was discovered so in this
the depth of your schism is manifestly discerned, in calling men to separate
not only from the practice of sin, but also from the true worship of God, upon
pretense of some unrepentant persons, which might pollute you with their
fellowship therein. As for the scriptures alleged by you, viz. Act. 20.21, and
26.18. Luke 13.5. Mark. 1.15. They show indeed that men ought to repent, but
there is not a word or syllable in them, that sounds to call us unto separation
from such as do not repent. These scriptures are all abused by you: and touch
not the question.

4. Consider how by this manner of reasoning you contradict yourself: for
whereas you acknowledge the Reformed Churches notwithstanding your separation
from them, to be Counterpo. p. 49.
true Churches and your brethren in Christ, and yet by your profession hold
them to be tied in the cords of their sin, because they do not repent of
diverse sins, which in your confession, dedicate unto their universities, are
co^vinced to be evil, as you imagine I would now know of you, why our want of
repentance makes us to be a false Church rather then them; especially, why more
then the Dutch and French Churches of this city, whom you note to be tied in
many cords of sin, whiles you Ans. to Th. wh. p. 78.79.
charge them with the transgression of so many laws of God, for which they do
not repent.

5. Seeing Mr. Robinson and his people do now (as diverse of themselves confess)
receyve the members of the Church of England into their congregation, and this
without any renunciation of the Church of England, without any repentance for
their Idolatries committed in the Church of England: how can you hold them to
be a true Church and communion with them lawful: seeing that by your reasoning
they are tied in the cords of their sin, as well as we; their guiltines is upon
them, though they have remooved their dwelling, and though they practice their
Idolatries no more? At every turn your partiality appears. Paul 1. Timo 5 21.
charged Timothy before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
Angels, that he should do nothing partially how little do you regard this
vehement obtestation? How will you answer it before the Lord and his Angels in
that great day?

6. This your reasoning serves to bring confusion and dissipation upon your
own particular Church: for it is manifest according to your own profession
that there are many known sins among you unrepented off and to omit a
multitude of others which I could name, consider but these: It is well known
that some of your people do hear sermons in Idol-temples as you call them, and
though you plead against me, that this is a heinous sin, yet you do now suffer
it practiced among you. Your Elder John Decluse alleged this among the rest
for one cause of his separating from the french church, viz. because they
suffered the party innocent to reteyne the offendant that had committed adultery
and to live still togather: and heretofore (as you Ans. to Th. wh. p. 32.
confess) it was the practice of your Church to excommunicate the innocent
parties that would forgive the offendour either husband or wife upon their
repentance in such case: since that time you confess also that your judgeme^t
is altered touching this matter, yet so that some of you are still persuaded
that your former judgment and practice was just. Of those that are so minded I
ask how they can (according to your reasoning against us) hold communion where
such scandalles and abominations as in their persuasion deserve
excommunication, are yet openly tolerated without repentance. As for your Elder
Decluse in special, if he be one of them that have altered his judgment, why
does he not acknowledge his fault unto the French Church for alleging unto
the^ such an unjust and unsound cause of his separation from the^? If he have
not changed his judgeme^t, how can he and the rest that are of his judgment
reteyne fellowship, where judgment and and justice is openly perverted, where
excommunicable crimes are contrary to the word of God covered and maintained?
we have here just cause to speak unto you as Barow does to the ministers of
England, even touching this very point, when he would show how ill they teach
and keep the seventh commandment: he says, H. Barow discov. p. 182.
And that your gravest and best conscienced preachers think not themselves in
this case without blame, let them examine their corrupt consciences, how many
of their cheef hearers and devout proselytes they know both men and women, that
know such crimes each by others, and yet for filthy lucre or fleshly respects
continue together. Are not their consciences rather most corrupt, that knowing
such crimes by one an other, and holding them to be just causes of
excommunication do hold with all that for crimes unrepented and vnredressed men
ought to separate, and yet contrary to their profession do live in a polluted
society? May I not say unto these men eve^ in your own words Mr. Ainsworth,
that Animadvers. p. 125
if they which hold otherwise in judgment, shall yet let the true practice of
the Gospel go: posterity after them, being brought into bondage, may justly
blame and curse them, that would not stand for the right, etc. Further when Mr.
Johnson in his public doctrine had expounded Mat. 18.17. contrary to your
practice, and by many disputes had publicly mainteyned his exposition, that
he might quite subvert and change the form of government long practiced among
you: you tell us that yet in end you offered unto him before your parting, that
Ibid. p. 123.
notwithstanding your differences of judgment, you would continue together, if
your former practice might be retained: howsoever you cover the matter under
the Phrase of difference of judgments, yet cannot you deny but that he openly
taught false doctrine, and that in a matter of great weight: and that therefore
he was tied in the cords of his sin, though he had absteyned from the practice
of his doctrine; and yet signify that you are content to reteyne communion with
an unrepentant teacher of false doctrine. Your first offer being refused, you
tell us that then Ibid. p. 126.
you desire of him, that you might have a praceable parting: and to be two
distinct congregations, each practicing as they were persuaded, yet nourishing
brotherly love and unity. If your desire had been granted, yet could you not
deny, but that Mr. Johnson and his people had been tied in the cords of their
sin; that their guiltines had remained upon them, both for false doctrine,
change of your former government, and great scandal which in your opinion
followed thereupon, and yet with these unrepentant Apostates, you profess to
hold and nourish brotherly love and unity: o extreme partiality in you, that
are so ready to smother scandalles among your selves without repentance of the
Authors thereof; and yet so far from nourishing brotherly love and unity with
other churches of Christ, whom you cannot with any color accuse to be so deep
in sin, by forsaking the truth formerly professed. Either repent of these
offers, or else think, that according to your own plea against us, your own
people cannot with good conscience communicate with you, that mainteyne so
great partiality.

CHAP. VII. Of temples: The first argument, examined.
Section, 1.
Hen. Ains.
FOr the Nuns Chapel, (the place where you assemble,) you need search no
records: I hope you think Christ instituted no such Nuns, Nunries, or
Chapels for them: but that they belong to Satan's synagogue, in what year
soever they were founded. And they being gross idolaters, their chapel was an
Idolie: (as the 1 Cor. 8.10.
Apostle names it,) or Idol house. And though themselves said no mass, yet
were they pertakers of the mass said by their Priests, and as is likely,
within their own Cloister, as was the custom in other Cloisters: and if not
for that, yet for other false Gods it was erected.

To our first reason against the reteyning of them to be places wherein we
should worship God, from Exodus 20.4 5.6. with Deuteronomy. 12.3. You answer six
things.

1. That the commandment in Deuteronomy. 12. was a temporary ordinance, part of
Moses polity now abrogate, etc. To prove this, you instance an other like law
in Deuteronomy. 13. for destroying an apostate city, with all the spoils thereof,
etc. not now in force.

I answer, from our Saviors testimony, that he came not to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it, Mat. 5.17. so that such judicials as apperteyned to the moral
law written on the Tables, and are of common equity to all nations, are not by
Christ abrogated, touching the substance of them. Such is this law, perteyning
to the 2. Commandment, and it is of common equity to all nations for to shun
1. Cor. 10.14. 1. Ioh. 5.21 Rev. 18.
idolatry: therefore it is not abrogated by Christ. And I add, touching the
substance of them: because you insist upon such manner and means as were then
used. For there might be some manner and means then used, which I say not that
Magistrates are now bound unto: as that all such malefactors as were then to be
stoned, must be stoned now, and may dye no other death. There were laws in
Israel, to cut off murderers, adulterers, and other flagitious: yet some things
perteyning to murder and adultery, were peculiar to that land and people, as
cities of refuge, Number. 35. the expiation of murder when the Author was not
known, Deuteronomy. 21. And so for the manner of punishing adultery, by stoning,
Ioh. 8.5. by burning, Lev. 21 9. or other ways. Now I suppose you hold, that
murderers and adulterers are by virtue of Gods law at this day to dye: and yet
you will not affirm that they must dye only after that manner that was in
Israel. Even so do I hold touching Idolaters and Idol-temples.

To your instance from Deuteronomy. 13 I answer, that it follows not if an other law
be all or any part of it abrogated, therefore this also in Deuteronomy. 12. is so
likeweise: as the law for a murderer to dye, is not now abolished because of
that law in Deuteronomy. 21. Secondly, you show no reason why that law in Deuteronomy. 13.
should not now stand in force: the inconvenience which you object of thousand
thousands of people at this day, under that judgment, is but a supposition. I
presume rather on the contrary, that you cannot name one city at this day in
the world, liable to that judgment: but that manifest difference may be put in
sundry things, from the plain words of the law, and the common exposition of
the Hebrews concerning the same. Thirdly, if any ceasing of that law be at
this day urged, it cannot in equity be for the idolaters them selves, or any
instruments of their idolatry, but only for their civil goods, whereof there
is no question between you and me. And for particular idolaters which were to
dye, as their goods were Deuteronomy. 17.2-7
not unlawful: so the Hebrews hold, that if any of those cautions failed
which Moses expresses in Deuteronomy. 13. The persons that sinned, were to be stoned
as particular persons, and Maimony treat. of Idolatry, c. 4.
their goods went to their heirs, and so were not destroyed with them.
Fourthly, if then judicial law against idols and idolaters be abrogated; then
also against blasphemers, murderers, etc. Which is the opinion of the
Anabaptists, who would take the sword from the Christian Magistrate, upon ihu
erroneous opinion that the judicials of Moses are at an end. They have all a
like authority; and the abolishing of one that is of perpetual equity,
overthrows all. But the Apostle tells us Romans 13.
that the Magistrate has the sword, and is Gods Minister: therefore he is to
use his sword according to the will of God; and that will is not to be found,
but in the judgments given by Moses. How should the Magistrate punish
malefactors lawfully, unless he do it of faith? for whatsoever is not of Romans
14.23.
faith is syn. And how should he do it of faith, unless he have the word Romans
10.17.
of God authorizing him? And where is the word that authorizeth him to kill
murderers, adulterers, buggerers, blasphemers etc. but in the Judicials of
Moses? It is also the doctrine of the Church of England that the Christian
Prince Apology (By B. Jewel) c. 11. divis. 2.
has the charge of both Tables of the Law, committed to him of God; and for
his power to abolish popery, it is by them alleged Ibidem divis. 3.
how God by his Prophets often and earnestly commanded the Kings to cut down
the groves, etc. yet you will not admit of the same reason now brought by us;
but put it off as a temporary precept, and abrogated by Christ.

Answer.
Ioa. Pa.
IN this your declaration of the Idolatrous use of the place, wherein we meet
for the true worship of God, we may observe: 1, the guiltines of your former
writing; your presumption in affirming you knew not what; in saying our Chapel
was built for the breaden God and other Idolles; your self do now seem to
stagger about it: you now come to speak of likelyhoods, and with ifs: if not
for that, yet for other false Gods, etc. but if not for that, then was your
former assertion false. You say, I need search no records: If I had that faculty
of presuming to speak of things unknown, as you do both touching true
Churches; as before in the matter of ordinatio^; and touching the building of
Popish Churches as here and afterward again, then would I not much stand upon
the testimony of any records; but love of truth and sobriety teach men
otherwise: 2, even in likelihood, whereof you speak; this Chapel was not built
for the worship of the breaden God in the Mass; for beside the testimony of
those that keep the evidence of this building, whereof I spoke before; there is
this testimony in general touching Chappelles: Hospinian. de orig. temp. lib.
3. cap. 2
Capellae ab initio, nihil altud quam oratoria sine missa: that at the first,
they were nothing else but oratories or places of prayer without the Mass: and
if this were true touching other Chapels at the first building and erecting of
them, much more in likelihood for this, where their ordinary devotions were to
be performed, not by a Priest, but by the women themselves, that lived alone.
3, note the idleness of that which you say, touching their Idol-worship: seeing I
granted so much before, and thereupon condescended to come unto the answer of
your reasons against such places of worship, after that the Idolatrous use is
remooved. As it is presumption to affirm that which you cannot prove, so is it
vain and idle, to insist upon that which is at first yielded unto you. 4,
though I think (as you hope) that Christ instituted no such Nuns, Nunries or
Chappelles for them, etc. yet let us not make them worse then they are: It is
sin to Job. 13.7.8, etc.
accept the person of God: and therefore on the contrary also a sin to talk
wickedly or deceitfully against the Idolatours themselves. Thus therefore I hold
of them, that their principal evil, (so far as they were Nuns, and
distinct from other Idolatrous people one with them in their common faith,) was
their Separation: This Separation was double, in the worship of God, having
their Chapels apart from others; and in single life, having their Cloisters
apart from the company of men. And yet in both these respects, I hold that the
new Monks and Nuns of your separation are more to be condemned, then these
Nuns, whose Chapel we do now use. For first, these Nuns, though they
worshipped apart from those that were of the same faith with them, yet did they
this without renunciation and condemning of others, but approved them as
lawful worshippers of God; you on the contrary in your Monastery separate with
renunciation from those that are of the same faith with you, and leave their
worship as a polluted thing in all Churches save your own. Again, for
separation from marriage, this kind of Nuns, whose chapel we have, were not
so bad as other sorts of them. This order of Nuns, being called Bagines were
not bound by vow unto single life, as other orders of them were: Etymolog.
Teutonic. in vocabulo. Beghijne.
Beguinae sunt mulieres religiosae, nullo voto astrictae, in sacro mulierum
contubernio viventes, quandiu illis gratum est. And besides this general and
public evidence, touching this order, we have also more particular testimony
touching the Nuns of this place, for the confirmation hereof: But on the
contrary the Monks and Nuns of your separation have a greater necessity laid
upon the^, touching Marriage, and are not so free: your people are not allowed
to mary with any godly person either in the Church of England, or yet in these
reformed Churches: but you have excommunicated diverse of your people for
marying with the members of the Dutch Church in this city: These Baguines were
free to mary when they would and to whom they would of their own faith, But in
your Cloister of the separation there is far greater bondage: no permissio^ to
mary with those that are of the same faith, except they be of the same Order
with you.

TO come now unto your first argument: my first answer was that the
commandment Deuteronomy. 12. was a temporary ordinance, etc. Your reply is, that
Christ came not destroy the law but to fulfill it, Mat. 5.17. so that such
iudicialles as apperteyned to the moral law written on the Tables and are of
common equity to all nations are not by Christ abrogated touching the
substance of them. Such is this law perteyning to the 2. Commandment, and it
is of common equity unto all nations to shun 1 Cor. 10 14. 1. Ioh. 5.21. Rev.
18.
idolatry: therefore it is not abrogated by Christ. Unto this argument I
answer.

1. Your marginall quotations of scripture, do not prove that the commandment
of destroying Idolatrous places is of common equity to all nations: though
they teach us to shun Idolarrie. Can not idolatry be shunned, unless the
places be destroyed? This you ought to have proved: This is the point: this you
leave as you found. You knew well enough before, that we grant Idolatry is to
be avoided, but how do you thence conclude the destruction of the place? Your
pretended common equity being applied unto the places and buildings themselves
is against common sense, and not a word to color the same, in any of these
allegations.

2. whereas you add that the judicialles touching the substance of the^ are
not abrogate: and yield unto me that Magistrates are not now bound unto the
same manner and means, etc. you do herein yield me the question: and all your
instances from Numb. 35. Deuteronomy. 21. Ioh. 8. Lev. 21.9 do serve for the further
declaration hereof. For the maine equity and substance of that commandment
Deuteronomy. 12. is to shun idolatry: the ceremonial manner and means were by
destroying and abolishing the places and buildings: even as the substance of
that law Numb. 35. for defense of the innocent that killes an other against his
will, is perpetual, but the respect of the place, to be fled unto at that
time, does now cease: And what is more peculiar unto the manner and means of
any action, then respect of the place: either places prohibited or places
commanded? As the holiness of places commanded by law, does now cease: so the
unlawfulness of places prohibited by the same law, does in like manner cease.

3. Whereas you grant that Magistrates are not bound unto the same manner and
means, in their execution of judgment, as by the same kind of death, by
burning, stoning, etc* and yet hold with all, that he cannot do any thing
herein of faith, without the word of God authorizing him: I would know of
you which be those places of scripture, that do now authorize a Magistrate to
put a malefactor to death, by any other kind of death, then those that are
peculiarly noted in the law: when you have nominated such places to allow a
change of the punishments, you shall then find that the very same places will
also give us allowance to shun Idolatry, without destroying and abolishing the
places according to the manner and means in Israel. Forget not to prove this
which I say unto you, as a special help to bring you to the sight of your
error.

4. Yet let me here warn you of your too much Annot. on Exodus 21.25.
enclining to the Rabbines opinions, that allow the commutation or chang of
corporal punishments for money, using great indulgence and giving
dispensations therein, in any of those cases Exo. 21.24.25. excepting only
life for life, and this even under the law it self. About this point you seem
to err doubly, both in ascribing a contrary opinion to the Sadduces, which you
know not but it was as well the opinion of the Pharisees, considering Mat.
5.20. with 38. as also in preferring the worse opinion: though our Savior
require private men to forgive one an other yea for life it self taken away,
yet this was no warrant for judges in public to change corporal punishments
for money. When you bring grounds out of the new testament for the change of
punishments, seek better then such.

For explanatio^ of my former answer, I gave instance in a like example, Deuteronomy.
13. whereunto your first reply is: that it follows not, if an other law be
all or any part of it abrogated, therefore this also in Deuteronomy. 12, etc. Hereunto
I answer, 1. you might and ought to have conceyved of that instance not as of a
new argument by it self to prove the abrogation of that law in Deuteronomy. 12. but
only as of an illustration to make my answer more plain and evident:
considering the phrase I used in alleging it thus, for example: As God, etc.
2. Seeing there is the like reason and consequence of things that are of like
nature: though it follows not that the like law of killing the murdrer is
disanulled, because the law of expiation in Deuteronomy. 21. is abolished: the one of
these laws being ceremonial, the other not: yet because the laws in Deuteronomy. 12.
and 13. are both of them ceremonial, apperteyning unto the means and manner of
shunning Idolatry, they are therefore both of them by the like consequence to
be held abrogated, so far as concerns the destruction of places, buildings,
etc.

Your second reply unto that instance in Deuteronomy. 13, is: that the inconvenience
which I object of thousand thousands of people at this day, under that
judgment; is but a supposition: that you presume rather on the contrary, that
I cannot name one city this day in the world, liable to that judgment, etc. I
answer.

1. You alter my words: I objected not that thousand thousands of people at
this day were under that judgment, Deuteronomy. 13. whatsoever I might have done: but
I said that the goods of so many persons should be avoided as execrable things,
etc. if that law were in force. This might be, though so many persons were not
guilty of that sin, nor liable unto that judgment: seeing the goods of one
apostate city being dispersed abroad into many cities might make their riches
unclean also, and unlawful for use, so that me^ should not know how to
traffic safely with them, either by buying, selling, etc. for fear that some
of the execrable goods might cleave unto their hands.

2. I marvel that you who have so often stumbled upon Room when you should
not, do now remoove it so far out of your sight: To omit other Christian cities
which have degenerate from Christianisme to Turcisme and Heathenisme: that
Idolatrous and apostate Room is the city which I name unto you, as liable
unto the judgment Deuteronomy. 13. if that law were still in force. Show a difference
from the plain words of the law as you speak, if you can. As for the common
exposition of the Hebrews, whereof you also speak, they are contrary to the
law of God and not worthy to be mentioned.

Your third reply is, if any ceassing of that law be at this day urged, it
cannot in equity be for the Idolaters themselves, or any instruments of their
Idolatry, but only for their civil goods, etc. I answer.

1. If that law be ceased for civil goods, then for the buildings and temples
likewise which are the civil goods of men; even as the Chapel which we use
is a part of the Magistrates civil goods, and by them lent unto us. The use
which we have of them in Gods worship hinders not but that they are our civil
goods: even our Bibles though we have a religious use of them both in public
and in private worship of God, are yet a part of our civil goods also. Your
meeting house serving for your religious exercises in public, is it not a
part of your civil goods? Unless you did use this plea before the Magistrates
in your suites about the same, I think you would not long enjoy the same.

2. If this law cease only in respect of civil goods, then what shall
become of infants and other little Children, the Ier. 7.18.
instruments of Idolatry with their parents? Are the Magistrates bound to slay
them with their apostate parents, as your Jew doctors would have it?

3. Whereas you say that the goods of particular Idolaters which were to die,
were not unlawful: What reason have you so to interpret that law, Deuteronomy. 17.7.
which makes no mention of his goods at all? And if the particular Idolater
did also seek to seduce others should not the equity and proportion of the
former law in Deuteronomy. 13.17. be regarded? or should the greater sin have the
lesser punishment?

4. Whereas you run for help to Maimony your fellow labourer, and allege
the opinion of the Hebrews holding that if any of those cautions failed which
Moses expresses, etc. You do hereby incur the blame which you do so often
impute unto others: you make flesh you arm, which yet can not save you. For
1. The Cautions which the Jewish expositors do observe from Deuteronomy. 13. touching
the apostate city to make it liable unto the judgment there specifyed, are
most vain and absurd, as may be seen in the commentary of R. Solomon upon
that place* yet your Misneh. tract. abodah zarah, sive de Idololat. Cap. 4.
Maimony goes far beyond him, even in the same chapter alleged by your self,
where he writes that the apostate city does not come within compass of that
judgment: unless the persons seducing the same were two or more then two:
unless the persons seducing were men and not women: unless they were men and
not Children: unless the seducers were of the same city and of the same
tribe: unless the persons seduced were an hundred or upward: And a number of
other absurdities might further be noted out of the same Chapter, which you
might well be ashamed to mention, for had you acquainted the readers
therevvith, they might easily have discerned, that your vvitnesses were not
worthy to be heard. 2. As the Jewish expositions are vain in themselves, so
are they also contradictory unto one an other: where as Maimony requires a
hundred persons to be seduced, for one condition of this apostasy: R. Josias
(as R Moses mikkotsi in SMG. praecept affirm. 15.
records) requires but ten and upward: and many other cautions are there
omitted also. 3. what if the goods of these apostates upon the want of any of
these cautions, did pass unto their heirs, as the Rabbines would have it?
This helps you nothing, nor yet hurts me at all, vvhiles I speak of the city
apostate according to the conditions expressed by Moses.

Your fourth reply is: if the judicial law against Idols and Idolaters be
abrogated: then also against blasphemers, murderers, etc. which is the opinion
of the Anabaptists, who would take the sword from the Christian Magistrates,
etc. I answer.

1. In this supposition you seek to encroach upon me, as though I had
maynteyned that the judicial law against Idolalaters were abrogated: which
is not our question, but only whether the places of Idol-vvorship, are of
necessity to be abolished: There may judgments of God be executed by
Magistrates upon Idolaters to the rooting out of false worship, though some of
the places be converted unto the use and benefit of the Church in the true
worship of God. Here therefore you turn quite out of way.

2. If the judicial law against Idolaters be not abrogated: then think
seriously and consider whether you yourself for your former Idolatries be not
the Child of death appointed to dye by the hands of the Magistrate: I mean
for your apostasy (after separation) unto the Idol-worship of the Church of
England, which according to your profession and judgment declared in your
writings, is a most horrible and heinous Idolatry: This judicial law of Moses
does not allow any repentance unto the Idolatour, more then to the murderer, to
save him from death of the body: and therefore you cannot plead that you are
freed from the guiltines of death, thereby. If you can find out any other
distinction, excuse or plea for the saving if your own life from the sword of
Moses judicial law: you shall then find out and show us such distinctions,
as will serve to frustrate and put away many of your own objections against us
in sundry points: see therefore that you do not slightly pass over this matter.

3. Whereas you say, touching the use of the sword that the will of God, is
not to be found, but in the judgments given by Moses: and again ask us,
where is the word that authorizeth the Magistrate to kill murdrers, adulterers,
buggerers, blasphemers, etc* but in the iudicialles of Moses? It is yourself
that by these erroneous speeches do exceedingly gratify the Anabaptists: for
howsoever the law of Moses does afford sufficient warrant to put these
malefactors to death: yet the most pregnant and evident determinations of the
judicial law, are those places of the new testament which do expressly and
particularly show some of them to be of perpetual equity: for example,
touching each of the malefactors here named by your self, there is special
warrant in the Gospel to execute judgment upon them: on Mat. 26.52. Rev.
13.10 and 18.20.
murdrers on Rev. 11.8 and 9.21.
adulterers, and buggerers: on Rev. 13.5.11. and 17.3.4.5. compared with Rev.
14.14-20. and 17.1.16 and 18.6.7. and 19.17.18.
blasphemers, and Idolaters: for unto such the Lord threatens vengeance, and
calls the Magistrates to execute his will upon them: And thus has Christ
declared his will unto us and hereby authorizeth the Judges and princes of the
earth to root out evil from among men: they have not only a general warrant
to use the sword, Romans 13 as you allege: but they have also these particular
directions to show them the several causes for which they are to draw their
sword: And therefore while you deny these most sure warrants, and grounds of
faith for the Magistrate to proceed by, sending him only unto the judicialles
of Moses, you do hereby give great advantage unto the Anabaptists, and take
away from the Church of God the principal weapons whereby they should convince
those heretics and defend the authority of Christian Princes against them.

4. Whereas you allege the doctrine of the Church of England. I grant the
same: that the Christian Prince has charge of both tables of the law, and that
Deuteronomy. 12. may be alleged for the abolishing of popery: I showed before that
the equity of that commandment leads us to the detestation of Idolatry; and
consequently of popery: yet does it not follow that it binds us to the same
manner and means of detestation, in each ceremony and circumstance of place,
time, etc. These ought to have been distinguished by you.

5. Suppose that our temples were to be pulled down by the Magistrate in the
same manner that was observed under Moses policy; and that the Magistrates did
offend in reteyning them: yet where is your warrant, for such an offense of the
rulers to separate from the worship of God in those temples? I call for your
proof herein: I pray you set it down plainly and fully. This concerns the
point of separation and ought to be insisted upon more then many others.

Section 2.
Hen. Ains.
YOur 2. exception is, that God commands to abolish their names also, Deuteronomy.
12.3. But we find Idolatrous names retained upon sundry persons: Romans 16.
Phil. 2. Tit 3, etc.

I answer: First then it seems you hold, that Magistrates are neither bound
to abolish idols, nor the names of false Gods out of their dominion: seeing the
law in Deuteronomy. 12. which commands to destroy such, is in your judgment
abrogated. Wherein you come short of the Zele which is said to have heen in P.
Silvester the first that he Polydore Virgil. l. 6. c. 4.
abhorring the memorial of the vain gentile Gods, decreed that the days of
the week which had before the names and titles of the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury,
etc. should be called the first, second, third, fourth ferie (or day of the
week) in semblable manner as the Jews (from Gods warrant Genesis 1.) counted their
days from the Sabbath day. Contrary unto you, I hold that law in Deuteronomy. 12.
moral and perpetual, both for false Gods, and for their Name. For as the Church
of old, Number. 32.38.
changed the idolatrous names of Nebo, and Baal meon: so God promised, Hos. 2.17
to take away the names of Baalim out of his peoples mouth, that they should be
no more remembered by their name. It is also prophesied of Christ (in Psalm.
16.4.) that he should not take up the names of such, into his lips. Moreover,
all uncleanness should Ephesians. 5.3.
not once be named among the saints: and if not bodily uncleanness, neither
spiritual, which is idolatry. Secondly, for the meaning of that law in Deuteronomy
12.3. I understand it not to forbid absolutely all naming of false gods; seeing
Moses and the Prophets do usually and lawfully name Numb. 25 3 and 21.29 Judge
2.13. and 11.24.
Baal, peor, Chemosh, Ashtaroth and other idols: but such naming, or reteyning
of their names, as tends any way to the upholding of their superstition. Even
as on the contrary, by the putting of the true Gods name in any place, Deuteronomy.
12.5. is meant the placing of his Religion and ordinances. And as Rabshakeh
honored not the true God, when he called him by his name Esai. 36.7 10.
Jehovah: so neither did the Prophets honor idols, or syn against the Law in
Deuteronomy. 12 3. when they mentioned their names which were set upon Deuteronomy. 3.29.
places, Esai. 37.38.
temples, and Dan. 3.26 and 4.8.9.19
persons of men. So then for your allegation of names mentioned by the Apostle;
First how prove you that those names, were at first given them in any respect
of honor to the idols of the heathens? If you say, the notation of their names
shows it: that say I is insufficient. For why may not Hermes in Romans 16.14.
have his name of Hermes Trismegistus the Philosopher, as well as of Hermes the
God Mercury? Or, without respect of either of them, of the notation of the
name, an Interpreter? Why should Phaebe in Romans 16.1. have reference to the
heathen Goddess, rather then to the Moon, or to the signification of the word,
which is Chaste, or Pure; and which might in that respect, be a common name to
many women? We find that Bell or Beel, was the name of an Esai. 46.1
Idol: and in Beel-zebub it is the name of a false God, 2. King. 1.2. But when
David named his Son 1. Chron. 14.7.
Beel-jada; will you say he had reference to any idol: or rather simply to the
common use and signification of that word? So for our times, you will not I
hope deney but the Papists syn against Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 12. whiles they make
and maintain images of S. Peter, S. Paul, S. James, etc. and erect temples to
their honor, and name them S. Peter's Church, and the like. Yet when men give
their Children civil names, of Peter, James, etc. must they needs herein
communicate with the Papists idolatry? Or when a man is named George, must
this name respect S. George the old idol of England and if we lived under Moses
polity, would you say men sinned against Deuteronomy. 12.3. in giving such names: yea
that whosoever calls them by those names which their parents gave them, did
break that law in Deuteronomy. 12? Wherefore it is yet for you to prove, that Paul in
mentioning Phaebe, Hermes, and others by their common known names, did
contrary to that commandment in Deuteronomy. 12.3. if it stand in force at this day.
Again, the offices and names of Pope, Abbot, Monck, Friar, etc. are
Antichristian, and to be banished out of Christ's Church, (as the name Zeph. 1.4
of the Chemarims,) so that none of his ministers may in respect of their
offices, be named a Pope or an Abbot, a monck or a friar: I hope you will not
deny this. How be it, such ministers as have their civil names Pope, or Monck,
or Abbot or Friar; may lawfully retain and be called by those names: yea
though we were under Moses law, which you think is abrogated.

But were it certain, and so granted that those in Romans 16, etc. had their
denomination of heathen Gods: it follows not, that the law in Deuteronomy. 12.3.
forbids to mention them by their names: for Daniel was named Belteshazzar,
Dan. 4.8.
according to the name of Nebuchadnezars God: yet the Prophet mentions this
his own name, and the names of Dan. 2 49 and 3.16.23 and 4.19.
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, which were likeweise idolatrous. So he
speaks to Nebuchadnezar, and to Belshazzar (named of their Gods Esai. 46 1
Nebo and Bell,) and calls them by those names, Dan. 2.28. and 3,16 and
5.18.22. Now Daniel who was so godly, as he would not break the ceremonial law
of Moses in meat and drink, Dan. 1.8. would not have mentioned those idolatrous
names, if that had been the meaning of the law in Deuteronomy. 12.3. which you would
enforce. So this your 2. reason does not yet prove that law to be abrogated.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
Unto my second answer touching the names of diverse Idolles retained in the
persons thereupon denominate in the new Testament, as the names of Mercury,
Venus, Phaebe, Jupiter, Apollo, Fortuna, etc. your first reply is, that then it
seems I hold, that Magistrates are neither bound to abolish Idols, nor the
names of false gods out of their dominions, etc. I answer.

1. It is not altogather as it seems unto you: though I hold that law in Deuteronomy.
12. to be abrogate as touching the strict manner and means of abolishing
Idolatry, yet hold I also that the equity of the same law teaches Magistrates,
to abolish both names and other monuments of Idolatry so far as they are not of
necessary use: my exception in this place was not of the Magistrates duty, but
of the peoples reteyning of these names, opposite unto your opinion, who teach
that both Magistrates are still bound to destroy, and people also to forsake
those things mentioned in Deuteronomy. 12. whereas on the contrary I show that the
saints and faithful brethren in the new Testament did not forsake but still
retained and carried the names of diverse Idolles.

2. Whereas in this first reply you object the testimony of Polydore Virgil,
and the example of Pope Sylvester, saying, that I come short of the zeal
which, etc. You do here again make flesh your arm, as before the flesh of the
Infidel Jews for your right arm, so here the flesh of blind Papists for
your left arm which you stretch out against me: but 1. as for Polydore know
you not that he is a fabulous writer, full of falsehood and forgery? read but
those things that go a little before, or follow after this allegation which you
bring from him and you shall easily discern the same; besides other manifold
instances that might be brought for proof hereof: what mean you then to bring
such notorious liars for your witnesses? yea even in his story of this Pope in
particular, he is taxed by Ioh. Bale Pageant of Popes, lib. 1 in Silvest. 1
better historians as a flatterer of this Sylvester, as the popes parasite,
etc. 2. As for Sylvester himself, neither do I come short of his zeal, for
though I hold that private Christians are not bound now to change their names,
(no more then your Sylvester a member of your Church, though this his name have
been the title of sundry Popes, that were great Idolles universally adored) yet
do I hold that Magistrates should abolish Idol-names being of no use. 3, you
have no such cause to commend the zeal of this Sylvester, who though he be
said to have changed some particular names of the days, yet is he therewithal
noted to have turned them unto an other Idolatrous name of ferie, which the
heathens used to express their Idolatrous worship and feasts: feriae, a
feriendo victimas: I could wish Christian Magistrates to go further then he,
though in the mean time, I see no warrant for you and your people to change
the names of days and Months in your speech and writings as you use to do:
in such manner that many do not understand you.

3. As for the promise of God Hos. 2.17. to take away the names of Baalim, etc.
It was then performed for the substance of it: when Idol-worship was remooved
from them; even as on the contrary, the name of God, is said Psalm. 44.20.
to be forgotten, when false worship is set up. God might be true in
accomplishing that promise, though the names of persons were not changed in
such manner as in Numb 32.38. Therefore those two places should not be so
strictly matched togather. Thus also is that Ps. 16.4.
prophecy concerning Christ to be understood: viz. that he would not take the
names of the Idols into his mouth in any act of honor unto them, or in any
unnecessary use. And thus also is that exhortation of the Apostle Ephesians. 5.3. to
be understood of us.

In the second place you come to show the meaning of that law Deuteronomy. 12.3. and
therein, 1. you do needlessly and superfluously allege diverse scriptures, to
prove that all naming of false Gods is not absolutely forbidden; for that is no
part of our question, neither have I in any place denied the same. 2. Your
interpretation is insufficient when you do so generally and confusedly tell us
that such naming or reteyning of their names, as tends any way to the
upholding of their superstition, is forbidden; but do not tell us by what
reteyning of their names men do uphold their superstition: whereas in a just
exposition you should distinctly and particularly have determined, whether the
bearing of their names, as Phebe, Mercury, Fortune, or the like be a means to
uphold their superstition; or if not that, what other reteyning of their names.

After these general replies, you come to speak of some of the Idolatrous
names retained in the new Testament: and therein, 1. You do idely and
impertinently ask me, How I prove that those names, were at first given them in
any respect of honor to the Idols of the heathens? For what though the names
of vile Idols were not given to that intent unto any person by his parents, at
the first, could not the^ the reteyning of such names in the time of the law be
a transgression of that commandment Deuteronomy. 12 3 or does this respect of the
name-giver alter the law? herein you seem to stumble at the stone which the
Papists do so often fall upon, namely in seeking to justify their actions by
their good respects and intents.

2. To your question of Hermes in Romans 16.14. I answer, suppose he had his name
either of Hermes Trismegistus, or of the notation of the name, an Interpreter:
yet does it not therefore cease to be the name of an Idol: The name of Baal,
though given to diverse men: and though for the notation thereof it signify a
Lord or an husband, and was Esa. 54.5
sometimes given unto God, yet being also the name of an Idol, the Lord does
therefore forbid the reteyning thereof, commanding his people to Hos. 2.16
call him Ishi, and to call him no more Baali.

3. To your question concerning Phaebe, Romans 16.1. I answer, 1. You do in vain
distinguish between the heathen goddess and the moon: seeing the moon was
that their goddess worshipped by them. 2, whether those that gave this name
unto Phaebe had reference to the Idol, or to the signification of the name,
that skilles not much to the justifying of the action. Actions are to be judged
of by the word of God, and not by the respects of men. If you should give unto
your Children the names of Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Diana: and excuse it thus,
that you had no reference unto the heathnish Idolles but only to the
signification of the names: could your conscience rest in this?

4 You say, we find that Esa. 46.1
Bell or Beell was the name of an Idol, and in Beelzebub it is the name of a
false God, 2. Kin. 1.2. But when David named his son 1. Chron, 14.7.
Beel-jada, will you say he had reference to any Idol: or rather simply to the
common use and signification of that word? I answer, 1. you presume without
warrant in saying that David named his Son Beel iada, we see that son has
an other name, to wit, Eliada, 2. Sam. 5.16. and 1. Chron. 3.8. how know you
that Beel-jada, was the name that David chose? 2. The name of Bell and Beel are
not properly Hebrew names to signify the Idol, but rather Babylonish or Syrian
words; neither is it Beelzebub, as you write, but Baal-zebub in 2. Kin. 1.2.
why should you think that David spoke in a strange dialect? 3. Suppose the name
Beel-jada, had been given to that son at the first, yet seeing he has an
other name also, why might we not the^ think, that this was given as a
correction of the first, as the name of Ierubbaal was afterward called 2 Samuel
11 21.
Ierubbesheth? 4. If David's reference to the common signification of the word
might excuse him in giving the name of Baal unto his children, as you plead,
then by the like reason he might have given unto other of his sons, the names
of Dagon, Ashtaroth, Molech, Nebo, Chemosh and of other abominable Idols and
have maintained his fact by his respect unto the notation of these names. And
if this respect and reference might thus warrant the giving of a name, why
might it not warrant the reteyning of an Idols name, by changing the respect?
And then what needed the Children of Ruben to have changed the names Numb. 32
38.
of Nebo and Baalmeon, while they might have said, we have no longer reference
to the Idols, but to the common use and signification of these words?

5. Having spoken of Popish superstition performed to Peter, Paul and James,
you then ask: when men give their Children civil names of Peter, James, etc,
must they needs herein communicate with the Papists Idolatry? I answer, 1.
your note of distinction and speech of civil names is vain: for the names of
these apostles and holy men may as well be called religious names, yea and
ought to be used for religious ends, serving to admonish us both of the faith,
obedience and holy examples of such men that we might imitate the same, as also
of the duties noted in the signification of the names: Col. 4.6.
And seeing all our speech and words which we name ought to have Religious use
and to serve for aedification: how much more that special name whereby we are
called? 2. The names of Peter, James, John and such like, as they are religious
names, so are they also allowed of God and commended unto us in the scriptures
for instruction and holy use: and therefore though they be abused by some, yet
may they more lawfully be given unto Children, then other Idolatrous names
which never receyved any such allowance from God. 3, as for other names of men
turned into Idols, whereof you also speak, if they by the law of Moses without
any sin, and without exception be given unto children: then might the most
abominable Idols of the heathen be given and retained: seeing the most of their
false Gods and Idols, as Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Hercules, Isis and Osyris
and the like are generally by the cheifest historians noted to have been men
and women, deifyed, canonized and turned into Gods by the people that
worshipped them and erected temples unto them. According to such expositions,
the law of God might quickly have been made of no effect.

6. Whereas you say: it is yet for me to prove, that Paul in mentioning
Phaebe, Hermes and others by their common known names did contrary to that
commandment in Deuteronomy. 12.3. if it stand in force at this day. I answer, 1. you
pervert the question, as though I had affirmed Paul to have done contrary to
the commandment, whereas I spoke of the reteyning and not abolishing those
Idol-names in the Saints which Paul mentions: Is there no difference with
you betwixt the men reteyning, or bearing an Idol name, for their title: and
the mentioning of the same by others? Then Nebu-chadnezzar, and Belshazzar did
as lawfully in bearing the names of the Idolles Nebo and Bell: as the Prophet
mentioning their titles. 2, if the law in Deuteronomy. 12.3. standing in force did not
forbid men the reteyning of the names Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Phebe, and the
like wherein I instanced, then did it forbid the use of no Idol-names, because
none were more vile then these: nor scarce any manner of reteyning them for the
out ward action, more vile then upon the persons of the Saints, the temples of
the holy Ghost.

7. Again you object that the Antichristian names of Pope, Abbot, Monk,
friar, etc. though unlawful to be given unto men in respect of their office,
yet ministers might reteyne them as civil names, though they lived under Moses
law, etc. Ans. 1, all that you here say, is a bare assertion and without
proof, not to be admitted. 2, This distinction of civil names (if it be ought
worth) reproves your practice, that do not reteyne the common and civil use of
the names, given to the days of the week, but change the same. And why do you
commend the needless zeal of Pope Sylvester in changing those names, when as
the civil use of them without respect unto religion, might have sufficed? 3.
If turning Idolatrous names unto civil use, was a sufficient warrant not to
abolish them even under the law, then what needed that loss 1 Deuteronomy. 12.2.3. 2.
Chron. 14.3. and 17.6 and 31.1. and 34.3, etc.
in burning and breaking down temples and groves? might not they have been
turned unto other proffitable civil uses? Seeing the names and the places were
in like manner forbidden, you may not use more indulgence in sparing one above
the other. 4. If the law in Deuteronomy. 12. do not condemn the civil use of names
and places abused unto Idolatry, the^ do you unjustly condemn our use of
temples, which is for a civil help unto us as well as the seats and stools
that men fit upon in the Church, and as well as the staves that old men lean
upon in coming to the worship of God. We esteem all places a like in respect
of holiness, using these only for civil conveniencie and commodity. 5. The
special warrant for the Saints reteyning those old Idolatrous names in the
new Testament, is that great benefit purchased by the death of Christ, who
hereby Act. 10.15. 1 Cor. 10.25.26. Tit. 1.15. Ro^. 14.20
purifyed for our use, those things which under the law were unclean and
unlawful for our use; of which benefit more is to be spoken hereafter, when I
come to answer your objection touching the same: where yet we are always to
remember this caution that the creatures and things abused unto Idolatry, are
to be forborne, save when there is a necessary use of them: as in the names of
Hermes, Phebe Fortunatus and the like, which being formerly given unto private
men, could not be changed by them without manifold scandalles and
discommodities, and therefore in that case of necessary use were lawfully
retained by them. But as for your plea, of reteyning Antichristian names, of
Pope, Abbot, monk, etc. for civil use: it is not to be admitted under the law
any more the^ the giving or reteyning the names of Baal-zebub, Baal-peor, Bell,
Nebo and the like: no nor yet under the Gospel, when the case of necessity does
not excuse them: what Christian man can without sca^dall give such names as
civil, without necessity unto his children? Therefore howsoever you do unjustly
separate from the churches of God upon pretense of their Idolatry; you do now
by this plea proceed to a further countena^cing of idolatry; then that any
godly Christian may follow your steps herein.

Lastly, whereas you do again allege diverse places out of Daniel to prove
that the law in Deuteronomy. 12.3. forbids not to mention heathen Gods: you do but
trifle, and turn from the question about reteyning or bearing the names of
Idolles, unto a question about mentioning their names, which I never impugned.
Could you have brought any sound matter against the question it self, you would
not so often have slipped from it, even three times in this one section. As for
the Idolatrous names give^ unto Daniel and his three friends, though he might
lawfully in his story mention them: yet the law of Charity binds us to judge,
that they bore and retained these names by constraint, being imposed upon them
against their wills, and that they protested against them: otherwise, how
could they have been innocent?

Section. 3.
Hen. Ains.
YOur 3. exception is, that the commandment in Deuteronomy. 12. is not universal for
the place; but expressly determined and restrained to the land of Canaan, to
the idols of those nations which Israel should possess; from that place they
were to be cut of Deuteronomy. 12.1.2.3 even as God would have greater severitie
against the Canaanites, then other idolaters, Deuteronomy. 20.10.-15.16.17. Ios.
9.6.7. etc.

I answer, this your restraint to the idols of Canaan only, as if God would
not have other idols destroyed also, is not according to the intent of the law:
for be mentions that place, because they were to possess it: not intending
that if they had possession of an other place, they should have let the idols
remain, According to which equity, Magistrates now should destroy idols in
their own dominions, and not thrust themselves into other peoples possessions
to do the like. And that this is the meaning, I manifest, first by an other
like law in Lev. 18.3. where they were forbidden to do after the manner of
Egypt wherein they dwelt, and of Canaan whither they should come: these lands
are mentioned by occasion of Isreal's dwelling in them: not that God permitted
them to follow the customs of other heathens, but under these two, implied all.
Secondly, I show it by other like words in that very law, Deuteronomy. 12. as when he
says in v. 2. all the places wherein the Nations which ye shall possess served
their Gods: here the limitation is as well in respect of the Nations as of the
Land. But that God respected not the places of those heathens only, appears
by the execution of this law: when not only the places wherein the Canaanites
worshipped false Gods, but also the places wherein the Israelites falsely
worshipped the true God, were destroyed: as Ieroboams temples and Altars, and
other like, 2 Kin. 23,15.19. Thirdly because not the idols of Canaan only, but
of all other nations, are Devils, Deuteronomy. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.20. and therefore alike
abhorred of God, and to be destroyed as abominable to men. Fourthly, because
long after the destruction of the idols of Canaan, God teaches his people the
like detestation and destruction of all Idols in general, Esa. 30.22. Ier.
10.11. and 51.17.18. Zach. 13.2. Ezekiel. 30.13. Fifthly, the Prophet speaking of
the Egyptians, says not only that God would break their images, but that he
would also burn the houses of their gods with fire, Ier. 43,13. wherefore the
law exte^deth not to the Idolies of Canaan only, as you suppose. As for Gods
greater severitie against the Canaanites and other peoples: there was cause of
difference, in respect of the persons: these being come to the Genesis 15.16.
fulness of their iniquity above other nations; and being Children of the Genesis
9.25
curse, more then other. But betvveen idols and idols, Divils and Divils, there
is no such difference, that God should root out some, and favor othersome: no
not the idols of his own people, as before is shevved; and so not the idols of
Antichrist, which are Rev. 9.20
devils also. And the example of Egypt confirms this: for God said. Deuteronomy.
23.7.
Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian; yet the idols and Temples of Egypt he
would have burnt with fire, Ier. 43.13.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
IN setting down my third answer: you do in the first place very deceitfully
and unjustly repeat the same: for whereas I according to the question betwixt
us, noted that the commandment for destroying idolatrous places was
expressly determined and restreyned to the Land of Canaan, to the Idolles of
those nations, etc. in stead of this, (the commandment in Deuteronomy. 12. being both
against Idolatrous places, and the Idols themselves) first you omit and leave
out that mention of Idolatrous places whereupon I insisted in particular, you
speak generally of the Commandment in Deuteronomy. 12. and afterward turn it in
some of your answers unto the Idolles themselves, as if God would not have
other Idols destroyed, contrary unto my words and meaning: as the reader may
see in my Page 20.
former writing. There is a great difference betwixt these two sentences: The
commandment in Deuteronomy. 12. is restreyned to the destruction off the Idolles of
those nations, which I said not: and this, The commandment for destroying
Idolatrous places is restreyned to the Idolles of those nations, etc. which was
my answer.

In the next place you bring 5. reasons to prove that there was no such
restreynt, etc. And first, you labor to manifest it, by an other like law in
Levit. 18.3. where they were forbidden to do after the manner of Egypt wherein
they dwelt, and of Canaan whither they should come, etc. I answer.

1. Though God have forbidden men to imitate the manner and works of the
Egyptians and other nations in their Idolatrous services and other abominable
practices, as well as the Idolatries of Canaan: yet does it not follow hence,
that he has condemned the use of the places in all alike. The law in Lev.
18.3. is not in this particular point of the place like unto that in Deuteronomy. 12.
This you should have manifested, if you could.

2. If using the place of false worshippers be a doing after their manner, then
are you guilty of following the manner of the Jews seeing since your separation
from Mr. Johnson, you have sometimes had your ordinary public meetings for
the worship of God, in the same place where they have also ordinarily and
publicly exercised their abominable Idolatries and false worship.

Your second reason is taken from other like words in that very law, Deuteronomy.
12.2. all the places wherein the Nations which ye shall possess, etc. and the
execution of this law in destroying the places of Idolatrous Israelites, as
Ieroboams temples, etc. Answ. Seeing even by your own confession and words, the
limitation is as well in respect of the Nations as of the Land; all reason
requires, when any commandment is described in diverse words, whereof some are
more full and ample then others, that then the limitation should be understood
according to those phrases that are of greatest extent: and consequently the
commandment for the Land of Canaan, containing not only the particular places
where the Canaanitish nations, but also the places where the Idolatrous
Israelites did worship their Idols, might serve for a warrant unto Josias to
destroy Ieroboams temples being within the Land of Canaan, 2. Kin. 23. But what
is this to us that are without the, Land of Canaan? The fullest and amplest
phrase in that commandment Deuteronomy. 12. does not extend unto the places which we
reteyne in the worship of God.

Your third reason is, because not the idols of Canaan only, but of all other
nations are Divilles, Deuteronomy. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.20. and therefore alike abhorred of
God and to be destroyed as abominable to men. I answer.

1. Though Idolles be called Devilles, yet does it not follow from thence, that
the places where they have been formerly served, may not be converted unto the
use of Christians to worship God in the same: you bring scriptures to prove the
antecedent of this reason, which you needed not: but for proof of the
consequent you bring nothing, which you should have done: if you would have
made your reason good.

2. We know that Devilles are of Mat. 17.21. and 12.45.
sundry kinds and some wicked Spirits are worse then others: as also are the
Idolles and the different services of them; and therefore we cannot say that
they are alike abhorred of God; or that the places where they have been served
are in like manner to be destroyed of men.

3. Suppose that all Devilles, Idolles and the services of them were in
themselves and in their own nature equally evil; yet as the circumstance of
the place does often aggravate the sin, so God having taken and appropriated
the Land of Canaan unto himself to be Levit. 25.23.24.
his Land in a peculiar manner, how can you say but that the pollution of this
holy Land by Idolatry, might in this regard deserve a greater detestation of
all the monuments, instruments and means of such pollution?

4. We see in Mark. 16 9. Luke 8.2.3
Mary Magdalene, that the very same breast which was first a real possession of
wicked Spirits, a cage of unclean birds, and an habitation of Devilles, was
afterward sanctified to be an holy temple and habitation of God by his spirit:
If the glorious and blessed God refuse not to be worshipped and dwell in such a
Den of Devilles after it is once purged, why should we in this respect of
former pollution (having no other special restraint) refuse to worship God in
such an habitation of idolles, when as the Idolatry is remooved, and the place
purifyed from the former uncleanness of the Devil?

5. If the worship of Devilles make places so polluted that no cleansing will
make them fit for the public service of God, then is that place of your
assembly unlawful, where you have taught the doctrine of Devilles; seeing Mat.
15.9
their doctrines are part of their worship, even as the doctrines of God are a
part of Gods worship and service. In Ans. to Mr. Jacob. p. 135, 140 147.
your writings against the Church of England, to prove that they are departers
from the faith, no true Christians, holding fundamental errors, teaching the
doctrines of Devilles: you allege that that Church forbids marriage, etc.
namely, unto fellows of colleges, prentises, and to all men and women in
Lent, Advent, Rogation week, etc. If this corruption dravv such a heavy Burden
upon the back of England, then will it bring as heavy a Doom upon your own
heads, who teach the Doctrine of devilles by forbidding Marriage in a far
worse manner then the Church of England does, viz. by forbidding your people,
all both men and women, to mary with the godly members of the Reformed
Churches, and this not for any term of years, at any set time, but at all
times: yea excommunicating such of your people as have so married with the
members of the Dutch Church, setting down this marriage as one cause of your
giving them to Satan: And in the cords of this sin you are still holden,
wanting repentance for your evil: for this doctrine of Devilles, which is a
part of their worship, according to your own reasoning, the very place where
you have so worshipped is to be destroyed, and can never be cleansed unto a
lawful use in the worship of God.

Your fourth reason is, because long after the destruction of the Idols of
Canaan, God teaches his people the like detestation and destruction of all
Idols in general, Esa. 30.22. Ier. 10.11. and 51.17.18. Zach. 13.2. Ezekiel.
30.13. Answer. You do here run quite beside the question: from the Idolatrous
places to the Idolles themselves. And of all the scriptures that you here
produce, there is not one of them that speaks a word, touching the destruction
of such places, as have been abused to Idolatry but either of the Idols
themselves or of other unnecessary appurtenances belonging unto them. When you
show by any just consequence of argument, how they speak for you: you shall
then (godwilling) receyve further answer.

Your fifth reason is, that the Prophet speaking of Egyptians, says not only
that God would break their images, but that he also would burn the houses of
their Gods with fire, Ier 43.13. wherefore the law extends not to the Idolies
of Canaan only, etc. I answer.

1. Here indeed is speech, not only of the images, but also of their houses
destroyed: and this you note so plainly and distinctly, that I wonder how you
could not observe it, in your former reason, unless you did willingly wink
and purposely turn away from the question. 2, there is yet in this speech no
prescription or rule to bind us to deal in like manner with all other places
abused to Idolatry: The destruction here noted is a judgment of God executed
by Ier. 43.10
Nebuchadnezzar an Idolater himself, that had no conscience or regard of that
commandment, Deuteronomy. 12. who did also by the like judgment of God burn the
Ier. 52.13.
temple at Jerusalem, and not only the house of the Lord, but also the Kings
house, and all the howses of Jerusalem: So that by such reasonings as this,
from the judgments of God by heathens, you might as well conclude the
destroying and abolishing of private men's houses for their Idolatry: of palaces
and judgments halles: and of Gods own house so often as it was defiled by
Idols.

That which I said for illustration of this point, in respect of greater
severity showed unto the Idolatours of Canaan themselves, in their own
persons, as well as in their Idoll-places, is so plain, that in stead of
refuting the same, you go about to confirm the same by bringing reasons
thereof from the fullnes of their sin: and because they were the Children of
the curse more then other. And yet there is a further and higher cause thereof,
even the hid counsel of God, and the good pleasure of his will: for others
also as the Jews came to Mat. 23.32-36. with 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.16.
fullnes of sin, and became the Mat. 11.21.22.
Children of curse, more then other for their contempt of the Gospel: yea more
then the Canaanites themselves; for the Genesis 10.15.
Sidonians were Canaanites: yet was there no warrant for any thereupon to show
so great severity against their persons. That which you repeat touching the
difference betwixt idols and idols, devils and devils: as also touching the
destruction of the temples of Egypt is already answered.

Section 4.
Hen. Ains.
YOur 4. exception is, seeing meats sacrificed to Idols were as much polluted as
the places of their worship, and yet may now be retained for our necessary
use, Psalm. 24.1. with 1. Cor. 10.25. -- 27. why not the temples also, contrary
to the ceremony of old?

I answer: The reason is because the absteyning from meats offered to idols, was
a shadow among other shadows, Col. 2.16.17.20.21. Heb. 9.10.
Touch not, taste not handle not: but the commandment to destroy idolies, was
not a ceremony or shadow to be abrogated by Christ, as before is showed: but a
moral precept and perpetual: and we are now plainly permitted to eat such
sacrificed meat, 1 Cor. 10. and as plainly commanded still to keep our selves
from idols, 1. Ioh. 5,21. And such are Antichrists temples, being consecrated
by many popish enchantments, unto the Pontifical. de benedict. primi lap. pro
ecclesia aedific.
honor of creatures; to be kept through the interceding merits of all saints
and by infusion of grace, to be purified from all pollution: and to be no other
then the house of God, and the gate of heaven, etc. Now how these abominable
places, should be by the blood of Christ, or by the word and prayer sanctified
to be places for Gods people to worship him in; appears not by Psalm. 24.
compared with 1 Cor. 10. but rather the contrary. For those meats offered to
idols, which might be eaten sold in the shambles, or at an infidels private
table, might not be eaten in the idols temple: although such as did eat them
there, knew that the idol was nothing, and thought it therefore in their
Christian tibertie to sit at table there, 1. Cor. 8.4.10. and 10.19. -- 22.
Neither am I of your mind, that the meats offered to idols, are as much
polluted as the idol or idol temple: for (if we may by the Apostles 1. Cor.
10.18.
example, compare things with Israel after the flesh,) as the temple of God,
was greater then the gold thereof, and the Altar greater then the gift offered
thereon, being sanctified (as our savior Mat. 23.16. -- 19.
witnesses,) by the temple and Altar: then by like reason, these idol-temples
and altars in them, were worse then all the offerings, and did pollute the
sacrifices, and not the sacrifices them. Moreover, in Deuteronomy. 12. which is the
scripture in hand, you find no such commandment to destroy meats or other
things offered to idols, as there is for the idols and idolies themselves: so
where the law is silent, you should not speak. Finally, though it was lawful
to eat Gods good creatures which the gentiles had sacrificed to idols; yet was
it not lawful (by 1. Cor. 10.) to use things for that whereunto idolaters had
in special manner consecrated them: but you use these Idoleies, for that
whereunto idolaters Bellarmin. de cultu sanct. l. 3. c. 4.
consecrated them: viz. for prayer, and for the words and Sacraments.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
IN your reply unto my fourth answer, taken from the lawful use of things
sacrificed to Idolles, though as much polluted as the places where the Idols
were served,

First, you do unjustly make one of these to be a shadow and ceremony rather
then the other: And the places alleged by your self do serve for your
refutation. For does not the Apostle Col. 2.21. describe the ceremonies there
spoken of, as well by those words of Touch not, handle not; as by the words of
Taste not? And do not men in absteyning from unclean places, observe the
ceremony of Touch not; as well as they do the ceremony of Taste not, by
absteyning from unclean meat? when God ordained and determined a ceremonial
uncleanness, upon the Numb. 19.14.
entering into the house of the dead, that men should be unclean by touching
the ground of that place with their feet, as well as by handling the dead body
with their hands: this shows that the ceremony of Touch not is to be observed
and acknowledged in absteyning from places, as well as in absteyning from
meats. This appears further by the Levit. 13.46. and 12.4 Numb. 5.2.3. Exodus
3.5. and 19.12.
commandment of keeping unclean persons and that in diverse degrees from
entering or coming into holy places, and from Touching of them, what aileth you
then, that you cannot see a ceremony in absteyning from the unclean place of
the dead idols, as well as in absteyning from the unclean meat of the dead
Idols? And as for Heb. 9.10. does not the Apostle as well mention carnal rites
in general, as abstinence from meats and drinks in particular? And why is not
the ceremony of not touching an unclean place, as well a carnal rite, as the
not touching of an unclean meat? Against this you bring nothing: That which
you say, you showed before, concerning the destroying of Idolies, is before
answered also.

Secondly, whereas you allege that we are still commanded to keep our selves
from Idols 1. Ioh. 5.21. and would show withal, that our temples are Idols,
being consecrated by many popish enchantments, unto the honor of creatures,
etc. I answer, 1. This kind of unlawful consecration though it be a greevous
sin, yet does it not make our temples to be Idols: you do only give us your
bare word, but bring no show of scripture for proof of this point. 2, when
you do bring any scripture to this end, you shall find, that the same
scriptures will as well prove meats sacrificed to Idols, to be very Idols, as
the places consecrate unto them: and that they will as much condemn the
Idololythes, as the Idolies; seeing that the Idolothytes, or sacrificed meats
are also consecrate by many heathnish and devilish rites unto the honor of
creatures, as well as the Idolies or temples. 3. If our temples be very Idols,
as afterward again you speak, then with what conscience or warrant can you or
any of yours frequent the same for the worship of God, as your manner is by
coming unto the library of the great church in this city where I have diverse
times found you? under the worship or service of God, according to your own
description, is comprehended, Arrow against Idolatry. Chap. 1. sec. 11.
all manner work, labor, industry of body or mind to help forward any
Religious action; so that your study in the library must be acknowledged a
worship of God, a gnabodah comprehending both dulia and latreia, as you note in
the same place. Now as it is said of Moloch that there were many chambers in
that huge Idol: so we see that Nebuchadnezzars Idol erected in the plain of
Dura, being Dan. 3.1.
threescore cubits high and six cubits broad in greatness like unto a stately
and high tovver or steeple which might conteyne in it many celles, chambers and
rooms (though not so great as this Idol which you haunt:) and now according to
your present practice and profession, if there had been a library in one of
those rooms, and if you had lived in those times you would have made no
scruple to have gone up into the chambers of that monstrous Idol, even for the
worship of God to have sitten in the celles and studied in the library thereof.
Though Ananias, Azarias and Mishael did choose rather to go into Ibid. verse.
6.12. -- 23.
a hot oven, then to do any honor unto that beast; yet you without fear or
suspicion of doing any honor unto that fie^d, would willingly in the sight of
all have gone in at the door or mouth of that Image, couched in some hollow
tooth, or sit in some great gutte of that Devil (for all Idols are Devilles as
you confess) and there have studied as in the oracle of Apollo. Yea and all
this while, you would boldly have maintained your separation from all the
churches of Christ, as being the one only minister in the earth, free from a
polluted communion: while all other are condemned by you as defiled with the
filthiness of Antichristian Idols. O Mr. Ainsworth, ponder with your self what
godly wisdom, modesty or sincerity can be in this your strange and
contradictory practice and profession. If our temples be Devilles and Idolles,
devote unto destruction, and this of God, as you write, how may any Servant of
God imitate your example, in sitting so securely in that place over which the
judgment of God and the sword of his vengeance does hang continually, none
knowing when it shall fall? As the Lord of old passing through Egypt did
suddenly Exo. 12.12.
destroy their Idolles, so still he Esa. 19.1. and 46.1.
threatens them: and their destruction is just that will tempt God and sit in
the bosom of known Idolles: If a sudden tumult by men, or a thunder bolt
from heaven should come to dash out the brains of abominable Idolles, how
could you think to escape sitting as it were in the mids of the brains,
studying in the books of this library in the Idol-temple as you take it? Yea,
if it were but for any civil business, to do the work of any trade whatsoever,
what conscionable man knowing the judgment of God against Idolles, that durst
make his shop in the belly of such an execrable, anathematized or damned Image?
Though you have written a book, and called it, an Arrow against Idolatry, yet
do you not fear, as is meet, the Arrows of God, which he has made ready upon
the strings of his Bow against the face of every Idol.

Thirdly, where you say it does not appear by ps. 24. compared with 1. Cor.
10. how these abominable places should be by the blood of Christ, and by the
word and prayer sanctified, etc. I answer, 1. David in ps. 24. prophesying of
Christ, the king of Glory; of the eternal durance of his Church, signified by
the everlasting doors: of his entrance into and of his administration of that
spiritual Kingdom, signified by the opening of the doors before him, and this
according to your own Annot. on ps. 24.7.
exposition also; does in the beginning of the psalm show the largenes of his
dominion, over all creatures and places in Sea and land, he being made Heb. 1.2.
heir of all things: If therefore Christ be a King universal and a Monarch
then may he be worshipped in every place, else that place should be none of his
rightful dominion: If we also be Romans 8.17.
heirs with Christ of the earth, then may each place of our inheritance serve
us for a place to worship the Lord in. This donation of the earth for our use
being indefinite, is to be understood in the largest sense for our comfort,
while no restraint is added. They that vnwarrantably restreyne this gift unto a
civil use only, they rob both Christ and his Servants of a great part of
their inheritance. 2, whereas you insist, that these meats sacrificed to
jdols might not be eaten in the Idols-temple: the Apostle speaks according to
the present estate of those temples, while jdolatry was still exercised in
them; while those Idol-feasts were kept, which were a part of their 1. Cor.
10.7 21
false worship performed unto the Idols: but what is this to the Religious
use of these places purged from Idolatry and employed in the true worship of
God?

Fourthly, unto your comparative reason to prove Idol-temples worse then
Idol-sacrifices, because they pollute the sacrifices and not the sacrifices
them; as on the contrary the temple sanctified the gold, etc. I answer. 1,
your comparison is unequal and unlike; for the sanctification of the oblations
and sacrifices depended upon one temple and Altar therein: there being no other
place to sanctify their offerings: but the consecration of these meats
sacrificed to Idols did not depend upon any one temple or Altar: Hos. 12.11.
their altars were many I as heaps in the furrovves of the field: therefore a
different power for consecration is to be observed. Neither is it true which
you say that the Idol-sacrifices did not pollute the places: though the holy
sacrifices could not so much sanctify the altar of the Lord as the altar them
Mat. 23. yet might the Idols sacrifice as much pollute, the Idol-places, as the
places them: because in unclean things there is often a Hag. 2.13.14.
stronger working to pollute, then there is in holy things to sanctify. Yet
further, that men be not deceyved in the misunderstanding of Christ's words,
Mat. 23.17.19. it is also to be considered how God would that Levit. 16 20.
Numb. 7.10.88. 1 Kin. 8.63. 2 Chronicles. 29.21.24.
both altar and temple should be sanctified by the offerings, 2, suppose it were
as you say, that Idol-places were worse the^ the Idol-sacrifices: the^ mark
into what evilles you cast your self: Then the places where we worship are
worse then the Idol-sacrifice of the Mass, worse then the sacrificing of a
child unto Moloch: and communion in the true worship in one of these temples
is worse then communion with the Mass or any of those abominable sacrificers
offered out of the Idol-temples appointed thereunto: Then how is your apostasy
aggravated hereby, when after your separation, you yielded to worship God in
one of these polluted places, committing a more unclean sin then if you had
yielded to hear the Mass, or to communicate in any heathenish Idolothyte out
of the Idol-temple? Then how great is your sin still, which tolerate among you
an Idolater, that daily worshippeth God in one of these temples? by this kind
of reasoning, you might as well allow the members of your separate company to
hear Mass, or to participate with other abominable Idolatries: Thus do you
dash your feet against the stones, which you cast in our way: and crush your
self in pieces, with your own reasons returning upon your head.

Fifthly, you say, that in Deuteronomy. 12. which is the scripture in hand, you find
no such Commandment to destroy meats or other things offered to Idols, etc. I
answer, 1. If I find it for you in other places of scripture, though not in
that, yet have you no cause to accuse me, for speaking, where the law is
silent. 2, even the analogy of that place Deuteronomy. 12. shows their destruction:
for if there can be no further uncleanness and pollution showed in the places
there appointed to be destroyed, then there is in the Idol-sacrifices: then
does the equity of that law require that like things should be alike destroyed.
3, we see more expressly in other places of scripture that things dedicate or
give^ to Idols were to be destroyed: as the 2 Kin. 23 11.
horses consecrate to the Sun which Josias abolished: and the Charets of the
Sun, which he burnt with fire. 4, even your self in this section confess
abstinence from things offered to Idolles to be a shadow or ceremony, etc. If
they must be absteyned from and not eaten the^ were they destroyed; whether
burnt with fire, or given to the Dog, or otherwise destroyed, it skilleth not.
How then do you forget yourself? 5, afterward again in the next chapter you
plainly argue that heathnish temples were to be destroyed, because they were
part of their Religion and Idolatries: which you prove, because Cicero calls
them holy and religious: Now I hope you will not deny but that Idolothytes or
Idol-sacrifices were also a part of their religion and Idolatry, that the
heathens accounted these sacrifices holy and religious, as well as their
temples: and therefore it follows most plainly by your own reasoning, that
they were to be destroyed as well as their temples. Thus you see there is no
cause to complain of me for speaking, where yourself are not silent.

Finally, you add, that it was not lawful (by 1 Cor. 10.) to use things for
that whereunto Idolaters had in special manner consecrated them, etc. Answ. 1.
It is showed before from ps. 24. with 1 Cor. 10. that we may have not only a
civil but also a religious use of such things notwithstanding any such
consecration. 2, though Bellarmin say, that their temples were consecrated for
prayer, for the word and Sacraments; yet does it not follow that we use them
for the same things; because our prayers, preaching of the word and Sacraments
are not the same with theirs; their prayers being Idolatrous invocations of
creatures: their scriptures, apocryphal: their preachings, heretical; their
Sacrament of Eucharist, an horrible Idol, etc. For these things they were
consecrated some of them: but for these ends we use them not.

Section. 5.
Hen. Ains.
To your 5. exception, about the burning of the remnants of the sacrifices,
etc. We do all agree that those things with the ordinances about them, were
shadows, and are abolished by Christ: and therefore no consequence can be
gathered for the like outward practice now, but only for the spiritual
equity.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
THough the holy things of God of old, as the remainder of the sacrifices, were
to be abolished when the religious use ceased, yet can there no just
consequence be gathered for the like practice now in abolishing the remainders
of bread and wine in the Lords supper: Thus much you grant; and thus far we
agree. But whereas in my answer unto you, I showed further, that God did in
like manner command to abolish one as well as the other: the high places of
Canaan, as the remainders of certain sacrifices: to this you say nothing. It
remains therefore for you to show, why one of these commandments should still
be in force rather then the other. If you think that one of these
commandments is a ceremonial shadow rather then the other: though the
contrary has been already showed before, yet it may further also appear by
this, because these things, viz. The abolishing of holy things after the
religious use: and the abolishing of Idolatrous places after the unclean use,
are commandments of like nature both for the action in themselves, and
proportion unto things signified: the one shadowing out unto us a special
estimation of Gods ordinances, as the other shadowed out a special detestation
of men's inventions.

Section. 6.
Hen. Ains.
YOur last exception is, that God of old appointed one only place for
sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 12.5.6. Lev. 17.3.4. therefore those high places being for
sacrifice, were to be destroyed, etc. but now difference of place is taken
away, Ioh. 4.21.

I answer: First the law speaks of Deuteronomy. 12.2.
all places wherein the nations served their Gods: so that though they were not
for sacrifice, but for prayer, or other like use, they were to be pulled down.
Secondly though there was to be but one place for sacrificing, yet follows it
not that that was the cause (at least the only cause) why heathenish idols and
idoleies should be destroyed: but for that they were divils, and divils howses,
and a part of their religion which God abhors, and men should detest,
therefore were they to be demolished, as Moses shows in Deuteronomy. 7.25.26. and
Exodus 23.24. And this appears by Iakobs practice, who Genesis 35.2.3.4.
abolished idols and moniments of them, before any one place was chosen: and so
did Exo. 32.20.
Moses destroy the idols in the wilderness, before the Tabernacle was made. In
other lands also, as Ier. 44.12.13. and 48.7.13. and 50 2. Ezekiel. 30 13.
in Egypt, Moab, Babylon, etc. where no one place was chosen for sacrifice: yet
God would destroy the Idols and idol temples, for detestation of them. Thirdly,
If we look upon the thing figured by that one place, it will lead us from these
idol temples now, rather then to them. For principally the Temple of old,
figured Ioh. 2.19.21.
Christ: secondarily the 2. Cor. 6.16.
Church of Christians. In both respects we should avoid to worship God under
the shadow of the idols of Antichrist: for the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.15.16.
what concord has Christ with Belial? and (of the Church he says) what
agreement has the temple of God, with idols? So the type of one place, helps
you nothing. No more will the taking away of the difference of place; which you
last insist upon. For our saviors words (in Ioh. 4) ought in reason to be
expounded according to his Fathers law, not against it, even by his own
doctrine, Mat. 5.17. So that when idols and idolies are destroyed as God
commanded, and the typical sanctity of Jerusalem is ended: then are all
places free to worship God in, in spirit and truth. And seeing Christ, to bring
in the true spiritual worship, would not only end, but even Dan. 9.26.
destroy the city and the Sanctuary, which once were holy: how can we think,
that he would have the idolie of the Samaritans stand vnderstroyed: or the
abominations that his enemy Antichrist should afterward erect? And the text
it self, if it be considered, teaches not otherweise. For first, it shows
that God shall be worshipped, Ioh 4.21.
neither in the mount of Samaria (where they committed idolatry) nor in
Jerusalem, (where the typical worship had been for a time.) Whereupon it
follows, that Antichrist having erected temples for idols, in imitation of
Ierusalems temple purposely in the parts and Shape, as the Bellarm. de cultu
sanct. l. 3. c. 3.
Papists acknowledge: and conjured them with more Pope-holy rites, and for more
irreligious uses, then there were holy rites and uses of Solomon's temple, as is
to be seen in the Pontifical: we are rather to conclude, that God is not to be
worshipped in them. Secondly, Christ there teaches all men to worship God Ioh.
4.23.24.
in spirit and truth: which are opposed both to the figurative worship of the
Jews, and false worship of the gentiles but Antichrists temples are a part of
the false worship which he has forged as the gentiles did of old (as shall
anon be more fully manifested:) therefore Christ by those words, rather calls
us from them then unto them, by his doctrine in Ioh. 4. Thirdly, we cannot in
reason think, that there should be more indifferency of place now, then there
is indifferency of other things, seeing The Apostle says Tit. 1.15
unto the pure all things are pure: whereupon you may as well conclude a lawful
use of popish garments, images, and other things of his religion, as of his
idol places. And so the minister may wear a cope, miter, surplice, etc. in his
ministration (which the Pope appointed in imitation of the Levitical preistly
garments) as well as minister in a popish sanctuary; and all other his
abominable rites, may be retained of us Christians in our Churches, by as good
reason as the temples of his ahomination. Which is as contrary to Christ's
intendement in Ioh. 4. as darkness is to light. And thus Deuteronomy. 12.2.3. compared
with Exodus 20.4.5 6. is of force to throw down idols and idol temples,
notwithstanding all that you have said to uphold them. And according to your
manner of pleading for idolies, the Corinthians, (whom Paul convinced of syn
for eating in the idolie, 1. Cor. 10 18.
by an argument of Isreal's practice) might aso have pleaded, that those things
concerned Israel which were a special people separated from all other, and
they were bound to eat of the sacrifices before Gods sanctuary only, one
peculiar place: but now, the earth is the Lords and the plenty thereof, all
places are alike, all idols are nothing, and were by them so known and
esteemed. And even as you plead against Deuteronomy. 12. which is an explanation of
the 2. Commandment: so Bellarm. de Imagine. l. 2. c. 7.
some Papists have also pleaded against the 2. commandment it self, that it
was a temporal precept, and that now under the new Testament images are
lavvfull.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
MY last answer to your first reason, was this, that there is not the like
reason to abolish the buildings abused unto Idolatry now, as the high places of
old, because God having then appointed one only place for sacrifice, Deuteronomy.
12.5.6, etc. Lev. 17.3.4. Those high places being for sacrifice were to be
destroyed, though no Idolatry had been committed in them; but being polluted
with the service of Idols, there was then double cause of their destruction,
which is not now in these, while difference of place is taken away, Ioh.
4.21.

Your first reply unto this, is: that the law speaks of all places wherein
the nations served their Gods: so that though they were not for sacrifice, but
for prayer, or other like use, they were to be pulled down. I answer again,
1. though Moses speak generally of serving their Gods, yet this shows not that
they had any place of solemn worship, wherein they did not sacrifice also: The
high mountains, hills, and green trees, whereof Moses speaks were the
ordinary places, where they did sacrifice as appears throughout the 2. Kin.
17.8. -- 11. and 1 Kin. 22.43. Esa. 57.5.6.7. Ier. 3.6. with 17.2.3. Ezekiel.
6.13. and 20.28. Hos. 4.13.
scriptures: And the Israelites following the manners of the heathens herein
also, did offer sacrifices in their own private 2. Kin. 23.12. Ier. 19.13.
Zeph. 1.5.
houses unto the host of heaven and unto other false Gods. 2. Even you
yourself have not brought any one instance or show of proof to manifest unto
us, that these Idolatours had any set places of worship either public or
private, wherein they did not sacrifice as well as they prayed or performed any
other service. And what weight is there then in a mere conjecture and
supposition, against a common and general practice described unto us by the
testimony of holy writ?

Your second reply is, that though there was to be but one place for
sacrificing, yet follows it not that that was the cause, (at least the only
cause) why heathnish idols and idoleies should be destroyed, but for that they
were divils and divils bouses, etc. I answer, 1. I said not, that the
commandment for one place of sacrifice, was the only cause why Idol-places
should be destroyed; your denial thereof is idle and beside the matter; and
tends to deceive your reader, in making him to think that I had affirmed the
same. 2, that the commandment of a peculiar set place of sacrifice was one
cause it may appear by the coherence of the text and by the opposition betwixt
the actions specifyed in Deuteronomy. 12. for whereas the destruction of the
Idolatrous places is commanded verse. 2.3.4. the using of one place alone which
God should choose to put his name there, is also immediately taught and
appointed in the same place, and in the verse. 5. next following 3, as for their
being devils houses, which you allege as the cause of their destruction, that
is without warrant, as has been showed before: and may further appear by
this: because then every private Idolaters house, yea and every obstinate
sinners house should be destroyed, and be unlawful for use, seeing all such
persons are called Ioh. 6.70. and 8.44. Act. 13.10.
devilles and Children of the devil and therefore their howses, devilles
howses. 4, those two places of scripture Exodus 23.24. Deuteronomy. 7.25.26. are in a
double regard misalledged by you, for first they speak not a word for the
abolishing of Idolatrous places, which is the question: but only of the Idols
themselves; and secondly, if they did speak of abolishing the places, yet does
it not thence appear, that it should be upon this ground, because they are
devilles howses, which is the point, that in this place remains to be proved
of you. 5, As for Iaakobs practice, Genesis 34.2.3.4. there is nothing said
touching the destruction of any place defiled by Idolatry, but of other things
of less necessary use, of which more is to be spoken hereafter, where that
scripture is again alleged by you. And what mean you to tell us of Moses
destroying the Idol, or gold Calfe Exo. 32.20. as though there were no
difference betwixt an Idol and the place where it stood? How often do you turn
away from the question of the place, to an other question touching images
themselves? 6. As for the destruction of Idols and Idol-temples in other lands
also as Egypt, Moab, Babylon, etc. where no one place was chosen for sacrifice:
touching that which was done in Egypt, Ier. 43.12.13, and Ezekiel. 30.13. you have
been answered already in the third section going before: And yet further you
may observe this, that if the fact of Nebuchadnezzar in destroying Idolatrous
countries and houses may thus be alleged as a rule to be followed of
necessity, you may as well plead that the houses of other sinners are to be
destroyed and not to be dwelt in, because of his and other princes decrees to
Dan. 3.29 Ezra, 6.11.
pluck down and deface them for blasphemy, hindering the building of temple,
etc. Then ought you not to have used that place which the blasphemous Jews had
once possessed and inhabited before you. Touching Moab and Babylon, Ier.
48.7.13. and 50,2. The prophet says nothing there touching the places
themselves, but only for the Idols Chemosh, Bell, Merodach: of which our
question is not. And in sum touching all these nations togather, though no
one place was chosen in them for sacrifice; yet seeing one place was chosen then
in Jerusalem for all the godly in the world to sacrifice in, and no other
allowed for sacrifice in any of these nations: even in this respect also the
use of such places, were double unlawful at that time, once for their
sacrifices, and again for their Idol-sacrifice.

Your third reply is, that if we look upon the thing figured by that one place,
it will lead us from these Idol-temples now, rather then to them, etc. But I
answer, though Christ and his Church were figured by the temple of old: though
Christ have no concord with Belial, nor his Church any agreement with Idols, as
you allege from 2 Cor. 6.15.16. yet what is this to the use of those temples
from whence Belial and the Idols are cast out? Though a Legion of devilles have
dwelt in any living temple or other place, yet when they are cast out and
dispossessed, cannot Christ enter in and dwell there, unless he hold a concord
and agreement with them? That no agreement is to be had with Belial and Idols,
we grant willingly, but that the worship of God in the places whence they are
cast out is an agreement with them, we deny: for proof of this, which is the
point, you have said nothing at all.

In the next place you reply diverse things also touching the difference of
place which is now taken away John. 4.21. You say, Seeing Christ, to bring in
the true spiritual worship, would not only end, but even Dan. 9.26
destroy the city and the sanctuary, how can we think, that he would have the
idolie of the Samaritans stand undestroyed; or the abominations that his enemy
Antichrist should afterward erect? I answer, 1. For that place, Dan. 9.26.
though the Angel Gabriel there show that the sanctuary should be destroyed, yet
does he not show that it was unlawful for Christians afterward to have met
togather for the spiritual worship of God in the same place: And therefore that
kind of destruction is nothing to the purpose, being nothing like unto that
which you plead for, even to the remooving of the lawful public worship of
God, for ever out of the place defiled by Idol-service. 2, as Gabriel foretells
the destruction of the sanctuary, so in the very same verse he foretelles the
slaughter of the Messiah: both these were to be done by the providence of God,
according to the determinate counsel of his will; neither of them according to
his law by any warrant of his word, but both of them by the authority of the
cruel and wicked Romans, which both destroyed the temple and slew Christ:
Their fact in destroying the temple was abominable, even Dan. 9.27 with Mat.
24.15. and Luke 21.20.
the abomination of desolation: so that if you have no better arguments for
throwing down our temples, then this example; your destruction of them shall
be but an abominable desolation, without any warrant of Gods word. 3, The
Angel in this place does show the will of God as well for the destruction of
the city it self as of the sanctuary: so that for ought in this place, you
might as well have collected and concluded the destruction of Idolatrous cities
and the private houses of Idolaters, as the destruction of the temples abused
unto Idolatry.

But for the confirmation of your opinion, you plead further from that text
Ioh. 4.21. and say, First, it shows that God shall be worshipped, neither in the
mount of Samaria (where they committed Idolatry) nor in Jerusalem, (where the
typical worship had been for a time.) whereupon it follows, that Antichrist
having erected temples for Idols, in imitation of Ierusalems temple purposely
in the parts and shape as the Papists acknowledge, etc. we are rather to
conclude that God is not to be worshipped in them. I answer, 1. The denial of
worship in the mount of Samaria and Jerusalem, is not absolute, but the meaning
is that men should not be tied to those places; and therefore Christ opposes
not any other local place unto those two, but only opposes the manner of
worship in spirit and truth, which might be now in any 1 Timothy 2.8.
places without exception. 2, Though our temples had been made liker unto the
temple in Jerusalem then they are: yet does it not follow that it is unlawful
to worship God in them: for proof of this consequence you bring nothing: And
as for the consecration of them and your testimony of Bellarmine, they are to
be examined in the next Chapter, where you repeat the same at large.

Secondly, you plead from Ioh. 4.23.24. that Christ there teaches all men to
worship God in spirit and truth: which are opposed both to figurative worship
and false worship, etc. I answer, though Antichrists temples in his use of them
are a part of his false worship: yet does not that pollute us in our use of our
own temples, being quite contrary unto his. The Jews temple wherein you
worshipped God after them, was in their use of it a part of their false
worship, (as is anon more fully to be manifested,) was your use of it therefore
condemned by Ioh. 4?

Thirdly, you plead, that we cannot in reason think, that there should be more
indifferency of place now, then there is of other things, etc. I answer, that
we are to distinguish betwixt things of necessary use and other trifles: A
place for the worship of God is of necessary use: and those which we have are
of great convenience for us, being civil helps in the service of God: and
therefore we use them with good conscience, seeing all things are pure unto the
pure, Tit. 1.15. But as for cope, mitre, surplice, and such like we do justly
refuse and reject them, being vain inventions that are of no necessary use at
all in the service of God.

Whereas you say further, that according to my manner of pleading for Idolies,
the Corinthians (whom Paul convinced of sin for eating in the idolie, by an
argument of Isreal's practice) might also have pleaded, that those things
concerned Israel which were a special people, etc. I answer, that you compare
things together very grossly: for Paul convinced the Corinthians of sin for
eating in the Idol-house with the Idolaters, at that time and place when they
did instantly committ Idolatry, those Idol-feasts being a part of their
worship, as has been showed before from 1 Cor. 10.7.21. but you in vain seek
to convince us of sin for the lawful worship of God in those places from
whence the Idols and Idolatry are remooved: Now I pray you, what proportion or
similitude is there betwixt these two things: viz. Communion in the true
worship of God with the faithful in a place purged from Idolatry; which is
our case: and Communion in an Idol-feast an Idolatrous worship, this with
heathnish Infidelles, even in the place where the Idolles stood, and were
presently worshipped; which was the case of the Corinthians? Let him that
reads judge, whether the Corinthians could make the like plea for themselves
that we do.

Finally as for your comparing of our defense unto the plea of some Papists in
expounding the second commandment itself to be a temporal precept, which
opinion of Catharinus even Bellarmine himself refuted in the place alleged by
you: I answer, that any lew might as lawfully tell you the same, and say unto
you, even as you hold and plead for the abrogating of the sacrifices and
ceremonies of the law: so some Papists have also pleaded against the second
commandment itself, that it was a temporal precept: If his comparison should
be unjust against you: so is yours against us.

CHAP. VIII. The Second reason concerning temples, examined.
Hen. Ains.
Our 2. reason against them is, Because so long as they are continued,
Antichrist with his abominations is not wholly abolished, as the Lord has
appointed, and will effect in his time, Rev. 17.16. and 18.11.12.13. 2 Thessalonians.
2.8. 2 King. 10.26.27.28.

This argument you deny: and say, The 3. first allegations show that Antichrist
shall be consumed: but they show not that our Temples are any of his abomination.
The 4. allegation is taken (you say) from the policy of Moses, that is now
abrogate.

I answer; if we had brought this reason against the Mass, or any other of
Antichrists synns, you might even as well have denied our argument, and be a
pleader for all popery: seeing the Mass it self is not named in any of those
places, more then his temples. But if they show that he (with his abominations)
is to be abolished, as you deny not: it will soon appear that your temples are
a part of them.

First therefore, the text Rev. 18.11 12.
mentions the merchandise of the whore, which no man should buy: naming Gold,
silver, precious stones, pearls, byss, purple, scarlet, etc. Vessels of wood,
brass, iron, marble, etc. Here I hope you understand not these things of
merchandise properly, but (as is throughout the Revelation) to be an allusion
to the Prophets, and in this place to the merchandise of Ezekiel. 27.
Tire. For you that are so large for the popes idols and idoleies, if there may
be any necessary use of them; it is not to be thought that you will be so strayt
as to forbid men to buy these civil wares of Papists, or merchants now to trade
with Spain or Italy. Secondly then, to prove that your temples are
Antichrists Merchandise, and none of the meanest: I will bring you into the
Popes own ware house, his Roman Pontifical, and other shops of his, where
you may see it with your eyes. And first by the decree of Pope Nicolas, De
consecr. did 1. c. Ecclesia.
it is not lawful for any man to build a Church or temple, without
Commandment or leave of the Pope and Apostolik See. Then, unto the place where
a temple is to be built, and where a cross is set to hallow it, comes
Pontifical. de bened. primi lapidis pro ecclesia aedific.
a Bishop with his Miter, and sprinkleth the place with holy water, and
prays God to visit that place, through the interceding merits of the Virgin
Marie, and St. N. (naming the he saint or she saint unto whose honor and
name the Church shall be founded) and all other saints: and by infusion of his
grace, to purify it from all pollution, etc. Then they say, the stone which
the builders refused, that is become the head of the corner: Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock I vvil build my Church: Glory be to the Father, etc. Then
sprinkling the stone with holy water, and graving the sign of the cross
upon it: he prays God to bless that creature of stone, that it may be a
saving remedy to mankind: and that whosoever shall afford help with a pure
mind to build up that Church, may have both health of body, and cure of
soul. Then placing that first stone on the foundation, with crossings in the
name of the Father, etc; it becomes a place destinate for prayer: and they
sing, How fearful is this place! surely this is no other then the house of
God, and the gate of heaven, etc. When the Church is builded, and is to be
dedicated; Pontifical. de eccles. dedicat.
the Archdeacon is to signify to clergy and people, that they fast before it
be consecrated, and so must the Bishop do that consecrateth it. And the evening
before, the Bishop prepares the relics which are to be enclosed in the
Altar, putting them in a vessel, with three grains of frankincense, and a
writing on parchment signifying whose relics are there enclosed, and to whose
honor and name, the Church and Altar is dedicated, etc. In the morning, they
make ready holy chrisme, holy oil, two pound of frankincense, a censer, ashes,
salt, wine, an hyssop sprinkle, five little crosses for the Altar, two vessels
of holy water: and they paint twelve crosses on the wall. The Bishop conjureth
the salt, sprinkleth the holy water, and then they sing, Thou shall sprinkle me
with hyssope, and I shall be clean, etc. The house of the Lord is founded on the
top of the mountains, and exalted above all hills, and all nations shall come
unto it, etc. The Bishop with his pastoral staff, smites the Church door,
saying, Lift up your gates ye Princes, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting
doors, and the King of Glory shall come in: and a Deacon that is locked within,
says, Who is this King of Glory? The Bishop answers. The Lord strong and
mighty, the Lord mighty in war. Then going about the outside of the Church,
he comes and knocks the second time, with like words: and so again the
third time, and then he adds, Open, Open, Open. Then the door is opened, and
he goes in with his clerks, (having first made the sign of the cross to
drive away all phantasmes) and he says, Peace be to this houses: the Deacon
answers, By thy coming in: and all say, Amen: and sing, Everlasting peace be
to this house, etc. Then ashes are sprinkled on the Church floor, and the
Bishop with his pastoral staff, writes on the ashes, the Greek and Latin
Alphabets. He blesses water with salt, ashes and wine: conjuring first the
salt, that it may drive away the Fiend, and may profit them that take it, to
health of soul and body: and conjureth, the water, to repel the Divil from
the borders of the just, and that he be not in the shadow of that Church: he
prays the Lord to power out the holy Ghost into that his Church and Altar,
that it may profit to health of Body and soul unto them that worship him: to
send an Angel from heaven, to bless and sanctify those ashes, that they may
be an healthful remedy to all that implore his name: and that they which
sprinkle themselves with it for redemption of synns, may perceive health of
body and protection of soul. He blesses the wine, and makes a mixture of
water and wine and salt and ashes for the consecrating of that Church and
Altar: and prays God to send the Holy Ghost upon that wine, to profit the
consecration of that Church: to send a shower of grace upon that house, to give
all good, repel all evil, destroy the Devil: that to the visiters of that
house, there may be peace: that he will bless and keep that Habitation by the
sprinkling of that water mixed with salt, wine and ashes: that he would repel
darkness from it, infuse light, that it may be Gods own house, and the Fiend may
have no leave to do hurt therein. Then they sing, this is Gods house, firmly
builded, well founded on the firm rock: this is no other but the house of God,
and gate of heaven. They pray God to infuse his grace on that house of prayer,
that the help of his mercy may be felt of all that there call on his name:
that his eyes may be open to that house day and night: that he would favorably
admit every man that comes to adore him in that place: that there the Priests
may offer sacrifices of praise, the people may pay their vows: that in that
house by the grace of Gods spirit, the sick may be healed, the blind cured,
Lepers cleansed, Divils cast out, and the bonds of all synns unloosed. Then call
they the saints of God to enter into the city of the Lord, for a new Church
is builded for them, where the people ought to adore Gods Majesty. Then the
Bishop makes a short Sermon to the people, of the virtue and privileges of the
dedication of the church, of Tithes, and other ecclesiastical fruits to be paid
etc. and so the founder and people promise to fulfill the Bishops
commandments. Indulgences are granted to all faithful Christians, for one
year: and in the yearly day of the consecration of that Church, 40. days
indulgence to all that visit it. They pray that God would enter into his house,
and that that house which is made solemn by that dedication, may be made high
by his habitation. And the Bishop says, this temple be hallowed and
consecrated, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
to the honor of God, and of the glorious virgin Marie, and all saints, and the
memory of S. N. Peace be unto thee. Then consecrateth he all the clothes,
garments, etc. for that Church: and prays God to illustrate by his habitation
that Temple of his Majesty: to grant that all which shall come thither to pray,
out of whatsoever tribulation they cry unto him, may obtain the benefit of his
consolation. These temples, whose adorning consists Bellarmin. de cult.
sanct. l. 3. c. 6.
partly in the very frame or fabrik, partly in the images, crosses, vestments,
etc. are builded Ibidem. c. 3.
after the form of Solomon's temple, with three parts, and the most holy toward
the east, (differing therein from the Jews temple, for a popish mystery) and
are erected Ibidem c. 4.
for 4. ends: for sacrifice, called therefore Temples: for prayer, and therefore
called Oratories: for to keep the relics of martyrs, called thereupon Basiliks
or Martyries: and for to feed the people with the word and Sacraments, called
therefore Churches. And to go on Ibidem c. 8.
pilgrimage to these and other like holy places, is pious and religious: and
they are worthily esteemed Ibidem c. 5.
holy and Venerable, and endued with a divine virtue. This place, to weet
Durand. Rational. l. 7. c. de festo dedicat.
the material Church, is holy: for it is hallowed to this end, that there the
Lord may hear men's prayers, and therefore praestat orantibus sanctitatem.
it gives holiness to them that pray therein. Now let these things speak,
whether your temples be not a notable part of Antichrists abominations: and
therefore by Gods word and spirit (according to 2. These. 2.8.) and by the
Magistrates sword (according to Rev. 17.16.) to be abolished, and dealt with as
was 2. King. 10.
Baals house, which example is of perpetual morality for the substance of it,
and not of Moses policy now abrogate, as before I showed. If the Faith and
ordinances of the gospel, be Christians merchandise, which we are called to
buy, Esai. 55.1. Rev. 3.18. then are these popish ordinance and idolatries,
Antichrists wares, which no man should buy, Rev. 18.11. If Solomon's temple
which he builded for 2 Chronicles. 2.6. and 6.2.20.29.
sacrifice and prayer and for God to dwell in, was a part of the Jews religion,
as all the scripture witnesses: and the destroying of it by the heathens, was
a synn against the true God and his ordinances, as the 79. Psalm teaches us:
if the temples also of the gentiles were a part of their religion and
idolatry; as we may learn by their own testimony, calling their Temples
Cicero Act. 6, in Verrem.
holy and religious: by their practice, as when Antiochus appointed 1. Mac.
cab. 1.47.
Chapels of Idols ( or Idolies) to be set up; and by their profession, as the
Town Clerk of Ephesus boasted of their devotion to their goddess Diana, in
that their city was her Neocoron. Act. 19. v. 35.
Temple keeper or Sexton: and finally by the Apostles doctrine, who as he
calls their false Gods and images Idols, so their temples he calls 1. Cor.
8.10. and 10.20.21.
Idolies, and blames the Christians for eating idolothytes in those places:
then can it not be denied, but these temples of yours, are Antichrists idolies,
a part of his religion or abomnation rather, to be loathed of all good
Christians, and ought (by evidence of the scriptures fore alleged) to be
destroyed. And you that use them for two of those 4. ends for which Antichrist
consecrated them, namely for places of prayer, and of ministration of the word
and Sacraments: do so far forth partake with his abominations. And that the
Pope traffiqueth with these temples, as with his other vvares, even for the
maintenance of his Kitchen also: a Friar Bapt. Mantuan.
a Poet of his, testifyeth saying, Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae.
So that to him it should be said, as to Tyrus of old: Ezekiel 28.18.
Thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries, by the multitude of thine iniquities; by
the iniquity of thy traffic: therefore will I bring forth a Fire from the
midst of thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of
all them that behold thee.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
THe reason why I denied our temples to be the abominations of Antichriste, was
not because they are not named in your allegations, as you would make the
reader to believe: but because the scriptures alleged by you do not show it at
all; I know well that the scriptures do show many things to be evil and
abominable, which are not at all named in them. How unjust then is your
inference from this pretext, viz. that I might as well have denied such a
reason against the mass, seeing the Mass it self is not named in any of those
places, more then his temples.

But to prove that our temples are a part of his abominations, you do further
urge both the scriptures, and popish writings: And first you say, the text,
Rev. 18.11.12. mentions the merchandise of the whore, which no man should
buy; naming Gold, silver, precious stones, etc. And you hope I understand not
these things of merchandise properly, etc. I answer, 1. Suppose this
merchandise is not to be understood properly, must our temples therefore needs
be a part thereof? you have not yet brought so much as a color of any proof
for this, out of the scriptures alleged. 2, That Gold and silver, and such
like things even properly taken are the merchandise of Rome, as well as other
spiritual things, it appears evidently, by the infinite treasures and sums
of money which that Church has extorted from the nations of the earth, and
divided the spoils thereof among her merchants: even by your own testimony
out of Mantuan, the crowns and diademes of princes were sold at Rome unto such
as would buy. All stories show, that even civil principalities, Kingdoms,
Empires were bought and sold at Room: the pope setting on the Emperors crown
with his feet, and with his foot again dashing it from the head. 3, what
though there be an allusion unto the Prophets through out the revelation, and
in this place also to the merchandise of Tire, as you allege? This hinders not
but that many things in such allusions may be understood properly. The Angel
that proclaims the destruction of Room, Rev. 18.2. with Esa. 21.9. Ier. 51.8.
alludes unto the destruction of Babylon: yet I hope you will not deny but
that the destruction of the very city of Rome it self taken properly, may be
understood thereby as well as the religion it self that is to be abolished; as
in Babylon of old. 4, though I do not absolutely condemn all trade in civil
wares with Spain and Italy, whereof you speak also; yet this helps you not:
for neither are all the merchandise mentioned in Rev. 18. counted for the
abominations of Antichrist: neither are our temples any part of his
merchandise. The Lord in his judging of Antichriste will have even Rev.
18.22.23.
civil commodities of Room to be abolished from that place, not as things
unlawful for use, but yet to be taken away from the whore for a punishment
of other sins.

In the next place, after streyning of the scriptures, you come unto the popish
writings and promise to bring me unto the Popes own Warehouse, etc. I
answer.

First, though you take upon you to be our guide to lead us into the Roman
Pontifical and other shops of the Pope, yet am I and other to take heed how
we follovv such a guide, when before our eyes we see you to stumble at the
first step, and to break your shinnes even at the very threshold of th shop you
enter into. Whereas you say, First by the De consec. did. 1. part. 3. c.
ecclesia.
decree of Pope Nicocolas, it is not lawful for any man to build a Church or
Temple, without commandment or leave of the Pope and Apostolik sea: you do
herein falsify the words of the decretal, which does not speak of building a
Church without the Popes leave, but of instituting a church. And this appears
more plainly by the Popish Gloss upon the next Chapter in the same
distinction, which says De consecrat. did. 1. part. 4. c. Nemo.
Hitherto is showed by whose authority Churches are to be consecrated, but now
by whose authority they are to be built. Whereby it appears that the Author
of the Gloss interprets the decree of pope Nicolas not of building as you
allege, but of the institution of Churches, according to the words of the
decree: These two things are plainly distinguished in that place. But as
before you dealt untruly with the Page 107.
Thalmudique canons, and with the Page 117.
canons of the Synods in the Reformed Churches, so do you here deal with the
popish canons. What unclean fingers have you thus to defile and corrupt the
several testimonies which you meddle withal?

Secondly, what weight or authority is there in the Popish records of these
uncertain and variable decrees? They were so often changed and altered, that
upon the credit of them, you cannot say of our temples, that they were
consecrated by such authority as is therein appointed. This uncertainty and
variablenes of the decrees, as it might be showed by many other insta^ces, so
does it also appear most plainly eve^ touching this point of consecrating
churches and this also in the tractate alleged by your self: for whereas the
text of the decretal says De consecrat. did. 1. par. 3. Cap. De locorum.
Church is to be consecrated without the authority of the pope: The Gloss
upon the same place says concerning that decree, Hodie non tenet: This decree
was then altered: And the explication of this matter is further described in
the same place. And thus we see that the authority of the pope was not
necessary, either for building or yet for consecrating of our temples. These
things were in the power of the Bishop, as well as of the pope: and therefore it
is also written in their law: Extravagant. Johan. 22. tit. 5. in Glossa.
The Bishops can do as much as the Pope in those things which are of the
efficacy of co^secratio^.

Thirdly, as there is this difference in the decrees touching the authority by
whom, so much more in the diverse rites and customs used in the manner of
consecration of temples: This diversity of rites is confessed by themselves:
saying, Durand. rational. in praefat.
It ought to be considered that in the divine service there is found a variety
of manifold rites: for almost every Church has their peculiar observations,
etc. Therefore let not the mind of the reader be moved: if happily he read in
this work such things, as he does not know to be observed in his own Church:
or if he do not find, whatsoever is there observed. In this regard you cannot
say of our temples with any assurance that those peculiar rites and customs
mentioned by you in this place, were observed in the consecration of them. In
ancient time, temples were consecrated Hospinia^ de Templ. p. 105.
only by prayer; and being once consecrated in such manner, they were not to
be consecrated again with these rites, even by the testimony of the Popish De
consecrat. did. 1. part. 7. c. ecclesijs.
decrees themselves. Therefore all that you have said touching these rites, is a
mere uncertainty, especially touching such Oratories as this place is wherein
our particular congregation does meet togather for the worship of God: This
difference they show betwixt oratories and other Churches, viz. that
Panormitan. de consecrat. Eccl. C. p. Auctoritate.
an Oratorie is not consecrated, neither has a dowry appointed, neither is
made principally that Mass should be celebrated therein, but for prayer, etc.

Fourthly touching the frame and Fabric of these temples builded (as you
allege out of Bellarmine) after the form of Solomon's temple, with three parts
and the most holy toward the east, differing therein from the Jews temple for
a mystery, etc. Herein also there is great difference of temples; neither do
you so faithfully relate the testimony of Bellarmine touching this matter as
was meet: for he speaks not indefinitely of them as you do, but with such
words as imply an exception: when he says of their 3. parts, Bellarmin. de
cult. sanct. lib. 3. c. 3.
fere omnes, almost all are so built: and of their looking to the east, he
says it is vt plurimum, for the most part implying that some are otherwise:
And his fellow-cardinall acknowledges, that some Churches, as Caes. Baron.
Annal. Eccles. Tom. 5. p. 140.
that of Gaza by Eudoxias means made in form of a Cross, were built
otherwise: differing mainely therein from the form of Solomon's temple. And for
the temples of this city they are of diverse shapes: no one fully like unto an
other: for our temple in particular, it has not those 3. parts whereby it
should resemble Solomon's temple, wanting both porch, and chancel: so that your
reasoning here against us in respect of the form and shape of temples (as you
did also in the former Chapter) is as vain as any things else.

Fifthly, as for that which you speak of the holiness, mysteries, or mystical
significations ascribed unto temples and unto the rites of their consecration
by Bellarmine, Durandus, and others: they are many of them more different and
uncertain then the rites themselves: Durandus himself in the Rational. divin.
offic. in praefat.
beginning of his book confesses touching the popish rites, that there are
diverse senses or significations given unto the same thing, and they pass from
one meaning to an other: And the Ioann Aloysius. ad Cardinal. Tiras.
popes auditour in an Epistle printed in the end of the same book affirms that
many priests, Bishops, Archbishops for innumerable years had consecrated, and
observed their rites and ceremonies being altogather ignorant what they did:
And that now only and not before they understood the same by Durandus his
explication of those mysteries. Hereby it appears that the mystical
significations of holiness ascribed unto temples and other ceremonies were
particular opinions invented at length by some special men, not known unto
many of the learnedest among the Papists, and therefore not observed generally
as parts of their worship.

Sixthly, suppose that our temples had been consecrated each of them, even in the
manner above mentioned by you, yet does it not follow that they are a part of
Antichrists abominations, as you would feign have the rites of their
consecration to speak for you. Though in their Idolatrous use of them for false
worship, and with vain confidence in them, they were unto the Papists a part
of their abomination, yet not so unto us, that reject those superstitions and
use them lawfully in the true worship of God: Even as Golias his sword though
an instrument of cruelty and murder serving for the maintenance of heathnish
Idolatry in the hand of the Giant, was yet 1. Sam. 17.51. and cap. 21.9.
lawfully used by David as an instrument of justice to the glory God: yea
though happily that sword were consecrated with magical enchantments,
according to the manner of the heathen which used enchanted armor and weapons.
When you conclude from the Christians merchandise Esai. 55.1. Rev. 3.18, that
these popish ordinances and Idolatries are Antichrists wares, you conclude
beside the question: Those popish ordinances and Idolatries are in our
assemblies daily confuted, condemned and consumed by the word and spirit of
Christ as 2 These. 2.8. and the authority of the Magistrate has made the whore
naked and desolate in taking away these temples from her and converting them to
the true worship of God, according to Rev. 17.16. though they be not destroyed
as Baals house was according to the policy of Moses which is now abrogate;
That which you showed before to the contrary is already answered. Though
Solomon's temple to the Jews, and the heathnish temples unto Cicero, Antiochus,
the Ephesians, and other heathens in their use of them were circumstances and
instruments of their religion (for you do unfitly call them parts of their
religion) yet the proportion thereof reaches no further, then to show that
popish temples were unto the papists instruments of their religion in their use
of them: but that our temples in our use of them are so, you cannot show from
hence. That which you allege of the heathens sin from ps. 79. in destroying
the temple is Idle, for it was also a syn of the heathen to destroy the private
houses of the Jews. That which you say of the Corinthian Idol-houses has been
answered before. The testimony of Mantuan for selling of temples at Room, is
against yourself, and shows that our temples are not the Popes merchandise,
because he cannot for the maintenance of his kitchen sell the same according to
the meaning of Mantuan: The pope should have but a lean kitchen, if he had no
greater revenues then the proffit which he now gets by the sale of our temples.
That allegation of Ezekiel. 28.18. is abused by you, for the Prophet there speaks
of the whole city and Kingdom of Tyrus to be destroyed for their sins: and you
might from thence as well conclude the destruction of Kings palaces and the
private houses of wicked Merchants for their false barganies, and fraudulent
dealings as of Idol temples, for their superstition.

Seventhly, if for the superstitious rites of consecration, our temples ought
to be destroyed and abolished, then how comes it that the churchyardes are not
liable to the same judgments, seeing they have been also consecrated by Bishops
in like manner with such abominable rites and Idolatrious superstitions, as the
temples were? How can you according to your manner communicate with the
churchyard; in the burial of the dead, and yet deny us the church, when as the
pollution of their consecration is alike for both? your own Pontifical. de
caemiterij benedictione.
Authors tell us: that the day before the consecration of the churchyard, five
wooden crosses are to be set up in the churchyard; one higher then the rest in
the midst, and other 4. according to the height of a man: one before the
middle cross in the utmost part of the Churchyard: an other behind the middle
cross in the utmost part of the Churchyard: a third in the utmost part on the
right hand of the middle cross: and a fourth in the utmost part on the left
hand: After this before each of the 5. crosses an other piece of wood is to be
set, that may receive 3. candles on the top of it, each of them of 3 ounces
weight or thereabout: then a ladder is to be set for the Bishop to climb up to
the top of the crosses: then a vessel full of water to be hallowed, and a
vessel full of salt. In the morning the Bishop being dressed in the vestrie
with his garments, the albe, girdle, stole, pluvial of white color, single
mitre and pastoral staff comes with his ministers unto this churchyard which
is to be consecrate, where there is a faldistorie prepared for him before the
middle cross, then he makes a short Sermon touching the holiness and liberty of
the churchyard: this being done fifteen candles are lighted and fastened, 3
before each cross: then the Bishop coming before the middle cross, lays aside
his mitre, and prays that God who is the keeper of the souls and bodies of
the faithful would look mercifully unto that duty of their service, and that
he would at their coming thither purge, bless, consecrate and sanctify that
churchyard that the humane bodies resting there after the course of this life,
might after the terms of this life deserve to obtain the joys of everlasting
life, etc. After this the Bishop goes to the other 4. crosses likewise, and
before each of them performs his devotions, with prayer, crosses, holy water,
songs and other ceremonies too long to be repeated. And being thus consecrate
this Churchyard Durand. Rational. lib. 1. de eccles. dedicatione.
enioyes the same privileges that the Church does: for after it is blessed, it
becomes a holy place: and is reconciled by the Bishop even as the Church by the
sprincling of water solemnly with holy wine and ashes, etc. And furthermore it
is then used for a place of Idolatrous and false worship, when as in the daily
burial of the dead, they pray before the graves for the dead and to the dead,
etc. Your self also do acknowledge these Arrow against Idolat. Chap. 5. sect.
18.
holy churchyards to be the abominations of the whore: and do there also
reckon them with the rest to be very Gillulim, the loathsome Idols and
excrements of the Queen of Sodom, and the filthiness of her fornication. Tell us
now by what means you have purifyed these Churchyards for your use in
funeralles, and why the temples themselves may not as well be purifyed for our
use, seeing both have been alike defiled by their consecration. It will not be
sufficient for you to say, that your use of these Churchyards is only a civil
use, otherwise then our use of the temples: for that commandment in Deuteronomy.
12.1.2.3. does as well condemn the reteyning of such places for civil use, as
otherwise. That commandment is so expounded by H. Barow, not only for the
times before Christ, but also for our time when he says of our temples:
Discov. p. 138.
Again the Idolatrous shape so cleaves to every stone, as it by no means can
be severed from them whiles there is a stone left standing upon a stone. So
that neither they can be used to the worship of God, nor we have any civil use
of them, seeing they are execrable and devote to destruction: so that they that
use such execrable and unclean things, cannot be clean, but must needs be
defiled with the filthiness of these Idols. By his verdict therefore you must
needs be defiled even with the civil use of these execrable things. And not
only Barow but your self also do condemn the reteyning of these places for
civil use: in that you hold they are to be thrown down and demolished by the
Magistrates sword: for if it were lawful for the Magistrates to convert these
places unto civil uses, as unto judgments halles, courts or the like, what
needed they to be thrown down or burnt with fire, as you teach in this place?
Yea even in this Chapter you teach that they are to be dealt with as was Baals
house, which was thrown down by Iehu, and 2. Kin. 10 27.
a jakes made of it. If these places in respect of former abuse are still to be
reputed so base and dishonorable, what mean you to deal so unnaturally with
the bodies of your friends as to bury them in these Idol-places, places of so
great dishonor: yea to execute upon them the Lev. 26.30.
curse that is denounced against such as the soul of the Lord abhorres, even
to cast their carkeises upon the bodies of these filthy Idols, as you call
them? The calamity which you bring upon your friends is (according to your own
profession) much like unto that which Josias inflicted upon the Idolaters: he 2
Kin. 23 16.
took their dead bones out of the graves and consumed them with fire upon the
Altars polluted with Idoltary: you take the dead bones of your friends and bring
them to be consumed in those graves which are in the Temples and Churchyards
polluted with Idolatry. The Papists sinned greevously against the martyrs of
Christ, when they caused them to be buried in dunghils, as they Ioh. Fox. Acts
and Mon. p. 1743. edit. an 1602.
dealt with John Careless; and the Ibidem. p. 1785.
wife of Peter Martyr: and we count it a remarkable judgment of God upon Ibid.
p. 1915.
Boner the persecuting Bishop, that his body was buried in the place appointed
for burial of thieves and murderers: but you (as it seems) care not to sin
against your friends, in causing them to ly under the judgment of God by
burying their bodies in places more vile and odious then common dung-hilles,
yea then common privies even in those polluted places which are as you say,
very Gillulim, the loathsome Idols and excrements of the Queen of Sodom, etc.
Your writings condemn these temples and Churchyards to be thus abominable in
the sight of God and in your own eyes, even for the present: but your hope and
expectation further is that the next Christian Magistrate which rises up
according to your mind, shall also actually reduce these places unto the state
of Baals house: that example if Iehu being (as you say) of perpetual morality
for the substance of it, etc.

Eighthly, if our temples formerly defiled with Idolatry, and superstitious
rites of consecration are therefore of necessity to be abolished, forsaken and
new ones to be sought: then will it also follow that popish baptism being in
like manner defiled with Idolatrous rites, ought by the like necessity to be
abolished, forsaken and a new Baptism to be sought. And while you reteyne
among you the Baptism administered in popery, you can not without partiality
refuse our temples. For the declaration of this consequence, you may observe,
1. The pollution of baptism by so many superstitious ceremonies of crossing,
exorcising or adiuration of Devilles, exsufflation, salt, spitle, oil, etc. is
as great as the pollutio^ of temples by their consecration: yea if there be any
difference, rather baptism is more polluted, as may appear both by your
Animad. verse. p. 68.69.72.73.
own writings, and might further be manifested out of the Roman pontifical,
missal, decretales and other popish writings, if need were: 2. As Baptism is
necessary and ordained of God, so is an house or place of worship for the
faithful to assemble Esa. 4.5. 1 Cor. 5.4.
in, necessary and appointed of God. If therefore the general commandment of
Baptising do warrant us to reteyne even that same particular baptism which was
so superstitiously administered at the first, then likewise will the general
commandment of having a place to assemble in, warrant us to reteyne even the
same particular place that was so superstitiously consecrated at the first. 3,
if the persons unlawfully circumcised and baptized in Idolatrous and false
Churches, might yet through faith and repentance come to a lawful and
comfortable use of their former circumcision and baptism, as your self do
Animadvers. p. 69. 70.
acknowledge: then why can not our repentance and faith as well sanctify unto
us the places superstitiously consecrated, while we do in like manner disclaim
and renounce the superstitions of each of these? 4. your doctrine touching the
reteyning of baptism does confirm unto us that distinction, which serves for
answer unto your maine objection against our reteyning of temples: H. Barow
says Discov. p. 119.
Peradventure hereupon may be collected that such baptism as is delivered by
an infidel, which never had knowledge of God in Christ, being afterward
repented of and sorrowed, that their body has been guilty of such profanation,
etc, the outward Baptism may in like manner remain, and not be repeted when
they join unto the true Church. This may at no hand be brought to pass,
neither indeed does it herehence follow: for easy it is to put difference
betwixt an Infidel which never knew God in Christ: and an Apostata which has
had knowledge of, and still outwardly (though corruptly) professes God and
Christ. The one sort know not what the Church, worship and Sacraments mean:
the other (though corrupted in their knowledge) yet carry a show of Church,
worship, Sacraments, ministry; yea and has them though corrupt and
adulterate: so there is neither sequel nor comparison betwixt them. According
to this distinction may we answer your reason from Deuteronomy. 12. and other like
scriptures touching the abolishing of temples defiled with Idolatry: viz. that
it is easy to put difference betwixt heathnish Infidels such as the Cananites
were that never knew God in Christ: and the Apostate Church of Rome, which
still outwardly (though corruptly) professes God and Christ, etc. And
therefore there is no sequel nor comparison, that the temples erected by Papists
should be abolished, because the heathnish temples of pagans and infidels were
to be destroyed. Though in other places you will not admit of this distinction
but cavil against it, yet this doctrine of Barow (which you Animadvers. p. 70.
also send us unto) does here plainly confirm the same.

Ninthly, if the superstitious consecration of places unto Idolatry do
necessarily infer the destruction of the same, then are private houses and
many other implements also of Idolaters to be destroyed: because they also are
often hallowed with many superstitious rites, etc. you labor here to prove
that the temples of the gentiles were a part of their religion and Idolatry,
by the testimony of Cicero Act. 6. in verr.
Cicero, which calls their temples holy and religious: and hereupon infer
that such places ought to be destroyed. If this kind of arguing be sound, then
will it also follow by the testimony of the same orator that private houses
are in like manner to be destroyed, as being a part of the Idolaters religion:
for he says of private houses, Cic. Orat. pro domo sua ad pontif.
Quid est sanctius, quid omni religione munitius, quam domus vniuscuiusque
civium? hic arae sunt, hic foci, hic dij penates, hic sacrae religionis
ceremoniae continentur: hic perfugium est ita sanctum omnibus, vt inde abripi
neminem fas fit. This testimony ascribes as much holiness to private houses in
respect of the household Gods, Altars, and Ceremonies of worship there kept and
observed, as the former testimony gave unto public temples. To prove our
temples to be the merchandise of Rome to be abolished, you allege Mantuan,
saying Venalia nobis
Templa, sacerdotes, Altaria, sacra, coronae.
And see you not here that ornaments and crowns are by this Poet reckoned up
among the Popes wares, as well as temples and Altars? And what is it that the
Pope sells without some consecration? The crowns which he gives are
Po^tifical. de benedictione coronarum.
consecrate with prayers, crosses, holy water. The like also may be observed
touching the consecration of Ibid. de benedictione ensis.
swords for knights and soldiers. And not only these, but a great multitude
of other things are also consecrate with holy water in the Romish Church, as
Sleidan. commentar. lib. 21.
herbs, flowers, fruits of trees and other unreasonable creatures: But as 2.
Sam. 12.30.
David heretofore refused not that the crown of the Idolatrous King of Ammon
should be set upon his head; so neither are princes nor people bound at this
day, to refuse either swords, crowns or houses either public or private, in
respect of any Idolatrous consecration wherewith they were once defiled in the
Romish Church, while themselves do renounce and disclaim such superstition.

Tenthly, if temples and houses defiled with superstitious consecrations are to
be destroyed, as being the Popes merchandise; then will it also follow that the
living temples and persons, as the infants in their popish baptism, and popish
ministers in their superstitious ordinations and popish princes in their
coronations being as much defiled with Idolatrous rites, as our temples, are in
like manner to be destroyed, and least of all to be used in the worship of God.
As for the measure of pollution, it were easy to make as large a narration and
story of superstitious ceremonies and divilish enchantments used in the
hallowing of these infants, priests and Princes, as you have made touching the
consecration of temples: but I take it to be needless: the matter is plain out
of the Pontifical.
Authors alleged by your self, that you cannot deny the same. And as for the
aptnes to receive guiltines by pollution; shall the dead and senseless
creatures and instruments of stone and wooden temples abused unto Idolatry be
subject unto destruction: and shall not much more the reasonable creatures,
polluting those instruments be subject unto the like judgment? shall Josh.
7.24.25.
Achans tent be burnt and not Achan himself? This is the rather to be marked,
because Rev. 18,13. with 2 Pet. 2.3.
the souls of men are expressly mentioned and reckoned among the vvares and
merchandise of Antichriste, so as the temples are not. You confess Apol. p.
112.
that some of yourselves have been baptized in the times and places of popery;
Such persons defiled with popish conjurations and exorcismes you do not refuse
to communicate withal in the worship of God: why then do you blame us for
communicating with temples once defiled, whiles we do as well disclaim the
superstitious consecration of temples, as the members of your Church do
disclayme the superstitious rites of their Baptism wherewith they were once
polluted? Look well upon John De Cluse your elder, once an Idolater a popish
Idol, and defiled with many superstitious ceremonies: when he stands up to
Prophecy among you, consider that he has been an Idol-temple, anoyled,
greased, sprinkled, and conjured with many magical ceremonies: if you can
lawfully join with him in the public worship of God, because he has
disclaymed his former superstition: then may we lawfully use our temples in the
worship of God, because we also have disclaymed their former superstition. If
still you will be froward, yet remember this, that so often as you allow this
man to rise up in your assembly, and to go before you in any religious action,
so often does he rise up as a witness for us, and as a judge against
yourselves to condemn you of partiality. I might press you yet further and
show how your kind of reasoning would lead you even to treason and to the
destruction of lawful princes in respect of the superstition used in their
coronations, but I spare you herein.

Lastly to conclude, howsoever there are many abominations and sinful abuses
of scripture in the popish manner of consecrating temples, yet this I hold for
truth and hope to manifest the same, that your abuse of scripture perverted for
the erecting and consecrating of your separated Church is as sinful as many of
the popish wrestings of the same. You tell us how the consecrating Bishop
says, Lift up your gates ye Princes, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors
and the King of Glory shall come in: how he knocks at the Church door three
times and then cries, Open, Open, Open: yourself cry out against every true
Church of God in the world this day, Come out of her my people: Touch no
unclean thing; what concord has Christ with Belial: Making as it were a
cross upon every Church door, you cry Shut up, Shut up, Shut up; because
Antichriste the King of Babel is there still with sundry of his abominations.
You tell us that in the popish consecration they sing concerning the new
founded church, surely this is no other then the house of God, and the gate of
heaven, etc. but touching your new founded Church, you sing in a higher
streyne, and say in effect: surely there is no other house of God, where a
lawful communion may be had, but in this our church: there is no other gate of
heaven then this, etc. All other Churches or temples are Devilles and Devilles
houses, etc. The communion of the Reformed Churches is unto you an Ans. to Th.
white page 26.
Apostasy: and therefore John De Cluse separated from the French Church, not
dating to enter into heaven by the gate of life opened in their Church, as
though there were no other gate of heaven, or lawful entrance into the
Kingdom of God, but by your separation. You tell us how the consecrating
Bishop makes crosses and coniureth salt and water to drive away Phantasmes, to
drive away the fiend, to repel the Devil, etc. H. Barow speaking of the
Discov. p. 144. 145.
learned and best reformed preachers in the Church of England, says they are
the most pernicious deceavers: that Ibid. p. 164.
the very light of that Church is darkness, and the very smoke of the bottomless
pit: and that their preaching of the Gospel is of all other the most detestable
and pernicious, even the strongest snare and delusion of Satan, whereby he
allureth, deceaveth, and holds captive the miserable world in the Chains of
transgression, error, Idolatry, abomination and impenitencie, unto
judgment. Again he says: Ibid. p. 154.
As for the comfort received by their preaching yt having no promise of
blessing in the word of God (your Church and whole ministry being accursed) is
rather a fearful sign of the effectual working of their delusions, then any
reason whereby you may assure your selves or justify them in their ungodly
proceedings, whom the word of God in all their works condemns. This is the
coniured salt of the separation to unhallow the Church of God: this is your
holy water wherevvith you sprinckle the faitfull ministers and people of
Christ. You tell us that at the consecration of the popish temples;
Indulgences are granted to all faithful Christians, for one year: and in the
yearly day of the consecration of that Church, 40. days indulgence to all
that visit it. This their practice of giving Indulgence or pardons is very
gross: and yet your doctrine and practice of giving Indulgence is as bad: To
those that visit your Church and join unto it you give Indulgence and pardon
of all their sins: and pronounce blessedness unto them, in their visible estate:
but unto the godliest and faithfullest servants of the Lord either ministers or
people whosoever which are in the Church of England, you grant no indulgence
unto them in their estate, but pronounce the curse of God upon every one of
them without exception. Your Elder John de Cluse writes of that Church, that
Advertisment against Mr. Brightman p. 9.
there is nothing to be expected from Christ, by any member thereof, but a
pouring out of his aeternal wrath upon them. And again exhorting all to leave
that Church, in the same book he says, Ibid. p. 11.
what is there then to be done, even this that every soul who has any care of
salvation, and of escaping the eternal flames of everlasting damnation be
careful to come out with speed from Babylon, etc. Thus without any Indulgence,
he leaves them all in the flames of hell: and this he learned from you, who say
likewise, Confession of faith. art. 32.
All that will be saved are bound by Gods Commandment with speed to come forth
of this Antichristian estate, etc. As you tell us that the consecrating Bishop,
had his clerks to say Amen unto his prayers: so have you John de Cluse as your
Clerk to say Amen unto your separation. Into your secret let not my soul come.
The Popish consecration, and this your separation are both to be abhorred.

CHAP. IX. The third reason concerning temples, examined:
Hen. Ains.
Our 3. reason against them is, Because the consecrating of any garments,
places, or the like, peculiarly to the worship of God now in the time of the
Gospel, has no warrant in the word of God.

You grant this; but yet deny that for the error of their consecration in
former time they must therefore of necessity be abolished now.

Seeing you grant this, then it follows, they are vain and Idolatrous, Mat.
15.9. Colos. 2.22.23. then are they a part of Antichrists abominations, and by
your grant of our former reason, are to be consumed with him: then are they to
be shunned of Christians, 1. Ioh. 5.21. and not to be employed by them, unto
that use for which Antichrist consecrated them, but to be abolished Romans 13.3.4.
by the Magistrate. And by such a pretext as you now make, the Corinthians
might have pleaded for their syn, who 1 Cor. 8. and 10. chapter
did eat in the Idols temple, that the gentiles error in consecrating it
before, could not hinder their liberty, who knew that the Idol was nothing,
and the consecrating of the temple was of no force. Your answer also serves as
well, for wearing a Miter, a cope, a cornerd cap, a Priests cloak, a surplice,
etc. the error in consecrating these, is no more then in the temples, if it be
so much. But in deed you nourish the error of their consecration, whiles you
use them for that unto which they were consecrate, so occasioning the simple
people, to esteem them holy places still: and you give Papists occasion to
reproach, who boast how their Papists supplic. to the K. An^o 1604. Art. 6.
Religion builded all the Churches, etc. and that your religion could not
without such their Churches, provision and ordinances, ever have carried the
exterior show it does. And so being a means to harden them in evil, your
practice is an occasion of offense, contrary to the Commandment of God, in 1.
Cor. 10.32.33. And if they can get their temples out of your hands (as they
have done in some towns of these countries) you shall plainly see that the
error of their consecration continues as a fretting Leprosy upon the walls
of these temples: and even now whiles they are in your hands, they are visited
and prayed in by Papists, as holy consecrated places: yea even by thousands
which are not professed Papists, as is to be seen throughout the Parishes of
England. So great is the iniquity of their enchanted consecration, which yet
remains.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
Seeing no places now in the time of the Gospel are to be peculiarly consecrate
unto the worship of God, it follows therefore from hence, that those who do so
consecrate them, and put holiness in them and teach others to do so, that such
(I say) do offend against the Scriptures, Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.22.23. But that we
also offend, which on the quite contrary do condemn such doctrines and
precepts of men, and teach that all places are alike holy and lawful for the
service of God; this consequence you will not prove in have. When you prove
that those Temples are properly Idolles in our use of them, then I will grant
that all godly persons ought to shun them according to 1. Ioh. 5.21. and not to
communicate with us in them, and that the Magistrate also is bound to correct
this error, according to Romans 13.3.4. But if there be any superstitious
persons that put more holiness in them then they ought, though such in a large
sense and metaphorically may be called Idolaters, and be said to make Idols of
them, yet this sin of theirs is not enough to prove that they ought to be
abolished: even as the covetous persons that put their trust in their riches,
and labors and say unto the wedge of Gold, Thou art my hope; may justly be
called Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5. with Hab. 1.16. and Job. 31.24
Idolaters, and their goods their Idols or gods, yet does it not follow hence
that these goods so trusted in are to be cast away or destroyed, but only to
be Luk 16.9 and 19.8.
used better and to be sanctified by the word of God. You do here also unjustly
confound Idolatrous places with Idols them selves; contrary to some of your
selves who in that piece of paper which is printed in the marge^t of H. Barow
his Discov. p. 133.
book for a correction of the same, do there plainly distinguish betwixt the
Synagogs dedicated to Idolatry and defiled with Idols; and betwixt Idols which
had a worship given unto them; though that note have other error amexed unto
it, yet for the distinction it self you are further from the truth which it
acknowledges.

That which you say of the Corinthians eating in the Idols temple, 1. Cor. 8.
and 10. chap. that they by such a pretext as I make, might have pleaded for
their sin, etc. is far otherwise: Had they used the Idol-temple only to the
lawful worship of God, after all exercise of Idolatry had been banished out of
the same, then should not the gentiles error in consecrating it before, have
polluted them: And this is our plea, for our use of temples at this time. But
what could this excuse the Corinthians communicating with the Infidels and
Idolatours, in the very act of their present false worship, in their
Idol-feasts and sacrifices, while their Idolatrous exercises were still in full
force with them? What a huge distance is there betwixt these two cases? What
Spirit of discerning have you, that can not or will not put difference betwixt
communion with Papists, in the mass, in eating of their breaden God, in their
Idol temple, which is like the practice of the Corinthes; and betwixt communion
with true Christians, in true worship, in the place purged from Idols and false
worship, which is our practice?

Whereas you object further, that my answer serves as well for wearing a
miter, a cope, etc. And that I do indeed hereby nourish the error of their
consecrating, etc. I answer, 1. the miter, cope, surplice and such like never
had nor can have a necessary use in the service of God, nor be any civil helps
in the same, unto such as have other clothes to put on their backs: but a
place and house to meet in for the service of God is a necessary circumstance
that cannot be missed as has been showed before: so that there being such
difference betwixt these two things, if simple people or Papists be offended at
that, which is of such use, their offense is upon their own heads only. 2,
Consider also that simple people by your use of the Churchyards are occasioned
to esteem them holy places still: The Papists may with like reason that they
used in their supplication to the King boast that their Religion has given and
consecrated the Churchyards as well as the Churches: And your practice of
burial in these places, being that end whereunto they were consecrated of
Papists, is as much an occasion of offense, and reproach unto them; does as much
harden them in their error: and is as much against that Commandment 1 Cor.
10.32.33. as is our use of the Churches or temples: and if you do not defend
your practice by the necessary use which you have of them, you will ly under
that guilt which you would so feign lay upon us: where necessity excuses not,
the guilt of offenses and scandalles does come upon men as well by civil as
religious actions. And further according to your objection, consider that if
the Papist can get their consecrated Churchyards, now used by you, into their
hands again (as they have already done in some towns of these countries) you
shall plainly see that the error of their consecration continues with them:
and even now whiles you do bury your dead in them, they are visited and prayed
in by Papists, as holy consecrated places, etc. And if any difference be, they
are like to be offended rather at the burial in the Churchyards and Churches,
then at the worshipping in them, in as much as they are more superstitious
about the burial then other services, holding it more lawful to pray and
serve God in other places, then to bury in other places. Thus you may see, that
if there be any force in this your reasoning, it is all against yourself.

CHAP. X. The fourth reason concerning temples, examined:
Hen. Ains.
Our 4th. reason you answer not, but alter it. We said, the worshipping of God
in the places, etc. hallowed by himself, was a part of his honor, Deuteronomy.
12.5.6. Lev. 17.3 4, and this you grant. So on the contrary, (say we) the
worshipping of God now, in the places, etc. hallowed by Antichrist, is a part of
popish devotion. You answer, Though it be a part of popish devotion, to hallow
places for Gods worship, etc. yet God requires not the plucking down of them.
Thus you shun the edge of our argument, who spoke not here of their hallowing,
but of the peoples worshipping in the places hallowed which being popish
devotion, and so far forth an honor unto Antichrist, it must needs be syn. So
in altering the case, you turn your eyes from your own syn in worshipping, to
the popes syn in hallowing. The Apostle to convince the Corinthians, shows
that the Israelites by eating of the sacrifices were 1. Cor. 10.18.
pertakers of the altar: so they, by eating of the heathenish sacrifices, were
pertakers of their altar. The same may be said of the Temple, that the
Israelites coming thither to 1. King. 8.33.
pray communicated with Gods honor therein: so they that go to the heathens or
Antichristians Temples to pray, communicate also with Antichrists honor;
though men despise Antichrists idols in word now, as the Corinthians did the
heathens idols then.

When again we compare things thus: As the destroying of Gods Temple tended to
his dishonor. Psalm. 79. and the building thereof, to the establishing of his
worship, Hag. 1. so the rasing of Antichrists Temples, would be to his
dishonor; and the contrary is in using, building and repayring them. To this
you give no answer, but say: It does not follow that God now requires the
plucking down of the (temples)* seeing there is a change of the Law, Heb. 7.12.
Whereas if you considered the weight of our reason, it must needs follow: for God
would have Antichrist to be dishonored, and 2 These. 2 Rev. 13. and 18. chap
not honored or mainteyned in any part of his cursed devotion: and such our
argument shows the rasing or repayring of his temples to be. The scripture
which you cite, serves nothing for your purpose. In Heb. 7.12. the Apostle
speaks of the preisthood, the Levitical ministry: which being changed and
abrogate, there must of necessity be a change also of the Law: so their
ministration cease, and Christ our only Priest, performs the work of our
reconciliation to God. But we speak of the Magistracy, whose office yet
remains and is not abrogated by Christ, but by his doctrine established in
Romans 13. and elsewhere. So that the Magistrate is Romans 13.4.
the Minister of God still, (which the legal Priest is not,) and has the sword
to cut of all synns, whereof popish superstition is not the least: and with this
sword and office, Christ Ioh. 18.36.
meddled not: therefore you cannot in this respect without error say, there is a
change of the Law. But the truth is, seeing the Magistrate continues, there is
a continuance also of the Law: for how else shall he do the work of a Minister
of God, if he have no law of God to direct him? for the other scriptures in our
reason alleged, Deuteronomy. 12. 2 King 10. and 14. and 23. You say they are already
answered: and unto your answers, I have also replied before.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
THe complaint which here you make of my not answering but altering and
shunning the edge of your argument, etc. is vain and unjust. Your argument is
like unto an overworne knife, whose edge is so blunt, that a man cannot easily
discern the edge from the back of it, nor find where the force of it lies: so
little cause there is to shun the same for fear of cutting or wounding. You say
that you spoke not here of hallowing, but of the peoples worshipping in the
places hallowing: but do you not here still utter a speech implying a
contradiction in it? for what sense or color of reason is there here against
the peoples worshipping except it be in respect of the places hallowed? do you
not also in the beginning of this Chapter twice together make mention of
hallowing when you repeat your argument, and tell us that you said thus: The
worshipping of God in the places, etc. hallowed by himself was a part of his
honor. So on the contrary, the worshipping of God now in the places, etc.
hallowed by Antichrist, is a part of popish devotion? Again, in my answer also
I did not only mention hallowing, but also which you omit, I mentioned, see
before Page 22.
putting of religion in places hallowed, and under that I comprehended such
kind of unlawful worship as the Papists use, and yet still denied the
consequence of your argument, against such use as we have of them, when as I
said, yet follows it not that God requires the plucking down of such places.

But let us further examine, whether now upon the second whetting, and putting
of more strength to it, your blunt Axe have got a sharper edge to hew down our
temples. You allege the conviction of the Corinthians for eating of heathnish
sacrifices from 1 Cor. 10.18. but that plea is already twice answered: that
place speaks of communion with 1 Cor. 10.17.21.
Idolaters in false worship, and not of using the place only, in a lawful
worship of God. You allege 1. Kin. 10.33. to show, that the Israelites coming
to the temple to pray communicated with Gods honor therein, etc. But I answer,
that Solomon there speaks of true worship in the temple: otherwise those that
came to the temple to pray and worship with Idolaters, as in the days of 2.
Kin. 21 4.5.7.
Manasses, and Ezekiel. 8.3.16. Ier. 32.34.
afterward when the house of God was filled with Idols, did not communicate
with Gods honor hereby, but with the honor of Devilles and so on the contrary
to make the opposition just and equal, those that go to pray in the temples of
Antichristians, when as the Idolatry of Antichrist is purged out and remooved
thence, and do only use the worship appointed of God, praying and fighting
daily against Antichrist with the sword of the spirit, such do not herein
communicate with Antichrists honor, but with the honor of Christ.

Again, as if your comparison were an argument with two edges, you say that
you also compare things thus; As the destroying of Gods temple tended to his
dishonor ps. 79, etc. so the rasing of Antichrists temples would be to his
dishonor, etc. The sequel of this argument for the necessity of plucking
down our temples, I denied, because there is a change of the law, Heb. 7.12.
This you call no answer, etc. I answer you again more plainly and fully, 1.
Though God would have Antichriste to be dishonored: and though the rasing of
his temples would in some regard be a dishonor unto him: yet are not we bound
unto all means, nor yet unto this particular means and manner of dishonouring
him by destruction of his temples: even as God would have Idolaters to be
dishonored, and the Deuteronomy. 13.15.16.
destroying of their goods and cartell, their city and their habitation would
be to their dishonor: yet does it not follow, that we are now bound unto this
means and manner of dishonouring them, as has been shevved before, because
there is a change of the law. God would have blasphemers to be dishonored; and
the Dan. 3.29.
plucking down of their houses, would be to their dishonor: yet does it not
follovv that we are now bound unto this particular manner of dishonouring
them. 2. Whereas you do allege three Chapters at randon and at large, viz. 2
These 2. Rev. 13. and 18. to show that God would have Antichrist dishonored;
and not honored, etc. you do but beat the air in vain, unless you could have
inferred thence that our not honoring of him could not stand without plucking
down his temples. 3. Touching the change of the law, Heb. 7.12. you say the
Apostle speaks of the Priesthood and leviticall ministry, etc. but we speak
of the Magistracy, whose office remains, etc. But if you did seriously
consider what you say, you might easily discern the truth that I showed you.
For though the office of Magistracy continues according to Romans 13. yet if
the Priesthood and leviticall ministry be abrogate, then is a great part of
the Magistrates charge abrogate also: seeing the Magistrates before Christ were
Exo. 12.15. Lev. 17.4.14. Numb. 1.51. and 3.38. and 18.7. Deuteronomy. 17.12. with ps.
101.8.
bound to see the Priesthood and ceremonial ordinances belonging unto the
same, mainteyned: and to execute judgments upon the violatours thereof: Those
ceremonial ordinances ceassing, the care and charge of the Magistrate about
the same, ceasseth also. And so the commandment of destroying places abused
unto Idolatry, being one of those ceremonial ordinances, Touch not, handle
not Col. 2 as is showed before: though the office and authority of the
Magistrates continues for the maintenance of the decague or moral law: yet
this ceremony concerning observation of places being changed, the authority of
the Magistrate is therein changed also. 4. your allegation of Ioh. 18.36. to
show that Christ meddled not with the sword and office of the Magistrate, etc.
is both needless, if you allege it to prove the continuance of the Magistrates
office which is not denied: and insufficient also, for if he had meddled with
the sword of the Magistrate, would it therefore follow that the office of
Magistracy had been abrogate? Nothing less: no more then it follows that the
office of ministry is abrogate, because Christ meddled with that sword of the
spirit, in preaching of the Gospel. As for Deuteronomy. 12. 2. Kin. 10, etc. where as
you say that you have before replied unto my answers: so have I before answered
you, and refuted your replies.

CHAP. XI. The fifth argument, examined:
Hen. Ains.
Unto our 5t. reason, from the examples of godly Princes, that abolished false
worship and the monime^ts thereof, 2 Chr. 17. 2 Kin. 18. and 23. you answer,
that they being under Moses policy, are commended for their obedience and
practice: but the godly Princes of our times, not being under the same
rudiments, are not bound to imitate them herein, further then the equity
before mentioned does require.

Repl. And how far equity requires, I have before showed in my answers to
your excepttons. But further I pray you tell us, under what policy, touching
Judicials Princes are at this day. If you say, under Christ's: that I deny, for
Princes have their authority from Romans 13.
God, who is the 1. Cor. 11 3.
head of Christ. If they had it from Christ, there could be no lawful
Magistrates but Christians: so Paul's doctrine, to be subject to Caesar, should
be overthrowen. Christ has neither given power to Magistrates, nor taken ought
from them; but left them as they were authorized of his Father. Either then
they are under Moses policy, (I mean, so as to execute the Judgments taught
of God by Moses) or else they are under none; but may judge and punish as they
themselves think good, killing such as God by Moses law would not have to dye,
and sparing such as he appointed to death. As for Christ, he has given them no
direction whom and how to punish, otherweise then he gave with God his Father
at mount Sinai. And whereas first you say, under Moses policy, and after,
speaking of our Princes, that they are not under the same Rudiments: you change
the word amysse, to restreine Moses Policy unto his Rudiments. For rudiments,
were such legal ordinances as led unto Christ, and are by him abolished, as the
Colos. 2.20.21. Gal. 4.3.
Apostle shows, and under them, neither Magistrates nor people are: but Moses
policy is more large. And that Gods judgments against idolatry, are not such
rudiments, but of perpetual right, is before manifested. For if the Decalogue
given to Israel, remains still to us Christians, then the Judgments due to
the transgressions of the Decalogue, remain also: they being alike
unchangeable, and common to all nations. As for Jewish rudiments, your temples
are a synful reviving of them, after they were dead by Christ. The things
appointed of God for his figurative worship, might not be imitated by men for
any use, as the Law in Exodus 30.32.33. teaches us: and the Hebrews from
thence rightly concluded, Maimony Beth habchirah. c. 7. s. 10.
It is unlawful for a man to make an house after the pattern of the Temple.
But these your Temples, are purposely made Bellarm. de cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 3.
after the form of the Jews Temple, as the cope is in imitation of Aarons
Ephod, the Surplice like the priests linen coats, etc. Although Christ at his
death ended all these rites. So you in using them as they were built by
Antichrist, for places of divine worship, are faulty for reviving rudiments
which God has ceased: but Magistrates in demolishing them, should perform a
judgment of eternal equity, which God has commanded, Deuteronomy. 12.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
HOw far you have gone astray from equity in your reasoning about equity, I
have also showed before: And am now to proceed unto those things which you add
further.

First, whereas you deny that Princes at this day are under Christ policy,
touching Iudicialles: This your denial appears to be an error; because God
has given unto his son Christ not only a special Kingdom of grace and
dominion in his Church; but also a general and large dominion over all persons
and their actions whatsoever, even Mat. 28.18.
all power in heaven and in earth; a Ephesians. 1.21 Phil. 2.9.10.
name above every name that is named, whereat every knee should bow: he is made
Heb. 1.2.
heir of all, Act. 10.36.
Lord of all, Rev. 19.16
King of Kings and Lord of Lords: how is all power given unto him, if Princes
touching their judicialles be not under Christ's policy? what authority
should Christ have to judge and punish Princes for their wicked decrees and
judicial proceedings, to Ps. 2.9 and 110.5.6.
break them with a rod of iron like potters vessels, if they were not under him
touching judicialles? what needed Princes Ps. 2.12.
to kiss the Son, to Rev. 21.24.
bring their glory and honor unto the Church for the service thereof, if
touching judicialles they were not subject unto him? According to your doctrine
Princes (though subject in other things) yet might reserve one knee of
Judicial authority, which they need not bow unto Christ.

Secondly, whereas for a reason of your former denial, you allege that
Princes have their authority from God, who is the head of Christ. This hinders
not but that they may have it under Christ, who by his Fathers Mat. 11.27. Ioh.
3.35.
grant has all things given into his hand; and therefore even by authority
receyved from his Father might change and abrogate some of the judicial laws
given by Moses.

Thirdly: when you say further touching the authority of Princes, If they had
it from Christ, there could be no lawful Magistrates, but Christians so Paul's
doctrine to be subject to Caesar, should be overthrown: This is also unsound:
for though there be no Magistrates but Christians, which can lawfully reteyne
and use their authority; yet does it not follow that subjection unto all other
Magistrates is unlawful: It is with Magistrates and their dominion and
authority as it is with other men in all their possessions and heritages:
whosoever is not in Christ is an usurper and unlawful possessour of whatsoever
he has, notwithstanding any right or title that they may have thereunto by the
providence of God in respect of humane laws: because Christ is Heb. 1.2 Romans
8.17 Mat. 5.5. 1. Tim. 4.3 8. 1. cor. 3.21 22.23.
heir of all things and in him the meek and faithful only are the right
heirs of the world: yet does it not follow hence that men may take away their
goods and inheritances from such. And even so every Magistrate that is not in
Christ, is but an usurper and an unlawful possessour of whatsoever dominion or
authority he exercises, notwithstanding any right or calling that he has
thereunto in respect of men: yet is this no warrant unto the subjects of such
Infidel-Magistrates, to with draw themselves from their subjection, or to deny
obedience and tribute unto them.

Fourthly, to that you say, Christ has neither given power to Magistrates, nor
taken ought from them; but left them as they were authorized of his Father,
etc. I answer, 1. for the kinds of offices them selves, that were authorized
of God before Christ, it was Exodus 18 23.24. Numb. 11 16.17. 1. Sam. 8.6.7.22.
unlawful to institute them heretofore without special allowance from God: but
now by consent of common wealths it is lawful to ordain their form of civil
government, and to make new offices, being but the 1. Pet. 2.13.
creations of men, for the form of them. 2. For the causes of executing
judgment, Christ has changed many of them, he has taken from Magistrates the
Mat. 5.31 32. and 19.8.9.
power of permitting divorces and polygamie, according to the iudicialles of
Moses: he has given 1. Cor. 7.12. etc.
power unto the Magistrates to permit the marriage of believers and unbelievers
without divorce contrary unto the policy of Moses: he has also taken from the
Magistrate the power of executing the Judicial laws against the transgressers
of ceremonial ordinances, as was showed before. 3, as for the manner of
judgments and punishments themselves to be inflicted on evil doers, even by
your own confession before noted, the Magistrates now are not tied unto the
Judicial law of Moses. 4, even for the time before Christ, the Jews
themselves were not absolutely bound unto the Judicial law of Moses, save in
their own land, whereunto God had apropriated those laws: for when Ester
10.3. and 8.2.
Mordecai, Dan. 2.48 49. and 6.2.
Daniel, and others were civil Magistrates in Persia and Babylon, they could
not administer justice according to the policy of Moses, but according to the
laws of those Kingdoms where they lived. If the observation of the Judicial
laws of Moses had been imposed on the Jews, as strictly as the moral and
ceremonial laws were, then could not Mordecai and Daniel have taken those
offices and callings upon them with good conscience: so that hereby it may
appear that there is great difference betwixt these laws, especially in these
times. 5, yea even in the holy land it self, when as the Judicial laws of the
Neh. 10.3.7.
Persians and Luke 2.1.4 Ioh. 18.31
Romans, were established among the Jews, who were then subject unto these
nations and unto their officers, yet did the godly Jews live under them and
submit unto their authority, which they could not have done in suffering them
selves to be guided by their civil laws, if the Iudicialls of Moses had been
imposed upon them by the Lord, as precisely and straightly as were the moral and
ceremonial laws. 6, it is yet a further presumption, when as you say, that
Christ gave Magistrates no direction whom and how to punish, otherwise then he
gave with God his Father at Mount Sinai. For Christ with God his Father gave
further direction how to Number. 15 32.34.
punish the Sabath-breaker, after that they had departed from Mount Sinai. And
afterward again at the repetitio^ of the law in the land of Moab, there was
further direction given touching Deuteronomy. 13.12. etc. and 21.1.10.15 and 25.9. etc
many particulars which were not described in Exodus and Leviticus at mount
Sinai. 7, to conclude though some of Moses judicials be abrogate, yet does it
not follow that Magistrates may judge and punish as they themselves think good,
etc. as you would infer against us: The particular determinations of Christ
in the new Testament, abrogating some, and confirming other of the Judicial
laws, compared with the general equity of the decalogue and the policy of
Moses togather now coincident with the doctrine of Christ, may and ought to be
a rule of direction unto Princes and Magistrates in their judgments.

As for the use of the words, policy, and rudiments, which I named one after an
other, you make a false collection from thence: though I name both, it follows
not that I hold both to be of like extent: neither do I restreyne the policy of
Moses unto his rudiments: but my speech argues that some part of his policy
consists in ceremonies and rudiments; such as the abolishing of places defiled
with Idolatry in such manner as I have manifested before from Col. 2. against
your perverting of the same.

After this you labor to prove that our Temples are a sinful reviving of
Jewish rudiments, after they were dead by Christ: your first allegation is,
that the things appointed of God for his figurative worship, might not be
imitated by men for any use, as the law in Exodus 30.32.33. teaches us. Hereunto
I answer, 1. this is a bold presumption, to make the yoke of the legal
ceremonies heavyer without warrant: for though the holy ointment and perfume
might not be imitated by men for any use, does it follow hence that other
things appointed for the figurative worship were in like manner forbidden? for
example, we read of sundry kinds of meat offerings, and among the rest of some
Levit. 2.4.5.7. etc.
baked, some fried, and some made in the caldron, and all for the figurative
worship of God: how can you ever prove that these kinds of meats thus
prepared, which might fitly serve for the ordinary use of man, were forbidden
to be imitated? 2, suppose that before Christ these kind of meats had been
forbidden, yet are you far wide to apply such a prohibition unto our time, and
to deny unto us such preparations of meat as were then used in the figurative
worship of God: yourself rather are herein guilty of a sinful reviviving of
Jewish rudiments by imposing upon us the ceremonial prohibitions and
ordinances, which are Gal. 4.3. Ephesians. 2.14.15. Ro^. 7.1. etc
dead by Christ. Yea you would make our burden heavyer then the Jews, by
laying such a yoke of ceremonies on our necks, as you can not show that God
ever laid upon them. 3, suppose, that the ointments, perfumes, meats and
temples appointed for the figurative worship of God in old time, might not be
imitated by men for any use as you say, and suppose that we offended also by
imitating the form of the Jewish temple, as you would have it: then are you
and your people inexcusably guilty of the same sin with us, while you use these
our temples for diverse uses; you for your study: diverse of your people for
receyving of alms in the^, etc. Thus are you caught and entangled in the snare
which you laid for us: for you are to remember that the holy ointment whereof
you speak, was Exodus 30.32.33.
forbidden unto men not only in the worship of God (otherwise then is there
expressed,) but for any use whatsoever: as yourself also confess: And therefore
that ceremonial precept if it be still in force, according to your urging of
the same, does as well condemn your use of these temples, as ours.

Secondly, for the countenancing and confirming of your objection, you content
not yourself with holy scriptures, but you lead us from Moses ben Amran unto
Moses ben Maimon, from faithful Moses the servant of Christ unto the Infidel
Moses a professed adversary of Christ, and out of his scripture you tell us,
speaking of holy ointment, that the Hebrews from thence rightly concluded, It
is unlawful for a man to make an house after the pattern of the temple. I
answer, 1. The collections of those degenerate Hebrews are most vain, and as
in other things, so touching this holy ointment and pattern of the temple: R.
Solomon Comment. on Ex. 30.31.
upon those words, This shall be an holy oynting oil unto me: throughout your
generations; by a cabalisticall rule collects that there were twelve logo or
measures of this oil: because the numerall letters of Zeh the word there used
for this do yield the number of twelve: And further they note that this
anointing oil [then made] should continue unto the world to come, according to
those words, throughout your generations. Touching Beth-habchirah, the temple
or house elect for the name of God, their traditions are R. Moses mikkots.
Sepher mitsvoth haggadol precept. affir. 164. Thalmud Ierusa. cap. haroeh.
that it is not lawful for men to assemble unto the mountain of that house,
since the desolation thereof, having with them either staff, scrip or shoes
on their feet, or dust on their feet, etc. That in the city Jerusalem itself
for the holiness thereof they might not give any place to strangers or
soiourners therein: that they might not make any house of burial therein,
except the burialls of the house of David, and the burial of Huldah which had
been there from the days of the former Prophets; that they might not plant any
gardens or orchyards in it; that they might not keep any cocks in it, etc. R.
Saadias (as is recorded by co^me^t. on Exo. 31.1.
Aben Ezra) gives this reason why Bezaleel of the tribe of Judah, and Aholiab
of tribe of Dan were chosen to make the tabernacle: namely because Judah and
Dan were compared unto Lions whelps, the Genesis 49.9.
one by Iaakob, the Deuteronomy. 33.22.
other by Moses; and that so acccording to the form of the Lion broad before
and narrow behind, the tabernacle was also made in that form: But Aben Ezra
himself contradicts this collection in the same place, and says that the
breadth of the tabernacle was equal, and that there was no cause why Bezaleel
and Aholiab were called unto this work, but because there were none like unto
them in Israel. And a number of such like collections vain in themselves, and
contradictory unto one an other might further be brought, to show how unworthy
a thing it is to allow any voice unto these Rabbines in the controversies and
questions of right among Christians. 2, there is yet more color and excuse for
the Rabbines in this their error considering their estate, then there is for
you: for they supposing that the leviticall and ceremonial ordinances are
still in force do more colourably hold that the holy things of God may not be
applied unto or imitated in common use, but you knowing the ceremonies to be
abolished, have less reason so to write as you have done.

3. The testimony of the Rabbines in this matter does not serve to condemn our
temples in respect of the form thereof; for as they R. Solomon and Aben Ezra
comment. on Exo. 30.32
write concerning the holy anointing oil, the composition made like unto it
was then unlawful, when it consisted both in number and quantity of the same
kind of spices, but if there were more or less in the composition it was
lawful: so in like manner if our temples differ both in many parts, and in the
proportion and measure of them from Solomon's Temple, by the same reason they
are to be held lawful. 4. If our Temples be unlawful because they are made
after the pattern of the Jewish Temple, then does this conclusion of the
Rabbines as well condemn you in the use of these Temples as it does us, for
that which you say the Hebrews have rightly concluded is spoken of any private
civil houses whatsoever made for civil use, such they hold to be unlawful for
any use being made after the form of the Temple: And so all that you have said
both from the Scripture and from Maimony is against your self, considering the
diverse uses which you have of these Temples, as I showed before.

In the third place, whereas you do allege the testimony of Bellarmine to show
that these our Temples are purposely made after the form of the Jews Temple,
etc. I answer, 1. you do unfaithfully allege the writings of Bellarmine, which
are directly contrary unto that which you pretend and give forth in his name:
for though he show that some Temples in some part were like unto Solomo^s
Temples, yet he Bellarm. de cultu sanct. lib. 3. c. 3. sec. vlt
shows, that whereas the holiest place in the Temple of Solomon was built
toward the west, that ours on the quite contrary were built looking toward
the east, and this purposely to signify and testify a difference and opposition
unto the Jews: Though this was done for a mystery also as some other observe,
and you note before, that hinders not this purpose of being opposite unto the
Jews, but may stand with the same. 2. As for our temple in special about
which our question is, it is in no respect that you can allege like unto
Solomon's: and therefore no Jewish rudiment to cause any separation from us in
that regard.

CHAP. XII. The sixth argument concerning Temples examined.
Section. 1.
Hen. Ains.
Our 6t. reason has 2. branches, I. That by the destruction of Idolies, men
are more easily drawn to Gods true worship, etc. II. By reteining them, they
are nourished in superstition, etc. Genesis 35. 2. King. 18. 2. Chron. 34. Act.
17. and 19. Lev. 13. and 14. with Jude 23.

You answer; That which belonged to the temporary dispensation under Moses
being set apart; the general equity of these scriptures leads us no further,
then to abolish such moniments of superstition and corruption as have no
necessary use.

Repl. To your exception about Moses temporary dispensation, I have spoken
before. This which you now add, of no necessary use, may in some sense be
granted: for in deed Christians have no necessary use of Antichrists idols or
idol Temples, let them therefore perish with him; as they shall, er. 10.15 Rev.
18.
in the time of their visitation. But if by Necessary, you mean in respect of
humane pleasure or profit, as the Lutherans may think they have a necessary use
of popish images (which they keep in their Churches) either to adorn their
Temples, (which may also be pleaded for by Psalm. 24.1. 1. Cor. 10 26. seeing we
may use of the plenty of the earth even for ornament also) or to remember the
saints deceased, though they worship them not: or, as others think they have a
necessary use of idol Temples, because they would spare their purses, and be at
no charge to build other convenient places to worship God in: this I judge to
be but a carnal reason, and that it savoureth not of Gods spirit, which
throughout the Scriptures condemns Idols and Idoleies, in respect of their
Exo. 34.12.13.14.15. Deuteronomy. 7.25.26. Ezekiel. 23.14.16. etc.
abomination before God, and snare that they are unto men. And if this your
exception should take place, we should have very few idols destroyed. For they
that are popishly affected, will find some necessary use for every idol, to
maintain their superstition. The gentry may wear the popes hallowed golden
crucifixes and other sacred Jewels for broches on their hatts, and tablets
about their necks, and his beads, for ornaments about their hands. The images
of their Lady, and other gods and goddesses, they may use to beautify their
houses, yea to adorn the walls and corners of their Churches, as they still
continue in the Church windows. The altar may be used for a communion table,
the hallowed font, for a vessel to baptize in, as is usual in Engl. though
these reformed Churches have done it away. The Bishops think they have as
necessary use of their copes and other hallowed vestiments, as you of your
Temples, which many of them by reason of their bigness and form, are fitter a
great deal to sing a mass in, then to preach the gospel. So it will come to
pass, that all the popes abominations shall be retained for some use or other,
and idolatry nourished to the dishonor of God. If we should expound all the
other commandments, as you interpret this concerning idolatry: God might
justly condemn us as corrupters of his Law, and seducers of the people. But
let us weigh your particular exceptions.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
FIrst, whereas by way of affirmation, you reply; in deed Christians have no
necessary use of Antichrists Idols or Idol-temples: I answer, 1. If no
necessary use: then is your use of them for study therein and for other
purposes, the more co^demnable, being idle and unnecessary. 2. These temples
have some necessary use, because by reteyning of them, that cost and charges
which should be employed in the building of others in their stead, may serve to
supply the wa^ts of many godly poor: Such works and considerations the holy
Ghost judges to be Tit. 3.14.
necessary uses.

Secondly, whereas by way of imprecation and cursing, you pray against our
temples, wishing for the destruction of Antichrist, and of them together,
saying, let them therefore perish with him. I answer, 1. you do herein worse
then Balaam, who was feign to say, Number. 23.8.
How shall I curse, where God has not cursed? for the law of ceremonies being
remooved, you can not show by any warrant of Scripture that God does curse the
places formerly abused unto Idolatry, when as the Idolatrous use thereof is
taken away: we see on the contrary by experience, and you might see that God
blesses our use of such Temples in all the Reformed Churches, even with that
Romans 15.29.
abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, which is there
administered; And therefore we may truly say unto the Lord concerning your
curse, Ps. 109.28.
though they curse, yet thou will bless. 2. Do you not see how you curse
yourself in praying for the destruction of these Temples which you and your
people frequent so often for diverse purposes? For what if God should hear your
prayer, and while your self are sitting at your study in one of these Temples,
should suddenly raise a tempest and overthrow the temple? should not your blood
be now upon your own head that had called for this judgment? dare you enter
into and continue in such a place, against which you pray daily that God would
destroy it? or are you content to perish your self, so that one of these
Temples might perish with you?

Thirdly, whereas by way of prophecy or prognosticatio^, you foretell the
perishing of these Temples, and say; as they shall, in the time of their
visitation. I answer, 1. that place Ier. 10.15. which you allege for
confirmation of your prophecy, speaks not of Temples but of Idols, and
therefore concludes nothing against the place used by us. 2. If the destruction
of the Babylonish and heathnish Temples had been there prophesied of and
foretold, as is in other places the destruction even of the private houses of
the Babylonians; yet does not this show that the like event shall be unto all
places where Antichristian Idolatry has been practiced: for both in respect of
equity, there is great difference betwixt Babylonish Temples not purged from
their Idolatrous use; and our Temples that are converted to the lawful worship
of the true God; and again in respect of the fact, suppose our Temples were as
unclean as the Babylonians, yet is not God bound to deal with all sins alike
in this world by executing the same judgments here upon all things that are
defiled. There is indeed a time of visitation when Ps. 102.26. Mat. 5.18.
heaven and earth shall perish; and then our temples are like to perish also;
but this perishing shows them to be no more unlawful, then other creatures of
God which are subject to vanity in like manner. 3. As for Rev. 18. which
chapter you also allege at large for proof of your prediction in the ruin of
our temples; why did you not nominate the verse and describe your collection
from thence, that we might have considered the truth and evidence thereof? 4.
Do not you remember, how one of your own fellowship and society has of late
time prophesied and foretold an universal massacre to come upon Christendom;
and how he is deceyved, the time being past which he had nominated and limited
for this event? Let his example warn you to take heed of being so rash in
prophesying an universal massacre of our temples.

Fourthly, you say if by Necessary, I mean in respect of humane pleasure or
proffit: as the Lutheranes may think they have a necessary use of images,
which they keep in their Churches, etc. this you judge to be but a carnal
reason and not to savor of Gods spirit, etc. Hereunto I answer, that by
necessary use, I do not mean such as you speak of in the Lutheranes: but I
mean (that which it seems you call sparing of the purse) such use as serves
to supply the necessities of the faithful, and to support the burden of such
as are oppressed with poverty and want, whiles the church is not charged with
the cost and labor of such buildings: and with all I mean such a circumstance
of place as is in general of necessary use for the assembling of people, in as
much as the worship of God by his people can not be performed conveniently
without such helps of a building. And that this regard of necessary use is not
a carnal reason, but savouring of Gods spirit: it may appear both by the
equity of Gods law even in the old Testament when as he would have Hos. 6.6. 1.
Sam. 21.4 5. etc. Mat. 12.1.7.
ceremonies some times and in some cases to give place unto works of mercy
performed for the necessities of his people: and much more after the death of
Christ, when for the proffit of his people, that their outward necessities,
wants and poverty might be the better sustained and releeved, he wholly Act.
15.10 Col. 2.14.
took away the burden of his own ceremonial laws. If God would have his
statutes and commandments once given concerning his own holy place and temple
to be changed for the necessary use and proffit of his people: how much more
the statutes once given touching other places and temples abused to Idolatry?

Fifthly, to prove that the reteyning of our temples in respect of necessary use
is but a carnal reason, you allege diverse scriptures, viz. Exo.
34.12.13.14.15. Deuteronomy. 7.25.26. Ezekiel 23.14.16, etc wherein as you say, the spirit
of God condemns idols and idoleies, in respect of their abomination before
God and snare that they are unto men. I answer; that God in his law condemned
many things as an abomination unto himself and as a snare unto men, which yet
are not now of necessity to be abolished as in old time: your own allegations
may lead you to see the same. 1. In Exodus 34. God allows no compact or
covenant with the Idolaters there mentioned: and this commandment of God as
appears by conference with other places of scripture was so strict that the
Ezra. 10.10.11.12.19. -- 44. Neh. 13.3.23.30.
covenants of marriage with such persons were to be dissolved and broken, even
after Children borne unto them in such marriage, that the infidels should not be
a snare unto the people of God. This law, notwithstanding the snare feared of
old, is now changed and more liberty granted unto Christians, as the 1. Cor.
7.12.13.14.16.
Apostle shows: but under Moses the unbelieving Idolatrous wife was not
sanctified to the believing husband, neither the unbelieving heathnish husband
sanctified to the believing Iewesse his wife: Paul's plea would not have served
in Ezra his time, when they put away their strange wives: A transgressour
might not then justly have used Paul's words for reteyning either husband or
wife: they might not have said; what know thou, o wife, whether thou shall
save thine husband? or what know thou, o man, whether thou shall save thy
wife? Herein therefore we see plainly that for the necessity and benefit of
families, God has changed his law, and taken away that respect of a snare,
which he so severely commanded of old. 2. In Deuteronomy, 7.25.26. God allovves not
his people to take the silver and gold abused unto Idolatry: not so much as to
turn it unto their civil use, by taking it to themselves, or bringing it into
their houses; and this in respect of the snare and abomination you speak of:
The transgression of this law was the Josh. 7.1. etc.
destruction of Achan and his familye, and a trouble unto all Israel. But now
this law is changed, and the respect of the snare and the abomination is taken
away, as appears in the 1. Cor. 10 27.
Idolothytes now permitted unto our use, which heretofore were unlawful, as
well as the silver and gold mentioned in your allegation. 3, as for that place,
Ezekiel. 23.14.16. It does not appear that the images there spoken of were
religious images, but rather civil pictures, images of the Babylonians, such
as was the Mat. 22.20.
image of Caesar in his coin: And therefore were not unlawful even in the time
of the law, otherwise then by immoderate and inordinate use: and so even many
other lawful things became Ps. 69.22.
a snare and a ruin unto men. So that the snare condemned in your allegations
is such, as that the strength and stain thereof depended either upon a
ceremonial commandment from which we are freed; or upon an unlawful use,
which you can not justly impute unto us in the use of our temples.

Sixthly, whereas you say, that if this my exception should take place, we
should have very few idols destroyed, for they that are Popishly affected, will
find some necessary use for every Idol, to maintain their superstition. The
gentry may wear the popes hallowed golden crucifixes, and other sacred
Jewels, for broches in their hatts, etc. Hereunto I answer, 1. You ought to put
difference betwixt Idols themselves, and the places where they have been
worshipped, as the Discov. p. 133.
marginall note on Barow acknowledges: These you do unjustly confound
togather at every turn in your reasoning; seeing more detestation is to be
shevved against the Idols, then against their houses. 2, As for Popish Idols,
hallowed crucifixes, their ladies images, and such like things converted unto
ornaments of temples and of the gentry; they are not things of necessary use in
either of those respects that I noted before: they are neither necessary
circumstances in the worship of God; neither does this kind of reteyning them
help to supply the necessities of the faithful: for if these golden implements
were broken quite in pieces and molten again, the poor and other faithful
men might then afterward have as much and more benefit and necessary use of
them then before; but with our temples it is quite contrary in both respects.
3, though we may use the plenty of the earth even for orname^t also, as you
allege before from Ps. 24.1. 1. Cor. 10.26. yet as the Apostle shows in the
same place, we may also better forbear the use of such things whereof we
enjoy a plenty; then of other things whereof we stand in great necessity. As
from this that the earth is the Lords, the Apostle 1. Cor. 10 26. with verse. 28.
proves we may have a lavvfull use of each creature therein: so from the
fulness, plenty and variety of creatures, he shows that in some cases we
should forbear the use of one rather then an other: and of what rather then of
such vain, and unnecessary ornaments, as you speak of? 4. As for copes and
other hallowed vestments, there is also a manifest difference betwixt them and
our temples: for whatsoever others may think, that skilles not, while we see
that an house is of necessary use in the service of God, and that the surplice
is but a surplus, a superfluous thing of no necessary use: And hereby you may
plainly discern the difference; because not only that very same surplice
which Papists used and defiled with their use, is unlawful: but any other
surplice newly made for a ministerial garment, yea though the form in some
part be altered, though it be not consecrated as the Pontifical. par. 2. de
benedictione sacerdotal. indum.
Popish vestments were, yet being of no necessary use in the service of God, is
still unlawful: neither do I think that you would willingly wear such an
albe: but I hope you will not say so of all temples new made, as of the Zuyder
Kerck in this city: And yet if you will argue against our temples as against a
surplice: then are we to have no temple at all, but to meet sub dio under the
welkin; because we are to have no surplice at all. If in your annotations on
the holy scriptures you should expound the other commandments of God on this
manner, you would yet prove a greater corrupter of his law and seducer of his
people.

Section. 2.
AGainst the example of Iakobs practice in Genesis 35.2. (which was before Moses
policy) you object, how many private houses should then be rased: seeing they
have been polluted with idolatry, and been nurseries of superstition, as well
as their publik high places, Ios. 24.23. Judge. 17.4. Zeph. 1.5. with Deuteronomy.
27.15.

I answer; first you change the state of the question, which is of Idols and
idolies: and not of houses or other things polluted with idolatry. Secondly,
there is no law of God to destroy such civil-houses, as there is to destroy
idolies: (and where there is no Law, there is Romans 4.15.
no transgression:) but on the contrary, God gave Israel the Canaanites Deuteronomy.
6.10 11.
Cities and howses to dwell in, when he Deuteronomy. 12.2.3.
commanded their idolies to be demolished. Thirdly, you have no reason to
compare civil houses polluted with idolatry, with idols or idolies: seeing even
Gods own house was polluted with idolatry, and yet was not counted an idolie,
or destroyed, but 2. King. 23 4.6.11.12.
cleansed: neither can it without impiety, be matched with the high places of
idols, or counted a nurserie of superstition, as well as they. Neither are any
civil dwelling houses, though idols have been worshipped in them, such moniments
of idolatry, or nurseries of superstition, as the temples of heathens or of
Antichristians; which are merely and properly idolies yea very idols, as before
I have manifested from the Pontifical. And this we may learn of the heathen
Act. 19.27
Demetrius, who complained how by the Apostles preaching, the temple of the
great goddess Diana should be despised, and her Majesty should be destroyed:
which he would never have spoken of the dwelling houses of Ephesus, though her
worshipers kept in them. The Papists also will tell you, that the very Bellarm.
de cult. sanct. lib. 3. c. 4.
wales of their Churches dedicated unto God, do move unto piety, as do the
Altars, crosses, images, etc. which incitements to devotion are not found
otherwhere. That God is after Ibidem.
a peculiar manner in the temple, and hears men's prayers sooner there, by
promise. That the temple is dedicated to sacred actions, and is not a profane
house but an holy: and Ibid. c. 5.
to signify that, it is anointed with oil. That the Divil Ibidem.
is cast out of it and not suffered there to dwell, therefore the door is knocked
on, and the Divill is bidden go away. So that there is no comparison between
these consecrate places, and the common houses of men: and let our very enemies
be the judges. Fourthly, the Hebrew doctors who are most precise in condemning
outward moniments of idolatry, and hold even a ceremonial pollution by the
very touching of an idol; yet say of such civil houses wherein Idols are set up,
that when the Maimony treat. of Idolatry c. 8 s. 4.
the Idol is taken out, the house is lawful. And these things serve for answer
to the scriptures by you cited; and to the houses of the Muscovites and
Papists, and the houses wherein we our selves meet, which you object unto us,
and do untruly call one of them, the Jews Idol-temple.

Answer.
When you argued that our temples were to be destroyed because they serve to
nourish superstition, I showed the weakness of this argument, because of the
inconvenience that would follow; namely, that the^ many private houses which
both of ancienter and later times have been defiled with Idols, should likewise
be destroyed, being nurseries of superstition as well as other public places:
Touching this first, you say, I change the state of the question which is of
Idols and Idolies, and not of houses or other things polluted with Idolatry. I
answer, 1. either you do not mark my reason, or else you do not understand the
laws of right reasoning: for that which I said of the lawful reteyning of
private houses was not to rest therein, as in a conclusion of the question; but
the mention thereof served only as a medius terminus or as an argument to
infer the conclusion, as if I had used this Syllogism: If all nurseries of
superstition are to be utterly destroyed, then are private houses also to be
destroyed for nourishing of superstition. But private houses are not to be
destroyed for their nourishing of superstition. Therefore, al nurseries of
superstition are not to be destroyed.
From hence you might have discerned the force of your reason, drawn from the
nourishing of superstition, refuted. 2. If this kind of reasoning in me may
not be admitted, then may I in like manner tell you when you seek to infer
inconveniences upon me, by the cope, mitre, surplice, and such like things;
that you change the state of the question betwixt us, which is not about
vestments and surplices, but about places and temples abused unto Idolatry. 3.
It is yourself who indeed seek to chang the state of the question, in that you
say, our question is of Idols, which it is not, but only of Idolies, or places
abused unto Idolatry, as may appear by the questions propounded in my Fol. 2.
a.
first writings, accepted of by you: neither have you proved our Temples to be
Idols, that so by that means you might bring in Idols within the compass of
the question. 4. You do here contradict your self, when you say, the question
is of Idolies, and not of houses or other things polluted with Idolatry: For,
I pray you, what is an Idolie, but an house or place polluted with Idolatry?
As public houses polluted with Idols, are public Idolies; so are private
houses polluted with Idolatry, private Idolies: And therefore both in the
Syriaque and Arabique translations of 1. Cor. 8.10. in stead of Idolie, they
have the house of Idols: and in other places of Scripture, these Idolies are
called Judge. 17.4.5.
houses of Idols, and houses of Gods.

Secondly, you say, there is no law of God to destroy such civil houses, as
there is to destroy idolies, etc. I answer: seeing God gave unto Israel the
cities and houses of the Canaanites to dwell in, when as he commanded the
public places of their Idolatry to be demolished, as you confess: this
confirms that which I said, and shows that the commandment of destroying
public idolies did not depend merely upon the nourishing of Idolatry, for
then the private idolies should have been destroyed also for their nourishing
of Idolatry: because the like sins deserve and call for the like judgment. And
this appears yet further from your own allegation compared with other
scriptures: for whereas in Deuteronomy. 6.10.11. God allows Israel to dwell in the
cities and houses of the Canaanites, to enjoy their wells, their vineyards and
olive trees; yet at an other time according to the pleasure of his own will,
he 2. Kin. 3 19.25.
commands the cities and houses of Idolatrous Moabites to be destroyed; every
fair tree to be felled; all their fountains of water to be stopped; and every
good field to be marred with stones; to show his detestation of their sin,
which yet he would not have to be showed against the Canaanites by the same
means, although the snare and danger of being nourished in Idolatry and other
sin, was greater and more to be feared from the Canaanites then from the
Moabites. If God took such a different course with Idolatrous and nourishers
of superstition under the law; it ought not to seem strange unto us that he
declares his destation of Idolatry now under the Gospel by other means and
manner then under the law, according to the counsel of his own will.

In the third place, you say, I have no reason to compare civil houses
polluted with Idolatry, with Idols or Idolies: seeing even Gods own house was
polluted with idolatry, and yet was not counted an Idolie, or destroyed, etc.
I answer, 1. Suppose I had no reason to compare civil houses with Idolies as
you say; yet your reason from Gods house does not warrant you so to say: for
the temple of God having many privileges which civil houses had not, might be
exempted from the judgment of present destruction more then they: and therefore
your plea is insufficient. 2, though Gods own house, when it was polluted with
Idolatry, was not to be destroyed, but cleansed as 2. Kin. 23. yet have you no
warrant to say, that It was not counted an Idolie: but as it was sometimes
denominate of other sins, and called Ier. 7 11. mat. 21.13
a Den of Thieves, when such wickedness was maintained: so what hinders
but that it might likewise be called a Den of Idolaters, or an Idolie,
during the time that it was full of Idols and not cleansed from Idolatry? 3,
it is also false which you say of the temple, that it cannot without impiety
be matched with the high places, or counted a nursery of superstition as well
as they. For when as the temple, through the abominable Idolatries 2. Kin. 21
4.5. etc. Ier. 2.10.11 and 3.11. Ezekiel. 16.46.47.51.52.57. and 23.11.39.40. etc.
practiced in it was become an unclean stews of spiritual whoredom, above
many of the Idol-places, being also more famous for the place and persons
polluting it and entising unto Idolatry, exceeding Sodom and Samaria in their
heathnish Idolatries: did not this notorious scandal given in the temple of
God nourish superstition ten times more then the Idolatries committed in some
obscure Idol temples of the heathen? And though God gave no law for destroying
of this his temple when it became a nursery of superstition, yet this hinders
not but that it did sometimes match and overmatch the high places of the
heathens in nourishing of Idolatry. The will of God was that some Idolies
should be destroyed and some not. 4, for civil dwelling houses where Idols have
been worshipped, though they be not such moniments and nurseries of
superstition, as some other public Idolies, that impeacheth not my assertion:
it is enough for me, that they have in some measure been nurseries of
superstition: Even among the public Idolies themselves, some temples of
Antichrist are not such nurseries of superstition as some other be, which are
ten times more devoutly observed and waited on, then the rest. 5, how know you
that that all the temples of the heathens had no civil dwellings in any part
of them, and that they were (as you say) merely Idolies? how know you but that
some of them might be inhabited, in such manner as your Idolie is, reserving the
principal place for their Idol service and devotion? your making of them mere
Idolies in this sense, seems to be a mere presumption and affirmation without
proof. 6, I may rather say on the contrary, that they were not merely Idolies
because some part of them were put to civil uses as one of your own Cranz.
VVandal. li. 4. c. 23.
Authors testifyeth for the Idolie that Geroldus destroyed: there being a
meeting in the court thereof every monday for judgments by the King and the
flamine: It is also noted of diverse temples of Antichrist, that Magdeb. centur.
12. col. 870. 871.
civil judgments, and other civil businesses were wont to be performed there:
And that our temples are often put unto diverse civil uses also, daily
experience witnesses. That which you say of manifesting them to be very Idols,
out of the Pontifical is already answered. 7. we cannot say but that some
private Idolies, and civil dwelling houses, were equal in nourishing of
superstition even unto some public Idolies: when as Zeph. 1.5 2. Kin. 23.12.
Altars were made upon the house tops, especially upon Kings or Princes houses
as upon Ahaz his chamber: The resort unto such places and the scandal by the
Idol-worship there performed might nourish superstition more then the devotion
performed in some other obscure Idolies and groves of the heathens. 8, How
frivolous is that which you write of the heathen Demetrius? how know you that
he would never have spoken of the dwelling houses in Ephesus as he did of
Dianaes temple, concerning her majesty? seeing that which he spoke was for his
Act. 19.24.25.
gain: and seeing his gain consisted in selling little temples of Diana: it was
suitable and fit for his purpose that men should think their private dwelling
houses would be more holy if they had those little temples or shrines of Diana
in them, and therefore who can say but that he would upon occasion complain
that the majesty of Diana and of her great temple would be despised, if men
did not show their devotion in buying those little temples for the hallowing of
their houses and for the maintenance of her worship? And what if he would not
so have complained? yet might their houses in Ephesus have been Idolies, in
respect of their lares familiares, and other household Gods privately worshipped
by them. 9. Unto that which you allege out of Bellarmine touching the Popish
opinion of holiness in their temples, I answer that they will also tell you he
like touching their private dwelling houses, when as they are consecrated also
according to their manner: namely, that the wales of their houses being
hallowed with the sign of the cross and holy water are more holy then other
houses not blessed after that manner; that God is then after a peculiar manner
present in such houses more the^ in other houses; that the devil is driven
away and expelled: for such virtue and efficacy of Bellarm. de imagine. sanc.
lib. 2. cap. 29. Pontifical.
driving away evil spirits, of communicating holiness, and stirring up
devotion they do eyery where ascribe unto the sign of the cross: Their
common saying is: Catechis. regin. Mariae, Angl.
per crucis signum fugiat hinc omne malignum, etc Having therefore that
Idolatrous sign over the doors of their dwelling houses without; and on the
wales within, what holiness and virtue can be vvanting unto them? And
therefore though our enemies are not to be admitted for Judges; except it be
against themselves as Moses Deuteronomy. 32 31.
alleges them: yet in this matter their testimony is against you.

Fourthly, you plead from the Hebrew doctors: and tell us out of Maimony, what
is said concerning civil houses, namely that, when the Idol is taken out, the
house is lawful: Hereunto I answer: 1. The testimony and authority of Maimony
is of no weight nor worth: think you that I fear the arm of Rambam, that you
come so often in his name against me? what mean you to tell us so often of
hebrew doctors and Jew doctors, which are indeed neither Jews nor
doctors; but such as the holy Ghost speaks of, Rev. 2.9.
which say they are Jews and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan: 1 Timothy
1.7
They would be doctors of the law and yet understand not what they speak: They
are 1. Tim. 6.4.
Doters about questions: puffed up and know nothing: Ibid. us. 5
Separate thy self from such: But you that separate your self from all the
ministers of Christ, and in all this writing have not alleged one of the
lights of the reformed Churches, do yet at every turn call for Jewish, popish,
heathnish writers to speak for you. You tell us they are most precise in
condemning outward moniments of Idolatry etc. But it is hard to say whether
theri precisenes be more impious or absurd; impious, in condemning the worship
of God in Christ Jesus to be Idolatry; absurd, in avoiding even the Arba Turim,
in lib. jore-dea. tract. cele haiajin. signo. 135. and tract. Pittim, sign. 112.
civil instruments and vessels and meat of Christians, as the pollutions of
Idolatry: and this yet with great contradiction among themselves. Their
precisenes is much like to that of the Jews in the Gospel, which Ioh. 18.28
would not go into the common hall lest they should be defiled: and yet in the
mean time imbrued themselves in the blood of Christ: And eve^ in the place
alleged how vain are the traditions which Maimony teaches, touching the body
of the Idolatrous oak or other tree, being lawful for use but only the
Boughs, branches and fruits unlawful: Maimony in Abod. Zarah. c. 8.
with diverse such like. 2, you do also corrupt the testimony of Maimony in this
place; for he speaks not of civil houses only as you would make him to speak
by your application of his words: his speech may be understood of other houses
also, as of Synagogues built for the worship and service of God: Neither is
there any thing in that Chapter that should restrain his indefinite speech of
a house unto civil houses: and therefore your own Author is even in this
testimony here produced by you, contradictory unto yourself, who in an other
Counterpoy. p 199.
place do teach that though our Churches have not been built by Antichrist,
though the Idols be also taken out of them, that yet they are to be destroyed:
being herein more unreasonable then your precise and impious Maimony. 3.
Suppose that Maimony here spoke of civil houses as being lawful for use when
the Idol is taken away, then does he in this point agree with me who hold the
same; and vvrote so much before, viz. that page 23.
God never commanded, nor the godly ever practiced such a demolishing of
private houses: but he is here against you who would have the houses which
have been nurseries of Idolatry to be destroyed; and consequently the houses of
the Moschovites, Papists and even of your own Idolies also, of which more
hereafter in their proper place.

Section. 3.
Hen. Ains.
AGainst the example of the brazen serpent destroyed, 2. King. 18.4 You say, it
was of no necessary use, and therefore might well be destroyed. I answer, there
was as necessary use of it still, as there had been before: and therefore in that
respect, no more cause to destroy it now, then in former times. Yea it being a
moniment of Gods ancient mercy to his Church, and a figure Ioh. 3.14.
of future grace: they might have pretended a much more necessary and
profitable use to reserve it, then you can for reserving the idolies of the
Pope. But the scripture it self shows an other cause then you allege, namely
for that the Israelits 2. King. 18.4.
did burn incense unto it, and not for that there was no necessary use thereof.
And the same cause (besides other) lies against your idol temples: for to this
day, many people burn incense unto them, esteming and using them as sanctified
places for the incense of their prayers, and other religious works. If you
require a proof, you may see it in this city, if not at other times, at least
on Sacraments day, so called: when above other days, the papists visit their
ancient Temple solemnly, some of them barefooted: and if the doors be shut that
they cannot go in, yet they do their devotion in procession about the idolie.
And wherefore may we think, have the Nuns a key of your chapel (as is
reported) but for to do honor to their Dianaes shrine: it is for no devotion
to your worship therein, you may be sure, but rather that they may continue
Temple keepers (or worshipers) of their former gods, as the Ephesians Act. 19.35
were of their Diana. If you plead, that these burn not incense to the
Temples, but to God in them: the same I answer for the Israelits, that they
also burnt incense to God, before the brazen serpent, for they were not so
sottish as to worship a piece of Brass. But the scripture uses to call the
worshipping of God, by or before an idol, the worshipping of the idol it self: as
in Act. 7.41. they are said to offer sacrifice unto the idol, whereas in Exodus
32. it appears they sacrificed to the Lord, the God that had brought them out
of Egypt. So they that worshipped in the idolatrous groves, are said to 2.
Chron. 24.18.
serve the groves: and sundry the like.

Answer.
Ioh. Page
Unto my answer touching the brazen serpent, your reply is: there was as
necessary use of it still, as there had been before, etc. I answer; And
therefore I grant also, if in former times it had been abused unto Idolatry, in
the time of the Judges or of former Kings, there had been cause to have
abolished the same, while there was no necessary use thereof: And what does
this help you?

Secondly, whereas you proceed and add that it being a moniment of Gods
ancient mercy and figure of future grace, they might have pretended a much more
necessary use, etc. I answer further, though it had been a holy sign and type
as Ioh. 3.14. yet this proves not so proffitable a use thereof as we have of
our temples: The Exo. 12.22.
bunch of Hyssop where with they sprinkled their houses at the passover, was
a monime^t of Gods ancient mercy and a type Ps. 51.7. 1. Pet. 1.2.
of future grace, yet after the sacred action of sprinkling ceased, there was
no such necessary use either of it or of the brazen serpent, being now no
necessary circumstances in the service of God, as a place or house to meet in
still is, and the poor not able to receyve any such benefit by reteyning the
hyssop or the serpent, as now they may by reteyning of these temples. As the
holy mount after the law was delivered, and the sound of the Trumpet ended
became Exodus 19.12.13.
lawful for common use again and the religious observation thereof ceased:
so was it with the brazen serpent, and the bunch of hyssop as touching the
holiness thereof: but as for the civil help and benefit we have by these
temples, the continuance thereof is apparent and manifest unto all.

Thirdly, whereas you say that the scripture it self alleges an other cause,
namely for that the Israelites burned incense unto it, etc. You know well
enough that I presuppose that cause and grant the same, according to your
allegation, from 2. King. 18.4. which I my self before noted; and the state of
our controversy which is concerning things abused unto Idolatry, does also
manifest unto every one: yet that hinders not but we may also consider this as
a concurring cause to be joined with the former, and this so much the rather
touching the destruction of the brazen serpent, because the original thereof
was not for Idol service. Otherwise, if without regard of necessary use each
temple abused unto Idolatry must be destroyed, as the brazen serpent was for
the abuse thereof; then not only the temples built and dedicated by heathens
and papists but also the temples newly built by the protestants for the true
and lawful worship of God, such as are the Zuyder-Kerck in this city and
diverse more in other places, (if the the papists should get them but one month
or week into their hands and sing one mass therein) should in like manner be
rased and demolished. But you must yet streyne your wit to draw more subtle
consequences before you can show us such temples in the belly of the
brasen-serpent, which by your arguing you would make to be such a devouring
Dragon. In Israel beside the temple were Act. 15.21. Mat. 4.23. Ps. 74.4.8.
Synagogues built for the service of God: And Historians record (as your self
also Annot. on ps. 74.4.
acknowledge) that in one city Jerusalem there were above four hundred
Synagogues: Now by your reasoning if an Idolatrous king had risen up over al
Israel; and reigned but one month as did 2. Kin. 15 13.
Shallum the son of Iabesh and during that time had converted all their
Synagogues unto the service of Idols, all those Synagogues throughout Israel
must never more have been employed unto the service of the true God, but every
one of the^ plucked down and destroyed: and this so often (if others were
built again) as any new pollution should come upon them, though but for a
month, or even for one hours abusing unto false worship. This havoc your
Hammer and argument makes among the houses of God. As Nebuchadnezzar was once
the Ier. 50.23
Hammer of the world; so if there were strength in your arm and authority
according to your mind, we should have you to be the Hammer of Christendom,
not only to break the constitution of their spiritual societies every where,
but also to overturne and raze their material buildings: No necessary use
would serve for any plea or excuse before such a severe judge.

Fourthly, you say: the same cause lies against our Idol-temples: for to this
day many people burn incense unto them: and for proof hereof, you allege
that in this city if not at other times, at least on Sacraments day, so called,
we may see the papists visit their ancient temple solemnly; some of them
barefooted, etc. Hereunto I answer. 1. This action of the Papists whereof you
speak is not in any public solemn meeting, as your words might make the
reader to imagine, and so deceive him thereby: but a thing done by stealth of
some superstitious persons, who as I hear do now and then visit that temple as
a holy place: The Magistrate of this city does punish the Papists even for
their secret meetings in private houses: and much less will they suffer
public and solemn assemblies for Idol-service. If such a visitation of
temples as this is be a just cause of destroying them, then what temple shall
be free from destruction, if the Papists may have liberty at any time to come
near it and to pollute it with their devotions? It is affirmed by many, (and
it is agreeable to the Romish profession) that the Churchyard and Church newly
built in this city, have in the night season been visited by the Papists and
consecrated by their priest or Bishop for the burial of their dead, which are
often buried there: And now by your reasoning, because the Papists have on this
manner burned incense unto it, and hallowed it for their use, and esteem it a
sanctified place, it should be destroyed as well as the brazen serpent was. 2,
The superstitious devotions which by some straggling people are now and then
performed at this temple whereof you speak, were in like manner practiced by
them, (as those that have seen do testify) even then when it was turned unto a
civil use and made a pack house for wares: for unto such use it was by the
Magistrates appointment heretofore employed, until of later time, the city
increasing, they found a necessary use of it for the people to meet in, unto
the service of God. And this being so, that the reteyning of this place for
civil use has given liberty unto Papists to burn incense unto it (as you
speak) as well as the religious use thereof: then are you as deep in this sin
as others whom you accuse for nourishing superstition: for it has been and is
the manner of your people to reteyne a civil use of these hallowed places for
the burial of the dead. Though you have not power to destroy them, yet ought
you to forbear the use of these hallowed places, if there be such a sinful
nourishing of superstition thereby. Yea if any difference be, it is the
reteyning of these places for civil use that gives the Papist more liberty and
occasion to perform and continue their devotions still, because they think
that our use of their temples in the service of God does more pollute them, and
make them unfit for their use then turning of them to pack houses. 3, Suppose
that there were offense given in reteyning this particular temple which you
mention and which some Papists do more dote upon, then upon other places; in
respect of some miraculous virtue and holiness which they have imagined and
believed to be in it through their popish delusions, yet this may not serve to
condemn all other in like manner: And least of all can it serve to condemn
the place of our worship, about which in particular this our present
controversy is. The woman that occasioned this dispute and pretended scruple
of joining with our congregation in respect of our temple, need not to be
offended at this place of ours, for the superstition that is practiced in an
other place.

Fifthly, you ask wherefore the Nuns have a key of our Chapel (as is reported)
but for to do honor to their Dianaes shrine, etc. I answer: 1. The report
which you repeat is a false report and untrue: The Baguines or women (whom you
call Nuns) have no key whereby they may come into our Chapel: neither have
had these many years; And therefore directly contrary unto that which the
town cleark of Ephesus said boasting, and which you Act. 19.35.
allege for them; they may take up a lamentation and say; who knovveth not,
that we are no longer temple-keepers nor vvorshipers in the Chapel, which is
taken from us: we have lost possession and have no keys of entrance, etc.
Regard not such slight reports: if you were wise you would not mention them,
until you had more vvarrant and assurance of the truth thereof. 2, your self
are rather a Sexton or templ-keeper of an Idol-te^ple, having obtained to keep
for your use a key of the library in that temple which you resort unto and yet
would have it to be destroyed and rased: No Nuns have any such door in our
temple to be opened by them at their pleasure as you have there: But I pray you
tell us, since you would not have these temples once abused by Antichrist to be
exempted from ruin and destruction more then the rest: would you be content
thus to have kept a key of some cel in Appollos Oracle at Delphos, or of
Baal-zebubs temple in Ekron where you might daily have heard the devil speaking
alowd in his own person? If so, surely you do the^ less hate Idol-te^ples and
devilles houses, then many of those whom you do so much accuse thereof.

Sixthly, as for the distinction which you would preoccupate viz. of burning
incense not to the temples but to God in them: though I condemn those that
shall make such distinctions to defend their superstition withal: yet whereas
you say further, that you answer the same thing for the Israelites, that they
also burnt incense to God, before the brazen serpent, for they were not so
sottish as to worship a piece of brass: this your saying is unwarrantable: for
the folly and sottishnes of Idolaters leads the^ to as great absurdities as the
worshipping of a piece of brass: Romans 1.22.23.25. Ezec. 8.10.11.14.
they being so infatuate as to worship the basest creatures: they become not
only Ier. 10.14
brutish as the beasts, but even Ps. 115.8
blockish like the senseless stones which they serve: And the^ what warrant
have you to limit their folly, as though they could not proceed thus far to
worship a piece of brass: especially considering the 2. Kin. 16 3.
rage of Idolatry that was about this time of Ahaz whom Hezekias succeeded and
then destroyed the brazen serpent? you are in this point more erroneous then
the Idolatrous Jesuit himself Bellarm. de imagine. lib. 2 c. 11 and 13.
who confesses this sottishnes of Idolaters, which you deny in the Israelites.
And what though sometimes the scripture call the worshipping of God by an Idol,
the worshipping of the Idol itself, as you show from Exo. 32 with Act. 7.41?
must it needs do so therefore at all times? or must it therefore do so at this
place concerning the brazen serpent? The sottishnes of Idolaters in worshipping
very wood and stone for their Gods is showed at large by Joan. Rainol. ce^sur.
Apocr. tom. 2. praelec. 223.
our writers who do therefore also justly reprove the slanders of Bellarmine who
because Calvine collected from Exo. 32. that there and in such places the true
God was worshipped by an Idol after a false manner, did therefore slander him as
though he had said the Jews did worship the true God in all their Idols. But
your allegation and application of that place Exo. 32. unto the question in
hand, is as vain as that which was slanderously imputed unto Calvine. Besides
this, there is great difference betwixt worshipping God by or before an Idol,
and the worshipping in or at an Idol-temple; These two are not to be matched
togather: As you allege that men are said to serve the groves, 2. Chron.
24.18. So by the like figurative speech men are said to serve the tabernacle or
to do Number. 18 4.6 1. Chro. 9 13. and 28.13.21.
the service of the tabernacle and of the house of God, because of their
attendance upon the same in their several charges: yet this is not all one
with kneeling down before a brazen bowl, a fleshook, or an embroydered Cherub
in a curtain of the tabernacle and worshipping God thereby, as Idolaters use
to do in the Idols: such serving of the tabernacle I think you will not allow:
And so on the contrary the service of the groves, being a large and general
speech is to be considered of more distinctly, then you have yet propounded the
same unto us.

Section. 4.
Hen. Ains.
AGainst the example of Josias, in 2. Chron. 34. you say, those things were
also of no necessary use. I answer, you fall again into your former fallacy,
putting that for the cause which was not. And besides the reasons which I
fore-alledged, the text itself shows otherweise, for he made Verse. 4.7
dust of them. Could not the things have been put to some necessary use: and
where they therefore turned to dust and powder? The godly zele of the King,
compared with Gods law, persuades that his own profit or necessary use, was
not the thing that he respected. And what if the high places were not houses
meet to be converted into synagogues; yet might they have served for other
uses: and the houses of Dagon and Baal, and the temples which Israel builded
Hos. 8.14
when they forgot their maker, were as fit for synagogues as Antichrists
temples now. And if you will regard later examples: you may see many idol
houses and moniments destroyed by Christian Princes, and by Bishops having
leave from such: and this not because they could not have put them to necessary
uses, but for zele and detestation of idolatry. As Eusebius de vita Constable. l.
3. c. 53.
Constantine the Emperor rased down Venus temple, with all statues and
moniments of it: and Socrates Hist. l. 1. c. 14.
the Python in Cilicia, with his temple. Theodoret hist. l. 5 c. 37. 20. 21.
Sozom. l. 7 c. 20. 21
Theodosius commanded the temples of idols to be overthrowen. Augustine de civ.
Dei. l. 18. c. 54.
Gaudentius and Iovius ruinated such places in the reign of Honorius. Cranz.
l. 2 Saxon. c. 9. and 12.
Carolus Magnus, when he had conquered Saxony, did the like to the idolies of
Maydenburgh and Mars mount. Theodor. hist. l. 3. c. 7
Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, performed the like service in Constantines days,
and Sigonius l. 10. Imperij occident
Bishop Porphyrie showed like zele at Gaza, and Cassiod. lib. 3. Hist. tripart.
Bishop Abdas did the like among the Persians, upon their Temples consecrated
to the Fire. John Theodor. l. 5. 2. 29.
Chrysostom sent men to do the like work in Phaenicia. Helmoldus in Sclavoru^
Chro^.
Bishop Geroldus burned to ashes, a grove which the Sclavi had in sacred
reverence. Chron. Mersburg. l. 2. c. 6.
VVigbertus Bishop of Mersburgh did likeweise, and Cranz. in Metrop. l. 4. c. 1.
Vnwannus of Hamburgh, cut down all the idolatrous groves in his diocese.
Cromer. l. 15. and Guagninus de Lituania.
In Lituania, the Temples and Altars of idols were demolished: and in sundry
other places, as Historiographers do record. And now of late the Christians in
France (as at Rochel) ruinated the popish Temples there: all which do bear
witness to the true meaning of Gods law, written in their hearts, otherwise then
in yours, who plead to have such places continued for to worship God in upon a
pretense of necessary use.

Answer.
Ioh. Page
THe reasons which you fore alleged against the consideration of necessary use
in things abused unto Idolatry, are before answered: unto that which you now
labor to show out of the text itself I answer further, 1. whereas you allege
that Josias made dust of the Altars and groves, etc. and thereupon ask whether
they could not have been put to some necessary use, etc. If you mean a
necessary use in any measure at all, I deny not the the same: for there is
nothing so small or abject but some use may be made thereof: and even after
these things were turned into dust, there might use be made of that dust, as
there was: but you pervert my words if you stand so servilly unto the letter
thereof: whereas I spoke of the great proffit that might redound unto the
maintenance of the Church: and namely such as might be proportionable unto the
worth of many temples, of ten thousand Churches happily in some one Kingdom:
and what is a basketfull of dust about which you trifle in comparison of this
great commodity employed to supply the wants of the faithful? 2. Touching
Josias his zeal compared with the law of God though I doubt not but that he
respected the Glory of God and not his own proffit: yet this hinders not but
that with a godly zele and care of Gods people he might also have respect unto
the common benefit of them in reserving many Synagogues and houses of assembly
built for the worship of God, and convert them to his service again though
they had been polluted with Idolatry, contrary to your doctrine that requires
the demolition of all such beside the temple alone. 3, as for the houses of
Dagon, Baal and such like, though they were not mentioned in the 2. Chr. 34
Chapter alleged by you to show us the example of Josias, yet did I also in my
former page 22.
answer, show the warrant for their destruction, though they might have been
turned unto necessary use, viz. in respect of the te^porary dispensatio^ under
Moses, though now abrogate.

In the next place, leaving the Scriptures, you betake your self to an other
help, and say in defense of your error, that if, I will regard later examples,
I may see many Idol houses and moniments destroyed by Christian Princes, and by
Bishops having leave from such, etc. Hereunto I answer in general, 1. We have
here a notable spectacle of your great partiality; while you that do so often
blame me for making flesh my arm, and for alleging the Examples of Reformed
Churches against you even when I did it not, do yet yourself seek help of men,
of Idolatrous men and fly for refuge unto them, and to their examples to
oppugn us therewithal. When Mr. Spr. propounded unto your consideration, the
example and judgment of Counterpoy. page 15.
all the pure Reformed Churches in the world, and of all the godly learned and
most excellent lights in the same, as Bucer, Martyr, Fagius, Alasto, Knoxe,
Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Gualter, Symler, Zanchius, Iunius, Rollocus, etc. You
answer as David did touching the armies of the heathe^s and infidels and say,
though be come against you with horsemen and Charets, yet you ps. 20.7.
will remember the name of the Lord, by whose word alone all doctrines must be
tried, etc. How much more justly might I now answer you in your own words, and
require you to lay aside carnal confidence and to remember the name of the
Lord: I may justly complain of you as Solomon does of the great evil which he
saw under the Sun; He saw Eccles. 10.7.
Servants on horses and Princes walking as Servants on the ground: In your
examples alleged against me, you set Servants and Beggars on horsback, even
the vassals and slaves of Antichrist, popish Priests and Prelates Geroldus,
Wigbertus, Vnwannus and other Lituanians and Polonians, and will have their
examples to be regarded of me; and yet make Princes to walk as servants on the
ground, by making base account of the judgments and examples of the truest
Churches and faithfullest Ministers, propounded unto you by others: Let those
that fear the Lord judge whether this be not shameful and gross partiality
and far from a sincere course.

2. We may here observe not only, your partiality but a further deceit; for
whereas in the beginning of your Page 35.
last writing, your counsel is that we discuss things by the word of God, not
of man: you are herein like unto a deceitful champion who being to combat with
an other, would aforehand agree upon the weapon and assistance to be used: but
yet contrary to agreement brings with him into the feeld both other weapons and
assistance then he pretended at the first: for so you making show that you
would use the sword of the spirit only, do yet bring with you other carnal
weapons and a company of hired Soldiers which you couch closely togather and
lay them in ambush: and here of a sudden they step forth, first a band of
Emperors and Princes as of Constantine the great, Theodosius, Gaudentius,
Iovius, Carolus magnus or Charles the great; and the marching of these horsemen
and Charets makes a terrible noise in the ears of many: after these you bring
forth a second band of Popish prelates, as Geroldus, Wigbertus, Vnwannus, to
come rusling in their rochets against me: and besides these diverse others. Who
would have expected such an onset, under your conduct, that made such show of
the contrary at the first?

3. As you have alledgedged the examples of these for breakin down of temples,
so might you as easily have alleged their examples for the maintenance of many
notorious corruptions some of them for the superstitious use of the sign of
the cross; some of them to allow primates and metropolitanes: some of them to
allow even the mass itself and all the abominations of popery. What weight is
there in the example of such?

4. The temples which these Princes and Bishops destroyed were all of them
heathnish and built by the Pagans for the worship of false Gods: other temples
such as ours built for the service of Christ, they destroyed not, but built
such themselves, as you would now have to be demolished. And suppose you could
prove that the temples abused by Antichriste were to be destroyed as well as
the Pagan-Idolies: yet at least by the testimony and judgment of these your
witnesses it was otherwise: so that look what the force of these examples is,
it is all against your self and not against us.

But to come more particularly unto your examples: The first is, that
Constantine the Emperor rased down Venus Temple, with all statues and
moniments of it: I answer, 1. It is uncertain whether this thing was done by
Constantine or not: for Eusebius the author that records the same is R. P. de
Politeria Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 23. 24. 25. 26. Scaliger. Ele^c. trihaeres.
Serrar. c. 29
often taxed for many errors in matters of fact described by him. His
testimony is therefore doubtful and not free from suspicion. 2. That Temple is
recorded by Eusebius to have been an extraordinary wicked place, not only for
heathnish Idolatry, but also for other monstrous and unnatural crimes
committed in the same, which are also alleged as a cause why it was destroyed:
Therefore the destruction thereof is no sufficient warrant for the subversion of
our temples. 3, It is also noted by Eusebius in the same Chapter which you
cite, that this temple of Venus was situate in a dearne place on a top of mount
Libanus, out of the way and remote from conversation of men: therefore could it
not even by his relation be converted unto such necessary uses as our temples
are.

4. That Idol temples were not destroyed by Constantine, it is confessed by an
Theodoret Hist. lib. 5. c. 20.
other of your witnesses: Therefore though he forbade the Idolaters to use them,
yet do not your witnesses agree that his conscience required the destruction of
them all together acccording to your doctrine.

The second example alleged by you is of Constantine also, that he destroyed
the Python in Cilicia with his temple. I answer, 1. The truth of this fact may
also be justly called into question, considering how uncertain or rather
fabulous things are recorded by that Socrates your witness. In the Socrates
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 13.
former Chapter next unto this alleged by you there is recorded the finding
out of the holy cross by Helena the Mother of Constantine: the miraculous
discerning of the same from the two other crosses of the thieves crucified with
Christ, by the means of Macarius, etc. 2. If the things there recorded by
Socrates be true, then was the superstition of Constantine very great; in
taking a piece of that cross which his mother found and sent unto him, and
hiding it in his own statue or image, believing perfectly that the city should
be preserved safe, where it was kept: in taking also the nails which fastened
the hands of Christ vnthe cross, and putting them in his horse bridles and in
his helmet (as an Theodoret Hist. lib. 1. c. 18.
other of your Authors says) to repel the darts of his enemies; and to
accomplish the ancient Zach. 14.20.
Prophecy, touching the holiness upon the bridles of the horses. Such examples
are of no great authority with us. 3. These Authors witness further that in
Constantines time, they did Eusebius. hist. lib. 20 cap. 3.
consecrate Churches, and kept feasts of dedication: that he Socrates hist.
lib. 1. c. 13.
caused a temple to be built where the temple of Venus had stood: and an other
at the ibid. c. 14
oak of Mamre eve^ in the Idol-place where heathnish sacrifices had been
offered. Do you think that such examples are to be regarded and follovved?

For a third example you tell us that Theodosius commanded the temples of Idols
to be overthrown: I answer, 1. Your historians witnessing this fact are so
full of apparent fables that there is no great credit to be given unto them. As
for Theodoret to go no further then these chapters alleged by you: in the
Theodoret Hist. lib. 5..37.
first of them he tells great wonders of Eunomius the Bishop that alone
resisted an army when others fainted, etc. in the ibid. c. 20
second place, the story of Macedonius the divine eremite that was ignorant of
the scriptures, is related: in the ibid. c. 21.
third place is the story of the Devil that at first would not suffer the fire
to burn the Idol-temple, but was after driven to run away by the virtue of
holy water and the sign of the cross, etc. And Sozomen in the Sozom. lib. 7.
c. 21.
Chapter next-following unto that which you allege tells a strange story of
John Baptists head which the mules would draw no further then to a certain
place supposed therefore to be chosen of God for the keeping of that relic:
and how Theodosius came thither either God or the Prophet mooving him, etc. 2,
Sozomen in the place cited by you shows that at length many of the
Idol-temples were overthrovvne by Theodosius: If he had thought them simply
unlawful according to Deuteronomy. 12. Then is it like that not many but all of them
should have been destroyed by him. And besides he ibid. c. 1^
shows that the temple of Bacchus in Alexandria was converted unto the use of
the Christians under Theodosius: That in the temple of Serapis, there was heard
to be sung Alleluia, by a strange voice, no person being seen for a token that
Christians should afterward sing psalms for the worship of God in that place.
3, In the first place which you allege out of Theodoret, there is also mention
made of a certain impudent monk or contemplative person that brought the
conscience of Theodosius into bondage with a vain excommunication, etc. And
therefore not the consciences of such men but the word of God which is the
perfect law of liberty must be our guide.

In the fourth place you allege, that Gaudentius and Iovius ruinated such
places in the reign of Honorius. Answ. 1. Though they did so in one city, in
Carthage, yet this shows not that they did so in other places, or that they
thought all others bound to imitate their example: for oftentimes such works
are done upon occasion of particular respects and specialll provocations, which
at other times and places they would not do: as was also noted before in the
practice of Constantine the great. 2. As for Augustine your Author, though he
approve this fact in them; yet it appears else where, that at some other times
and places he August. ad Publicola^ Epist. 154.
allowed the reteyning of them: and shows reason for their converting to
religious uses, even as sacrilegious and impious persons themselves are changed
or converted unto true religion: And his reason is not to be despised: seeing
living temples of the devil abused unto Idolatry being more capable of the
infection of sin may be employed and turned unto the service of God; why not
other dead temples made of vvood and stone? 3. This your witness does yet
further condemn you, in that he Ibidem.
allovves the converting of Idol-temples and groves unto the worship of the
true God, or unto other common and public uses, but not unto other private
uses and commodities: whereas on the contrary you that do deny such public
use of them in the service of God, are yet content to employ them to your own
private use and benefit as by study in the library, etc.

Your fifth example is, that Carolus magnus when he had conquered Saxony, did
the like to the Idolies of Maydenburgh and Mars mount. I answer. 1. Cranzius
the popish writer whom you allege for these things is of such authority,
that for many matters the golden legend of lies deserves as much credit as he:
He tells Cranzius VVandalia lib. 5. c. 41.
of strange apparitious at noone day made unto virgins for the receiving of
Henricus the new Bishop: and of the great miracles that cap. 42.
Evermodus the Bishop wrought in loosing the chains of prisoners by the holy
water that he sprinkled upon them: and how in the open congregation he beat
out the unmerciful devil that would not forgive the murdrer. He records how
Ibid lib 4 cap. 19.
Vicelinus the Bishop after his death appeared unto a certain woman
complaining that the alms which were given for his souls health were not
duly bestovved by Tolcardus the Priest to whom that business was committed,
etc. And that he appeared unto an other virgin, sending her to Eppo his old
friend that lamented his death, to comfort him and to signify unto him, that he
carried his tears in his garment which was upon him white as snow: And he
shows also what a miracle he Ibid. c. 20
wrought upon a blind woman unto whom he appeared in a dream and restored her
sight by printing the sign of the cross upon her eyes, etc. He Saxoniae lib.
2. c. 26.
records how Carolus magnus having begun to build a Church at Elize, and that
dying his Son Lodowick succeeded him, who riding a hunting on a certain
day, and hearing Mass in the field, his chaplain left the sacred relics
behind him, to wit, some of the milk of S. Mary, and of the hairs of her head
which he had hung upon a tree: but being come back and missing the same, ran
again with have unto the tree where he left them, but being come could by no
means of any strength pluck them away from the tree. This they judged to be a
sign that Mary had chosen that place to dwell in and so they translated the
Church begun at Eltze unto this place, etc. 2. In the place Ibid. c. 1^
alleged by you, he shows that this Charles the great when he had broken
down the temple of Venus at Maydenburgh, did erect an other even in the same
place unto the honor of St. Stephen: and so destroying one Idol-temple he set
up an other. Had I alleged against you such examples and such Authors, then
had it been time for you to have called me, Esa. 8.
to the law and to the testimony.

In the sixth place you come from Emperors and Princes unto Bishops, destroying
Idol-temples; and here you tell how Marcus Bishop of Arethusa performed the
like service in Constantines days. But (not to speak further of the authors
uncertainty that records this fact) seeing the destruction of Temples is a work
of the civil Magistrate, and by them to be executed as your self confess; how
could Marcus perform this work without usurpation of the civil sword? If you
say that leave and authority from the Prince did warrant him thus to do, then
by the like grant and warrant from Princes you may allow Bishops to be high
commissioners and civil Magistrates: And they may as well allege these
examples of Bishops for maintenance of their double authority, as you do for
the destruction of temples. But more particularly touching this example when
you come afterward to allege it the second time.

Your 7th. example is of Bishop Porphyrie that showed the like zele at Gaza. I
answer, 1. It appears out of Sigonius in the place you alledg, that Bishop
Porphyrie, was stird up unto this fact by the injuries that he received from
the gentiles which prevayled in Gaza: and therefore his zele against Idolies is
not very evident. 2, The manner of dealing which this Bishop and the Bishop of
Caesarea that joined with him, did use in Prophesying unto the empress Eudoxia
touching a Son to be borne unto her, to win her assistance in this matter,
makes their zele the more to be suspected. 3. Their Baptising of the Emperors
Child with the sign of the cross even at the same time when they got license
to destroy the Idol-temples at Gaza, does show that you may as well allege
their examples for the maintenance of other superstitions, as for the
countenancing of your opinion in this controversy.

Your 8. example is of Bishop Abdas that did the like among the Persians, upon
their temples consecrated to the fire. I answer, That Cassiodorus who relates
this fact (not in the 3. book, as you cite the same, but in the 10. book and
3. Chapter of his tripartite history) does also justly reprove the same, both
by the Act. 17.22 23. etc.
example of Paul who though he showed the error of the Athenians, yet did he
not himself destroy their altars and idols; as this bishop did without any
lawful authority: as also by the woeful eve^t that followed, namely that upon
this fact all the Churches of the Christians were destroyed and overthrown by
the Persians; and not only this; but here upon also was raised a most cruel
and extreme persecution of the Christians which continued for the space of 30
years together. And if this example ought to be followed, then ought you and
your people to come with your hammers to break our temples, but I need not to
dehort you from such folly.

Your 9. example is that John Chrysostom sent men to do the like work in
Phaenicia. Answ. 1. The men whom he sent about this work, were (as the author
alleged by you Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 29.
shows) monks inflamed with divine zele: if you had alleged this testimony
so in your authors own words, the weakness of such examples would the better
have appeared unto the readers: for thereby they might have discerned your
author commending monks, and showing the antiquity of monastical life, as
well as he shows the ruin of Temples. 2. If the example of Chrysostom be of
any worth in your eyes, we may then allege the same against your oppugning of
set forms of prayer, which he allowed in the worship of God, as appears by
the hymns and antiphones which as an other of your witnesses Socrates hist.
lib. 6. c. 8.
records) he made for the Christians to use in their feasts of the Sabath and
the Lords day at their nocturnal assemblies, etc.

Your 10th. example is that Bishop Geroldus burned to ashes, a grove which the
Sclavi had in sacred reverence. Answer. As for Helmoldus, your author that
records this story; 1. He was a popish mass priest; His name in the native
speech signifies Etymologic. Teuto^. in proprijs nominibus.
Hell-mouth, a fit memorial to show how you go from the mouth of God to Hell
mouth for testimony in this controversy; for as is his name, so is his book,
replenished with many fables, lying visions and miracles wrought by the sign
of the cross, and some of them the same that I noted before out of Cranzius,
and therefore his record is not much to be regarded; 2. He Helmod. epist. ad
canonicos Lubic.
confesses that he was the scholar of this Geroldus, his venerable Mr. and
that by his persuasion he was drawn to write this story: And therefore being so
fabulous in other parts of this writing, is yet more to be suspected of
flattery in this which he says touching his Master. 3. He was also an
ignorant historian, and erres grossly in the very lib. 1. c. 1.
entrance into his book where he writes that the Baltique sea is so called
because by a long tract it is stretched out in manner of a girdle or belt
through the Scythian regions even unto Graecia, contrary unto the testimony of
all Cosmographers and of daily experience: He is herein refuted even by
VVandaliae lib. 2. c. 17.
Cranzius him self your other witness. His skill in Geography seems to be
like unto yours, when by a like though a greater error, contrary to the
description of mappes, and contrary to the testimony of the Scriptures you do
write concerning the limits of the tribe of Isachar, that Annot. on psalm. 68.14.
it had the Philistians at one end, and the Ammonites on the other, that vexed
them: where as by Josh. 13.10. and 15.45. etc. and 19.17. etc.
conference of scriptures showing the topography and situation of the tribes,
that tribe of Isachar had neither the Philistines on the one side of their
limits nor the Ammonites on the other, neither is there any color of reason,
why the tribe of Isachar in special should be said to couch down in respect
of any vexation by the Philistines or Ammonites. Such is your ignorance of
history, when speaking of Tarsus mentioned in Act. 21.34. you call it Annot. on
psalm. 48.8.
the chief city of Cilicia in Syria; as if you should have said, London the
chief city of Middlesex, in Scotland; or Amsterdam the chief city of Holland
in France: you might as well have said that Samaria was in Galile; or Judea in
Moab, as have said that Cilicia was in Syria: not only Ptolomaeus. Geogr. lib.
5. cap. 7
Cosmographers but the holy Act. 15.23 41. Gal. 1.21
Scripture it self does often distinguish those countries one from an other. An
other the like error you commit in the same place, when speaking of that
Tarsus in Cilicia, you say: from thence they went by shipping into far
countries, Africa, India, Ophir, etc. 1. Kin. 22.48. and 10.22. For those
voyages mentioned in the book of the Kings were not from Cilicia into Ophir by
sailing through the Mediterranean Sea, as they needs must if they had gone
from Tarsus: but 1. both a firm continent was in the way to hinder their
passage, and the scripture it self 2. Chron. 20.36.
shows that the ships intended for that voyage mentioned 1. Kin. 22. were
made at Ezion geber, a city situate upon the red sea, from whence there was a
convenient passage into India. These your errors in misplacing of countries
are like unto Mr. Smyths error in misplacing of the brazen altar, and if your
reasoning therevpo^ against Mr. Smyth be sound, then may I upon the like
occasion of Helmoldus, and of your errors observe against you in your own
words, and say: Defense against Mr. Sm. page 12
God would let the reader see how you are given over to blindness of heart, in
judging spiritual things: by that blindness which is in you in discerning
carnal things, and which are set before all men's eyes. As for Geroldus the
popish Bishop, whose example you object unto me: 1. It does not agree with that
which you propounded to show at the beginning viz. the examples of Christian
Princes and of Bishops having leave from such: for where does it appear that
he had such leave to do this thing? It does rather appear, to be a sudden
motion, and an occasional thing falling out in his journey, when the story
shows that Helmold. Chron. Slavor. lib. 1. c. 84.
meeting with such a grove in his way he lept from his horse, and fell upon
that work exhorting others to follow him. 2. The destruction of such a Grove
is not to be matched with the destruction of our temples, in respect of the
necessary use whereunto they may be employed in the service of God, so as those
trees and hedges could not. 3, It is noted of this Geroldus, that he Cranzius
VVandal. lib. 4. c. 21.
went to Room to be consecrated and made Bishop by the Pope; and though in the
way the thieves met him and smote and wounded him in the forehead, yet would
not that Balam turn back or desist from his journey: that he Ibid. c. 26
Helmold. vbi supra.
also consecrated a Church in Oldenburgh unto the honor of St. John Baptist,
etc. Thus you see that your Cousin Mr. John Ains. might have alleged the
example of this Geroldus against yourself for the defense of all popery, even
as you do against us for the destruction of our temples.

Your 11th example is that Wighertas Bishop of Mersburgh did likewise: If he
did but likewise, then the like answer may serve for this, that was given unto
the former examples. Touching this popish Wigbert, it is Magdeb. centur. 11.
cap. 10. col. 602.
recorded indeed that he did destroy a certain grove consecrate unto the Idol
Zuttiber, and reduced it unto a plain: but it is withal recorded that he did
in the same place build a Chapel unto an other Idol, namely unto St. Roman.
And where he had remooved the heathnish Idolatry, even in the same place he set
up popish Idolatry. Are we to be guided by such examples?

Your 12th. Example is that Vnwannus of Ha^burgh cut down all the idolatrous
groves in his diocese. I answer, 1. It is to be observed how you omit the
title of this Vnwannus, being Archbishop of Hamburgh, as your author in the
Cranz. metrop. l. 4 c. 1.
place alleged by you does acknowledge: So before you omitted the title of
Chrysostom being Archbish. of Constantinople: Those that were but Bishops you
give all them their titles: but not so to either of the Archbishops. It seems
you thought that so long as any were called Bishops, the reader might conceave
they were no usurping Bishops: and so have regarded their examples the more,
that name being given by the holy Ghost unto his ministers: but if you had
named Archbishops, the reader might have conceaved the weakness of their
examples, serving as well to stablish the primacy of Archbishops, as to destroy
temples 2, It is further to be observed, that this Vnwannus was not only an
Archbishop but also a popish Archbishop, that Ibidem.
received his pall of Pope Benedict the 8t. that he built chapels in honor of
Saints, as that of S. Vitus at Breme. The reader that considers this, might
think that his example in destroying temples is of less weight, when he gave so
foul an example for building Idolatrous temples. 3, even that which Vnwannus
did in cutting down groves is against yourself: for of the groves he made
Churches: Ibidem.
ex lucis fecit ecclesias renovari, etc. This had been unlawful in the time of
the law: The groves of the Canaanites might not be converted unto such use. If
this example of the Archbishop may be imitated, then is the commandment in
Deuteronomy. 12. a ceremonial and temporary ordinance, not binding us in these times.

Your 13th. Example is, that in Lituania, the temples and Altars of Idols were
demolished. According to your own authors the thing was done on this manner:
Cromerus de orig. and rebusgestis polonoru^ lib. 14.
Iagello an heathen King of Lituania seeking to obtain Heduigis Queen of
Poland for his wife, does promise as a condition of the marriage, that his whole
country shall become Christians. Hereupon lib. 15.
his people being hardly drawn unto it: he is Baptized and named Wladislaus:
this honor is vouchsafed only to him and to his nobles: because it was
counted too great a labor to baptize the common people, therefore they standing
by great troops and companies together in stead of baptising were sprinkled
with holy water: and but one name given to each company as well of men as
women: then by the Kings commandment they destroy the Temple, Altar and oracle
at vilna: the grove is cut down and the living Serpents which they worshipped
were killed: a new Church is built at Vilna, and is consecrated to the memory
of S. Stanislaus by Bozentas Archbishop of Cracow: then Andreas vassil^ a
polonian of the order of the Franciscanes is instituted Bishop at vilna: And
the King sends an Ambassador unto pope Urban to promise obedience unto him.
Your other Alexand. Guagninus in Sarmatiae Euroropeae descript.
Author adds further, that there were thirty thousand of the Lituanians
Baptized in one day, and this of the polonian Priests which were ignorant of
the Lituanian tongue: He In Polonoru^ regu^ descript.
says also: Heduigis was first betrothed unto Vilelmus Duke of Austria her
father being alive: that these two were joined in Marriage also by the nobles of
Pola^d in the castle of Cracow: but immediately again so soon as the
Lituanian Kings coming was known, they expel the Duke, violate the marriage
and urge the Queen against her mind to mary with the King. This is the worthy
example that you propound unto us. From this barbarous adulterer and Idolaters
conscience you will inform and illuminate the eyes and consciences of all
faithful ministers and people at this day: from the rude and blind practice
of these whom by your own profession you cannot esteem to be otherwise then a
false Church, you insult against all the Churches of Christ: And of these
mungrilles, half heathens, and half Papists you say of them with the rest, that
all these bear witness to the true meaning of Gods law written in their
hearts other wise then in ours, etc.

Your last example is, And now of late the Christians in France ( as at Rochel)
ruinated the popish temples there. I answer, 1. Had you noted any Chronicle or
good writers where this act is particularly described, with the circumstances
and occasion hereof, the reader might thereby have had satisfaction touching
the same, which now your writing does not afford. 2, As for ruinating some
popish temples, it is that which has also been practiced in diverse other
countries, and even in this city as that of the Minorites, etc. Yet this
hinders not but that they have the true meaning of Gods law written in their
hearts otherwise then in yours that require all such of necessity to be
destroyed, and do also separate from the worship of God in all such places: As
Israel was to destroy Josh. 6. and 7. chapter
Jericho the first city of Canaan which they came unto after they passed
Jorden; and to keep others for their use: so many Christians in the beginning
of the reformation to show their detestation of popery destroyed some popish
temples, and yet reserved the rest for their necessary use in the service of
God. 3. As for them of Rochel in particular; the ancientest ministers of the
French Church in this city, as they have testified unto me, do not know,
neither can learn by any enquiry of their people, some whereof have formerly
been members of that particular Church of Rochel, that ever the Christians
there did make any question or scruple of worshipping God with the rest of
their brethren in any popish temples being once purged from their Idolatry. And
therefore until you bring better evidence of that which you write, we have
reason to hold the example of Rochel for our selves against you. 4. Upon
further enquiry, I am Anno 1618. Iun. 8.
now of late advertised by letters from Monsieur Loumeau a reverend minister of
the Church of Rochel; that the ruinating of some temples there was done not
because they thought it unlawful to use them, but least the Papists should
have them; that some of them were broken down in respect of civil necessity,
because they were of importance for fortification in their wars: that at the
same time when they ruinated some, yet they reserved others for their use in
the worship of God; as namely, a little temple of the Nonnes, wherein they
preached long time after others were destroyed: and also that of the Convent of
the Augustines, wherein (as he testifyeth) they do still preach unto this day.
This being so, every one may plainly see how you abuse and pervert the
examples of the Christians in the Reformed Churches as though they were
witnesses for you and a bettours of your folly. If a fear of pollution in the
use of them had caused them to pluck them down: then might their consciences
have been polluted with the use of those two which they reserved, as well as
with the rest. 5. The Acta Colloquij Mo^pelgart. page 398.
testimony of Beza is, that the overthrow of temples in France was done
tumultuously in the civil wars, not according to knowledge, that it was not
approved by their confession and doctrine: That he himself could be a witness
thereof, being present at the wars from the beginning to the end: That he and
his fellow ministers did often admonish the Princes and captains: and did
labor to hinder those enterprises which fell out in that disorder, but could
not. You might as well plead that private houses and palaces of Papists were
to be destroyed, because the unruly Soldiers in the heat of war, did sometimes
destroy them also. Again for the overthrow of them in some other places, Beza
Respo^s. Theod. Be. ad acta colloq. Mo^p. part. 2. these. 1.
avoucheth upon his own knowledge and the testimony of the cities, that they
were constreyned to do it for their safety against the violatours of public
peace, the situation of the temples necessarily requiring the same. And this is
the same reason that Mr. Loumeau alleged before, as one cause of their
practice in Rochel. And while they were guided by such civil respects, this
argues no scruple of conscience in the use of such temples. 6. Suppose that
this one Church of Rochel did condemn our use of temples, which you are not
like to prove; yet the other Churches in France, and that of Geneva also, (as
many in this city upon their own knowledge do testify) do still keep the
temples formerly abused unto popery, for their necessary use in the service of
God. And Rochel being laid in the balance against the rest would be too light,
and weak to abolish the necessary use which we have of our temples.

Section. 5.
Hen. Ains.
Unto the Scriptures Act 17 and 19. by us alleged: you say as before, that
those things were of no necessary use. Whereto I answer, that as there is no
necessary use of this your reason, so were it stronger then it is, yet would it
not break the force of our argument, which is in regard that they are
nourishments of superstition, and therefore to be abolished. For will you for
your own proffit and use, nourish superstition and Idolatry? Have you no
otherweise learned the Law of God? How unlike are you herein to Marcus Bishop
of Arethusia, Sozom. l. 5. Theodoret l. 3.
who having at the Commandment of Constantine pulled down a temple of Idols,
and being after accused by the Arethusians to Julian for a traitor: he was
miserably tortured, to enforce him either to build the temple again, or to pay
for the building: which he refusing, they promised to forgive him half. After
that, denying but a small sum, he said, It is great wickedness to give a half
penny in case of impiety, as if a man should bestow the whole. He for this is
registered with honor in your own Acts and Momuments p. 89. edit. Ao. 1610.
book of Martyrs. How much better then you, did the Emperor Theodosius, who
when Constantine had shut up certain Idol temples, but destroyed them not: and
after, Julian opened and restored them: and others after him, shut them up: and
others again opened them: Theodosius coming to the crown theodoret l. 5. c.
20. and 37.
destroyed them utterly, that no footsteps of the ancient error might appear
to posterity. And had you minded the scripture which we cite, you might see
how the Apostle calls them their Devotions (Sebasmata) Act. 17.23. which word
being used by him elsewhere 2 these. 2.4
in his Prophecy of the Pope should teach us to abhor his temples, Altars,
images, etc. which are his Sebasmata or Devotions in like manner, and not only
unnecessary, but hurtful to the world. And could not the Christians which
burned their books of curious arts, Act. 19.19
whose price was 50000. pieces of Silver, have put them to some other necessary
use then for the fire? Although there were many evil things in them, yet do
you not think there were some good things also? whereof (when the other were put
out) much profit, and some good use might have been made. Our generation is
wiser, that can refine the Popes Mass book, and make thereof a Communion book,
not for civil use only, but for the highest spiritual use, to worship God
thereby: and so having some what purged his temples, they put them to two of the
4. religious uses which Antichrist made them for: so greatly do they esteem of
his Devotions.

Answer.
Ioh. Pa.
HEre in the first place to show that there is no proffit of this distinction
of necessary use, you ask whether we will for our own proffit and use,
nourish superstition and Idolatry; whether we have no otherwise learned the law
of God, etc. I answer, 1. We do not for our own proffit break the law of
God; but God for our proffit has changed his own law: And they that do deny
this, do deny the proffit which comes by the death of Christ, and dishonor his
merit. The benefit of Christ vouch safed us herein is exceeding great and
unspeakable: Through his death we come more fully to enjoy the fullnes of the
earth: The meats which before were Levit. 11.
unclean, are now 1. Tim. 4.4.
sanctified for our use: and millions of treasure are gained yearly hereby:
Again, the clean beasts and meats, which were of old in Numb. 28 1. Kin. 3.4
and 8.5.
great abundance consumed in sacrifice, by thousands at once some time, are now
given wholly unto us: and the benefit redounding hence every year is not to be
reckoned: The unspeakable cost of traveling from all places unto the temple of
the Lord is now Ioh. 4.21.
taken away, etc. Yea besides this, the liberty of enjoying things abused unto
idolatry and defiled by Idolaters is now granted unto us; as the Deuteronomy. 13.
cities, houses, cattle and goods of Idolatrous apostates: the meats
sacrificed unto Idols: and consequently in like manner the holy places and
temples of Idolaters, which before were unlawful are now granted unto us: for
he that has now given us his own Son to die for us, Ro^. 8.32.
how shall he not with him give us all things also: now 1. Cor. 3.21.22.23.
all things are ours; and 1. Tim. 4 4.
nothing to be denied us, or refused by us. Those that with the Jews do
oppugn this truth and count it a carnal doctrine are such as under pretext of
mainteyning the law, do pervert the Gospel in a special point thereof. Among
all the snares and entisements drawing unto superstition and Idolatry and
nourishing the same, there were none more strong and effectual, then the Deuteronomy.
7.3.4. 1. Kin. 11.4.
having of Idolatrous wives and husbands in so much that God commanded the
Ezra. 10.3
putting away of such even after marriage: whereas now since the death of
Christ, for the benefit and commodity of Christian families, God 1. Cor.
7.12.13. etc.
does not require such marriages to be dissolved being once made: And this is an
evident proof that God has now otherwise determined and declared his meaning
touching the occasions of superstition in case of necessary use, then he had
under the law. 2. Even your Maimony, whose expositions you do so often commend
unto us, whom you note to be so precise in avoiding things polluted with
Idolatry, is not yet so precise in denying this exception of necessary use, as
you yourself are. For he having first Maim. in Misn. in Abodah zarah cap. 11.
sec. 1.
showed that it is unlawful to follow the heathens in wearing their kind of
apparel and in cutting the hair after their manner, does yet thus interpret
himself: ibid. sec. 3
An Israelite that is a courtier and has necessity of sitting before the
Kings of the gentiles; if it be a dishonor unto him that he is not like unto
them: behold, it is then lawful for him to put on their apparel, and to be
shaved according to the manner that they use. Are not you more then Iewishly
ceremonious in this point, which deny that liberty unto Christians, which the
Jews permit? 3. But you do elsewhere contradict yourselves herein, for whereas
you grant it to be Inquiry of Th. wh. p. 56. 57.
lawful to pray and preach in Idol-temples, as there might be occasion, if
they were made prisons and you committed thither: it follows hereupon, that
either you must confess the commandment in Deuteronomy. 12.2. as it is expounded by
you against the worship of God in Idol-temples, to be a ceremonial
commandment, in that you will have it give place unto that necessity which the
prison brings with it, and so yield the praying, preaching and worshipping of
God to be lavvfull in that place, which otherwise you condemn; or else you
must grant that the moral law itself (if that commandment of abolishing
Idol-temples be such) does also give place unto necessity; and consequently
that if you were in prison, it should also be lawful for you in such a strait
and necessity to swear, forswear, lie, steal, kill and use treachery, or
break any other commandment of the moral Law, as well as this of worshipping
God in Idol-temples. Either therefore confess your fault in denying this
commandment to be ceremonial, or else show us your dispensation to break one
commandment of the moral law rather then an other, when you come into prison.
In the mean time we hold that he which for his commodity, or necessity Iam.
2.10. Mat. 5.19.
breaks one of the least of the moral commandments and teaches men so, is
guilty of all, and shall be called least in the Kingdom of heaven.

In the next place you allege the example of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa who
endured great torture rather then to give one half penny toward the building of
an Idol-temple: who for this is registered with honor in our own book of
Martyrs; and you ask, how unlike I am to him. I answer, 1. It is not recorded
that he refused to worship God in such a place purged from Idolatry; but that
he would not help forward the building of such a place, when he knew it should
be employed to the service of Idols: neither am I herein unlike unto him, for I
hold it to be the duty of a Christian man rather to die then to give any thing
for the furtherance of Idolatry, though it were but a half penny. 2, if the
example of this one Martyr be worthy to be regarded, how much more the rest,
which in so great a number like a cloud of witnesses or Martyrs, are registered
in our book of Martyrs, al bearing witness against you touching the use of
temples formerly abused unto Idolatry in England and other places? How unlike
are you unto them all? do they not all condemn your schisming from the
churches of Christ upon such pretenses? do they not all show the meaning of
Gods law to be written in their hearts otherwise then in yours? 3, for yourself
in special, I may rather ask you and say: how unlike are you unto this
constant and patient Martyr, he enduring so much for his religion, and you so
often changing your religion, and stayning your self so many times with
apostasy, as has been page 91
showed before. Yet you tell us, Preface to confess. of faith edit. Ao. 1596.
you trust, that God will one day raise up an other John fox to gather and
compile the Acts and monuments of his later martyrs, for the view of posterity,
etc. when this your own book of martyrs shall be compiled and published, what
place or memorial can you expect therein (if things be faithfully registered)
but such as D. Perne has in our book of Martyrs for his often turning of his
coat?

Moreover, whereas you do again repeat the example of Theodosius, whereunto I
have already given answer in the former section; I do yet further answer, that
your allegation that he utterly destroyed the Idol-temples, is contradicted and
refuted even by the other examples cited by your self: for if after this, the
Idol temples at Gaza, at Carthage and in Phaenicia were destroyed under the
reign of Arcadius and Honorius which succeeded and followed Theodosius in the
empire, then were they not utterly destroyed by that Theodosius of whom
Theodoret speaks, in the places by you alleged. As it is a sure argument that
all the high places were not utterly destroyed in the days of Asa, because
Iehosaphat, which came after him, destroyed 2. Chron. 17.6.
some, that remained unto his time: even so it is a sure token that all the
Idol temples were not utterly destroyed in the days of Theodosius, whiles
according to your own example others were destroyed in the times succeeding by
Iovius and Gaudentius, by Porphyrie and by Chrysostom with his monks.

Further, to prove our temples unnecessary, you plead that the Apostle calls
them their devotions (Sebasmata) Act. 17.23. which word being elsewhere used by
him in his Prophecy of the Pope should teach us to abhor his temples, etc.
Answer. 1, though Paul mention the Devotions or Sebasmata of the Athenians Act.
17. yet does it not follow that he speaks of their temples, themselves, for he
might see their devotions though he saw not their temples: the Ier. 11.13
manner of Idolaters being to have their Altars and images in streets, and
market places, and by the way-sides and this many times without any houses or
temples built over them. If the open places where such devotions were
publicly performed, should be abolished as unnecessary, then not only houses
and temples but streets and market places were in like manner also to be
destroyed and made desolate, for as much as they also had been places to
nourish superstition 2, as for the word Sebasma used again 2. These. 2.4. in a
prophecy of the Pope, that may well be expounded of the Majesty and honorable
estate of Kings and Emperors, above whom the Pope exalts himself and thereby
is known to be Antichrist; the Sebastos and Sebaste. Act. 25.21 25. and. 27.1
like words being elsewhere again used to express the same dignity: yet does
not the attributing of this word unto Princes prove them to be of no necessary
use. If your reasoning were sound, the Anabaptists by the like argument might
abolish and condemn the estate of emperors and Kings because of these titles
given unto them.

Lastly, you reason thus; could not the Christians which burned their books of
curious arts, whose Act. 19.19
price was 50000. pieces of silver, have put them to some other necessary use
then for the fire? Although there were many evil things in them, yet do you
not think, that there were some good things also? whereof (when the other were
put out) much proffit, and some good use might have been made, etc. Answer. 1,
what you or I may think and conjecture touching some good things being in those
books that were burned at Ephesus, it skilles not much: If you could prove
that such good things were in them, your objection or instance might then have
had the greater color to deceave a simple reader. 2, suppose there were some
good things in them, whereof much proffit and some good use might have been
made, then I say that the evil things being put out, (which you also admit by
suppositio^) we are not absolutely bound at al times to abolish such books but
may keep them for that good use which may be reaped thereby: neither does that
example Act. 19.19 bind us to the contrary; for if Bellarm. repe^ting of his
Idolatrous studies, and you of your schismatical studies, should in a 2. Cor.
7.11.
holy reve^ge and detestatio^ of your errors freely burn your deceitful
books for a sacrifice unto the Lord as 2. Sa^. 23.16.17.
David powered out the water unto the Lord which he had longed for: yet this
hinders not but that others might lawfuly retain the same books of yours for
the co^victio^ of such as had not repented of your errors. The books of
Bellarmine of Becanus, of Vorstius have been of late justly burned by diverse
Christian Princes, and yet some books of the same kind are justly retained by
others for some good use that may be made of them. 3, if Idolatrous books and
such as are of curious arts may not be retained for some good use of them, when
the evil things are put out: then how guilty are you that reteyne such books
and that for religious use even whiles the evil things are not put out of
them: This your use of such books appears in the manifold testimonies which
you bring and allege out of them. 4, by this your reteyning and reading of
Idolatrous books you do plainly condemn and overthrow yourself in this
question of temples: for seeing Idolatrous books are strong nourishments of
Idolatry unto many, yea far more effectual thereunto then are any shapes of
Idolatrous buildings; if you can still allow the keeping and using of such
books, while the evil things are not put out, how partial are you that will
not allow the keeping of temples abused unto Idolatry, even when the images,
Altars and Idolatrous worship are put out of them? And you do yet further
condemn yourself herein, because in expounding the decalogue you make Annot.
on Exo. 20.5.
the reading of Idolatrous books to be a breach of the second commandment as
well as building of temples unto Idols. Now the breach of the second
commandment is simply a sin: and the building of a temple unto Idols is an
heinous sin though the reteyning of them when they are converted to the true
worship of God be not so. Thus by your practice contrary to your doctrine, you
streyne out a Gnat and swallow a Camel, in dispensing with the use of
Idolatrous books, while you condemn the use of our temples. How can you blame
the Magistrates for not using their power to abolish our temples; whiles
yourself having power to abolish some Idolatrous books, do yet keep them for
your use and refuse to burn them? That which you say of a communion book is be
side the present question: your vnreverent speeches and blasphemies touching
the same, notwithstanding any faults therein, may be showed in due time.

Section. 6.
Hen. Ains.
But you find (you say) an idolatrous place converted unto the service of God,
Act. 19.9.10. the school of Tyrannus, being as the rest of the hethenish
schools, the nurseries of superstition, etc. Whereto I answer: First you barely
affirm and prove not that it was an hethenish school: for there might be a
Jews school in Ephesus, as well as there was a Jews Act. 19.8.
synagogue: and by the Hebrews canons, they were Maimony in thalmud thorah. c.
2.
bound to have schools in every city and in every country, as well as
synagogues. Neither does the Schoolmaisters Greek name Tyrannus hinder, but he
might be a Jew: for in Romans 16. Jews had names both Greek and Latin: yea
Turnus or Turannus is a name mentioned of the Hebrew doctors, as is the Greek
name School also. And Tyrannus might favor the truth, (as did Crispus and
Sosthenes Act. 18.8.17.
rulers of the synagogue) when others blasphemed it. Secondly, if it were an
hethenish school as you say, yet I deny that it was an Idolie, or place devote
to destruction by the law in Deuteronomy. 12. or any other. For God never commanded
that hethenish schools, (wherein humane arts and Philosophy were taught,
though idolatry with them) should be destroyed, any more then other civil
houses. And this is called the school of Tyrannus a man, and not the school
of Jupiter, Apollo, or any hethen God or Goddess, as the temples had their
names Act. 19.27
of such. Daniel also and his brethren, (who strictly Dan. 1. verse. 8.
kept Moses ordinances, refused not verse. 4. etc.
the learning and tongue of the Chaldeans, among whom idolatry was taught, as
among other hethens Neither was there any such conversion of this school to
the service of God, as you mention: for Paul disputed daily in the school, and
turned it not from a school to a Christian synagogue, but it continued a
school still. By which (if you apply it to an Idolie) you may conclude that
Idol-temples may be used unto the service of God, whiles the idol-service is
continued also in them. Moreover it appears by the 10. verse that both Jews
and Greeks heard Paul there disputing as they Act. 18.4.
had done in the synagogues; but the Jews hold it unlawful to come into an
Idol temple, and they were under Moses polity (as while are you spoke) until
they were converted to Christ. Finally in ages following, Christians who
altogether refused communion with the the hethens in their Idolies, and
sacrifices: yet used sometimes the hethenish schools: and were by Julian the
Emperor Theodoret. l. 3. c. 8. Sozom. l. 5. c. 18.
forbidden both their schools and their books: of malice, because he would not
have them learned. As for Epimenides the Cretian Prophet, or any Philosopher,
Poet or Priest, teaching with humanity other curious arts or idolatie: it
proves not that either Idolies should be let stand, or that other should be
pulled down: neither does the equity of Gods law extend so far. For such
houses, (though idol Priests dwelt in them, and taught their idolatry
everyday) were not nourishments of superstition, but only they that dwelt in
them. Whereas these idol-temples of Antichrist, in themselves, and in all the
parts and proportion of them, are idolatrous, and causes of syn to many. Even
as on the contrary, Gods temple in Israel was a nourishment of true religion:
but the dwelling houses of the Priests and people, not so. And if Paul had
holden it lawful to use idol-temples, as you think you may: why took he not
occasion to go into Dianaes Act. 19.27
temple in Ephesus, as well as into Tyrannus school there? seeing it was lawful
for Christians to go into such temples if they would, as some 1. Cor. 8.10.
in Corinth did. It is not found that there or in any other city where Paul or
any other of the Apostles came, they ever went to preach in any such place: who
yet took all occasions to preach to the gentiles, whersoever they might
lawfully. Unto the Jews, Paul became a Jew: that he might gain them: and
usually therefore went into their temples and synagogues, to preach unto them:
unto the gentiles also, which were without law, he became 1. Cor. 9.20.21.
as without law, that he might gain them: yet we never see him to preach in
any of their temples or Idolies: though they were so common as it is recorded
they had Prudent. l. 1. contr. Symmachum.
as many temples of Gods in Rome, as there were sepulchers of noble men in the
city.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
IN your first answer unto that which I said touching the school of Tyrannus
converted unto the service of God, there are diverse things to be considered:
first, though-yow say I barely affirm and prove not that it was an hethenish
school, yet it seems the very recital and naming of the words of the
Scripture, viz. of the school of Tyrannus was more then a bare affirmation,
even by your own confession in this first answer, for what needed you to
preoccupate the objection that might arise from the greek names of Tyrannus and
his School, if there were not some appearance of a probable argument to be
taken from them? It is an idle thing to prevent objections, where there is no
danger of them.

Secondly, whereas you say that I affirm it was a hethenish school, this is
also something more then you might justly affirm: for suppose that I took it
to be a Jewish school, yet might I say as much as I did, viz. It being as the
rest of the hethenish schools, etc. For both the Ephesians. 2.3.
like phrase is used by the Scriptures, when speech is of the Jews to compare
them with the rest of the gentiles, and that the Jewish Schools were nurseries
of superstition as well as the gentiles it may appear by that which follows
hereafter.

Thirdly, though there might be (as you object) a Jewish school in Ephesus, as
there was a Jews Synagogue, yet this hinders not, but Tyrannus his school
might be a hethenish school; unless you could show that there was but one
school in that city.

Fourthly, you run for help unto the great Eagle of the Jews (as he is called)
and fly upon his wings, when you tell us in the name of your doctor Maimony,
that by the Hebrew canons they were bound to have schools in every city and
in every country, as well as synagogues. Hereunto I answer, 1. you honor these
infidel Rabbines too much, when you give unto their writings the title of
Hebrew canons, which is a name more fit and agreeable to the canonical
scriptures of the old Testament, unto Moses and the Prophets containing the
Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.16.
canon or rule of our faith and obedience, even as the greek canons may
likewise denote the scriptures of the new Testament. The name of the holy
scriptures should not be given to superstitious writings, to Jewish fables, and
to legends of lies: And besides, these Thalmudicall canons are but carnal
weapons; think not with such canons and ordinance to batter down our temples.
2. These canons, are many of them the inventions of later Jews long after
Paul's times, and you can not show that the Jews in the apostles days were
governed by them, how then will you apply this canon alleged by you unto the
question of fact betwixt us? 3. Maimony in the In Thalmud thorah, c. 2.
place alleged recording the canon you speak of, says that the city which had
not a school Mr. in the same, should be anathematized, or cursed, and if they
did not repent, that city should be destroyed and wasted: And therefore suppose
this canon had been more ancient then the Apostles, yet could it not have been
executed in Ephesus the city that we speak of: the cities of the gentiles that
had some Jews dwelling among them, yea or the cities of the Jews in their
own land being under the dominion of the Romans were not subject unto such
canons: would the Romans endure that the cities under their government should
be wasted and made desolate upon such pretenses? 4, Touching these canons also
the Rabbines do contradict one an other: for R. Iaakob in Lib. Iore degnah,
tract. Thalmud thorah. signo. 245.
Arba Turim shows that R. Asher differs from Maimony in such manner touching
the number of scholars and schoolemaisters to be employed about them in each
city, that if we were as credulous as the Jews in regarding these forged
canons yet could we have no certainty therein. 5. Suppose there were such
ancient canons binding the Jews in Ephesus to have a school among them, yet
that does not hinder but that the school of Tyrannus might be a hethenish
school also. 6. If you will have the testimonies of men to be produced in
these controversies, are we not much more to regard the writings of learned
Christians, then of these impious Jews, infamous as well for their fables, as
for their infidelity and hatred of Christ? And the Magdeburgenses, cent. 1. l.
2. cap. 7. de scholis. col. 516.
Christian writers of the Ecclesiastical history do expressly note this place
to have been an hethenish School.

Fifthly, whereas you say; Neither does the School-maisters Greek name Tyrannus
hinder, but he might be a Jew, etc. I answer, 1. Though I deny not but some
Jews had Greek names, as diverse of the Apostles themselves besides sundry
others: yet considering that ordinarily Jews were called by Hebrew names and
Greeks by Greek names, and so men of other nations likewise, if things be
equally weighed [caeteris paribus,] when there is no other particular
testimony or determination touching any person to show what nation he is of,
as there is not here for Tyrannus: then in all reason the name of such a man
should lead us unto such a nation where his name is most ordinarily used: as
the name of Pharaoh unto an Egyptian: the name of Agag to an Amalekite: and the
name of Tyrannus to a Greek. Yea thus the holy Ghost purposely vset to
distinguish and point out unto us special countries, times, places and offices
of men by using a word of different language in those books of holy scripture
which were written in an other tongue: as for example, Esaias writing in Hebrew
touching the ruin of Babel uses a Madhebah Esa. 14 4.
Chaldaean word to signify the overthrow of the Chaldaean Monarchy; Jeremy in
his Hebrew Prophecy against Babel uses a Sheshach Ier. 25.26. and 51.41.
Babylonian word to note the very time of their fall, as they should be in the
mids of their feasting: The Apostle writing in Greek of the judgment hall
where Christ was condemned uses a Praetoriu^ Ioh. 18.28
Roman or latin word showing the Roman authority that was exercised in that
place: and so the Evangelist in his Greek story uses a Centurio^ Mark.
15.39.44 45.
Roman word for a Roman officer: And so the Syriaque Translatout in this
place Act. 19.9 use the Greek word for a School, all the rest being Syriaque
might hereby most fitly note unto us a Greek school of the gentiles: as the
Greek name of Tyrannus to show a Greek Schoolemaister: there being no other
proof to the contrary, to praeponderate this apparent reason. 2, it is also a
great uncertainty and not proved of you by any instance, when as you affirm,
that in Romans 16. Jews had names both Greek and Latin: As for Aquila the Jew,
verse. 3. Drusius Praeteritoru^ lib. 5. in Act. 18.2
shows you how his name comes plainly and directly from an usual Hebrew
word: As for the kinsmen of Paul, mentioned verse. 7.11.21. it is uncertain
whether they were Jews or proselytes, which might be his kinsmen though they
were Romans or Greeks: As for any other mentioned in that place you have
less color to affirm that they were Jews having Greek and Latin names. 3,
you say that Turnus or Tyrannus is a name mentioned of the Hebrew doctors: but
you do not show that he is mentioned as a Jew: the Rabbines mention the names
of sundry gentiles in their writings: and Turnus Rophus or Rufus that is
mentioned in the In Sanhedrin. c. 7. fol. 65. and in Babha bathra, c. 1. fol.
10.
Thalmud, is not said to be a Jew: Such kind of their mentioning this name is
against you, and leads us to think Tyrannus should be a gentile rather then a
Jew: but if an other Tyrannus in any Rabbine be nominated for a Jew, yet this
hinders not but this Tyrannus in Act. 19. should rather be taken for a gentile,
there being no determination of his person contrary to his name, ordinarily
given to a Greek. 4, you allege, that Tyrannus might favor the truth as well
as Crispus and Sosthenes rulers of the synagogue: but what mean you by this
comparison? whether Crispus and Sosthenes were Jews or proselytes it is
uncertain, that Tyrannus whether Jew or ge^tile might favor the truth, we
doubt not: but how this should confirm your opinion, it appears not.

In your second answer touching the school of Tyrannus, first you say, if it
were an hethenish school, yet you deny that it was an Idolie, or place devote
to destruction by the law in Deuteronomy. 12, etc. But herein you do first contradict
yourself: for page 165.
before in your reply unto the sixth answer which I gave unto your first
reason, you said and urged this, that the Law speaks of all places where in
the nations served their gods: so that though they were not for sacrifice, but
for prayer or other like use they were to be pulled down. Now, that the
hethenish Gods were served in these Idolatrous schools, by schoolemaisters it
is manifest out of that Tertullia^. de Idololat. cap. 10.
Author whom yourself sometime produce for a witness, who shows that the
Schoolemaisters did preach the Gods of the nations and declare their names,
their genealogies, fables and other honorable ornaments and observe their
feasts, etc. that the first schoole-hyre of the new scholar was consecrated to
the name and honor of Minerva. That Idolothyte was called Minerval. This
Idol-service of the heathnish schools he shows at large as by Catechizing
touching Idolles, so by diverse other services. And therefore the Gods of the
nations being served there, it follows by your former grant contrary to this
later denial that such schools ought to be pulled down as places devote
unto destruction. 2. You do here seem to make an Idolie or place devote to
destruction to be the same thing, but this error is page 220. 221.
before reproved: And when you labor to show that hethenish schools are not
to be pulled down; you confirm that which I say in my argument against you.

Secondly, you say, this is called the school of Tyrannus a man and not the
school of Jupiter, Apollo or any hethen God, etc. Answer. 1. It is
Idol-service by your own grant from Deuteronomy. 12. that makes a place subject to
destruction; and therefore the want of an Idol name could not in such case save
or deliver the polluted place from destruction. 2, as Dan. 6.7. Act. 14.11.
Rev. 13.4.
Idolaters have been ready to perform divine worship unto living men many
ways: so also by this that they have built temples, altars, images to their
honor: Thus, to omit many other examples that might be noted, one of your own
Authors whom yourself allege for your witness Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. lib.
15. c. 12.13.
does testify of Herod, that he built not only a city, but a temple unto
Caesar, to the worship and honor of his name: And according to your reasoning,
such Idolies might be thus excused, that these were called the temples of
Caesar a man, and not the temple of Jupiter, Apollo, etc.

Thirdly, you say, Daniel also and his brethren (who strictly kept Moses
ordinances) refused not the learning and tongue of the Chaldeans, among whom
Idolatry was taught, as among other hethens. I answer, 1. Daniel and his
fellows might be instructed in the learning and tongue of the Chaldeans though
they did not frequent the schools or temples where Idolatry was publicly
taught: And seeing Daniel was so careful to keep himself from pollution with
unclean meat we are bound to judge that he wanted not care to preserve his
soul from the unclean food of Idolatrous doctrines taught in their schools:
And the Dan. 1.9.
great favor which he had with their overseers may persuade that he found
favor in this point as well as in the former. 2, your R. Saadias, and R.
Abraham Abe^ Ezra, Comment. on Dan. 1.4
Jew doctors interpret this learning of the Chaldeans which Daniel refused
not, to be the vvriting and language of the Chaldeans: Now this might easily
have been learned by Daniel of some godly and faithful Jews, though he had
nothing at all to do with Chaldeans themselves: there being ordinarily enough
of one nation that can speak and write in the language of an other nation. 3,
though we grant that Daniel might learn of the Chaldeans themselves, not
only, to speak, read and write their language, but also other lawful and
liberal sciences: yet this was to be done with caution of not learning their
Idolatries and curious arts, which were Deuteronomy. 18.10. -- 14.
unlawful to be taught or learned: And this might the better be done,
considering there were so many sects among the Chaldeans, of which some
attended unto more lavvfull studies and as Strabo geograph. lib. 16.
historians write, did condemn and reject the curious arts of the rest. 4,
See what strange extremities you run into: You that condemn and forsake the
true service of God in the Reformed Churches, in any temple formerly abused
unto Idolatry, do yet here allow communion with Idolaters even in
Idol-service by hearing and listening unto Idolatrous doctrines taught in their
heathnish schools which were public Idol houses: yea you that condemn all
religious communion both public and private with the Godliest Christians in
the Church of England, and hold it unlawful to hear even a private lecture
of divinity from any minister of that Church, though no error at all should be
taught in the same, are not yet afraid to justify the hearing of a lecture of
philosophy and Idolatry mixed togather, and this from the Chaldaean Ministers
or Prophets even in Babylon it self. oh how is your conscience benumbed?

Fourthly, you say further, neither was there any such conversion of this
school to the service of God as I mention, etc. I Answer, 1. your reason to
prove that it continued a school still is insufficient: for though it be said
that Paul disputed daily in the school of Tyrannus, this kind of speech does
no more prove that it continued a school still, then the speech of the Apostle
saying of Antichrist that he 2. These. 2 4.
sits in the Temple of God, does prove that the Church of Rome does still
continue the Temple of God; do you not know that many places reteyne their old
names, though the use of them be changed, and they couverted unto other
services? your bold affirmation that it continued a school still is very
vnvvarrantable. 2. Though I affirmed not, that it ceased to be a school of
humane learning, yet is it most probable that it was no longer such a school:
for how could it conveniently serve for both uses? It is said that Paul Act.
199
disputed there and that daily: such kind of disputes might often times
require the greatest part of the day: and sometimes in Act. 28.23.
other places such exercises continued from morning to night. It is said that
Paul continued this exercise there Act. 19.10
by the space of two years so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word
of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Grecians. This continuance in the place with
such fame, could not but increase his auditors, and his employment and
consequently decrease the opportunity of employing that place unto an other
use. It is noted further what Ibid. verse. 11.12. etc
great miracles God wrought by the hand of Paul during this time, and what
confluence of people such miracles wrought, appears in other places where upon
like occasion, Luke 12.1
millions of people gathered together, and thronged to hear and see: upon such
occasion there were so Mark. 6.31.33.
many comers and goers unto Christ and his disciples, that they had no
leisure to eat bread; And when he withdrew himself into the wilderness to rest a
while, the people perceyving it, ra^ a foot thither out of all cities, and
came thither and assembled unto him, etc. And here being now the like occasion
of concurse, what reason is there to think that there should be liberty and
opportunity to keep an other school in this place, where in all appeara^ce the
time did hardly suffice for the disciples which came to be enstructed of Paul
in this school of Christianity? And this inconvenience for an other school in
this place may further be discerned of you, if according to your allegation
before, the Thalmudique canons are to be applied unto the schools in this
time; for those canons require touching the Jewish schools, that Arba Turim,
lib. Ior. dea, Tract. Thalmud thorah, signo 245. Maymony in misneh, tract.
Thalmud thorah cap. 2. sect. 2. and 3.
the school Mr. must sit and teach the children all the whole day and part of
the night, so as he may enstruct and teach them day and night; that they cease
not at all, except in the evenings of the Sabaths, and in the evenings of the
good days, in the end of those days: that on the sabaths they may not begin a
new lesson, but may cause the children to repeat that which they have learned
before, etc. That the school Mr. which lets the children rest and goes forth
or which does an other work with them, or which is idle, is altogether accursed
for doing the work of the Lord negligently, etc. How could these canons
possibly be observed, to teach children night and day, in that place, where
Paul disputed daily with such concourse of people? 3. Suppose that heathenish
schools being Idolies, and that this school being such an one, was still
retained for a school, yet does it not follow as you would infer that
Idol-Temples may be used unto the service of God, whiles the Idol-service is
continued also in them: For if we should grant unto you that it still continued
a school, yet then any reasonable man would grant unto me withal, that it was
reformed by Paul that the curious arts and Idolatry were no more taught in the
same, but only such humane learning as was of lawful and good use; and thus
the Idol-service being abolished both it and other such like places might then
lawfully be used unto the service of God. 4. Whereas you plead further that
both Jews and Greeks heard Paul there disputing, etc. that the Jews held it
unlawful to come into an Idol Temple, etc. This latter clawse is affirmed but
not confirmed by you: how prove you that the Jews being under Moses polity
held it unlawful to come into an Idol Temple, when the Idolatry was remooved,
especialy being out of Canaan, as this place in Ephesus was?

Fifthly you allege, that in ages following, Christians who altogether refused
communion with the hethens in their Idolies and sacrifices; yet used sometimes
the hethenish schools: and were by Julian the Emperor forbidden both their
schools and books; of malice, because he would not have them learned.
Hereunto I answer, 1. That hethenish schools were sometimes lawfully used by
Christians when as the hethenish Idolatry was no longer taught in them, is the
thing that I plead for; and this serves most evidently to overthrow your error
that deny Christians the use of other places abused unto Idolatry, even after
that Idolatry is no longer taught in them. 2. If Christians did sometimes use
the hethenish schools even while their Idolatry was still taught in them, this
example has no warrant from Gods word: and we see that the Christians in those
ages that you speak of, did sometimes pollute themselves with Idols, especially
with their Tertul. de corona militis cap. 3.
superstitious use of the sign of the cross, etc. Their example in using such
places as were polluted with public and ordinary Idol-service, does not
hinder but that those places are to be esteemed Idolies. 3, though Julian of
malice might forbid the hethenish schools and books unto Christians, yet
might the Lord in mercy use the malice of that Emperor as Hos. 2.6.7
a thorn to stop the way of his people and as a hedge to preserve them from
the entisements of Idolaters, to whom all ages are too prone to hearken.
whereas the Lord requires that children should be initiated or Prove. 22.6.
consecrate betimes in a good way, how dangerous a thing was it to seek their
consecration from Idolatrous school Mrs, and to suffer their children to
communicate with them in their hethenish lore, where (as one co^plaines, and
not without cause) Tertul. de Idololat. cap. 10.
the first faith is edifyed unto the devil from the beginnings of their
learning; where (as others Eusebius. Hist. lib. 9. c. 5. and 7.
record) these hethenish schoolemaisters did sometimes teach their scholars
blasphemous lessons composed of purpose against Christ Jesus. 4. Do not you
yourself note it for a transgression of the second commandment, to Annot. on
Exo 20.5.
read the books of them that be teachers of Idolatry? And is there any case of
reading such books more dangerous, then when children in their tender age shall
read them, and this in hethenish schools, among hethens, where Idolatrous
schoolemaisters shall commend the Idols and Idol service unto them? In these
your different writings, you are like unto the Iam. 3.11
fountain that sends forth sweet and bitter. 5. You Annot. on Exo. 20.5.
I tell us out of Maimony, that Idolaters have made many books of their
service, and of the works and rites of the same; that the holy blessed God has
commanded us, that we should not at all read in those books. And I may again
tell you out of Maimony from his own confession in an other place, that he
himself did not observe this comandment, but does often Maimony in Moreh
Nebuchim, chel. 3. per. 30. and 31.
allege the books of the Idol-Prophets, and repeats many fables out of the
same, and notes their Idolatrous opinions, and says: The knowledge of those
opinions and works is a great Door, through which may be drawn forth reasons
and causes of the comandments; seeing the foundation and pillar of the whole law
whereupon it rests is to blot out those opinions from the hearts of men, etc.
Thus in regard of necessary help which he alleges in this place he was
content to reteyne the use of such books which he did so peremptorily condemn
before; And except you defend your self with the like regard of necessary use,
you will also be found a transgressour of the second comandment, condemned even
of your own mouth for reading the most Idolatrous books, that are extant at
this day, as appears by your manifold allegations of them. And then further,
if you will reteyne the most Idolatrous books, in regard of necessary use, how
can you then condemn us that for necessary use do likewise reteyne our Temples
though formerly abused unto Idolatry? yea if we compare these two things
together, it is most evident, that Idolatrous books are far stronger
nourishments of superstition and entisements unto Idolatry, then are our
temples: The shape of our Churches does not deceive as do the subtle
persuasions of false teachers in their writings, continual experience
witnesses and proclaymeth the same unto us. And if your ears were not stopped
with prejudice against the truth, this alone consideration might serve to
convince your error touching our Temples.

Sixthly, as for Epimenides the Cretian Prophet or any other Philosopher, Poet
or Priest teaching with humanity other curious arts or Idolatry, etc. It is
to be observed, 1. Seeing the public teaching of Idolatry and invocation of
false Gods used by such Poets, Prophets or Priests are parts of Religious
worship and service, seeing your self confess in this writing here before
noted, as also in Counterpoy. p. 199
other of your writings that all the places where such Idolaters, served their
Gods, were to be destroyed; if your doctrine were sound it would follow
hereupon that all such hethenish schools, were to be destroyed as well as any
other Temples. 2. If your sixth argument were sound, viz, that our temples are
to be destroyed because they nourish superstition, as you say, then will it
hence follow also, that the School of Tyrannus, suppose it were a Jewish
school, was yet to have been destroyed in like manner because the Jewish
schools were Act. 23.3.4. with Act. 26.4.5. and phil. 3.5.6
nurseries of superstition, where vain inventio^s and traditions of men were
taught. And if after your example we might allege the Thalmudique canons, and
apply them as you do unto the school in question, then would it be far more
evident, that the Jewish Schools were in a high degree nurseries of
superstition; for the Rabbines showing how Children are to be taught, have this
rule of education among them, Thalmud, tractat. cethuboth, c. 4. fol. 50.
Bar schith, lemikra: Bar gnasar lemischneh: Bar teresar, leragnanitha; that
is: A child of six years, to the scripture: a child of ten, to the Thalmud:
a child of twelve, to fasting: And again, in an other place: Thalmud tract.
Kidduschim, c. 1. fol. 30.
R. Saphra, in the name of R. Iehoshua the son of Hananiah says: what is
that which is written, Thou shall rehearse them to thy Children? Read not,
Schinnantem, thou shall rehearse them, but Schillaschtem, thou shall divide
them into three parts: for ever shall a man divide his years into three parts:
a third part, to the scripture: a third part to the Gemara, (which is one maine
part of the Thalmud) a third part, to mischneh: which is the other maine part
of the Thalmud: So that by these canons and testimonies of the Rabbines the
Children in the Jewish schools were fed with the milk of superstition, and
laden with traditions in learning the Thalmud, the grand forge of
superstition: and twice so much pains they were to bestow therein, as they did
in the scriptures: And therefore according to your arguing these schools were
to be destroyed, for nourishing of superstition.

Seventhly, where as you say of the Idolatrous schools, that such houses
(though Idol-Priests dwelt in them, and taught Idolatry every day) were not
nourishments of superstition; but only they that dwelt in them. Whereas these
Idol-temples of Antichrist, in themselves, and in all the parts and proportion
of them are Idolatrous and causes of sin to many, etc. I reply, 1. If this
distinction be good, how will you prove that the Canaanitish Idol-temples were
nourishments of superstition and to be destroyed in that regard? How can you
say that they were in their shape, proportion and parts Idolatrous? The
scripture shows not the form of them, nor yet any mysteries or sacred
significations noted therein. We have no testimony touching the superstitious
frame and structure of the house of Dagon, of Baal, or of Ieroboams temples:
And therefore according to your distinction in this place they were no
nourishments of superstition, but only those that dwelt or taught Idolatry in
them so that if the Altars, images and false worship had been remooved, they
might even under Moses have been converted unto the service of the Lord. 2. I
have showed before that our temples, and especially that wherein we meet
togather, and about which our question is, does not consist of such a
superstitious structure and fabric as you pretend: yea it is manifest in
experience and manifold instances might be given of sundry private houses which
for the situation and three parts before noted by you, are liker unto Solomon's
temple then ours is: and consequently to be rather destroyed as being
idolatrous shrines. 3, if our temples in respect of their form, proportion and
parts be nourishments of superstition, and therefore to be avoided; then are you
as guilty in coming unto them as we: for whether you come for your study, or
whether some of your people come for the alms distributed there: the visible
shape and proportion of these temples in the form of their building does as
much present itself unto your eyes coming thither to serve your selves: as unto
our eyes when we come thither to serve the Lord. The outward shape of the
Church may as well affect and ensnare him that walks up and down therein for
his pleasure or proffit: as him that sits there to hear the word of God for
his edification: so that if there be any weight in this pretense, it then
lights upon your own head. 4, how know you also but that the heathnish
schools might have a superstitious structure as well as temples: and that some
mystical significations might be imputed or ascribed unto some parts thereof?
and what then shall become of your distinction, where by you imagine and feign
such a difference betwixt our temples and those public Schools? 5. That
which you speak by way of comparison with the temple touching the dwelling
houses of the Priests and people, is both unequally and unfitly applied unto
the controversy in this place, seeing I spoke here of the public places and
schools where the heathnish prophets or Poets did ordinarily and openly teach
idolatry, and not of their private houses: and besides that, it is but a bare
and false assertion which you utter of their private houses: seeing they also
may justly receive a denomination of the works performed in them whether good
or evil.

Lastly, you object, if Paul, had holden it lawful to use idol Temples as we
think we may; why took he not occasion to go into Dianaes temple in Ephesus, as
well as into Tyrannus school there, etc. I answer, 1. there is manifest reason
for this, seeing Dianaes temple was still retained for Idolatrous use, as may
be observed from there text; but that it was so with Tyrannus his school,
Act. 19.28. -- 35.
the text shows not at all; but the contrary is plain by the daily use
which it was put unto. 2. Where you say, it was lawful for Christians to go
into such temples, if they would, as some in Corinth did: though I deny not but
that in some cases of necessity this is lavvfull, yet does not your allegatio^
from 1. Cor. 8.10. prove the same; for neither, may the word Idolie there used
be restreyned unto an Idols temple, though it be commonly so translated in that
place: it signifyes a place of Idols, though there be no building over them,
though they stand in open places, in mountains, or valleys, in streets and in
market places, in bathes, etc. as oftentimes the Idols were Tertullia^. de
spectaculis. cap. 8
wont to do. In such open places might a vveak Christian in Corinth see many
sitting at an Idols table: yea he might also discern and see some sitting in a
temple without entering into the same: and further, if Paul had shevved that
some weak Christians in Corinth had entered into the very temples, yet is not a
simple narration of such a fact, any justification thereof, to prove that it
might lavvfully be done, as you seem to plead. 3. Where you say also, It is
not found that there or in any other city where Paul or any other of the
Apostles came, they ever went to preach in any such place, etc. And again, yet
we never see him to preach in any of their temples or idolies, etc. This is a
very vveak pretense, for what though it be not found; and what though we
never see it? will you reason thus negatively from the scripture? It is not
found in the scriptures, in what cities, nor so much as in what countries
some of the Apostles did preach, much less in what temples. Also it is not
found in the scriptures that ever Paul or any other of the Apostles did refuse
to preach in such places purged from Idolatry. 4. It is very probable, that
Paul did preach in the Idolie or Idol-place at Athens: for seeing as I noted
before, it was the manner of the heathens, to make their streets and market
places to be Idolies; seeing Athens is Pausanias and Xenophon, citante Beza in
Act. 17.16.
recorded to have far exceeded the other cities of Graecia in store of Idols
and Idolatry: seeing Luke Act. 17.16.17.18.23.
records how Paul passing by did see their Altars and superstition: and being
stirred in spirit, did thereupon in the market daily dispute with whomsoever he
met, as well as in the Synagogue with the Jews: we have therefore reason to
think that Paul did preach Jesus in their Idolie or market place. It seems
also that the man of God which came out of Judah did preach in the 1. Kin. 13.1.
Idolie of Bethel, (whether it was a temple or an other open place it is
uncertain,) when as he denounced the wrath of God against Icroboams Idolatry.
Thus Jeremy also Ier. 19.2. with Ier. 7.31.
preached in the vallie of Benhinnom, the Idolie of Moloch. And thus upon like
occasion and like necessary use, it may still be lawful to preach in an
Idol-temple in like manner, to protest against the Idolatry that is for the
instant practiced therein. 5. As for the testimony of Prudentius recording that
they had as many temples of Gods in Rome, as there were sepulchers of noble men
in this city, this makes against your self: for if there were so many temples
and Idolies in Room now in Prudentius his time when he wrote this (for that
which he says, he affirms for the time present) then this overthrowes your
former allegation out of Theodoret concerning all the temples destroyed under
Theodosius This record of Prudentius being given Magdeburgens. cent. 4. c. 10.
Col. 1179.1180.
after the death of Theodosius. And again if according to your plea, Paul
might not preach in any of those places where the noble men had been buried in
Rome, they being all defiled with Idolatry: then do you hereby again incur
the danger of that consequence which brings with it the destruction of private
Idolies or houses abused unto Idolatry, as well as of public temples: for
how know you that this multitude of noble men's sepulchers were all public,
and that some of them were not in their private houses?

Section. 7.
Hen. Ains.
Unto our 5. allegation, from the leprous garments compared with the Apostles
doctrine, Jude v. 23. warning us to hate even the garment spotted of the flesh,
and consequently to hate the houses of Antichrist which are not only defiled
with idols, but are idols them selves: you say nothing hereto, but take
occasion from an other place to speak again of Gods indulgence for some things
of necessary use, whereof there is enough said before, and I shall leave it unto
judgment.

You here lay sore blame upon me, for that in showing out of the pontifical the
popish manner of Ordination, I set it down with crosses, as it is printed in
that book before. You say, I erect them a new, and set them up for religious
use, etc. Whereto I answer, Howsoever you aggravate this thing, the most that
you can truly say, is that I seek to pull them down from religious use after
an unlawful manner, if so it be found: but let us weigh your reasons. The 1.
is, that a Papist seeing them, may come to bless an idol in his heart, or adore
one of them that he sees. And so (say I) when he sees or hears the name of
St. Peter, or any other St, or of a cross or crucifix, he may happily come to
bless an idol in his heart, and with his mouth too: shall they not therefore be
spoken of, or written? 2. Therefore you say, this divised kind of instruction
has no warrant from God, and so the syn comes on the instructours head. Your
reason is, for that God in his word causes not the shapes or figures of idols
to be pourtrayed, when he names Chemosh, Moloch, etc. therefore there is no
excuse left for me herein. I answer, neither does God in his word, set down any
figure of his Tabernacle, Ark, Temple, or of any man, beast, or other creature,
or mapp of any country: is it not therefore lawful in private books to
pourtray any of these? If it be, then your reason from a devised kind of
instruction without warrant from God, will be little worth in this case. But
whereas you say, that I neglecting the examples of all the Churches of Christ in
that which is good, do follow a few in that error which I would seem most to
condemn: I will therefore leave it to the judgment of the Churches of God, and
strive no more. For be it that I have offended herein, (as I confess I syn
many other ways, and so may in this though I see it not) yet is there no help
to your cause thereby at all. For, to justify evil because an other man does
the like, is but a sorry plea.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
Unto your allegation of Levit. 13. and 14. Chap. with Jude 23 I said the less
because I supposed you did not direct the same against our temples, but against
the garments mentioned also in the same place of your Apology: yet had you
well regarded mine answer, you might have found sufficient therein, to show you
that there is no consequence from the burning of an unprofitable leprous
garment, to the abolishing of our temples. I alleged diverse Lev. 11.32.33. and
6 28.
scriptures unto you, teaching that God allows the reteyning of such things as
are of more proffitable use, though they have been formerly polluted: The Lev.
15.12
earthen vessel being polluted was to be broken; but the vessel of wood or
brass was to be rinsed and scowred only, and then made lawful for use again.
And is there not as much difference be twixt our temples and a rag: as there is
betwixt an earthen and a wooden vessel? To these scriptures you say nothing. I
showed Page 214 and 250.251
before that the goodness and bountifullnes of the Lord toward his people was
to be discerned herein: but you despise the bountifullnes of the Lord and will
have his benefit to bereiected. Your complaint against all you write against,
is that they bring not scripture: but when it is brought, we see that you are
willing enough to pass by it sometimes, as if it had not been brought at all.
You say that touching things of necessary use, there is enough said before: but
touching this new reason from the scripture, nothing was said before: and that
which you have said before for the rest is showed to be insufficient. Yourself
do often allege one and the same scripture six or seven times over: And must
we so often give answer unto your allegations, vvhiles you give no answer at
all unto some of ours? But for the weight thereof, I am content to leave them
unto the judgment of the reader.

Touching the grand Idol, erected by your self, pourtrayed and printed in your
book, these are the things which I commend unto your consideration, 1. You do
therefore deserve the sorer blame to be laid upon you, for setting up this Idol,
because your self do so unjustly labor to bring the blame of so heinous
Idolatry upon all the Churches of God: and you should not complain (as you do)
that this thing is aggravated against you, because the sight of your error
herein may be a means to bring you unto some feeling of your self and of your
rash judgment. 2. Your fault has not been so aggravated against you, but that
it may yet be showed to be far greater, for though it be great in each of the
respects which Page 24.25
before I showed, because without any necessary use, you do a new erect, not a
monument only, but a very Idol, and a principal Idol of Antichriste, even
the Idol of the cross, though in your answer you have not been able to deny
any one of these respects: yet your offense in setting up this Idol is by far
the more heinous and notorious in respect of the place, where you have set it.
The settle or shrine whereupon you have placed this Idol, is the name of God,
even of the most holy Trinity, as appears in your printed Animad-vers. page 6.
book, where you have affixed the idol-crosse unto the name of each person in
the Trinity, even as it is done in the idolatrous pontifical: And thus you do
most unworthily abuse the name of God, in making it a foote-stoole for a most
filthy idol to stand on and tread upon the same. When the hethenish Idols or
gods that could not carry them selves, were Esa. 46.1.2.
carried upon the bunches of the camelles or upon the backs of other beasts that
bowed and fell down under the burden, it was folly to be laughed at and sin to
be condemned; but to set the most abominable idol upon the back of the most
holy and pure God; this is a sin of greater indignity, to be abhorred and
trembled at. It is odious to see the pope that great beast carried upon the
shoulders of men; but that the popes Idol cross should ride upon the shoulders
of the holy Trinity, as in a chariot of Triumph, as in your book you have made
it, this is far more odious and detestable. The sin of Solomon was greater in
respect of the place where he set up Idols, even 1. Kin. 11 7.
in the mountain that is over against Jerusalem: The sin of Manasses was yet
greater in respect of the place where he set up Idols, even 2. Kin. 21 4.5.7.
in the house of God: but if he had placed an Idol in the oracle, in the most
holy place, even upon the Mercy-seate over the ark, this had been more
horrible: And if yet further he had placed there betwixt the Cherubims the
most vile Idol, even Beelzebub the Prince of the devilles, this had been out of
measure sinful and impious above the rest: And yet even this is the sin which
you ignorantly run into, while yourself do confess the image of the Cross to
be Arrow against Idolat. cap. 5. sect. 13.
Beelzebub Prince of the Devilles, and yet place it over the ark, even upon the
Glorious and fearful name of the Holy Trinity: You that so rashly blame all
the Churches of Christ for their use of temples formerly polluted with
Idolatry, have not feared to make the name of God an Idol-temple, where to
this day the Idol-stands still: were your books as much vvorth as the
Ephesians Act 19. you should do well to burn them all, that are yet in your
hands, for a testimony of your repentance. And for so much as you have
condemned the Church of Rome, for imprinting the very same Idol of the cross
not only in their Churches and houses, but also Ibidem.
in their books and writings; abolish your own book and vvriting wherein
you have caused it to be imprinted. 3, whereas you plead, the most that I can
truly say, is that you seek to pull them down from religious use after an
unlawful manner, etc. I am indeed willing to judge the best of you, and think
that your intent and meaning was to do God good service, (as I wrote before)
in teaching men the evil of Idolatry. But the best that we can judge hereof is
evil enough: we see many Authors of plays and comedies do set forth such
enterludes with intent to pluck down vice, but doing the same without any
warrant of Gods word, and using such a kind of instruction as God never
appointed: they do strengthen the vices and wickedness which they would reprove.
And what is the maine breach of the second commandment but the serving of God
after an unlawful manner? Therefore when you see yourself co^victed of this
unlawful manner by setting up an Idol, and making the name of God an Idolie for
the same, your evil therein may be great enough though there be no more then
that. 4, In setting down your answer to my reason against your Idol, you deal
deceitfully, and use a fallacy ab iniqua divisione, dividing that reason in to
two, which was but one. The sum of it was: that such kind of instruction as
did occasion men to stumble, to bless an Idol in their hearts, and to worship
the same, and withal was a devised kind of instruction without warrant of
Gods word, that was unlawful. The latter part of this reason I set down by
way of preoccupacion, to prevent those vain answers, which yet you have made
unto it: as may be seen in my Page 25.
former writing, This reason being taken thus together, your answers do both
vanish presently: for that which you answer first of men being offended and
brought to bless an Idol, by seeing or hearing the name of a cross or crucifix,
is cut of by the second part of my reason: because there is warrant in the
scripture to write or pronounce the name of an Idol, but not to picture them
for religious use, as you have done the cross: That which you answer in the
second place touching the tabernacle, ark, temple, and such like things
described in mappes, is cut of by the first part of my reason: because these
figures and descriptions are not Idolatrous and scandalous as is the paynting
of Idols and images for religious use. That you may more plainly see how
unequally and unreasonably you match these things together, which are so
unlike: do but consider, that in the description of carnal adultery and
uncleanness, it would be a sinful and scandalous thing to picture many stories
in such manner, as they are recorded to have been done in the scriptures: as for
example, to paynt Bathsheba as she was 2. Sam. 11 2.4.
seen of David, and defiled of David, to pourtray the images of Genesis 38.18.
Judah and Thamar: of 2. Sam. 13.14.
Amnon and Thamar, and of diverse others as they are described in the word of
God. You acknowledge, I doubt not but that their sin is great which make such
offensive pictures, Ezekiel. 23.14.16.
occasions of lust. And if the naked pictures of carnal adulteresses be
unlawful, then are the pictures of spiritual whoredom in the case of offense
unlawful also. And who sees not the great difference betwixt these unclean
scandalous pictures, and the mappes of countries or figures of the temple and
such like things as you speak of? 5, of the 7. reasons which you bring against
our use of temples, though they be all insufficient against us: yet there are
5. of them that do condemn this unnecessary use of the Idol-crosse erected in
your book; namely, the first, second, fifth, sixth and seventh which serve to
reprove the Idols and monuments of Idolatry, whereof there is no proffit to the
Church of God. 6, whereas you seek to diminish your fault, by asking whether it
be not lawful in private books to pourtray any of, etc. You wa^der far from
the matter, and do ill apply this demand to the question in hand: for who sees
not that your printed book wherein this Idol stands is a public writing,
published unto the world, and to the eyes of all that can read? yea herein you
reprove yourself, in that in your Page 3.
former writing you do twice or thrice call your printed books your proofs in
public: reasons set forth in public: how can you now make them to be
private? And yet if your books were private only for your own house, yet to
Deuteronomy. 27.15.
set up an Idol in them in secret, is not free: The Ibid. c. 13 6.
secret entiser unto Idolatry is subject unto judgment. 7. whereas you say
concerning this Idol, that you will leave it to judgment, and strive no more:
and confess also that you may sin in this matter though you see it not: you do
hereby show some doubting and uncertainty in this question. It is also some
sign of remorse in you, in that here Page 175.
before having as much or more color to paynt crosses in showing the manner of
consecrating Churches out of the pontifical, then in showing the manner of
popish ordination, yet have you now (after admonition and warning) abstayned
from making these Idols. But as yourself said before, The absteyning from the
practice does not clear the Sinner; unless you do further repent and renounce
your sin: yea if Page 82.
your reasoning against us were sound, your ministry should be unlawful and
not to be communicated withal until you had repented for making this Idol. If
therefore you see not your sin herein, as you say, you ought not to rest, but
rather to desire to hear more of this question in special, that your
conscience might be settled and you come to some resolution. But as for your
ceassing to strive upon that pretense because I spoke of some that had done
this before you and of following a few herein, neglecting the examples of
others, etc. this is very vain: if upon such pretenses men should ceass to
strive for the truth, you may see that many most necessary controversies would
be cut of, and the truth not mainteyned as is meet. Lastly, I do not justify
our evil by your doing the like, as you warn me not to plead: but I labor to
condemn your evil, your making of an Idol without cause: if this were like
unto our temples I should condemn my self also: And I show your fault herein
to this end, that you seeing your error touching the nature of Idols and
Idolatry, might learn to be more sober, and more swift to hear and slow to
speak against the Church of God, and more slow to wrath in plucking down our
temples over our heads, unless you could better show the wrath of God against
them.

CHAP. XIII. The seventh argument touching temples, examined.
Hen. Ains.
Our 7. reason against idolies, etc. is from the blessing promised to them that
abolish them, and curse threatened to the contrary, etc. Esai. 30.22.23, etc.
Exodus 20.5.6. 2 Chronicles. 17. c. and 31.20.21. with 2. Chron. 21.13.14. and 24.17.
-- 25. and c. 28.

To this you say as before, that these scriptures are all to be understood
partly according to the state and condition of the old testament; and partly
according to the equity mentioned before with exception of necessary use: and
therefore they reprove not the use of temples which you now have.

But both these your answers I have before refuted: showing idolatry and idols
to be forbidden as well in the new Testament as in the old, 1 Cor. 10. 1. Ioh.
5. Rev. 18. and that the destruction of Idols and idolies is a moral and
perpetual precept, not figurative or temporary. And your exception of
necessary use, I have disproved: showing that for detestation of idols, God
commanded and his people performed the demolishing of them, Exodus 34. Deuteronomy. 7.
Ezekiel. 23. Genesis 35. Both these are confirmed by the first scripture in our
reason here alleged. For in Esai 30.22, the coverings and ornaments of idols
are prophesied to be cast away with detestation: yet who knows not that of
them there might be a necessary use to men? whereupon a promise of blessing
follows, v. 23, etc. And this prophecy respects the days of the Gospel,
and so not the old Testament only: for the rivers of waters upon every
mountain v. 25. the increase of the light of the Sun sevenfold, v. 26. the
promises that they should weep no more, v. 19. nor want teachers v. 20. these
and the like speeches show the prophecy to perteine unto the new Testament. So
does also the continuance of it, in Esai. 31. where again he foretells in v.
7. the casting away of their idols: not because they could not have no
necessary use of them, but because they were their Syn: (which was the reason
also, why Moses of old abolished Deuteronomy. 9.21
the Calf of Israel:) and thereupon God promises the ruin of their enemies, by
the example of the Assyrians v. 8. and in chapter 32. he shows by whom this
should be obtained, even by the King that should reign in righteousness, which
is our Lord Jesus Christ. So your exceptions are but pretexts: and our reasons
remain in their force for the ruinating of all idolies, and so of Antichrists
as bad as any.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
Whatsoever you have before objected against both my answers, is again
answered; and for each of those places which you again repeat, viz 1. Cor. 10.
1. Ioh. 5. Rev. 18. Exo. 34. Deuteronomy. 7. Ezekiel. 23. Genesis 35. I have at large showed
how you have perverted every one of them, and have in vain labored to take
away the distinction of temporary precepts; and the consideration of necessary
use. As for the scriptures alleged in this seventh argument, you leave them
all without defense, one only excepted: let us examine your allegation
thereof, and see whether that be not also perverted. You say, in Esai. 30 22.
the coverings and ornaments of idols are prophesied to be cast away with
detestation: yet who knows not, that of them there might be a necessary use
to men, etc. I answer, 1. The casting away of the coverings there mentioned is
expressly noted and declared in the text, to be as the casting away of a
stained garment, which was cast away, only during the stain upon it, but
being washed with water might lawfully be used again; neither did God ever
command otherwise in his law: And so this place is against your self, showing
that our temples being purged may yet be retained. 2, what comparison is there
betwixt the clothing and covering of an Idol and our temples, but even such as
there is betwixt the Lev. 11.33 and 15.12.
earthen and the wooden vessel, whereof one was to be broken and cast away,
the other to be washed and retained for the proffit of Gods people? 3. The
covering and ornament of an Idol is of no necessary use in the service of God,
but the circumstance of place is necessarily required to meet in: and our
temples serving conveniently for such purpose may therefore be retained, rather
then the ornaments of Idols. 4. Though this prophecy do respect the days of
the Gospel as you show from Esa. 30.25.26, etc. Yet is it to be understood and
expounded according to the determination of Christ and his Apostles in the new
Testament, which show us a lawful use of every creature of God for the
necessary help of his people. Otherwise without this caveat men might still
reteyne the whole ceremonial law: seeing there are so many prophecies
respecting the days of the Gospel, which yet tell us of Esa. 19.19.21.
Altars, of sacrifice and oblation, of Mal. 1.11
incense, of Zach. 14.16.17.
going up to Jerusalem to keep the feast of Tabernacles, of Ezekiel. 40. chap. etc.
building a new temple with ceremonial observations therein, etc. All these
prophesies respect the new Testament, describing a spiritual worship under
carnal rites and shadows of the law: so that though Esaias had spoken in this
place more ceremonially in the description of our estate, then he had done: yet
the determinations which I have before showed cut of the new Testament, must be
our rule and guide to expound the same: and being so expounded your cause is
not helped thereby. 5, as for Esaias. 31.7. and Deuteronomy. 9.21. they speak not of
places abused unto Idolatry, but of Idols themselves, such as you cannot prove
our temples to be: And besides this, even Gods own ordinances in the abuse
thereof are called Esa. 1.13
a syn or iniquity: and therefore this phrase proves not an utter abolition of
things so called, being attributed and given unto such things as after the
purging thereof may and ought to be retained. Again as for the destruction of
the Calfe in Deuteronomy. 9. it was extraordinary, neither were men bound strictly to
follow the same manner of showing detestation against idols, no not under the
law itself. Your boasting in conclusion, that our exceptions are but pretexts,
that your reasons remain in their force for the ruinating of all idolies, etc.
is like unto a pleasant dream, wherein you fancy and imagine that which you
feign would have: but you may not sit down in the throne to judge of your own
dispute: stand up at the bar and let others judge whether all your shot and
ordinance have been able to batter down our temples: and whether your schism
rather be not near unto ruin, which for such pretexts of Idol-temples do
separate from all true Christians.

CHAP. XIV. Touching the Jews Synagogue.
Hen. Ains.
HEre again you come, with reasons from our own practice: which were it such
as you suppose, and that we walked not aright, yet helps it you nothing. For
the truth shall stand, though all men fall: and it is Gods word, not men's
ways, that must be our rule in Religion.

For your 1. and 2. objections from the houses, wherein we meet: I have In the
defense of our 6. reason.
before proved, they are not, neither ever were Idolies, nor by any law of God
to be destroyed, though Jews or any, have worshipped in them.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
HEre, before you come unto the particular answer you say something in general
by way of complaint, that I should reason against you from your own practice:
of this you affirm, that were it such as I suppose, etc. yet it helps us
nothing, etc. Hereunto I reply, 1. It helps much to set forth the glory of
God, to confirm the comfort of the faithful, and to stop the mouth of
iniquity, when we do observe the contradictory practice and doctrine of such
as are enemies to the Church of God. And God himself has taught us to urge
such things against them that are maintainers of error, to show how he will
condemn the evil servants Luke 19.22
out of their own mouths, by their own words and deeds: how he will Ezekiel.
16.43.
bring their own ways, upon their heads: how they Ps. 7.15.
fall into the pits which they dig for others; how he will make them Romans 2.1
inexcusable, when they do the same things which they condemn in others: how
he 1. Cor. 3.19.
catches the wise in their own craftines. In these judgments of God, his
glory shines brightly, and they take his name in vain that do not duly
consider of these his works in and upon you, as well as upon others. 2. How do
you forget your self, who else where do confess that Praeface to Annot. on Genesis
page 6
the testimony of the adversary against him self, does help our faith? Your use
of the Jews Idol temple is a testimony against your self, and yet here you
say, were your practice such as we suppose that you walked not right, yet it
would help us nothing. We suppose you have no great conscience of your own
profession, and therefore can not so easily be drawn to receive your doctrines
without further examination of them by the word of God: Herein we are much
helped and kept from joining rashly unto you. Your own endeavor in your
writings is to press your adversaries with their own practice, as Animadv p.
12. 59. 123. etc.
Mr. Johnson and Mr. Smith and others very often: And how partial therefore are
you, that allow that to your self, which you disallow in others? 3. Though the
word of God and not men's ways must be our rule in Religion, yet seeing so many
men prefer their own ways before the word of God, is it not therefore meet to
convince such men by their own ways, and to reprove them even by their own
wanderings? As truth destroys error, so does one error destroy another
sometimes, and one practice refute an other and therefore though the holy
scriptures only can show the truth of religion, yet erroneous and
contradictory practices are also a means to condemn falsehood and stop the
mouth of those that maintain such errors. To this end and not further do we
allege your practice: far be it from us, that we should make your ways a rule
of religion.

But now to come unto the objection itself, I seek your answer here in the
proper place, but find it not, as I expected: In stead hereof you send me back
unto the defense of your sixth reason, and therein a corner you would hide your
head from the force of this reproof, but you must be brought forth into the
light again: for 1, howsoever you say of this Jews synagogue, which you used
to assemble in, that you have before proved, that it is not, nor ever was an
Idolie: that have I already reproved and refuted again: That defense of your
sixth reason being showed to be vain. 2. The objection which I made against
your sixth reason, did concern private houses of Idolatours, as of Papists,
Moschovites and such like: but this synagogue of the Jews was not a private
place, but a place of public worship where many families of the Jews did
ordinarily meet together in a solemn congregation; and so also has your
separate company done as publicly and solemnly after the Jews had left it.
And therefore those private houses and this public synagogue are most
unequally and unjustly matched together, neither can the answer of that place
be applied unto this. 3, you made exception for the private houses mentioned in
the former place that they were civil houses, but the synagogue of the Jews
whereof I speak, being for the public worship of God may be called a
religious place as well as any other. And though some persons dwelt in some
part of it, that hinders not but that it was to be esteemed a religious house
or synagogue: you see the most of the temples in this city, have diverse
persons dwelling in several parts of them, which yet you condemn as Idolies:
If you were not partial you would consider this: for the excuse of our
temples, as well as of the Jews. The Jews Arba turim, lib. Orach chaim
tractat. beth hacceneseth, signo 153.
accounting their Beth-midrasch to be an holy place and more holy then other
synagogues, do yet confess it may be part of such a building where men may
have a dwelling place in some other parts of it; in that they Elias levita in
Tischbi. in darasch.
note it to be either an house or chamber or parlour (cheder.) And if such an
excuse as this which you make, might have saved Idol-temples from ruin in the
time of the law: then those Idolaters which had once seen the overthrow of
Baals houses, might according to this shift have taken some old palaces or
halles and converted them to the service of Baal, for his ordinary and public
worship, suffering yet some persons to dwell still in some other parts thereof,
and by this means all danger of ruin should be turned away from them. And if
they had not old houses enough convenient for their purpose, they might make
new, provided that they made some rooms above or below for their Priests and
other persons to dvvell in, and then if any Iehu or Josias came to pluck down
those Idolies of Chemosh, Baal or Dagon, they might plead against them that
those places were civil houses, and dwelling houses of men, though public
worship were ordinarily performed in them, and that therefore such Kings had
no authority to demolish them: and thus had they had some of your subtle
shifts they might have coosened the law, deluded the godly Kings and preserved
their Idol-temples from destruction.

MOreover whereas you said in the defense of your sixth reason, touching the
Jews place of public worship wherein you succeeded them, that I do
untruly call it the Jews Idol-temple; that it may appear unto the reader
whether I spoke truly or not, I desire these fevv things may be considered
touching the estate of the Jews and their Idolatry according to your own
description of Idolatry. As before you led us into the Popes vvare houses, the
Pontifical and others shops of his: so here you must give me leave to bring
you into the Jews vvare-house, the Thalmud and other shops of theirs, that by
comparing of them with the stuff, that is found in some of your own shops, I
may thereby show unto you, that the Jews Synagogue is an Idol-temple.

First, as for the members of the Jews Church, they are by your own testimony
all of them heinous and horrible Idols: for you write that Counterpoy. page
143. 144.
the bringing of Satan's seed into the Church, unto the Altar of God, may
further be minded as a high degree of violating the second commandment,
whereby all images, idols and similitudes whatsoever, of the Devil or men's
invention or forming are severely forbidden to be brought into Gods house, or
used in his worship Now such images or Idols are these wicked persons. For as
Children are the images of their parents, etc. So Satan's Children (as wicked
worldlings be called in the scripture,) are his lively images, having lost the
first image of God wherein they were created, etc. As it is a syn, and so
esteemed, to have images and representations of beasts, of fowls, of fishes,
etc. brought into the Church and worship of God: so would and well might it be
esteemed more horrible, if in any Christian congregation, there should be
brought in pictures of the Divil, or other like hellish representations. Yet
men will not see the horror of this syn, that the living images and pictures of
the serpent should be brought into the Church and worship of God, etc. Now it
being manifest and undeniable that the Jews are wicked persons, despisers of
Christ, and his Gospel, and profane wordlings also, by your own confession
they must be Idols, and images, and consequently the place of their public
worship a receptackle of Idols, and an Idol-temple. And yet even in the same
place where such pictures of the Divil and hellish representations have been
brought into the worship of God, even there have you agreed to assemble
together for the service of Christ: The horror of that place has not deterred
you from converting it unto your holy place.

Secondly, as for the ministers of the Jewish Church, according to your
doctrine they must also be esteemed Idolles: for unlawful ministers you
reckon up in the catalogue or roll of Idolles and say of them as of others
idols; Arrow against Idolatry chapter 1. sec. 18.
Nor is there less impiety in Idols of an other nature and esteem for when
among men one is set up as head of the Church, an other as Patriark, an other
as primate, Archbishop, Metropolitan, etc. and these without calling and
appointment from God: these be Idol-shepheards, not true pastors of the flock,
etc. Now among the Jews at this day, they have unlawful offices without
calling and appointment from God: Their principal Doctor, to whom for honor
sake they give the title of Gaon or excellence, is Elias Levita in Tisebbi, in
Gaon.
said to be so called, because he must be expert in the Thalmud and in the
sixty treatises thereof, which by a Cabalisticall reckoning are found in the
word Gaon, which ^
yields the number of sixty. And according to his title, which signifies
pride as well as excellency, so does this Rabbine presume above the holy
scripture, and out of the Thalmud preaches unto the Jews a huge burden and
load of superstitious traditions: And thus his administration becomes
Idolatrous. Thus do the inferior Rabbines and Ievv-doctours also. Their
unlawful ministeries might further be observed in the 7. yearly offices
which they are Joan. Buxt. in Synag. Iud. cap. 22.
recorded to sell for money, by an open proclamation in their Synagogue, to
vvhomsoever will give most money for them; as the office of lighting candles,
which they perform with many superstitions; the office of distributing wine
on their Sabath and at other feasts: the office of Gelilah to open the roll of
the law and to vvrap it up again: the offices of hagbohab to carry about and
elevate the book of the law, etc. the offices of Ets chaijm, to touch those
pieces of vvood unto which the volume of the law is fastened: in the touching
of this tree of life they put great confidence for attayning of understanding,
virtue and long life thereby: the office of Acheron for to propound something
to be read out of the law; the office of schehia, to be a substitute, ready to
supply the office of any of the rest which through negligence should omit the
same. And many other vvayes it might be shevved what Idol-shepheards they
have. Now where these Thalmudique doctors have administered, there come you
the only doctor on earth (in your own and your peoples account) that may be
lavvfully communicated with all; and you that refuse to worship in the places
where Christ Jesus is preached, have not refused to assemble ordinarily,
where Christ Jesus has been condemned and a false Messiah preached.

Thirdly for their prayers, they do therein commit Idolatry many vvayes. They
turn God himself into an Idol (so much as in them lies) when they call upon
him, by denying the Trinity of persons and by calling upon God without
Christ: and as yourself note from others, that by false worshippers God
Animadv. page 73.
is tra^sformed into an Idol, so may it be noted of the Jews, in their
misconceaving of God and worshipping him so misformed in their minds. And if
it be true which is taught in your vvritings, that in the Church of England,
Christ is H.B. disc. p. 161.
an Idol King and an Idol Christ, how much more evident is it, that the Jews
in their worship do set up their Christ for an Idol? By your doctrine all set
forms of prayer are Ibid. p. 64
detestable Idolles. Now that the Jews have public prescript and set forms
of prayer, their Minhagim or books of their public leiturgies do show it
abundantly. And your Maimon. in misneh, in Seder tephilloth col hasscha nah.
Maimony shows us at larg their order for set forms of prayer for appointed
seasons throughout the whole year. And so according to your profession, if
there were nothing else but this, their Synagogue should be an Idol-temple.

Besides this they have many particular and several prayers and blessings,
wherein they put vain confidence and make Idols of them. Their Arba turim,
lib. Orachchaijm tract tephil lah. sig. 58 and 70 etc.
Krias shema, or Keriath shema (as they call it) has a multitude of
superstitious observations in the use of it, and as many vain promises annexed
unto the same. Their prayer which they call Ibid. sig. 55
Kaddish, may not be said of less then ten persons; and those all the sons of
nobles and great ones which have brought forth the 2. hayres: some conte^d that
there may be one Child or little one with the other 9, if he have the pentateuch
in his hand: others deny it: and these ten must be all in one place, and
sheliac tsibbur or the minister of their synagogue with them, etc. But if there
be a little court broken fully into a great court; if there be 9 persons in the
great court, and one in the little one, they allow this prayer to be said there;
but if there be 9 persons in the little court and one in the great one, or 5 in
one and 5 in an other, they allow it not, etc. An other prayer they have which
they call jithgaddel according to the beginning thereof, or Kedushah and this
they may not say, in the Hebrew tongue, but in the language of the Thargum,
least (as they Ibid. sig. 56.
say) the Angels hearing the same should envy them for this excellent hymn,
and therefore they say it in a language which they do not understand, for the
Angels (as they affirm) know not the Aramites tongue. An orher famous prayer
they have, which they call schemone Esre consisting of 18, parts: This they
Thalm. Babylonic. in megillah chapter 2. fol. 17.
hold to have been made by an hundted and twenty Elders and some of them
Prophets. In giving a reason of this mystical number, why it has just 18
parts, whereupon it is denominate; Iehoshua ben Levi, Thalmud Ierusalemy in
Beracoth chapter 4. f. 7. and. 8.
says it is in reference unto the 18 first psalms, reaching unto those words,
the Lord hear thee in the day trouble, etc. R. Simon says, it is respect of
the 18. little bones or joints which are in the back bone, because in the hour
that a man stands and prays this prayer, it is of necessity that he bow with
them all: for which reason it is said, All my bones shall say, Lord who is like
unto thee. R. Levi says it is in respect of the 18. memorialles (of the word
Jehovah) which are found in the Psalm which begins thus, give unto the Lord ye
sons of the mighty, viz. ps. 29. R. Hanina in the name of R. Phinehas says,
it is in respect of the 18. times that the fathers, Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob
are mentioned in the law, etc. A number of other such like prayers they have,
whereunto they attribute miraculous power and virtue, as by the saying of their
Kaddish before mentioned they hold that the souls of dead men are delivered
out of their torment in hell or purgatory and translated into paradise: and
therefore are Children bound to use that prayer for their parents deceassed for
the space of a year or thereabout. Unto these prayers they join their
Phylacteries and make Idols of them also: They say, Arba Tutim, lib. or. cha.
tractat Tephillin fig. 37.
Great is the commandment of the Phylacteries: because every one that wears
them shall prolong his days, as it is said, o Lord by them men live: And Rabba
says every one that puts on the Phylacteries and wears zizith or the fringes
and reads Keriath shema, and prays, let him be sure that he is a Child of
the world to come. And Abaii says, I will be his surety that the fire of hell
shall not have power over him. R. Papa says, I will be his surety, that all
his sins shall be forgiven him, etc. The Thalmudique canons teach that those
Phylacteries which are written Thalmud Bab. in Menachoth cap. 4 f. 42 Arba
Turim, orach chaiim in Thephillin sig. 39. and in Gittin. c. 4. fol. 45
by a servant, by a woman, by a child, by a gentile, or an Israelite changed
from them, are unlawful for use, etc. that if they be written by an heretic,
then they are to be burnt: if they be found in the hand of an heretic and it
be not known whether they were written by him or not, that then they are to
be buried, etc. with an hundred superstitions more about the making, using,
keeping and vain confidence in them.

Again they turn the ordinance of the priests lifting up his hands in
blessing the people, into great superstition; Orach chaiim in Tephillah sig.
128. comp with R. Moses Mikkots. in SMG. precep. affir. 20.
none of the priests may go up unto the stairs, pulpit or scaffold from whence
the blessing is pronounced, but he must first put of his shoes. All the
priests that are present are bound to go up unto the scaffold (when the
Minister of the congregation comes to a certain prayer, called ratsah, etc.)
and they that do not, sin against three affirmative comandements, viz. Thus
shall ye bless them: say unto unto them: put my name upon them: when they are
gone up they are to stand on the scaffold with their faces toward the temple
and their backs toward the people, having their fingers bowed into the
mids of the palm of their hands, until the Minister have finished an other
prayer Modim, etc. When they turn their faces toward the people to bless,
they do first bless the Lord for that blessing, for sanctifying them with his
sanctification of Aharon, etc. Then they lift up their hands over against their
shoulders in height, and open their fist and devide their fingers according to
the midrasch, he shows himself through the grates; because that Schecinah or
the divine Majesty is above upon their heads and looks through the grates of
their fingers; and they direct or set them so, that they may make windooes for
the Lord, betwixt each two fingers one window; and betwixt a thumb and a finger;
and betwixt thumb and thumb a window, (9 windows in all) to establish or
fulfill that saying, he shows himself through the grates. ( Cant. 2.9.) Then
their Minister reads or prays those words: The Lord bless thee, etc. Number.
6.24.25.26. And they say after him word for word till he have finished the
first verse; and then the congregation answers Amen, and so they do also after
the second and again after the third verse of that blessing. And they may not
bless but in the holy tongue: and standing, and with lifting up of hands, and
with a high voice, etc. The Priest that is Orach Cha. in Tephillah sig. 128.
zebalgan,.i. which lets his spitle fall upon his beard, or is blind of one
eye, may not lift up his hands in this blessing: but if the men of his city
be used unto him and do all know that he is Zebalgan, and blind, then he may
lift up his hands: If his hands be colored with diverse colors and skarlet, he
may not lift up his hands, least they should be offended at him: but if the
multitude of the me^ of the city do use such work, then he may lift up his
hands, then they will not be offended at him, etc If the priest Maimony in
misn. in Tephillah chapter 15. sec. 4.
drink a quadrant of wine at one draught, then he may not lift up his hands:
but if he drink it at two draughts, or two times: or if he put a little water
into the mids of it, then it is lawful for him: but if he drink more the^ a
quadrant, although it be mixed, and although he drink it at diverse times, yet he
may not lift up his hands, until he put his wine from him, etc. And many other
vain observations they have about this particular. If Arba Turim, lib. Orach
cha in Tephillah. signo. 130.
any man have seen a dream, and knows not what he has seen, he is to come
before the Priests in the hour that they go up unto the scaffold where they
lift up their hands to bless: and to say thus, o Lord of the world, I am
thine, and my dreams are thine: I have dreamed a dream and I know not what it
is: whether I have dreamed for my self, or whether others have dreamed for me,
if they be good confirm and ratify them, as the dreams of Joseph: if they be
evil, heal them, heal them, as the waters of Marah by the hands of Moses,
and as the waters of Jericho by the hands of Elisha, as Miriam from her
leprosy, and as Naaman from his leprosy, etc. Besides these prayers and
blessings, they have also their solemn curses, wherein they curse Christians
and even Christ Jesus himself, praying for the destruction of Christians,
especially of those Jews that are converted to Christianity: wishing also
that the name of Jesus may be blotted out, as is Buxtorf. de abbrev. p. 87.
noted from their jimmach schemo, though they do it more covertly, according to
their Cabalisticall art. Yea, it appears that they are more careful of these
curses, then of many other blessings: for their canon is, that Orach a chaiim,
in Tephillah, sig. 126.
if the minister of their congregation do err in any one of all the blessings
by omitting or skipping over the same: if when they admonish him, he know how
to return unto the place, they do not remoove him: but if he skip over the
curse of heretics (under which they reckon those that do embrace
Christianity), they do forth with remoove him least he himself be an
heretic, etc. Now while you plead against our temples that they are to be
destroyed and avoided as being Page 16^
Devilles houses: if your plea be sound, then may it justly be used against
yourself: for as the Devil is denominate of slandering and accusing, so where
cursing, and blasphemy are joined with superstition and Idolatry, the house
where these sins are ordinarily and publicly practiced, may well be called a
Devilles house; and consequently that meeting house of the Jews which you
chose to be your house of prayer. Hereby you have condemned your self in that
wherein you would blame us.

Fourthly, they make an Idol of the holy scriptures which they use in their
synagogue: of the book of the law in special: and of the reading thereof. One
superstition is, that they hold it Arba Turim, lib. Ioreh degnah trac. Seph.
thorah sig. 270.
unlawful for a man which has the book of the law to sell the same,
though he have many of them: yea that it is unlawful to sell an old one to buy
a new one, even when a man has nothing to eat: only they allow a man in this
case of necessity to sell the same, viz. to pay for learning of the law, and
for the taking of a wife, when he has no other means to procure the same,
etc. An other superstition is, that they Ibid. sig. 271.
make it unlawful to write the book of the law save upon the parchment which
is made of the skin of a clean creature: and not upon the skin of a fish
though it be clean, but upon the skin of a clean beast, foul or living
creature which is clean: also not upon the skin of those creatures which are
dead and torn. They hold it not lawful to write the same upon the parchme^t
made of the skin of a clean beast, unless the skin be dressed purposely to
that use at the first, unless it be made in that name and dedicate to such
use: R. Moses bar Maimon Maimony in misneh, tract. Tephillin c. 1. sec. 11
writes further, that if a gentile dress them they are unlawful, though an
Israelite say unto him, dress these skins for a book of the law: but R. Baruch
Iore deah, tract. Sepher thorah. sig. ^71
writes that if a gentile make them and an Israelite stand at his back and help
him a little, then they are lawful. Also for the manner of dressing them, they
Ibid.
hold it unlawful to dress these skins save with galls: though R. Tam
allows the lime which they have to that purpose. They make great question,
upon which side of the parchment the law is to be written and thereabout do
Maimony and R. Ascher differ among themselves. Also they hold it is not to be
written but with ink: but R. Tam says it is not called ink, but they make it
of certain kinds of known thorns which are sodden, and of that water they
make it, but if it be ink made with galls, then it is unlawful for a book of
the law, etc. further they Ior. deah. in Seph. thor. sig. 274.
hold superstitiously, that the scribe which writes the book of the law, must
of necessity when he begins to write say thus; this book I write that it may
be a holy book of the law: and this suffices for every book, and if he do not
thus, the book is unlawful. Also that he must have a book before him out of
which he may copy it: that it is unlawful to write even one letter which is
not out of the copy: (though he knew it never so perfectly without the same)
Seven letters comprehended in the words, Schagnatnaz gats they do idolize after
a special manner, Ibid. with Thalmud in menachoth, f. 29.
writing over them 3 crowns, so often as they are repeated in the law, one
crown on the right side of the letter, an other on the left, an other above:
These crowns are not to be found in any Hebrew Bible that is printed: Therefore
the Jews use in their synagogue not a printed, but a written book of the law.
Again, although the scribe in the beginning of his writing, do say he writes
the same in the name of a holy book for the consecration thereof, yet it is
further Ior. dea. sig. 276.
required as necessary, that so often as he writes the name of God, he do every
time think in himself that he writes that name for a holy use, and if he do not
so, the writing is unlawful. And if a King salute him, as he is writing that
name, he may not answer him. And when he has dipped his pen into the ynke to
write the name of God, it is not lawful for him immediately to begin with the
name of God least there should be too much ynke in the pen, but for a
praeparative he must first begin to write the word that comes before the name
of God, with that new penfull of ynke. If he write any of the names of God in
gold, it is unlawful: And a number of other superstitious traditions they have
about the measures of the book, the form of the letters, the sections open
and shut, the distances betwixt book and book, section and section, line and
line; about the correction of literal faults, and the toleration of them: about
the ruling of the book, the sowing of the parchments with the sinowes of clean
beasts, etc. But when it is made, then they Ior. dea. in Seph. th. sig. 282.
give great honor unto this book of the law: they are commanded to make a
peculiar place for it, and to honor that place with great reverence: they may
not spit before it, nor turn their backs toward it, nor carry it upon their
heads as if it were a burden: they that see it as it passes by are bound to
stand still, until it be passed by and brought unto his place, or until it be
covered from their eyes. He that travelles from place to place and has the
book of the law with him, may not put it in a sack, nor lay it upon the back of
the ass whereon he rides, but he must put it in his bosom, over against his
heart. They may not sit upon that bed, where this book is laid: They may not
touch this book, but through a veil, wherewith it must first be covered: They
may not bring it into many places: And that house where it is, may not be used
as before it was. When it is worn out, or made unmeet for use, they must put
it into an earthen vessel, and so bury it: and this, nere unto one of their
wise disciples or Rabbines. They distinguish betwixt this book of the law, and
the pentateuch, or 5. books of Moses, in respect of this form and manner of
writing, though the same words be contained in both: Though they may lay this
book upon the back of an other book of the law, and the pentateuch upon the
Prophets, and Psalms, etc. yet they may not lay the Prophets and psalms upon
the back of the pentateuch, nor the pentateuch upon the back of this book of
the law: such superstitious differences and degrees of holiness do they forge
unto themselves. The superstitions which they use Orach. chapter tract. keriath
hattho rah. sig. 135 136. etc.
in reading this book of the law in their synagogues, are also very many:
concerning the time, the persons, the order to be observed herein; and too long
it would be to rehearse the same in like manner also do they Idolize the book
of Ester, both in the writing and in the reading thereof, using many of the
very same superstitions which they do about the book of the law, though not so
precise herein: yet have they many peculiar traditions here also, as thalmud
Ierusalemy in megillah. chapter 3. fol. 74. with Orach cha. in megil. sig. 690 691.
Maimony in Megillah c. 2.
that the names of the te^ sons of Haman are to be written after the manner
of a song, and yet not as common songs; that the names of the men are to be
written in the beginning of the leaf or line, and that the particle, veeth
that goes with each of them is to be written in the end of the line: and that
otherwise the writing is not lawful: that in the reading of them also, they
are all to be read with one breath: with a multitude of the like devises. Now
if popish superstitions have defiled our temples, and made them unfit for our
use, how comes it that these absurd and manifold Jewish superstitions have not
defiled their synagogue and made it unfit for your use?

Fifthly, the Sacrament of Circumcision observed among the Jews, is also set up
for an Idol among them. As you note of the Popish Baptism, that there are
Animadv p. 72.
two sorts of idols therein, some merely devised by men: as their crosses,
exorcismes, greasings, etc. some perverted by men from holy signs to idols,
etc So may you see both these kinds of idols in the Jewish circumcision: for
(not to speak of many other superstitions) their Arba turim, li. Ior. dea, in
Milah, sig. 264 R. Moses mikk. in SMG. praecep. affir. 28
priah, or tearing of the other skin with their nails, (after the foreskin be
cut away) is merely devised by themselves, a more painful and dangerous thing
unto the circumcised infant, the^ is the cutting of the foreskin itself. And
this priah or perignah, they hold to be so necessary, that they make
circumcision without it to be no circumcision: they say, he that circumciseth
and uses not this priah, is as if he had not circumcised. Herein their
superstition is greater then the Papists, who do not maintain such a
necessity of their inventions and devises in the administration of Baptism.
Again, their Ioreh dea. tract. milah or of circumcision sig. 265.
custom is to set a chair or seat for Elias at their act of circumcising: and
the original of this custom is noted by them to be this: when Elias
complained, I have been very jelous for the Lord, because the house of Israel
have forsaken thy coveranr (1 Kin. 19.15.) the Rabbines say that from that time
the Lord made a promise unto Elias that the Israelites should never perform
that covenant or work of circumcision, until Elias did see it with his eyes:
and that from thence forward their wise men ordained to set a chair for Elias,
because he is called the Angel of the covenant. Herein they commit heinous
Idolatry, by ascribing unto Elias a divine power and property as though he
could be present in many places at once whersoever circumcision is administered:
As the Papists offend by mainteyning the body of Christ to be present in their
mass whersoever it is celebrated; so do the Jews by mainteyning the body of
Elias to be present in their Idol circumcision vvhersoever it is administered by
the^, honoring his presence also by setting a chair or throne for him, etc.
Again they turn the ordinance of God into an Idol, by mainteyning an use of
it, when as it is now abolished: and especially by putting so great confidence
therein, as that they do thereby Gal. 5.2.3.4.
abolish themselves from Christ and the salvation purchased by him. They hold
the commandment of circumcision to be greater then the rest of the
comma^dements that are to be performed: they say Thalmud in Nedarim chapter 3. fol.
31
that there are thirteen covenants made concerning circumcision; because the
word covenant is found to be 13. times repeated in Genesis 17. where circumcision
was instituted: They Arba turim, l. Ior. dea. in milah, sig. 260
allege out of their Bereshith rabbah that Abraham our father sits at the gate
of Hell and suffers not any that are circumcised to be gathered in thither.
They affirm that by it men are delivered from the judgment of hell. The
Chalde^ paraphrast expounding those words of Solomon, every one has his sword
upon his thigh for the fear by night, Thargum on cant. 3.8
notes this sword upon the thigh to be the seal of circumcision in the flesh,
whereby they prevayle and do not fear the divelles or the toads that walk
abroad in the night. Yea such confidence they have in this ceremony, that they
use to Arba Turim, l. Ior. dea. treat. of burial, sig. 353. and of circumcis.
sig. 263.
circumcise dead infants to obtain and procure the more mercy for them at the
resurrection, though after an other manner, then other infants be commonly
circumcised Now you that condemn our use of temples, which have been abused
heretofore unto the worship of Saints: why were you not afraid to worship in
that Synagogue where Elias has been deifyed by the Jews, and divine honor
given unto him being but one of the Saints? you that refuse to hear all the
ministers of Christ sitting in Moses chair, what mean you to go and sit in
Elias his chair, to teach and preach unto your people in that very place where
the Jews have set that Idolatrous chair for Elias?

Sixthly, the feasts of the Jews which they keep at this day cannot be denied
of you to be Idols, whiles you H.B. disc. p. 181.
say as much of the Idol-feasts in the Church of England. A whole volume would
not suffice to express the innumerable superstitions of the Jews which they
observe herein: They have a whole book in folio containing their preparation
unto one of their feasts, showing only what is to be done in the evening of
their passover. I will only note one or two of their impious pactises. At
their feast of reconciliation, their manner in some places is to kill a cock
for reconciliation. Arba turim lib. Orach cha. tract. jom haccippurim, sig. 605.
The minister of the congregation uses to take a cock, and lays his hand
upon his head, and lifts him up, and lays him upon the head of him that is to
be reconciled and says; This for this: This is changed for this: This is
wounded for this. Then he turns unto him the second time and says, They sit
in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in misery and iron: He
brings them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and breaks their bands
asunder: fools by reason of their transgression and because of their
iniquities are aflicted: Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble and he
delivers them out of their distress he sends his word and heals them, and
delivers them from their graves: Let them confess before the Lord his loving
kindness, and his wonders unto the Sons of men. Life for life. And he does
according to this order three times. After this he lays his hand upon the head
of the cock after the manner of laying on of hands, and leaning upon him
kills him presently: straight way after the imposition of hands is the
slaughter of him. And they use to give him unto the poor that this may be a
reconciliation for his life, etc. At their feast of Purim, their manner is in
reading the book of Ester to say, Ibid. tract. megillah, sig. 690.
Cursed be Haman: Blessed be Mordecai: Cursed be Zeresh, Blessed be Ester:
Cursed be all that serve Idolles (under these they comprehend all Christians:)
Blessed be all Israel, etc. Yea in the sig. 695. and Talmud Bab. in Megill. c.
1. fol. 7.
same place they say that they are commanded to make great cheer, and that it
is necessary to be drunken, till they cannot discern betwixt Arur Haman, and
Baruch Mordecai, etc. till they know not Haman from Mordecai: blessing from
cursing, etc. Of all the Idolatrous feasts that are kept either at Room of the
Papists or at Constantinople among the Turks, I think you cannot name any more
detestable then these, where Christ is so dishonored and Christianity so
directly blasphemed and cursed, and drunkenness so extolled for a virtue: yet
are you become so partial in yourself and a judge of such evil thoughts, that
you blush not to condemn our use of temples for the superstition of the former
times, while your selves dare venture into this Jewish synagogue, a nest of
superstition nothing inferior unto the Papists.

Seventhly, as for the discipline and censures used among the Jews you can not
deny them to be Idolles, whiles you H. B. disc. p. 234 and 236.
make the suspension used in true Churches of Christ to be Idolatrous and an
Idol-suspension; though nothing so absurd and vile as is that suspension of the
Jews. The censures of the Jews are many first they have a kind of rebuke
which they call neziphah, this they Elias Levita in Tischbi in nazaph.
refer to the initial letters of nezem zahab be -- aph, etc. a Jewel of gold
in a swines snout: Prove. 11.22. This they describe to be the Arba Turim in
Ioreh dea. tract. Niddui. sig. 334.
rebuke of a great man upon an other: And the manner is, that he which has it
upon him must hide himself and sit in his house, and be ashamed and not see the
face of him that has rebuked him, nor stand before him with his head
uncovered, and must diminish his mirth his talk his exercises, etc. But others
need not to avoid him, neither is he required to seek reconciliation with him
that is offended, neither is any absolution required after this rebuke has
been borne a certain time. Again, they have three sorts of excommunication,
niddui, cherem and shamatha, all which as they are now used by the Jews, are
Idolatrous and superstitious. For the first, which is a kind of suspension,
they May money in misneh, in Thalmud thorah, chapter 6.
assign four and twenty causes for which it is to be inflicted: Among the
rest, one cause is, for despising even one word of the scribes, etc. which are
most absurd and impious many times and ought to be despised: An other
unreasonable cause is, if a Jew sell any ground unto a gentile that is an
Idolater (such they account all to be that call upon the name of Christ) they
suspend him, until he will take upon himself all the hurt which may come
thereby from the gentile unto an Israelite, etc. Him that is suspended they
avoid in eating and drinking with him and must sit 4. cubits from him: during
the time of this reiection he may not shave himself, nor wash himself, etc.
Thalmud Ierusalemy in moed katon chapter 3 f. 81. col. 4.
He that is thus suspended or rejected by a Rabbine, is rejected of his
scholar, but he that is rejected of the scholar is not rejected of the
Rabbine. He that is rejected of the Father of the Judgment house, is rejected
of the wise man but he that is rejected of the wise, is not rejected of the
Father of the judgement-house. Ior. dea. vbi supra.
He that is rejected of the prince, is rejected of all Israel: but he that is
rejected of all Israel is not rejected of the prince, etc. As for the
absolution and loosing this band, the form of words used is, scherui lach,
machol lach: Thou art loosed: thou art forgiven: and if the man to be absolved
be absent, they say, scherui lo: He is loosed: Touching the persons that may
absolve, Misneh in Thalmud thor. 2. 7.
Maimony says, that three Idiots or private men, or one alone that is
approoved may absolve the suspended person, and that a Thalmid or disciple of
the Rabbines may loose either the anathema or the suspension even in the place
of the Rabbie; If three have suspended a man and be gone away; if the suspended
person repent, three others may absolve him, but Ex Arba Turim vbi supra.
R. Abraham ben Dior writes that three other can not absolve him except they be
as great as the three former: and that a third man may give authority unto two
to absolve, etc. That if a man be rejected by this censure of niddui and he
know not who it is that has rejected him, there is no other may absolve him
but the Prince: but if he know who has rejected him, then he that rejected,
may absolve, though he be one of the people of the Land, or an other like him.
They give special warning that whosoever will absolve or loose that which his
neighbor has bound must consider diligently whether he be equal unto him
whether he may be compared with him in wisdom, and that if he be not like
unto him in the fear of God and in greatness that then the absolutio^ be
performed by two, etc. Many other are the superstitious devises about this
matter, as touching those that are Ibidem, and Maimony in Thal. thor. vbi supra.
rejected by an oath, touching those that are rejected by dream, not to be
absolved but by 10. persons, of such and such quality: touching the number of
days both for neziphah and niddui; touching the stone to be left upon the
chest of him that dies without absolution: touching cherem or anathema the
second kind of excommunication: to be Ioa Buxt. Epist. Heb. institut. c. 6
executed with candles lighted in the synagogue, and extinguished upon the
curse pronounced, to signify that the person so rejected is deprived of the
light of heaven: touching their shamatha also, etc. In these censures of the
Jews there is as much superstition and impiety practiced, as is by the
Papists in their curses: and in this regard you had as much cause to have
avoided the Jews synagogue used by you, as we have to avoid any place abused
by the Papists for their superstitious discipline.

Lastly, the very place itself, the house of prayer or the synagogue where the
Jews do assemble for their worship, is unto them a holy place, and
consequently according to your reasoning page 178.
before, is unlawful to be used, and to be avoided as a very Idol, for the
holiness that is put in the same. Their Thalmudicall canons require and enjoin
them, Arba Turim, lib. Orachchaijm tract. beth hacceneseth. sig. 151 R. Alphes
in megillah c. 3. f. 356.
not to laugh, jest, or talk therein: not to cat or drink there; not to dress
themselves there: not to walk up and down there: not to go thither in the heat
to avoid the heat of the sun: nor in time of rain to avoid a shewer: yet
they hold it lawful for the disciples of their Chacamim, their wise rabbines
to eat and drink in that place: They hold it unlawful for a man to invent or
devise any matter there except it be some work of alms, the redeeming of
captives or the like. They allow not a man to mourn in that place, except it
be for some great man of the city, when as all the inhabitants of the city be
gathered together to lament him: They forbid men to meet one an other there for
any necessary business: but if they do meet there, they are required first to
read a verse (of the Bible,) or to speak a word out of the Thalmud: but if they
can neither read nor repeat any thing out of their traditionall books, then
they are required to say unto some child, read me a verse, etc. that they may
not seem to have met there for any other necessary business. Their custom is
to light candles there for honor, and to bring sweet herbs or flowers, etc.
They esteem their synagogue so holy, that they make it a dangerous matter to
spit there: Thalmud Ierusalemy in Beracoth c. 3. fol. 6. col. 4.
R Chalaphta ben Saul says if a man neeze in prayer it is an evil sign to
him. ( R. Moses mikkotsi, says if the spit be ready to arise it is to be
swallowed, SMG. precepr. affir. 19.) R. Hanina tells how he saw a Rabbine
coughing or neezing and laying his hand on his mouth but did not spit. R.
Iochanan says, he that spits in the synagogue, let him see that his coso.
cup be clean: or as R. Moses mikkotsi relates it, that his ciso.
bag or Chest be clean: and this he expoundes of his body: How this may be
done is showed in the Thalmud by this rule that is there given: to spit before
him is unlawful: to spit after him is lawful: to spit on the right hand is
unlawful: but on the left hand it is lawful: R. Iehoshuah ben Levi says, he
that spits in the house of the congregation, is as if he did spit in the apple
of his eye. R. Jonah says, he that spits let him rubit out. R. Jeremy and R.
Samuel say, he that prays let him not spit till he go 4 cubits from the
place. R. Iose says, he that spits let him not pray till he go 4. cubits from
the place. These are the learned Jew doctors, and ancient Rabbines without
whose help (as you say) we cannot well understand the scriptures. To confirm
and countenance the rule before mentioned, showing at what side a man must spit
in case of necessity; it is alleged in the same place of the Thalmud, this is
that which is written, a thousand shall fall at thy side. (ps. 90.) to wit, if
this rule of spitting in right manner be duly observed. Thalmud Babylonic. in
Schabbath. c. 2. fo. 32.
R. Ismael the son of Eleazar says, that for the wickedness of two things or of
two words the people of the earth do die, because they call the holyark (aron)
arna; and because they call the house of the congregation, the house of the
folk or people; beth gnam: viz. because they do not in their speech honor the
synagogue, with a holy title. Now these and many other the like superstitious
observations do show that the Jews put as much and more holiness in their
synagogue, then the papists do in their temples: for the Papists do not forbid
men to walk up and down therein: they do not forbid men to fly thither to
avoid a shewer of rain: they are not so scrupulous about spitting there, etc.
And therefore the blame that you would lay upon us for reteyning of such temples
wherein superstitious persons have put holiness, does redound unto your own
reproof and comes more heavily upon your own head for using the Jews
synagogue.

CHAP. XV. Touching the present meeting house still retained by Mr. Ainsworth.
Hen. Ains.
FOr your 1. and 2. objections from the houses wherein we meet: I have In the
defense of our 6t. reason.
before proved, they are not, neither ever were Idolies, nor by any law of God
to be destroyed, though Jews or any, have worshipped in them.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
AS you did formerly use a Jews synagogue for the place of your worship: so do
you now presently use the synagogue or meeting house, where Mr. Johnson and his
people after your division and separation from them, did still use to meet
together for the public service of God: And this meeting house according to
your doctrine is an Idolie, or place of Idols, which by you ought to be avoided
as well as our temples.

First, for the constitution of Mr. Iohnsons Church assembling in that place:
by your testimony and dealing therewith it must needs be false in as much as
they did degenerate and prove obstinate sinners, in your account: while you
witness of them, that Animad. p. 48.
their error did eat out the very constitution of the church: that they
Animadv. p. 129.
departed from and spoke evil of, and persecuted the truth and way of God,
wherein they had once walked with you. You say that Ibidem. p. 132.
daily in their public doctrines and prayers they inveighed against the truth
they formerly professed, wounded the consciences of the brethren and sought all
occasions to draw men from the right way and practice of the Gospel. What
should we do, but shake of the dust of our feet against such authors of
errors and peace breakers? Now such obstinate and degenerate apostates,
against whom men may shake of the dust of their feet, cannot by your own
confession be the true matter of a Church, nor yield a true constitution
thereof: and being a false constitution set up in stead of a true, you also
therein acknowleage it Counterp. p. 172.
a very Idol. And as you thus make the body of their constitution in general
to be an Idol; so the several members in particular being according th your
judgment of them, wicked apostates, persisting in sin, they also by your
writing are to be deemed Ibid. p. 144.
Satan's images, pictures of the devil and hellish representations, and
consequently their meeting house an Idol-temple.

Secondly, for the worship of that Church: you must needs confess it to be
Idolatrous also, upon the former ground. For whereas you write that Cou^terp.
p. 142. 143. 144. 145.
the bodies and souls of men are spiritual and living sacrifices, and the
persons offered in the Church by the ministry of the Gospel, should be as the
holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in the solemn feast, etc. The people of
Mr. Iohnsons company being as you have accused them obstinate and degenerate
apostates, persisting in wickedness, hereupon all that blame which you impute
unto the worship in the Church of England falls upon their heads upon your
own grant; namely that they neither deserve to be laid on Gods Altar nor to
be touched of any true Israelite in such respect, etc. that the precious body
and blood of Christ represented by bread and wine at his supper, is prostituted
unto the wicked and unworthy receyvers in that church, etc. that baptism is
there given unto the seed of the most ungodly, blasphemers and enemies of
Christ, unto whom by no right it does apperteyne: That there is a sacrilegious
profanation of the holy mysteries, etc. That the bringing of Satan's seed into
the Church, unto the aliar of God may further be minded as a high degree of
violating the second commandment, whereby all images, idols or similitudes
whatsoever, of the Divils or men's invention or forming, are severely forbidden
to be brought into Gods house, or used in his worship, etc. That they remaining
in impenitency, etc. have no word or promise in scripture that Christ is the
Priest or sacrificer of such worship or worshippers. And must not that place
where all this false and Idolatrous worship has been performed, be
acknowledged to be an Idol-temple? yet is it now your temple.

Thirdly, for the ministers of Mr. Iohnsons company. I Page 26.
showed them before out of your own writings to be Idolles: and you deny it
not. And it may further appear by that which you write against their Animadv
p. 59. -- 67.
ministry executed by such as have not rightly been called by the Church
whereof they stand ministers, etc.

Fourthly for their government; you call it a Ibid. p. 36 38. 42.
prelacie: a new established hierarchy: a spiritual tyranny: and such
governors, you hold to be Arrow against Idol. p. 19.
Idolles. Besides Mr. Johnson using the censure of suspension which heretofore
you held to be an H.B. disc. p. 234. and 236.
Idol, his government in that respect is idolatrous according to your
profession. Now there being so many Idolles in the constitution, ministry,
worship and government of that Church, the 4. maine heads of transgression
imputed by you unto the Church of England, how can you blame us for our use of
temples, when as yourselves even to this hour do still reteyne that meeting
house, where all these Idols have been discovered by you?

If you will distinguish betwixt Idols, whereof some cause ruin to the
temples, and others not: show us a clear warrant from the scriptures for such
distinction, and you shall then find how many ways it will return upon your
own heads. And besides you cannot help yourself with any such distinction,
because you do already here affirm in express words, that these houses are
not to be destroyed though Jews or any have worshipped in them. So that though
Indians had worshipped the devil in his own person in your synagogue
neither that nor any other of the grossest Idolatry should have hurt your
privileged place, though far less Idolatries might tumble down our Churches.

If you will send us still unto the defense of your 6t. reason; you may see it
before refuted and besides, that which you there said of private dwelling
houses, will not serve to excuse your plate of ordinary and public assembly
for the worship of God.

If you or any of yours should except, that this your synagogue was not built
by Antichrist, nor dedicate to Antichristian Idolatry: that will not help you:
you cut of yourself from having any excuse thereby, vvhiles in your reply unto
Mr. Ber. making such a like answer unto you, you say in effect, that Counterp.
p. 199.
the law of God makes no inquiry, by whom such places have been built, but
whether Idolaters have set up their Idolatry there and worshipped in such
places. Yea if your arguing be sound, if the Church of God should build a new
temple for his lavvfull service and worship, and if the Papists or other
Idolaters should by violence take the same from them and use it but one year
or one month for their Idolatrous service: by your doctrine it could never be
lawfully employed again unto the service of Christ by any true Christians.
And therefore by the same reason is your meeting house to be abolished and
destroyed, having been defiled with so many Idolles.

CHAP. XVI. Touching alms receyved publicly in an Idol-Temple.
Hen. Ains.
FOr your 3. it is an objection of a former adversrie, and heretofore publicly
answered. But the answers, you say, are in sufficient. For, the difference
between the ordinary public worship in such places, and the occasional
receiving of alms therein by the poor, cannot (you say) without manifest
untrueth be affirmed or applied to the matter in hand. Your reason is, the
distribution of this alms, is not occasional, but an ordinary publik work of
mercy, etc. I answer; The publik worship of the Church is Ecclesiastical, the
alms here spoken of, is political and civil: to put no difference between
these, is manifest error and ignorance; and let all men of knowledge, be
judges. Again, peoples of all Religions or of no Religion, which never go
thither for religious exercise, yet upon occasion of the alms there given, go
thither to receive it in the winter, one working day in the week, from the
hands of the Magistrates deputies: to say there is no difference between these
things, argues want of judgment.

To the 2. difference which we put, between the benevolence of a Church to the
saints, (the sacrifice spoken of Phil. 4.18.) and the releef of a city, given
to all poor people without respect of their religion: you answer, the
benevolence given to the poor of any Religion, is Heb. 13.16. Gal. 6.10. 2.
Cor. 9.13
a sacrifice, etc. And this alms is not the releef of a city, but chiefly of
a Church, collected publicly every Lords day, in the congregation of the
Saints, etc.

Repl. First, for the scriptures which you cite, they imply private benevolence
also, and not publik only: so upon this your doctrine, it seems that if any
of your people should for their necessity receive private alms of papists or
other heretics, they should not receive a civil benevolence but an
Ecclesiastical, and so have a Religious communion with their sacrifices. If
thus you think, I pray you tell me in your next. Secondly, you say not well nor
rightly, that this is not the releef of a city, (as we oppose City or
political estate, to Church or Ecclesiastical estate) For 1. the Magistrates of
the city, are not necessarily of the Church, but only such as will. 2. This
collection is not by the appointment of the Church (who have an ecclesiastical
collection by their Deacons,) but by the appointment of the Magistrate. 3. They
collect it not from the Church only in their congregation, but from all the
city also, by every street and house, of all the inhabitants that will give: of
which not one among many, are members of the Church. 4. They collect it not for
the Church, but for the city: and so for the poor of the Church, not
considered as members of the Church, but as members of the common wealth. 5.
The distributors appointed by the Magistrates, are not necessarily members,
much less Deacons of the Church. 6. And they to whom it is distributed, are
the poor of all sorts, not in respect as they are members of any Church: but
as they are poor and dwelt for a time in the city. These things some of them
my self know, the rest I have heard of such as are better acquainted with the
State, to be certainly true. Now let all that know what political and
ecclesiastical means, judge between you and us, of what nature this
benevolence is.

To our 3. difference, between the solemn appointed worship of God by the
Church, and the private duties of thankfulness, salutation, etc you say, the
duties of godly thankfulness and blessing in the name of the Lord are and ought
to be here performed: and that they are not private duties but publik, as is
this alms, etc. I answer: By this your plea, you would seem to prove an
ecclesiastical communion in public prayer, which the dutch Church of this
city should have with all the poor in the town; even the most irreligious,
profane and heretical. And would you thus grace their communion to disgrace our
poor? But indeed, you manifestly turn away from the matter in hand. For you
deny not the difference which we put, neither in truth can you. And as for any
publi^k blessing, it is known that the Magistrates deputies perform this
business without any publik prayer or blessing, either before or after. Neither
do they require of all or any of the people any prayer or blessing public or
private: neither do the people perform it otherweise then by thankful
obeisance of each one that receives it: as is usually done at other times, and
in other places of the city, for like favors.

Unto the question made in that book, about the lawfulnes to walk up and down
in idol-temples, as they use in Paul's, etc. You answer: that in idol-temples
where idolservice is still ordinarily performed, we cannot lawfully walk up and
down, as men use to do in Paul's: for woe is denounced to men by whom Mat. 18.7
scandals do come. Repl. Behold how you who keep Idolies to worship God in (as
Antichrist consecrated them to that end,) and have so pleaded before for those
nurseries of idolatry: can now against others, denounce woe, as causing
scandals, even for walking up and down in them. But by this your answer it
seems that either the temples in Rome and Spain, where ordinarily Mass is
sung, are in your judgment no idol-temples, nor their service idolatry: or
else, you think it unlawful to walk in those temples. If thus you hold, when
you shall so signify, you shall hear what I will further say unto it: and to
your question about Baals temple also.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
TO convince you of partiality in condemning our use of temples, I alleged
your own use of the same, while your poor do also publicly worship God in
the same temples, if they do but publicly bless them in the name of God, of
whom they do publicly receive those alms in such places. And here I See
before page 27.
refuted three distinctions which you use to excuse your selves in this matter.
I showed the error of your first distinction, in that you made the receyving
of the alms in this place to be occasional, and the worship of the Church to
be ordinary, etc. Now you answer, that the public worship of the Church is
ecclesiastical, the alms here spoken of, is political and civil, etc. And
hereunto I reply. 1. I do not herein so much blame your manifest error and
ignorance, your want of judgment in the distinction as you made it at first,
as I do now blame your want of upright and honest dealing in changing and
altering the distinction, in putting political and civil in stead of
occasional: As there is a plain difference betwixt betwixt Ecclesiastical and
political, so is there also betwixt political and occasional: for many things
are political which are not occasional, but ordinary: let all men of knowledge,
be judges. 2, whereas you say that people of all religion or of no religion do
receive this alms, this does not excuse the false hood of your first
distinction in making the alms to be occasional: for even atheists or
heretics or schismatiques that never go thither to hear the word of God, may
yet observe an ordinary and set time of the alms, and be willing to receive
the same in a public and solemn manner and not only occasionally. 3. Though
it were very gross, if you should plainly affirm that this alms here spoken
of was occasional; yet to color the matter a little you use an absurd phrase
which might insinuate as much unto the simple, in saying of the poor that upon
occasion of the alms there given, they go thither to receive it, etc. for you
might as well say touching the public ordinary worship of the Church, that
upon occasion of the word preached the godly go to hear, etc. And where then
is your difference betwixt occasional and ordinary? 4, I will make even your
self judge of the matter: for when you speak without prejudice and contention,
then you do rightly interpret this word occasional, and do expound Annot. on
Exo. 21.13.
occasionally delivered to be offered by chance: an example whereof is set down
in Deuteronomy. 19.5. And so according to your own exposition of the word this alms
cannot be occasional, seeing it is not an unexpected thing that is by accident
or chance received, but an ordinary, solemn thing purposely given and sought
for at an appointed time and place.

In the refutation of your second distinction, the first thing which I See
before page 27.
noted in opposition thereunto was, that not only the benevolence given to the
ministers or Saints of Christ, but that also which is given to the poor of
any religion whatsoever, one or other, is a service and Heb. 13.16 Gal. 6 10.
2. Cor. 9.13
sacrifice of sweet odor, etc. And what have you said hereunto? 1, in
repeating my reply, you leave out those words not only, which showed the very
point wherein I opposed your answer, and say nothing at all unto it: but
smoothly pass it over without any defense: I desire the reader to observe your
cunning therein. 2, In stead of answering that which was plainly set down,
you make inquiry about a devised thing seeming so unto you which is not set
down nor meant at all: you ask me whether I think that if any of our people
for their necessity should receive private alms of Papists or other
heretics they should not receive a civil benevolence but an ecclesiastical,
etc. Whereunto I answer that I do not think they should receive an
ecclesiastical benevolence: yea further if our people should privately join
with such in prayer unto God, yet would I not account this an ecclesiastical
communion or action. And though the scriptures I cited may be applied to
private benevolence also and not public only: yet does not the citing of
them imply that I think private benevole^ce to be an ecclesiastical matter.
what mean you to run away from question by such vain shifts?

The other thing which I noted in opposition to your second distinction, was:
that this alms we speak of is not the relief of a city, but cheefely the
benevolence of a Church, etc. Hereunto you reply that I say not well nor
rightly, etc. Your reasons are diverse.

First you say, the Magistrates of the city are not necessarily of the Church,
but only such as will. I answer, 1. This hinders not but the alms spoken of
may be cheefely the benevolence of a Church: even as other actions may be
actions of the church, though the Magistrates be not of the Church. Show I pray
you, how this your proposition may be applied against my assertion (...) what
if the Magistrates here were all necessarily of the Church should this make the
alms to be then the benevolence of the Church? should this either further or
hinder the thing in question? your loose allegation can no way be applied unto
this matter, either one way or other.

Secondly you say, this collection is not by the appointment of the Church (who
have an other ecclesiastical collection by their deacons) but by the
appointment of the Magistrate. I answer, that there be many ecclesiastical
actions, which are done by the appoyntme^t of the Magistrate, as the holding of
an ecclesiastical Synod: the observation of solemn and religious fasts not by
the appointment of the Church but of the Magistrate: yea the ordinary worship
of God in preaching the word and other services here are and 2. Chro. 8.14. and
14.4.
ought to be commanded by the Magistrates: And now according to your unsound
reasoning these and such like actions should not be ecclesiastical. You ought
to have considered that as in these so in the alms spoken of, because they are
administered publicly of the Church and at the exhortation of the ministers
going with the same, they may therefore be called the benevolence of a Church,
though appointed by the Magistrates.

Thirdly you plead that they collect it not from the Church only in their
congregation, but from all the city also, by every street and house, etc. I
answer, 1. In that this alms is ordinarily and publicly gathered every Lords
day in the congregation, and that the greatest part thereof is collected in
this solemn manner in the Church, the other collection in the streets being but
seldom in comparison of this; this is enough to confirm as much as I affirm,
namely that this alms is not the relief of a city but cheefely the
benevolence of a Church, etc. All reason requires that each thing should receive
denomination of that which is principal and cheef therein. 2, even that which
the deacons distribute is by them collected for a great part thereof, of such
as are no members of the Church: and this not only in respect of the strangers
which come into their congregations, but also privately collected from such as
daily get some thing into the poor man's box upon occasion of bargianes with
whosoever. And thus according to your reasoning that which the deacons
distribute should be the releef of a city, and not cheefely the benevolence of
a Church, because they do not collect it from the church only in their
congregation, etc. 3, even that alms which is collected in your own Church,
is not from the members of your Church only: but though an 100, strangers,
infidelles in your account, come into your congregation and should publicly
contribute with the rest into your Church treasure, though it was heretofore
Refut of Giff. p 147.
condemned by H. Barow) yet do you now accept and allow the same. If this alms
thus receyved among you be ecclesiastical, then have you no reason to deny
this other alms we speak of, to be the benevolence of a Church, in respect of
the persons from whom it is collected.

Fourthly, you argue, that they collect it not for the Church, but for the
city: and so for the poor, etc. I answer, that it may be an Ecclesiastical
alms if it be collected of the Church, though not for the Church. As those
prayers which are publicly made by the Church Ezr. 6.10. Ier. 29.7. Mat.
5.44. 1. Tim. 2.1.2.
for strangers, and for such as are no members of the Church, are to be
accounted an Ecclesiastical service, and a worship of the Church, though they
be made not for the Church, but for the city, for friends or enemies without:
even so the alms collected of the Church in a solemn assembly on the Lords
day, and given as a part of their public service unto God, are to be esteemed
a benevolence of the Church or a Church Service, though they be collected for
such as are in misery, though not of the Church; seeing the Churches (as well as
private persons) are Esa. 58.7. Neh. 5.5. Heb. 13.2.3 1 These. 4.12.
bound to show mercy unto them without.

Fifthly, you argue that the distributors appointed by the Magistrates, are not
necessarily members, much less deacons of the Church. But where is the proof
of this consequence, that therefore this alms is not an Ecclesiastical
benevolence? If your Church should agree together publicly to collect in your
congregation and then to send the same alms unto any in affliction, and not by
any deacons or members of your Church but by some other honest and trusty
persons without; should this alms now cease to be a Church service, or an
Ecclesiastical bevevolence? What color of reason can you bring for this?

Sixthly, you say, they to whom it is distributed, are the poor of all sorts,
not in respect as they are members of any Church, but as they are poor and
have dwelt for a time in the city. Ans. This reason is the same in effect with
the 4th that went before, and an idle repetition of the same, and is before
answered. And now I do willingly agree with you in this that all who know what
political and ecclesiastical means, judge between you and us of what nature
this benevolence is, and whether it be not as I said chiefly the benevolence of
a Church, etc.

But suppose I should grant you, that this alms were merely civil, and not
the benevolence of a Church, yet this does nothing weaken our maine objection
against you: for 1. Whether it be ecclesiastical or civil, if your people do
publicly in the name of God bless those that so mercifully distribute unto
them in an Idol-temple as you account it; then must you needs acknowledge,
that there is a lawful worshipping of God in an Idol-temple, which yet you
condemn in all other churches of God. 2, you cannot deny but that this
distribution of alms which your people do receive in this temple, is a solemn
public action performed for the glory and service of God by them that
administer: And do you then hold it more lawful to communicate with such
almoners as yourself note to be sometimes no members of the Church, then to
join in the service of God with a true Church in the same place? If it were an
ecclesiastical action of the deacons of the reformed dutch Church,
distributing out of their Church treasury as they do unto the members of their
own Church, would you then condemn the members of your Church for receiving
the same of them? 3. By your doctrine this temple where your poor receive this
alms, ought to be ruinated, either burnt or otherwise broken down, and so in
your judgment is unlawfully retained even for this use of distributing to the
poor therein: Now if notwithstanding this unlawful reteyning hereof you can
yet join with others in using this place to such purpose of distributing alms
therein as it ought not to be employed unto: why can you not as well join with
others in the other use of hearing Gods word therein? The Deuteronomy. 12.23.
legal commandment of destroying Idol-temples, does as well abolish them from
being alms houses as from being houses of prayer. And where then is your
dispensation to use them for receiving of alms, rather then for receyving of
spiritual instructions therein? If you plead that your use of them is only a
civil use, so as meats sacrificed to Idols were to be retained: This cannot
help you, because 1. Cor. 10.25.
things sacrificed to Idols need not to be burnt and abolished, but by your
doctrine our temples should be abolished, and destroyed, and so consequently
made unfit to meet or assemble in even for civil uses. A waken your conscience
Mr. Ainsworth, and examine yourself, whether you be not guilty of partiality,
in these your contrary doctrines and practices, which cannot agree one with an
other. And think that God knockes at the door of your conscience by these
admonitions: and despise not the counsel that is given unto you in his name.

As for your third distinction, between the solemn appointed worship of God by
the Church, and the private duties of thankfulness salutation, etc. I shevved
that this distinction also could not truly be applied unto the matter in hand
for the duties of godly thankfulness and blessing which are and ought to be
here performed, are not private duties but public even as is this alms that
is always publicly administered in the presence of a great multitude
assembled together. Hereunto you answer again that by this plea, I would seem
to prove an Ecclesiastical communion in public prayer, which the dutch
Church of this city should have with all the poor in the town, even the most
irreligious, profane and heretical, etc. But for reply unto this. 1. I observe
how you again leaving that which is plainly set down, do feign matter for
yourself to answer, and imagine a semblance, a seeming unto you, which can by
no means be justly collected from my words. For though I said, the poor do
bless publicly in the name of the Lord those that distribute unto them, yet
does not this prove a communion in public prayer which the dutch church
should have with all such. 2, though I had said much more: if I had said that
the dutch Church had been all present: that this alms had been given by their
deacons in their name: that there had been solemn prayer conceived by the
deacons at the delivery thereof: that all the poor had said Amen unto it and
again blessed them publicly in the name of the Lord, yet would not this
infer such an ecclesiastical communion of the dutch Church with the profane
and heretical poor, as you accuse me for going about to prove. Are not many
irreligious, idolatrous and profane people oftentimes present at your
ecclesiastical assemblies hearing your sermons, and saying Amen unto your
prayers: and does this prove an ecclesiastical communion of your Church
withal those profane persons that receive instruction from you? where then is
your separation? But if all this do not prove that you hold communion with such
persons: then much less does that which I said prove such a communion of the
Dutch Church with the profane, as you would draw from my words. 3, neither do I
mention this receyving of alms to disgrace your poor, as you mention it, but
to reprove your partiality, who seeking to disgrace and condemn all the
Churches of Christ for the use of their temples, do yet for your proffit allow
your poor to use the very same temples in receyving of alms.

You say further, that I manifestly turn from the matter in hand: for I deny
not the difference which you put, neither in truth can. But I pray you, is that
to turn from the question, when I showed that the difference or distinction
which you brought could not be truly applied to this matter in hand? And what
though your difference alleged by you be true in itself: is it not reproof
and shame enough unto you that it cannot be truly applied unto the present
controversy? Is not the misapplication of a true distinction unsound dealing,
and an abusing of the reader? Though I deny not a difference betwixt solemn
appointed worship, and the private duties of thankfulness, salutation, etc. yet
I deny that the blessing in the name of God whereof I spoke is any private
thankfulness or salutation: and what proffit can you then here make of this your
distinction?

But you proceed and say, As for any public blessing, it is known that the
Magistrates deputies perform this business, without any public prayer or
blessing, either before or after. I answer, 1, it is enough, for proof of that
I said, if the people receyving the alms do pray or bless in the name of God,
those that distribute unto them: if your poor do so much at the receipt thereof
then do they openly and publicly worship God in the place, which you account
an Idol-temple. 2, as for the distributours of this alms, there is the less
need for them to make any public prayer, because they begin there
distribution instantly and immediately after the sermon is ended, and after the
public prayers of the minister and the Church: which prayers being in the
same place may also serve for the sanctification of the alms then distributed.
And may not the consciences of your people be touched and smitten in them
selves to consider how they stay out of the Church till all the spiritual
alms of instruction for the soul be distributed and ended, and then to come
into the same place immediately, just when the corporal alms is to be reached
forth unto them? 3. The public collection and giving of alms even in your
own Church after your sermon, is performed without any public prayer or
blessing made by your deacons, as is testified unto me: does it therefore ceass
to be an ecclesiastical and solemn part of Gods worship?

You say moreover, that neither do they require of all or any of the people any
prayer or blessing public or private. And what though the almoners require it
not? yet as I showed you Page 26.
before from diverse Phil. 4.19.20. 2. Tim. 1.16. 2. Cor. 9.12.13.
scriptures, God requires this duty of public thanksgiving and blessing in
his name upon such occasion. But those testimonies you pass by and say nothing
at all unto them.

Again you add: Neither do the people perform it otherwise then by thankful
obeisance of each one that receyveth it, etc. But this you say, is not true for
all that receyve it: for there are some which upon the receipt do straightway
open their mouths and pray for a blessing and reward unto those that give this
alms unto them: And so ought your people to do according to those short forms
of prayer used in the scripture, ps. 129.8. Ruth. 2.4.
The blessing of the Lord be upon you: or we bless you in the name of the
Lord: And besides, I propounded this objection at first by way of suppositio^
saying, if you will allow your people to bless them in the name of the Lord,
etc. And to this you answer nothing: Tell us therefore at last: if your people
should thus breefely call upon the name of God for a blessing upon those that
minister publicly unto their wants at the same time, would you then be
content?

Touching your reply made unto the answer which I gave unto your question
about vvalking up and down in Idol-temples I do observe further.

1. You say nothing at all in refutation of it: but only wish me to behold how
I who keep Idolies to worship God in, etc. can now against others, denounce
woe, as causing scandalles, even for walking up and down in them: well, this I
behold and hold to be most equal: considering that the temples I pleaded for,
were such as are purged from Idolatry, and are not retained for that false
worship whereunto they were consecrated by Antichriste, but are become
nurseries of true godliness: whereas the temples wherein the Idols and
Idolatrous service are still retained and daily practiced, cannot lawfully be
frequented nor walked in as men unnecessarily use to do in Pawles, etc. For
those that should see you enter into such an Idol-temple, might easily conceive
that you went to hear a mass therein, and so they be confirmed in error, and
you thereby incurie the Mat. 18.7
woe denounced by Christ against Scandalles.

2. I may here justly admonish you to behold how you that co^de^ne our use of
temples purged from Idolatry, do yet in a contrary extreme allow your people a
use of temples, which by your profession are still polluted with the practice
of daily Idolatry: eve^ the temples of this city are in your account
Idol-te^ples, and the read prayr used therein, is in your eyes a detestable
Idol, a golden calfe, etc. yea in your writings you incline to allow your
people the use of the temples where popish Idolatry is in heinous degree
exercised

3. Whereas you seem to doubt whether I think that it is unlawful to walk
in the temples in Rome and Spain, where ordinarily mass is sung: telling me
also that I shall hear what you will further say unto it when I have signified
unto you, if thus I hold, etc. All this is very vain and idle, for when I
told you plainly before, as yourself also repeat, that in idol-temples where
idol-service is still ordinarily performed we cannot lawfully walk up and down
as men use to do in Paul's: was not this enough to signify that I held the
temples of Rome and Spain to be unlawful for such use? or what color of
reason had you to imagine that I should not think the Romish and Spanish
temples to be Idol temples and their service, idolatry? This vain demurre
seems to be nothing else but an excuse or shift to avoid the writing of that
which you were ashamed to utter concerning this point.

4. Whereas I demanded the like thing of you, whether you held it lawful for
men so to have walked up and down in the house of Baal, and there to have
receyved alms as your people do in these temples whereof we speak. To this
likewise you give no answer but take time to consider of it. Well, in the
mean time until you have taken better advise, see what an unworthy practice
you already stain yourself vvithall. You that condemn our temples to be See
before, p. 165.
merely and properly idolies, yea very Idols: you that condemn our reteyning
of them for necessary use, do yet for your proffit use them to walk in, to
receive alms in, etc. Though H. Barow write that Discov. p. 134.
God allows no use at all either civil or ecclesiastical of such Idolatrous
places: yet contrary to your profession you suffer your people to transgress
for a morsel of bread, by reteyning at least a civil use of these places: In
the mids of your invectives and dispute against them you allow your
disciples to go into these abominable sties, as Barovv Discov. p. 141.
calls them: togather up the crummes under the table in Devilles houses, as
yourself do Before. page 218.
call them. Is it not strange that Christian men, and such as separate from
other best Christians in the world wheresoever, should yet be so familiar with
devilles, as to creep into the bodies of very Idols or Devilles, to fetch their
meat out of their unclean stomachs and bellies? yea the Jewish Rabbines whom
I mention, because you honor them so much, Arba turim, halac. Tsedakah, or
treat. of alms, sig. 254. Thalmud in Babha bathra c. 1. Fol. 10.
teach that it is not lawful for an Israelite to receive any alms of an
Idolater openly, unless it be in case of necessity, (which respect in our use
of temples you judge to be a carnal consideration.) And though a Prince or King
of the gentiles should send any money unto them for an alms, though they would
not turn it back for peace sake, but receive it to avoid offense, yet are they
to give the same again unto some poor of the gentiles, in secret so that the
King may not hear of it. How much more ashamed would they be to receive such
an alms not only from Idolaters openly, but from out of the public Idolie,
yea Idol itself, as you profess to do?

CHAP. XVII. Touching the vvaverings of such as impugn our Temples.
Hen. Ains.
TO your last observations, of such as heretofore have written against these
idol temples, and after that wavered, or changed their minds: First, Mr.
Barrow (whose writings you mention) wavered not nor changed his mind, but was
constant in this, that Idol temples were to be destroyed: and not to be used
for places of Gods worship: let his writings be viewed.

As for others whom you speak of: if they have changed their minds, I leave
you if you please, to demand the reasons of themselves. I am to answer for my
self, according to the grounds which I maintain by the scriptures: which if
you cannot take away by the word of God; the weakness of men will little avail
you. And for such amongst our selves as walk not aright, we shall look unto
them as there is cause. If I should take this course with you, to gather the
variety of things written about religion by men of your side, and the change
of their judgments afterward, and their weak walkings, etc and put them upon
you to answer: you should have work more then enough. And how justly you retort
my words used to you about read prayer: and apply them to this of the Temples:
let any indifferent persons judge. For I maintain our reasons set down in our
Apology and refute your answers given unto them: but with that question of
read prayer, you meddle not: though it came in among the synns showed in my
argument unto you, about the causes of our separation.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
Four examples of your waverings were observed by me. The first instance of H.
Barow his wavering, you deny not, but do in part explane it: The piece of paper
affixed to the Discov. p. 133.
margent of his book shows it more plainly; that his mind became doubtful
if not changed in this point, namely, though he held our temples ought to be
plucked down, yet not with such detestation to be utterly destroyed, as these
Idols which had worship given unto them, but that the idolatrous shapes being
utterly abolished, the stuff of these synagogues, as the stone, timber, lead,
iron, etc. might be converted to civil and honest uses, etc. Now those that
saw him wavering in this part and doubting whether he had detested where God
has not detested, had just cause to take warning hereby, that they should not
rashly hearken to such a person who in all his writings powers forth a flood of
detestation against the lawful communion of the Churches of Christ.

The second and third instancee of Mr Iohnsons wavering, and Mr. Robbinsons
recantation, you deny not. You leave me to demand the reasons of themselves:
you say you are to answer for yourself, etc. But is not the case strangely
altered? Have not both these labored to answer for you; Mr. Johnson in his
answer to Mr. White, seeking to excuse and diminish the fault of your apostasy
objected to you; Mr. Robinson also in many points seeking to defend your cause
in his book against Mr. Bernard? And have you now never a word to answer for
them? Is not this ungrateful dealing with your friends? Nay rather take heed
that you become not ungrateful unto God, by neglecting his mercy which he
shows unto you, in setting these examples of your old friends before you; that
in them you might learn to turn from your error unto the Lord and to the
communion of his people.

The fourth example of wavering which is observed was in the people of your
own congregation, together with your toleration of the same. Of this you say,
And for such amongst our selves as walk not right, we shall look unto them as
there is cause. But who sees not what a faint answer this is? for 1, when as I
had showed that diverse of your people did not walk according to your
profession: they frequenting the places which you call Idol-temples and teach
men to avoid them as execrable, as devilles houses: was there not a cause for
you to look unto such, who^ so long you had let alone? yea or have you to this
hour brought them to public repentance after so many years, when as they
have publicly and openly used such places? suppose they did now abstain from
those temples, yet according to your See before. p. 36. and 121.
own writing against me you are holden in the cords of your trangression, and
this sin remains upon you till it be purged and broken of by repentance: your
own Luke 13.3.5. Mark. 1.15. Act. 20.21. and 26.18.
allegations of scripture do serve to condemn yourself herein. As Cains murder
cleaved unto him so long as he repented not, suppose he slew no more men after
Abel: so the guilt of this sin in frequenting devilles houses according to your
profession, does still cleave unto you so long as there is no repentance for
it, suppose the practice should cease. 2, But does this practice cease among
you? No not that also: VV. S. in special whom I before noted unto you, is
seen of many still openly and publicly frequenting these temples which you
so plead against: yea and professes before diverse that he will continue so to
practice. I did before in my former writing manifest your notorious partiality
herein, and you cannot either deny or defend it: and yet after a years warning
you continue in the same halting course, tolerating that among yourselves for
which you separate from us, and thus have doubled the guilt of your partiality:
let all men of conscience judge what sincerity there is in your course. 3, what
does it help you by vain arguments and pretenses to seek the ruin and rasing
of our temples, whiles other of your own society do do help to repair our
temples, as I showed you Page 29.
before? The stroke of your hammer makes a great sound, yet it breaks nothing
in our temples: but the stroke of some of your peoples hammers and axes have
done good service unto us in making our temple fit for our use. 4, as for your
own person in particular, do you not remember that you and Mr. Th. your elder
have been content to come unto our temple, to present yourselves before our
Eldership, and to be examined and heard what you could say in an
ecclesiastical controversy in the case of C. B. to give evidence or light in
the trial of that matter? And therefore seeing you confess the trial and
examination of such causes to be Animad. verse. p. 49. 50.
works of the Sabath day, holy and religious actions, as well as the
prophetical and priestly office of Christ, it may hereby appear that you
also by your own example do build that which you seek to break down, in that
you have voluntarily come into an Idol-temple as you call it and this not for a
civil but a holy and religious action. Thus also have sundry others of your
people done, in coming to bear witness in such cases.

But you object, that if you should take this course with us, togather the
variety of things written about religion by men of our side and the change of
their judgments afterward, and their weak walkings, etc. put them upon us to
answer: I should have work more then enough. Answer. 1, whatsoever pretenses
you make to the contrary, yet is this thing done by yourself: and few or none
have done it so much as you: Throughout your Counterpoyson, there be abundant
examples hereof. When you so bitterly inveigh against the hellish errors
taught by the transformed ministers, to make men keep communion with Belial, as
you speak: you say, Forespeech to the Counterpoys.
worthy it is to be observed how the ministers of England are come to
contradict and depart from their own grounds for to mainteyne their corrupt
estate. And is it not also as lawful and as worthy a thing for us to observe
how the ministers of the separation are come to contradict themselves, to
depart from their own grounds, etc. you allege, that Ibidem.
men will hardly be a known of the manifold evils and gross corruptions, that
prevayl in their assemblies: That therefore you are forced to produce their own
writers to witness with you: to complain of the sins that reign among them.
Even so because you will hardly be a known of the manifold evils and gross
corruptions that prevayl in your assembly, therefore are we forced to produce
your own writers as Mr. Johnson and Mr. Robinson that complayn of the sins
that reign among you, etc. And this we do, to this end, (to use your own words
in the same place) that if you will yet resist, the world may see, that you are
condemned by yourselves. Again in the next leaf unto your preface, in the
Table or Direction to some principal things contained in your counterpoyson,
you note the Testimonies of the ministers of England against the estate of that
Church, and refer us unto more places and pages of your book for those
testimonies, then unto any other matter in your table: hereby you acknowledge
such testimonies to be among the principal things of your writings, and to be
looked after and sought for oftener and in more places of your book, then any
other principal matter contained therein. In your answer to Mr. B. you
Counterpo. page 153. 155.
note his changing and weak walking, etc. Shall these observations in you be
principal matters; and shall they be of no regard, of no worth, nor yet to be
endured, when we observe the like matters against you? 2, there is not the like
reason that I should be required to answer for all the differences and
contradictions that have been or are betwixt the ministers that are of the same
religion with me: they being so many thousands, and such as for the most of
them I never saw their faces nor so much as heard of their names; whereas these
whom I object unto you are but three or four in all: and not only so but some
of them such as have already answered for you: so that both for number and bond
of thankfulness, you both better may and ought to answer for them. 3, the thing
which I object here unto you is not so much your disagreement and differences,
as your inexcusable and blind partiality in the same, whiles you suffer such
things among yourselves for which you do condemn, disclaim and renounce the
communion of other churches: This unchristian dealing I showed to be contrary
to prove. 16.17.
the High way of the upright man, which you had poynted at with your finger.
Mr. Ainsworth, if you can find the like unconscionable partiality in me, then
press me with it, and call for answer: If I teach men to separate from the
Churches of Christ, for those very things which I practice my self and wink at
in others, then let me bear the shame of such evil dealing. In the mean time
consider that this cloak of partiality is the robe of confusion wherewith you
array and bewray yourself and your profession.

Moreover, as for Mr. H. his sermon, and how justly I retort your words to me
used about read prayer, and apply them to the practice of Mr. Johnson and
Robinson contrary to you in the question of temples, I desire also with you,
that any indifferent persons judge. For I urge you with their practice which
yourself cannot deny: you tell me of a matter which I have showed to be
otherwise. You tell me of read prayer which is not the question betwixt us at
this time; whereas I urged you with your differences about the temples, which
you cannot deny to be the present question betwixt us. As for your reasons in
your Apology and my answers, and your disorderly bringing in of read prayer in
your maine argument sent unto me, there is enough said Chap. 2.
before, whereunto I refer the reader.

CHAP. XVIII. Of some other differences.
Hen. Ains.
TO the other things which I signified we misliked in you: you answer in
general: that the question betwixt us is not about all things wherein we differ,
but only about those things which we hold to be just causes of renouncing your
communion. You say, Our separation or schism is a double iniquity and an
error of errors, etc. and you would have the axe of our separation laid unto
the root of your religion, etc. and you account all other differences, to be a
wandering from the question.

Hereupon I answer, that I am willing to hold only unto the mayn causes of our
separation, and to let other particulars rest, til this question be ended. For
as you began to write, so I gave you to choose, and still give you, what things
to reason of: and I mislike not your choice. For as I would not willingly abide
in any error, so much less in an error of errors: though I am yet persuaded:
it is your great syn so to call it: but let the word of God be judge between
us. Now for our separation, I set you down an argument fortified with many
scriptures and reasons: against which, you have not alleged anyone word of God:
let your former answer be viewed. So mine error of errors if such it be, must
remain with me still, for my conscience cannot be convinced but by the word of
God. You allege our renouncing of your communion: and that either is not (as
before I showed you) or it is as you stood one with the Church of England in
the synns thereof, wherein we with you were all once entangled. But God of his
grace has given us repentance unto life, and we have manifested the
particulars: you have not so done, therefore (for ought that we know) your synns
remain upon you. Yea you disclaim our separation as a schism, in your
pulpit, in private, and in printed works: how can we now give you the right
hand of fellowship, seeing repentance from dead works, is one of the Heb. 6.1.
principles of the doctrine of Christ? And for this your particular
congregation, here gathered, you cannot say we renounce it or separate from it,
who were never of it: but if any separation be, I have before showed it is
first upon yourselves. I shall not need therefore at this time to make any reply
unto your particular answers unto the differences propounded. Only for the
present, I put you in mind that you have not as yet alleged any one word of
God for your festival days, marriage by the minister consistory, or communion
of your members with an other Church, worship, ministry, etc. so far
differing from yours in appearance. But when these things shall come to
discussing, I hope you vvil not be so barren. So for the differences that you
allege from us, touching marriage with the members of the Dutch church,
marriages and divorces without authority of the Magistrate, judging of
ecclesiastical causes on the Lords day, omitting and thrusting out in part
sometimes the administration of the word and Sacraments, and for the ministers
set maintenance: in the trial of them, I shall by Gods grace manifest, that in
the most we are vvronged: and for that which we do h^ld in any of them, we
vvil confirm it by the word of God, and reasons from the same, otherweise, we
vvil reform it.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
TOuching 3 other differences betwixt us: I noted diverse things distinctly:
unto which you make a confused and defective reply: unto my first answer, you
say something unto the two last, nothing at all. For the first, you seem to
allow my choice, that we hold only unto the maine causes of your separation,
etc. but I spoke not of the maine causes, but of the just causes of your
separation, whether great or small; so that you leave the matter in some
uncertainty still, not showing me which and how many you hold for just causes,
when I had nominated sundry differences betwixt us. You say, you set down an
argument for your separation fortifyed with many scriptures, etc. And I have
showed the contents of your maine argument, to be beside the question of our
Church: and there is no place of scripture which I can discern to be alleged
against our estate in particular, but I have given answer thereunto. And for
our particular congregation, though you were never of it, yet may we justly say
that you have renounced the communion thereof, and not only as we agree with
England but as we agree with these Churches: for you that had separated
yourself from all the true Churches long before this our particular Church was
gathered; and you that do still renounce and refuse the worship of God in such
temples as we use, (if there were nothing else) do thereby renounce communion
with us in our ordinary worship of God. That we have just cause to disclaim
your separation as a schism, I have labored to show in some part in this
treatise, and will endeavor make it yet more plain, as the Lord shall give
strength and opportunity. And if there were nothing else, your allegation of
this scripture Heb. 6.1. might show us your schism: when having spoken of our
standing one with England; of your own repentance for it; of our sins
remaining upon us, etc. you say, how can we give you the right hand of
fellowship, seeing repentance from dead works, is one of the principles of the
doctrine of Christ? The substance of this objection has been twice largely
Chap. 4. and 6.
answered before: yet since you repeat it again, I do again tell you, 1. If
it were granted that our communion with England were a sin, yet might we have
true repentance though we could not see the same to acknowledge it. Your
contrary plea savours of the error of the perfectionists and enclines to
familisme: for if true repentance cannot be without the knowledge of every
particular sin, then do you teach a perfection of knowledge contrary to the 1
Cor 8.2 and 13.9.
scriptures: If true repentance may be had without the knowledge of of each
particular sin, then why not without the knowledge of this sin as well as of
others? The Apostle shows that repentance from dead works Heb. 6.1.
is necessary to salvation, but he does not deny that to be true repentance,
where there is ignorance of some particular dead works that are in us: this
holy scripture is therefore abused by you. 2, suppose that we were without
true repentance, yet where is the scripture, that shows our Church ought
therefore to be separated from? The sin of some does not pollute the rest which
approve not thereof. 3, whereas in my second answer Page 31.
before I noted as great differences among yourselves, as these 3. last be
wherein you differ from us; notwithstanding your unconscionable course might
thereby appear unto all, in holding such communion among yourselves as you
deny in others: yet as if either partiality were no blot, but a beautiful
wart in the face of your Church: or else as if you dispaired of washing away
this blot, even so do you pass by this matter in silence without any reply
unto it.

Whereas you put me in mind that I have not as yet alleged any one word of
God for our festival days, marriage by the minister, consistory, and
communion of our members with an other Church, etc. I answer, that seeing you
are the accuser, that maintain a separation from us in these respects, the
falt is yours that have not brought any word of God to conclude a separation
from us upon these grounds: Though in your Apology you have pretended
scripture to show some of these things unlawful, yet have you not directed any
reasons against our communion for these things: even as in your Apology you
have pretended scripture against our use of the Lords prayer, and yet confess
that you would not separate for this. As for our communion with England I have
said enough before Chap 4. and 6. so far as concerns separation from us upon
such a pretense. As for our consistory or Eldership, I showed in my former
writing how you have allowed it yourself in communicating therewith, and you
have answered not a word unto it. Now those that refute themselves on this
manner, have no reason to call for further refutation, unless they acknowledge
their errors in such practices. Besides seeing you have not yet answered,
neither the Expos. of Mat. 18.
first nor the Christian plea.
last book of Mr. Johnson wherein he has written against your popular
government, what mean you to call for more? If more be requisite, you may see
that I Page 33.
promised you in my former writing that when I should receive any arguments
from you to prove your refusal of communion upon these grounds, that I would
then give further answer unto you. The errors which you have published in your
Animadversion for the maintenance of your popular order, and the enormities
which in that order are committed by you in your unlawful excommunications and
censures are so many that they require a distinct treatise for the refutation
thereof: of which I purpose to say more hereafter as occasion is given. As for
the state of the question and what we hold in these matters, I have set it
down in my former writing, and to this point also you say nothing. Touching
the other differences betwixt us, which are here ambiguously repeated by you
and not so that the reader might well understand the meaning thereof, I am
ready to manifest that I have not done you any wrong in the relation thereof;
and that you cannot confirm any of them by the word of God: if you will bring
any reasons to conclude a separation from thence.

CHAP. XIX. The Conclusion.
Hen. Ains.
Unto your Conclusion I willingly assent, and by Gods grace shall endeavor so
to do: wishing the like in you. And upon this occasion I shall put you in mind
of that which in part appears in this your writing, and more fully in the
disguised pamphlets that come out of your congregation: how you take a special
delight and think it for your vantage, to upbraid m^ns differences, to rake into
particular men's synns and infirmities, yea though they be repented of, and to
blazon them abroad to the world, for the discredit of the cause which they
profess, or have professed. If the arrows of the Almighty did stick fast in
you, and you felt your own misery: you would no: write after this manner. If
a Jew or Julian apostata should gather and publish all the open professed
differences in Christendom, yea among them that err from the truth: what would
this tend unto, but to the disgrace of Christ; and yet help Iudaisme nothing.
But if the contentions and particular synns, I say not of all Christendom, but
of England or the Churches in Netherland, or the like, which you acknowledge
true Churches, were thus blazoned: what a sink of ill savor would be smelt.
And are there no personal synns amongst yourselves may we think: that you take
such a course. If God herein should reward you according to your works, where
should you appear? I counsel you therefore to take a better course. Error may
be refuted by the word of God, without any such leaven of maliciousnes: and the
truth needs no such fleshly means to maintain it. If you like not of this
counsel: you may walk on in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you
have kindled: but my soul shall not come into your secret: though I shall not
cease to wish your welfare, so long and so far as I may.

November 9. 1617. Henry Ainsworth.

Answer.
Io. Pa.
WHereas you take occasion from the Conclusion of my former writing, to
complain against me that I think it for our vantage, to vpbrayde men's
differences, etc. I cannot but marvel at your strange partiality, wherewith
you begin, continue and end this your writing: for have not you yourself first
endeavored to seek advantage by Fol. 4. B.
vpbrayding me with the difference of Mr. Hu. from me, which I showed to be
otherwise? Have you not vpbrayded me with the difference of the courts of
England whereunto when as I had given you divets Page 33.
answers, you reply not a word? And besides many other differences of men which
you urge me with all in this writing, your other books do much more abound
with the same, as I have showed before. Remember what Barow faith of the
ministers of England of the Discov. p. 183. and 162. refut. of Giff. p. 138.
139.
particular personal errors, which they in their public doctrine and daily
ministry sparse abroad, even as that flood of bitter waters, etc. that there
arise such an innumerable heap of errors, so many diverse, variable, inconstant
and contrary opinions amongst them, that (as the ignorant Papists say) it is
impossible to find two of them in one mind and judgment, yea in any two
Churches of the land to hear the same doctrines because indeed they preach
either their own dreams and fantasies, or else their lucuorations out of
humane vvritings, etc. Thus has God in his just judgment divided the tongues
and confounded the language of these Babylonish builders, that they almost
agree not in or upon any thing; one preaching one thing, another the quite
contrary; one building after this sort, an other after that: one calling or
this law, this thing, an other for that. Thus is their Kingdom divided, their
estate confused, and their house shall shortly be left unto them desolate. Now
when thus you write and print yourselves, touching men's differences, and
prophesy of desolation to ensue thereupon; with what forehead can you condemn
in others, this very thing which you commend in your own practice? yea the
differences as you record them are slanderously and untruly set down, but the
differences which I note are such as you cannot deny any one of them; and shall
you have more liberty to publish falsehood, then we to speak truth?

As for the publishing of the notorious scandalles of such as continue in
schism, and labor daily to seduce men from the Church of God: (which you call
a raking into particular men's syns and infirmities) you have not brought any
one word of God to refute this course: Had you done it, I doubt not but I
should then have showed how you had perverted the same. How can men beware of
schisms, and divisions; of offenses and scandalles committed in the same, as
the Apostle Romans 16.17.18. Jude. 17.18.19.
requires, unless they have warning and intelligence thereof? Are we not
taught to look upon the lives and Phil. 3.2.17.18.19. 2 Timothy 4.14.15. and
3.1-11.
walking of men, that profess to be our guides? If need were I might produce
unto you a multitude of examples from all stories divine and humane, of the
ages past and of the time present, and even your own examples both against
others and against yourselves, for your conviction herein. But this would
require a whole volume: and more needs not, while so little is alleged against
it. Your maine sins and scandalles, are not repented of, as you would
insinuate: the unlawful excommunications, and the notorious slanders published
by you are not recalled: if some other faults be acknowledged by some, yet
while you stand in open defiance against all the Churches of Christ, and
proclaim a separation from them all, is there not a cause to proclaim and
blazon the iniquities of such deceivers, that the simple may take the more
heed? you speak of disguised pamphlets that are come out of our congregation:
but the books which you seem to aim at, are such as for the matter of them
are taken out of your offensive company, and do in part show the disguised
practices of your separation: for the persons that published them, they also
were such as came out of your company, who leaving their schism, which they
once professed with you, were more fit to witness such things as they had
heard and seen among you: for the helpers, which they had herein, they had
(besides others) Mr. Th. now an Elder of your congregation also (but then a
deacon) out of whose The Hunting of the fox. part. 1.
vvriting which he communicated with them, they receyved sundry things which
they published, and many more which should have been published, had not their
book been misprinted contrary to their minds: for the manner of printing and
publishing one of those books, great injury has been done unto them, as has
been noted before.

You say, If the arrows of the Almighty did stick fast in me, and I felt mine
own misery: I would not write after this manner. But on the contrary, the more
I feel mine own misery, the more careful ought I to be to deliver others
from their misery also: and the declaration of the manifold evilles committed
in your separation, being a means and help to pluck some out of the fire and
to save them from your miserable schism, therefore should this means be the
more diligently used in such case. If you on the other side did feel your own
misery as you ought, you would not exalt yourself with the Judge. 9.15.
bramble above all the trees of the forest, against all the Churches of God on
earth as though none were worthy of your fellowship: if you had true sense and
feeling of your own scandalles, you would be more humble and not maintain
such a vain separation. Hawty Edom had his nest among the stars: but a nest
among the stars will not content you. There is no communion with the
worthiest ministers, the Rev. 1. and 2.
lights and stars of the Churches, that you can away with: Therefore have
you got a higher sphere of separation above them all. But remember that the
wandering stars are Rev. 12.4
drawn from the heaven, remember that you among the rest have often fallen
from your orb by Apostasy: know yourself at length, that you fall not further.

You object, that if a Jew or Julian apostata should gather and publish all the
open professed differences in Christendom, yea among them that err from the
truth: what would this tend unto, but to the disgrace of Christ: and yet help
Judaism nothing, etc. I answer, 1. Suppose this would help Judaism nothing, but
be a further occasion of offense unto Infidelles, yet might it be a great help
unto the weak Christians that were already members of a true Church to preserve
them from the ways of false Christians, when they saw their differences and
contradictions. 2. This might also tend unto the honor of Christ, to have
false Christ's and false Christians discovered, and might help the elect Jews
to bring them unto true Christians, and keep them from Antichriste. Yea when
the time of their visitation is come, that the Jews shall be called and grafted
in again, this knowledge of the differences among Christians, may be a great
means to direct them unto the truth: for the godly shall rise by that thing
vvhereat others stumble. 3, if it be an unlawful thing to publish the open and
professed differences of Christendom, then is your sin great in this behalf,
as I have showed already, and might easily bring an 100. more examples and
insta^ces to prove the same: as for Julian the apostata, though his apostasy
was the deeper, yet is he the glass of your evil, and you may name him and
think of him with fear and trembling: for the number of apostasyes, I think
you cannot show that he has apostate and fallen from his profession so often
as you have done: and as for contempt of the Church of God and true Christians,
for which he is most infamous, I dare undertake to manifest that your
separation has published more reproaches and slanders of them, then you can
show that he has done. 4. As for the contentions and particular sins of true
Churches, whether would a Jew or Turk be more offended to hear of some
wicked and unchaste persons in your company: or to hear you say of the Church
of England, that H. Bar. discov. p. 182.
there is not almost one among them that has his wife chaste, or their bed
private: whether would be a greater stumbling block unto them to hear the
scandalles of your company reproved: or to hear you affirm that Inquir. of T.
Wh. p. 26.
you could not without apostasy so much as hear the word of God preached in
any of the Reformed dutch and French Churches, if they be like unto those in
this city? Whether would a Julian more triumph and be hardened against
Christianity to hear of your apostasy: or to hear you affirm (if he did
with all believe it,) that Counterp. 168.
the reforming preachers were the greatest deceyvers of the people, under show
of holiness: and that it is a blessed work of God that the most dangerous
seducers should thus first be discovered. Had you conscience of the things that
tend to the disgrace of Christ and Christianity, then would you be humbled for
these your writings, and revoke them with speed.

Again you ask, And are there no personal sins amongst yourselves may we
think, that you take such a course? If God herein should reward you according
to your works, where should you appear? etc. Answ. We acknowledge our sins to
be innumerable, and all our own righteousness to be as a defiled garment, and
have no where to appear save under the righteousness of Christ: but if
according to your example, in the mids of our sins we should lift up our
heads so high, as to disclaim the fellowship of such as are far better then
our selves, yea of all the faithful congregations in the world: where should
we then appear? If in the mids of my corruption, I should exalt my
ministry as only lavvfull to be communicated with, and teach the godly to
abandon and separate from al other ministers wheresoever, as you do: where
should I then appear? Then might I fear as Mr. Robinson notes concerning you
in the refutation of your private schism, that Relig. comm. p. 5.
God would be provoked to suffer us to fall into such personal sins and
evilles from which thousands of others have been preserved, etc. Then were it
most just that these personal sins and scandalles should be published for a
warning to others, to keep them from the like presumption. This is the point,
which you cover and hide in your reasonings. This I desire that every Modest
Christian would consider and judge of. And as for you, where think you to
appear in the day of Christ? among the goats on the left hand you think not:
among the sheep on the right hand with us, it is contrary to your present
separation from us. If you expect a place in the Church triumphant, according
to the place which you take unto yourself on earth, separated from all the
Churches militant here: then must you also look for some solitary place in
heaven, separated from the common Saints, and exalted above the rest.

As for your counsel to me; it is such as Christ Jesus has taught me not to
embrace: for he has taught us to bevvare of error, and to know false
teachers the better, by their scandalous and wicked practices, which he Mat.
23.13.14, etc. 2 Pet. 2.3.10, etc. Rev. 9.7.8, etc.
publishes unto men; This his practice in your language, is the leaven of
maliciousnes and a fleshly means. My purpose and endeavor is to follovv him
that is light it self vvalking in the mids of his golden candlesticks,
vvhither you refuse to follovv him. Into the secret of your separation let not
my soul enter: yea let every soul bevvare of that mystery of iniquity,
which as a vvilde fire consumes the communion of Saints and their loving
society. By this schism you have shut out your self from the secret of the
righteous, and from their assembly. The Lord show mercy unto you in raising
you out of this pit, and keep the feet of his Saints from falling into this or
the like snare. Farevvell in the Lord.

December. 6. 1618. John Paget.

AN ADMONITION Touching TALMVDIQVE and RABBINICAL ALLEGATIONS.
Mr. Ainsworth, it was much beyond my expectation, when as I met with your
allegations of Rabbines against me in this controversy: Hereupon I enquired
after your annotations on Genesis and Exodus, which before this time, I had not
seen; and there I saw them so frequently alleged, with such pomp of glorious
titles, and vnderserved honor given unto them that I supposed both the purity
and sufficiency of the holy scriptures to be much eclypsed and empaired
thereby. For this cause I have thought it expedient to note some things
concerning these authors, for help of the Christian readers that they may be
the better able to discern and judge of them.

All use of the Talmud I do not condemn: There is some use of the Rabbines for
understanding and learning of the holy tongue: And a principal use of them is,
thereby to refute the Jews themselves from their own writings; and not them
only, but all such also as dote upon their writings in such manner as you do.
And to this end have I alleged them against you, which otherwise I would not
have done: It was far from my thoughts, when I first undertook this
controversy with you. Your manner of quoting them, I cannot approove of: many
scandalles and errors I do observe in your use of them.

CHAP. I.
FIrst of all, it is an offe^sive thing so abu^da^tly to allege such authors
for our guides unto the mysteries of religion, as do abound with innumerable
dotages, presu^ptuous and vain traditions, lying visio^s, feigned miracles,
prodigious and monstrous fables. And such are the Thalmudists and Cabalists,
who^ you (Mr. Ainsw.) do so often bring upon the stage. There is almost no work
or word of God recorded in the scriptures, which they do not defile with
their gloss. For example.

TOuching the Angels: As the Rabbines of the Sadducees faction, were very
gross, saying there is Act. 23.8.
neither Angel nor spirit: so the Rabbines of the Pharisaical sect were as bold
in a contrary extremity to feign any thing of them: And to give insta^ce first
of all in your Doctor Maimony, he says that the vision of Angels is nothing
but the vision of prophecy and according to the apprehension of the beholder:
that therefore Maimony Morch Nebuchim, Cherek. 2. pelek. 7.
Abraham whose virtue was great or strong saw them as men: but unto Lot whose
strength was evil they appeared as Angels. The Chaldee paraphrast expounding
those words, the soul of the heaven shall carry the voice, etc. says that
Targu n on Eccles. 10.20.
the Angel Raziel shall proclaim it every day from heaven upon the mount of
Horch, etc. They presume to tell us what peculiar Angels were allotted unto
several persons to be their guides and masters: as unto Ioa. Reuchlin. Cabal.
lib. 1.
Adam they assign Raziel; to Shem Iophiel: to Abraham Zadkiel: to Isaak
Gabriel; to Iaakob Peliel: to Moses Metatron, etc. So for particular actions
and words recorded in the scriptures, the Rabbines tell us how many and which
angels were employed therein: In expounding psalm. 137. the Chaldee paraphrast
faynes Micael whom he calls the Prince of Jerusalem to make the the prayer
against Edom, verse. 7, Targum on psalm. 137.
and Gabriel whom he calls the Prince of Sion, to pronounce the blessing on
them that should destroy Babel, verse. 8.9. when Ester had sent Hatach to
certify Mordecai of the Kings decree, Ester 4.10.12.13. the paraphrast says,
that Targum on Ester, 4.
Haman in his rage slew Hatach, and that then the Angels Micael and Gabriel
came and supplied the place of Hatach, delivering Esters message to Mordecai,
and again Mordecai his answer unto Ester. And further he tells us of King
Ahasuerus his vision how he being at Esters banquet, he Ibid. on Chap. 7.
lift up his eyes, and saw and behold 10 Angels like unto Hamans 10 Sons
cutting down the trees in the royal garden, etc. That when Haman fell down
before Ester, the Angel Gabriel had thrust him down, etc. R. Simai Isaak Ben
Arama in Akedath Isaak. Por- 44. par. 2.
says, when Israel had set we will do, before we will hear, (resolving and
promising to do the law before they had heard it, Exodus 19.8. with 20.19.) then
forth with there came 60, millions of Angels, and bound two crowns upon every
one of the Israelites, one in respect of we will do, another in respect of we
will hear: but when they sinned in the Calfe, there came down an 120 millions
of destroying Angels, and broke them off, as it is said, The Children of Israel
plucked of their ornaments (Exodus 33.6.) Touching the Angels ascending and and
descending on the ladder in the vision, Genesis 28,12. they say, the R. Solomon
Iarchi in Genesis 28.12.
Angels of the land of Israel went up, and the outlandish Angels came down.
And so accordingly of the Angels that met Iaakob at Mahanaim, which signifies
two hosts: they on Genesis 32.
say, they were one host of outlandish Angels that had convoyed him to the
border of Israel; and that the Angels of the land of Israel, were the other
host, that came to receive him there. Other of the Rabbines Ioa. Merc. in Genesis
19.13.
say that the Angels which said of Sodom, we will destroy this place, were
deposed from their ministry for an 138. years, because they had ascribed unto
themselves that which was proper unto God; and were not restored until Jacobs
time, when they ascended again to heaven by the ladder which he saw in the
vision, etc.

TOuching wicked spirits or devilles: Some of the Rabbines Sebast. Munster,
Annot. on Levit. 17.
hold that as other creatures are compounded of 4. elements, so these of 2, to
wit, of the fire and air: And that they have 3 properties of the ministering
Angels, viz. wings; swift motion; and foreknowledge of things to come: and 3.
properties of the sons of men, viz. to eat and drink as men: to procreate
others and multiply by generation as men: to dye and to have their bodies
dissolved as men. For their meat, they say they lick the moystnes of the air,
and are affected with perfumes and smell of the fire (according to that
Rabbinical conceit noted in the Apocryphal story, where it is said, that the
Tobit, chapter 6.8.9. with 8.3.
perfume made with the liver and heart of a certain fish, would drive away the
devil.) Others of these Rabbines say upon Ge^. 2.2. That they were created
imperfect in the evening of the Sabath: and that God having made their spirits,
being prevented with the Sabath that came upon him, was feign to leave his work
half made: and that therefore their spirits want their bodies which otherwise
should have been made for them, etc. They write Elias Levita in Tishbi in
lilith.
that there are 4 mothers of the devils, viz. Lilith, Naamah, Ogereth and
Machalath: The Targum on Eccles. 1.12.
Chaldee paraphrast shows the Prince of the spirits by name, when he says
that Aschmedai the King of the Devilles was sent unto Solomon to cast him out
of his throne and to take his signet from him. The same Targ. and Rasion Psalm.
91.6.
paraphrast also with R. Solomon Iarchi do tell us of night spirits and noone
spirits; that Deber is the name of a spirit destroying in the night and Keteb a
spirit destroying at noone day: In so much that both the vulgar Latin and
Greek translations following these Rabbines in ps. 91. do there make mention of
a noone-devil. With the like presumption is Samael noted by Maimony in Morch
Nebu. chel. 2. per. 31.
them to be the name of an other, that rode upon the serpent, and deceyved
Evah. That these spirits are male and female, and have difference of sex, is
often R. Solomon Iar. n Esa. 34 14.
affirmed by them, so that when God commanded Noah to take male and female of
every living thing to keep them alive in the Ark with him, they say that On
Genesis 6.19.
the devils also were to be receyved with the rest, as though God had given
charge to preserve them from drowning: that their generations might be
continued in the world. They say R. David Kimchion 1 Samuel 28.12.
that when wicked spirits are raised up, and called for by witches, or such
like; that their manner is to ascend with their feet upward and their head
downward; and that the spirit raised by the witch of Endor came up with his
head first contrary to the custom in reverence and honor of King Saul; and
that thereby the vvitch knew him to be King. Others go further and Elias Levita
vbi supra.
teach me^ how to defend themselves against them by charms and circles, etc.

TOuching the Spheres and stars: The Rabbines hold that Maimony in mor. Nebu.
chel. 2. per. 5. and 6. and 8.
they are living bodies, having an understanding soul; that they have
imagination, election, will, an understanding of their operations, etc. And
besides philosophical reasons alleged for proof hereof, they do also pervert
many scriptures to establish this opinion, as ps. 19.1. The heavens declare the
glory of God: They say, that man is far wide from the truth, that thinks this
to be spoken in respect of that which appears in them: seeing that in the
Hebrew tongue, that word of counting or declaring is not attributed but unto
the thing that has understanding, etc. They say, No man but a fool or an
adversary of the truth will contradict this proof which is taken from the
words of the Prophets. To this purpose also they allege, The stars of the
morning praised me together, Job. 38.7. Again Maimony there argues from. Genesis
1.16. Deuteronomy. 4.19. that they must needs apprehend and know all things which
they govern, etc. Besides this, he embraces the opinion of Pythagoras which
Aristotle rejected: namely, that Ibidem Perek 9.
the heavens by their motions do make sweet and pleasant sounds, though there
be many things that hinder us from hearing those strong and sweet sounds, etc.
If the stars have such knowledge, it is the less wonder, that the Sun should
find out and make known those heads of the people which sinned in Baalpeor:
which were hanged up unto the Lord before the Sun, Numb. 25.4. where (as R.
Solomon Comme^t. on Numb. 25.4.
records) the Sun did manifest and discover the sinner and the guilty persons
by pearcing through the cloud and shining upon them. And still they hold a
prognostication of things to come, by these stars. As the sun before is said
to have discovered the sinners: so the moon has like virtue ascribed unto her
by them. It is Ioa. Buxt Synag. Iud. Cap. 16.
observed out of Rambam, R. Menachem Rakanat, R. Bechai and others, that on the
seventh day of the seventh month at night, God shows whatsoever shall fall out
unto them the year following by the shadow of their bodies in the moon light,
as if their shadow want a head, or if they have no shadow, that then they shall
certainly die that year, etc. The ground of this magical observation they draw
from the Numb. 14.9.
words of Joshua and Caleb, unto the people touching the Canaanites, saying
their shadow is departed from them: for so they read the word of shadow in
stead of shield. They say, that R. Solo. in Genesis 1.14.
when the lights are eclypsed it is an evil sign for ever: And whereas it is
said, be not afraid of the signs of heaven, they interpret it thus, when you
do the will of God, ye have no need to care for the vengeance. When they apply
the number of the spheres unto the commandments, they say R. Abraham Aben Ezra
comment. on Exo. 20.
that the fifth commandment, honor thy father, etc. has reference unto the
sphere of Tsedek or Jupiter, because it teaches concerning peace and
righteousness and mercy, etc. That the sixth commandment, Thou shall not kill,
has reference unto Mars because it teaches us concerning the shedding of
blood and wounds, etc. That the seventh commandment has reference to Venus,
that teaches concerning the Bed, etc. And so for the rest. Upon those words of
Pharaoh, Ragnah or evil is before you, they say, R. Solom. on Exo. 10 10. and
Aben Ezra on Exo. 32.12
that Pharaoh did understand by his astrological instrument, that there was a
star called Ragnah which did arise to meet the Israelites in the wilderness and
that it was a sign of blood and slaughtvr unto them and that thereupon when
Israel sinned in the Calf, and God fought to destroy them, Moses said in his
prayer, why should the Egyptians say, he has brought them forth unto Ragnah,
of which Pharaoh said, Ragnah is before you: That then forthwith God repented
concerning Ragnah (that evil star) and turned the blood into the blood of
Circumcision when Joshua circumcised them, and so took away the shame of Egypt.
Again, they write R. Sol. on Genesis 15.5.
that when God brought Abram forth, Genesis 15.5. it was from his Astrological
instrument, by which he saw that Abram should have no children; and that God
showed him, though Abram should have no Children, yet Abraham should have
Children, when his name was changed, etc. They tell us Seb. Munst. Annot. on
Genesis 12.1.
also in Maasch thorah in the story of Abram that when he was but 3. years
old, he was cast into the furnace by Nimrod, for destroying his fathers Idols;
when the Astrologians told Nimrod that the star of Abram at his birth had
devoured 4 other stars, etc. Moreover they teach not only a prediction of
future things by the stars, but other strange operations also: upon the
defect of the letter Vau in the word Meoroth which signifies the lights which
God created the fourth day, they Rasi or R. Solom Iarchi on Genesis 1.14.
tell how dangerous a day that is, in respect of the squinancy whereunto the
Children are then most subject: and of the fast ordained that day of the week
to prevent that evil. They Joan. Isaak Levita prefat. ad Ruach hachen.
write that the Sun to celebrate the day of his nativitie, does evermore
throughout the whole year even in time of greatest tempests, yet always shine
upon the fourth day of the week on which it was created. Of the Sons of God
mentioned Genesis 6.2. they Aben Ezra on Genesis 6.2.
say that they were wise men exercised in astrology, which took unto
themselves wives which were borne under the same disposition of the heavens
that they themselves were, and that so being of the same constellation they
brought forth mighty men, etc. Others of them do not only record that the
stars teach, but Ben Arama, in Akedath Isaak, Porta. 45.
also stir us up unto several actions and virtues, as that Tsedek or Jupiter
megnorer el hatsedek stirs up unto righteousness and the fear of the Lord;
That Nogah or Venus stirs up love, etc.

TOuching the Clouds and other meteores in the lowest heavens: R. Samuel bar
Isaak says, Talmud in Beracoth cap. 9 Fol. 59. A
Behold, the Clouds of the morning there is no joy in them, as it is written,
your goodness is as a morning Cloud, Hos. 6. And the like prognostications they
do observe in the same place touching the lightnings and other Clouds.
Touching the Rainebow though God appointed it to be the sign of his covenant
unto perpetual generations, yet Rasion Genesis 9 12.
because of the defect of Vau in the word Doroth which signifies generations,
they observe and teach that there were some generations of just and perfect men
wherein they needed not this sign of the Rainebow: as namely in the generation
of Hezekiah King of Judah, and in the generation of R. Shimeon ben Iochai. From
the wind that blows upon a certain day they prognosticate what weather they
shall have for the whole year following: R. Isaak bar Abidemi Thalmud in Ioma,
C. 1. Fol. 21.
says, that upon the latter good day of the feast, every man looks after the
smoke of the camp: If the smoke incline to the North, then the poor are glad,
and the rich householders are sad: viz. because the South wind blowing at that
time, and driving the smoke into the North is a sign of great rain that
year, which shall rot the fruits, and so force the rich to bring them forth and
sell them for small price unto the poor: If the smoke incline to the South
then the rich are glad, and the poor are sad, that Northwind driving the smoke
Southward being a sign of such a dry season, that the rich may store up their
fruits and not bring them forth to the poor: If the smoke incline to the west
then all are sad: because the hurtful East wind driving the smoke into the
west is a sign of dearth and famine: If the smoke incline to the East, the^
all are glad, because the west wind driving the smoke into the East is a
sign of such a temperate season as shall bring abundance for benefit both of
rich and poor. So they R. David Kimchion Josh. 5.2.
say of the North wind that it did not blow for the space of 40. years
together whiles Israel was in the wilderness, least it should have blown away
the cloud of glory from the Tabernacle: the nature of the North wind being to
scatter the clouds (Job. 37.22.) And that for this cause also they did not
circumcise their Children for 40 years, because they wanted the North wind
whose property is to heal; and that therefore the sore made by cutting the
flesh in circumcision would have been dangerous to the Children. They presume
also to tell us what particular Angels are set over several winds of which
afterward.

TOuching man: R. Jeremiah ben Eleazar says that Talmud in Beracoth cap. 9
Fol. 61.
God created the first man do partsuphin, with two faces or persons, as it is
said Ps. 139.5, thou have fashioned me behind and before. This they also Rasi
on Genesis 1.27.
collect from that which Moses says, that God created them male and female:
Hence they gather that the first man was created with a double person at the
first, that he was both man and woman, both male and female, an Hermaphrodite:
and that these 2. persons were parted asunder then when God took the rib out
of the side of Adam, etc. As for the souls of men, they hold that they were
created before the bodies: that all the Rasi on Esa. 48.16. and on Mal. 1.1.
Prophets were in their souls present at the delivery of the law on mount
Sinai, many generations before they were borne, and that their prophecies were
there delivered unto them. Some of them teach that God created man with
original sin: R. Nachman bar Chasda Talmud in Beracoth. c. 9. Fol. 81.
asking the question why vajitser in Genesis 2.7, is written with two iods, makes
this answer, that the holy blessed God created man with two inclinations or
dispositions, with ietser tob, and ietser ragh, with a good dispositiou and an
evil disposition. And in the same place it is said of the two reins that the
one at the right side counsels unto good, and the other at the left side
counsels unto evil, etc. When a man dies and is buried, they write that
the Elias Levita in Tishbi in Chibbut hakkeber.
Angel of death comes and sits upon the sepulcher and then the soul entering
into the body again, causes the man to stand upon his feet: Then the Angel of
death with a chain in his hand half of iron, and half of fire strikes the
man, so that at the first stroke his members are dissolved: at the second his
bones are scattred, which the Angels come and gather: at the third he is turned
to dust and ashes and so the body returns into the sepulcher, etc. As for the
soul, as the same Elias Tishbi in Gilgul.
shows, they say it is three times created: This they understand of the
revolution of souls through the bodies of three men: And for proof hereof they
alledg that saying in Job, Job. 33.29.
All these things will God work thrice with a man. Hence also they say the
soul of the first man was translated into the body of David, and from thence
is to return into the body of Messiah: This the Cabalists note by the three
letters of Adams name, A, D, M, whereof the first stands for Adam, the second
for David, the third for Messiah. But they teach that the souls of great
sinners do pass into the bodies of beasts: as the soul of a Sodomite into the
body of a hare: and the soul of an adulterer into the body of a Camel and that
therefore David in the Psalm. 13.5
psalm praises God, with these word, ki gamal li, which they interpret thus,
because he has delivered my soul from the Camel: he for his adultery having
deserved to be translated into the body of an unclean Camel, etc.

TOuching the stories of particular men: Of Adam they Rasi in Genesis 5.3.
say that for those hundred and thirty years until Sheth, he lived separate
from his wife, viz. after his banishment out of Eden. Of Cain, and the mark set
upon him; R. Solomon On Genesis 4.15.
says it was a letter of Gods name imprinted in the forehead of Cain: R.
Iehudah says it was the sphere of the Sun which was made to rise upon him: R.
Nehemiah Akedath Isaak, Porta 11.
says it was the leprosy arising on him: R. Aba says it was a dog given unto
him: viz. to go before him and defend him from wild beasts or those that would
kill him: R.A. Joseph says it was a horn that grew out of him, etc. Of
Lamech, they R. Sol. on Genesis 4.23.
write that he being blind slew Cain: that being led by his son Tubal cain,
to who^ Cain appeared as a wild beast, he spoke unto his father to shoot,
who shot and killed Kain: that when he knew what he had done, to wit, that
it was Kain his ancestour whom he had slain, then he smote one hand upon
another, and clapped his son Tubal-kain betwixt them and so slew him also:
That hereupon when his wives separated from him, he excused himself by his
error: that if Kain who slew his brother presumptuously had his punishment
deferd for seven generations, then he offending through error and mistaking
should be forborne for many more sevens, etc. Of Noah they R. Solomon Genesis 5.29.
write that until his time they had no instruments of plowing: that he
prepared them: that the earth brought forth thorns and thistles when they
sowed wheat, for the curse of the first man: that in the days of Noah, this
curse ceased: that this is it which is written of him, he shall comfort us,
etc. Whereas there is mention, of his drunkenness and nakedness in the mids of
his tent: because Ahotoh signifying his tent is there written with the letter
he, they Idem on Genesis 9.21.22.23, etc.
collect thence that by way of a mystery thereby is noted how the 10 tribes
which are called Aholah (Ezekiel. 23.) should go into captivity for drinking
wine in bowls. And whereas it is said, that Cham saw the nakedness of his
father: some of the Rabbines expound it, that Cham gelded Noah, and that he
said unto his brethren: The first man had but two sons and one slew the other
for the possession of the world, but our father has three sons and yet he
seek to have a fourth. Therefore they say that Canaan the fourth son of Cham
was cursed, because he would not that his father Noah should beget a fourth
son, etc. And that Shem and Iapheth for covering their father obtained this
blessing, viz. that the posterity of Shem should wear zizith or fringes on
their garments: that the posterity of Iapheth should obtained a burial, as it
is said, I will give unto Gog a place there for burial, etc. (Ezekiel. 39.11.) Of
Abram and Noah they R. Isaak Ben. Arama in Akedath Isaak, Porta 16.
observe, because it is said of Noah that he walked with God ( Genesis 6.9.) and
to Abram, walk before me ( Genesis 17.1) that therefore Noah was in feriour to
Abram: like to little Children whereof the less is led by the hand and goes with
the father, and the other that is stronger is appointed to go before him, etc.
When they tell how Terach brought Abram his son before Nimrod for breaking
his Idolles, and how he was cast into the fiery furnace, they record further
concerning Haran his brother, that he thought within himself, if Abram
overcome I will be like unto him: if R. Solomon (...) Genesis ^ 28.
Nimrod overcome I vvil be like unto him: And when Abraham was delivered,
Haran being demanded to whom he would be like, he answered to Abram:
whereupon they cast him into the fiery furnace, wherein he was burned. This
they will have to be noted when it is said, Genesis 11.28
Then Haron dyed before the face of Terah his Father, in vr of the Chaldees:
because vr signifies fire. Where it is said that Abram brought forth three
hundred and eighteen persons to pursue the Kings: the R. Sol. on Genesis 14 14.
Rabbines will have this to be understood of Eliezer alone, who was Abrams
steward: that he alone went with Abram to the battle, because according to
their Gematria, the ^
numerall letters of Eliezer his name in the Hebrew do stand for three hundred
and eighteen. Of Og the giant, they R. Solom. on Genesis 14.13.
write that it was he which escaped from the slaughter of the Sodomites made
by Amraphel and his companions: that he came and told Abram of the battle,
thinking that Abram also would be slain, and that he then would get Sarai to
be his wife: And that this Og also escaped from the flood being one of those
Nephilims, the giants that lived before the flood. Indeed if this Og was of
such a stature as the Thalmudists, do Thalmud in Beracoth c. 9. fo. 54.
write, viz. that Moses being 10 cubits high, and having an axe in his hand 10
cubits long, and leaping also 10 cubits from the ground could yet reach but
unto the ankles of Og, when he killed him: then might this giant have rested
upon some mountain, over which the waters prevayled 15. cubits: And so as 8.
persons were saved in the ark, he should be the ninth, that escaped drowning
being out of the ark. They R. Sol. on Genesis 4.22.
say of Naamah that she was the wife of Noah: of Idem on Genesis 16.1.
Hagar that she was the daughter of Pharaoh, who when he saw the wonders done
for Sarah, said it is better that my daughter be a servant in this house, then
a Queen in an other house. Of Idem on Genesis 19.26
Lots wife, that she was turned into a pillar of salt because she refused to
give a little salt unto the travelers or strangers that came into her house. Of
Thamar defiled by Judah, they On Genesis 38.24.
say that she was the daughter of Melchizedek or Shem, and was therefore to be
burned because being the Priests daughter she played the harlot. Of Rebekah they
tell great wonders: how On Genesis 24.17.
when she came to draw water, the water of it self came up out of the well
to meet her: how the Ibid. on verse. 42.
earth lept and remooved under Abraham's servant to bring him in one day to his
iourneys end, unto Mesopotamia: how an Ibid. on verse. 55.
angel came and killed Bethuel for seeking to delay the journey of Rebekah unto
Isaak. Of Leah they On Genesis 29.17.
say that her eyes were become tender with weeping for fear that she should
have been given for a wife unto Esaw the elder brother, as Rachel her younger
sister was given to Iaakob the younger brother. Of Dinah they On Genesis 30.21.
say that she being first conceyved a male in the womb of Leah, was by her
prayer turned into a female, least her sister Rachel should be inferior to the
handmaydes in Children, etc And further they say of Dinah, not being reckoned
with his eleven Children, when Iaakob was to meet Esaw, that On Genesis 32.22.
she was put into a chest and locked up, least Esaw should set his eyes upon
her: and that therefore Iaakob was punished, because she being given to Esaw
might have been a means to have converted him to goodness: that therefore she
fell into the hand of Schechem. The like thing do they record of Sarah also,
viz. that Abram going down into Egypt because of the famine, On Genesis 12.14.
did shut up Sarah into a chest, and that she was found by the receyvers of the
tribute, who opened the chest and saw her. Of Levi they On Genesis 29.34.
say, that when he was borne, God sent the Angel Gabriel to bring the Child
before him: and that so he gave him this name: and gave him the four and
twenty gifts of the Priesthood: that in this respect he was called Levi. Of
Joshua his burial in Timnath-serah, or Timnath-heres, Judge. 2.9. they R. David
Kimchi, and. R. Sol. on, Josh. 24.30.
say, that the place was so called, because of temunath Here Is or the image of
the Sun that was set upon his sepulcher, with this saying, This is he that made
the Sun to stand still, etc. And that the mountain was called Gaash which
signifies shaking and mooving: because when the Israelites at the burial of
Joshua did not mourn and lament for him as was meet; the earth did then quake
and the mountain was moved against them. When Joshua said o sun, (dom) stay
thou in Gibeon, etc. they R. Sol. on Josh. 10.12.
say that by virtue of a song called Dom, Dom, he stayed the Sun: and that all
the while so long as he did sing Dom, it stood still, and went not forward. Of
the two spies sent by Joshua, they R. David Kimchi on Josh. 2.4.
say that they were Caleb and Phinchas: and that Phinchas being an Angel he
stood before the people and they neither knew him nor saw him: and that
therefore it is said of Caleb only, that Rahab the harlot did hide him, etc. Of
Sampson they Idem on Iud. 16.28
write, that when he desired to be avenged of the Philistines for his eyes,
that he prayed for the vengeance upon them but only in respect of one of his
eyes, and that he desired of God that the reward for his other ey and the loss
of it might be reserved unto him in the world to come. Of Iphtah though some
Ralbag or R. Levi ben. Gerso^ on Judge. 12 7.
write that he was buried in diverse cities for his honor; that having neither
son nor daughter his bones were buried part of them in one city and part of
them in an other, for a memorial how he had delivered them from the Ammonites:
yet others R. David Kimchi ibid.
say the contrary, that he was stricken with a greevous boil: that the members
of his body fell of, some in one city and some in an other: that so they were
buried in diverse cities: and this for a punishment unto him because he slew his
daughter, and did not further enquire concerning his vow: Of Samuel they R.
Solo. on 1. Sam. 28.13.15. and Kimchi ibidem.
write that he was raised up by the witch of Endor: and that Samuel thereby
was much disquieted and fore afraid thinking that it had been the day of
judgment, and that he had been called to judgment: and that therefore he
brought Moses with him for his help and safe conduct, etc. Of Paltiel they R.
David Kim. on 2. Sam. 3.15. and R. Sol. ibid.
write that he was so called because God delivered him from from sinning
against Mical the wife of David, and that he had laid a sword betwixt him and
her in the bed for a token thereof, etc. Of Obededom they R. Solom. on 2. Sam.
6.11.
write that the blessing of his house consisted in this that his wife and his
eight daughters in law brought forth each of them six sons at once, and that
hence are those 62. mentioned 1. Chro. 26.8. Of Naboth, they Kimchi and Rasi on
1. Kin. 22.20.21.
write that the spirit which came forth to be a lying spirit in the mouth of
Ahabs Prophets, was the spirit of Naboth, etc. Of Elias and Elisha they R. Sol.
on 1. Kin. 18.34 and on 2. Kin. 3.11.
write that Elisha pouring water on the hands of Elias, his fingers did
miraculously become like to fountains of water to fill the ditch made about
the altar in mount Carmel, etc. Of Ahaz they R. David Kimchi and R. Solo. on 2.
Kin. 20.11.
feign this miracle that when he dyed the day was shortened 10. degrees, and
that the Sun went down ten hours before the time, to the end that the
mourning of the people for him might quickly be at an end, because he was
wicked: and that in recompense hereof, in the days of Hezekias the Sun came
back and returned those 10. degrees which it hasted to go down in Ahaz his
time. And with such fictions and additions unto the holy story, they abound in
every place.

TOuching the sensitive creatures, as birds, beasts and fishes they presume in
like manner: Of the Raven that Noah sent out of the arc, they R. Sol. on Genesis 8
7.
say that he flew about the arc and went not as he was sent for the jelousy
that he had of his make or fellow against Noah: and that this same Raven also
was reserved unto Elias his time to bring him bread and flesh morning and
evening. And some of the Rabbines presume and R. David Kimchi on 1. Kin. 17.4
say that this bread and flesh was brought by the Ravens from the table of
Ahab: others say it was brought from the table of Ichoshaphat. Of a certain
Bird, which they call Bar-juchne, it is written in the Tractat. Becoroth Cap 9.
f. 57
Thalmud, that when this fearful bird, cast but one egg out of her nest, it
drowned 60 towns, and broke down 300. Cedar trees. And as Elias Levita Tishbi
in vocabulo Iuchna.
records, with this bird also is the banquet for the righteous prepared,
togather with the Leviathan, and the wild Ox. Again Rabba bar Channah says
he Thalmud in Babha bathra Cap. 5. Fol. 73.
saw on a certain time a frog as big as Akra a town in Hagronia containing
60. houses: that a serpent or Dragon came and devoured that frog: that
straightway a great Raven or Poshkanisa came and devoured both the Frog and the
Dragon, and flying away light upon a tree, etc. These and a huge number more of
such fables are recorded by your ancient Rabbines and Hebrew doctors, by so
much worse then Aesops fables: in that these are R. Otto in Gali. razia lib. 3.
c. 11.
told for truth, but his not so: these are confirmed with pretense of holy
scripture, to the great abuse of the name of God: but so are not his: these are
set down without any good use of them, but his fables had their moralles
annexed for use and instruction of men. What good moral use can we make of
this Parable of the great frog, unless happily it may serve to represent unto
us the estate of your separation* you yourself Defenc. against Mr. Smith. Page
106.
compare Mr. Smith unto Behemoth in bigness, and some reason there was, for by
the profession of separation which he then made he devoured all the Churches of
Christ, and so was comparable in greatness to this Rabbines frog: but presently
Mr. Johnson like the great Dragon comes and devoures Mr. Smith: and straightway
come you like the great Raven of the separation and devour both the frog and
the Dragon, both Mr. Smith and Mr. Johnson so that you Mr. Ainsworth, remain
the huge Poshkantsa that devour and swallow up all: All the churches of God,
all Christians, yea all the separate companies beside are in your belly:
according to your doctrine no religious communion may be retained with any of
them. And therefore as the Lord once theatned the devouring city; Zephan. 3.1.
woe unto the craw; as the word in the Hebrew signifies: so may it still be
said, vvoe unto this craw of the separation that devoures all Christian
communion.

Touching Behemoth; both the Targum on psalm. 50.10. and Rasi ibid. etc.
Chaldee paraphrast and other of the Rabbines expounding those words of the
Psalm: The beasts on a thousand mountains, interpret them of one beast, of
Behemoth, that great creature which is mentioned Job. 40.10 This Behemoth is
said in one day to eat up and devour the grass of those thousand mountains,
which they will also have to spring again and to be renewed every day. And this
beast as they say is reserved for the banquet of the righteous in the garden of
Eden in the world to come, viz. when their messiah shall come. They Talmud, in
cholin. c. 3. fol. 60
tell us also of a strange Ox with one horn in his forehead, which the first
man should offer for a sacrifice the first day that he was created: They Targum
on ps. 69.31 and Rasi, ibid.
say that this is that young Bullock mentioned in psalm. 69.31. from whence they
also do collect that this Ox had the horn created before the hoofes, because
the order in the words in the psalm is thus, which has horns and hoofes, the
horn being first mentioned. Of the Ram which Abraham offered in stead of his
son Isaak, they Rasi on Genesis 22.13.
say it was created in the beginning of the world, and prepared hereunto from
the sixth day of the creation: This Ram they hold to be one of those 10.
things created in the evening of the first Sabath. And they note further, that
when this Ram came running unto Abraham; Satan seeing the same thrust the
Ram into the bush, etc. Of a Roe in the forest of Elai, they Thorah Or, 1.
Glos in Thalmud, chol. c. 3. fol. 59
write that in the time of sleep one eye is still open, when the other is shut:
And the Thargum on Cant. 3.14.
Chaldee paraphrast noting this same thing, will have this to be that Roe
whereunto the Messiah is compared. The Thalmud Tractat. Cholin, c. 3. f. 59.
records, that on a certain time when the Roman Emperor enquired of Rabbi
Iehoshua the son of Hananias, why their God compared himself unto a Lion: and
whether he was so strong that he could kill a Lion. The Rabbine answers, that
their God did not compare himself ynto a common Lion but unto the Lion that was
in the forest of Elai. Hereupon the Emperor desires that this Lion may be
showed unto him: and the Rabbine making supplication unto God, the said Lion
comes running out of the forest, and being 400. miles from the Emperor, he
roared so strongly, that the women with Child in Rome fell in travel before
their time, and the walls of the city fell down. When as he had come an
100. miles nearer, then he roared again so terribly, that all the Romans
teeth fell our of their heads, and the Emperor himself half dead fell down
from his throne unto the ground: entreating the Rabbine that this Lion might
return unto the forest, from whence he came: which also was done according to
his desire. By the view of these fables, the reader may learn in some part,
what to judge and how to esteem of your Thalmudicall allegations. What
goodness or fruit is there in these fables? will you have your separation
represented by this Lion in the forest of Ela? If it were true that you
profess and pretend, the terror of your roaring should not only make the
walls of Rome to fall down, but the walls of all reformed Churches: both
their material buildings and temples as you plead in this writing, and also
all their spiritual society and communion should be dissolved: but as the Lion
of Elai when he drew near to Rome, was yet turned back by the Rabbine: so when
you drew near to Rome, through the title of your book that roared in the
Franckford catalogue as I noted Page
before, yet have you also been persuaded to stay that roaring a while, and to
spare them that were ready to perish at the sound thereof.

Of the Leviathan, R. Iehuda Thalmud in Babha Bathra. c. 5 f. 74. and 75.
says, whatsoever God has created, he has created male and female, and so
without doubt the Leviathan: And least they being so great should destroy the
world if they did multiply, therefore God has gelded the male killed the female
and powdered her with salt for the righteous in the world to come. For proof of
this he alleges Esa. 27.1. And in the same place, R. Jonathan says, that
when the angel Gabriel shall hunt this Leviathan, he could nor prevail except
God did help him. This hunting they collect from that place in Job. 40.20. Will thou draw out Leviathan with a hook? Of the Whale that swallowed Jonas, they
R. Solom. on Ion. 2.5
say that the two eyes of the fish were in stead of two vvindooes unto the
prophet, through which he saw all that was in the Sea: that God showed him the
red Sea, and how Israel passed through the mids thereof, etc. Because it is
said, that Suph or the weeds were wrapped about his head, they do vainly
collect from thence that jam suph or the red Sea was before him: there being
the continent betwixt the red Sea and that Sea whereinto Jonas was cast. And
here they R. Solom. on Ion. 1.17.
write further, that the great whale which first swallowed Jonas, was a male,
where Jonas had such a large room in his belly, that he did not give his mind
unto prayer: whereupon God spoke unto this VVhale to cast him out of his belly
into the mouth of the female who being full of young ones, Jonas had not there
such room, and so being in a strait, that then he prayed, as it is said, out
of the bowelles of the Fish. Ion. 1.17.

TOuching the vegetative creatures as plants, trees, etc. They Thalmud in
Cholin. Cap. 3. f. 60 and Rasi on Genesis 2.5.
say of them in general, that though they were created the third day, yet they
did not then appear, but the earth brought them forth only to the door of the
earth, where men tread, until the sixth day: that then at the prayer of Adam
there came shewers of rain, that then they budded forth and were seen. Of the
trees in the orchyards of Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar, there is this miracle
recorded by the Targum on Job. 2.11.
Chaldee paraphrast, that when these three friends of Job saw the trees in their
orchards withered away: that the bread for their food was turned into living
flesh that the wine of their feasts was turned into blood, then they came
every man from his place to visit Job: and that for this meritotious work they
were delivered from the place appointed unto them in hell. Of the tree of
life, they have this paradox, that Maimony in Moreh Neb. chel. 2. per. 31.
it was a journey of fifty years: and that this measure was the height of it,
besides the head of it, and the breadth of the branches. Of the cedars growing
in the garden of Eden, the Chaldee paraphrast writes Targum on Cant. 1.16.
how they shall be brought from thence for the building of a new temple at the
coming of Messiah. Of the tree planted by the rivers of waters, whereunto the
godly man is compared, in Psalm. 1.3. they Ben Arama in Akedath Isaak. Porta. 12.
say, that it was a tree, which God planted in the arc upon the face of the
waters. And hundreds of such like vanities do fill their vvritings every
where.

But you say that for Preface to Annotations on Genesis.
Jewish forbidden fables of which there are too many you pass them over as
unprofitable. Answ. 1. The vvriters of notorious fables and lies do therefore
loose their credit in other assertions, and deserve to have their vvritings
wholy passed over, as being guided therein by the Ioh. 8.44
father of lies, and so being the instruments of Satan to lead men into error
are to be had in suspicion in all that they say, unless there be sufficient
proof of the same by some other means. 2. How true it is that you pass over
their fabulous vvritings in expounding the scriptures let the reader consider
by these fevv instances that follow: you Annot. on Genesis 4.22.
record how the Hebrew Doctors say of Naamah, that all the world wandered (in
love) after her, yea even the sons of God, (as in Genesis 6.2.) and that of her
there were borne evil spirits into the world. You Annot. on Genesis 18.2.
relate from the fabulous Thargum Ierusalemy that the three Angels sent unto
Abraham were sent for three things, because it cannot be, that more things then
one should be sent by the hand of one of the high angels: that the first
Angel was sent to show glad tidings to Abraham, etc. The second to deliver
Lot: the third to overthrow Sodom, etc. This fable is not only repugnant to
the scriptures but to other of the Rabbines also relating it after an other
manner: R. Solomon Iarchi Common Genesis 18 2, etc.
says, that one of these three Angels was sent to bring the good tidings to
Sarah one to overthrow Sodom and one to heal Abraham (meaning for his sore
after circumcision) etc. and that he which healed Abraham was Raphael. Other of
them tell this tale yet an other way. Some thing like unto this unprofitable
Jewish fable, is that which you Annot. on Exo. 28 30.
record from Maimony touching the enquiry by vrim: that they made not inquiry
of two things at once: and if they so enquired, yet the answer was but unto the
first only. You Annot. on Genesis 46 27.
record from R. Menachem, touching the 70. persons that went down into Egypt,
that things beneath do mystically signify things above: and that these 70.
souls signified the 70. Angels that are about Gods glorious throne, the
presidents over the (seventie) nations. Why might you not as well send us to
the fables of S. Denis touching the diverse orders and offices of Angels for
the exposition and illustration of the scriptures as unto these dotards? In
your exposition of Moses his sight of the back parts of the Lord, you Annot. on
Exo. 33 23.
record this Jewish tradition from Maimony and R. Menachem, that God then
appeared like sheliach tsibbur, clad with a robe like a minister of the
congregation. You On Exo. 32.16.
report from the Thargum that the first tables of the law were hevven out of
the saphir of the throne of Gods glory mentioned in Exo. 24,10. These Jewish
traditions are presumptuous Col. 2.18 1 Cor. 4.6 Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. and
29.29.
forbidden additions to the holy story more unlawful then many of their
grossest fables, like unto those forged mirackles which the popish legends do
add unto the story of the new testament touching the acts of the Apostles and
other saints. Though Moses was Numb. 12 7. Heb. 3.2.
faithful in all the house of God, yet as if his story had been defective, and
his writings imperfect, you help to make it up with the superstitious
traditions of the Rabbines. You Annot. Exo. 26.1.
tell us from their canons, that wheresoever fine linen twisted, is spoken of
in the law, it must be six double thread: On Exo. 28.33.
That wheresoever this word twisted is used alone (as it is in Exo. 39 24) it
must be eight double thread: That the robe was all of blew, and the threads
thereof were Ibid. on verse. 32.
twelve times double: That the breast plate and Ephod were On Exo. 28.6.
woven with 28 threads, etc. Moses Genesis 14.22.23.
tells us that Abraham would not have so much as a thread from the King of
Sodom, to avoid offense, least he should say he had made Abraham rich: and by
his example you also had done better if in the exposition of the law you had
not taken the description of one thread from the infidel Moses Bar Meimon,
otherwise the^ the faithful Moses has described the same: The Rabbines may
say they have made you rich: that your Annotations are enriched with their
traditions: so are you an offense to the Jews. Again to give light unto the
scriptures you Annot. on Exodus 27.21.
send us unto the Thalmud, and allege from thence the superstitious order in
trimming and lighting the lamps of the golden candlestick: The Children of
light need not to learn such things from the Prince of darkness. Though Moses
in his story was guided by the spirit of him that is the Dan 8.13
wonderful Numbrer, yet as if the numbers and measures of the sanctuary had
been insufficiently described by him, you for our further instruction will
needs Annot. on Exo. 25.30.
record unto us a more full reckoning from the Thalmudiques: as for example,
that they say touching the show bread, that the length of every cake was 10.
ha^dbredths, and the breadth, 5. handtbreaths, and the height 7, fingers. That
the On Exo. 28.33.
belles on Aarons robe were in number 72, that they hanged 36. on the one
skirt, and 36 on the other: that in these 72 belles were 72, clappers, all of
gold, etc. That the plate of the holy crown was Ibid. on verse. 36.
a long plate of gold, two fingers broad and reached from one ear to an other:
That the Ibid. on verse. 39.
girdle was about 3. fingers broad and 32. cubits long, etc. These and many
more such like novelties have you recorded from the presumptuous Rabbines, who
being rashly puffed up of their fleshly minds have added these things unto the
word of God. Though the spirit of God has thought it meet to pass over these
things, and to mention none of them in his word, yet you on the contrary have
thought it meet not to pass them over, but to join them with your notes for
illustration of the scripture.

But touching the Jewish forbidden fables, you say further; Preface to annot.
some things also you note from them, not as approving them yourself
absolutely, but leaving them to further consideration of the prudent. Ans. 1.
If you did absolutely approve the^, you should be more absurd then I can yet
imagine that you are. It is too much that you approve them in so great a
measure, as to allege such a multitude of them without any note of dislike or
censure upon the allegation of them even in such manner as good writers do use
ordinarily to allege the testimonies of those whom they do approve. 2. For
more particular approbation, let the reader consider how you approve that false
and frivolous saying of R. Menachem, namely, that Annot. on Genesis 12 9.
Abraham cleaved unto the condition of mercy, for that is the south of the
world: and therefore all Abraham's iourneyes were toward the South: to confirm
this you do vainly allege the scriptures Ezekiel. 40.2. Ier. 1.13.14. For many
of Abraham's journeys were not toward the south: And the scriptures do often
show mercy and judgments by and from the North and South indifferently. When
you Annot. on Genesis 15 12.
allege the false assertion of Maimony concerning Prophets: that they saw no
prophetical vision, but by dream or by night vision, ( Numb. 12.6. and
22.19,20.) or by day, after that a dead sleep was fallen upon them: ( Dan.
10.9.) And all that Prophesied, their joints trembled, there remained no
strenght in them, etc. you add then for confirmation, But they except Moses,
as the scripture also does, Nu^b. 12.7.8. But how does the scripture make an
exception from that which it never affirmed? Though Moses be exalted above
other prophets in the place alleged: yet neither does the scripture determine
visions to be either night visions, or in the day after a dead sleep: neither
does it affirm that trembling of all that prophesied: neither is Moses
excepted from that trembling. And Maimony himself when he else where Morch
Nebuchim Chel. 2. per. 45.
describes eleven degrees of prophecy does therein refute his own
distinction, whiles there in the tenth and eleventh degree he gives instances
of the visions of Joshua by Jericho and of Abraham in the mount Morijah, which
yet were neither by dream, nor by night vision, nor by day after a dead sleep.
3. Though you thus approve their vain expositions, yet do you at other times
refuse their more sound interpretations: as when Comment. on Hos. 12.4.
R. Abraham aben Ezra, R. David Kimchi, and R. Sol. Iarchi do expound the
action of Iaakob holding Esaw by the heel (which is expressed in the name
Iaakob,) to be a sign and note of his power, dignity and victory over Esaw,
yet you write that Annot. on ps. 14.7.
Iaakob is a name that notes infirmity, etc. and do observe that Annot. on
Genesis 32 28.
the Church, when speech is of her infirmity, is often called Iaakob: and when
her glory and valor is signified, she is called Israel: as throughout the
scriptures may be observed: as though we might not as well and truly observe,
that the Church, when Esa. 9.12. Ier. 50.17. Romans 9.3^ Mat. 10.6.
speech is of her infirmity, is often called Israel: yea when the miserable
apostate Church for defection is cast of and divorced from the Lord, the
scripture still gives the name of Israel unto her, rather then the name of
Iaakob: and on the other side, when her Mal. 1.2. Ps. 24.6. and 47.4. Esa. 44.5.
glory, valor and dignity is signified, she is also called Iaakob. 4. Whereas
you say of those vain traditions, which you do not absolutely approve, that
you leave them to further consideration of the prudent. I ask you what the
imprudent and simple shall do, of whom there is the greatest number, and into
whose hands especially these your annotations are like to come: be like it is
enough that they stand amazed admiring these rare Rabbinical conceits, though
they know not what to say or think of them. How do you forget the rule of the
Apostle, which requires that 1 Cor. 14 25.
all things be done unto edifying? why do you not go before them by telling
them your judgment plainly, what you approve, and what you do condemn? 5.
Nay, herein you show less zeal and care for the instruction and guiding of
the simple and ignorant people, then many of the infidel Rabbines themselves
have done: for in their Commentaries upon the Thalmud, when they meet with
diverse opinions of their doctors, their manner is to tell whose judgment they
do follow and approve; as for example in the place which you objected unto me
to show that any wise man might advise the Priest, etc. diverse opinions of R.
Ismael, R. Akiba, R. Iehuda and others being there set down in the text of the
Thalmud, R. Schimean in his gloss thereon Comment. on Thal. Tractat. negaguim,
c. 2.
says in one section, vehaijnu R. Akiba, that is, we are of R. Akiba his
mind: on an other section, abal roeh any, etc. i. but I respect that which is
said of R. Iehuda: so your Rambam or Maimony also in his gloss upon the same
Chapter, says in one section, vehalacah cachachamim, that is, the law or
tradition is according to their Chacamim: upon an other sectio^, vehalacah
cerabbi Iehuda, that is the tradition or right law is according to R. Judah. And
thus also they use to declare their judgeme^ts in other place: had you but
showed the like care in your allegation of their traditions, your people should
have had less cause to complain of your ambiguous expositio^s.

CHAP. II.
A Second scandal and a more unworthy thing is this; to allege the testimonies
of such as are not only fabulous but also blasphemous writers, unless it were
against themselves and such as rely upon them. Iam. 3.11.12.
Does a fountain send forth at one place both sweet water and bitter? Can a
fig tree bring forth olives or a vine figs? Can those impious Rabbines that
with a blasphemous mouth do curse the son of God, and pray daily against the
Christians that are renewed after his similitude: Can these I say with the same
mouth send forth sweet and wholesome waters of instruction for the flock of
Christ to drink at? why do you the^ lead Christians for spiritual information
in the law of God, unto that swine-trough of the Thalmud? Even those infidelles
themselves do confess and yield that there are many things that disable diverse
persons to bear witness and make them pesulim lehagned, unmeet and unworthy
to be allowed for witnesses: R. Iaakob that compiled Arba Turim, the 4. Tomes
of Thalmudicall canons, sets down many of these causes, as namely Choshen
hammisch pat, tractat. Eduth, signo. 33, 34. 35.
wickedness, enmitye, blindness, deafnes, etc. so that they being wicked enemies
of the gospel and of true religion, blind and deaf that have shut their eyes
and stopped their ears from hearing the word of the Lord by his prophets are
therefore by their own sentence to be rejected from bearing any testimony in
matters of religion.

Now their blasphemies are many: To begin with Maimony, he says of God and
repeats it, that he is Maim. in Misn. in Iesudei hatthorah Cap. 2.
one of every side, and on every corner, and every way one. This he says by
way of opposition unto Christianisme, and so denies the holy trinity, and the
godhead of Christ, teaching an unity of person as well as of essence: Thus
where he professes to describe the foundations of the law, he overthrowes the
foundation of our religion. The holy gospel containing the story of Christ, and
called Evangelion of the good tidings which it declares, they do blasphemously
slander, and R. Natha^ in Aruch in Aven gillaion and Elias Lev. in Tischbi, in
gillaion.
call it Aven-gillaion, a vision of vanity or a volume of iniquity. There is
no part of that sacred story concerning the birth, the life, the death, the
doctrine and miracles of our blessed Lord Jesus, but they have a multitude of
blasphemies touching each of them, and so vile that I abhor to mention them. One
impious Rabbine in special in a certain treatise which he entitles Nizzacho^,
which he inte^ds as a triu^ph over the gospel, has been bolder then the rest
to publish the the same, as is Seb. M^st. Annor. in Mat. 1.1. etc.
showed at large in the annotations upon the Hebrew edition of the gospel of
Matthew: where they are in part refuted. All men know in general that they deny
Jesus the son of Mary, to be the Messiah and savior of the world; and that
herein the blaspheme they son of God as a deceiver and as a false Christ. And
yet this they do with such vanity and contradiction among themselves, that all
may see their madness therein: Some of them say that their Messiah is not yet
borne, and others say he is borne but not reveiled yet, because of their
iniquities. Of them that say he is borne and come into the world, some say he
is among the Lepers at Roomegates: and that Talmud in Sanhedrin. c. 11. Fol. 98.
R. Iehoschua ben levi finding Elias at the gates of Paradise and enquiring for
the Messiah, did by his direction find him among those Lepers, and asked him
of the time when he would reveal himself. Others of them say, Emunath Ichud.
p. 44
that he is in Paradise (to wit, on earth,) being borne the same day that the
second temple was destroyed, and that Elias must first anoint him for King, and
that then he shall come, etc. Some of them say that there be two Christ's or
Messiasses, one the son of Joseph, an other the son of David, one poor,
the other more mighty: These two Messiasses the Targum on Cant. 4.5.
Chalde paraphrast will have to be signified by the two young roes that feed
among the lilies. And diverse of the Rabbines do in other places Aben Ezra and
R. Solomon comment. on Zach. 12.10.
note the same thing. Some Thalmud Sanhedrin. c. 11. fol. 99
others of them say that King Hezekias was the Messiah, and that now there is
no Messiah for Israel. And Ibid. f. 94
R. Thanchom enquiring why Mem is shut in the word Lemarbeh in the prophecy
concerning Christ Esa. 9. whereas in other places it is open in the mids of
words: he shows this to be the occasion: when as God sought to make Hezekias
to be the Messiah, he says that Sennacherib, Gog and Magog yea and the whole
consistory or council of God came unto him and said, o Lord of the world, seeing
King David has praised thee with so many songs why will thou not make him
Messiah rather then Hezekias for whom thou have done wonders and yet he has
not sung one song unto thee: Hereupon he says that immediately the Mem in
Lemarbe was shut up, viz. as a token that Hezekias should not be Christ: but
then after this comes the earth itself and opens her mouth and says O Lord of
the world I will sing a hymn unto thee in stead of this righteous Hezekias,
and so hereupon it was concluded that Hezekias should be the Messiah: Now the
proof which the Thalmud brings to show that the earth did sing for Hezekias,
is taken from Esa. 24.16. from the uttermost part of the earth we have heard
praises, glory to the just, etc. Some of the Rabbines do reckon the years and
make a computation of times when their Messiah shall come: and this with many
and great absurdities and contradictions among themselves: Others of them seeing
how often they have been deceyved do say the times are not to be reckoned: R.
Samuel bar Nachman and R. Jonathan do lay the curse upon such as presume to
reckon the time of his coming, saying, Thal. in Sanhedrin C. 11. f. 97.
Let their bones be broken that count the times.

Whereas they Seb. Mun. annot. in Mat.
blaspheme Christ Jesus in respect of his age, living but three or four and
thirty years, as though he was accursed like the wicked, of whom it is said
he shall not live out half his days: see with what vvarrant and agreement
among themselves they do this: R. Eliezer Talmud in Sanhedrin c. 11. Fol. 99.
says that the days of Messiah shall be 40. years, according to the years
that they had seen evil, namely, according to the 40. years that they
wandered in the wilderness, ps. 90.15. with ps. 95.10. and Deuteronomy. 8.2 R. Eleazar
ben Azaria says that the years of Messiah must be 70. years according to the
years of one King, Esa. 23.15. That one King they say is their Messiah. One
Rab says, he must live 3. generations, noted in Dor Dorim, signifying a
generation and generations, which they reckon for three, ps. 71.5. R. Dosa
says that the days of Messiah must be 400. years, according to the years
that they have seen evil, viz. according to the 400. years that Israel
soiourned in Egypt, ps 90.15. with Genesis 15.13 An other Rabbi says, that the
years of the Messiah must be 365. acccording to the number of the days of the
sun finishing his course in a year: this they gather from the year of the
Lord mentioned in Esa. 61.2. R. Nachman bar Isaak says that his years must be
according to the days of Noah until this time Esa. 54.9. R, Ichudah and R.
Samuel say that his days shall be as long as from the creation of the world
unto the time present from Deuteronomy. 11.21. Others of them say, that their Messiah
must live seven thousand years: This they gather from the words of the
Prophet, As a bridegroom is glad over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over
thee, Esa. 62.5. Now the En mishpat gloss. in Tal. vbi supra.
gloss upon the Talmud in that place shows us how to count 7000. out of that
verse, by reckoning the 7. days of the bridegroomes marriage feast, and making
each day to stand for a year, because a 1000 years with God is but as one day:
and so those 7 days do note 7000. years, Judge. 14.12.17. with Psalm. 90.4.
Whereas they blaspheme the name Jesus given by the Angel unto our Lord, and
turn it into a curse, by certain words according to the initiall letters
thereof: see what vain conjectures and collections they make for other names
to be given unto him: Talm. in Sanhedrin, Cap. 11. Fol. 98.
The Scholars of R. Shiloh say that the name of Messiah shall be Shiloh from
Genesis 49.10. and the scholars of R. Iannai say his name shall be Iinnon from Ps.
72.17. The scholars of R. Chanina say his name shall be Chanina which signifies
grace from Ier. 16.13. Others say his name shall be Menache^ or Co^forter from
La^. 1.16. But the name Jesus they hold in execratio^: so that their
blasphemies of his majesty may justly cause their testimony and judgment in
expounding the mysteries of holy scriptures to be refused and not alleged by
us.

But you do not only allege them, but even their blasphemous sayings and
testimonies also without any note of dislike: as for example, you Annot. on
Exo. 28.30.
tell us how the Bab. Thalmud in Ioma Cap. 1. Fol. 21. speaking of Hag. 1.8.
where the Hebrew word Eccabda (I will be glorified) wants the letter H, which
in numbering signifies five, says, The want of H, shows the want of five
things in the second temple, which had been in the first, namely, 1. The ark,
with the mercie-seat and Cherubims: 2. The fire (from heaven) 3. The majesty
or divine presence:) 4. The holy Ghost: 5. And the vrim and Thummim. This
Rabbinicall observation is most impious, false and blasphemous: first, it
serves to overthrow the whole new Testament, to deny Christ Jesus, and to
condemn all his holy Apostles, Evangelists, John Baptist and other excellent
Saints and servants of God who lived under the second temple and worshipped God
therein, as though they all had been deceyvers and none of them endued with the
holy Ghost, which this Thalmud says was wanting in the second temple.
Secondly, this observation is directly contrary to the scope of that Prophet in
his whole prophecy, and even to the meaning of the word Eccabda I will be
glorified: The spirit entending to promise Hag. 1.8. with chapter 2.4-10.
more full and excellent revelation of the glory and grace of God in this
second temple rather then in the first, how abis it so to pervert the word of
the Lord quite contrary to his meaning?

But it is the less mervaile that you should thus produce this testimony of
the Talmud, when as so many learned men have alleged it before you: and
especially that Joan. Rainold. censura libror. apocryph. To^. 2. praelect. 134.
worthy light of our Church, whose memorial is blessed, who disputing against
the Papists touching the fire come down from heaven which in the second book
of the Maccabees is said to have been reserved in a pit during the time of the
captivity until the second temple was built, does for their conviction
allege this testimony, to show that that fire was vvanting in the second
temple, and therefore in a whole lecture throughout the same does labor to
procure credit unto this testimony. His maine reason is, that howsoever the
Jewish vvriters do abou^d with many monstrous lies and fables, yet when they
speak against themselves and the honor of their own nation, they are rather
to be credited, and their testimony receyved. But touching this point we are
to consider: 1. When adversaries of the truth bearing witness against
themselves do not agree in that testimony with themselves, then can we not
safely receive their testimony, howsoever they may bring great shame upon
themselves and may have their mouths stopped thereby. Now in this
Thalmudicall testimony touching the want of the five things in the second
temple, the Thalmudists do not agree among themselves: for the Thalmud
Ierusalemy alleged by D. Rai. reckoned these 5 things to be vvanting: Tract.
Maccoth, Cap. 2. Fol. 32. col. 1.
the fire: the arc: vrim and Thummim: the anointing oil: the holy ghost: The
Talmud Babylonique of which D. Rai. confesses he could not come to the sight
of it) leaves out the anointing oil and In Ioma. c. 1. f. 21.
reckons up five or rather 7. other things: the ark, the mercy seat, the
Cherubims, the fire, the divine presence, and vrim and Thummim: R. David Kimchi
Comme^t. in Hag. 1.8
speaking of the five things that should be wanting, does neither reckon the
anointing oil, nor the mercy-seat, nor the Cherubims: R. Solomon Iarchi in his
Comme^t. Ibid.
reckoning omits the anointing oil, the mercy seat, the Cherubims and the ark
also: so that unless he count vrim and Thummim for two, which none of the
former did, he must come short of the number of five, Aben Ezra in his
commentaries on the same place omits this mystery, and thinks it not meet to
make any mention at all thereof. Again the Thalmud Ierusalemy relates this
matter from R. Samuel in the name of R: Acha (not Achar as is printed in the
lecture above mentioned:) but the Babylonian Thalmud relates it from R. Samuel
in the name of R. Aini. and therein disagrees also. And other differences there
are betwixt them also, so that for this cause their credit is like the credit
of those Mark. 14 56.
disagreeing witnesses that rose up against Christ. 2. Those witnesses which
so speak against themselves, that they do vvithall speak against the honor of
Christ therein, are not to be credited: but the Rabbines in this place
affirming the holy Ghost to be vvanting in the second temple, do herein speak
against Christ, and make him (that Mat 3.16 Ioh. 3.34.
receyved the holy Ghost and Ioh. 16.13.14. Act. 2.4.
communicated the same unto others more then ever before) to be inferior unto
all the Prophets that went before. If this Thalmudicall testimony touching the
want of these 5. things in the second temple were true, according to the
meaning of the Rabbines, then could not Jesus be the true Messiah. 3, It might
easily be showed by an 100. instances, that these Rabbines do often speak
falsely against the honor of their own nation, and against the worthiest men
of God in their nation, to honor themselves with the invention of some
Cabalisticall conceit: though to the dishonor of Abraham, of Iaakob, of
Samuel, of David, Hezekias, Elisha, etc. Yet to magnify their own fictions,
they tell many fabulous things touching the faults of these persons. And so to
broch their curious and absurd conceit from Eccabda under show of a great
mystery, it is no marvel, nor unusual thing if the devisers thereof should
utter some things against the honor of their public estate, especially when
those privileges which they take from the second temple, are given in the same
place to the first temple, for the honor of their nation at that time. As for
the antiquity of these Talmuds, and Rabboth that relate this testimony, it
gives no more credit hereunto then unto the rest of their fables and impious
traditions: And therefore is of no worth further then it receives confirmation
from else where: or serves by way of supposition to convince such as rely upon
the same.

CHAP. III.
THe third Scandal in the allegation of these Thalmudicall traditions, is in
respect of the divine honor which the Jews give unto them, holding that they
are the very word of God, immediately delivered of God unto Moses in mount
Sinai, when as he was 40. days and 40 nights in the mount with God. It is not
enough for them to profess, teach and practice such fabulous, superstitious and
blasphemous things, unless they obtrude them upon God, equalling them with the
holy scriptures and preferring them before the writings of the Prophets. They
tell us that there is a double law, thorah abschebicthab, a written law:
thorah schebeal peh, a law in the mouth: which Moses did receive but not write,
only delivering it from mouth to mouth unto posterity: And this is their
Thalmud. R. Aben Ezra in his preface to the commentaries which he vvrote on
the law calls it the joy of their heart and the health of their bones, and
says there is no difference betwixt these two laws. R. Solomon Iarchi
Comme^t. on Deuteronomy. 4.14.
teaches, that the ordinances and laws which the Lord commanded Moses to
teach Israel Deuteronomy. 4.14. were this traditional law, thorah schebealpeh, the
law delivered by mouth and not written: though now at last the Jews have
written the same. Maimony to show the dignity and excellency of these
traditions, In misneh, in tephil. col hasshanah.
alleges that saying from Hab. 3.6, his vvayes are everlasting; but (says
he) read not, halicoth, vvayes: but halacoth traditions. And says, whosoever
teaches those traditions let him be assured that he is a child of the world
to come. That Targum or Chaldee paraphrast which you often allege, does
interpret those kisses of the mouth, Cant 1.1. to be the six parts of the
Thalmud: and afterward again most absurdly Thargum on Cant. 5.10.
speaks of the same, desiring to serve that God, which in the day being clothed
with a robe white as snow studyeth the 24. books of the Bible, and in the
night season studieth the six parts of the Thalmud. And the Thargum Ierusalemy
expounds those words of Iaakob in his blessing of Judah, that his on Genesis 49.12.
teeth should be white with milk, of such as are bakian bahalacah exercised in
the tradition of the Thalmud. And further that they prefer their Thalmud before
the holy scriptures, it appears by such sayings as are Buxtorf. recens. operis
Tal. p. 197.202.
noted to be ordinary among the Rabbines: namely, that the words of their wise
men were more amiable and excellent then the words of the Prophets that the
scripture or text of the Bible is to be compared unto water: the mischna,
(which is one part of the Talmud) unto wine: and the Thalmud (or Gemara) unto
Condite: that the law is like unto salt, the mischna like unto Pepper and the
Thalmud like unto sweet spices. If this be so, it is no marvel that you do so
sugar and spice your annotatio^s with the traditions of these wise men. It is
affirmed in the In Babha metsia c. 2. Fol. 33
Thalmud, that to be exercised in the scriptures it is a virtue and no virtue,
that is very small in comparison: to be exercised in the mischna, that is a
virtue for which they receyve a reward: to be exercised in the Gemara, (which
is an other part of the Thalmud) is a virtue, then which none is more
excellent, R. Solomon expounding those words of Moses touching the submissio^
unto the) judgment of the Priests and Judges in Israel, that it was not to be
declined from neither to the right hand nor to the left, does hereupon reach
that they are to be obeyed and followed, Comment. on Deuteronomy. 17.11.
when they say that the right hand is the left, or that the left hand is the
right hand: and how much more when they say that the right hand is the right
hand, and that the left hand is the left hand? Thus do they set men in the seat
of God, and make vile flesh like unto the most high, yea and exalt them into a
throne of dignity above him. In this regard it is more offensive to allege
such counterfaite stuff as does fasly bear the name of God, as if it were
suggested by his divine and extraordinary inspiration. In the popish legends
there are many fained visions and mirackles recorded, and some of them devised
only to persuade unto mercy and works of charity: yet do we justly abhor
them and the use of them to any such end, because they are forged with the
great abuse of Gods name: for the Kingdom of God needs not to be vpholden with
any props or pillars borrowed from the Kingdom of Satan. He that being to bear
witness of any matter, shall first be convicted of a lie touching the means
of his knowledge, and touching the person from whom he pretends he heard that
which he is to witness, even for this cause deserves to be condemned and to
have his testimony rejected: And even so the Thalmudists being herein
manifestly guilty of a notorious and blasphemously touching the means of their
knowledge, while they pretend a divine revelation from God for all that they
say, though he never delivered the same unto any: for this cause is their
testimony also to be refused exceptit be against themselves. And for this cause
also your boldness and your fault in frequent alleging of them, is the more
inexcusable.

CHAP. IV.
A Fourth Scandal, is your forgerie in the allegation of these Rabbines, and
this in diverse kinds.

First, in that you join with the Jews in making diverse of their traditions
to be part of the authentic word of God: and namely, in canonizing the diverse
readings that are in the line and in the magine of the Masorites Bible: for
example, in ^ not, ^ to himself: not betrothed her, and yet betrothed her to
himself: of these you say, Annot. on Exo. 21 8.
Moses hearing it of God, did by his spirit, write both. Before this time, I
never heard of any Christian, that durst avouch so peremptorily, this
presumptuous or rather blasphemous assertion, by which you make God like unto
Ianus Bifrons the Idol with two faces, to look two diverse vvayes at once, in
these diverse and contrary readings of the same text. Do you not remember what a
fearful Prove. 30.6. Rev. 22.18
curse is pronounced against those that add unto the book of God? why then do
you bring these additions and maintain them, as the work of Gods spirit? It
is great sin to add unto the vvritings of men, and to put forth things in
their name, whereof they are not authors: but much more to deal so with God.
It is a point of treason against the King to counterfeit his hand, his seal,
his coin: how much more to counterfeit the hand and writing of God, to coin
new scripture, and to set the stamp of the Rabbines upon the coin of the
Lord, by adding their traditions unto his word, and giving divine authority
unto them? But it is the less marvel that you who err so strangely in
discerning the Church of God, should also err in discerning the scriptures of
God.

You Annot. Ibid.
plead, that the Hebrew has both readings, the first in the line, the later in
the margin: I answer. 1. There be many Hebrew Bibles: which do want these
readings that you speak of: That ancient edition of the Hebrew Bible by
Sebastian Munster has them not: That great edition of the Hebrew by Plantine
has not these additions in the margin: The most excellent and diverse editions
hereof by Rob. Stephanus both in 4o and in 16o, have them not. A new edition of
Raphelengius has them not. The late edition by R. Isaak Bar Shimeon has the^
not: so that we may say with as good reason as you, that the Hebrew has them
not. 2. That Masoriticall Bible of Bomberg, that has these diverse readings,
has also so many other traditionall observatio^s, in the margin thereof round
about, that I think you will be loath to afme them to be receyved from God and
written by his spirit: and yet that Masoriticall bible which mainteyneth these
diverse readings delivers one sort of traditions as well as the other, and puts
no difference betwixt them. 3. There are also sundry editions of the new
Testament, which have diverse readings, one in the line, an other in the
margin, yet can we not hence conclude that both these readings are receyved
from God: and yet may we say of these as well as you do of the other, that the
Greek has both readings, etc. though only one of them were delivered by the
spirit extraordinarily from God. And even so, Arias Montanus in his edition of
the Hebrew Bible, though he have noted the diverse readings in the margin, yet
not as if they were delivered by the spirit of God; but as In apparatu Bibl.
praefat. ad lect. var.
falts grown by the calamity of times, the negligence and ignorance of
scribes, or otherwise, etc.

You allege further, that the writing differs in the eye, ( ^
lo, not; and ^
lo, to himself) but has no difference in the ear: so Moses hearing it of
God, did by his spirit, write both. Answ. 1, how know you that there was no
difference of sound in Moses his ear, when he heard those words whose letters
do differ? want of a distinct sound, in words that signify distinct and
several things is an imperfection of speech, and a defect in the language: but
now the language spoken unto Moses being Hebrew which is the perfectest
language: the Lord that spoke, speaking after a most perfect manner: and Moses
that heard being prepared thereunto of God, after the most perfect manner that
was needful for the receyving of that law; who is it now, that can justly
affirm, that at this time distinct words had an indistinct and confused sound
without any difference in the ear?

2. Though the common rule of grammar at this day teach that those two Aleph,
vau.
letters are quiescent or silent and not pronounced in the end of words, yet
are there still some exceptio^s made by some, and the other He, jod.
two being of like nature for the pronunciation are by many learned men
pronounced in like case in the end of words.

Some write that these quiescent letters as they are called, do cause a
different pronuntiation, in making the vowelles unto which they are joined to
be drawn out with a longer sound and therefore are by them called Val. Schind.
Institut. Hebr. lib. 1. p. 12.
literaeflatus and protractionis. Others tell us that Ioa. Drusius de recta
lectione ling. Sanct. cap. 8.
Cholem has six or seven different kinds of sounds according to the
diversity of letters with which it is joined, and in particular what distinct
and peculiar kind of sound it has in lo, not: and how it differs from Cholem
in other places. And if this be so, how can any man affirm that there was no
difference in the ear betwixt lo, not, and lo, to himself, when Moses heard
them of God?

3. This your distinction of difference in the eye, and no difference in the
ear seems to be very idle, and of no use to give any light unto the matter
that you are speaking of: you can not pretend the like distinction to bring in
some other of the diverse readings noted by the Masorites, seeing many of them do
manifestly differ in the ear, as much or more then in the eye. To what
purpose then serves this distinction?

4. If there be little or no difference of sound betwixt these words, this is
the more against you: and helps to make it more apparent that these and the
like diverse readings did arise from the error of the scribes that wrote out
the copies of the Bible, which might easily be deceyved in those words, which
by their sound were not distinguished from one an other. And thus also from the
likeness of the figure in diverse letters, as in van and Iod, it is observed that
Io. Buxtorf. Thesaur. gram. lib. 1. c. 28
in writing of them one has degenerated into the other. And if we look upon
those seven classes or ranks, whereunto Masoreth hammasoreth in Tabulis
secu^dis, Orat. 1.
Elias Levita has reduced these diverse readings, we may thereby plainly
observe that they are all such, as through some similitude either in sound, in
figure, or in signification or through transposition, conjunction, or division
of the letters, or the like occasion the pen of the scribe might quickly slip
and miss therein: for example to give instance in two like letters: he tells
us that in 52 places of these diverse readings, jod is written in the beginning
of a word, and the Masorites will have it be read vau: And on the contra in 56.
places vau is written in the beginning of a word and they read it jod: Again
in 70. places jod is written in the mids of a word and they read it and
pronounce it as vau, etc. And hence as it seems, Rabbinicall superstition and
curiosity meeting with these diverse readings have turned humane slips and
errors into sacred mysteries, and given divine authority unto the faults of
men. As the Pope in his Calendar many times canonizeth the^ for Saints, who are
the Children of Hell: so have the Jews in their Masorah turned the errors of
men into Canonical scriptute. Why do you follow them herein?

FOr confirmation of your opinion, you produce witnesses, and say, The Hebrew
Doctors (in Thalmud Bab. in Nedarim, Chap. 4 Fol. 37. B) say, The words read
and not written, and written and not read, were the tradition of Moses from
(mount) Sinai: that is, as the Hebrew Scholion on that place notes, so Moses
receyved in Sinai, and delivered to Israel. I answer,

1. These witnesses being already convicted of falsehood, dotages and
blasphemies are not to be admitted to speak in this controversy, their
testimony is not to be receyved. This Thalmud which you allege, is that bed
of slumber into which the Lord had Esa. 29.10 Romans 11.8
threatened to cast the Jews: in this bed of error do your Hebrew Doctors lie
snorting in the spirit of slumber: what mean you to waken them and call them
up to come and tell us their dreams? You may as well allege their testimony,
to make us believe that their Thalmudicall canons and constitutions, are from
God as well as the holy scriptures, and that we are bound to exercise ourselves
in them, rather then in the scriptures: for this they affirm as I showed
before. And there is no tradition so impious or absurd, but the Thalmudists
commend the same unto us, even with the same phrase, that is here used in this
your allegation. At every turn they say, Thalmud in Menachoth. c. 1. Fol. 29.
Maimony in Tephillim, cap. 1. Sec. 3. R. Alphes in Tephillim, fol. 78. a. b,
and 79. a. b, etc.
Halacah lemoshe missinai. i. a tradition of Moses from (mount) Sinai. With
this cloak they array their superstitions, and with this false boasting they
sell their Rabbinicall wares. How great is the scandal which you give unto the
Jews by this your dealing? how may they be encouraged to drink more deeply of
that spiced cup of their Thalmud, when as they see the wine thereof to go down
so pleasantly with you, by receiving their testimony and their traditions in
so great a measure?

2. If there were nothing else but the foolish traditions contained in this
very Chapter unto which you send us, touching Ben Modar with other vain
observations; we might thereby be sufficiently warned not to receive the
testimony of this Thalmud. R. Iosei bar Chanina Thalm. in Nedarim, c. 4. F. 38.
a
says, The law was not give^ but unto Moses and to his seed, because it was
said, write thee and engrave for thee two tables of stone, but Moses having a
good ey: of his liberality gave it to Israel. etc. R. Iochanan srith in the
same place, The holy blessed God does not cause his schecinah or habitatio^ to
abide but upon a strong man, a rich man, a wise man and an humble man, and that
all these were in Moses: that he was a strong man, because it is said, he
spread the covering over the tabernacle, etc. Exo. 40.19. This same thing is
also noted by Comme^t. on Exo. 39 33.
R. Solomon from R. Tanchuma, that no man had the strength to do this thing but
Moses alone, etc. That he was strong also, in that he could bear the two
tables of stone in his hand, that he could break them, the length of them being
six, the breadth six, and the thicknes thirteen cubits, etc. That he was
wise; that all the 50 gates of understanding were given unto Moses, one
excepted; that they prove from ps. 8.5. That he was meek from Numb. 12.3. That
he was rich from Numb. 16.15. So they write of diverse others: as of Jonah whom
they prove to be rich, because he paid the fare of the ship: Ion. 1.3. R.
Iohanan says it was the hyre of the whole ship: R. Romanus says it came to
four thousand pieces of gold, etc. with a number of such like presumptions.

3. There be also of the Rabbines themselves that reject this superstitious
conceit of these diverse readings delivered unto Moses from mount Sinai. R.
David Kimchi one of the learnedest and most judicious among them all, though he
ascribe too much unto their Kabalah and tradition, yet Kimchi Preface unto
Joshua.
he judges that these diverse writings and readings came from the dispersion of
the Jews, from the difference of copies written by diverse scribes: and that
Ezra and the men of the great congregation (as they are called) in correcting
the copies when they found difference, went according to their knowledge after
the greatest number, and when they did not clearly understand some words,
sometimes they wrote them and did not point them: sometimes they wrote one way
in the margent, and did not write so in the text, etc. And this is the
judgment of other Rabbines also as of Ephodaeus, and Don Isaak Abarbinel or
Abrabinael, that this diversity of writing and reading arose from hephsed,
balbul and Saphek, that is, from corruption, confusion, doubting and
uncertainty of scribes, etc. This is acknowledged by Preface to Masorites Bible.
R. Jacob ben Chajim, who in vain labors to refute them. Had you but cleaved
unto the sounder sort of Rabbines you should not have gone so far astray.

4. It is worthy to be observed also, that the very same testimony alleged by
you from the Thalmud, Nedar. c. 4 f. 37. is that maine stone of offense,
whereat the later Rabbines have stumbled and fallen into the pit of
superstition, and therefore is it so often cited by them, viz. by Preface ad
Sepher mitsvoth gadol.
R. Moses mikkotsi: by Preface ad Bibl. masorit.
R. Jacob ben Chajim: by Masor hammasor. prefat. tertia.
Elias Levita, etc. Had you duly considered in what superstitious manner they
use the same, and how it serves their turn, you would not so lightly have
produced such witness.

5. To come nearer unto this your testimony itself: if we consider the
instances and examples of the words written and not read: and read and not
written, which the In Nedarim. c. 4. f. 37.
Thalmud propounds unto us as a tradition of Moses from mount Sinai: we may
perceive that there is never a one of them taken from the law, from the five
books of Moses, but all of them from later Prophets, from the books of Ruth,
of Samuel, Kings, of Jeremy and Ezekiel. If your witness had said that Moses
had delivered the diverse vvritings and readings of his own books, there had
been some more color for it, but that Moses in mount Sinai should deliver the
diverse writings and readings of Ezekiel and Jeremy that prophesyed so many
generations after him: this is most senseless and absurd to imagine. Had not
Jeremy and Ezekiel the spirit of God to direct them in the vvriting of those
particular words, as well as to set down the maine matters of their prophesy
which they foretold? And what need was there then of a tradition from Moses,
for the vvriting or reading of them? And who can say that Moses foreknew these
things? Though the Masorites have numbered unto us many diverse writings and
readings out of the books of Moses, yet the Thalmud in your allegation
mentions none of them, but such as are in the Prophets.

6. Suppose all were true that the Thalmud and the gloss thereupon does
testify in this place: namely that these diverse readings were the tradition of
Moses from mount Sinai, etc. yet would not this make good your assertion nor
prove the same, when as you say that Moses by the spirit of God did write
both; The Thalmud here says nothing of writing one word in the text, and an
other in the margin. The Rabbines here speak only of receyving and
delivering, but not of writing both. They Elias Levita Masoreth hammasoreth,
praefat. 3.
hold that their traditions were nor written by Moses, but delivered from
mouth to mouth and afterward written by Ezra and others, etc. Herein
therefore you go further then your Thalmudicall testimony will extend, and
pass the bounds of sobriety in this your assertion, more then many of the
presumptuous Rabbines themselves.

7. If it were true, as you plead, that Keri and Chethib, the diverse readings
(as you call them) as not betrothed her and betrothed her to himself, were
both written by Moses, by the spirit of God: then are they both holy and
divine scripture: then do you herein declare your self to be guilty of great
sin, treachery and unfaithful dealing with the scriptures, in that you do
leave out diverse parts of the same at your pleasure in your translation both of
the psalms and of these two first books of Moses which you have already
published: for though some of these diverse readings be noted by you in your
annotations on Genesis, yet are many of them quite left out: as namely, in Genesis
8.17. and Genesis 10.19, and Genesis 25.23, and Genesis 27.3, and Genesis 33.4, and Genesis
36.5, etc. Again in your translation of Exodus you leave out very many also,
as in Exo. 13.11 and Exo. 16.2. and Ibid. verse. 8, etc. And in your translation
of the Psalms, though diverse be noted by you, yet are a great number left out,
and passed by, as in Ps. 5.9, and Ps. 6 4, and Ps. 10.10. and Ps. 123.4, and
Ps. 139.16. with a multitude more as may be seen in the Masorites Bible,
only one of these readings are mentioned by you, and yet there is as much and
the same vvarrant for both in each of these places, as there is for both those
in Exo. 21,8, which you say were written by Moses. This being so, how great
is your sacrilege that devour holy things, and steal away the word of God
(so acknowledged by yourself) from the people of God. There is Prove. 20.15.
gold and a multitude of precious stones, but the lips of knowledge are a
precious Jewel: each jod and title of holy scripture written by the spirit of
God, are in vvorth above all pearls, what mean you then with Achan to dig
in the earth, to hide these vvedges of gold in the ground and to bury them in
your tent? Consider your estate: either you are under the curse for adding some
of the readings unto the word of God, or else it hangs over your head for
diminishing from the word of God, in taking away and concealing the rest,
that are of like authority with the former. The Rabbines R. Solomon Iarchi on
Genesis 17.5.
write that jod being taken away from the name Sarai contended with
Schecinah, with God until satisfaction was made unto this Iod by adding it
again unto the name of Hosea making it to be Iehoshua: How much rather might
many jods contend with you for taking them away from the holy scripture, if
they be divine traditions as you say? The Jews do also R. Sol on Genesis 2.7.
write, the word jitser used to describe the forming of man, being written with
two jods, Genesis 2.7. does show unto us how man was formed both for this world
and for the world to come at the resurrection of the dead: but the word jitser
used to describe the forming of beasts, Genesis 2.17. being in the Hebrew written
with one Iod only, shows that the beasts are not formed to stand up unto
judgment in the world to come. If this be so, what a world of injury and wrong
have you done, by omitting it so often? Yea seeing Christ himself tells us,
Mat. 5.18.
that heaven and earth shall perish, rather then one jod or title of his law
escape, etc. shall not heaven and earth be witness against you that do let so
many of those jods and titles to escape and pass away in your translation,
when as yet you confess that they were written by the spirit of God? why
have you not translated the reading of the margent, and set it in the margent
of your translation, as well as the reading of the text, if both be from the
spirit of God? why have you not done it in other places, as well as in this
place Exo. 21.8? But it may be that as in many things you honor the Jewish
expositions and opinions too much, that so you Iudaize in this also: that as
they, so you think it not meet to reveal in writing many of your special
mysteries and secrets unto them that are without, but deliver them from mouth
to mouth unto your own people. Seeing the communion of all Churches in
Christendom is according to your profession an unlawful and an unclean
thing, it is the less marvel that you refuse to cast your pearls before such
polluted persons whom you dare not touch nor join yourself unto them in the
worship of God. Always these two things are evident and apparent in you, that
as you make little conscience of the rules of your separation among your selves,
for then there would be yet more divisions among you then there are: so also
you make little conscience of these diverse readings, which you say were written
by Moses: for if you did reverence them according your own plea, you would not
pass by so many of them in such manner as you do.

8. Suppose that you would go about to set down all the diverse readings, how
could you come to any certainty, to know which be they? In the place of the
Thalmud quoted by you, there be not above twelve or thirteen mentioned: and
this of lo, not: and lo, to himself is none of them* Where will you find
those other hundreds of them? If you betake yourself unto the Masorites Bible,
from whence many have taken them you may as well take a thousand superstitions
more which by like warrant are there recorded unto us as divine traditions.
Whereas you tell us here of the Hebrew scholion confirming the testimony of
the Thalmud: had you looked well upon the same, you might further have seen
this also, that the very same hebrew R. Nissim gloss. in Talm. in Nedarim. c.
4. f. 37.
gloss does there dissent from the Thalmud, touching some of these diverse
readings: Touching eth dehuggad (as they call it) in Ruth; though the Thalmud
note it to be read and not written, yet the Hebrew scholion says, In the
books or copies which we have it is both written and read: neither is it
mentioned in the Masorah among the words that are read and not written. Again,
touching eth dehammitsvah (as they call it) though the Thalmud notes it among
the words written and not read, yet R. Nissim in his Ibidem. f. 38.
gloss hereupon does show, that how soever some say this is found in the
section of the law which they name ethchannan, yet it is not found there in any
copies which they have, nor yet in the Masora, etc. R. Jacob ben Chajim
Praefat. ad Bibl. Masorit.
relates the same thing, and adds further a different opinion of R. Solomon
Iarchi about the same. And Elias Levita in the warning which he Masor. hammas.
praefat. 3.
gives concerning the Bibles printed at Venice both in greater and lesser
volumes, anno 278 (according to the Jews lesser computation,) says that the
Masoriticall traditions about the diverse readings there specified are full of
error, that he which added them was unlearned, had no judgment touching
diverse copies, that he put that in the text which should have been in the
margent, and contra, etc. From whence then will you get a just and sufficient
warrant of all these diverse readings, which you hold to be divine traditions
written by the spirit of God?

9. When you think that you have found out these diverse readings, and are
resolved of the number of them: what will you do to find out the meaning of
them? every word of God is for the aedification of his Church: and Prove. 8.9
they are all plain to them that will understand and straight to them that
would find knowledge: God has taught us how to Neh. 8.8
expound the scripture by the scripture itself, by comparing one part thereof
with an other. But where is the rule of interpretation, by which we may find
out the mysteries of these diverse readings? for example, when Zeboim Genesis
10.19. go^im, Genesis 25.23. and Ioush, Genesis 36.5. are written in the text
without vau and in the margin with vau: when the vowelles for the word
Perath are written and not the letters, 2. Sam. 8.3. When the letters of the
word Iidroch are written and not the vowels, Ierem. 51.3. by what found
kind of interpretation can both these writings be so expounded that the
consciences of Gods people may rest therein, and be edifyed unto the Kingdom
of God? If we go unto the Jews Cabala, they will give us new and strange kind
of expositions upon the want or change of a letter; because R. Solomon Iar. on
Genesis 25 24. and on Ge^. 38.27.
theomim the word that signifies twins Genesis 25.24. is written in the text
with defect of the letter which is in the margin, that is a sign that one of
Rebekahs Children was just and the other wicked: but because the word theomim
for twins is written full in the story of Thamar, Genesis 38.27. that was a
sign that both her Children should be righteous. They expound Joan. Rainol.
censur. lib. apocr. tom. 1. praelec. 27.
the want of Iod in the last syllable of Tanninim signifying the whales Genesis
1.21. to be a sign unto us how God gelded the male Leviathan to hinder the
procreation of them least they should devour all, etc. From the defect of vas
in doroth Genesis 9.12. they teach that the Rainebovv should not be seen in some
generations, as I noted Page
before: But what wise man is there that will not reject these vanities? And
yet whether you or any other can dravv any sounder observations from these
changes of jod and van and such like diverse readings, it is much to be feared.
If these were written by the spirit of God as you will have it, then must
they be for our Ro^. 15.4
learning and instruction, for increase of our comfort and hope: but if you
cannot show that there is a certain and sure way to gather necessary
doctrine from them for our edification, then have we no reason to think with
you that they are any part of the scriptures of God, or written by the spirit
of God.

10. In the last place, that all may see how dangerous a thing it is to regard
the testimony of these Thalmudists, touching these diverse readings, I will
propound unto the reader one other vile practice of them, viz. their al tikri
in changing and altering the reading of the scripture according to their lust,
which is done on this manner: They Thalmud in Menachoth, c. 1. Fol. 29.
teach from those words in Esaias, 26.4. bejah jehovah tsur ghnolamim, that God
created two worlds with the two letters of the word jah; with jod and he:
but being in doubt whether the world to come was created with jod and the
world present with he; or on the contrary: for help in this doubt they go to
an other place of scripture Genesis 2.4. which they do thus corrupt: whereas it
is there said in the text touching heaven and earth, behibbaream, when they
were created: they say al tikri, read not, behibbaream, but behebaream: that
is, he created them with he: and then also they give other reasons why the
world to come should be created with jod, and this world with he; viz. because
the righteous which belong to the world to come are little in their own eyes,
and also bowed down, as the letter Iod in this form (^) is little and bowed
also, etc. These collections, (beside the corruption of the text) are like unto
the De^^inghe. Fol. 20. B.
collections of Thomas Lea^ar once one of your separation, but now an Arian,
who by his cabala from the letters and characters of the Hebrew Alphabet
professes to show us the course of the sun, the way to the Indies, with
other secrets of Astronomy. Again, they Thalmud in Beracoth c. 9. Fol. 54.
write that the stone which Og the King of Bashan sought to cast at the
Israelites, was three miles long according to the length of their camp: that
when he had lift this stone upon his head, God sent a pismire which made a
hole in this stone, so that it fell down about his neck: and that while Og
strove to get it from about his neck, his teeth presently grew out into such a
length, that he could not lift up the stone nor deliver himself from it: for
proof of this miracle, they allege the Psalm. 3.7
words of the psalmist, thou have broken the teeth of the wicked: but vvithall
they bring their al tikri, and say, read not schibbarta, thou have broken: but
scherababta, which signifies the quite contrary, to wit, thou have increased
or augmented, namely the teeth of Og, that the stone could not be got from his
neck. R. Meir Thalmud in Sotah, c. 7. f. 37.
says, when Israel stood by the Sea, (Exo. 14.) the tribes did strive one
with an other, one said I will go down first into the Sea: an other said I
will descend first into the Sea; but the tribe of Benjamin lept forth and
went down first into the Sea; their proof there is from the words of the
Psalm, There was little Benjamin, Rodem, their ruler: But say they, al-tikri,
read not, rodem, but radiam he descended into the Sea. This proof is some
thing like unto your own Annot. on Psalm. 68 28.
exposition of this very word, when as you also from the corrupt Greek
version, which translateth this word rodem to signify in a trance, do there
tell us that these things applied to Christ's times and after one very
mystical; from hence you show how Paul of Benjamin was converted in a
trance or ecstasie, etc. that Benjamin the least is here put first: so in the
heavenly Jerusalem the first foundation was a Jasper, on which Beniamins name
was graven, etc. Of this your revelation, ecstasy or Phantasy more is to be
said Cap. 7.
hereafter. This kind of corrupting the text is ordinary with them: some
examples hereof I noted before out of the Page 370.
Thalmud and Page
Maimony; and an 100. more might easily be alleged to show the same. Elias
Levita Masor. hammasor. prefa. 3.
bringing an example or two hereof Esa. 54.13. and Psalm. 50.23, where they
say al-tikri, read not banajic thy Children: but bonaijc thy builders: read not
sam deres he that disposes his way, but scham deres, there is the way: he
gives this judgment hereupon, viz. that if the pricks or vovvels had been
given before from Sinai, that then this should have been a heinous practice.
And therefore seeing the vowels are so ancient (...) and seeing also that they
have presumed to make this change as well in letters as in pricks, as the
examples first mentioned do show, it does therefore follow from his grant, that
this al tikri or changing of the reading has been a heinous corruption of the
scripture. And therefore howsoever otherwise, they have been superstitious in
keeping a reckoning of all the words and letters in the scripture: and that
God also has used their superstition unto our good in some things: yet their
boldness and licentiousnes in these kind of depravations makes that their
testimony about the reading of the scripture is not to be rested upon.

But you bring yet more witness for the countenancing of your assertion, and
say, Annot. on Exo. 21.8.
The Chaldee version in this and other the like places, translateth according
to the margin: an evident proof that these diverse readings were not added by
the Maforites, as some think: seeing the Masorites were not so ancient.

I answer* First, this testimony is against yourself: for if the Chaldee
version in this and other the like places, translate according to the margin,
and that only (as it does) or else according to the text only: then does it
afford unto us, not both the diverse readings, but one only: and so is contrary
to your translation that yields two. Had the Chaldee paraphrast thought, that
Moses by the spirit of God, had written both these diverse, readings, (as you
say he did) then it had been sacrilege in him to have suppressed and kept back
one of them from us. This we see also in the Arabique version, which though it
sometimes translate according to the readings which the Masorites have set in
the margin, as in 1 Samuel 2.3. and sometimes according to the reading which is
set within the line of the text, as in Psalm. 100.^, etc. yet still it has b^t
one reading, and must therefore be guilty of perfidie and treachery against the
holy Ghost, if it had acknowledged two readings appointed of God. The like is
to be observed also in the Persian Thargum, which still follows not a double
reading, but keeps to one only, as in gardan o, Genesis 33.3, and perasaue^,
Deuteronomy. 33.9, and so in other places. And this also is that which is commonly
practiced in other vulgar translations used in the Churches of Christ this day,
who are therefore vvitnesses against you in this matter, unless they will
condemn themselves of unfaithfulness in keeping the scriptures.

Secondly, though the Chaldee version do sometimes follow that reading which
now stands in the margin: yet who can affirm that it stood in the margin of
that copy which this paraphrast then used, rather then in the text itself? The
Masorites though coming after the Chaldee paraphrast might find diverse copies
of the scripture, differing one from an other: from these might they gather the
diverse readings, and to write some of them in the text, and some of them in the
margin: even as many Printers of late, having gathered and noted diverse
readings from such as were ancienter then themselves, do now add them to the
margin of the new Testament. And therefore that which you call an evident
proof of the Mascrites not adding them: is no proof at all. It is one thing
to invent or devise diverse reading; an other, togather, compile and add them
to the scriptures.

Thirdly, suppose the Chaldee versio^s had followed and mainteyned both the
diverse readings, and that they had placed the partly in the text and partly in
the margin: yet is not their authority so great, that we might therevpo^ say
with you, that Moses did by the spirit of God write both. These Chaldee
paraphrasts in their versions do insert many fabulous things, and often go
astray in most gross manner: so that such weighty points are not to be built
upon their credit. The Onkelos Targum on Genesis 4.23.
first and ancient test of them, and freer from error then the rest,
translates the words of Lamech quite contrary to the text: whereas the
scripture makes Lamech to say, I have killed or would kill a man, etc. this
paraphrast makes him to say, I have not killed a man: This his error is Annot.
on Genesis Ibid.
acknowledged by yourself: and herein I do agree with you, for how soever
Animadv. contra Bellar. de verbo dei, lib. 2. Cap. 3.
Iunius says, that the words in the Chaldee paraphrast are to be read
interrogatively, have I not killed? that is, I have: according to the meaning
of the Hebrew text: yet seeing the other words of the paraphrast which follow
immediately in that place do not so fitly agree with such an interrogation: I
do therefore take the paraphrast his meaning to be according to the Rabbinical
exposition of that story, which I noted Page
before; viz. that he had not killed a man, presumptuously but by error not so
that I should bear sin for him, or that my seed should be consumed for him:
for so the paraphrast explanes his meaning, and so R. Solomon Comme^t. on Genesis
4.23.
would have Lamechs meaning to be: though the scripture seems to teach an
other thing. Again this paraphrast translating the story of the well which the
Princes of Israel dug, does quite pervert the text, and turns it into a
fable, and says that this Onkelos Targum on Numb. 21.18.19.20.
well being given unto them from the wilderness, went with them down into the
valleys, and ascended with them up unto the hills and high places, and
followed them still, etc Whereas it is said in the blessing of Gad, that there
was a portion of the law giver hid: this he turns into an other fable, and
says, that Onkelos Targum on Deuteronomy. 33 21.
Moses the great scribe of Israel was buried in the inheritance of Gad, which
is directly contrary unto the scripture, which shows that Moses was Deuteronomy.
34,6.
buried in the land of Moab, a place which none of the tribes possessed: and
the tribe of Reuben was also situate betwixt this place and the tribe of Gad.
From this paraphrast do other of the Rasi on Deuteronomy. 33.21.
Rabbines borow this fiction also. And a number of other errors and false
translations might be showed in him. As for the other Chaldee Paraphrast, R.
Jonathan ben vzziel whom the Jews do so highly extol, he is yet more full of
errors: They say of him, that Thalmud in Succa, c. 2. Fol. 28. A
in the hour that he used to fit and study the law, every bird that flew over
him was presently burnt: And the gloss thereon does give this reason, that the
words of the law did then rejoice, as when they were given at Sinai, where
the law was given with fire. And to make the matter the more credible, En
mishpat, ibidem
there are brought the like examples of R. Eliezer, and R. Iehoshua compassed
with flames of fire round about them. The other Ibidem.
gloss upon the Thalmud, giving a reason why the birds were burnt, says that
the ministering Angels were about him, and gathered themselves unto him to
hear the words of the law from his mouth. These words of the paraphrast his
mouth are such, that even the fabulous Papists themselves, do justly reject
many of them: and therefore some of these instances which I bring, are not to be
found in the King of Spain his great Bible printed by Plantine, but in the
Masorites Bible: This I thought good to advertise the reader of, least any
should be deceyved in seeking them there, where they are left out and omitted.
Touching the army of Sisera, this paraphrast faith, R. Jonathan ben vzziel
Targum on Judge. 5.8.
that he came up with 40000. heads or cheeftaines of his camp: On verse. 5
with 50000. men armed with svvords: with 60000. armed with spears: with
70000. armed with targets: with 80000. shooters of stones or bolts: beside
the 900. charets of yro^, etc. And there he tells us of commotion and
contention betwixt the mountains, Tabor, Hermon, and Carmel each of them
persuading themselves that the Majesty of God should abide upon them and be
revealed unto them: and how mount Sinai being a little and weak mountain the
glory of God was revealed upon it, etc. Upon the song of Hannah he says,
Targum on 1. Sam. 2.1.2, etc.
that she was endued with the spirit of prophecy, and how in particular she
prophesied of her Son Samuel and diverse wonders to be wrought by him: of
Heman her Sons son who with his 14. Sons should sing praise with violes and
harpes in the sanctuary of the Lord: of Sennacherib, of Nebuchadnezzar: of the
Kingdom of Graecia, of the sons of Haman; of Room, etc. Touching Goliath
the giant of Gath he Targum on 1. Sam. 17.8.
brings diverse fictions, how it should be he that slew the two sons of Eli,
that took the arc, etc. Touching Solomon, he Targ. on 1. Kin. 4.33.
feigneth, that he prophesied of the kings of the house of David, which should
bear rule in this world and in the world to come, (the world) of the
Messiah. Touching the army of Sennacherib, he says, that Targum on Esaias, 10 32.
he brought with him forty thousand guspanin or charets or coaches of gold for
the Princes clothed with robes to sit in: that he brought with him two hundred
thousand armed with swords and spears: and two hundred and sixty thousand
shooters of stones: and an hundred thousand valiant man to run before him: that
the length of his camp was four hundred miles: that his horsequarter was
forty miles: that the number of his host was two hundred and sixty thousand
millions vvanting one: that so they came up against Abraham when they cast him
into the mids of the fiery furnace: and that so they shall come up when Gog
and Magog come, etc. Touching the vision of the 4 creatures showed unto
Ezekiel, whereas the scripture mentions only four faces, which each of
these creatures had: this Chaldee paraphrast Targum on Ezekiel. 1.6,
adds further that each of them had sixteen faces, and that so the number of
faces unto these 4. creatures were in all sixty four faces: Whereas the
scripture mentions only four wings unto each creature, this paraphrast adds
furthet by a strange kind of reckoning, that there were sixteen wings to every
one of the faces: and that the number of the wings of the four creatures were
two hundred fifty and six wings, etc. And in many other places does this
paraphrast pervert the prophecies concerning Christ, and misinterpret the
scriptures quite besides the meaning of the holy spirit. When this paraphrast
had thus translated the first and latter Prophets, the Jews say Thalmud in
Megillah Cap. 1.
that there was an earthquake, and that the earth was moved for the space of
400. miles: that there came a voice, (a bathkol) saying, who is this that
reveals my secret to the sons of men? And after that an other voice, Let it
suffice thee: it is enough, and they give the reason why this Jonathan might
proceed no further in his paraphrase with the other books of the old
testament, least he should reveal the time of Messiah his coming noted in
Daniel: But after him rises up a third chaldee paraphrast, R. Joseph the
blind, as he is commonly called, even that blind guide whom you do so often
and so abundantly allege in your annotations on the psalms. And this
paraphrast is full of Thalmudique fables, and wresteth and profaneth the holy
scriptures to confirm those fables: as for example, the R. Joseph Caecus,
Targum on Ps. 50.10.
fable of Behemoth before noted, which daily devoures the grass of a thousand
mountains: the Ibid. on verse. 11.
fable of Tarnegol, the vvilde cock whose feet rest upon the earth, and his
head touches the heaven, and there crows or sings before God: the On Ps. 69
31.
fable of that fat Ox which Adam offered having horns before hoofes: the On
Psalm. 104.26.
fable of Leviathan reserved for the sport and play at the banquet of the
righteous at the coming of Messiah: In Psalm. 57.3. this paraphrast says that
God commanded a spider to make a web in the mouth of the cave for David's
defense. In ps. 78.49. he adds unto the text, that God laid two hundred and
fifty strokes upon the^ in his great anger, by the hand of wicked devilles. In
Ps. 137.4. he says that the Levites bit of their thumbes with their teeth,
when those that led them captives required songs of them. And the whole psalm
is turned into a dialogue: and the words of the psalm are attributed to five
sorts of persons: some to the Babylonians; some to the Jews, some to a voice
of the holy Ghost some to the Angel Micael called the Prince of Jerusalem: some
to the Angel Gabriel called there the Prince of Sion. And Micael is said to
pray against Edom: and Gabriel is feyned to pronounce a blessing upon the^ that
destroy the Babylonians. Touching Job he feigneth that his Targum on Job. 1.3.
substance was far greater then the text shows he puts On v. 15.
Lilith queen of Zemargad for the shabeans: he On Job 2 9.
feigneth Dinah to be the wife of Job: he tells a miraculous wonder touching
the three friends of Job, noted before. He alludes unto the On Job. 3 7. and
38.36 and 39.16.
fables of the cock: and a number of other fictions he has in that book. As
for the paraphrase on Pster, it is full of vain and presumptuous fictions: as,
that Targum on Ester. 1.
a decree was made concerning Vashti that she should be slain naked, because
of her counsel to hinder the building of the temple: that King Ahasuerus
sought to sit on the throne of Solomon which was brought from Jerusalem by
Shesbak King of Egypt; and from thence was taken by Sennacherib and from thence
returned to Jerusalem in the days of Hezekias: and from thence was brought
again to Egypt by Pharaoh: and from thence to Babel by Nebuchadnezar: and from
thence to Elam by Cyrus: and that now Ahasucrus sought to sit upon this throne,
but could not, that he sent for workmen from Alexandria to make an other like
unto this, and that they could not: but made an other worse then it in two
years space, and that in the third year Ahasucrus did sit upon it: that with
the six hundred and fourscore brazen Chests full of gold and pearl found by
Cyrus in a haven of Euphrates he made that feast for a hundred and fourscore
days: that in his second feast he appointed them to drink in the golden
Vessels of the sanctuary brought from Jerusalem by the wicked Nebuchadnezzar,
and that the other vessels of the King did change their shape before the
vessels of the sanctuary: that Mordecai absteyned from that feast and prayed
and fasted until the seventh day; that the King sent for vashti to come naked
before the people to show her beauty that this was, because she had made the
daughters of Israel naked, and so to card wool and flax upon the Sabath day:
and a multitude of such like presumptions and pervertings of the holy text are
there to be seen throughout that whole story from the beginning to the end
thereof. In Ruth likewise the Chaldee paraphrast tells us of ten famines: of
which Targum on Ruth, 1.
one was in the days of Adam, an other in the days of Lamech, etc. he says
that Ruth was the daughter Eglo^ King of Moab: that Boaz On Ruth 2.
said unto her at the first finding of her in his field, that it was told him
by prophecy that Kings and Prophets should come of her: that when Boaz
measured unto her On c. 3.15.
fix measures of barley, she obteyning strength from God to carry the same, did
then forth with prophecy that six righteous persons should proceed from her,
whereof every one should be blessed with six blessings, to wit, David, Daniel,
and his companions, and the King Messiah: And Isaak ben Arama on Ruth, 3.15
other of the Rabbines say, that those six blessings were the gift of the
spirit mentioned with six names or attributes in Esaias. 11.2. But they differ
about the persons, some reckoning Hezekias and Josias among those six. Sundry
other such things does this paraphrast there record. In the paraphrase upon the
Lamentations it is said, that Targum on Lam. 5.5.
when the wicked Nebuchadnezzar saw some of the captived Princes of the
Children of Israel, to go empty without burden, he commanded them to sow the
books of the law together, to make sackes of them, to fill them with gravel
from the shore of Euphrates, and then to lay them upon their necks; that then
there was no rest unto their eyes. As for the Chaldee paraphrase on the
Canticles so often alleged by you, it is all over in every Chapter replenished
with Thalmudique fictions: And what vvorth is there then in these witnesses,
if they had given testimony unto those diverse readings that you maintain? If
their translations according to the margin or line be of authority, you may
thereby bring the Rabbinicall fables into the text and prove them to be divine
scripture, written by the spirit of God, as well as you may justify lo, not; and
lo, to himself.

YOu add yet further in the Annot. on Exo. 21.8.
same place: that the Greek copies here vary, some having, has betrothed her
to him, other some, has not betrothed: and so Theodotio and symmachus also
translated, has not betrothed. Answer.

1. Howsoever they translate this place in the Greek with much variety: yet
this is to be observed that none of the several translations do commend unto
us a double reading, as your translation does: each of them shows unto us but
one only reading: and therefore the example of every one of them testifyeth
against you. Had the Greek translatours imagined that the double readings were
a divine tradition delivered unto Moses at mount Sinai, it had been great
impiety in them to have suppressed the same: This had been to have clipped the
Lords coin by paring away so many parts of his holy word.

2: As for these Greek translations of the old Testament, had they been more
direct for your purpose, yet should their testimony have little helped you in
this matter; Their credit is very small, in respect of the innumerable errors,
falsifications and corruptions of the holy text whereof they are most
apparently guilty. You say indeed touching the Greek and Chaldee versions, that
they are, Preface to annot. on Genesis
both, of great authority, especially the Greek, honored even by the Apostles
in their so often following not only the words but even the theological
exposition. And for the declaration of this, you produce diverse examples,
comparing the Greek version with the new Testament in Esa. 11.10. with Romans
15.12. In Prove. 3.34. with Iam. 4.6. In Prove. 11.31, with 1 Pet. 4.18. In Esa
42.4. with Mat. 12.21. with sundry others And else where also you Preface to
annot. on Psalms
write to the same purpose I answer.

First, for the translation of the 72. interpreters in the days of Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus: it is uncertain whether they translated any more then the five
books of Moses: for the testimony of ancient writers varieth much about this
matter: And Josephus witnesses, that Ptolemee had not the whole scripture, but
the Antiq. Iud. proaen. lib. 1. c. 1.
law only from these interpreters: and alleges this as a reason, why he
undertook a more full declaration of the Jews story. And this reason of his,
is against their opinion also, who imagine that the rest of the scriptures
were translated by other 72. interpreters in the days of Herod and the last
Ptolemee for if the whole story of the old Testament had been by such a famous
translation of other Septuagints turned into Greek and published unto the
world, then could not Josephus have alleged this reason as a special cause of
his enterprise. And then if this testimony of Josephus be true, the most of
those instances which in both your forenamed prefaces you bring to countenance
this translation of the Septuagint as being approved in the new Testament, are
quite beside the matter; because the most of these your instances are taken not
from the law, but from other parts of scripture, which according to the
testimony of Josephus were not translated by the septuagint.

Secondly, the translation of the septuagint whether it was of the law only,
or of the whole scripture of the old Testament, is much to be suspected as an
unfaithful and maimed work even from the first beginning thereof: seeing diverse
Hieron. prefat. in Pe^tateuch.
vvitnesses do record unto us of them, that they did purposely add, alter
detract and change many things in their Greek translation otherwise then they
were in the original Hebrew text. The honor that many give unto these
interpreters is far too great, August. de civitate Dei lib. 18. Cap. 43.
affirming even their aberrations and contrarieties to the text, to be written
by the direction of a divine and prophetical spirit: and tell us also of
Epiphan. de mensuris and ponderibus.
miraculous things touching this translation, and this both with contradiction
to themselves and apparent contrariety to the truth.

The Jews them selves confess that this translation of the law has been a
burden upon their consciences; for which they do repent unto this day R. Iaakob
describing the diverse fasts which they observe, each month in the year, says
that they fast Arba Turim, lib. Orach chajim. in in Taanith, or treat. of
fasting, fig. 580.
in the eight day of the month Tebeth, because then the law was written in
Greek in the days of king Ptolaemeus and that there was darkness in the world
for three days. This their practice is suitable to their ancient envy against
the gentiles, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Act. 22.21.22. And being so affected, it is the
less marvel, if they sought to hide or change diverse things in their
translation.

Thirdly, that ancient translation of the septuagints does not appear at this
day. Some think we have only some fragments thereof: and others think it to be
quite lost. Touching these opinions, D. Whitaker De sacra scriptura. contr. 1.
quaest. 2. Cap. 3.
says Verior illorum sententia videtur, qui versionem illam omnino perijsse
existimant. He approves their judgment most, that hold it altogether lost. And
again in the same place, after many corruptions noted in it, he says we may
thence conclude that either we have not this translation of the 70 elders; or
else that it is so infinitely and filthily corrupted, that it is now of very
small authority.

Fourthly, as for that Greek translation which is extant at this day, going
under the name of the septuagint, and which you honor so much and allege so
often, it appears evidently to be a most corrupt thing, full offorgeries, and
swarming with errors over all from the beginning to the end of it. All good
writers at this day do generally upon occasion witness so much. In special
there is one Engelbertus Engels in proaem. pentaglott. val. Schind.
learned man who has taken pains to set down some general heads and as it
were standerds under which those troops and legions of error and
falsifications might be in some part reduced and marshalled. Diverse examples he
shows of several kinds, and yet unto each kind more instances might be
added: yea and more general heads of such errors be described also. Many
witness that it was corrupt of old: but for this time present, the corruptions
are unspeakable and without number: and more also then the corruptions of
Onkelos and Jonathan the Chaldee paraphrasts, and therefore also of less
authority though you in your comparison affirm the contrary.

Fifthly, as the errors of this Greek translation are for number many: so are
they for the nature of the^ very great. Some of them do directly contradict the
text as in Ps. 105.2.8. Genesis 26.32. in the first place affirming what the
scripture denies, and in the later denying that which God affirms in his word.
They impugn the truth of the holy story, in describing the years of sundry
patriarchs, especially by giving so many years unto Methuschelah as if he had
lived 14. years after the flood, Genesis 5. In stead of 40. they put 3 days,
Ion. 3. That most absurd fable of the Jews touching the play with Leviatha^ is
countenaced by this translation of the septuagint Ps. 104.26. The most impious
error of the Arrians denying the eternal godhead of Christ, does also receive
strength from this corrupt version, whiles they translate Prove. 8.22. he has
created me in the beginning of his ways: in stead of he has possessed me, as
though Christ were but a mere creature. In respect of these forgeries, it is
most untrue which you say, of this Greek translation, with the Chaldee: that
they are both, of great authority. The Chaldee Paraphrast translateth that
place of the Proverbs as the Greek has it.

Sixthly, whereas you say, that the Apostles do so often follow not only the
words, but even the Theological exposition of these interpreters; this is also
an uncertain and unwarrantable assertion for all the examples that you allege
who is it that ca^ certainly prove ynto us that the Apostles followed the
septuagint and that those corrupted Greek versions of the old Yestament were
not rather corrected according to the allegations of the Apostles in the new;
Seeing this translation is generally supposed to be a patchery out of many; what
hinders but that the correctours of the septuagint, in later editions, might
follow the words of the Apostles, and that so by this means, that agreement of
expositions words and phrases which is betwixt them in some place might arise?

Sevently, suppose the Apostles in their Greek writings did use the version of
the septuagint, in some allegations as being then best known there being few
or none other translations at that time, it does not follow hence that it
should therefore be honored above others in these times, when as there is not
the like occasion of writing in Greek; when as there are many other
translations extant more fit for use, and far freer from corruption.

Eighthly, as for the translations of Symmachus and Theodotio, they being both
of them heretics and enemies of Christ, and one of them also an Apostate
from Christianity to Iudaisme, yea and since that time also their translations
being exceedingly corrupted, it skilles not much, whether the margin or the
line, or both be followed and observed in the fragments of their Greek
versions. Their credit is far too weak to procure divine authority unto both
the diverse readings which are in the Masorites Bible, yea though they had
plainly avouched the same, which yet is not showed out of them: even by your
own instance of their translation, they followed but one reading only, and
therefore their example, if it be ought worth, is against your self, who deliver
two unto us, and those both as from the Lord.

ANother spice of this transgression is, that Annot. on Ge^. 23.2 and 33.4. and
on 34.31. etc.
you propound unto us for grounds of instruction, to be observed and meditated
upon, such traditions of the Masorites as are not manifested to be from God, no
more then those diverse readings before spoken of: as namely the great and little
letters in the mids of words and sentences; the extraordinary pricks that
are set over some words, etc. Touching these we may observe;

First, that they have no other ground then the Kabala or tradition of the
Masorites: These and other such like traditions they hold to be the strength of
the law and of divine warrant, and commended unto us by the holy Ghost: Elias
Levita in his explication of the masora or tradition sings on this manner:
Masoreth hammasoreth, in his rythmical preface.
vahalo hammasorah, hi sig lethorah: Is not the masora, the hedge of the law?
And to this purpose after his own song, he alleges the song of songs, Cant.
3.7.8. with the opinion of the Rabbines, touching those 60. strong men which
are round about Solomon's bed, the valiant men of Israel, all handling the
sword, expert in war, every one having his sword upon his thigh for the fear
by night: these says he are the tradition or masoreth, Ibid. prefat. tertia.
and their signs, least the law should be forgotten in the captivity. R.
Solomon in his commentaries on the same scripture teaches the same. But note
the uncertainty and vanity of the^, eve^ from their own vain and perverted
expositions: The Chaldee paraphrast upon the same place expounds those 60.
strong men, to be the Priests spreading out their hands, standing upon their
pulpits, and blessing the people, the house of Israel with the 60. letters
delivered unto Moses their master, etc. By those 60. letters (as I take it)
they mean that form of blessing prescribed, Numb. 6.24.25.26. for by the
reckoning I find that in it there are just 60. letters, contained in those 3.
verses. Aben Ezra in his comment on Cant. 3. expounds those 60. strong men to
be the 60. myriads or six hundred thousand that entered into the Land.

Secondly, whereas on Genesis 33.4. you say. Therefore the word kyssed is
extraordinarily noted in the Hebrew with three pricks over it, as leading the
reader to observe well this matter: let us see what extraordinary mysteries
your Jew doctors will teach us from hence: It is Joan. Buxt. Thesaur gram.
Cap. 5. ex Ialkut.
showed us out of their records thus, Rabbi Iann^ said the pricking does show
that Esau sought not Lenasscheko.
to kiss Iaakob, but Lenasschec^o.
to bite him: and his neck became marble, so that the teeth of that wicked one
were set on edge. Therefore also it follows, And they wept to wit, one for his
neck, the other for his teeth. R. Solomon in his commentaries on that place
notes further the difference of the Rabbines touching this matter.

Thirdly, whereas upon the word harlot in Genesis 34,31, you say: In the Hebrewe
Zonah, the first letter is extraordinarily great, for some hidden meaning, What
if it be, to signify the stout and big words of these young men to their father?
So a little letter is used before in Genesis 23.2. to signify moderation without
excess in Abraham's weeping. Your conjecture for Zonah has some color, though
a trifling vanity and without ground, but your assertion to countenance the
same from the little letter in Genesis 23. to signify moderation is a very
unreasonable and absurd speculation. For what color of reason is there, that a
moderate sorrow should be signified by an immoderately little letter, that an
ordinate affection should be represented by an inordinate extraordinary token?
if the big letter in Zonah note the fault of the excessive stout and big words
in the young men to their father: why should not the letter in BAcAH, Wept,
wanting the due proportion and measure with the rest, as well note a defect and
fault of the too little sorrow in Abraham? The comparing of these two examples so
unequally opposed and mismatched togather does justly reprove and refute your
collection from the same.

Fourthly, whereas you pleaded Page 46
before, that the separation of Mr. Cluse your elder from the French church,
was lawful, because of their preaching from humane apocryphal catechismes;
even by the like reason may you see that your ministry also is to be forsaken
and left, if you preach in your congregation, and expound the scriptures in
such manner as you do here. For what are these extraordinary pricks, that you
speak of: these forms of great and little letters in the mids of words and
sentences, but humane apocryphal devises of Rabbines and Thalmudiques? what
divine warrant have you for them, and for your expounding of them and of Keri
and cethib, both togather in one place? It is ten times more lawful to expound
the principles of Christian religion in Catechismes according to the manner of
the French Churches, then to expound these Jewish fables and toys in such
manner as you do. These Jewish devises are 1. Tim. 1 4. Tit. 1.13.
expressly condemned by the holy Ghost: the other not so.

Fifthly, if the Lord by the finger of his spirit do direct us to take special
observatio^ of those extraordinary pricks that you tell us of in Genesis 33.4. to
the end that we might search out some hidden meaning therein: then are you
again guilty of great perfidie and vnfaithfullnes, which in your translation
and annotations also in other places do pass them over and conceal those
parts of the scripture, where divine warnings of meditation are propounded
unto us. For whereas there are fifteen words noted by the scribes and by some
printers to have such pricks over their heads: five of them are by you already
wrapped up in darkness and passed over in silence, namely in Genesis 16.5. and 18.9.
and 19.33, and 37.12. and Psalm. 27.13. In each of these places, are these
pricks to be seen, which you omit with out giving any warning of them. So
do you also pass by the little letter in Annot. on Genesis 2 4.
behibbarcam: the great letter in Annot. on Psalm. 80.13. and verse. 15.
Cannah, and the suspended letter lifted up in the word jagnar, etc. These
being of like regard by the tradition of the Masorites, ought in like manner to
have been noted by you: and suppose you could not have showed the reason of
them in these places, yet should you at least have given warning of them unto
your readers and have left them to their consideration. In like manner do you
also pass by the crowns of the special letters which are so often noted
therewith in the law, of which it is said by R. Judah, that Thalmud in
Menachoth cap. 3. Fol. 29.
Moses on a certain time ascending on high, he found the holy blessed God
binding crowns upon the letters; to wit, three for each of the seven letters
contained in the word schagnatnazgats, as was noted Page 294
before. In the same place of the Thalmud it is recorded how the Lord foretold
unto Moses, that after certain generatio^s there should come a man eve^ Akibah
be^ Joseph by name, who should expound unto us all those crowns, pricks and
titles of the letters: that the Lord also at Moses request did show that man
unto him: and that Moses in admiration of him did say, O Lord of the world have
thou such a man as this, and do thou deliver thy law by mine hand? etc. Now
R. Akiba being come: and you being so familiar with these Talmudists, is it not
wonder that you have nothing to say for our instruction, touching these crowns
and miters, especially there being the same Talmudique warrant to prove that
they are divine, holy and from God, as there is to prove Keri and cethib, the
diverse readings to be both written by the spirit of God? When the Lord showed
the pattern of the tabernacle and instruments thereof unto Moses, he commanded
him to make Exodus 25 11.24.25. and 30.3.
limbs or crowns of gold for the arc, the table and altar of incense: and it
had been great unfaithfulness in Moses to have neglected the same. Now the frame
of the holy scriptures is as precious and excellent as was the form of the
tabernacle: if therefore those pricks over special words belong unto them of
right as their crowns, then is your unfaithfulness in the house of God, great
in your omitting of them.

And as for the Jew doctors, they plot with these pricks a Crown of thorns
for the head of the Lord directly contrary unto the letter and sense of the
scripture: as in Genesis 19.33. where it is said of Lot touching his eldest
daughter, that he perceyved not, neither when she lay down, nor when she rose
up: because of the prick that crowns the word rose, Thalmud de nazir. cap.
4. P. 23.
they gather and teach that though he perceyved her not when she lay down, yet
he percevved her when she rose up. Where it is said in Genesis 37.12. they went
to feed the flock, etc. because of the prick over the word the, R. Solomon
Comme^t. on these places.
gathers that they went not but to feed themselves. In Numb. 3.39. because of
the crown, of pricks over the word Aaron, R. Sol. gathers that Aaron was not
in the number of the Levites. In Deuteronomy. 29.29. because of the pricks over the
words, to us and to our Children the same Rabbine teaches that Israel was not
urged to do the things revealed until they had passed over Jorden and taken
upon them the oath in mount Gerizim, etc.

ANother curiosity of much like nature with the former is, when according to
the manner of the Cabalists, you draw observations to illustrate your doctrine
from the transposed letters of the scripture. As for example concerning Er and
Noah you Annot. on Ge^. 38.7.
say thus: The letters in Hebrew of this word evil, and of his name Er, are the
same, the order only changed: the like whereof is before in Noes name and
Grace, Genesis 6.8. I answer, 1. The letters of the scripture being thus
transposed by men, are no scripture nor ground of instruction; if the order be
only changed, it is enough to change the whole sense: if accidentally it come
to pass in one or two words, that there is an agreement of sense, yet in
hundreds it falls out otherwise: and therefore there is no found collections or
annotations to be made from such a forged order of transposed letters. 2,
though the Hebrew letters that signify Evil, be the same with Er his name, yet
the vowells differ, and they also make the signification different: 3, suitable
unto this curiosity, is that presumptuous assertion which in your annotations
on the same verse you make by occasion of this Er and his evil, in that you
say, as our Lord Christ was to come of Judas, Heb. 7.14. so God would have no
wicked man to be his progenitour. For where has God revealed this unto you,
which you do so peremptorily affirm? or why do you presume above that which is
written? The son of God has abased himself for us in wonderful manner, and
in many degrees; in that he was made man; suppose man had been without sin: in
that he took upon him our nature, eve^ after the fall, after that our nature
was abased and dishonored with sin: in that he refused not to come of such
parents, as were stained with notorious adulteries, as David and Bathsheba: in
that he refused not to descend unto us through the loins and womb of
incestnous parents, and even at the act of incest, at the same time and
instant, as in Judah and Thamar begetting Pharez: in that he came of wicked
parents before their effectual conversion, as Josh. 24 2. with Genesis 11. with
Genesis 12.
of Terah begetting Abram, before God called him. And further, how know you
that none of Christ's progenitors from Arpacshad to Terah, from Nathan to
Salathiel: from Salathiel to Jesus in so many generations, were wicked men?
why dare you speak so boldly, where the scripture is silent? As it is sin to
remoove the ancient bounds, so is it also a sinful presumption to set down
such bounds and limits of Christ's humiliation as God has not described unto us
in his word. Besides, is there not as much reason to say that God would have
no wicked woman from Evah to Marie to be the mother of Christ, as that no
wicked man should be his progenitour? And if this may be affirmed in honor of
Christ's kindred, why may it not as well be extended unto others that were in the
same loins with him: and where shall the stay be? if modesty and sobriety
stay us not, there will be no end of forging and presuming above the scriptures.

OF this sort also is that kind of observation which you commend unto us when
as you note the word sleep, to signify, quiet sleep without cark and sorrow: And
for proof to confirm the same, you add: Annot. on Psalm. 127.2.
Therefore also the Hebrew word Shena is written with, a quiet dumm letter,
(otherweise then usual) to denote the more quietness. Answ. 1. The Masorites
indeed both in Masora magna, and parva do set their mark upon this word, for a
memorial of their tradition concerning the same: Elias Levita also in his
explication of the Masora does Masoreth hammasoreth in Tabulis primis: Orat. 9.
mention this word Shena, but he does withal in the same place note many other
words of like nature and observatio^, viz. 22 words wherein Aleph is quiescent
or deficient in the mids or in the end of them: and 17 others which they call
maphkin Aleph: All these vary from the common and usual manner; and do yield
the like ground and warrant for instructions to be gathered from them, as does
the word Shena in Psalm. 127.2. Yea and not these only, but all the other
forms of words, full, defective, changed, etc. which he has noted in that
treatise. Elias Levita there alluding to the tables of the law, in his first
tables has 10 words or sections: and in his second tables 10. other sections
describing those words from whence the Masoriticall mysteries are collected.
And if any sound collections are to be drawn from such grounds then are you to
blame which pass by such words without giving your readers any warning
thereof: If your annotations on this place, ps. 127. be just, then are they
defective in other the like places as in Ps. 94.5. Genesis 20.6, etc. 2. If some
mystery were to be gathered from Aleph in Shena, yet how should we be assured,
that it does denote more quietness, as you affirm? if it had been written Shena
with the letter he in the end according to the usual manner: you might as well
have said that he is a quiet dumm letter: being quiesce^t in the end of a word
as well as Aleph. And we see the word Shenah without Aleph is else where used to
signify a most quiet sleep: as the Eccles. 5.11.
sweet sleep of the labourer: and the Ierem. 31 26.
sweet sleep of the Prophets; and the Prove. 3.24.
sweet sleep of the godly. Yea and further the word Esa. 56.10.
hazah used to express the sleep of the greatest sleepers, has in it a double
he without any Aleph, as most fit to denote unto us a strong sleep. Moreover
if Aleph in Shenah be a note of greater quietness, then why should it not
signify the same in other words as well as in this? And then according to
this your collection, if he be a more quiet letter then Aleph, the thrones of
earthly Princes should be more quiet without cark and sorrow, then is the throne
of God; because the word Genesis 41.40. Judge. 3 20, etc.
Cese used ordinarily for their thrones, is written with Aleph, the quiet dumme
letter, denoting (as you say) more quietness; whereas the word Job. 26.9
Ceseh whereby the throne of God is described, does (otherwise then usual) want
the letter Aleph and has he in stead thereof.

MVch like unto this, is that kind of instruction, which you Annot. on Ge^.
1.1.
use, when having alleged some scriptures, to prove by the heave^s and earth
in Ge^. 1.1. are understood, the world and all things therein: things visible
and invisible: You add further, that the Hebrew articles eth and ha, seem also
to imply so much; eth, having the first and last letter of the Hebrew alphabet,
and so being of general comprehension: and ha, of plain demonstration. If
this kind of teaching were good you might as well say, that when the Prophets
Esaias, Amos and Micaiah are said to see the Lord in their several visions;
they did see him and all that is in him: because this same article eth is
prefixed before the name of the Lord in each of their Esaias. 6.1 Amos. 9.1. 2.
Kin. 22.19.
visions; and that it being of such general comprehension does imply so much.
But seeing this is impossible, you shall do well to cease from the wisdom of
such Cabalisticall collections.

CHAP. V.
A Fifth error is, in that you allege the words of the Rabbines contrary to
their meaning; either not understanding what they mean, or else wilfully
perverting that which they say, and this also in matters of greatest weight:
This may be seen in many instances.

First, when as you speak of Adam cast out of Eden, and kept from the tree of
life, you say; Annot. on Genesis 3.24.
The ancient Jews had an expectation of recovery of this loss by Christ,
though now they are ignorant of him: for they write of 7 things which the King
Christ shall show unto Israel, two of which are the garden of Eden and the tree
of life. R. Elias ben Mosis, in sepher reshith chocmah, fol. 412. Also
expounding that in Song 1.3. the King has brought me into his Chambers: Our
Doctors of blessed memory, have said, that these are the Chambers of the
garden of Eden. And again, there are also that say of the tree of life, that
it was not created in vain, but the men of the resurrection (that are raised
from the dead) shall eat thereof, and live for ever R. Menachem on Genesis 3. And
by the garden of Eden (or paradise) it seems they understood the Kingdom of
heaven, for the chalde Paraphrast on Song. 4.12. says, as the garden of Eden
into which no man has power to enter; but the just, whose souls are sent
thither, by the hands of Angels. I answer.

1. Why might you not as well have said, that the later Jews as well as the
ancient Jews, have still an expectation of the recovery of this loss by
Christ, namely of the garden of Eden, and of the tree of life, etc. do not the
Jews that now live receive and approve the writings of these Rabbines here
alleged by you? how then do you show any difference betwixt them in this point?

2. How can you say by way of opposition, in comparing the later Jews with the
ancient, that now they are ignorant of Christ, seeing the ancient Jews were
also ignorant of him? The Chaldee paraphrast being of cheifest authority among
all that are here alleged by you, was most ignorant of Christ: he knew not
that Christ was come, but On Cant. 8.
writes of him as of one that should come hereafter, though by consent of all
he lived after the death of Christ. And further he writes of two Christ's
that are to come: for, expounding those words in Cant. 4.5, and 7.3. Thy two
breasts are as two young roes that are twins, etc. this paraphrast says,
that these are two Messiasses that are to come, namely Messiah the son of
David, and Messiah the son Ephraim. And many other things he writes most
ignorantly touching Christ, being a blind guide unto the later Jews that yet
are alive to confirm them in their ignorance.

3. Though the Rabbines speaking of the garden of Eden and of the tree of life,
do therewithal mention the men of the resurrection and the sending of them
thither by the hands of Angels: yet is this no token that they understood
hereby the Kingdom of heaven: because these blind Doctors hold and teach
that there is a double resurrection, one in which the bodies of men shall be
raised up to live on earth again at the coming of Messiah: and an other at the
last judgment, when they shall be raised up to live in the Kingdom of heaven.
The Chaldee paraphrast expounding those words, Cant. 8.5
who is this that comes up out of the wilderness, etc. and alluding to that
place in Zach. 14.4.
Zechariah, where it is said that the mount of olives shall cleave in the
mids, shows that at the coming of Messiah (which he mentioned a little On
Cant. 8.1.
before) the dead shall arise, the mount of ointment shall be divided, the dead
of Israel shall ascend from under it, also the dead that dyed in the captivity
shall come Orach Cubbaia.
the thorny way from under the earth and shall ascend from under the mount of
ointment or of olives. The meaning is that those which dyed in Israel, in the
holy land shall rise again with greater ease; and those Jews which now living
in dispersion shall die in other countries must not rise again in the lands
where they dyed, but must have their bodies royled and tumbled under the ground
through diverse holes and clefts in the earth until they come under the mount
of olives, and then that being divided in the mids, they must arise in that
place. Aben Ezra shows Comme^t. on Dan. 12 2.
further that those which rise at the coming of Messiah shall live long time
on earth, that their days shall be as the days of a tree, and then dye the
second time and rise again with an other resurrection afterward. Yea, this
kind of resurrection of the body is believed and receyved as an artickle of
the Jews faith, and recorded in their creed, as is showed at large first by
Sebast. Munster in Emunath Iehud. p. 46. 47. 53.
that their creed which he published togather with the Hebrew edition of the
gospel according to Matthew: and afterward by Synag. Iudaic. page 29, etc.
Buxtorf; at which resurrection the Jews think that they shall live on earth so
many hundred years as the Patriarchs did in the old world before the flood,
before that they dye the second time: and with all they write of so many
miracles to be wrought for them at that time, as it is no marvel that they do
vvithall dream of their carriage into an earthly paradise by the hands of
Angels at the same time.

4. Though the Chaldee paraphrast speak of the just entering into the garden of
Eden, etc. yet does it not appear that he meant the Kingdom of heaven, but
the garden where Adam was placed at first, even the earthly Eden: seeing in the
same book he speaks of the use thereof in diverse things* having spoken of the
beauty of the first temple, he says, on Cant. 1.16.
but the house of the sanctuary to come, which is to be built in the days of
Messiah the King, shall be much more beautiful in that the walls thereof
shall be of the cedars of the garden of Eden. That is the third material temple
which they expect: and accordingly they expect that the matter thereof shall be
not from heaven, but from the earthly Eden. Again, speaking of the coming of
their Messiah and of the feast that is to be made at the same time upon the
earth, he says, on Cant. 8.2.
and there we shall keep the feast with the Leviathan, and we shall drink the
old red wine, which has been laid up in the grapes from the day that the world
was created, and of the pomegranate fruits which are prepared for the just in
the garden of Eden. And after this he speaks of diverse things to be done on
earth, so that it is every way plain that he intended not an heavenly, but an
earthly Paradise in these places.

5. As for the testimony of R. Menachem, if we go no further then the words
here cited by yourself, even by them it is apparent, that he had not a
spiritual meaning, but spoke of that tree from which Adam was de^rred, and
of that tree created in the beginning, which he says was not created in
vain: meaning that the men of the resurrection, of that first supposed and
pretended resurrection should eat thereof.

6. As for the testimony of Elias ben Moses in Reshith chocmah, it is so vain
and superstitious a thing that I marvel you would allege the same, 1.
whereas he writes of 7. things which the King Christ shall show unto Israel,
you only mention two of them, viz. the garden of Eden: and the tree of life;
had you but mentioned the other five: the reader might easily have discerned
how vainly you have alleged this testimony: The other 5 things which he
says Messiah shall show unto Israel are these, to wit; the throne of glory:
the lifting up of Korah and his company: Hell; the godly and the just: all the
living and the dead: He speaks here of the garden of Eden, and the tree of
life, as he speaks of Hell: to be showed, he speaks not of enjoying: therefore
this testimony does not so much as prove that they expected a recovery of the
former loss: as you would have it: Much less does it show that by the garden
of Eden or Paradise, they understood the Kingdom of heaven, as it seems unto
you: That seems rather to be understood by the throne of glory, which is here
distinguished from Paradise: Least of all does it show that the ancient Jews
were less ignorant, then the Jews of our time: for what can be more ignorant
then this dream of these 7. spectacles to be showed at the Messiah his coming,
when as not one of them was showed unto Israel according to the meaning of this
Rabbine? 2. They that do but consider what other vain and senseless things he
writes in his numbers in the same place, may discern what a carnal Rabbine
this Elias was; as namely, that 7. sorts of men are accursed, which want
phylacteries on their head and arms, fringes on their coats, post-papers on
their gates, shoes on their feet; which have no wife: nor Child: which teach
not their Children; which go not to their meeting house: which run not after
the commandments: which eat with unwashed hands* That there were 7. men over
whom jetser haragh or evil concupiscence had no power, viz. Abraham, Isaak,
Iaakob, Henoch, Moses, Ishai, David: what reason is there to say thus of these,
rather then of Joseph, Joshua, Samuel, Elias, Esaias, etc.

But you proceed, and say further; Annot. ibid on Genesis 3.
And that the Jews understood not these things carnally, appears by these
words of theirs. In the world to come there is no eating or drinking, nor any
other of the things, which the bodies of the Sons of Adam, have need of in
this world: as sitting and standing and sleep, and death and sorrow and mirth
and the like: so our ancient wisemen have said, In the world to come, there is
no eating nor drinking nor use of marriage but the just do sit with their
crowns upon their heads, and have the fruition of the glory of the Majesty of
God. Maimony in misn. treat. of Repentance, Chap. 8. Sect. 2. Hereunto I answer.

1. The world to come whereof the Rabbines often speak, is diversely taken in
their writings: Elias Levita In Tishbi in Athad.
shows that it is taken 3. ways, for the days of the Messiah: for the time
that immediately follows death: and for the day of judgment: The same is
Citante Drusio; praeterit. on Mat. 12.32
noted by others also out of Don Isaak Abarbinel. Now Maimony in this place
alleged by you, speaking of the world to come either in the second or third
acception, does not at all deny, exclude or remoove a carnal understanding of
the other Jewish Rabbines touching the garden of Eden and the tree of life in
the supposed time of their Messiah his coming and living upon earth: though
they thought there was no eating, drinking, or marying after the day of
judgment, this proves not that they thought so touching the time of their
Messiah his conversing with them on earth. R. Abraham Aben Ezra also does very
plainly and distinctly Comment. on Dan. 12.2.
show the opinion of the Rabbines herein, namely that when those that dyed in
the captivity are raised up at the coming of their redeemer, then they shall
be delighted or feasted with Leviathan, with Ziz, and with Behemoth, and shall
dye again the second time, and shall live again at there surrection of the
dead in the world to come, where they do not eat or drink, but only enjoy
the brightness of Schecinah, or the divine presence. And thus distinguishing the
two worlds to come, he declares that in the first they did expect a carnal and
earthly feasting and banqueting of the bodies that rose again, though after
the day of judgment they believed it should be otherwise.

2. Though they thought there was no use of marriage and material food after
the general judgment, yet they expected a most carnal use of marriage for
their Messiah on earth, and as is recorded in the artickles of their faith,
they believed, that Emunath Iehud p. 54. 55.
every King of the gentiles should count it their honor to give their
daughters unto him: and though Kings daughters were his wives, yet the Queen
an Israelitesse should sit at his right hand in a crown of the gold of Ophir,
etc. That his other wives should come unto him at certain times when they were
called to enter in unto the King, but that the Queen his chief wife should
evermore be in his bed chamber, etc. that after he had lived many years he
should dye with honor and his Son should reign after him and his sons
Son, etc. And sundry testimonies of scripture are in the same place perverted
by them for the proof of this their carnal opinion. And besides that which is
before noted touching their feasting with the wine of Paradise, the carnal
boldness of the ancient Rabbines in describing the banquets of that expected
time of their Messiah, is yet greater: in that they presume to determine the
largenes of the cups that shall then be used, saying that Thalmud in Ioma, c.
8. Fol. 110.
the cup whereof David shall drink in the world to come conteyneth two hundred,
one and twenty measures or logs: as it is said, my cup is full: revaiah
according to the Gematria is so: The ground of this mystery is taken from the
words of ps. 23.5. Cosirevaiah, my cup is full; where the numerall letters of
the word revaiah according to the Cabalists observation do express this
Number; to wit, R in Hebrew account standing for 200, v for 6, ^ for 10, and h
for ^. and these added together make 221, the measure of that royal cup.

3. You allege the testimony of Maimony by the halfes, and thereby hide the
absurdity of that Infidel which is meet to be known, that the reader be not
deceyved by you. Maimony says indeed that in the world to come, there is
neither eating nor drinking, etc. But he says vvithall in the same Chapter and
Section alleged by you, that Misneh, in Teshubah cap. 8. Sec. 2.
in the world to come there is neither body nor bodily substance (of any
person,) but the souls of the righteous alone without bodies, as the
ministering Angels without body. This he would prove from the saying of their
wise men that say, in the world to come there is neither eating nor drinking,
etc. Behold (says he) it is made plain unto thee that there is no body there
because there is no eating and drinking there, etc And Sec. 3.
afterward again he would show this from the 1 Samuel 25
words of Abigail unto David, that there is no body there, but a bundle of
life, etc. And again he says, all the good things that the prophets
prophesied of for Israel, they were nothing else but things for the body, which
Israel shall enjoy in the days of the King Messiah, in the time that he shall
turn the Kingdom to Israel, etc. Thus does the place alleged show what a
carnal opinion Maimony had concerning the Messiah, and how carnally the
Rabbines did understand the spiritual promises and prophecies concerning
Christ, quite contrary to that which you would make your readers to believe.
Though they imagined a resurrection of the body to live upon earth again with
their Messiah, yet they denied the resurrection of the body to live in heaven
therewith after the last judgment. Thus you deal with the testimonies of the
Rabbines, as hucksters with their deceitful merchandise: you paint and color
them, and set a deceitful gloss upon them, that so you might the better vent
these Rabbinicall vvares.

4. How can you allege this testimony of Maimony to show a difference betwixt
the ancient Rabbines and the Jews that now live, touching their opinion of
Eden and the tree of life to be enjoyed by them, seeing Maimony is of so great
credit with them now at this present? where is there a Rabbine or Jew that now
differs from him herein and will not acknowledge as much as is contained in
this your allegation? This being so, the opposition which you make betwixt the
ancient and later Jews in this matter touching their expectation of recovery
of their loss by Christ is very vain.

ANother instance of your perverting the meaning of the Rabbines, as though
they took Michael to be Christ, is to be observed in you, in that you say,
concerning the man that Iaakob wrestled withal: Annot. on Genesis 32 24.
The Ancient Jewish Rabbines acknowledged this Angel to be Christ: Our
doctors of blessed memory (R.D. Kimchi, on Hos. 12.4.) have said this Angel
was Michael: and of him he says (Genesis 48.16.) the Angel that redeemed me from
all evil. Then you add; Micael is Christ the Archangel, Dan. 10.21. Jude 9.
Rev. 12,7. Later Rabbines do feign, that this was Esaus Angel, who sought to
hinder Jacob, etc. The like observation you have Annot. on Genesis 31 11. and on
Exodus 14.19.
else where also, as though they took Michael to be Christ: Hereunto I answer.

1. Your opposition here also betwixt the ancient and the later Rabbines is
vain. For it does not appear that the doctors of blessed memory whom Kimchi
speaks of, were more ancient, then those Rabbines that feign this person that
vvrestled with Iaakob, to be Esaws Angel. R. D. Kimchi in his commentary even
upon the same verse alleged here by you does twice give unto his own Father
Joseph Kimchi that title of blessed memory, yet was he not more ancient then
R. Solomon Iarchi who Comment. on Hos. 12.4.
expoundes that wrestler to be Esaws Angel. David Kimchi is recorded to have
lived anno 1190, and Rab. Solomon to have dyed anno 1105. The title of blessed
memory does not carry any such antiquity with it, as you would here make us
believe.

2. How know you that the later Rabbines feigned this exposition, and that they
did not receive it from their ancients, as well as many other the like fond
interpretations? yea R. Solomon when he expoundes that vvrestler to be the
Angel of Esaw, he says it is Comme^t on Genesis 32 24.
perush rabbothenu the exposition of their Rabbines: which speech bears as
much show of antiquiry in it as that of R. Kimchies does.

3. That the Rabbines of old did not take Michael to be their Messiah or
Christ, it is evident over all by their vvritings. The Chaldee paraphrast on
Ca^t. 8.4. etc.
framing that last chapter of Solomon's song into a dialogue, brings in many
persons speaking one after an other: verse. 4. the King Messiah is brought in
giving a charge: v. 5. Solomon speaks as a Prophet verse. 6. the Church or
Children of Israel speak: verse. 6. The Lord of the world, God himself is said
to speak: verse. 7. the Angels of heaven are brought in speaking: and verse. 8.
Michael the Prince of the nation of Israel, and as a chief Angel has his
speech also and so has a distinct person attributed unto him diverse from the
Messiah. Again in the description of those ten miracles which the Jews do
Abkath rochel citante Buxtorf Synag. c. 36.
faigne to be wrought before the coming of the Messiah, Michael the Archangel
is evidently noted as a distinct person going before and making way for the
Messiah the son of David, and blowing three times the great horn or trumpet
and working wonders therewith: so that by their opinion he must needs be a
distinct person from the Messiah. The Chaldee paraphrast in an on ps. 137
other place as has been shevved before ascribes the like works to Michael
and Gabriel, as being follow Angels of the like condition. And other Cabalists
do likewise show this; they Bereshith Rabba. Fol. 1.
write that Michael was created in the beginning togather with other Angels:
they give the like office to him with the rest, and divide works betwixt them
in like sort: In the administration of the world they Ioann. Reuchlin. de art
cabalistica. lib. 3.
give unto Michael the rule and government of the east wind; to Raphael the
government of the west wind: to Gabriel the government of the North wind,
and to Noriel the rule of the South wind. And Michael is reckoned among the
72. Angels by which they ascend unto God in their prayers. These 4. Angels are
also R. Abraham in Zeror Hammor, on Numb. citante Io. Buxtor. de Abbrev. hebr.
p. 35.
said to carry the Chariot of the divine majesty, and to have waited on God
when he came down on mount Sinai, like unto 4 standerd bearers, even as the
Israelites marched under 4. ensigns: Michael having the right hand, Gabriel
the left hand: Noriel going before, and Raphael following. In the like manner
also when they assign unto 7. Angels the government of the 7. days, they
ascribe unto him his lot and his portion of one day as they do unto the rest,
Iunius annot. on Tobit. 12.15.
giving Sunday to Raphael, Monday to Gabriel, Tuesday to Sammael, wednesday to
Michael, Thursday to Tzidkiel, Friday to Anael, and Satterday to Kephariel: So
that by all these testimonies and many more the like it is apparent, that they
did not take Michael to be Christ.

4. Whereas you allege some scriptures to prove that Michael is Christ; that
is nothing to the question; nothing unto the honor of the ancient Rabbines
unless you could prove that they held the same thing with the scriptures: but
the contrary thereunto is already manifested.

Again you seem to err from the Rabbines meaning in this, that you ascribe
unto them the knowledge of Christ from their speeches of Schecinah. You say,
Annot. on Exo. 34 9.
By the majesty or divine presence of the Lord, which the Hebrews call
Schecinah: we may well understand Christ: for the Hebrews usually distinguish
this from God the Father: and say; there is no coming before the blessed and
most high King, without schecinah. R. Menachem on Levit. 10. Our savior more
plainly says, No man comes unto the Father but by me, Ioh. 14.6. Of him the
ancient Jews seem to speak, under this name Schecinah: though at this day
they despise their salvation. See before on Exodus 33.14.15. and 34.6, and
14.19. Answer.

1. Whereas you do here oppose the ancient Jews acknowledging Schecinah
against the later in regard of their dispising their salvation, this is vain:
for both the ancient Jews you speak of, and this magical Menachem with the
rest have despised their salvation in refusing Christ, as well as the latter
Jews: and the Jews at this day again do acknowledge Schecinah, according to
the testimonies and speeches of the ancient Jews. How unjust then is this
opposition?

2. If the ancient Jews spoke of Christ under the name of Schecinah, then did
they despise their salvation, in that they held Schecinah to be See before P.
336
one of those 5. things that were wanting in the second temple, whiles our Lord
Jesus did live on earth. So they must needs be blasphemers of him and denyers
of the Lord of life, looking for an other Schecinah.

3. This word Schecinah properly signifies habitation or dwelling, and so may
be understood and applied to any special revelation of the grace and glory of
God resting or dwelling upon any place or person ordinarily or extraordinarily
according to the diverse degrees in which it pleases him to manifest the same.
According to this signification may all the testimonies alleged by you be
understood of the Jews, and yet they still remain ignorant of the person of
Christ. Whereas you allege out of Menachem, that there is no coming before
God without Schecinah, this may be understood of some certain measure of the
spirit, required in those that should draw nearer unto God then the ordinary
sort of men: according to the like testimony which you Annot. on Exo. 28 30.
allege out of Maimony giving a reason why the Priests in the second temple
did not enquire of God by vrim and Thummim. Every Priest that speaks not by
the holy Ghost, and on whom the divine majesty rests not: they enquire not
by him. And so the saying of Menachem has no affinity with the saying of
Christ Ioh. 14.6. For any Priest or godly person might come unto the Father by
Christ, according to the meaning of Christ, though they wanted that
extraordinary Schecinah. And further how does this his testimony show unto us
their distinction of God the Father? etc. As for the other notes you refer us
unto in Exo. 33. and 34. by that which is already said it may appear that
there is no necessity of understanding them of Christ's person, considering
withal, that the Rabbines use to attribute the titles of Christ unto the
Angels; and that sometimes also the name of God is given unto the signs and
tokens of his presence.

4. Seeing Schecinah habitation, or dwelling in the Church and in the members
thereof is John 14.17.23. Ephesians. 2.22. 1. Ioh. 4.15.16.
common to each person in the trinity, to the Father and to the holy Ghost as
well as the Son; and seeing withal that this name of Schecinah is by the
Chaldee paraphrasts and other writers often attributed to God absolutely
considred, what reason have you to restreyne their meaning to the second person
in the trinity?

5. R. Moses Bar Maimon writing of Schecinah or habitation, says; Morch
Nebuchim, Chelek. 1. perck. 25.
where so ever this word is spoken of God, it signifies the firmnes of his
glory, that is, of his glory created in that place, or the firmnes of his care
abiding upon any thing: And so he brings example, that so the glory of God
dwelt upon mount Sinai. According to this his interpretation may that place of
the Prophet be understood: Esa. 4.5.
And the Lord shall create upon every place of mount Sion and the assemblies
thereof a cloud and smoke by day, etc. Now while the Rabbines do thus expound
the word of the outward sensible tokens of Gods glorious protection and care,
and of the graces created or infused upon his Church, we can not justly from
this their phrase conclude, that they spoke of the increated Son of God under
this name.

6. It is recorded, that Thalmud in Baba bathra Fol. 134. and in Succa Fol. 28.
Hillel the old man had 80. disciples: 30, of them were worthy that the
Schecinah should rest upon them, as upon Moses: other 30. of them were worthy
that the Sun should stand still unto them, as unto Joshua the son of Nun: 20 of
them, were of a middle sort, etc. Hence it appears that these Rabbines did
understand by Schecinah the more high degree of knowledge and grace of the
spirit: for were they so senseless to think that the first 30 only were
partakers of Christ, and that the other 50. were without the Messiah, or that
their graces were not from him, whom they should acknowledge so bou^tifull
unto others? If so, then surely you have no reason to think the later Rabbines
more ignorant then those ancient dotards that were so far from the knowledge of
the way to salvation and life.

7. If Michael, Gabriel, Nuriel and Raphael do carry the Chariot of Schecinah,
as was noted before according to the opinion of the Rabbines: then is it
probable that either they thought Michael was not Christ, contrary to your
imagination; or else that they thought not Schecinah to be Christ, as it yet
seems unto you: for should the Messiah be both horse and rider at once in
their account?

8. Whereas the Thargam or Chaldee paraphrast says on Pf. 110.1. The Lord
said in his word, etc. If by word he meant the Messiah, according to Preface to
Annot. on Genesis
your opinion, then does he also upon the same psalm plainly distinguish
Schecinah from the Messiah: for there he faith further verse. 5. The Shecinta or
Schecinah of the Lord is at thy right hand: So by your own exposition if they
make Schecinah a helper to Christ at his right hand it will follow that the
ancient Jews should not think Christ to be Schecinah. And many other places
might easily be alleged out of the same paraphrast, to show that the Jews
held the Messiah and Schecinah to be two several things: but this may suffice
for the present.

WIth this kind of error we may reckon your misinterpretation of some of the
diverse readings recorded by the Masorites: for example, the word jadau, you
expound it thus, Annot. on Exodus 32.19.
his hands) or, his hand: that is, each of his hands: the Hebrew has both
readings: the first by the vowels and margin: the other by the letters in the
line. And again, the like: when after the same manner, you interpret the word
berichan, to signify Annot. on Exo. 35 11. and on Exo. 39.33.
bars or, bar: etc. But herein you err, seeing both the readings whether in
the margin or in the line, are to be translated his hands, his bars: and
neither of them his hand, his bar: and the same is to be held for the other
diverse readings whereunto you refer us in Levit. 9.22. Deuteronomy. 2.33. and the
like. If the word read in the line had had Cholem annexed with van, then should
it have been so as you say: but seeing it has there a kamets coming before van;
that R. D. Kimchi in Miclol. Fol. 197.
kind of affix is still a note of plurality in the signification of words.
Though sometimes jod be wanting in the last syllable of such words by a
grammatical figure, yet do they not therefore cease to reteyne a plural
signification; as is Ioa. Buxt. Thesaur. gramm. lib. 2. c. 8.
showed in diverse words, in ghnammudan, pillars: Exodus 27.12. Tabbeghnothan,
rings, Exo. 28.28. which are of the same form with the words jadau and
berichan as they are written within the line in the places above mentioned.
Could you show that the words in the line, had other manner of vowels belonging
unto them, then unto those in the margin; then should you have some reason for
that you write here in your annotations: But seeing it is observed concerning
those 848 diverse readings, that the readings in the line and the margin differ
only in letters, and that Elias Levita Masor, hammasor. praefat. 3.
there is no difference in the vowelles in any of them: and seeing the copies of
the holy scripture do also witness the same thing unto us: therefore had you no
warrant to write so as you have done. These things may seem small: but seeing
they concern the purity of the holy scriptures, therefore are they not to be
despised, especially of you, which would have the diverse readings to be both
written by the spirit of God.

HItherto also may be referred your unfound observation upon the word Zebojim:
when you note, that Annot. on Genesis 14 2.
it is written by the letters in the line Zebiim, of Zebi which signifies
glory, pleasantnes, and a Roe: by which name the pleasant and glorious Land of
Israel is called, in Ezekiel. 20.6. But by the vowels and in the margin noted to
be read Zebojim, as being unworthy the pleasant name. Here you err many ways,
1. There is no warrant to say it is written by the letters in the line Zebiim;
for the letters in the line without vowels, do yield no word at all: if you
devise vowels for it, as you do, then you destroy the tradition of the
Masorites, who (as I showed before from Elias Levita) do admit no difference of
vowels in any of their diverse readings: And where as they make two diverse
readings: if your observation were admitted, we should then have three, viz the
first, Zebiim: the second Zebojim, without vau as it is now in the text: the
third Zebojim with vau as it is in the margin: the first devised by yourself:
the two latter already receyved by the Masorites. 2, if difference of vowels
were to be admitted in these diverse readings, yet not in such manner as you
feign for you err in deriving Zebiim of Zebi; by putting Chirck for Kamets;
Zebiim for Zebaim: This your error is plainly reprooved by the Kimchi in
Miclol, Fol. 239.
cheifest of the Rabbines that show the forming of this word. 3, suppose
Zeboim was put for Zebiim, yet have you no reason hence to gather that it was
unworthy the pleasant name: for why may not Zeboim come of Zebi also, and so
carry in it a signification of glory and pleasantnes as well as your imagined
Zebiim? And if Zeboim do not come of Zebi then show from whence it comes and
what signification it has wherein no glory and pleasantnes is employed. 4, by
this kind of collection where you thus exclude and remoove the signification of
one of the diverse readings from the subject spoken of, you do also overthrow
your interpretation of these diverse readings in other places, where you labor
to reteyne, to establish and to apply the signification of them both unto the
subject matter that is mentioned with them. With such inconveniences are you
justly entangled, vvhiles you maintain these diverse readings for grounds of
doctrine and instruction: whiles the Masorites traditions are chosen of you as
your text, which thus you preach on. Hereby you run into absurdities which
even the Rabbines themselves are free from.

CHAP. VI.
A Sixth Scandal is that blasphemous assertion touching the help of the
Rabbines, when as concerning the Chaldee paraphrast and other Hebrew doctors,
you say that you allege their expositions for two causes: the one, Preface to
Annot. on Genesis.
to give light unto the ordinances of Moses touching the external practice of
them, in the common wealth of Israel, which the Rabbines did record, and
without whose help, many of those legal rites (especially in Exodus and
Leviticus) will not well be understood, etc. To this presumption I answer, in
defense of the holy scriptures;

First, The law of God is Ps. 19.7.8. and 119.130. Prove. 1.1. -- 6. and 8.8.9.
perfect: and not only for the truth thereof, but also for the perspicuity,
and evidence sufficient in itself (as a divine instrument) to convert the soul
from any sin: to give wisdom unto the simple, and to enlighten their eyes in
any doubt or danger: why do you then accuse them of imperfection, as though the
well understanding of them did depend upon the records of the Rabbines? The
whole scripture is 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
given by inspiration of God, and is proffitable to teach, to convince, to
correct, to instruct in righteousness that the man of God may be absolute, being
made perfect unto all good works: But you contradicting the spirit of God
tell us that without help of the Rabbines many legal rites will not be well
understood: and so according to your tenent, the man of God cannot be absolute,
nor made perfect unto all good works, and to all the works of his ministry
as to expound Exodus and Leviticus well, unless he be a Scholar of the
Rabbines: To be a disciple of the Prophets and Apostles, and of Christ Jesus
himself is not sufficient with you, unless he be also a student and proficient
in the School of the Thalmud. As Judge. 14.18.
Sampson once vpbraided the Philistines, that they could not have found out his
riddle, but that they plowed with his heifer: even so the Jews at this day
might vpbraid the Christians, and tell us out of your mouth, (if there were any
truth in this your assertion) that we could not have found out their
mysteries, nor well understood the ordinances of Moses, except we had plowed
with their heifer of the Thalmud. You ought to fear the Lord who is a jealous
God and Esa. 48.11
will not give his glory to the Thalmudists: Neh. 8.8.
Ezra and Act. 9.22. and 17,2.3.
Paul and Act. 18.28.
others honored the scriptures, and did well expound them when they gave the
understanding thereof by the scripture it self, and by comparing them togather:
but you dishonor the scriptures and take away a great part of their glory,
when you say they will not be well understood without help of Rabbines: yea you
are herein guilty of the same blasphemy with the Rabbines themselves: and your
speech is in effect one with theirs, who are noted to affirm that R. Bechai in
Cad hak kemach. Fol. 77.
the law written cannot be expounded or made plain without the help of the
mouth tradition: for from those pretended Thalmudicall traditions are your
explications drawn. How do you forget yourself and your former writings in
which you profess touching the Shepherd of Rome, that Answ. to Ioh. Ains. p.
22.
you will never go over the Alps to fetch your food from him? And yet here you
run over the Alps, yea over the mountains of Ararat to fetch your food from
the Babylonian Thalmud as though you could not be well fed without Rabbinicall
chafe. Heretofore you could write and maintain; that Ibid. p. 153.
It is a ly against the truth to say, that the holy Bible which we have
written, does not sufficiently express diverse mysteries of us to be believed:
And yet here to make way for the broaching and venting of your Rabbinicall
vvares, you contradict yourself: for if many legal rites will not be well
understood without the Rabbines, then does not the holy Bible sufficiently
express diverse mysteries unto our understanding: And thus yourself are guilty
of the like ly against the truth, whiles to vvin credit unto the Rabbinicall
expositions, you spare not to slander both the perspicuity of the scriptures,
and also the Ioh. 1.16. and 7.37.38 and 14.26. and 16.13. Ephesians. 4.8.14. Esaias.
29.18. and 35.7.8. Heb. 8.10.11.
grace of God given unto the Churches of Christ so abundantly in these last
days: as though the spirit of truth, and all the gifts which Christ asce^ding
on high has given to us could not lead men to understand the scriptures well:
as though without a thread of direction from those infidel Jews, that deny
Christ, we could not come out of the pretended Labyrinth of the scriptures.

Secondly, as for the external practice of Moses ordinances in the common
wealth of Israel, recorded by the Rabbines: what extraordinary light is to be
expected from those blind guides whom our Savior every where condemns for
their ignorance, blindenes and superstition? even the Pharisees, those more
ancient Rabbines, (by which title you do so often commend them) were ignorant
of the law, and by their traditions receyved from their Elders had falsified
and corrupted the right practice of the ordinances of Moses, and to magnifye
their own devises and inventions, they Mat. 5.20. -- 43. and 15.2,3. -- 14.
and 16.12, and 23.16, etc.
wrested and changed the law, and the right observation of the whole decalogue
and of every commandment in the same: unto the legal rites they joined a
burden of their own traditions, men's precepts, vain worship, plants which the
heavenly father had never planted, and made the commandments of God of no
authority, for these things Christ often reproved them, denounced woe unto
them, and for this cause the Jews again denounce woe unto our Blessed Savior
and Thalmud tract. Gittin Cap. 5.
blaspheme him wickedly with words which I abhor to mention, as being a
contemner of their wise men. And is it not madness then to think, that the law
of God will not be well understood, without the help of such accursed and woeful
guides?

But to give the reader some more particular instances of this; Let it be
considered what a sorry change you have made in leaving the ministers of Christ
to be come a disciple of your Iew-doctours. Against the Church of God in
England you protest on this manner and say unto us: H. Bar. refut. of Giff. p.
214
we hold that you have poisoned all the fountains of sincere doctrine and
pervert the whole Testament, and turn away the practice thereof by your
damnable false expositions, yea that you teach not one point sincerely. If this
were true then had you reason to separate: and not to hear such damnable
doctrine: but let us see whether those fountains be purer, without drinking
whereat you would make us believe we could not well understand some parts of
the holy scripture.

AGainst the first commandment, your Rabbines teach us to choose a false God
without Christ: they impugn the doctrine of the holy Trinity, as I showed
before. They teach many things not agreeing with the nature and majesty of
God: as that he should Rasi on Psa. 104.26
play ^hre hours in the day with Leviatha^; that Chald. paraphr. on Cant. 5.10.
in the day he exercises himself in the scripture, and in the night studies the
Thalmud: that in the Thalmud in Beracoth Cap. 9. Fol. 59.
hour when he reme^bers the dispersion of Israel, he lets two tears fall into
the great Sea and makes lamentation for the destruction of the temple: That the
Thalm. in Cholin. c. 3. F. 60. and Rasi on Numb. 28.15.
Sun and moon being created equal in light at first, upon the complaint of the
moon, he diminished her light: but the moon expostulated so long with God,
that as they write he appointed a sin offering to be brought for himself for a
reconciliation: even that Goat offered for a sin offering in the beginning of
every month. That the Sun, Moon, and Stars are living creatures having
reason and speech, the Jews hold firmly as I noted before: and therefore no
vvonder that the Moon should so plead with God. As the creatures pray in their
wants so they teach that the creator himself does make prayers: R. Iohanan in
the name of R. Iosei Thalmud in Beracoth, c. 1. Fol. 7.
proves it by that place in Esa. 56 7. where God calls the temple Beth
tephillathi; The house of my prayer: They note it is not called the house of
their prayers, but of his. And R. Zutra bar Tobijah shows what his prayer is,
viz. that his mercy may overcome his wrath and his other properties, etc.
Concerning the anger of God, they write further in the same place, that God is
always angry once in a day: which they would prove from that saying Ps. 7.11.
But this anger they say is but for a moment: and how much is a moment? They
teach that if an hour be divided into five millions, eight thousand, eight
hundred, eighty eight parts, then a moment is one of them. They say no creature
knows that moment save only Balaam: because it is said, he saw the vision of
the almighty, etc. Numb. 24. and therefore in Balaams time God was not angry
once a day according to his manner, least Balaa^ should have cursed Israel in
that moment, and so destroyed them: this they will have to be noted from Numb.
23.8. with Mica. 6.5. For it is held that if in that moment of Gods anger any
man should curse an other, he must needs die presently: and that men cannot
prevayle with God in that moment: And hereupon they write also that God bade
Moses to stay and wait till his face or anger was past, that then he would
give him rest, viz. when the moment of his passion and indignation was over:
that they would prove from Exodus 33.14. Concerning that moment of indignation
they say that the cocks then standing upon one foot, their combs become pale
and loose their rednes, etc. Into such a horrible pit of ignorance of their
creator, have these miserable Jews been cast, by the heavy hand of God upon
them. Their confidence in creatures appears by the sundry sorts of Elias
Levita in Tishbi in Lilith.
charms which they have taken from the names of Angels written on their
wales and doors in time of danger. Yea as the rude Indians are said to offer
sacrifice to the Devil for fear, least he hurt them: so the Ibidem in Samael.
Jews themselves write of their offering or gift, which in the feast of
reconciliation they give unto the wicked spirit or fiend whom they call Samael.

IN stead of Gods true and pure worship required in the second commandment,
they bring in a Sea of superstition: In stead of worshipping Christ, they have
Seb. Munst. de fide Iudae: p. 110.
prayers against him, so execrable, as that I think it not meet to rehearse the
same. And for other prayers how vain are they? Among the 5 things that stay
them from prayer, one is when their hands are not clean: And of this they
write, that Maimony in Misneh, in Tephillah, or treat. of prayer, c. 4. Sect.
1.2 5
if a man have journey by the way, and the time of prayer be come and a man
have no water: if there be betwixt him and the water the space of 4. miles or
8000. cubits, he is first to go unto the place of water, to vvash and then
after that to pray: but if there be betwixt him and the water a greater space
then this, he is to vvrive or rub his hands with gravel or dust or the like
and then to pray. But this distance of 4. miles they do there expound of the
place before them; but for the place after them, they are to return but one
mile back for water and no more: This washing of hands they require for every
set time of prayer beside the morning: for then they require the washing of
face, hands and feet before prayer. For praeparation to prayer, they require a
settling of the mind and thoughts: And therefore they teach, Ibidem, Sec. 15.
if a man return from a journey and be weary or troubled it is unlawful for
him to pray: and their wise men say, a man shall be weary three days until
he rest and refresh his mind, and after that he may pray.

In the time of prayer they use phylacteries: and of these R. Hanina in the
name of R. Iohanan gives this rule; that R. Alphes in phillim, or treat. of
phylacteries, Fol. 78. A.
they may not make the phylacteries of the head, to serve for phylacteries unto
the hand: but the hand-phylacteries are allowed to be made head phylacteries:
because they may not descend from a greater holiness to a less: but contra.
Touching the hand whereon these phylacteries are to be worn, the Rabbines
say, R. Alphes ibid. f. 81. a
it is the left hand; for proof thereof they allege these scriptures, his
hand has founded the earth, and his right hand has spread out the heavens:
and again, she put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the hammer of
the workmen, Judge. 5. But if a man be left handed, then he is to wear them on
his right hand, because that is unto him as his left hand. The like care they
have about their zizith or fringes with as many superstitions as there be
threeds in a fringe. Further, Thalmud in Babha bathra c. 2, Fol. 25.
if a man seek wisdom in his prayer, he is to pray toward the South; if he
seek riches, he is to pray toward the North: and the reason that they give
hereof is, because the table was set on the North-side, and the Candlestick on
the South Side, ( Exodus 40.22.24.) When for their necessities they go into the
place, where they think it is not meet that the Angels should be present with
them: they have Arba turim, Orach Chaijm, tract. 1. fig. 3.
a set form of prayer, in which they desire those Angels, the ministers of
the most high to keep them, to help them and to stay for them, until they come
forth of that house: with many other superstitions annexed, not fit to be
named. They think also, that Ibid. fig. 4
there is an evil spirit abiding upon their hands until they have vvashed,
etc. When they are see to pray, they tell us that R. Alphes in Beracoth, c. 4.
F. 22.
though a King salute them, they may not answer him, and though a serpent bite
them by the heel, they may not cease. Yet the gloss upon that place, helps
to mitigate the matter a little, and faith, R. Jonah comme^t. on R. Alphes.
though they may not cease to speak, yet they may go aside to shake of the
serpent, to avoid danger etc. After prayer for the further confounding or Orach
Chajim, in Rosch hasschanah fig. 581. and in Seder Tekiath Shophar, fig. 596.
astonishing of Satan, as they say, they use sometimes to sound a Trumpet, or
to take up a great showte together, without sounding of the Trumpet. He that
killes a bird or beast, Iore deghnah, Treat. of covering blood, fig. 28.
must cover the blood and a set form of prayer or blessing is appointed for
that action; except it be, when they kill a beast which they call Cavi begotten
of a Roe and a he goat: though they cover the blood thereof, yet may they not
do it with prayer and blessing eve^ as they teach that Tract. Milah. fig. 365.
they are to circumcise an Hermaphrodite, a person that is both male and
female, but without that set form of blessing appointed for the action of
circumcision. And infinite and the traditions wherein they put holiness and
religion: Yea they Thalmud in Sanhedrin, c. 7. F. 68.
tell us of 300. traditions about one kind of leprous spot and of three
thousand traditions about the planting of Cucumbers besides those which are for
the plucking of them up. And how many millions of superstitions must they then
have for all other things? But if there were nothing else but their set forms
of prayers which they use: according to your profession they must be violatours
of the second commandment and great Idolaters. And touching these they say,
that Maimony in Misneh, in Beraco^d (...).
Ezra the scribe and his consistory ordained the form of all their blessings,
and that it is not meet to add unto one of them or to diminish from them: and
that whosoever changes the coin which their wise men have coined in their
blessings, cannot but err, etc. If in any thing the Rabbi^es might know the
external practice in the commonwealth of Israel then in this general point,
that they used set forms of prayer, though they might err touching some
particular prayers: If in this matter they cannot help you better to understand
the practice of Gods people, then in none other rites. Show if you can, how we
may regard them in any tradition, if not in this.

FOr the third commandment, they have also most vain doctrines, touching
taking the name of God in vain. They say, whosoever Maimony in Misneh, tract.
Iesudei has orah, Cap. 6,1.2 3, etc.
destroys any of the holy and pure names of God, he is Lukah, to be beaten or
whipped: for proof they allege Deuteronomy. 12.3.4: Now these are the 7. names,
Jehovah, Adonai, Eloah, Elohim, Ehich, Shaddai, Tsebaoth: whosoever blots out
but one letter of these names, he is Lukah, to be beaten: And further, they
say, whosoever blots out any letter added to the name of God, in the forepart
thereof, as L in Laihovah: and B in Belohim, that is free: but the letters
added to the name of God, in the afterpart thereof, as C in Eloheca: on M in
Elohecem, may not be blotted out, but are holy as the name of God. Yet he that
blotts them out is not Lukah: but punished with a lesser kind of punishment,
with Maccath Marduth, etc. Again they hold it for an heinous sin, that any man
should pronounce this name Jehovah: only they Thalmud in Kiddushin c. 4. f.
71, and in Sotah, c. 7. Fol. 37.
allow it to be pronounced in the sanctuary, and that only by the Priests and
that not at all times but only in the solemn blessing appointed Numb. 6, and
that also with a swift voice, that the found thereof may be as it were
swallowed up. The reason alleged is, because the Lord says, this is my name
for ever, and this is my memorial Exodus 3.15, where they do not read,
leghnolam, for ever; but leghnallem, to hide, to conceal: as though God would
have his name Jehovah concealed, and Adonai or Elohim to be his memorial
pronounced in stead of it: And diverse like superstitions they have about the
name of 12 letters, and the name of 42 letters. Yet they Aben Ezra on Zach.
14.9. Thalmud in Pesachim, c. 3. Fol. 50.
hold that in the world to come, viz. when their Messiah comes, that then it
shall be pronounced of all; because it is said, Zach. 14.9. that there shall be one
Lord, and his name one, to wit, the name Jehovah to be read as it is written,
etc. Moreover as they abuse the name of God, by obtruding all their traditions
upon him, as if he had given them at Sinai; by perventing the law that he has
given: so do they also by concealing some parts of scripture, when they say, R.
Alphes in Megilla, c. 4. f. 365.
some of them are to be read and expounded: some of them are to be read and not
expounded: and some of them neither to be read nor expounded; And diverse
instances they give for each of these kinds. And not only this, but they do
also show in strange manner, how a great part of the scriptures shall be
abolished, even then when they will have their traditions to continue: they
say, that Maimony in Misneh, tract. Megillall, c. 2. sec. 18.
all the books of the Prophets and Cethubim (viz. Job, psalm, proverbs,
canticles, Daniel, Ezra, etc.) shall cease in the days of Messiah, except the
volume of Ester: behold it shall continue as the 5. books of the law and as
the traditions of the law schebeal-peh, delivered by mouth, which are not to
cease for ever. This is the blasphemy of your Maimony. Concerning oaths, as
our Savior in his time Mat. 5.34 and 23.16, etc.
reproved diverse of their errors: so are their later Rabbines also to be
condemned. In that Sebast. Munster, Annot. on Genesis 2.
story where the 7 places of paradise are described by them, with their
several glory, and with the several persons that are in each of those places,
they say, that when the same were showed unto Iehoshua ben Levi by the Angel
of death at the commandment of God, he suddenly lept from the devil into that
place, and swore by the name of God that he would not depart thence; Hereupon
though the Angel of death would have drawn him back, and though the ministering
Angels also complained hereof unto God, yet because- of his oath, it was
concluded of God that he should stay there, it having been found that this
Rabbine had never made false oath before. The like liberty and presumption in
swearing do others of them commend unto us on earth, when as some of their
great Rabbines having a special request unto God do tell him with an oath that
they will not depart from the place where they stand until they see their
desire granted. Thus it is Thalmud in Taanith, or treat. of fasting, c. 3.
accorded of Chone Hammagal, that in a time of great drought when as other
humiliation would not prevail, he shut up him self in our with a Cake, and
prayed thus, O Lord of the world, thy Children direct their eyes unto me,
knowing that I am dear unto thee as a Child unto his Father: I swear by thy
holy name, that I will not depart hence, until thou have pity upon thy
infants: This being done there came shewers of rain. And thus R. Solomon
Iarchi their great Parshandatha or cheef expositour of the law, interpreting
those words of the prophet I will stand upon my watch, Rasi and Kimchi comment.
on Habak, c. 1.1.
writes hereupon: ghnugah ghnag Habakuk, etc. that is to say, Habakkuk baked a
Cake and stood in it or by it, and said, I will not depart hence until I hear
what he will say unto me, etc. And this exposition is also related by Kimchi in
the same place. This practice is like unto the dealing of some presumptuous
persons in these our times, of whom I have heard, that coming unto persons
possessed and taking with them a pound of raysins do avow they will eat
nothing else until the persons be dispossessed. Many other vain doctrines they
have touching oaths and blasphemies but I may not insist further upon them.

TOuching the observation of the Sabath taught in the 4th. commandment, they
R. Abraham Aben Ezra comment. on Exodus 20. Isaak ben Arama in Akedath Isaak,
porta 45.
show from their wise men, that the 7. planets have each of them a several day
in the week assigned unto them wherein they bear rule and show their force;
that among these planets Saturn and Mars are hurtful stars above the rest:
that those who begin any work or enter upon any journey when they bear rule
shall not prosper but come to some hurt: that among all the days of the week
there is not to be found any day and night together wherein those two hurt full
planets bear rule save only upon the Sabath day: and that therefore it is not
convenient for men to be then exercised in wordly affairs, save only in the
service of God: This is laid down as a reason of rest upon the seventh day: If
this were just and sound, it should go ill with Christians who have their
Sabath now changed from the seventh to the first day of the week: Now for the
keeping of this Sabath, they propound most carnal and absurd observations:
they then Maimony in Misneh, tract. Schabath, c. 30.
require that a man have clean and fair apparel, and change of apparel; and
if a man have not change of apparel, yet they require him so to wear it, that
it may seem not to be the common apparel. They bind every man to make;
banquets on the Sabath, and if it be possible to keep them with wine: to spread
the table upon the evening when the Sabath begins: and to see that it be spread
when the Sabath goes out, though a man had no more meat then an Olive to set
upon the same: And for honor of the Sabath, they do then especially commend
taschmish hammittah, the use of the marriage bed. And they teach there, that it
is unlawful to mourn or cry on the Sabath even to pray for compassion and to
seek mercy from God, even in affliction, except it be extraordinary, as when
the city is beseeged, etc. They say, Ibidem, c. 19. sec. 1.3.
whosoever wears arms on the Sabath, which are put on like apparel, as
helmet, brigandine, and boots of brass, he is free: but who so caries arms
that are not like unto apparel, as spear sword, bow or the like, he is guilty:
That it is unlawful for a woman to go forth on the Sabath, with a ring which
has a signet upon it; but if a man do it, he is free: and on the contrary,
that it is unlawful for a man to go forth on the Sabath with a ring, which
has no signet upon it, but if a woman do it she is free. They say, Ibid. c. 27.
whosoever goes out of his bounds on the Sabath, he is Lukah to be beaten;
those bounds they describe to be 2000 cubits: but if a man walk through the
city where he lives, though it were as great as Nineveh, that it is lawful.
If a man through ignorance or otherwise exceed that bounds then he has but 4
cubits left him to stir in. If for performing the necessities of nature he be
urged to go aside, yet he must return to that place again, (to his circle.)
They teach, that Ibid. c. 16. sec. 12.
if one man alone (overtaken with the Sabath in his journey) do rest in a
plain and make a trench round about him: if there be in it a space containing
two measures (of seed,) it is lawful for him to walk through all that space,
but if there be in it more then the space of two measures, then he may not
moove above 4. cubits: and so it is if there be two men together. But if there
be three Israelites or more the^ these behold these are a ca^pe, and it is
lawful for them to walk for all their necessities, though it were diverse
miles: and this so, that the space of the two measures which they have
compassed in be not left void without some vessels or implements in the same;
otherwise it is unlawful for them to moove through the whole trench, but only
for 4. cubits: And a Child may not make up the number for a camp, etc. If we
will believe Rabbines this was the external practice of the legal rites in the
Jews common wealth: how should we understand these things without their help?

FRom the observation of the fifth commandment they teach men to go astray both
in defect and excess of giving honor diverse ways: As in Christ's time they
did frustrate this commandment of God by their sacrilegious Mat. 15.4,5,6.
Korban, in giving that unto the Priests which they should have bestowed on
their parents: So do they still teach men to practice. They say, Maimony in
Misneh, in thalmud thorah, c. 5. sect. 1, etc.
if a man see a thing lost by his Father, and a thing lost by his Rabbi, he is
first to bring the thing lost unto his Rabbi: If his Father and his Rabbi be
laden with burdens, he is first to take of the burden of his Rabbi, then of his
father. If his father and his Rabbi be taken captives, he is first to redeem
his Rabbi then his Father. They say in the same place, that it is unlawful for
a man to teach in the presence of his Rabbi for ever: and whosoever teaches a
tradition in the presence of his Rabbi is guilty of death. If there be the
space of 12 miles betwixt him and his Rabbi, and a man ask him a word of the
tradition, it is then lawful to answer him, etc. But for a man to set himself
to be seen, and to sit down to teach whosoever shall ask him: though he be in
one end of the world and his Rabbi in the other end of the world, yet it is
unlawful for him so to teach, until his Rabbi die, or except he get a license
from him, etc. If the R. Alphes in Moed Katon, c. 3. Fol. 380.
Father of the house of judgment transgress, they may not censure or suspend
him for it, but they say unto him, boast of thy glory and stay at home, etc. If
a student, or young scholar transgress they may not suspend him openly but in
the night, when the Sun is gone down: and their proof is as Raschbal there
notes, because it is said by the Prophet: Thou shall fall in the day: and the
Prophet shall fall with thee in the night: Hos. 4.5. And the night shall cover
him ( Mica. 3.6.) Again whereas the law of God appoynteth, that he which
curses Father or Mother shall die: they do frustrate this commandment, by this
distinction, that Arb. Tur. l. Ior. dea. trac. cibod ab. fig. 241.
this is to be understood of such as curse by some of the proper names of God:
but if they curse by any of his attributes they are not subject to this
punishment but only sin as if they should curse any other of Israel, that is
not their parent. And where God ordained those that smite Father or mother, to
be put to death, this they say is to be understood of such smiting where a
wound or blew mark follows: and that otherwise it is but as if they had
stricken an other Israelite, etc. They give this honor unto their parent of
parents, the father of their great court, that the same error which is an
heinous sin in an other, shall not yet be so in him: for whereas they Maimo. in
Morch Nebuchim lib. 3. perck. 42.
make 4. degrees of transgressio^, viz. 1, against a man's will: 2 of error: 3
of pride: 4 of malice; They do in the same place note, that there is herein
this great difference betwixt private men, and their chief rulers: namely that
if a private man work any transgression and judge according to his own
understanding, it is a transgression of pride: and he may may be put to death
for it: but the chief rulers and the high Priest not so: in them this is but a
transgression of error.

AGainst the sixth commandment, they give allowance of murder, diverse ways.
They say, R. Moses mikkotsi in SMG, in Loim, praecept. ^ 163.
if ten men do strike a man with ten staves, so that every one be sufficient to
kill him, and he die; whether they stroke him one after an other, or whether
they stroke him together as one man, they are all free from being slain by the
court of judgment, because it is said every soul of a man which is one, if he
kill, etc. They say, Maimon. in Misneh, in Aisure Biah, cap. 12.
whosoever goes in unto a woman that is a gentile, (under whom they comprehend
Christians) whether by way of marriage, or by way of fornication, if he do it
manifestly in the sight of ten or more Israelites, if they find him and be
zealous and kill him: behold these are to be praised and preserved: this is
halacah lemosheh Missinai, a tradition delivered unto Moses at Sinai: But if
the zealous come to kill this man and he escape, and kill the zealous to
deliver himself out of his hand, then is not he to be slain for killing the
zealous. In an other case they SMG. in A sin, praec. 70.
hold it lavvfull to kill the Gentile that does but strike a Jew, and for
proof they allege Moses his example, Exo. 2.11.12. Again they Arba Turim, l.
Ioreh dea, in Abodah Zarah, sig. 158.
teach, that if any of the Idolatrous gentiles (such as they esteem Christians
to be) do fall into a pit, or into a place of danger, he that sees them may not
lift them or help them out, except they hyre him: even as they may not heal
such persons but for a revvard, etc. But if they be heretics, apostates, or
the the like, such as do leave their Iudaisme and embrace Christianity, they
hold it lawful to thrust them down with their hands viz. to drown or kill
them as occasion is offered. And many other bloody doctrines are mainteyned by
them.

MOst vain also are the Rabbinicall doctrines touching marriage, tending many
ways to the violation of the 7th. Commandment: They say, Arb. Tur. lib. Eben
Ezer, in Aisure Biah, sig. 1.
that every man is bound to take a wife, to increase and multiply: that he
which does not mary, is as he that sheddeth blood: and as he that defaceth the
image of God: and that he causes Schecinah or the majesty of God to depart
from Israel: that whosoever lives without a wife, lives without goodness,
without joy without blessing, without habitation, without law, without wall,
without peace, and. that such an one is no man, etc. that the commandment of
taking a wife is exceeding great, because they may not sell the book of the
law, but for to learn the law, and for to get a wife: that this commandment
lies upon a man when he is 18. years old: that he may not pass 20 without a
wife: the disciples of R. Ismael say that until 20 years God stays for a man
that he may take a wife: but if he pass 20 years without a wife, the holy
blessed God says, let the bones of that man be broken. R. Asher says if he
pass 20 years without a wife, the house of judgment is to compel him to
mary. Only they have an exception for students as ben Azzai that made the law
his wife, etc. If a man have had a wife and Children by her in his youth, he
must also as R. Iehoshua says take one in his age: and so to prove that a man
may not live a vvidower they allege that saying of Solomon, Eccl. 11.6. If a
man have lived with a wife 10. years and she have brought him no Children,
they say he is bound to put her away, that he may fulfill the commandment,
increase and multiply. Further, that a man is to take many wives to increase
and multiply: but the counsel of their wisest men is that a man should have
but 4 wives that he may the better please them: that yet if they live in such
places where the law allows them to take but one wife (as herein Christendom)
they are then to follow the custom. Besides this as they have many canons
touching marriage unmeet to be mentioned, so they Eben Ezer in Aisure Biah, sig.
24.
have allowance of some practices which are monstrous and against nature not to
be named. And woe to them that fetch the exposition of Gods law from such
practices as are recorded by these Rabbines.

Again, they teach that Maimony in Aisure Biah, c. 17. sect. 2. and 3.
every Priest whether high Priest or other inferior priest that takes one of
the three women (either harlot, or divorced or polluted) and shall marie her,
he is to be punished: but if he go in unto her after the manner of an harlot, he
is not to be punished: because it is said, he shall not take: until he take
and mary her, etc. But if the high Priest go in unto a widow (after the manner
of a harlot) he is punished once: if he mary her, he is to have double
punishment, etc. They teach Ibidem cap. 3.
also, that he which goes in unto a deaf woman; to a mad woman: to a person
that is Tomtom, i^ in respect of certain knowledge neither male nor female: to
an Hermaphrodite that is both male and female, etc. that all these are free, if
presumption be not added. Their other vain traditions concerning women, wives
and maids are innumerable.

OF their false expositions of the eight commandment, there is also a great
number. Their Thalmudique canons require a man to restore the thing lost by an
Israelite, but R. Moses mikkotsi SMG. in Asin. praec. 74.
if they find a thing lost by an heretic, an Epicure, an Idolater and such
as openly pollute the Sabath, they give men liberty not to restore unto them
the thing lost by them, etc. If a Thalmud Sanhedrin, c. 8. fo. 72.
thief dig through and break into the house of a man and steal away his
goods, they do not require restitution in this case as in other thefts, because
the thief herein adventured his life, and it had been lawful to have killed
him if he had been taken in the fact. And Choshen hamishpat, in Genibah, sig.
351.
such a kind of excuse they have to free him that steals upon the Sabath day.
If a thief Ibidem, sig. 350.
steal a thing and sell it, and an other thief come and steal it: the first
thief is to restore 4 or 5- fold: the second is required to restore double if
he stole it after the owners thereof despayred to find it: but if he stole it
before they despayred to find it again, then is he free from the double
restitution, by their canons. They say, SMG, in Asin, praec. 71.
if a man steal any thing from a gentile, from any that is not an Israelite,
or if he steal the treasures of the sanctuary he is freed from restoring
double, because it is said he shall restore double unto his neighbor, etc.
Touching receyving of alms, Ioreh dea. tract. Tsedakah, sig. 253.
their canons are, that a man which has meat for two meals may not receive
any thing from their Tamchavi, the common dish, or almes-basket: if a man have
meat for fourteen meals, he may not receive any thing from their Kopheh, the
common purse or poor man's Box: if a man have two hundred pieces of that
money, which they call Zuz, (commonly reckoned to be the fourth part of a
shekel,) though he do not traffic with them: or if he have fifty of those
pieces, and do traffic with them, then may he receyve no alms at all: if a
man have two hundred of those pieces of money, wanting a penny or a dinar:
though any would give him a thousand more of those same pieces at one time,
behold he may then receyve them all: Or if a man have a house and much household
stuff, and have not these two hundred pieces of money, he may still receive
and need not sell his household stuff, though they be vessels of silver and
vessels of gold, etc.

AGainst the truth and lawful witnessing thereof, taught in the 9th.
commandment; they bring diverse glosses to pervert the same. They R. Moses
mikkotsi in SMG. in Asin, praecep. 74.
allow a man in many cases to break his word and his promise: and diverse
instances hereof are alleged by them, in such bargains or agreements, wherein
they have promised to give unto an other more then he deserves, and then is
convenient for him. When many give testimony concerning one matter, if there
be Choshe^ hammishpat in Eduth, sig. 36. and SMG, in Loim, praec. 213.
one of the witnesses that be a Kinsman, or otherwise insufficient to bear
witness; then they hold that the testimony of them all ceasseth, yea though
they be an hunddred of them, yet their testimony is void. They hold Ibid. in
Loim, praec. 214.
also that it is not lawful for a man to join in testimony with a wicked man,
although the wicked man be willing to witness the truth also. When they
Chosh. hammishpat, tract. Eduth, sig. 36.
examine witnesses apart and ask them whether they went to see that thing, or
to be witnesses: they hold, he that answers, he went to be a witness makes the
whole testimony unlawful: he that answers, he went to see, does not prejudice
the testimony. Moreover SMG. Loin, praec. 215.
because it is said, the Fathers shall not be slain for the children, nor the
Children for the Fathers; they collect and conclude that fathers may not be put
to death upon the testimony of their Children: nor Children upon the testimony
of their Fathers. And many other such like canons they have concerning this
matter.

COncerning the lust forbidden in the 10th. commandment the more ancient
Rabbines have denied the same to be any transgression of Gods law as appears
Mat. 5.22 28.
by our Saviors refutation of their opinion therein: But diverse of the Maimon.
in Moreh Nebuchim chel. 3. perek. 34. and R. Moses mikko. in Loin, 158.
later Rabbines do acknowledge this concupiscence of the heart to be a sin and
forbidden of God. The ancient Iew-doctours whom you use most to commend, are
herein most erroneous and greater corrupters of Gods law, then their
successors. And how much more are we to reject these Rabbinical traditions,
when as the Rabbines themselves do begin to be weary and ashamed of them?

THirdly, as for those legal rites which (as you say) will not be well
understood without help of Rabbines especially in Exodus and Leviticus: The
truth is that the Rabbines dote about nothing more then about them. This is
evident by manifold examples: Among other legal Ordinances described in
Leviticus, the first and the tenth day of the seventh month were appointed to
be kept holy, Lev. 23.24.27. Of these days thus say the Rabbines; R. Alphes in
Rosch hasschanah Cap. 1. Fol. 303.
Three books are opened in the beginning of the year, one schel Tsadikim
gemurim, for those that are perfectly just: an other schel Reschaghnim gemurim,
for those that are perfectly wicked: a third schel Benonijim, for the middle
sort: The first sort are then presently written and sealed unto life: the
second sort are presently written and sealed unto death: the third sort are
suspended and stand until the day of reconciliation, (for 10. days, from the
first unto the tenth day of the seventh month:) If in that mean time they do
well or merit, they are then written into the book of life: if they do not
merit, they are then written into the book of death. Hereupon they say, for
ever a man must look to himself, when he is half pure, and half guilty: by one
good work he may bring himself lecaph zacuth, into the state of purity; and by
one transgression he may bring himself lecaph chobah, into the state of
guiltines and be cursed for ever. Therefore they exhort to seek the Lord while
he may be found, that is, the 10 days betwixt the beginning of the year, and
the day of reconciliation. The school of Schammai R. Alphes, ibid. Fol. 304.
makes the same distinction of persons for the day of judgment, and says of
the third sort, the middle kind, that being laid in the balance they go down
to hell: then they cry and come up again: and for proof of this their going
down to hell for a while, they allege diverse scriptures, viz. Zach. 13.9. 1 Samuel 2.6. Ps. 116.1, etc. But the school of Hillel says further of that third
sort: if they be of the sinners of Israel they shall be twelve months in Hell,
and after that be delivered: but as for heretics, apostates, etc. those go
down to hell for evermore. Again where as God commanded in the levitical
ordinances, that there should be drink offerings of wine with certain other
sacrifices; with these do the Rabbines teach drink offerings with water to be
used at the feast of Tabernacles. The Masorites for a note thereof, set this
sign Masorah ketamah on Numb. 29. 19.
(...). Elias Levita expounding this mark shows Masoreth hammasoreth, in
schibre Luchoth, sive in fragmentis Tabularum.
that by the three numeral letters in Buz are noted the second, sixth, and
seventh days in the feast of Tabernacles, where in the description of the
drink offerings for those three days, there is written in the Hebrew for the
second day niscehem with mem: for the sixth nesaceha with jod before the affix,
and for the seventh day cemishpatam with mem, these three last letters yielding
the word maijm which signifies waters hereupon they collect and conclude that
they had drink-offrings of water for those three days as well as drink
offerings of wine, for the other 5. days of that feast which in their
description have still niscah, a drink offering without addition of jod or mem,
Numb. 29.16. -- 38. And this observation is also recorded in their Talmud from
Taanith, c. 1. Fo. 2.
R. Iehudah ben Bathirah, and from R. Akiba. If these be just and true
expositions, who could have found them out or well understood them without help
of Rabbines?

Again, the observation of the Sabath is often commanded in Exodus and often
in Leviticus: and see how well they record the external practice thereof in the
common wealth of Israel: and what cause you have upon such records to commend
their expositions unto us. They teach us that it is a principal duty of the
Sabath to make good cheer upon that day: and to keep 3 feasts in the same: at
the beginning, middle and end thereof. Thalmud in Sabath c. 16. f. 118
R. Iose blessing himself says, let my portion be with them that keep the
three banquets of the Sabath. This they say is, Esa. 58.13
to call the Sabath a delight. i. Oneg. R. Iehudah, says this Oneg or delight,
Thalmud ibid.
is to have tartes, great fishes, and heads of garlic. To those that thus
delight themselves on the Sabath, they apply that saying of David, delight
thyself in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire, ps. 37.4. And
for confirmation of this they tell us many strange stories: Thalm. ibid. f. 119.
R. Chaia tells of the householder that had a golden table with sixteen silver
chains affixed thereunto, which sixteen men could scarsely carry; also that it
was furnished with dishes, spoones, trenchers, pots, etc. and all this given
him of God, because whenever he found a good fat beast, he kept the same to
honor the Sabath withal, by making good cheer. And because the word Oneg, or
delight, in Esa. 58. does want the letter vau, the numeral letter which
stands for six: hence they collect that they ought not to continue fasting on
the Sabath above six hours: And for this they have Arba Turim in Orach chajim,
in Sabath, sig. 288.
a Canon requiring great care herein least the delight of the Sabath should be
violated; that they must make have to end their prayers and service before
midday, that they may then keep the second feast of the Sabath, etc. As for the
works forbidden on the Sabath, they make them of two sorts, Aboth melacoth,
Thalmud Tract. de Sabb. and Ioa. Buxt. in Synag. Iudaic. c. 11
and Toledoth melacoth, that is, Father or head works, and the generations
proceeding from them and both sorts under great penalty are condemned by them:
The head works they reduce unto 39. artickles: the offspring derived from these
are a huge number. A head work forbidden is, to plow or till the ground: under
this article they condemn all digging, filling of ditches, watring of herbs,
etc. Therefore their Rabbines permit men to sprinckle, their houses or chambers
with water, that the dust be not raised, but forbid men to sweep with
besomes: least in sweeping any clefts or holes like unto little ditches should
be filled with dust. A work forbidden is, cutting down of corn, and reaping:
under this article they comprise all plucking of apples, dates, figs,
gathering of beries. And therefore they permit men to eat apples or other
fruits, if they will put their mouths unto them as they hang upon the tree:
but with the hand to pluck away an apple from the tree or berie from the bush,
that they utterly condemn. Sowing corn on the Sabath is a head work
forbidden: but under this also, they forbid men in giving of corn to hens or
the like creatures, to cast any more grains of corn unto them then they will
be sure to eat: for if any grains lighting upon the earth where the rain
falls, should hap to spring and grow, this should then prove a great sin, like
to that of the husbandman that sowes his field on the Sabath day. To bear a
burden upon the Sabath is a capital sin: and hereupon they forbid men to wear
pattins upon the Sabath, as the manner of some is that are to walk through
myerie and foul places: their reason is, though these seem to carry a man: yet
indeed he bears the burden of them when he lifts up his feet and goes with
them.

Killing of beasts by butchers is unlawful on the Sabath: accordingly they
teach that if a flea be found leaping on the earth or on clothes it is not
lawful to take it on the Sabath, but if the flea bite, then it is lawful to
take it to remoove it and cast it away, but not to kill it: but if it be a
lowse that may be killed. Yet on the contrary side R. Eliezer teaches that
whosoever kills a lowse upon the Sabath, does as much as if he should kill a
Camel. And hereupon touching the hunting of a flea there grows a great and
subtle dispute among the Thalmudistes. The works of artificers in their
ordinary trades and callings being forbidden: thence they Sebastian. Munster in
Mat. 15.
say, we may not blow the fire with bellows on the Sabath, because it
represents the work of an artificer; but through a hollow reed or cane men
may lawfully do it. And in making a fire, great care is to be used that the
sticks be not so laid, that they should carry show of a building: That were
unlawful, like the building of a house on the Sabath. Moreover there is great
Thalmud in Betsah, or treat. of the egg. c. 1. fol 1.
controversy betwixt the school of Hillel and Schammai touching the egg that
is laid upon a a good day. And some of them Seb. Mu^st. in Mat. 15.
say, that it is unlawful to touch an egg that is laid upon a good day, and
consequently that it is much more unlawful to eat the same: yea if they be
uncertain when the egg was laid and do but doubt whether it is laid on a
good day or on a common day that it is then unlawful to be eaten: yea if such
an egg be laid among a thousand other eggs, that they cannot know it from the
rest, that then they all become unlawful. Thus do the Rabbines record the
external practice of Moses ordinances in the common wealth of Israel: thus do
they help us to understand the observation of the Sabath and other legal rites:
There is as much assurance of truth and right in these traditions as in others
that you allege from them: and I desire the reader to excuse me in the
rehearsal of them, because the knowledge hereof helps to refute your
presumptuous assertion touching the help to be received from them. When they
have Thalmud de Sabb. c. 16. f. 119 and Arba Turim in Orach Chajim trac. Schab
fig. 262.
prayed diligently on the Sabath, and in special have vttred that verse, Then
the heaven and the earth were finished and all the host of them: Genesis 2.1. The
Rabbines tell us, that then there be two Angels one good, the other evil,
which bring them home to their houses, and laying their hands upon their head,
do say, Behold, this coal has touched thy lips; thine iniquity shall be taken
away and thy sin purged. R. Iose says, that there be two Angels, the one
good, the other evil, which every Sabath day in the evening do lead each man
from the Synagogue to their house: where if these Angels do find the
Sabath-candle burning, the table spread, and the bed prepared, then the good
Angel says; God grant, that the Sabath following, all things may be in this
house so as now they are, whereunto the evil Angel is constrained to say
Amen, whether he will or not. On the contrary, if these two Angels coming to
the house, do find the former things unprepared, then the evil Angel says,
let all things be in this house the next Sabath, as now they are: whereunto the
good Angel is compelled to say Amen, whether he will or not. The Rabbines say
it is impossible for Christians and others to keep the Sabath as the Jews do,
because they want a soul which the Jews have more then they. By virtue of
this superfluous soul, they say that the heart of the Jews is enlarged to
rejoice and to be glad and hereby they banish all cares and troubles out of
their breasts, and so keep the rest of the Sabath. This Thalmud in Betsah c. 2.
fol. 16 and Thalmud in Taanith c. 4. fol. 27
soul as R. Simeon ben Lakish affirms is given them every week at the
beginning of the Sabath and taken away at the end of the Sabath again. This
they also labor to prove by the scriptures, from the word of Moses, Exo.
31.17, and in the seventh day he rested and was refreshed; schabbath
vaijnnaphesch. Whereas the men of the station appointed 4. fastes in the week,
to wit, on the, second, third, fourth, and fifth days: on the second day for
them that went down to the Sea; on the third, for them that traveled in the
wilderness: on the fourth, for little children that the squinancie should not
fall on them; on the fifth, for women great with Child, and for nurses that
they should not let their sucklings fall: on the evening of the Sabath they
fasted not, for honor of the Sabath, and much less upon the Sabath it self:
but on the first of the week: what is the reason? R. Samuel bar Nachmani says,
because that day is the third after their affliction; Resh Lakish says,
because of neshamah iattirah, the redundant Soul: for Resch Lakish says, a
redundant soul is give^ to man in the beginning of the Sabath and taken away
in the going out of the Sabath, as it is said, schabbath vaijnnaphesch:
streightway as he has kept the Sabath that soul departs or is lost. For
this loss no marvel if they fasted the next day of the week. Again, the
Rabbines teach, that upon the Sabath day the Souls in hell do rest from their
torment: and their fire that uses to burn them all the week, ceasseth. They
Thalmud in Sanhedrin, c. 7. fol. 65.
say, that Turnus Rophus demanding what the Sabath day was above other days,
R. Akiba answered him, that the excellency thereof above other days was proved
by three things, by the river Sambation: by them that had familiar spirits: by
his Fathers sepulcher, where the smoke did not ascend upon the Sabath: And the
Rabbinique Gloss. on Talm. ibid.
scholiast on the same place declares, how that river Sambation though it flow
and run violently all the week yet rests on the Sabath day: how the spirits are
not raised on the Sabath day: how the souls in hell tormented and burned all
the other days of the year, do yet rest on the Sabath: and that so
accordingly the soul of this Turnus his Father being in hell, and the smoke of
his burning ascending through his grave on other days, did yet cease on the
Sabath. When the Jews have ended their prayers and concluded the Sabath, then
comes an evil Angel called Dumah which commands them to return unto their
torment. Ioa. Buxt. Synag. Iudaic. p. 253
Hereupon it is an ordinance and rite among the Jews that they may not quite
empty any vessels of the water in the^ upon the Sabath, but alvvayes to leave
some in, least those miserable souls that are come out of hell for the space of
the Sabath, should any where want water to cool and refresh themselves
withal. And a thousand such like vain observations are retained among them.
On this manner (Mr. Ainsworth) do your ancient and later Jews record the
external practices of Moses ordinances: so that it is manifestly true which
one said, Buxt. ibid. p. 36.
it does as well become the Iew-doctours to expound the holy scripture, as it
does a wild bore to dig a vineyard.

Fourthly, To come yet nearer unto you, tell us what one legal rite there is
which could not be well understood without the Rabbines exposition alleged by
you in any part of your annotations: Name one if you can: Nay even such Jewish
records and expositions, as you yourself do pick out and present unto us as
more worthy to be remembered then others: with which also you do adorn your
book and paynt the face of your annotations: even those also are so full of
notorious absurdities, presumptions without scripture and apparent pervertings
of the same, that by them it may easily be discerned what little reason or
warrant you had to say, that many of those legal rites especially in Exodus and
Leviticus, will not be well understood without the help of the Rabbines. For
example,

Touching the diverse gestures in the worship of God, you Annot. on Exo. 4.31.
record, that the Hebrew-doctours in the Zohar do help us thus to understand
them: that the bending of the head, with the face toward the ground, was for to
escape judgment and the bowing of themselves (or worshipping,) was for to
obtain mercy: and that the bending of the head was before the worshipping:
according to the mystery of the sin offering before the burnt offering. To
illustrate this vain distinction you allege diverse places of scripture to
show the order of the sin-offring and burnt-offring: you might have done better
to have alleged as many in refutation of this Zohar. Touching other external
practices in the Jews common wealth: you tell us from the Rabbinicall records,
Annot. on Exo. 21.19.
He that kicked his neighbor with his foot, paid five shekels: he that smote
him with his thigh, paid three shekels: he that bent his fist and smote him,
paid thirteen shekels: if he smote him with the palm of his hand one shekel,
etc. Touching the neighbors gored Ox, you Ibid. on verse. 35.
note that the Hebrew doctors take it strictly and say. If an Israelites Ox
push an Ox sanctified (unto God:) or an Ox that is sanctified do push an
Israelites ox: he is not bound to pay (by this law;) for it is said his
neighbors Ox. Touching the law of fire kindled in stacks of corn, you On
Exo. 22.16.
note, that the Hebrew Doctors explayn thus: One brings fire, an other after
brings wood: he that brings the wood is bound to pay. One brings wood, and then
an other brings fire: now he that brings the fire is bound to pay. If one come
and make the flame, then he is bound to pay, etc. Touching the kind of usury,
you Ibid. on verse. 25.
show us this their exposition: It is unlawful to take usury before or after.
As, one intending to borrow of a man, sends him a gift, to the end that he may
lend unto him: this is usury aforehand. Or, he has borrowed of a man, and paid
him again: and sends him a gift, for his money which he had of him for naught:
this is after usury. Who so boroweth of his neighbor, and was not wont in
former time to salute him first: it is unlawful for him to salute him first,
(and I need not to say to praise him:) for it is written, Usury of any word
(or thing) Deuteronomy. 23.19. though they be but words they are unlawful. Likewise
it is unlawful for the borower to learn his leder to read, etc. all the while
his money is in his hand, if he were not wont to do it before: as it is said,
Usury of any thing: And again a little after in the same place. He that lends
unto his neighbor, may not reteyne his servant to do work for him, although
the servant sit still and has nothing to do, etc. Touching the law of first
fruits, you Ibid. on verse. 29.
note that the Hebrew canons say, They bring no first fruits but of seven
things, viz. of wheat, and of barley, and of grapes, and of figs, and of
pomgranates, and of olives and of dates. And if one bring other besides these
seven kinds, they are not sanctified. They bring no first fruits of liquors,
save of olives and grapes: if a man bring other liquors they are not receyved
of him. There is no measure of first fruits set by the law: but by the Doctors
a man must separate one of sixty. If the well understanding of the legal rites
do consist in such explications and interpretations as these: then will I yield
unto you that the ordinances of Moses will not be well understood without the
Rabbinicall records, as you would have it: I think no man alive would have
arrived unto these profound determinatio^s, nor ever have light upon these
expositions, except he had plowed with the Jews heifer of the Thalmud.
Touching the precept of keeping men far from false matters, you Annot on Exo.
23.7.
note, that from thence the Jews have a rule, A judge that knows of his
fellow, that he is a violent extortioner or a wicked man, it is unlawful to be
joined in society with him, as it is written from a word of falsehood thou shall
be far. And so they in Jerusalem, that had a clear conscience were wont to
do: they sat not in judgment, till they knew who should sit; nor sealed any
writing, til they knevv who should seal it with them, etc. If this rule were
sound, then would it help much to the establishing of your separation and not
only of it: but of a further then you, I think, will maintain. Touching the
fruits of the seventh year, you Ibid. on verse. 11.
note how it is showed by the Hebrew records, that whatsoever was properly man's
meat, as wheat, figs, grapes and the like: they might not make of them
medicine,, plasters etc though for man's use because it is said, To you for
meat, Lev. 25.6. and not for medicine, etc. A number of these vain traditions
I observed before in setting down your first sca^dall in allegatio^ of the
Thalmudists and many more such like might be also noted, wherein it may appear
how well the Rabbines understood the external practice of the legal rites: yea
I may justly say of these their expositions as yourself do of the Answer to
John Ains. p. 65.
popes determinations. Whereas men might have some good measure of light in
these mysteries, by the plain scriptures it is come to pass by these Rabbines
and Thalmudique glosses, interpretations, comments, etc. that darkness and
gross darkness has covered many people, who if they had never read any thing,
but the book of God, might have seen much more clearly, through his grace: P.
66. 67.
Their expositio^s do often times as well clear the truth, as a cloud before the
sun. Yea even the plainest places, which in holy writ are as bright as noone
day; these Thalmudists have enveloped with Egyptian darkness. Their expositions
do illustrate the scriptures, as the smoke of the pit did the Sun and the aier
Apo. 9.2. So far wide are you, in saying that many legal rites will not be
well understood without their help. You once Ibid. p. 21.
said well: The scriptures are not so bare and naked as to need the rags of
men's inventions to array them. Why do you now then yourself so plod and labor
to array them with the mensturous rags of the Rabbines?

Fifthly, where as you Preface to annot. on Genesis
say further: By their records also, many particulars about the Passover,
which Christ kept, Mat. 26. the phylacteries which the Pharisees wore, Mat. 23.
and other things mentioned in the Evangelists, will much be cleared: whereof
see the annotations on Exo. 12, and Exo. 13.9. Even these more special
instances chosen out by you, do also plainly witness against you that the
Thalmudique traditions do not so much clear as darken and obscure the
ordinances of God; and the story of the scriptures: As for your annotations on
Exo. 12. touching their keeping of the passover, which you desire us to see:
there we see a number of superstitious traditions related by you, but not
reproved by you as was meet: you Annot. on Exo. 12.8.
tell us of their sauce charoseth a memorial of the clay wherein they wrought
in Egypt: you note the 4. Cups of wine which every man and woman was bound to
drink that night without fail: you note the measure of each cup containing a
quarter of a log, so much as an egg and a half: you note the several
blessings to be made for every cup by itself: you note their tradition of
washing their hands twice that night, whereas other nights they do it but
once: and their blessing for the washing of hands: that all other nights, they
eat either sitting or lying: but this night; lying only: you make relation
also of a fifth cup and the great hymn, that was said for it, viz. the psalm
136. But that they are not bound to this cup as to the four former cups. And
in fine, having related these and some other of their traditions, you say
further; These observations of the Jews whiles their common wealth stood, and
to this day: may give light to some particulars in the passover that Christ
kept: as why they lay down, one leaning on an others bosom, Ioh. 13.23. (a
sign of rest and security) and stood not as at the first passover, neither
sat on high as we use. Why Christ rose from supper, and washed and sat down
again, Ioh. 13.4.5.12. Why he blessed or gave thanks for the bread apart, and
for the cup (or wine) apart, Mark. 14.22.23, and why it is said, he took the
cup after supper, Luke 22.20. also concerning the Hymn which they sung at the
end, Mat. 26.30, etc. But we are here to consider, that 1. It is uncertain
whether these were the observations of the Jews vvhiles their common
wealth stood: The records of the Rabbines from whose mouth you speak, are full
of lies, fictions, contradictions even for matters of fact and practice: and
even for these particular observations here mentioned by you: if you deny it, I
can bring you plentiful proof thereof: And how great folly is it, to stuff our
expositions of the scripture with such things as the conscience can not be
assured of the truth thereof? 2. Suppose the observations of the Jews before
Christ were such as you in particular do relate: how unworthily do you apply
his holy institution unto their vain inventions? Do you not make Christ Jesus
guilty of their superstitions and presumptuous additions unto the ordinance of
God, as though framed himself unto their unlawful practices and followed the
same? The light you boast of, is darkness, and not light. These things which the
Rabbines record are not according to the law and the testimony: and whiles
they speak not according to that word, what light Esa. 8.20
is in them? The manner of Christ's sitting down with leaning upon one an others
bosom, was according to the common and ordinary manner of their sitting down
to meat at those times as appears by the use of the Mat. 9.10, and 22,10.11.
and 26.7. Mark. 16.14. Luke 7 37. and 22.27.
like phrase serving to describe the same: and therefore was directly contrary
to the superstition of the Jews, that all other nights did eat sitting or
lying, that night lying only: and therefore a superstitious bondage.. As for
Christ's rising from supper to vvash his disciples feet: what co^munity is there
betwixt it and the superstitious hand-washing of the Jews? If our Savior Mat.
15.2, etc.
had no regard of the pharisaicall washing of hands at other times; much less
had he regard to this invention in the worship of God and celebration of this
sacrament: yea it is impiety to think that he followed their fashion either in
this or in any of the like traditions. 3. The observations of the Jews in
keeping their passover, according to the records of the Rabbines are ten times
more then these that you have repeated: and they are of like nature, of like
warrant and authority, even from their own brains: you might as well have
repeated them also: as namely, The mystery of the Arba Turim in Orach Chajim,
sig. 473, etc
three cakes covered betwixt two napkins in a dish; one which was highest
representing the high Priest: the middle most representing the tribe of Levi:
and the lowest representing the whole people of Israel: a mystery as worthy to
be noted as that which you mention of the 4. cups, etc. You might as well have
related the mystery of their quishions then sometimes leaned upon, sometimes
not: their hiding of a piece of a cake under a napkin, to signify how their
elders coming out of Egypt carried their dough upon their shoulders bound in
clothes, etc. Some other of these traditions I noted before, in describing
their Idol-temple; and many more if need require may be brought forth for a
testimony, how far they were from the right external practice of Moses his
ordinances. As for your notes upon that Annot. on Exo. 13 9.
other place, which you send us to look upon touching the Phylacteries: 1. we
find there so much superstition and vanity recorded by yourself out of the
Rabbines touching the manner, order, time and fruit of them, as may justly serve
to reprove your own assertion, touching the necessary help of such recorders:
It is wonder, that you beholding and considering their gross corrupting of
Moses ordinances in the external practice thereof, are not yet ashamed to
affirm that many legal rites will not be well understood without their help.
^ I find, by comparing your notes with the Jews records, that you do yet omit
the Arba Turim in Orach Chaijm, trac. tephil. sig. 25, etc.
greatest part of the most superstitious observations which those magical
Rabbines and charmers do record touching those phylacteries: as namely, the
quality of the parchment whereon they wrote the sentences of scripture; the
color of the ynk, and the matter of the ynk wherewith they were written: the
color of the lether into which they were put: the quality of the beast of
whose skin that lether was made; the quality and condition of the man that must
kill that beast: The condition of the Tanner that must dress that lether the
quality of those persons that might wear those phylacteries; the quality of
the place where they must be kept when they were laid aside: the manner of their
penance and fasting if they had let them fall to the ground: the curious x
manner of the knots they make in tying and binding them, so that the letters of
the word schaddai, which is one of the names of God be represented and figured
out therein. These and many other such things they Thalmud in Berachoth cap. 1.
p. 7.
hold to be divine traditions delivered of God unto Moses in mount Sinai when
the Lord showed his hinder parts unto him. If Christian men did see the volumes
of dotages which the Thalmudists have written touching these phylacteries, they
might thereby learn to beware of following you to seek the well understanding
of Gods ordinances from such blind guides: But this I observe throughout your
allegatio^ of the Rabbines that to win the more credit unto your own notes,
you conceal the grossest absurdities of them, like the deceitful merchant
that to vent his wares conceales the greatest faults thereof: Thus, the simple
may be deceyved by you both. 3, that the place of the Evangelists Mat. 23,
touching the phylacteries which the Pharisees wore, should much be cleared by
these Rabbinical records, as you pretend, it is but a bare assertion. Wherein
is the text cleared? In what point may we better understand the words of our
Savior? And what is it in the rebuke of the pharisees which we could not as
clearly understand, without help of the Rabbines? we may not measure nor
Judge of the Pharisaical traditions observed in Christ's time, by the records of
the Rabbines whom you allege: because the Thalmudique traditions recorded by
these Rabbines are many of them of later invention, and far different from the
traditions observed heretofore in Christ's time. For whereas Mat. 12.11, and
Luke 14.5.
the Pharisees of old, if a sheep, ox or ass fell into a pit upon the Sabath
day, would allow the same straighway to be lift up and taken out on the Sabath;
the Thalmud de Sabbat. c. 18. p. 128.
Thalmud allovves it not, but only allows meat to be given unto the beast in
the water; or if the water be deep, that bottles of straw or such like things
be put under the beast to save it from drowning. R. Julius Otto a Jew
converted unto Christianisme, in his book entitled the Gali. Razia lib. 1. c.
13.
revelation of secrets shows many parables recorded in the Thalmud, which
the Rabbines (as it seems) have had out of the Gospel, though corruptly set
down by them: for how it can be showed, that Christ has taken ought out the
Thalmud, which was compiled long after his death, and stuffed with new invented
traditions of the infidel and reprobate Rabbines, accursed for rejecting of the
son of God; And what is the Thalmud but even the black darkness, and the Mat.
8.12
utter darkness into which the Jews are now cast? And what light is to be
expected from such a hellish dungeon, where we may see the Rabbines, sitting
fast bound in the chains of ignorance, superstition, infidelity and blasphemy?
How dare you say, that some parts of the scripture will not be well understood:
unless we become scholars in that accursed school?

Sixthly, how can we expect any great light from the expositions of the
Rabbines, when as they profess that they may not commit the secrets of their
law unto us: yea they make it matter of death and condemnation to reveal the
same unto us; that for such Elias, Levita Masor. hammasor. praefat^
cause they should go down to hell with grief, and be devoured with the fire
that is not blown. They may not teach them but only to Israelites, and those
also having the five conditions which they observe from Esa. 2. And further as
your Rambam or Maimony says, when they do teach the Israelites so qualifyed,
yet it must not be by writing, Morch nebuchim chel. 3. per. 1. ex edit.
Justinian.
but from mouth to mouth. Or at least if they expound the secrets of their law
in writing, it must be so obscurely and darkely that none but their own
Scholars and friends can understand: and so Maimony in the same place
professes unto his special friend and scholar touching his own writing to
him: as Aristotle once said of his writings, unto Alexander; that they were to
be understood of the only that had been hearers of him. Hence it is that in
the Jewish writings there are many ambiguities: and many things spoken
according to receyved opinions, when they have yet an other meaning ^ Maimony
in Misneh (as he is Annot. on Genesis 1.17.
alleged by you) teaches that there be 9 spheres, namely, one for each of the
seven planets, one that has in it all the other stars which are seen in the
firmament: and a ninth sphere which turns about every day from east to west,
etc. But in other later writings, he Mo. nebuch. chel. 2. perek. 10, and 11.
labors at large to show according to the demo^strations of Abubacus that
there are but four spheres, to wit, the sphere of the fixed stars; one
sphere for five planets: the sphere of the Sun: and the sphere of the Moon;
And these according to the number of the elements: that the sphere of the moon
moves the element of water, that the sphere of the Sun moves the eleme^t of
fire: that the sphere of the five planets mooveth the air: and that the
multitude and variety of their motions in that sphere in their
retrogradatio^s, progressions and stations causes the change of the air and
wether: that the sphere of the fixed stars, changes the earth, etc. These
things he seeks to illustrate by the ladder on which the Angels ascended and
descended: by the 4. stepps of that ladder, and the 4. Angels, two ascending
and two discending and meeting together upon one step, etc. likewise by the 4
Chariots in Zachary, coming out from betwixt the mountains of brass, etc.
Hereby it appears what uncertainty there is in such writings where they do
purposely obscure and hide their meanings: like charmers they do obscurely Esa.
29.4.
mumble and whisper out of the dust: and their talk is as of one that has the
spirit of divination, a hollow voice, loath to be heard, or understood. A man
may say of the Rabbines mystical doctrine, as themselves do write of Moses his
sepulcher, which they R. Solom. on Deuteronomy. 34.6.
reckon for one of those ten things which they say were created in the
beginning of the world, in the evening of the Sabath on the sixth day: of this
sepulcher they Isaak ben Arama in Akedath Isaak, porta, 105.
write when some went to see it: when they stood above in a high place, they
saw it as if it were below: when they stood below, they saw it as if it were
above: when this company divided themselves, half of them that went below saw
it over against them that were above: and the other half that stood above savv
it as if it were over against them below. So does the meaning of the Rabbines
vanish and fly away from them that seek after some of their mysteries: To
follovv after them is to grasp after a shadovv.

Lastly, if it were true which the Rabbines and your Maimony in special does
write touching the cause of prophecy ceassing, and the spirit of understanding
vvithdravvne from men, then should there be no reason to seek the right
understanding of the scriptures from them. Maimony Moreh nebuchim chelek. 2.
perek. 37.
records that the cause is affliction and grief: because the imaginative
faculty is weakened thereby: that the spirit of prophecy rests not upon an
afflicted sorrowful man: that prophecy is taken away in the time of anger and
anguish: that therefore Iaacob prophesied not all the days of his sorrow
because his imaginative power labored about mourning for Joseph: that
prophecy rested not on Moses after the sending of the spies as it did before,
until all that generation was consumed: because he was greeved for their
evilles, etc. that this sorrow and grief is the next cause of prophecy
departing in time of captivity and dispersion, etc. that this is it which
was said by the prophet they shall be dispersed or scattred, to seek the word of
the Lord and shall not find it: and again, Their King and their prince is
among the nations, there is no law, neither have the prophets found out the
prophecy of the Lord. So Kimchi Comme^t. on Ps. 3.5,
expounds the words of David, that he lay down and slept, viz. when by Cushi
he heard the sorrowful tidings: that then the spirit of prophecy ceased in
him, because it rests not on a sorrowful person: that when Nathan came to him
with good and joyful matter, then he awoke and rose again, then the spirit
came again unto him. Thus their own words and writings are against
themselves: and according to the same, they being now scattred abroad, and
their present dispersion being a most greevous captivity unto them, as they
every where call it, the law is not among them, the word of God is not to be
found among them: The spirit of the holy prophets and of good understanding is
departed from them: And therefore their help to understand the ordinances of
Moses should not be thought so necessary as you would persuade us.

CHAP. VII.
YOur seventh error and scandal in alleging the Rabbines is; that you
approve and justify their presumptuous expositions of Moses, which they vainly
and boldly affirm without the vvarra^t of the scripture. It was great
presumption in you to say that many legal rites could not be well understood
without their help: yea although their expositions had been good and sound: for
other men endued with the spirit of wisdom might have brought in like manner
as good and sound expositions as they: but when you justify their rotten and
unsound traditions, this is an other evil. To give instance in such an
exposition as you do much insist upon, and describe largely with tables, as
being a flourishing ornament of your annotations; Touching the names of the
tribes engraven upon the stones, according to their birthes; you expound it
Annot. on Exo. 28.10.
or generations by their mothers: first all Leahs Children, (as Moses himself
reckons them Exo. 1. verse. 2.3.) and then the other mothers Children and
Rachels last: as shall after be more fully showed, in their several stones;
verse. 17, etc. This is a mere presuming to understand above that which is
written, contrary to that reverence and sobriety which God requires: for 1,
who has told you or what Bath-kol has rung it in your ears, that all Leahs
Children were first in the stones according to their naming in Exodus 1. rather
then according to the reckoning which Moses himself makes of them by their
birthes Genesis 29. and 30. Secondly, if you will have all Leahs Children
togather, though some of them by birth were younger then the sons of the
handmayds, as in Exodus 1. Why do you not in like manner set Benjamin before the
sons of the handmayds as in the same place is done Exodus 1.3.4. which gives
as much vvarrant for one as for the other?

But while scripture fayles you, you bring in Maimony for your help, to give
some authority and show unto your exposition, and say; Of this also Maimony
writes, impl. of sanct. c. 9. s. 9. He set on each shoulder, a Beryll stone,
fouresquare, embossed in gold: and he graved on the two stones, the names of
the tribes, six on one stone, and six on an other, according to their birthes:
and they wrote Joseph's name Ihoseph (as he is written in psalm. 81.6.) So there
were 25. letters on the one stone and 25. on the other. And the stone whereon
Reuben was written, was on the right shoulder: and the stone that Simeon was
written on, was on the left, after the manner here set down. diagram of a stone
engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of the Israelites
Symeon (...) Jhudah (...) Zebulun (...) Dan (...) Asher (...) Benjamin (...)


diagram of a stone engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of
the Israelites (...) Reuben (...) Levi (...) Jssachar (...) Naphtali (...) Gad
(...) Ihoseph


Touching this testimony and table of Maimony, I answer:

First, it is composed of many presumptions without warrant of scripture: and
namely, these, 1. That Joseph's name in this place should be written with H,
and withal such a distribution of their names that each of the stones might
have just 25 letters upon them: a cabalisticall fancy: 2, that Symeon was
written on the left shoulder as in the table: and not with Reuben on the same
stone: as also the separating of Joseph and Benidmin and not setting them on
the same stone: and some other of them in like manner also: 3. The unequal
setting of the handmayds Children in the mids neither perfectly according to
the time of their birth whiles Issachar and Zebulunare set before Dan and
Naphtan nor according to the dignity of the Mothers, while Rachels sons are
placed after the handmayds: 4, the placing of Naphtali before Dan his elder
brother, being both sons of the same mother, of Bilhah the handmayde: In all
these your Rambam Col. 2.18
has unjustly advanced himself in those things which he never saw, rashly puffed
up of the mind of his flesh, and was not taught of God in the scriptures. Such
curious and light bladders of presumption blown up with the breath of blind
and infidel Rabbines ought not to be admitted of you, neither are they to be
tolerated of any Christians.

Secondly, to come unto the Rabbines themselves if any weight were in them,
they also in this matter are rather against you then for you; though all of
them to lay them upon the balance are lighter then vanity: 1. R. Solomon
Iarchi more ancient then your Maimony, sets down an other order of their names
in his exposition of this place: he Comment. on Exo. 28 10.
explaneth, according to their birthes: according to the order wherein they were
borne, Reube^, Symeon, Levi and Judah, Dan and Naphtali upon one stone: and
upon the second Gad and Asher, Issachar and Zebulun, Joseph and Boniamin full
(that is, written with two jods) because so he is written in the Genesis 35.18.
place of his birth, 25 letters upon each stone: after the manner here set down.
diagram of a stone engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of
the Israelites Gad (...) Asher (...) Jssachar (...) Zebulun (...) Joseph (...)
Benjamin (...)


diagram of a stone engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of
the Israelites (...) Reuben (...) Symeon (...) Levi (...) Jhudah (...) Dan
(...) Naphtali




This exposition of R. Solomon though it have a vain respect to the equal
number of letters on each stone, yet is it far more agreeable to the simplicity
of the scriptures then that of Maimony, being free from those 4. unwarrantable
presumptions delivered by him. Why do you take the worse and leave the better?
2. R. Moses Kotsensis Sepher mitsvoth haggadol. trac. vessels of sanct.
praecept. affirmat. 173.
also as he relates the exposition of Maimony, so does he also set down the
interpretation of R. Solomon and does not determine the ordering of the stones
by Maimony to be more just and vvarrantable, then the order declared by Iarchi.
3. When there is speech in the Thalmud of the distribution of the 12. tribes,
6 upon mount Gerizim to bless and 6 upon mount Ebal to curse: it is thus
recorded there Thalmud in Sotah cap. 7. f. 36.
R. Cahana says, as they are divided here, so were they divided in the stones
of the Ephod, etc. Now the division of them upon the two mountains was thus:
on Gerizim stood, Deuteronomy. 27 12.13.
Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, Benjamin: on Ebal stood, Reuben, Gad,
Asher, Zebulun, Dan and Naphtali: This order of the two ^les contradicts your
order of the two stones: Again in the same next of the Thalmud it is noted
that the names of he tribes upon the second stone were according to their
birthes, but not on the first, because Judah was there placed foremost. Thus
they expounded Exodus 28.18. referring those words, according to their birthes,
unto the latter clause of the verse only, and not unto the former part.
Thalmud. in Sotah c. 7. Fol. 36. A. B.
4, in the same ^ tractate it is recorded that R. Hamina the son of Gamaliel
said, the names of the tribes are not distributed in the st^ of the Ephod
accor^g to the order of the distribution in the book of numbers, but according
to the order in the book of Exodus to wit, the sons of Loah according to their
order: the sons of Rachel one of this side an other of that: and the sons
of the handmaydes in the mids. This testimony is very corruptly and
imperfectly Advertisement. of corruptions N. 1.
alleged by Mr. Br^n, and yet after he has perverted the same, he says
vainly, this note of the Thalmud ends this ^sie: and again in the margin he
points at it and calls it, an exquisite note for a translatour: whereas if
there be any weight in that testimony (as there is not, it being a mere
presumption) he^ does it plainly refute both his opinion, and yours that
without judgment follow him too much, in this matter of ordering the stones:
for if the sons of the handmaydes were placed in the mids betwixt the
sons of Rachel as in Exo. 1.^5. on this manner, Benjamin, Dan, Naphtali, Gad,
Ascher, Joseph, as R. Hanina would have, then are both your descriptions false,
being different from this order.

5. R. Iohana^ in that gloss upon the Thalmud which has this title affixed,
Lex fux. gloss. on Sota vbi supra.
Thorah or, says, Benjamin was half upon this side, to wit, upon the second
stone, where the names were written according to the order an mount Ebal, Ben;
and upon the first stone, jamin. In the gloss upon the otherside of the
Thalmud, it is again noted how Iehud^ was placed first among the stones. 6.
For a further proof of the lightness and insufficiently of these Rabbinicall
expositions and presumptions, consider but the vanities that are recorded in
the same leaf of the Thalmud above noted: speaking of the Deuteronomy, 27.5.7.
altar upon the stones whereof God had commanded them to write his law, they
record, that the law was written upon the stones of the altar in 70. languages
as it is said, well and plainly, etc. They say there also, The hornet passed
not over with them: but is it not written, Exo. 23.
I will send the hornet before thee? R. Simeon ben Lakish says, at the brink
of Jorden the hornet stood and sprinkled bitterness or gall upon them, and
blinded their eyes above, and made them eunuchs below, as it is said, Amos. 2.
I destroyed the Amorites before them, whose height was like the height of
Cedars, and he was strong as the oaks: notvvithstanding I destroyed his fruit
from above and his root from beneath. R. Papa says, there were two hornets
one for Moses and one for Ioshuah; that of Moses passed not over, but that of
Joshua did go over. There also they write how the Angel Gabriel taught the 70.
languages unto Joseph: with other such like fictions. Let sober men take heed
how they build any of their opinions upon such presumptuous expositours as
these be: let not men seek for order among the sons of confusion that dwell
in the shadow of death, where there is no order, but their light is as darkness
itself.

Again, touching the order of the Tribes names upon the stones of the
Breast Plate, you note thus. Anhor. on Exo. 28.21.
And here the Greek translation adds, according to their generatio^s ( or
birthes) as was expressed in the tenth verse, and is here again employed. For
in the same order that they were graven upon the Berylles, were they here set
and graven upon twelve several stones: as they are here set down in the Page
following.

Upon the 1 Sardine. was graven 1 Reuben. Sonns of Lea. 2 Topaze. 2 Symeon. 3
Smaragd. 3 Levi. 4 Chalcedonie. 4 Judah. 5 Saphir. 5 Issachar. 6 Sardonyx. 6
Zabulon. 7 Hyacinth. 7 Dan. Of Bilha, Rachels maid 8 Chrysoprase. 8 Naphtali. 9
Amethyst. 9 Gad. Of Zelpha, Leahs maid 10 Chrysolite. 10 Aser. 11 Beryll. 11.
Joseph. Of Rachel. 12. Jasper 12 Benjamin

Hereunto I answer, 1. The names of the tribes are often described unto us
expressly and plainly: many times Genesis 29. with 30. chapter and 35.23.^6. and
45.8. -- 24. and 49.3-27 Exodus 1.2.3, etc.
before and many times Numb. 1.5. -- 42. and 2.3. -- 29. and 7.12. -- 78. and
10.14. -- 27. and 13.5. -- 16. and 26.5.48. Deuteronomy. 27.12.13. and 33.6-24. 1
Chro. 2.1.2. Rev. 7.5-8
after this place in Exodus, but never according to this order which you
imagine here: always some difference is observed more or less. And what
presumption is this, without warrant of scripture revealed to apply the names
unto the stones, contrary unto the order of reckoning the tribes in every
place? what modest Christian dare imitate you herein?

2. Whereas you tell us that the Greek translation adds, according to their
generations: I have showed before that the greek translation which you allege
so often in vain, is a most corrupt, and forged thing abounding with many
unlawful and presumptuous additions, subtractions and alterations of the holy
text, and therefore we ought not to build expositions so boldly upon the credit
and authority of such a false and deceavable translation.

3. Suppose it had been expressed in the text, that the names of the tribes:
had been engraven upon these stones according to their generations: yet does it
not follow that they should be engraven according to the order, which you do
here so peremptorily avouch and demonstrate in this table; for if the order
according to the time of their birth be precisely followed, then are they to be
reckoned as in Genesis 29, and 30, and then should the Children of the handmayds
be set before Issachar and Zabulon, contrary to this your order: if the time of
their birthes be followed in some part and measure, yet so as respect be had
unto the dignity of Leah and Rachel above their maids, then might the order of
Genesis 35, or Genesis 46, have been followed: which both are also contrary unto this
your order; neither of them leaving Benjamin to the last place, as you do.
Christian humilitye and shamefastnes should have taught you to have suspended
your judgment herein, and not to have intruded your self into such things as
God has not manifested unto you.

But for the establishing of this your assertion, you tell us in the same
Annot. on Exo. 28.21.
place, that This order of names is before showed out of the Ierusalemy
Thargum: The testimony of this Thargum you propound unto us and very carefully
set before our eyes Ibid. on verse. 17.18 19. and 20.
four several times according to the four parts of it: you minse it as if it
were Manna or some angels food to feast us therewith and to instruct us
concerning the four rewes of stones; And this is that testimony which Mr.
Broughton also has in like manner Advertisement of corruptions N. 1.
alleged to the same purpose.

Hereunto I answer, 1. The testimony of this fabulous writing is of no worth,
being full of unwarrantable presumptions, fables, errors and most gross
absurdities. In the first section of Genesis, this Thargum says, that Two
thousand years before the world was created, God created the law, and prepared
Hell and the garden of Eden, etc. On Exodus 1. this Thargum says of Shiphrah
the midwife, that she was Iochebed; and of Puah, that she was Miriam; that
these women fearing God got them a good name in the rest of the generations,
and built them houses, the house of the Levites, and the house of the great
Priesthood: This Jerusalem paraphrast on Genesis 32. confirms the fable of Esaw
his biting Iaakob by the neck, as was noted before, and says that both wept,
Esaw because his teeth were set on edge, and Iaakob because his neck was
become Marble. This same Thargum on Deuteronomy. 33. tells us, how the glory of God
was revealed on Mount Seir to give the law to the sons of Esaw: but when
they found written therein ye shall not kill, they would not receave it. That
then this glory shined on the mount of the border, to deliver this law unto the
sonns of Ismael: but when they found written therein ye shall not steal,
they would not receive it. That then the glory of God returned and was
revealed on mount Sinai with millions of holy Angels: That then Israel said,
whatsoever the word of the Lord says, we will do it and will receyve it,
etc. And with a multitude of such like fabulous matters is that Thargum full
stuffed: when you feed your readers with allegations of such authors, you may
fill their bellies with gravel and ashes, and choke them in stead of
nourishing them. And a heap of such vanities are in the same, which show the
unsoundness thereof.

2. Even in that very place which you allege is there apparent and manifest
error in expounding the stones of the breast plate: and to omit others, this
is to be observed in the two last stones, which this Thargum translates,
Bedoicha and margalitha; Bdelium and a pearl: and herein contradicts your
translation: By this Thargum, Beniamins name should not be engraven upon the
Jasper, as you would have it: If you think the Thargum to be erroneous in this
point, why do you follow the presumption of it in an other which is vttred as
it were with the same breath in the exposition of the same verse touching
order of the names?

3. Against this Thargum Ierusalemy, I may oppose the Thalmud Ierusalemy:
though neither of them be indeed of any worth, yet of you they are much
esteemed and often alleged; and of the Jews this Thalmud is the more respected.
In Thalmud Ierusalemy in Sotah Fol. 21. B.
it, among the opinions of other Rabbines, according to that which I noted
before out of the Babylonian Thalmud, the opinion of R. Zabida is recorded,
touching the names in the Ephod, that the first were not written according to
the order (of their birth) because Iehudah was King, but the later were written
according to the order. And so if, (as you affirm) the same order of engraving
was observed both on the two shoulder stones and on the 12 in the breastplate,
then this Thalmud Ierusalemy affordes us an order contrary to you and to your
Thargum Ierusalemy.

Again, for confirmation of the order described by you; you allege that
Annot. on Exo. 28 21.
the same is also expressed by the Chaldee paraphrast on Song. 5.14. where
speaking of the 12 tribes engraved on 12 precious stones, he names them thus:
1, Reuben, 2 Symeon, 3 Levi, 4 Judah, 5 Issachar, 6 Zabulon, 7 Dan, 8 Naphtali,
9 Gad, 10 Asher, 11 Joseph, 12 Benjamin: who were like to the 12. celestial
signs, bright as lamps, and polished in their works like yvorie, and shining
like Saphirs. I answer;

1. This Chaldee paraphrase of R. Joseph Caecus (as it is commonly taken,) I
have Page 390.
already showed to be most fabulous superstitious and erroneous, a fit match to
be alleged as witness with your Thargum Ierusalemy; neither of them being of
any credit: upon the words of the former Chapter, Song. 4.6 until the day
break and shadows flee away, etc. this paraphrast speaks like a charmer or
Magician showing us a distinction of devilles, making some to be night spirits,
some morning sprights, and some noone sprights: as also away of putting them to
flight by the smell of the perfume in the sanctuary: not much unlike to the
Tobit. 6.9. and 8.2.3.
chasing away of the fee^d Asmodeus by the perfume of the heart and liver of a
fish. The expositions which this paraphrast gives on each chapter of this Song,
are a pregnant proof of the authors insufficiency to be allowed as a witness
in these controversies.

2. To go no further then this paraphrase on this verse which you allege; we
may here observe how he erreth in the exposition of the stones, in making the
seventh to be a Beryll and the eight a saphir, manifestly contrary to the text,
and contrary to you also: Had you fully set down your allegation, as you do a
part thereof; had you noted how this paraphrast translates the stones, so as
you do his naming of the tribes, then the reader might easily have perceived
either your authors error, or else the refutation of yourself by his words
cited in this place. But you did wisely to leave out that which is against
yourself.

3. This paraphrast in this same place alleged, says that the names of the
three Fathers of the world, Abraham, Isaac and Iaakob were engraven togather
with the twelve tribes: Thus also it is recorded in both the Thalmud Babylon.
in joma, c. 7. Fol. 73. Thalmud Ierusalemy in joma Fol. 44.
Thalmud, viz. for so much as the letters Tsadi and Koph were not found in the
names of the 12 tribes in the breastplate, therefore as R. Samuel says, the
names of Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob were written above the names of the tribes
in the breast plate; and because there wants also the letter Teth in those 12
names, therefore as R. Acha says there was written under them, schibte
jeschurun: or as R. Moses Mikkotsi Sepher mitsvoth haggadol precept. affirm.
173.
notes, schibte jah: And so by this means they would have all the letters of
the whole Hebrew Alphabet contained in the breastplate; to the end that any
answer of God by vrim and Thummim might be delivered in the letters of the
breastplate and so read and understood. Seeing these be their bold assertio^s,
who would not be afraid to take the testimony of these presumptuous Rabbines?
And much more ought every minister of Christ to be ashamed to allege their
testimonies in his expounding of the scriptures, whiles with one breath they do
at the same time send forth such unsound fancies.

4. Even as you yourself allege and repeat the words of this paraphrast: his
vanity appears further in this, that by way of mystery these twelve stones
are compared to the Zodiac, like unto the twelve celestial signs, etc. which
Josephus antiq. Iudaic. lib. 3. c. 9.
others yet have set down more fully, describing the the fabric of the world
by the high Priests attire; The 4 elements they show thus: the earth by the
sylk, sea by the purple, air by the blew, fire by the skarlet color; the sun
and moon by the 2 stones on the shoulders: the 12 signs of the Zodiac by the
12. stones in the breastplate: the thu^ders and lightnings by the sound of the
belles and pomegranates: the highest heavens by the holy crown, etc. So your
Maimony Mo. nebuch, chel. 2 perek. 11 and Chel. 3 per. 5.
expounds many places of scripture. And the vanity of these presumptuous
speculations is such that if there were nothing else it might justly deter us
from building our expositions upon their traditions, as you do. To give one
instance more hereof in stead of many, and this touching these garments and
ornaments of the high priest: R. Simon says, Thalmud Jerusalem, in Ioma. Fol.
44. col. 2, and 3.
As the offerings did serve to make reconciliatio^ for sins, so the garments
also: That the Coat made attoneme^t for the^ that had worn linsey-woolsey:
Some say, it made atonement for them that shed blood, because it is written,
they dipped the coat in blood: (Genesis 37.31.) That the Dinnen Breeches did
reconcile those that had uncovered the shame, etc. That the Miter reconciled
the proud in spirit. That the Girdle did make reconciliation for thieves; and
as some say for the frowardnes of heart: That the Breastplate of judgment did
expiate them that had perverted judgment: That the Ephod did expiate their sin
that had committed Idolatry: Their proof is because it is said, without Ephod
and without Teraphim (Hos. 4.4.) That the Belles of the Robe did make
atonement for an evil tongue: That the Golden plate upon the forehead of the
high priest did reconcile the blasphemers: and their proof is because it is
said, the stone sticked in his forehead (1. Sa. 17 49.) some say it did
reconcile the impudent that had an hard face, their proof is because it is
said, thou had a whores forehead (Ier. 3.3.) Others of them, as In Akedath
Isaak, porta. 51.
Ben Arama out of vajikra rabba, do record this same mystery: But let those
that seek the meaning of the holy Ghost, leave these things to the Rabbines,
and let Jewish fables alone.

5. Against this Chaldee paraphrast may be opposed an other Chaldee paraphrast
upon the law going under the name of Jonathan, who though he be vain, yet is
he not worse then this; but he is one of the authors whom you yourself do
Annot. on Exo. 3.14.
allege in the exposition of Moses, and he (as is Advertisem. of corrup. N. 3.
confessed) places the names of the tribes upon the stones in an other order
then you would have them: so that one of the Chaldee paraphrasts speaks as much
against you, as the other does for you Let them both alone and seek better
vvarrant for your expositions of the holy scripture.

In conclusion of this point touching the order of the stones, you say, Annot.
on Exo. 28.21.
The same order we showed also from Maimony, to be upon the two Berylls verse
10, except the transplacing of Bilhahs sons. To this I answer, 1. the
presumption of Maimony in this matter is already manifested before. 2. even
this very exception serves for the refutation both of you and your Maimony for
what warrant is there to make this exception, and to assign a different order
and place to the sons of Bilhah upon the shoulders and upon the breast of
Aaron? what reason have you to follow such as without warrant do thus place and
transplace the tribes according to their fancy?

A Fruit of this your presumptuous intrusion touching the order of the names in
the stones, is your error about the translation of the stones themselves; and
in special that you interpret Annot. on Exo. 28.18.
jahalom to be the sardonyx, which should have been translated the Adamant or
Diamonde, according to the example of the best translatours both new and old:
For

1. The Adamant is known and found to be the hardest of all stones, resisting
the power Pliny, histor. not. lib. 37, c. 4.
both of iron and fire, neither broken by the one nor molte^ by the other: and
therevpo^ in Greek named Adamas of the invincible force of it, not easily
subdued. Hereunto agrees the hebrew name jahalom, coming of the word to
strike with the hammer: showing that this stone is as the hammer of other
stones, breaking them, but not broken by them: Hereunto agrees the Chaldee
name, Onkelos on Exo. 28 18. Jonathan on Ezekiel. 28.13.
Sabhalom, so called of enduring the strokes of the Hammer. Hereunto agrees
the arabique name, al mas which On Exo. 28.18.
Aben Ezra and from him In lib. radic. on jahalom.
Kimchi do note to be given unto jahalom, because it breaks all other stones
and boreth through the Bdelium, etc. The Adamant is also in the Arabique named
pentaglot. val. shind. in Dum.
Diama of Dum a word that notes durablenes and continuance: The Persian Thargum
likewise gives such a name unto this stone, as shows the same nature of it:
and calls it On Exodus 28.18.
loguard having affinity with the word garad which signifies Scalpere to cut
or grave: and according to this Pliny says of the Adamants; Nature. histor.
lib. 37. c. 4.
expetuntur a scalptoribus, etc. They are desired of engravers, etc. It seems
that of this stone they have their scalpra or scalpella, instruments of cutting
and engraving. Now seeing the name Iahalom does so fitly agree unto the nature
of the Adamant, it is against al reason to leave and change the fittest name,
and in your translation to give a new name without the force and help of any
new argument.

Whereas you say of the Sardonyx that On Exo. 28.18.
It is a very hard stone like the Adamantor Diamond: and Mr. Broughton also
says, that it is the hardest next the Diamond, and fit for the notation of
jahalom; I ask for your proofc herein: where is your vvarrant that the Sardonyx
is a very hard stone like the Adamant? It is vvonder you would not express it,
if you had any. And besides, if it were as you say, that the Sardonyx were like
unto or next unto the Adamant in hardness: yet hereby you confess that the
Adamant excels in hardness: and all reason requires that the thing which is
most excellent in his kind should beat the name or denomination above the
rest, unless some other necessary proof were brought to the contrary.

2. Seeing the manner of the holy Ghost is to describe and commend unto us the
vvorth of excellent things by Prove. 3.15. and 8.11 and 20.15. and 31.10. Mat.
7.6.
comparing them unto precious stones and pearls: and in this place Exodus 28.
the Lord would show unto us the dear and precious account that he makes of
his Children by engraving their names in these gemmes and setting them upon the
breast of his son figured by the high priest: seeing also that the Diamond is
Pliny, Nature. hist. l. 37. c. 4.
esteemed of greatest price, not only among gemmes, but above other humane
things; for this cause, you ought not to have changed the common
interpretation, by leaving out the most precious Adamant serving most fitly to
express the meaning of the Lord, unless you could have brought unto us some
rare and strong argument for your so doing. He that does unjustly take out the
more precious stone, and instead thereof put in a baser into the breastplate,
does thereby in some measure obscure and darken the counsel of the Lord, and
hide the brightness of his grace.

3. Seeing the counsel of God in appoynting this breastplate to be made, was
(as in the rest of the tabernacle-vvorks to show his wisdom and glory by
giving gifts unto men, and by Exodus 31.1-6.
putting wisdom into the hearts of all that were vvise-hearted; and in
special, (as is of purpose largely described) by calling Bezaleel and filling
him with the spirit of God, in wisdom and in understanding, and in knowledge
in all workmanship: and yet more particularly by reaching him the art to work
in gold, to ingrave in stone and to filler set the precious stones in gold:
seeing the Adamant is more hard to be engraven then other stones, and that
therefore the wisdom of God in teaching them to set this stone in the
breastplate, might appear rather more, then in setting of the other stones:
for this cause, men ought not without sure ground to remoove this stone out of
the breast plate, least they be found guilty of cutting off one special means
and occasion of showing and manifesting Gods wisdom and glory seeing in all
his works the Lord uses to seek such occasions. Pliny Vbi supra.
considering the hardness of the Adamant, and withal the means that were found
out to break the same by steeping it in the fresh and warm blood of a Goat,
breaks out into admiration concerning this experiment, and acknowledges all
such inventions to be the gift of some divine power or godhead teaching men
such wisdom and skill. Whether this invention of preparing the Adamant to be
engraven by the means of goats blood, was found out in the days of Bezaleel
at the making of the breastplate: or whether any other way proportionable unto
this was then used, it is uncertain: Always we are sure, that such rare
invention and skill was used by the help of Gods spirit, as might justly moove
men to break out into Admiration, and with Pliny to acknowledge the wisdom
of a divine power teaching the same. Hereunto should men attend, and take heed
of denying any means or occasion that might serve to manifest and demonstrate
this glory of God.

4. When as you dispute against Mr. Brought on touching sylk or wool in the
high Priests Ephod: you allege for yourself against him, the judgments and
interprerations of diverse learned men, as namely, of Answ. to Mr. Broug. Page 3.
Tremellius, Iunius, Marcus Marinus in Arca Noa, Munsterus, Vatablus,
Pelicanus, Lyra, Arias Montanus, Forsterus, Avenarius: If the judgment and
interpretations of these men, were at that time of any weight for you against
him, the^ are they now at this time also of weight against both you and him,
touching the precious stones in the high Priests Ephod: for there is never a
one of these your ten authors but they are against you in this matter: none of
them interpret jahalom to be a Sardonyx as you do: each of them allows a place
for the Adamant or Diamond, in the Ephod. And besides these, there are yet more
then ten other witnesses, which do all of them contradict your translation of
this stone; Johan. Buxtorfius, Mercerus, Pagninus, David de Pomis, Reuchlinus,
Valentinus Schindlerus, Josephus, Hierome, Calvine, and even that Greek
translation which you do so often allege, though it have not the name of the
Adama^t yet it has not the Sardonyx: and to these may be added the testimony
of other translatours in the English, Dutch, French Bibles and many others: and
not one of them but they are in their translations and expositions of this word
witnesses against you. It seems you have taken the Adamant from the
breastplate of the highpriest that you might set it in your own breast, or in
your own forehead, and so by virtue thereof hardened your face not only
against all reason and judgment of the learned in this controversy, but
against all the Churches of Christ by opposing them: By the virtue of this
invincible and hard Adamant in your forehead you stand out against all the
churches of God, and renounce the fellowship of every one of them.

But as Mr. Smith once vvrote for his separation, that Parallels p. 34.35.
having John the divine for him, he respected not what all other divines could
say against him: so you also flying unto the Revelation of John, for vvarrant
of your translation, do tell us, that Annot. on Exodus 28.18.
jahalom, in Rev. 21.20. is named in Greek Sardonyx. And this also M. Broughton
has Advertis. of corrupt. M. 2.
told us before you. In an other place you you say, Answer to Mr. Brough. p. 37.
you followed the translation of John the Apostle Rev. 21 of whom you were
persuaded in general, before you knew the particulars, that he translated all
the stones from Aarons breast to the heavenly Jerusalem. That you might most
safely follow him (you say) none of grace will deny. I answer; Though none of
grace will deny that you ought to follow the Apostle, yet many of grace and
learning will deny that you do follow him: your bare persuasion and thereupon
your bold assertion that John did translate all the 12. stones from Aarons
breast, and that he named Iahalom in Greek Sardonyx, is no vvarant for any of
grace to follow you herein. Where is your proof or show of proof that John did
so translate all the stones, as you speak? your bare persuasions and
assertions that he did so do not help you, but make you more guilty of
presumption, in obtruding your conceits upon the holy Ghost and taking the name
of God in vain. We see the names of the tribes themselves are reckoned up by
the Rev. 7.5.^.8.
holy Ghost in the Revelation with omission of Dan, otherwise then they are
reckoned in any place of the old testament: and how know you then, or how can
any affirm that the very same stones mentioned Exodus 28. are all without
exception and omission of any reckoned up in Rev. 21. as by your translation
and annotations you make the simple to believe?

Through this your presumption in expounding the stones of the breastplate it
comes to pass that you deal not so soundly in your controversy about the
supremacy of Peter, as otherwise you might have done: when you would show the
vanity of the popish argument, taken from this, that Peter was named first
among the Apostles, you declare it thus: Answ. to Ioh. Ainsw p. 73.
The first foundation of the wall of the heavenly Jerusalem, was a Jasper, the
stone of Benjamin, the Apostle Paul's tribe: will you grant me hence to conclude
that S. Paul was head of the Catholic Church? In these words you give
advantage to your adversary, for thus might he answer you. 1, it is presumption
to say that the Jasper was Beniamins stone: your allegation of Exo. 28. is but
an abuse of scripture: you might as well have said that the Jasper was the
stone of Ascher or Naphtalt; being alike uncertain. 2. though the Jasper had
been the stone of Benjamin in Exodus 28. yet could it not be the stone of Paul
in Rev. 21.19. because those 12. stones had the names of the Rev. 21.14.
lambs twelve Apostles, of which number Paul was Mat. 10.1-5. and Act. 1.26 1
Cor. 15.5.8.
none, but was distinguished and reckoned apart from the twelve: whatsoever
therefore may be said for peter in other places, paul could not step in to plead
for any head ship above the rest from that place. 3. Suppose the stones in Rev.
21. had been all of them, the very same that were mentioned in Exo. 28. yet
could not the Apostles be distinguished thereby or claim for pre-eminence in
respect of the tribe, because diverse of them were of the same tribe being
brethren, as Peter and Andrew: James and John; James and Jude; and for some of
the rest they were happily of the same tribes with these: and therefore of
necessity sundry of them must have their names written not upon the stone of
that tribe whereof they descended by birth, but on some other: and thus your
instance fails in the very ground thereof, and therefore cannot justly serve
for such a declaration of your reproof of their argument, as you intend thereby.

Lastly, to conclude this point: to show the folly of the Rabbines, and how
vain their testimony in these things is, observe their superstition and
contradiction about an other of Aarons ornaments: for example, The Rabbines as
is Drusius comment, ad loca diff. Exo. p. 217 cap. 52.
observed, have three opinions, touching the golden plate, viz. 1. R. Eleazar
shows how the words engraven upon the same were written in one line, on this
manner, Holiness to Jehovah 2. R. Levi, thought if they were engrave^ in two
lines the^ the word Holiness was written in the line below, and To Jehovah in
the line above. 3, others as in Moses Mikkotsi thinking they were engraven in
two lines would have Holiness to in the under line: and Jehovah above. Touching
this plate, you observe out of Maimony, Annot. on Exo. 28 36.
the letters were so grave^ that they stood out above the rest of the plate and
were not cut inward: which is a mere presumption and rather refuted by the
signification of the word there used to express that ingraving then approved
by the same. And whither may men be led if they will hearken unto these
presumptions as you have done touching the order of the stones in the
Breastplate? Let the example of Drusius be a warning to you and others, that
they take not so much heed unto Jewish fables: This learned man, by his too
great regard of the Rabbines in their vvritings, was colored with diverse of
their absurd opinions: taking some of them for a certain truth, and brought
also to doubt and fluctuate about others: for example; whereas the Rabbines
write that Esaws Angel wrestled with Iaakob for the blessing and R. David
Kimchi in Hos. 12.
wept because he could not prevayle, Drusius writes, Praeterit. lib. 4. in Ioh.
11. verse. 35.
if an Angel once wept, what marvel that Jesus should weep? and that the Angel
did weep which wrestled with Iaakob, it is certain from Hos. 12.4. Whereas the
superstitious Rabbines hold it to be a heinous crime and a matter of death for
any (except the priests) to read or name this word Jehovah as it is written,
herein also he follows them thus far; that he accounts it Praeterit. lib. 10
in Apo. 19. verse. 12.
mere ignorance, if not blasphemy, to hold that it may lawfully be read: and
after again he says Ibid. in append. ad p. 445.
he thinks that no godly man which fears the Lord can with a safe conscience
use the same. In his annotations upon those words, a voice from heaven Mat.
3.17. he says, Praeterit. lib. 1. p. 6.7
it was not so much a voice, as Bath-kol, or an Echo; and in the same place
noting out of the Rabbines 4. degrees of prophecy, he observes this Bath-kol to
be the lowest degree: and below vrim and Thummim. The seven spirits mentioned
Rev. 1.4. he notes to be Praeterit. l. 10. p. 402
Angels: and declares this by the counterfeit story of Tobit. c. 12.18. and
by the testimony of Ionatha^ speaking of the seve^ Archangels that stand
before God. Upon the doctrine of the Rabbines, he professes that he is In loca
diffic. Lev. c. 61.
doubtful and wavering in his mind whether Polygamie was forbidden by the law
or not. Thus was he carried, but your danger of being carried further, is so much
the greater in respect of your presumptuous estate of separation wherein you
stand: in the practice and profession whereof (as if you were a new Priest
risen up with vrim and Thummim to show the errors of these last days) you
arrogate unto yourself alone, above all other ministers the knowledge of these
three things, viz. of a true Church: of a true minister: and of a true
Christian: name one Minister of Chiste in the world, if you can that beside
yourself is able to discern of these three things: And think seriously withal
in the fear of God, whether you be not in danger of being blown away with the
vvinde of presumption and error, for want of true humility.

CHAP. VIII.
YOur great partiality in alleging these Rabbines is an other main offense
in you; and this appears in diverse kinds:

First, betwixt yourself and opposites; you are partial in blaming them so much
for using the testimonies of men, whiles yourself do use them far more
frequently: you have often complained of me for making flesh my arm in
alleging the authority of men against you: even when I did it not, as has
been showed Page 45.47.50.
before. Herein you seem to be like unto that famous usurer who rejoiced to
hear that sin of usury reproved, condemned and publicly preached against: in
hope that others thereby would use it the less, that he might use it the more
and have the more customers for his interest: but you are in this unlike him
and more blameworthy, in that he only rejoiced to see others condemn it,
whereas you your self do often and openly condemn a practice, in the mids of
your own most immoderate use thereof.

Secondly, in respect of the authors alleged you are very partial; whiles you
allege Infidels rather then the most learned Christians endued with the spirit
of wisdom and understanding: yea so far that in your annotations even in
Genesis and Exodus alone you have alleged these Jewish writers more the^ a
thousand times in exact number, whereas among them all I find not the name of
one Christian writer from the Apostles time unto our age once alleged by you.
But to prevent this blame you say, Preface to Annot. on Genesis.
The Christian Fathers and Doctors because they are usually cited by other
expositors abundantly: I thought needless to repete: and the rather for
brevitie, which is requisite in annotations. But against this excuse it is to
be observed, 1. that as for the heathnish writers though they be as usually
cited by other expositours, and though they be as commonly known as the
Christian Fathers and Doctors, yet you do very often allege them, and repeat
the common allegations of them formerly used by others and find place enough
for them among your annotations: should not the Christian writers therefore at
least have had as much honor as they, in your allegations? 2, you do also
allege and repeat many Jewish testimonies formerly alleged by others: If
need be I can show you manifold instances in your annotations; so that you had
no cause upon this pretense of rarenes to have alleged them so much: there
being many excellent observations of some Christian vvriters that are far more
rare and unknown then sundry of the Rabbinical testimonies alleged by you. 3,
though sundry of your Thalmudique testimonies be not commonly known, yet seeing
the most of them are unprofitable, vain traditions and fabulous matters: it
had been more proffit for the Christian readers, and a greater help for their
understanding of the scriptures to have alleged some of the best Christian
writers in stead of some of the worst of those Rabbines. 4, it is to be
observed, that though you glory in the name of a Rabbine for every trifeling
allegatio^ which you bring from them, yet when by stealth you Annot. on Genesis
37.35
allege the rare observations of some Christians, as that of Hades derived
from Adam, and diverse others: then do you conceal the names of the authors as
if you were ashamed to learn or borow anything from them, you being separate
from such a society in the Church of God as they all embraced.

Herein you seem to be like unto the Jews, who though they have their set
form of prayer or blessings which they use at the lighting of Candles; yet
their canon is, R. Alphes in Beracoth, cap. 8 Fol. 42.
that they may not bless for the candle which they light at the candle of the
gentiles or of Christians: so you, when you light your candle at the Jews, in
alleging any thing from them, as if there were special cause of blessing for
it, your manner is to give them honorable titles of Hebrew Doctors, Jew
Doctors, Ancient Rabbines, etc. and not only that but without regard of that
brevitie which you pretend, your manner is to allege their testimonies at large
with the superfluous and vain titles they assume unto themselves, viz. our
ancient wise men: our Rabbines of blessed memory, etc. But on the contrary
when you light your candle at the Christians, in expounding the scriptures, you
smother their names in silence, as if you were ashamed of them.

Thirdly, even toward the Rabbines themselves you are very partial, in
alleging diverse of the worst sort far oftener, then those which are more
proffitable among them. Aben Ezra, R. David Kimchi, Ralbag or R. Levi ben
Gersom, which have taken great pains to expound the words and phrases in the
text of the scripture, whose writings are far more proffitable then those of
Maimony, that spent his time most in expounding the Thalmud and the vain
traditions thereof, are yet very seldom alleged by you. Others that are not
half so judicious and far more fabulous writings, as R. Menachem, R. Eliezer,
R. Bechai, the Thalmud, the Zohar, Tanchuma, Bereshith Rabba, Elleshemoth
rabba, etc. being the maine fountains of blind superstition and the greatest
corrupters of Gods ordinances have most honor given unto them by you. As for
R. Eliezer whom in special you reckon to be one of Annot. on Ge^. 14.18.
the best and most ancient Hebrew Doctors, whose Pirkei are often alleged by
you: how many of his observations or testimonies be there, even of the best
that you could choose and pick out of all his vvritings that are worthy to be
recorded? From him you note that Adams dressing of the garden should be his
Annot. on Genesis 2.15.
labor in, and keeping of gods law: that God did On Genesis 3.14.
cut off the feet of the serpent and curse him: that the vvindow or light which
Noah was commanded to make in the ark, On Genesis 6.16.
was a precious stone hanged in the Ark, which gave light to all creatures
which were the rein: that On Genesis 14.18.
Melchizedek was Sem: that On Genesis 25.21.
Isaak went with his wife, to Mount Moriah, to the place where he had been
bound Genesis 22.9.) and prayed there: that as the Chalde paraphrast translates
Iaakobs dwelling in tents to be a A Minister of the house of doctrine: so
others as in Pirkei R. Eliezer, that he dwelt in tents and Ibid. on verse. 27.
studied the law: that Ibid. on very. 34.
Lentiles were wont to be eaten of men in their sorrow and mourning: and that
Iaakob did feed upon Lentiles in mourning and sorrow; for that the Kingdom and
dominion and firstbirthright was Esaus: that the sons of Esau should not
fall, until the remainder of Iaakob come and give to the sons of Esau, food
of Lentiles with mourning and sorrow and take from them the dominion, Kingdom
and firstbirthright which Iaakob bought of him by oath: that Iaakob On Genesis
29.10.
as a mighty strong man rolled away the stone from the wells mouth, etc. that
the sheepheardes saw it and wondered all: and were not able to roll away the
stone, but Iaakob rolled it away himself alone: that Iaakobs sinew being
touched: On Genesis 32.32.
it became like the fat of a dead thing: therefore it is unlawful for the sonns
of Israel to eat of the sinew, etc. that the On Genesis 37.15.
man which met Joseph in the field was the Angel Gabriel, called in Dan. 9.21.
the man Gabriel: that of the 20 shekels of silver for which Joseph was sold, On
Genesis 37.28.
every of the ten Patriarks, had two shekels to buy shoes for their feet.
These as it seems are the best observations which you could find in the best
of the Rabbines: the choice of the choice: And yet of them all there is not one
of them free from presumption. And cannot the holy scriptures be well
understood without these forgeries? In stead of these fictions you might have
brought far more proffitable annotations from Aben Ezra, Kimchi and Ralbag
before mentioned touching the words and phrases of scripture: but you prefer
the worst, and give least honor unto the best of them. It is true indeed that
there are many fables also recorded in these Rabbines, as I showed Cap. 1.
before yet are they but drops in comparison of that flood of error,
presumption and curiosity which is to be found in others of your most honored
Thalmudists: And as is observed by Ioa. Rain. censura. lib. apocr. tom. 1.
praelec. 77.
others touching Kimchi, so is it plain for the other two also, that the
fables rehearsed by them are not set down as their own assertions, but
ordinarily in the name of others.

Lastly, in the writings of one and the same Rabbine you seem to deal
partially: The superstitious Mishneh of Maimony is most frequently alleged by
you: but his Morch Nebuchim which is of far better use is scarsely touched by
you in one or two allegations. This later work of his, being made long after
his Mishneh, though full of Rabbinical vanity, yet is not like to his former:
in so much that the Jews of France, as some do Nebiensis in Octaplo. Annot. in
Psalm. 68.
record, did themselves burn this his book because it seemed too much to
favor the doctrine and profession of Christians.

TO conclude, as these things do serve for a Glass of your error in alleging
the Rabbines: so the due consideration of the Jewish errors here noted upon
occasion of this controversy, may justly serve for a Glass of Gods most
severe judgment against Israel, that we may justify and glorify him in the
same. Hereby we see the Mat. 8.12
Children of the Kingdom bound hand and foot in the cords of these errors
and cast out into the utter darkness of obstinate infidelity, superstition and
blasphemy. Hereby we see the truth of Gods word, in the present wrath that lies
upon them according to the ancient prophesies Ps. 69.23. Ro^. 11.10
for blinding of their eyes and bowing down their backs. Hereby we should
learn to kiss the son least he be angry, and to hearken to the voice of
Christ in his Gospel, whiles it is called to day; when as we see the contempt
thereof to be so fearfully avenged on this elect nation, by giving them up so
long a time unto such horrible delusions, and by scattring some of them into
all quarters, (even as the Iud. 19.29.
Levites concubine cut into many pieces and sent abroad) that all the people of
the earth might see and know the work of God upon them for their daily
instruction. Hereby we may also learn to be touched with the miseries of this
nation, holy in the root and still beloved for the fathers sake. As Mat. 2.18
Rachel is said to mourn for her Children slain in Beth-leem and the coasts
thereof: so may both Rachel and Leah be said to make lamentation for these
rejected and dispersed tribes. The miseries of Desolate Jerusalem do call and
cry unto us, louder then ever they did of old, Lam. 1.12
Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by the way? Behold and see if there be
any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath. When we pray for them we pray for
our selves: their conversion is our Romans 11.12, etc.
riches and life to the world. And we may be bold to make our prayers for
them, having the special promise of God for their restoration. Arise therefore
and put on strength o arm of the Lord: rise up as in the old time and as in
the ancient generations: turn again the captivity of Sion, and take away the
iniquities of Iaakob: Lord how long will thou be angry for ever; shall thy
jealousy burn like fire? Remember thy covenant made with Abraham, Isaak and
Iaakob, and call home thy banished: Let the new Jerusalem descend from heaven
as a Bride trimmed for her husband in the conversio^ of thy people: make a way
for thy redeemed: remoove the stones of offense, the Idolatries, superstitions,
schisms and separations among Christians* Take away the veil that is spread
upon the eyes of the Jews, and show thy salvation unto them, that the whole
earth may be full of thy glory shining in the face of Jesus Christ. AMEN.

ERRATA.
Page 48. l. 10. for ear read are: Page 107. 26. for such read suck: Page 208.
read Amram. Page 384. in the margent, read, r Page 369. s page 370. Page 437.
in the margent read, Ketannah.


