A Most brief, easy and plain receite for fair writing.

Wherein the Author being well acquainted with the causes, which in these days
hinders it, has for the good of his Cuntrie, so distinguished and broken every
particular letter for the true making thereof, and so perfectly and plainly
showed the ready way of true joining the same.

Both for the Roman and Secretary hands, as any one of ordinarye years and
capacity, not hindering any other business, may at his idle times by his own
private practice, in short time attain to write, to serve very good uses
either in office or otherwise.

AT LONDON Printed by E. A. for John Perin, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Angel.

To the right Worshipful my singular good Master, M. Thomas Powle Esquire,
one of the six Clerks of her Majesty's most honorable Court of Chauncery.
W. P. wishes all happiness with increase of spiritual blessings in the
greatest measure.
RIght worshipful I have here undertaken a work, how profitable, I refer
to the event. And for that I had no better means then this to manifest my
duty I have presumed to make your W. the patron of my travel: wherein if
you shall be pleased to allow me your ordinary favor, it will be of force
sufficient not only to defend me from the greatest adversary, but also to
arm and encourage me to a work of better effect. Thus as I have presumed to
commit unto your W. this my first croppe, so will I in my best exercises
commend all your actions to be governed by the Lord.

Your W. most bounden servant in the highest degree of his duty. W. Pank.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, in respect that many would willinglye attain the perfection of
writing, and cannot, either for that their abiding is too far off, or held
back by occasion of business or otherwise (which is most like, Such as teach by
great.
) that some newlye sprung in that knowledge, have rated it so high as the
greater sort that would, cannot, by reason of the price, and other better able
for the same cause will not. This Author has devised such plain, easy, and
exact, rules for fair writing, Though they never handled pen.
as any one of ordinary years and capacity, (much more they of greater
judgment) not subject to impediment, may in a short space, at idle times not
hindering their other business, and by their own private practice attain, to
write both the secretary, and roman hand, to serve very good uses either in
office or otherwise.

And to the end, that he would avoid all occasions that might hinder his
honest meaning in this his profitable work: he promises to such as shall
buy his book, that whatsoever either in the same, or otherwise belonging to
writing shall seem hard, that he will gratis show it them by word of mouth,
if they repair unto him. Vltimo Septembris. 1591.

Quod ignoras, ne doceas. W. Panke.

First I have thought good to begin with the breaking of every particular
letter.






stroke joining to the highest part of your former compass thus (...) and so
at once close him round, so as it may still keep his compass as an (...) thus
(...)









































NOw that I have showed you the breaking and making of every particular letter
in the cross row, it is as necessary to show you how to join and set them
in their order.
First you must specially mark how many of your letters have whites or
compasses.

And every one of them in words as they fall out, must you as near as you can
make of like bigness, as for example (...) and your blackes which is all the
strokes in every letter also: must be of like fulness as near as you can: yet
for your (...) and (...) it is tolerable that you make them fuller then the
rest.

All the letters in the cross row excepting (...) are to be joined to the
foot of them thus (...)

There is no other letters to be joined but these that follow, and they must be
joined thus (...) all the rest must stand as close as they that join, as thus
(...) etc. saving the (...) which you may join thus (...)

Must you join all your letters alike as (...) and as you thus join your
(...) to every of these particular letters, so must you do also all your other
letters, excepting (...) which you may closely set by thus (...)

All your letters must stand close (...) not joining to the belly, as (...)
etc. I set no more examples for that these letters are in effect the beginnings
to all the rest of the letters in the cross row.

It is sufficient that you set the usual letters that follows it in this
manner (...) for you shall never have any other letter follow (...) besides
(...)

You must set every letter that follows it, as near to the body of it, as
the rest of your letters stand one from another thus (...) you must set all the
letters thus (...)

FOr the setting of your words, the distance of them is vsuallye known: viz.
between every word the space of an (...) and as you keep equal distance
between your words, the like care must you have for your letters, that they
stand not one wider or closer, or one higher or lower then another.

For the Roman hand.
The Distinguishing of Letters.
TO learn to make your letters speedily.

First especially mark how many letters are made after one fashion, by noting
whereof you shall very easilye attain to the making of al your letters, as for
example. Make the half of a compass somewhat longer then your secretary (...)
thus (...) which makes the (...)

The next is a slope stroke toward your left hand thus (...) which is the
first part of your (...) whereby you shall make your (...)

The next is this little stroke somewhat slope, and a little longer then your
secretary (...) thus (...) which is a letter of it self called (...) whereby
you make (...) and by drawing it somewhat longer thus (...) makes your (...)
with the first stroke of your (...) turned backward thus (...)

The little (...) having their proportion of themselves. I will show how to
make them afterward in the true making of letters.

Now that I have thus distinguished every letter, I will likewise show you how
every letter is made by himself.

The making of the Letters.










The (...) is also the first part of your (...) being just in the midst
turned backward like the foot of your (...) thus (...)

your right hand and up to the head of your (...) thus (...)



















joining to the bottom of the first thus (...)







The (...) is only two of those compasses joined together thus (...)

The (...) is made with the head of your (...) thus (...) and the first part of
your (...) thus (...) joined together (...)



FINIS.

