THE TRVE CATHOLIC Collected out of the Oracles, and Psalteries of the holy
Ghost.

for Instruction, and Devotion.


1 TIMOTHY 2.4. God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth.

IOH. 14.17. The world cannot receive the spirit of truth, because it sees him
not, neither knows him.

1 COR. 2.10. The spirit searches all things; yea the deep things of God.

EPHESIANS. 5.9. For the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, and
righteousness, and truth.

LONDON, Printed for E. BLACKMORE. 1628.

THE PREFACE OF DOCTOR FRA. RIBERA (...), In Coment. in Amos: Prophet:
touching the Excellency, Dignity and profit of finding the holy Scriptures.
THAT there is no study either more Excellent, more profitable: or more worthy
of Man, then the study of the holy Scriptures; he shall best know and judge
that applies himself wholly thereunto; and shall perceive that man to be
worthily called blessed, Which meditateth in the law of God day and night.
Psalm. 1, 2.
I do verily confess that all the sacred books, especially those of the
Prophets, are wrapped and encumbered with many difficulties; by which (as it
were by certain strict keepers of a most stately Temple) The holy Ghost has
straightly prohibited the access and mysteries unto profane and proud men; and
that it is rightly spoken of them which Socrates is reported to have said when
he happened upon Heraclitus books of nature: That those things which he
understood seemed excellent unto him; and that he thought so also of them
which he understood not; but that it was needful to have an Interpreter to
them. No where can you see more evidently, no where can it more appear which
is spoken in the old Greek proverb; Those things which are excellent are
difficult: Or, that saying which passes far and near from Hesiodus concerning
virtue, That it is situate in a steep and high place, and that it has a
passage in the beginning, hard, and full of pain and labor. But doubtless
although the labor be great, and continual, it does sufficiently recompense
with profit, the pain with ease; the earnest endeavor of the mind with rest.
For although they seem to have much hardness; yet without doubt they have
far more of true and perfect delight. For how great a matter is it to be led
by a King into a wine-Cellar? Cant. 2.4.
For Charity to be rightly ordered? How great a matter is it to suck those
breasts better then wine, savoring sweetly with the best ointments? Cant. 1.2.
To hold wisdom (as the Apostle speaks) among those that be perfect? 1.
Cor. 2.6.
Yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world which
come to naught; but the wisdom of God in a mystery, which none of the
Princes of this world knew? 7.
8.
To be present at the distribution of heavenly treasures? To behold the glory
of God with open face? Certainly the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the future glory, which (when we well understand
the sacred books) shall be revealed in us. But the men of our time are quick
and ready to other studies, unto these for the most part they are slow and do
imagine that these are to be left to idle men, and such as tarry at home, or
else unto Preachers. Whereby it happens that such as are unfit for sermons,
though they have leisure enough, do rather bestow their labor, and endeavor
in any other matter.

How much the holy Scriptures do profit preachers, I have often said; and how
greatly they stand in need of them which are excercised in School
disputations, I could say, and perchance will hereafter show. Now this I
avouch, that (albeit these Scriptures be most profitable to help others) they
judge very ill, who think they are to be studied only for other men's sakes.
For if we read with great profit the books of the holy fathers, and of other
learned men which are called, and are spiritual, and by reading them do find
our selves much bettered; shall there be any book so spiritual which may be
compared with those which the spirit of God it self (by the choycest, and
wisest men) has delivered unto us? If the small brooks do help and (as it
were) satisfy; what shall that great River do which Ezechiell saw, Ezec. 47.1.
issuing forth under the threshold of the Lords house? which he could not go
through because the waters of that deep river were risen so that they could
not be passed over. And when I had returned, 5.
said he, behold, at the bank of the river were very many trees on either side,
7.
what are those many trees on either side the bank of the river, but the
ancient writers joined to the Law and the Prophets, and the new writers, who
sitting together by the streams of the Evangelists and Apostles; do always
wax green as most beautiful trees and abound with pleasant fruit: the river
is the same, because it is the same author of the Scriptures, and the scope the
same, but the ages and times diverse, which are resembled by both the banks.

Of these trees and of these waters it is said, and he shall be like a tree
planted by the rivers of waters that brings forth his fruit in his season,
Psalm. 1.3.
his leaf also shall not fall away, and whatsoever be does it shall prosper.

I was wont to marvel with my self as often as I did read in Saint Jerome,
that the study of the Scriptures had wonderful power to change the mind of
man, to quench the desires of the flesh, to procure the contempt of the world,
and briefly to gain all kind of virtue; until I perceived he spoke those
things whereof he had made trial in himself; and that it is a wrong, not to
believe him that has experience. He that believes not, let him first read
the Scripture, not as though he would interpret it to others, but to be turned
wholly to his own profit: let him meditate therein day and night; he shall
feel a stony heart to be mollified, a cold heart to be inflamed, with
heavenly fire: for the words of the Lord are like fire, ^er. 23.29.
and as a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces. He shall perceive the love
of the world to vanish away, the desire of eternal good things to be stirred
up in himself, his mind filled with a certain incredible delight; which he
that felt it cried out, how sweet are thy words unto my taste? Psalm. 119.103.
yea sweeter then honey to my mouth.

O wisdom guide of the heavenly life, teacher of virtues, bane of vices,
fountain of light, expeller of darkness, what should we, nay what should
the whole life of man be without thee* Thou art the companion in labor, thou
art the comforter in adversity, the ouerseere and guide in prosperity, the
instructor of youth, the foundation of manhood, the most sweet rest of old age.
Come therefore let us ascend up to the hill of the Lord, Isa. 2.3.
to the house of the GOD of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we
shall walk in his paths, and let not obscurity discourage us.

(...)
The heads contained are these, viz.
A Preparation. Fol. 2 God. Fol. 5 The Scriptures. Fol. 12 The Church. Fol. 23
Traditions. Fol. 28 Images. Fol. 38 Invocation. Fol. 47 Adoration. Fol. 53
Faith. Fol. 61 Repentance. Fol. 64 Confession. Fol. 68 Faith and works. Fol.
73 Justification. Fol. 81 Fasting. Fol. 90 Meats. Fol. 98 Love and Charity.
Fol. 105 Prayer. Fol. 111 One Mediator. Fol. 116 Our propitiation, Purgatory,
and satisfaction. Fol. 118 Sins. Fol. 124. Will. Fol. 130 Hypocrisy. Fol.
135 Riches. Fol. 139 Patience. Fol. 145 Humility. Fol. 149 The holy Eucharist.
Fol. 155 The happiness of Gods servants. Fol. 164 The vanity of the world.
Fol. 167 The end of the world. Fol. 171 The Judgment. Fol. 179
Psalms.
Of Confession. Fol. 200 Of contrition. Fol. 203 For remission. Fol. 206 For
mercy and direction. Fol. 209 For understanding. Fol. 212 In trouble. Fol.
215. For deliverance. Fol. 217 Against our Enemies. Fol. 220 Of Confidence in
Gods mercy. Fol. 225 Acknowledging Gods mercy. Fol. 228 Magnifying Gods
mercy, and goodness. Fol. 233 Of praise. Fol. 236
Psalms in Sickness.
1 Psalm in sickness. Fol. 242 2 Psalm. Fol. 244 3 Psalm. Fol. 246 4
Psalm. Fol. 248 A Prayer. Fol. 252 The souls Comfort. Fol. 254
AN EPISTLE GENERAL.
Beloved,
1. 1. Tim. 4.
THe Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils.

2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot iron.

3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the
truth:

1. Tim 4.
4. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving.

5. For it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer.

Tit. 1.
10. There are many unruly, and vaine-talkers, and deceivers.

11. Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things
which they ought not for filthy lucres sake.

14. Give not heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men that turn from
the truth.

5. 1. Ioh. 4.
They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them.

6. We are of God; he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God,
hears not us: hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

8. Beware, Col. 2.
lest any man spoil you through phylosophie, and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.

9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

10. And we are complete in him which is the head of all principality, and
power.

2. Tim. 2.
14. Strive not about words to no profit, but to the subuerting of the hearers.

23. Foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender
strifes.

Phil. 1.
27. Stand fast in one spirit with one mind, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel.

28. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident
token of perdition; but to you of salvation, and that of God.

29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake.

12. Col. 3.
Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy, and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering.

13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

14. And above all things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness.

15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts to the which also ye are
called in one body, and be ye thankful.

17. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

6. Phil. 4.
Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer, and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.

23. Col. 1.
Continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the
hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every
creature which is under heaven.

14 That ye henceforth be no more children tossed too and fro, Ephesians. 4.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

15. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things which is
the head, even Christ.

Phil. 1.
9. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge,
and in all judgment.

10. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere,
and without offense till the day of Christ.

11. Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. Amen.

ORACLES AND PSALTERIES OF THE HOLY GHOST.
WHat Nation is there so great, Deuteronomy. 4.8.
that has Statutes, and Judgments so righteous, as all this Law, which I set
before you this day?

This is the way; Isa. 30.21.
walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.

Deuteronomy. 12.34.
Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

Preparation.
Amos 4.
12. PRepare to meet thy God o Israel.

1. Sam. 12.
23. I will teach you the good and the right way:

24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart.

Mat. 6.
33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all things
shall be added unto you.

Psalm. 37.
4. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.

5. Pro. 3.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own
understanding.

6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

4. Psalm. 91.
He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wing shall thou trust,
his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

8. 34.
O taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that trusts in him.

5. 146.
Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God.

Psalm. 27.
14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart:
Wait I say on the Lord.

125.
1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be
removed, but abides for ever.

2. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people; from henceforth even for ever.

God.
8. Hear o my people, Psalm. 8 1.
and I will testify unto thee; o Israel, if thou will hearken unto me:

9. There shall no strange God be in thee, neither shall thou worship any
strange God.

3. Isa. 43.
For I am the Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel, thy Savior.

10. Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

11. I, even I am the Lord; and besides me, there is no Savior.

44.
6. I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God.

24. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from (...)
womb; I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the heavens
alone, that spreads abroad the earth by my self.

48.
12. Hearken unto me O Jacob, and Israel my called; I am he, I am the first, and
I am the last.

Act. 7.
49. Heaven is my Throne, and earth is my footestoole.

Isa. 45.
22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and
there is none else.

6. 1. Cor. 8.
To us there is but one God, the Father of whom are all things, and we in him;
and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things, and we by him.

6. Ephe. 4.
There is one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all.

28. In him we live, Act 17.
and move, and have our being, for we are all his of spring.

29. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think
that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by (...), and
man's device.

30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commands all men
every where to repent.

31. Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

Revel. 4.
11. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

3. This is eternal life, Ioh. 17.
that we might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent.

27. Psalm 73.
They that are far from thee shall perish; thou have destroyed all them that
go a whoring from thee.

4. 16.
Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God.

5. 96.
All the Gods of the Nations are Idols, but the Lord made the heavens.

6. Honor and Majesty are before him; strength and beauty are in his Sanctuary.

89.
6. For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord? who among the sons of
the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?

95.
7. He is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his
hands.

Josh. 2^.
16. God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, to serve other gods.

23. Put away the strange gods which are among you and incline your hearts unto
the Lord God of Israel.

24. The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey.

18. Isa. 30.
The Lord is a God of judgment, blessed are they that wait for him.

10. Psalm. 34.
They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing.

13. For he is gracious, Joel 2.
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness.

50. Luke 1.
And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.

12. Psalm 33.
Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord: and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance.

Romans 11.
36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: To whom be glory
for ever. Amen.

The holy Scriptures.
Mat. 22.
29. YE do err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the power of God.

Ier. 23.
29. Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer that
breaks the rock in pieces?

Ioh. 5.
39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and
they are they which testify of me.

(...). Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your
souls.

31. These are written, Ioh. 20.
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God: and that
believing, ye might have life through his name.

4. Romans 15.
For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

3. 1. Tim. 6.
If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness.

4. He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, raylings, evil surmises;

5. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain is godliness; from such withdraw thy self.

Ioh. 8.
31. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed.

32. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

8. Pro. 8.
All the words of my mouth are in righteousness: there is nothing froward, or
perverse in them.

9. They are all plain to him that understands, and right to them that find
knowledge.

47. He that is of God, Ioh. 8.
hears Gods words.

9. 2. Ioh. 1.
Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and
the Son.

10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed.

2 Chronicles. 17.
9. The Levites and the Priests sent by Iehosaphat, taught in Judah, and had the
book of the Law of the Lord with them; and went about throughout all the
Cities of Judah, and taught the people.

34.
31. Josiah made a covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord, and to
keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his Statutes, with all his
heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are
written in this book.

32. And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to
it: And the Inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the
God of their fathers.

35. Act. 15.
Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch teaching and preaching the word of
the Lord with many others also.

11. 17.
The Jews of Berea were more noble then those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily whether those things were so.

12. Therefore many of them believed; also of honorable women which were
Greeks, and of men not a few.

Acts. 17.
1. When Paul and Silas had passed throrough Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came
to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews.

2. And Paul as his manner was, went in unto the^, and three Sabbath days
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.

17. Ephe. 6.
Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God.

12. Heb. 4.
The word of the Lord is quick, and powerful, and sharper then any two edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart.

2. 1. Pet. 2.
As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby.

15. 1
The word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the word which by the
Gospel is preached unto you.

2. Tim. 3.
16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.

17. That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works.

2. Pet. 1.
20. No prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation.

21. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; But holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

7. Psalm. 19.
The law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple.

6. 12.
The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth
purified seven times.

104. 119.
Through thy precepts I get understanding: Therefore I hate every false way.

100. I understand more then the ancients; because I keep thy precepts.

118. Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes for their
deceit is falsehood.

Psalm. 119.
105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path.

165. Great peace have they which love thy law; And nothing shall offend them.

130. The entrance of thy words gives light; it gives understanding to the
simple.

Phil 3.
16. Whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same thing.

Gal. 6.
16. As many as walk according to this rule, Peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

The Church.
23. Ephesians. 5
CHrist is the head of the Church, and he is the Savior of the body.

18. Col. 1.
He is the head of the body the Church who is the beginning, the first borne
from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.

24. I now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the
Church.

1. Cor. 12.
14. The body is not one member but many.

18. GOD has set the members every one of them in the body as it has pleased
him.

19. And if they were all one member, where were the body.

20. But now are they many members, yet but one body.

24. God has tempered the body together, having given more abundant honor to
that part which lacked.

25. That there should be no schism in the body: but that the members should
have the same care one for another.

26. And whether one member suffer all the members suffer with it: or one member
be honored all the members rejoice with it.

27 Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

25. Ephe. 5.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it.

26. That he might sanctify, and cleanse it, with the washing of water, by the
word.

27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spotte,
or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should he holy and without blemish.

1. Tim. 3.
15. The Church of God is the house of the living God, the pillar, and ground of
truth.

Acts 2.
47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.

42. And they continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship: and
in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

Ioh. 10.
27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

28. And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

5. A stranger will they not follow, but fly from him: for they know not the
voice of strangers.

37. Ioh. 18.
Every one that is of the truth, hears my voice.

19. Ephesians. 2.
Now therefore ye are no more strangers, and forreyners, but fellow Citizens
with the saints, and of the household of God.

20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone.

21. In whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy
temple in the Lord.

22. In whom you also are builded together, for an habitation of GOD, through
the Spirit.

Traditions.
Col. 2.
8. BEware lest any man spoil you through Philosohie, and vain deceit, after
the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.

17. 2. Pet. 2.
These are wells without water; clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom
the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

4. My speech, 2. Cor. 2.
and my preaching, was not with enticing words, of man's wisdom but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power.

5. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of Men, but in the power
of God.

6. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of this
world, nor of the Princes of this world that come to naught.

7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery; even the hidden wisdom
which God ordained before the world, to our glory.

2. Cor. 3.
19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: for it is written,
he takes the wise in their own craftiness.

Ier. 23.
28. The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that has my
word, let him speak my word faithfully: what is the chafe to the wheat says
the Lord.

Mat. 16.
6. Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces.

13. Isa. 29.
Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their
lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their
fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men.

14. The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid.

7. Mar. 7.
In vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

Isa. 8.
20. To the law, and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them.

66.
3. They have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their
abominations.

Ier. 6.
10. Their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken; the word of the Lord
is to them a reproach; they have no delight in it.

Ier 2.
13. They have forsaken the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out
cisternes, broken cisternes, that can hold no water.

8. But though we, Gal. 1.
or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel to you, then that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

11. The Gospel which was preached of me, was not after man.

12. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

17. 2. Cor. 2.
We are not as many, which corrupt the word of God; but as of sincerity, but
as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ.

2. 4.
Not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth; commending our selves unto every man's conscience in
the sight of God.

3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

4. In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of men which believe
not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them.

Ezekiel 20.
18. Walk not in the statutes of your Fathers, neither observe their judgments,
nor defile your selves with their Idols.

19. Ezech 20.
I am the Lord your God, walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them.

2. Deuteronomy. 4.
Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall you
diminish ought from it; that ye may keep the cammandements of the Lord your
God, which I command you.

32. 12.
What thing soever I command you, observe to do it; Thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it.

Deuteronomy. 5.
32. Ye shall observe to do as the Lord your God has commanded you, you shall
not turn aside to the right hand, or to the left.

28.
14. Thou shall not go aside from any of the words which I command thee this
day, to the right hand or to the left, to go after other Gods to serve them.

16. Ask for the old paths, Ier. 6.
where is the good way, and walk therein; and you shall find rest for your
souls.

Number. 15.
39. Remember all the commandments of the Lord and do, them; and seek not
after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring.

17. Ier. 6.
Hearken to the sound of the trumpet.

4. Mal. 4.
Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded to you in Horeb
for all Israel, with the statutes, and judgments.

6. Pro. 30.
Add not thou unto his words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a lier.

15 Though it be but a man's covenant, yet, Gal. 3.
if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereto.

Revel. 22.
18. I testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this
book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book.

19. And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
Prophecy; God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of
the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.

Images.
21. LIttle children, keep your selves from Idols. 1. Ioh. 5.


1. Leuit. 26.
Ye shall make you no Idols, nor graven Image, neither rear you up a standing
Image, neither shall you set up any Image of stone in your land to bow down
unto it, for I am the Lord your God.

8. Deuteronomy. 5.
Thou shall not make thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing that
is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters
beneath the earth.

9. Thou shall not bow down thy self unto them, nor serve them.

Isa. 40.
18. To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him?

Deu. 4.
15. Ye saw no similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out
of the midst of the fire.

12. Ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a
voice.

13. And he declared unto you his covenant which he commanded you to
perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of stone.

8. I am the Lord, Isa. 42.
that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to
graven Images.

14. Ier. 10.
Every founder is confounded by the graven Image: for his moulten Image is
falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

15. They are vanity, and the work of errors, in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.

8. The stock is a doctrine of vanities.

29. Isa. 41.
Their moulten Images are wind, and confusion.

Psalm. 97.
7. Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of
Idols.

Isa. 44.
9. They that make a graue^ Image are al of them vanity, and their delectable
things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses, they see not, nor
know, that they may be ashamed.

45.
16. They shall be ashamed, and also confounded all of them; they shall go to
confusion together that are makers of Idols.

Deuteronomy. 4.
23. Take heed unto your selves, least ye forget the covenant of the Lord your
GOD which he made with you, and make you a graven Image, or the likeness of
any thing which the Lord thy GOD has forbidden thee.

29. Acts 17.
We ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone graven by art, and man's device.

19. Habak. 2^
Woe unto him that says to the wood awake; to the dumb stone arise, it shall
teach; Behold it is laid over with gold, and silver, and there is no breath at
all in the midst of it.

Deuteronomy. 4.
3. Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal Peor; for all the men
that followed Baal Peor the Lord thy God has destroyed them from you.

Numb. 33.
52. Ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and
destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their moulten Images, and quite
pluck down all their high places.

Deuteronomy. 7.
5. Ye shall destroy their Altars, and break down their Images, and cut down
their groves, and burn their graven Images with fire.

3. 2 Cro. 34.
Josiah while he was yet young, began to seek after the God of David his
father, and began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the
groves, and the carved Images, and the moulten Images.

4. And they brake down the Altars of Baalim in his presence, and the Images
that were on high above them be cut down, and the groves, and the carved
Images, and the moulten Images he brake in pieces, and made dust of them, and
strowed it upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.

5. And he burnt the bones of the Priests upon their altars, and cleansed
Judah and Jerusalem.

1. Sam. 7
3. If ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts; then put away the
strange Gods, and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
Lord, and serve him only.

4. The children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the
Lord only.

10. Ier. 10.
The Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King; at
his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide
his indignation.

Invocation.
13. Romans 10.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

15. Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

9. Zepha. 3
I will turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the
name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.

Act. 7.
59 They stoned Steven calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit.

Luke 11.
2. When ye pray, say; Our father which art in heaven; hallowed be thy name:
Thy kingdom come: thy will be done, as in heaven so in earth.

3. Give us day by day our daily bread.

4. And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted
to us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

23. Io. 16.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name he will give it you.

28. Mat. 11.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.

16. Heb. 4.
Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need.

14. Psalm. 50.
Offer unto GOD thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high.

3. 18.
I will call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved
from mine enemies.

6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God; He heard my
voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.

5.
3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

13.
3. Consider, and hear me o Lord my God; lighten mine eyes, least I sleep the
sleep of death.

1. King. 8.
39. Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to
every man according to his ways, whose heart thou know: for thou, even thou
only know the hearts of all the children of men.

16. Isa. 63.
Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not; thou o Lord art our father, our redeemer, thy name is from
everlasting.

5. Eccle. 9.
The living know that they shall die; but the dead know not any thing, neither
have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten.

6. Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished; neither
have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun.

Job 14.
21. His sons come to honor, and he knows it not; and they are brought low,
but he perceives it not of them.

Psalm. 99.
6. Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his
name, they called upon the Lord, and he answered them.

7. He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies, and the
ordinance that he gave them.

12. Romans 10.
The same Lord over all is rich to all that call upon him.

Adoration.
18. Psalm. 145.
THe Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him; to all that call upon him
in truth.

23. Io. 4.
The true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and in truth: for
the father seeks such to worship him.

24. God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit
and in truth.

Psalm. 51.
17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart o
God thou will not despise.

1. Cor. 6.
20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in
your spirit, which are Gods.

1. Pet. 2.
5. Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Philip. 3.
3. We are the circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

20. Ier. 6.
To what purpose comes there to me Incense from Sheba? and the sweet cane
from a far country? your burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your
sacrifices sweet unto me.

23. Amos. 5.
Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs, for I will not hear the melody
of thy viols.

24. But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty
stream.

8. Micha. 6.
What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God?

Isa. 1.
16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil;

17. Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow.

Deuteronomy. 13.
4. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him.

12. 10.
What does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to
walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul?

13. To keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes, which I command
thee this day for thy good.

30. Mar. 12.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this is the first
commandment.

Josh. 22.
5. Take diligent heed to do the commandment, and the law which Moses the
servant of the Lord charged you; to love the Lord your God, and to walk in all
his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve
him with all your heart, and with all your soul.

Col. 2.
18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.

8. When I had heard, Revel. 22.
and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, which showed
me these things.

9. Then says he unto me, see thou do it not; for I am thy fellow servant,
and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this
book; worship God.

10. 19.
And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me; see thou do it
not; I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of
Jesus; Worship God.

2. The Lord is great in Zion, and he is high above all people.

5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy.

Josh. 24.
14. Fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity, and in truth, and put away the
Gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt,
and serve ye the Lord.

Isa. 8.
13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let
him be your dread.

Revel 14.
7. Worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of
waters.

8. Luke 4.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy GOD, and him only shall thou serve.

Faith.
1. Heb. 11.
FAith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of things not seen.

6. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

46. Io. 12.
I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me should not
abide in darkness.

John. 3.
36. He that believes on the son, has everlasting life; and he that
believes not the son shall not see life: but the wrath of God shall abide on
him.

Galat. 3.
26. Ye are the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

Act. 10.
43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever
belieueth in him, shall receive remission of sins.

22. Heb. 10.
Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith.

23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is
faithful that promised.

9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, Romans 10.
and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved.

10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness: and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.

Gal. 3.
9. They that be of faith are blessed, with faithful Abraham.

1. Pet. 1.
9. The end of your faith, the salvation of your souls.

Repentance.
Hos. 14.
1. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.

Act. 3.
19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out.

23. Ezech. 18.
Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says the Lord God? and
not that he should return from his ways and live.

30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your (...).

31. Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby you have transgressed;
and make you a new heart, and a new spirit.

11. Turn ye, turn ye, 33.
from your evil ways, for why will ye die, (...) o house of Israel?

Isa. 1.
18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be
as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson,
they shall be as wool.

Heb. 6.
9. The Lord is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to repentance.

Isa. 55.
7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our
GOD, for he will abundantly pardon.

40. Let us search, Lam. 3.
and try our ways and turn again to the Lord.

25. The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him.

27. Job. 33.
If any say I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited
me not;

28. He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall fee
the light

7. Psalm. 130.
Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him
is plenteous redemption.

8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

Confession.
Pro. 28.
13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so confesses, and
forsakes the^, shall have mercy.

Luke 15.
18. I will arise, and go to my father, and will say unto him, father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee,

19. And am no more worthy to be called thy son.

5. Psalm. 32.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid, I said I
will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the iniquity
of my sin.

4. Dan. 9.
I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said; O Lord the
great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant, and mercy to them that love
him, and to them that keep his commandments;

5. We have sinned and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments.

Dan 9.
6. Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spoke in
thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of
the land.

Nehem. 1
5. O Lord God of heaven, the great and terrible God, that keeps covenant, and
mercy for them that love him, and observe his commandments;

6. Let thine ear be now attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou may
hear the prayer of thy servant which I pray before thee now, day and night,
for the children of Israel thy servants; and confess the sins of the
children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee, both I, and my fathers
house have sinned.

7. We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the
commandments, nor the statutes, nor the Judgments, which thou commandedst thy
servant Moses.

10. 2 Samuel 24.
David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done; and now I
beseech thee O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done
foolishly.

Luke 18.
13. The publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes
unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful unto me a sinner.

1. John 1.
9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Romans 14.
11. As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue
shall confess to God.

12. So then every one of us shall give account of himself unto God.

4. Psalm. 41.
Lord be merciful unto me heal my soul; for I have sinned against thee.

Faith and works.
22. James 1.
BE ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

23. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man
beholding his natural face in a glass:

24. For he beholds himself, and goes his way, and straight way forgets
what manner of man he was.

Iam. 1.
25. But who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein,
he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be
blessed in his deed.

26. If any among you seem to be religious, and bridle not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart; this man's religion is vain.

27. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the father is this; to visit
the fatherless, and the widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world.

Romans 2.
13. Not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law
shall be justified.

21. Mat. 7.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.

24. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him
unto a wise man which built his house upon a rock:

25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock.

Math. 7.
26. And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not; shall
be likened unto a foolish man which built his house upon the sand:

27. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell; and great was the fall of that house.

5.
16. Let your light so shine before me^, that they may see your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

5. Peter 1.
5. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge,

6. And to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience
godliness:

7. And to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity:

8. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that you shall
neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9. But he that lacks these things is blind and cannot see far off, and
has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

2. Pet. 1.
10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling, and
election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

11. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Tit. 3.
8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good works: these things are good and profitable unto men.

14. Iam. 2.
What does it profit my brethren, though a man say, he has faith, and have not
works, can faith save him?

15. If a brother, or a sister be naked, and destitute of daily food;

16. And one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled;
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful for the body;
what does it profit?

17. Even so faith, if it have not works, is dead, being alone.

James 2.
21. Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he had offered Isaac
his son upon the Altar?

22. See thou how faith wrought with his works? and by works was faith made
perfect.

23. And the Scripture was fullfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and
it was imputed to him for righteousness; and he was called the friend of GOD.

24. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.

26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead
also.

Justification.
19. NOw we know, Romans 3.
that what things soever the law says, it says to them that are under the
law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God.

20. Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight; for by the law is the knowledge of sin.

Romans 3.
21. But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being
witnessed by the law, and the Prophets.

22. Even the righteousness, of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto
all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference.

23. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;

24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ.

28, Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds
of the law.

31. Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea we establish
the law.

4 To him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. Romans 4.


5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly; his faith is counted for righteousness.

13. The promise that he should be the heir of the world was not to Abraham,
or his seed thorough the law, but thorough the righteousness of faith.

Romans 4.
14. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void and the
promise made of none effect.

Romans 5.
1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ:

2. By whom also we have access by faith into his grace, wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

18. As by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation: eue^
so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life.

5. Titus 3.
Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost:

6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our savior.

7. That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to
the hope of eternal life.

8. Ephe. 2.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God:

9. Not of works, least any man should boast.

Galat. 5.
4. Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by
the law; ye are fallen from grace.

5. For we through the spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.

6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

Luke 17.
10. When ye shall have done all those things, which are commanded you, say, we
are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.

8. Phil. 3.
I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung that I may win Christ;

9. And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by faith.

11. Be not slothful, Heb. 6.
but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promise.

Gal. 3.
2. This only would I learn of you, received ye the spirit by the works of
the law, or by the hearing of faith?

3. Are ye so foolish, having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by
the flesh?

11. That no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident;
for the just shall live by faith.

18. If the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: but God gave
it to Abraham by promise.

21. Gal. 3.
For if there had been a law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the law.

22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin; that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

23. But before faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith
which should afterward be revealed.

24. Wherefore the law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith.

Gal. 3.
25. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster.

26. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

Fasting.
Matthew. 6.
16. WHen ye fast, be not as the Hipocrites, of a sad countenance; for they
disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast: verily I say unto
you, they have their reward.

17. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face:

18. That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy father which is in
secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

5. Isa. 58.
Is it such a fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his soul? Is
it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackloth, and ashes under
him? will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?

6. Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bonds of wickedness,
to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke?

7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that are cast out to thine house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover
him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh?

Zechar. 7.
5. When ye fasted, and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those
seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me.

9. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, execute true judgment, and show
mercy and compassion every man to his brother?

10. And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the
poor, and let not any of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.

3. Dan. 9.
I set my face unto the Lord God to seek by prayer, and supplication, with
fasting, and sackcloth and ashes.

4. Nehem. 1.
I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed
before the Lord of heaven.

1. Sam. 7.
6. The Israelites fasted and said, We have sinned against the Lord.

Luke. 2.
37. Anna was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not
from the Temple; but served God with fasting, and prayers day and night.

udg 20.
26. All the children of Israel, and all the people went up, and came unto the
House of God and wept, and sat there before the Lord and fasted that day
until even, and offered burnt offerings, and peace offerings before the Lord.

12. Joel. 2.
Turn ye even to me says the Lord, with all your heart, and with fasting and
with weeping, and with mourning.

13. And rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your
God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and repents him of the evil.

15. Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemme assembly:

16. Gather the people; sanctify the Congregation; assemble the Elders; gather
the children, and those that suck the breasts; let the bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.

Joel 2.
17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the
Alter, and let them say, Spare thy people O Lord, and give not thine heritage
to reproach; that the heathen should rule over them.

Jonah 3.
5. The people of Nineueh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on
sackloth, from the greatest of them, to the least of them.

6. And the king of Nineueh arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from
him, and covered him with sackloth, and sat in ashes.

7. And he caused it to be proclaimed, and published through Nineueh (by the
decree of the king and his nobles) saying, let neither man nor beast, heard nor
flock taste any thing; let them not feed, nor drink water.

8. But let man, and beast be covered with sakcloth, and cry mightily unto God;
yea let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is
in their hands.

Jonah 3.
9. Who can tell if God will ^^^ne, and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that we perish not?

10. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way: and God
repented of the evil that he had said, that he would do unto them, and he
did it not.

Meats.
Col. 2.
16. LEt no man judge you in meat or in drink;

Romans 14.
17. For the kingdom of God is not meat, and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

8. 1. Cor. 8.
Meat commends us not to God, for neither if we eat, are we the better;
neither if we eat not, are we the worse.

25. 10.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, making no question for
conscience sake: for the earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof.

14. Romans 14.
There is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any thing to
be unclean, to him it is unclean.

Tit. 1.
15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their mind, and conscience is defiled.

Mat. 15.
11. Not that which goes into the mouth defiles a man, but that which comes
out of the mouth, this defiles a man.

18. Those things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from the heart,
and they defile the man.

Mar. 7.
15. There is nothing from without a man that entering into him can defile him;
but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man.

21. For from within out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders.

22. Thefts, coueteousnesse, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil
eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness.

23. All these evil things come from within, and defile the man.

31. 1. Cor. 10.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

1. Tim. 4.
4. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving.

5. For it is sanctified by the Word of God and prayer.

1. Cor. 8.
9. But take heed least by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling
block to them that are weak.

Romans 14.
15. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably;
destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

20. All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man who eats with
offense.

21. It is neither good to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

13. 1. Cor. 8.
If meat make my brother offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, lest I make my brother to offend.

2. Romans 14.
One believes that he may eat all things, another, who is weak, eats
herbs.

3. Let not him that eats despise him that eats not; and let not him which
eats not, judge him that eats; for God has received him.

Romans 14.
6. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks: and he
that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and gives God thanks.

23. He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith:
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another.

Love and Charity.
7. Beloved, 1. John. 4.
let us love one another, for love is of God; and every one that loves, is
borne of God, and knows God.

8. He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love.

12. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us.

16. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

10. 2.
He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no occasion of
stumbling in him.

11. But he that hates his brother is in darkness, 1. Iohh 4.
and walks in darkness, and knows not whether he goes, because that
darkness has blinded his eyes.

20. If a man say, I love GOD, and hates his brother, he is a lier: for he
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen?

21. And this commandment have we from him, that he that loves GOD, love
his brother also.

10. Romans 13.
Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the fullfilling of the
law.

14. Gal. 5.
For all the law is fullfilled in one word, even in this, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self.

15. But if ye bite, and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one
of another.

9. 1. These. 4.
Ye your selves are taught of God to love one another.

22. 1. Pet. 1.
See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently.

1. Tim. 1.
5. The end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

1. John 3.
18, Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in truth.

Deuteronomy. 15.
7. Thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother.

8. But thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him
sufficient for his need in that which he wants.

10. Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved, when
thou give unto him, because that for this thing, the Lord thy GOD shall
bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put ^hine hand unto.

27 He that gives unto the poor shall not lack; Pro. 28.
but he that hides his eyes, shall have many a curse.

17. 19.
He that has pity upon the poor lends unto the Lord; and that which he
has given, will he pay him again.

1. Psalm. 41.
Blessed is he that considers the poor, and needy, the Lord will deliver him
in time of trouble.

Romans 12
8. He that gives, let him do it with simplicity; he that shows mercy with
cheerfulness.

1. John 3.
17. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him?

1. Peter 4.
8. Above all things have fervent charity among your selves; for charity shall
cover the multitude of sins.

1. Cor. 16.
14. Let all your things be done with charity.

1. These. 3.
12. And the Lord make you to increase and to abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men.

Prayer.
8. 1. Tim. 2.
I Will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath, and
doubting.

18. Ephe. 6.
Praying always with all prayer, and supplication in the spirit.

20. Jude
Build up your selves in your most holy faith praying in the holy Ghost.

24. Mark 11.
What things soever ye desire when ye pray; believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them.

25. And when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have ought against any, that your
father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.

26. But if you do not forgive, neither will your father which is in heaven
forgive you your trespasses.

Mat. 6.
5. When thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hipocrites are; for they love
to stand praying in Synagogues, and in the corners of the street, that they
may be seen of men: verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut
thy door, pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly.

7. When you pray, use not vain repetitions as the heathen do, for they
think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

41. Lam. 3.
Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

14. 1. Cor. 14.
If I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but mine understanding is
unfruitful.

15. I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with understanding also.

19. In the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that
by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue.

8. For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to
the battle.

6. So likewise you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye speak into the air.

2. Continue in prayer, Col. 4.
and watch in the same with thanksegiuing.

10. Dan. 6.
Daniel kneeled upon his knees three times 1 day and prayed, and gave thanks
before his God.

17. Evening, Psalm. 55.
and morning, and at noone will I pray, and cry aloude; and he shall hear my
voice.

16. James 5.
Pray one for another, that ye may be healed; the effectual fervent prayer of
a righteous man avails much.

13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.

One Mediator.
1. John 2.
1. IF any man sin, we have an advocate with the father JESUS CHRIST the
righteous.

1. Tim. 2.
5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus.

Romans 8.
34. Christ is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us.

Hebr. 7.
25. He is able also to save them for evermore that come unto God by him; seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them.

24. 9.
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the
figures of the true (...), but into heaven it self, now to apeare in the
presence of God for us.

6. I am the way, John 14.
the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the father but by me.

1. 10.
He that enters not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climeth up some
other way, the same is a thief, and a robber.

9. I am the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved.

Math. 11.
28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.

28.
18. all power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.

Our Propitiation, Purgatory, and Satisfaction.
Romans 3.
25. GOd has set forth Christ Jesus to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God.

2. 1. John. 2.
And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world.

6. 1. Tim. 2.
He gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time.

4. Isay. 53.
Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows.

5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.

25. Romans 4.
He was delivered for our offenses and was raised again for our justification.

1. Pet. 2.
24. His own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes we were healed.

25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but now are returned to the
sheapheard and Bishop of your souls.

Romans 5.
11. We also joy in God thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the atonement.

10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God, by the death of his
son.

9. Heb. 5.
Being made perfect he became the author of eternal salvation unto all that
obey him.

3. 1.
When he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of
the majesty on high.

12. 9.
By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us.

26. Once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself.

Heb. 9.
28. Christ was offered once, to bear the sins of many.

2. Cor. 5.
18. All things are of God who has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ.

1. John. 4.
10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

John. 8.
36. If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

1. John 1.
7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

18. 1. Pet. 1.
Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your
vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers.

19. But with the precious blood of Christ as of a lamb without blemish, and
without spot.

14. Heb. 10.
For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Romans 4.
7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

Sins.
Pro. 20.
9. WHo can say, I have made my heart clean? I am pure from my sin?

1. John. 3.
4. Sin is the transgression of the Law.

Gal. 3.
10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for it is
written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them.

10. Ia. 2.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all.

36. Math. 12.
Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in
the day of judgment.

22. 5.
Whosoever is angry with his brother, without a cause shall be in danger of
the judgment, and whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in
danger of the Council: But whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be in danger
of hell fire.

Romans 6.
23. The wages of sin is death.

7.
11. Sin taking occasion by the commandment deceived me, and by it slew me.

Ezech. 18.
20. The soul that sins shall die.

Romans 5.
12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Ephe. 5.
5. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous
man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of
God.

6. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

30. Ezech. 18
I will judge you o house of Israel, every one according to his ways says the
Lord God: repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin.

Genesis 19
26. Lots wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.

Number. 15.
36. All the congregation brought the man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath
day without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died, as the Lord
commanded Moses.

Leuit. 24.
13. The Lord spoke unto Moses saying;

14. Bring forth him that has cursed, without the camp, and let all that
heard him, lay their hands upon his head, and let all the Congregation stone
him.

6. 2. Sam. 6.
Vzzah put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took hold of it, for the
oxen shook it.

7. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and God smote him
there for his error, and there he died by the Ark of God.

19. 1. Sam. 6.
And he smote the men of Beth-shemesh because they had looked into the Ark of the Lord, eue^ he smote of the people threescore thousand, and threescore, and
ten men.

30. Math. 25.
Cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Iam. 3.
2. In many things we offend all.

1. John. 1.
7. And the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

Will.
Genesis 6.
5. GOd saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.

8.
21. The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth.

23. Ier. 10.
O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps.

18. 31.
Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God.

24. Pro. 20.
Man's goings are of the Lord; how can a man then understand his own way.

1. 16.
The preparations of the heart of man, and the answer of the tongue, is from
the Lord.

5. John 15.
I am the vine ye are the branches; he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing.

Psalm. 32.
8. I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way that thou shall go: I will
guide thee with mine eye.

Hosea 13.
9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help.

John 6.
44. No man can come to me, except the father which has sent me, draw him.

2. Cor. 3.
5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves:
for our sufficiency is of God.

13. Philip. 2.
It is God which works in you both to will, and to do of his good pleasure.

17. James 1.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from
the father of lights; with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.

18. Of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth, that we should
be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.

15. Ye ought to say, James 4.
if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, or that.

Acts 18:
21. I will return again unto you, if God will.

1. Cor. 4.
19. I will come unto you shortly if the Lord will.

Heb. 6.
3. This will we do if God permit.

Ezech. 36.
26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh.

17. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

45. Luke 24.
Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.

12. John. 1.
As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name.

13. Which were borne not of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man but of God.

Hypocrisy.
8. James 4.
CLeanse your hands ye sinners; and purify your hearts ye double minded.

Luke 12.
1. Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.

Pro. 30.
12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not
washed from their filthiness.

Job 36.
13. The hypocrites in heart heap up wrath.

Isay. 58
2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did
righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God, they ask of me
the ordinances of Justice, they take delight in aproaching to God.

5. Mat. 23.
But all their works they do, for to be seen of men.

23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye pay tithe of mynt
and annise, and cu^myne, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the
other undone.

27. Ye are like to whited sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful
outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of uncleanness.

28. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are
full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

Luke 11.
39. Ye Pharisees do make clean the outside of the cup and platter, but your
inward part is full of ravening, and wickedness.

Mat. 23.
26. Cleanse first that which is within the cup, and platter, that the outside
of them may be clean also.

Luke 11.
40. Ye fools, did not he which made that which is without, make that which is
within also?

41. Rather give alms of such things as you have; and behold all things are
clean unto you.

Riches.
1. Eccles. 6.
THere is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common among
men.

2. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he
wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not
power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it: this is vanity, and it is an
evil disease.

1. Tim. 6.
17. Charge them that be rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy.

18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

19. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

James 5.
1. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come
upon you.

2. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten.

3. Your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire; ye have heaped up
treasure together for the last days.

24 Woe unto you that are rich, Luke 6.
for ye have received your consolation.

19. Mar. 4.
The cares of this world, and the deceitfullnesse of riches, and the lusts of
other things entering in, choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.

Luke 16.
13. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

1 Timothy 6.
6. Godliness with contentment is great gain.

Psalm. 62.
10. If riches increase, set not your heart upon them.

1 Timothy 6.
7. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out.

8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

9. But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish, and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction, and perdition.

10. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coueted
after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves thorough with
many sorrows.

20. Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee; Luke 12.
then whose shall those things be which thou have provided.

21. So is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.

Pro. 18.
11. The rich man's wealth is his strong city; and as an high wall in his own
conceit.

11.
4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath; but righteousness delivers from
death.

Zepha. 1.
18. Neither their silver, nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lords wrath.

Luke 12.
15. A man's life consists not in the abundance of things which he possesses.

31. Rather seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added
unto you.

Patience.
14. 1. These. 5.
BE patient toward all men.

15, See that none render evil for evil unto any man, but ever follow that
which is good, both among your selves, and to all men.

19. Romans 12.
Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written,
vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.

3. James 1.
The trying of your faith works patience.

4. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect, and
entire, wanting nothing.

Romans 5.
3. Tribulations work patience.

4. And patience experience, and experience hope.

Luke 21.
19. In your patience possess ye your selves.

Phil. 4.
5. Let your moderation be known unto all men.

Iam. 1.
19. Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.

20. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

Pro. 16.
32. He that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty, and he that rules
his spirit, then he that takes a city.

29. 14.
He that is slow to wrath, is of great understanding; but he that is hasty
of spirit, exalts folly.

4. Wrath is cruel, 27.
and anger is outrageous.

9. Eccles. 7.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of
fools.

7. Iam. 5.
Be patient unto the coming of the Lord; behold the husbandman waits for
the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he
receive the early, and later rain.

8. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh.

10. Take the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example
of suffering affliction, and of patience.

11. Behold we count them happy which endure: ye have heard of the patience
of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is pitiful, and of
tender mercy.

1. Pet. 5.
10. The GOD of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you.

11. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Humility.
6. 1. Pet. 5.
HVmble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time.

5. Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility:
for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

^^o. 16.
19. Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, then to divide the
spoil with the proud.

11.
2. When pride comes, then comes shame, but with the lowly is wisdom.

Mat. 11.
29. Learn of me, for I am lowly in heart.

^uk. 14.
11. Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself
shall be exalted.

^phes: 4.
1. Walk worthy of the vocation wherein ye are called.

2. With all lowliness, and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one
another in love.

3. Phil 2.
Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind
let each esteem other better then themselves.

5. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.

7. Who made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men.

8. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.

Phil. 2.
9. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is
above every name.

10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth.

11. And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the father.

Psalm. 138.
6. Though the Lord be high, yet he has respect unto the lowly, but the proud
he knows afar off.

9. 25.
The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.

34. Pro. 3.
Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he gives grace unto the lowly.

6. Psalm. 147.
The Lord lifts up the meek: he casts the ungodly down to the ground.

10. Luke 18.
Two men went up into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a
Publican.

11. The Pharise stood and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank thee that I
am not as other men are, exortioners, unjust, adulterers, and even as this
Publican.

Luke 18.
12. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.

13. And the Publican standing a far off, would not lift up so much as his
eyes unto heaven; but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a
sinner.

14. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified, rather then the
other: for every one that exalts himself shall be abased: and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

The holy Eucharist.
26. Jesus took bread, Mat. 26.
and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, take,
eat, this is my body.

27. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying;
drink ye all of it.

28. For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins.

22. Jesus took bread, Mark. 14.
and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said; take, eat, this is my
bod^.

23. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to
them, and they all drank of it.

24. And he said unto them, this is my blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for many.

Luke 22.
19. He took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, this is my body, which is given for you; this do in remembrance of me.

20. Likewise also the cup after supper, saying; this cup is the new Testament
in my blood, which is shed for you.

16. 1. Co. 10.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
CHRIST? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ?

17. For we being many, are one bread, and one body; for we are all partakers
of that one bread.

23. The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread;

24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said; take, eat, this is
my body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.

Cor. 11.
25. After the same manner also he took the cup when he had supped, saying;
this cup is the new Testament in my blood: this do, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me.

26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the
Lords death till he come.

27. Wherefore who soever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup.

29. For he that eats, and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

3. Cor. 10.
Our fathers did all eat the same spiritual meat.

4. And did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.

35. Jesus said, Ioh. 6
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me, shall never thirst.

51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: If any man eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world.

56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in
him.

58. Not as your fathers did eat Manna, and are dead; he that eats of this
bread, shall live for ever.

63. John 6.
It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words that
I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.

28. 16.
I came forth from the father, and am come into the world: again I leave the
world, and go to my father.

7. It is expedient for you, that I go away; for if I go not away, the
comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

2. 14.
I go to prepare a place for you.

3. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

Mat. 26.
29. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day,
when I drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom.

Mar. 16.
19. After the Lord had spoken to them, he was received up into heaven, and
sat on the right hand of God.

Heb. 10.
13. From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.

14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

1. Col. 3.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God.

20. Phil. 3.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior the
Lord Jesus Christ.

21. Acts 3.
Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world
began.

The happiness of Gods servants.
Psalm. 37.
37. Mark the perfect man and behold the upright; for the end of that man is
peace.

92.
12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm tree: he shall grow like a
Cedar in Lebanon.

Hosea 14.
6. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree; and
his smell as Lebanon.

Psalm. 92.
13. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the
Courts of our God.

14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat, and
flourishing.

23. 37.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord; and he delights in his way.

24. Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down: for the Lord
vpholdeth him with his hand.

12. 25.
What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he reach in the way that he
shall choose.

13. His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the earth.

14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them
his covenant.

^sal. 103.
17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting, to everlasting upon them that
fear him; and his righteousness unto childrens children.

18. To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his
commandments to do them.

65.
4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and causest to approach unto thee,
that he may dwell in thy courts: he shall be satisfied with the goodness of
thy house, even of thy holy Temple.

The vanity of the world.
15. Love not the world, 1. John 2.
neither the things that are in the world; if any man love the world, the love
of the father is not in him.

16. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh; the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.

17. And the world passes away, and the lust thereof: but he that does the
will of God abides for ever.

Eccles. 1.
14. I have seen all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold all is
vanity, and vexation of spirit.

Col. 3.
2. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.

James 4.
4. Whosoever will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God.

Mat. 6.
24. No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love
the other: or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot
God and Mammon.

15. Luke 16.
That which is highly esteemed amongst men is abomination in the sight of God.

14. What is your life? James. 4.
It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

4. Psalm. 144.
Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passes away.

15. 103.
His days are as grass, as a flower of the field; so he florisheth.

16. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone: and the place thereof shall
know it no more:

2. Job 14.
He comes forth like a flower and is cut down; he flies also as a shadow,
and continues not.

1. Pet. 1.
24. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of
gras: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away.

Psalm. 62.
9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to
be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.

39.
5. Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.

The end of the world.
3. Math. 24.
AS Jesus sat upon the Mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately,
saying, tell us what shall be the sign of thy coming? and of the end of the
world?

4. And Jesus answered and said unto them; Take heed that no man deceive you.

5. For many shall come in my name saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

6. And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars: See that ye be not
troubled; for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.

Math 24.
7. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and
there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in diverse places.

8. All these are but the beginning of sorrows.

9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye
shall be hated of all Nations for my names sake.

10. And they shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall
hate one another.

11. And many false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many.

12. And because iniquity shall abound; the love of many shall wax cold.

13. But he that shall endure unto the end shall be saved.

14. And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come.

21. Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of
the world to this time, no not ever shall be.

Mat. 24.
22. And except those days should be shortened there should no flesh be saved:
but for the elects sake, those days shall be shortened.

24. There shall arise false christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great
signs, and wonders: in so much that if it were possible, they shall deceive
the very elect.

2. Tim. 3.
1. This know also that in the last days perilous times shall come.

2. For men shall be lovers of their own selves covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy.

3. Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good.

4. Traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God.

5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such
turn away.

6. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly
women, lade^ with sins, led away with diverse lusts.

7. Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 2.
Tim. 3.


8. Now as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning faith.

9. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifested
unto all men; as theirs also was.

Luke 21.
25. And there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the
stars, and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea,
and the waters shall roar.

26. Men's heart failing them for fear, and for looking after those things
which are coming on the earth; for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

27. And then shall they see the son of man coming in a cloud with power
and great glory.

28. And when these things shall begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads for your redemption draws nigh.

13. Mar. 13.
But of that day and hour knows no man, not the Angels in heaven, nor the
son but the father.

Luke 21.
36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things, that shall come to pass, and to stand before the
son of man.

1. These. 4.
15. For this we say, unto you by the word of the Lord; that we which are
alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which
are asleep.

16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute, with the
voice of the Archangel and with the trumpe of God: and the dead in Christ shall
rise first.

17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with
the Lord.

The Judgment.
27. Heb. 9.
IT is appointed unto all men to die; but after this the Judgment.

7. Eccles. 12.
The dust shall return to the earth as it was; and the spirit shall return to
God who gave it.

1. 2. Cor. 5.
We know if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved; we have a
building of God, a house not made with hand, eternal in the heavens.

Romans 8.
10. The body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of
righteousness.

Gal. 6.
8. He that sows to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

John 5.
24. He that hears my Word and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.

18. Psalm. 37.
The Lord knows the days of the upright; and their inheritance shall be for
ever.

20. But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the
fat of lambs; they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away.

23. Romans 6.
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of GOD is eternal life thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord.

22. The beggar died, Luke 16
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, the rich man also died,
and was buried.

23. And in hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom:

24. And he cried, and said; father Abraham have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue,
for I am tormented in this flame.

25. But Abraham said, son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted,
and thou art tormented.

13. Wide is the gate, Mat. 7.
and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many there be which go
in thereat.

14. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leads unto life, and
few there be that find it.

28. John 15.
The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves, shall hear his
voice.

29. And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.

Mat: 25.
46. These shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into
life eternal.

Dan. 12.
2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

Mat. 25.
31. When the son of man shall come in his glory, and shall the holy Angels
with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory.

32. Mat. 25.
And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one
from another, as a sheapheard divides his sheep from the goats.

33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

34. Then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed of
my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.

41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels.

Jude.
24. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultlesse, before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy.

25. To the only wise God our Savior, be glory, and majesty, dominion, and
power, now, and ever, Amen.

Revel 22.
14. Blessed are they that do his commandments that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.

15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers,
and Idolaters, and whosoever loves, and makes a lie.

PSALTERIES OF THE HOLY GHOST

ROMANS 14 17. The Kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

LONDON, Printed for E. BLACKMORE. 1628.

A PREFACE concerning the PSALMS.
DAVID is said to be the isntrumental cause of the Psalms, to whom all things
were revealed, and by him set down He is also esteemed the greater, 2. Samuel
23.2.
and more excellent Prophet, in that he did not Prophecy by certain visions
of things, or dark couerings of words, but by the inward motion only of the
holy Ghost: which is most evident, because the manifold and most beautiful
riches in that tresurie contained, are impossible to be matched by any other.
Among which the invocation of Almighty God (being the greatest defense for our
salvation, against the continual assaults of Satan) is most excellently
composed for a presedent, and direction unto us upon all occasions. Ephesians. 6.18
We are commanded to pray always, with all prayer and supplication in the
spirit, which is impossible for us to do, unless we be learned in the exercise
of Piety, and guided therein by the holy Spirit of God. The true rule whereof
is to be taken out of the Book of the Psalms. For by reading them we are as
well stirred up to the understanding of our infirmities, as admonished and
taught how to seek a sure remedy for them. They are doubtless the Anatomy
of all the parts of the soul: for we cannot find any disposition or
affection of the mind in our selves, the form and proportion whereof, is not
in this glass represented. When in this language we prepare our selves to
speak unto God, we are drawn to so strict an examination of our
transgressions that all our secret offenses being disclosed, and our hearts
cleansed from hypocrisy, we cannot but deliver a real account, and full
confession of them. By this language (which is Verba spiritus sancti, The words
of the holy Ghost) we have not only a familiar access unto God, but do also
find it more safe and available for us to acknowledge and confess our sins
before him, then before men, 1. John 1.9.
for he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. Psalm. 118.8.
And it is better to trust in him then to put confidence in man. In them we
have examples and directions of thanksgiving for blessings received, and
dangers escaped. They are most comfortable in all times of temptation, trouble
and affliction.

The Psalms therefore ought to be our meditations in all holy exercises, both
private and public; they are the key of knowledge. Almost all holy write and
mysteries are briefly contained in them. Their scope is the right way to
eternal felicity.

Some of the Fathers do counsel the young soldiers of Christ Jesus, Cassidor
first to learn them, before they learn the other holy Scriptures.

Others affirm that they are Arma Iuuenum, Climac. ex sententia Patrum.
The armor and weapons of young men; And I doubt not but they may also truly
be accounted, Armentaria senum; The armories and storehouses of old men.
Another says, Basil.
Liber Psalmo^u^ quidvi, in se complectitur quod vsui sit, and omni. bonae
doctrinae promptua^ium est; The book of the Psalms contains in it
whatsoever is useful, and is the storehouse of all good doctrine. In them
certainly is expressed as in a lively resemblance, the true rule of religious
service, and worship; for the example of a godly man assaulted by all manner of
temptations, is of more power to move, and encourage us to fly unto God, in
time of necessity, then a Commandment alone. In proem. in 7. Psalm. poenitent.
INNOCENT the third says; Inter omnes orationis species, post orationem
dominicam, perfecta in Psalmis forma orandi reperitur. Among all kinds of
prayer, next unto the Lords prayer, the absolute form of praying is sound in
the Psalms, yet not only the words are to be read, and rehearsed in our
meditations, but our hearts also must be attendant, and elevated unto heaven;
for we are taught to lift up our hands with our hearts unto God in the heavens.

The holy Ghost being the dictator and guide of David's pen, Lam. 3.41.
and tongue when they were by him registered, It is most meet and requisite,
that in all times of our devotion, they be recited with the assistance of the
same blessed Spirit, which we must beforehand invoke, lifting up holy hands,
1. Tim. 2 8.
without wrath or doubting.

S. AUGUSTINE in his last sickness appointed DAVID'S Penitential Psalms to be
written, Possidius in vita August.
and set upon the four sides of the wall, which on his sick days lying on
his bed, he did behold and read; always shedding forth tears abundantly. S.
BASIL also being in his death bed, desired that the Psalms might be read unto
him by GREGORY NAZIANZEN. A man certainly in his greatest sorrow, and anguish
of conscience occasioned by Gods wrath, and judgment, may by them learn to
raise up, and comfort himself. Come then, let us bring our offering of the
finest gold to lay upon Gods Altar, the least grain whereof is more precious
in his sight, then all the Alcumie of the world. Let us drink of the purest
fountain and forsake the troubled and muddie rivers.

Isa. 55.1.
Every one that thirsts, come ye to these waters, and he that has no money,
yea, come buy wine, and milk without money, and without price. Wherefore do
ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which
satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto the undoubted testimonies of our God,
and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto him, hear, and your soul shall
live; and he will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of DAVID.

PSALTERIES OF THE HOLY GHOST.
A Psalm of Confession.
VERSE

Psalm. 25.
1. Unto thee O LORD, do I lift up my soul.

19.
14. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be acceptable
in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

Psalm. 5.
2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King and my God; for unto thee will I
pray.

4. Psalm. 5.
For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness: neither shall evil
dwell with thee.

3. 130.
If thou Lord should mark iniquities; O Lord who shall stand?

4. But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

5. 86.
For thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all
them that call upon thee.

5. 69.
O God thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee.

Psalm. 119.
176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant, for I do not
forget thy commandments.

51.
3. I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight.

38.
3. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there
any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

4. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head; as an heavy burden, they are
two heavy for me.

5. My wounds stink, and are corrupt; because of my foolishness.

12. Psalm. 40.
Innumerable evils have compassed me, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me,
so that I am not able to look up. They are more then the hairs of mine head;
therefore mine heart fails me.

Of Contrition.
1. Psalm. 38.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

2. For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore.

Psalm. 38.
6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long.

22.
14. I am powered out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is
like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

31.
12. I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel.

41.
4. Lord be merciful unto me; heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

38.
9. All my desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

18. Psalm. 38.
For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.

17. 51.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; A broken and a contrite heart o God
thou will not despise:

8. 51.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice.

10. Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me.

11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Psalm. 51.
12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit.

For Remission.
Psalm. 51.
1. Have mercy upon me O God according to thy loving kindness: according to
the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

7. Purge me with Hisop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow.

11. Psalm. 25.
For thy names sake O Lord pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.

7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to
thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake o Lord.

16. Turn thee unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted.

18 Look upon mine affliction, and my pain; and forgive all my sins.

20. O keep my soul and deliver me; let me not be ashamed, for I put my
trust in thee.

Psalm. 39.
8. Deliver me from all my transgressions, make me not the reproach of the
foolish.

31.
16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, save me for thy mercies sake.

51.
9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

141.
8. Mine eyes are unto thee o Lord God, in thee is my trust: leave not my soul
destitute.

For mercy and direction.
16. Hear me o Lord, Psalm. 69.
for thy loving kindness is good, Turn unto me according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies.

6. 25.
Remember o Lord thy tender mercies and thy loving kindness; for they have
been ever of old.

9. 27.
Hide not thy face from me, put not thy servant away in anger; thou have been
my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

^sal. 86.
3. Be merciful unto me O Lord, for I cry unto thee daily.

25.
4. Show me thy ways O Lord, teach me thy paths.

5. Lead me in thy truth and teach me, for thou art the God of my salvation,
on thee do I wait all the day.

43.
2. For thou art the God of my strength, why do thou cast me off? why go I
mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?

43.
3. O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me; let them bring me
unto thy holy hill, and thy tabernacles.

8. Psalm. 143.
Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning for in thee do I trust:
Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul unto
thee.

10. Teach me to do thy will for thou art my God, thy spirit is good: lead
me into the land of uprightness.

11. 40.
Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me O Lord; Let thy loving kindness
and thy truth continually preserve me

^sal. 119.
133. Order my steps in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over
me.

86.
11. Teach me thy way O Lord, I will walk in thy truth, unite my heart to fear
thy name.

39.
4. Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days what it is, that
I may know how frail I am.

For understanding
119.
169. LEt my cry come near before thee O Lord, give me understanding according
to thy Word.

26. Psalm. 119
I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me; teach me thy statutes.

27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts; so shall I talk of thy
woundrous works.

18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wounderous things out of thy
Law.

73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding that I may
learn thy commandments.

41. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according
to thy Word.

Psalm. 119
77. Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live, for thy Law is my
delight.

119.
175. Let my soul live and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments help
me.

156. Great are thy tender mercies O LORD; quicken me according to thy
judgments.

144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me
understanding and I shall live.

160. Thy word is truth from the beginning; and every one of thy righteous
judgments endures for ever.

In trouble.
13. Psalm. 9.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble which I suffer of them that
hate me: thou that liftest me up from the gates of death.

12. 10.
Arise O Lord lift up thy hand; forget not the humble.

11. 22.
Be not far from me, for trouble is near, for there is none to help.

1. 31.
In the O Lord do I put my trust, let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy
righteousness.

Psalm. 31.
2. Bow down thine ear unto me, deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock
for an house of defense to save me.

3. For thou art my rock and my fortress: Therefore for thy names sake lead
me, and guide me.

16. Turn thee unto me, 25.
and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate, and afflicted.

17. The troubles of mine heart are enlarged: O bring me out of my distresses.

18. Psalm. 25.
Look upon mine affliction, and my pain; and forgive all my sins.

20. O Keep my soul, and deliver me: Let me not be ashamed, for I put my
trust in thee.

21. Let integrity, and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on thee.

15. 25.
Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord; for he shall pluck my feet out of the
net.

For deliverance.
1. Save me O God, 69.
for the waters are come in unto my soul.

Psalm. 69.
2. I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep
waters, where the floods ouerflow me.

13. My prayer is to thee O Lord in an acceptable time, O God in the multitude
of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.

14. Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered
from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

15. Let not the waterflood ouerflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up:
and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

16. Hear me o Lord, Psalm. 69.
for thy loving kindness is good; turn unto me according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies.

17. And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble; hear me
speedily.

33. The Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners.

13. 72.
He shall deliver the needy, when he cries: the poor also, and him that
has no helper.

5. 70.
I am poor and needy, make have unto me O God: thou art my help and my
deliverer, O Lord make no tarrying.

Psalm. 71.
2. Deliver me in thy righteousness and cause me to escape: incline thine ear
unto me, and save me.

3. Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou
have given commandment to save me, for thou art my recke and my fortress.

Against our enemies.
35.
1. Plead my cause O Lord with them that strive with me: fight against them
that fight against me.

2. Psalm. 35.
Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for my help.

3. Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me:
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

23. 35.
Stir up thy self and awake to my judgment: even unto my cause my God and
my Lord.

1. 59.
Deliver me from mine enemies. O Lord my God: defend me from them that rise
up against me.

^sal. 36.
25. Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it; let them not
say, we have swallowed him up.

9.
20. Put them in fear O Lord; that the nations may know themselves to be but
men.

109.
29. Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion, as with a mantle.

5.
11. But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice, let them ever shout
for joy, because thou defendest them; let them also that love thy name, be
joyful in thee.

7. Psalm. 138
Though I walk in the midst of trouble thou will receive me; thou shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me.

1. 7.
O Lord my God in thee do I put my trust; save me from al the^ that persecute
me, and deliver me.

8. Lead me O Lord, 5.
in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies: Make thy ways straight before
my face.

28. 35.
And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness: and of thy praise all the
day long.

Psalm. 71.
14. I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more.

15. My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all the
day, for I know no numbers thereof.

16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only.

18.
3. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved
from mine enemies.

84.
12. O Lord of Hosts: Blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

Of confidence in Gods mercy.
1. Psalm. 23.
THe Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

2. He makes me to lie down in green pastures: He leads me beside the
still waters.

3. He restores my soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness for
his names sake.

4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
none evil; for thou art with me, thy red, and thy staff, they comfort me.

Psalm. 61.
4. I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert of thy
wings.

7. Because thou have been my help; therefore in the shadow of thy wings will
I rejoice.

61.
3. For thou have been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from mine enemies.

71.
5. Thou art my hope, O Lord God: Thou art my trust from my youth.

35.
7. Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble; thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance.

7. Psalm. 5.
I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear
will I worship toward thine holy temple.

12. For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass
him as with a shield.

8. 16.
I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved.

5. 62.
My soul wait thou only upon GOD, for my expectation is from him.

6. He only is my rock, and my salvation: he is my defense I shall not be
moved.

40.
4. Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his trust.

Acknowledging Gods mercy.
Psalm. 28.
7. THe Lord is my strength, and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoices and with my song will I praise him.

86.
12. I will praise thee O Lord my God, with all my heart; and I will glorify
thy name for evermore.

13. For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from
the lowest hell.

3. Psalm. 1^3.
In the day when I cried thou answeredst me; and strengthenedst me with
strength in my soul.

5. 32.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity I have not hid.

6. I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgauest
the iniquity of my sin.

11. 16.
Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is fulness of joy, at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Psalm. 18.
32. It is God that girdeth me with strength; and makes my way perfect.

31. For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock save our God?

147.
3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.

^4.
22. The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that trust
in him shall be desolate.

145.
8. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great
mercy.

9. Psalm. 145.
The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

10. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints bless thee.

11. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominion endures
throughout all ages.

5. 36.
Thy mercy O Lord is in the heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto the
Clouds.

Psalm. 36.
6. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains, and thy judgments are a
great deep, O Lord thou preseruest man and beast.

7. How excellent is thy loving kindness O God? therefore the children of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou
shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures.

9. For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light shall we see light.

Magnifying Gods mercy and goodness.
1. I will praise thee, Psalm. 9.
O Lord with my whole heart; I will show forth all thy marvelous works.

2. I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I will sing praise unto thy name, o
thou most high.

10. They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee; for thou Lord have
not forsaken them that seek thee.

90. 119.
Thy faithfulness is to all generations: thou have established the earth and
it abides.

Psalm. 119.
142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness; and thy Law is truth.

135.
13. Thy Name, o Lord endures for ever; and thy memorial o Lord through out all
generations.

106.
2. Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all his
praise?

33.
5. He loves righteousness, and judgment; The earth is full of the goodness
of the Lord.

111.
7. The works of his hands are verity, and judgment; all his commandments
are true.

4. Psalm. 111.
He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: The Lord is gracious and
full of compassion.

14. 145.
The Lord vpholdeth all that fall; and raises up all those that be bowed
down.

19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; He will also hear
their cry, and save them.

1. 103.
Bl^sse the Lord O my soul: and all that is within me bless his holy name.

2. Bless the Lord o my soul: and forget not all his benefits.

Psalm. 103.
3. Who forgiueth all thine iniquities; who heals all thy diseases.

4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowns thee with loving
kindness, and tender mercies.

113.
2. Blessed be the name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

Of Praise.
104.
33. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise unto my God
whiles I have any being.

7.
17. I will praise the Lord, according to his righteousness: I will sing praise
unto the name of the Lord most high.

1. O Lord our Lord, Psalm. 8.
how excellent is thy name in all the earth; who have set thy glory above the
heavens?

18. 35.
I will give thee thanks in the congregation: I will praise thee among much
people.

2. 138.
I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy name for thy loving
kindness, and for thy truth: for thou have magnified thy word above all thy
name.

Psalm. 145.
1. I will extol thee my God, O king; and I will bless thy name for ever and
ever.

2. Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

21. My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, and let all flesh bless his
holy name for ever and ever.

18.
46. The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my salvation
be exalted.

28.
6. Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplications.

13. Psalm. 41.
Blessed be the Lord GOD of Israel from everlasting to everlasting. Amen.

Amen.
PSALMS IN SICKNESS.

JAMES 5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

LONDON, Printed for E. BLACKMORE. 1628.

THE FIRST PSALM IN SICKNESS.
Psalm. 38.
1. O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

2. For thine arrows stick fast in me; and thy hand presses me sore.

3. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is
there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

14. Psalm. 22.
I am powered out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: My heart is
like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

4. 38.
For mine iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me.

5. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness.

4. 41.
Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul; for I have sinned against thee.

9. 38.
All my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.

18. For I will declare mine iniquity; and will be sorry for my sin.

Psalm. 119.
176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant, for I do not
forget thy Commandments.

175. Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and let thy judgments help
me.

Second Psalm.
69.
16. Hear me o Lord for thy loving kindness is good: Turn unto me according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

25.
18. Look upon mine affliction, and my pain; and forgive all my sins.

20. O keep my soul, Psalm. 25.
and deliver me: let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee.

28. 119.
My soul melts for heaviness; strengthen me according to thy word.

2. 51.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity: and cleanse me from my sin.

3. For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

7. Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean: Wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow.

8. Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou have broken
may rejoice.

Psalm. 142.
5. Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living.

31.
16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; save me for thy mercies sake.

Third Psalm.
6.
2. Have mercy upon me o Lord, for I am weak; o Lord help me for my bones are
vexed.

69.
3. I am weary of crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail while I wait for
my God

11. Psalm. 51.
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation: and uphold me with thy free
spirit.

8. 17.
Keep me as the apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

94. I am thine save me; 119.
for I have sought thy statutes.

174. I have longed for thy salvation O Lord; and thy law is my delight.

5. My soul, 62.
wait thou only up in God; for my expectation is from him.

^sal. 62.
6. He only is my Rock, and my salvation: he is my defense, I shall not be
moved.

40.
4. Blessed is that man, that makes the Lord his trust.

Fourth Psalm.
42.
5. Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my
countenance and my God.

27.
1. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

4. Psalm. 23.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

5. 13.
I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.

19. 31.
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men?

Psalm. 36.
7. How excellent is thy loving kindness O Lord? Therefore the children of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

9. With thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see light.

145.
9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.

66.
8. O bless our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard.

103.
2. Bless the Lord O my soul; and forget not all his benefits.

3. Who forgiueth all thine iniquity; who heals all thy diseases.

4. Psalm. 103.
Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; and crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies.

13. 41.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting, to everlasting.

Amen, Amen.
A PRAYER.
Ephesians. 1.
17. THe GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give unto you the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him.

18. That the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, you may know, what
is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the Saints.

19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward that believe,
according to the working of his mighty power.

20. Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him
on his own right hand, in the heavenly place.

21. Far above all Principality, and power, and might, and dominion; and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come.

22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to the Church;

23. Which is his body; the fullness of him that fills all in all. Amen.

The Souls comfort.
AS by the sacred Fountain I did pass,
The streams sent forth such pleasant melody;
That, with deep sighs, my soul cried out, Alas
Why should I wander from this harmony?
The sound whereof guides to eternal bliss,
Diuerting from those paths which lead amiss.
The warbling notes resounded still and said,
Often have thou fallen by thine iniquity:
Yet lift thy heart to heaven, be not afraid,
Repentance is a constant remedy.
Then search and try thy ways, return, and know,
Thy scarlet deeds shall be as white as snow.
If thou confess thou have perverted right,
Yet no advantage have thereby obtay'nd:
Thy soul shall live, thy life shall see the light,
Thy sins seem wool, which were with crimson stayn'd.
A light is come, and darkness vanished:
Believe in him alone that promised.
Afflicted widows and the fatherless
To visit, is a work of charity;
The poor to help, and such as in distress
Want comfort to relieve their misery.
Yet plead not merit in thy lost account;
Trust to that mercy which does al surmou^t.
Still do thou violate the sacred laws,
And justly heapest wrath upon thine head:
Yet have an aduo ate to plead thy cause,
Who only has the power to interceade.
He ever lives at the tribun^ll seat,
Mercy for our offenses to entreat.
When neither silver, gold, nor earthly price
Could us redeem, and purge our heinous sin:
He shed his blood, his life did sacrifice,
That for us which were lost, he heaven might win
He loved us, though his statutes we forgot,
And suffered for our sins; yet had no spot.
He craves no meed for all that he has done,
But with our hearts to fear, to serve to love him:
His glory is, from death he has us won,
That we may know there is no power above him.
Then let us strive to walk in all his ways;
And in all things to give his name the praise
And ever listen to those heavenly streams,
Which yield such music for the souls delight:
Abandoning all men's deceitful dreams,
Who through their pride obscure the clearest light
Close by this fountain I resolve to dwell,
Whose warbles do all humane art excel.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6. Line 6. read the for thy. p. 13 l 1 r. Ia 1. for Isa. 1 and 21. for
16 p. 44. l. 8 r. from among you. p. 65. l. 10. r. ruin. for reign and l. 19
dele ye. p. 112. l. 18. r in the Synagogues p. 117. l. 8. dele Sanctuary p.
149. l. 4 r. make you perfect.


