ECLOGARIVS, OR BRIEF SVMME OF THE TRVTH OF THAT Title of Supreme Governor,
given to his Majesty in causes Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical, from the Kings
of Israel, in the old Testament; the Christian Emperors in the Primitive
Church; confirmed by 40. Epistles of Leo the Bishop of Rome, unto the
Emperors, Theodosius, Martianus, and Leo.

Not published before.

BY JOHN PANKE.

Gratian decrees, Causa 23. Quaest 5. cap. 20. Let the Princes of the world
know, that they of duty shall render an account to God for the Church which
they have taken of Christ to preserve. For whether the Peace and discipline be
increased, by faithful Princes, or it be loosed, he does exact of them an
account, who has delivered his Church, to be committed to their power.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, 1612.

TO THE CHRISTIAN REAder whether Protestant, or Romish Catholic.
THE question of late risen since his Majesty's reign, (Christian Reader,
whether Protestant or Romish Catholic) are especially now about the oath of
allegiance, made in Parliament, and commanded by his Majesty and the state, to
be taken by every Subject for the security of his Highness person and life, if
ought should be intended against him. The exceptions against the said oath, are
justly none, but only a commandment there is from the Pope in his Breues,
forbidding the Romish Catholic the taking thereof. Now because his Majesty
himself, In his Apology for the oath of allegiance.
has in a Princely care of satisfying his subjects of his intent therein, and
Priestly judgment laid open himself and confuted those Breues, Iallude to
Constantines Communis Episcopus Eusebius de vit. Constable. l 1. c. 37. Pope Paul, 5.
needles it is for any man after him, further to write in defense of what he
has justified. But since the pretense of the Pope in his Breeues, and of
Bellarmines letter to the Archpriest Blackwell, was to insinuate that under
color of swearing to the oath of allegiance, they should be forced that took
it, to swear something against the Popes supremacy in spiritual matters,
which being not by that oath intended, his Majesty has in an holy and
painful regard, to satisfy those, whom any thing would satisfy, set his pen
to paper again, acknowledging the former work to be his own, and added
thereto a premonition to all Christian Monarchs, free Princes and States,
containing most sweet doctrine of his own faith; besides many plain
evidences, that the Pope is Antichrist; holding the same intent in both;
proves sufficiently in both, that those two oaths have their contrary ends,
and are nothing like each to other, and that they who take the one, are not
therefore charged with the other. The like answer again received Bellarmine
from the Archpriest, Mat. Tortus calling himself Bellar. chaplen but was
Bellarmine himself.
in defense of his taking the said oath; as also Bellarm. under the name of
Tortus first, and of Bellarmine after, from the Reverend Bishop of Ely. Now
because in this conflict between the Church of Rome and us, for this later
oath of allegiance, The oath of allegiance.
that former of his Majesty's supremacy in spiritual matters should neither
lie forgotten, as though it were not, nor be mistaken through ignorance by
those who understand it not; I will (because perhapps to me is ministered some
speech thereof, which to others is not) show all men out of the true records of
all antiquity the truth and equity thereof; That as in this last, his Majesty
requires nothing of the takers thereof, but saftie for him and his (as by an
oath of true allegiance) against those that shall seek his life: so in the
former, he intends to usurp nothing in spiritual and ecclesiastical
matters, that is, belonging to the Church: but to practice that power, which
the Godly kings of Israel in their times about the same matters; and the most
Christian and best Emperors of the world ever practiced and used in all their
days; thereby to exclude all foreign power and jurisdiction, which any
Prelate, Prince, or Potentate, shall execute, or promote in his dominions; the
safty of taking both oaths, and the truth of both being both alike. Much
labor I confess has formerly bin bestowed, and many treatises written by
worthy, Defense of the Apology by B. Iuell, part. 6. B. Horn against Fecknam.
B Bridges against Staplet. counter blast. B. Winchester that now is in his
Dialogues. D. Rainolds conference with Heart, part. ult. Tortura Torti. Vincent.
Lyrinensis cont. haeres. c. 27. Eadem quae didicisti, ita doce ut cum dicas
nove, no^ dicas, nova.
and reverend men in this famous kingdom, touching the explication and
explanation of the said oath, some whereof having long since passed, and others
at this present published in latin; the former, those it concerns will not
now pervse, as breeding forsooth fastidiousnesse; the other in latin through
their own disabilitie some of them cannot take any profit by; so that I am in
good hope only by a few new collections in few sheets of paper to win both
their attentions, though not to a new matter, yet set down in a new manner.
Further I am taught by the wise, that in a time of danger to the Church, it is
not amiss, that many though some of them be but meanly qualified should
write, for although they write all of the same things, yet may it be in other
form and words; And that it is necessary, that an adversary should know,
Bellarm. in the the preface to the reader, in his 1 Tom. and 1 controv. out of
Augustine.
that in the contrary camp there are not one only or two, but many that dare
encounter with them. This commodity besides comes of many writing, that
quicklier and easier our books may come to the hands of all, though not all to
every one, yet one or other to al and so every man shall be furnished with
some thing. And to say the truth, I have a desire to draw on the Papist in
this, to answer beyond his ordinary gloss Old Testaments warrant.
For although the history of the old Testament give absolute and vnevitable
grounds for warrant of what we seek; Ecclesiastical histories.
The Ecclesiastical histories for 600. years and better after Christ, in the
best times of the most Christian Emperors give proof of what his Majesty
does: yet am I willing herein to press them with a witness without exception,
Leo the great Pope of Rome flourished anno 440 In his Epistles to the Emperor
Theodosius, Martianus, Leo to the Empresses Pulcheria Eudocia. Eudoxia, in
folio, an. 1569.
from whom by them, lies no appeal, and do adjure them, by the honor they
would seem to bear to that sea, whereof he was Bishop, to speak plainly and
directly to tell me, after they have considered of the true state of the
question, and some other premises; whether he in this join not with us, and
give to the Emperors in his time by his letters as much, as we strive for or
his Majesty takes to himself in this business, whereof we entreat. If he
do I crave but their assent to that oath; if he do not, their just exceptions
against the evidence which is drawn from him. A show of an answer to the most
pressing arguments brought by us, I know has been ever ready from them; but
such that coming from none of them; Read D. Mort. 1. and 2. part of his
Apology, and his Catholic appeal for the Protestants, and M. White of the way
of the true Church.
an other has evermore bin ready to oppugn it, a manifest evidence of a
false ground. Those evasions and tricks on their parts, I wish in this
excellent temper of the world, and light of knowledge in the guids of this
Church, whose eyes they cannot blind with any craft, were wholly laid aside;
and that the direct voice of Scripture first; ancient Ecclesiastical
histories, for the practice of the christian Emperors, and testimonies of
fathers confirming their practice, might be called in. For in these cases to
answer of our selves is to answer nothing; not to answer to the allegation, is
silently to grant our adversary what he would. To be so conceited to our
cause, that whatsoever is tendered, not to see it, is willingly to cast our
selves headlong into the gulf of endless woe and misery. To come therefore
to the first thing required, which is the oath it self, that al men may see
what they swear unto, that swear unto it. The tenor where of is this. I.A.B.
do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, The oath of Supremacy, in
his Majesty's Apol. page 48.
that the kings highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, and
all other his Highness dominions and countries, as well in spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporal. And that no foreign Prince,
person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction,
power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority Ecclesiastical, or spiritual
within this Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce, and forsake all
foreign jurisdictions, powers, superiorities, and authorities, and do promise
that from henceforth, I will bear faith and true allegiance to the Kings
highness, his heirs, and lawful successors, and to my power shall defend all
jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and authorities granted, or
belonging to the Kings highness, his heirs and successors, or united, or
annexed to the imperial crown of this Realm. So God me help, and by the
contents of this book.

Besides the setting down of this oath, thus in these terms, of which the
Papists are afraid, as of some monster, I must express the meaning and
intendment thereof; what is challenged thereby, and what is unsought for by his
Majesty, and from whom more sooner, and trulier may we learn the scope and
drift thereof, the^ from him to whom we owe it, and to whom of right it
belongs to be sworn. His Majesty therefore having proved, from many and
sundry sentences, titles, and prerogatives both in the old Testament, and in
the new, that Christian Princes within their dominions, have warrant to govern
the Church, as well as the rest of their people in being Custodes vtriusque
tabulae, persons to whom God has commended and commanded the keeping of both
tables, does there disclaim and deny that he has any power to make new
articles of faith, What the king does either take or refuse by the oath of
supremacy. His Majesty's Apol page 108.
(that office he leaves to the Pope) or to set up any points of religion not
warranted by the word of God: but by commanding obedience to be given to the
word of God, by reforming the religion according to his prescribed will, by
assisting the spiritual power with the temporal sword, by reforming of
corruptions, by procuring due obedience to the Church; by judging and cutting
of all frivolous questions and schisms, as Constantine did. And finally by
making decorum to be observed in every thing, and establishing orders to be
observed in all indifferent things for that purpose. And this is the only
intent of this oath of Supremacy.

This is enlarged with more words, Rain. conf. with Heart. c. 10. div. 1.
but to the same effect, by D. Rainolds in his conference with M. Heart. For the
king (says he) to be supreme governor of all his dominions in things
spiritual and temporal, is to have the pre-eminence over all rulers in
government of matters touching God and man within his dominions, and this by
the Scripture is Cesars right. 1. Pet. 2.13. The high Priest is ordained for
me^ in those things that appertain to God to do them, The Priest duty Heb. 5.1.
that is, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin; this is the peculiar duty of
the priest, which if the Prince meddle with as Ozias did, 2. Chro. 26. v. 16,
18.19.
who would have burnt incense upon the Altar of incense, a thing inioined to
Priests only, then he transgresses the bounds of his office, and provokes
vengeance of the Lord upon him The Princes du tie.
But to provide by Civil punishments, and orders, that Priests do their
duty in things concerning God; not only Priests, but people too, it is the
Princes charge, and so he is ordained to deal in things of God Judges, 27 5* 6
For when Michah had an Idols chapel in his house, with a vestment and
Images, in those days (says the text) there was no king in Israel, but every
man did that which was good in his own eyes Judges. 18.1.2
And again there was no king in Israel when the men of Dan got that
Idolatrous stuff with an Idololatrous Priest, 17.
and went a whoring after it, which being said in like sort, when adultery was
committed, 19.
and with adultery murder, does show, that as the subject should have been
restrained from murder and adultery, Judge. 19.1.2 25.26.
so from Idolatry too, by the Princes sword, since all these sins reigned,
Iud. 20.28. Deuteronomy. 17.19.
not for want of a Priest, but of a king in Israel. And where the king is
willed by Moses, to keep all the words of the law to do them, the Lord meant
thereby, that he ought to keep them, not only as a private man, but as a king,
by seeking and providing that all his subjects did their duties both to God and
man. Wherefore since the supremacy we give to our Prince in things
Ecclesiastical, 2. Chr. 29. v. 5. 21: 27.30. 2. Chr. 30.1.6.12.
to deal therein as Ezechias did, first to command that the Priests and
Levites do do their duties, and afterward the people to come and serve the
Lord, and finally both Priest and people to reform themselves for maintenance
of religion; not as Ozias who (as is said before) would burn incense: nor ours
to preach the word, minister the sacraments, celebrate the prayers, or practice
discipline of the Church, but to provide, that those things be done as they
ought, by them whom God has called thereunto. And this is to Give Caesar, no
more then is Caesar's; for every lawful Prince is the supreme governor of his
own subjects in things spiritual and temporal. And the Parlame^t may take an
oath of English men for James our King, against the Pope, A president for the
lawfulness of the oath of supremacy. 2 Kings. 11.4.17.
against Athalia that usurped his state.

Now in this manner, as has been expressed, and no otherwise, does his Majesty
take, or we give him the title of Supreme governor in matters spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, which so understood would cut of a great number of addle and
idle talk which at this day passes amongst them touching it, who know not what
they say To govern and rule the Church of God is of two sorts. The kings duty
consists in this 1.
For to distinguish the offices which are by God at this day set to rule and
govern his Church, must we not needs say they are of 2 kinds and sorts? The
one being by the supreme authority, and power of the sword, to guide care for,
provide, direct, and aid Gods Church, to further, maintain, and set forth the
true religion, unity, and quietness of Gods Church, and to oversee, visit,
reform, restrain, amend, and correct all manner of persons, with all manner
errors, superstitions heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts, and
enormities, in or about Gods Church, which government, and rule, belongs to
kings, queens, and princes, and not to Apostles, Bishops, and Priests. The
other is to govern and rule by feeding the flock of Christ with the spiritual
food of Gods word, The Priests duty consists in this.
preaching it in season, and out of season, 2.
administration of the sacraments and power of the keys, which is the only
rule and government belonging to the Apostles, Bishops, and Ministers of
Christ's Church.

Examples of the god^y kings of Israel, and their practice.
Shall we see then by the practice of the Godly kings in the time of the old
Testament, this supreme government, I mean in spiritual and Ecclesiastical
matters, and over the persons exercising the same, confirmed? Tortura Torti,
page 363.
From thence we must begin, from the common wealth of Israel, all this
question has its strength and force Ecclesia est in republica, sed respublica
non est in Ecclesia.
For, in Israel the people of God, did God ordain the kingdom, and the
Church in the kingdom according to his own mind, and since we have no example
in the new Testament, we must take it from the old. The Empire and the Church
in that time were never united in one; the Empire was then enemy to the
Church; therefore what charge the kings had of religion must be fetched from
thence; where the civil policy, and the Church are as it were twins, and
friendly embrace together, not where they are separated; From that fountain
therefore of Israel, do we derive our cause, and from that example (where
both are together, where the Church is in the kingdom) do we inform our
selves of the Government, both of our Church and Kingdom. Touching their
practice therefore, I doubt not, but to make our question clear, insomuch that
I hope I shall find none so shameless as to deny the principal care in the
matter of religion belonged to the king, which is seen by this one argument
drawn from the whole course of the holy history Note this especially.
That look how the king was changed, 1.
so was the form of religion: 2.
and that change was always ascribed to the king as his deed: neither could
the Priests at any time so order the matter that any change was made, 3.
from the worse to the better; or from the better to the worse, But if the
chieftie had been theires, 4.
some one Priest or other, would have been found at one time or other, or at
the least some part of the people, though the king had been otherwise
affected, that would have kept the worship of God sound.

I will now begin with the example of Iehoshaphat mentioned in the text of
the Apology, Tortura Torti, page* 364. Iehoshaphat the king.
whose doings in the matter of religion is notably set down in the chapter
quoted 2, Chron. c. 19 v. 4.
The king went through the people from Bersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought
them again unto the Lord God of their fathers. He brought them again to the
Lord, that is, he caused that they were a Church, and he did it by his kingly
authority, whereby also afterward in the 8. verse, V. 8.
he appointed Judges in Israel, of the Levites, Priests, and chief of the
families of Israel, to judge the cause of the Lord which is said in the 10. v.
to be of the law, and of ceremonies; And what greater supremacy can there be,
then of setting and appointing Judges in matters of religion? And where the
text says, V. 11.
Amariah the Priest shall be the chief over you, in all matters of the Lord;
and Zebadiah the son of Ishmaell, a ruler of the house of Judah, shall be for
all the kings affairs, and the Levites shall be officers before you; it
appears plainly that the king Iehoshaphat commands the Priest to be chief
in those things which belongs to the Lord; and gave the captain, or
Lieutena^t charge of those things which appertains to the Common weal:
Iehoshaphat appointed both. The ground of the high commission in England taken
from Ezra, cap. 7. v. 25 26. etc. 10.
By which deed of his he teaches us, that no less the one, then the other,
does principally belong unto the kings charge, since first he could reduce the
people to the worship of God, and when they were reduced, to appoint Judges,
and by his kingly power to divide the causes amongst the Judges, and who should
be chief, and in what things. Thus has the civil policy and the church
distinct causes, and distinct courts; but under the king, no less the church
then the common wealth has them, by whose authority, and command Judges do
sit, and Amariah over the one and Zabadias over the other. Both of them handle
matters belonging to their courts, but both of them under the king.

What Josias did in the affairs of religion appears by that which is written
of him. Tortura torti, page 367. Josias. 2. Chron 22.11.
He made the book of the law, which was new lie found to be read unto the
people. The text says further, the king called the assembly together,
commanded the book to be read unto them, being read entered into a new
covenant with the Lord, An (...) of the (...)
and took an oath of the people for the performance thereof. There the king
commanded the high priest himself, and the rest of the priests of the second
order, that they should cast out of the temple of the Lord, and burn all the
vesse is that belonged to Baall, and throw down their high places. He also
gave commandment for the keeping of the Passover a new, and at a word, for
the whole reformantion of religion. Here is as much for the Kings Supremacy,
as either we give, or his Majesty requires.

Joshua. Read the whole story in the book of Joshua.
The history of Joshua before these, is plain enough for this, who although he
were none other but a Civil Magistrate, yet as soon as he was chosen of God,
and set as a ruler over the people, he received commandments aspecially
touching Religion, and the service of God. He caused the people to be
circumcised. He caused Altars for their bloody sacrifices to be erected. He
caused the people to make their sacrifices. He commanded the Priests to take up
the Arc. He caused the Deuteronomie to be written in stones. He caused both
the blessings and the cursings of the Lord to be pronounced. He spoke openly
to the people, and fraid them from Idolatry. All these were cases of Religion,
and not of Civil policy.

The doings of Ezechias and Asa, Ezechias. Asa. 2. Chron. 29. and 15. 1. King.
15.8. 1. King. 2.27. Tortura Torti. 371.
in purging the temple when it was defiled; King Salomons deposing of the high
Priest Abiathar, and placing Zadoc in his room, are frequently known. I need
not much stand on them. Wherefore did Solomon thrust out Abiathar, but because
he was guilty of treason against the king? Mark the words Go to Anathoth unto
thine own fields, keep thy self there, thou art a man of death, or art
worthy of death, but I will not this day kill thee. These are the words of a
king in his supreme government, over an high priest. To confine men within a
circuit; where they are worthy of death to give them life, to change a capital
penalty into an easier of deposing, is the authority also of a king. Moreover,
by the same authority, that he placed Banaiah in Ioabs stead over his army,
(which no man I think will deny to be done by his kingly supremacy) by the
same, and none other did he place Sadoc in stead of Abiathar over the
priesthood; so it is in the 35. verse. And the king put Benaiah the son of
Iehoida in Ioabs room over the host: and the king set Sadoc the Priest in the
room of Abiathar. Done by the kings authority both, both in one and the same
verse.

But that I may at once dispatch out of the old testament, Tortura Torti, page
380.
this whole question of the kings supremacy, and that the right of it, may be
more fully seen (although enough is said before) and what is understood
thereby, so to stop if it be possible their after slanders rising upon it,
devised only by themselves: In few this it is.

First under the title of supremacy the king brings in no new Popedom into
the church, for he sets not up a power like Aaron the high priest of making
a Golden Calfe; Exodus 32. v. 4. 1. King. 12 28. These things the king takes
not.
or of proposing it to be worshipped as Jeroboam the king did his; or makes
new articles of faith or ha^mereth any new forms of religion in the service of
God. Neither burns he incense with Ozias, 1. Chro 26.16 2. Sam. 6.6.
or of touching the Arc with Oza. Nor takes he the office of teaching; we
place the primacie in Governing, The king is the chief Governor; but not the
chiefest doctor.
and not in teaching. And therefore we say he is the Chief Governor, but not
the chief teacher, or Doctor. He expounds not the hard doubts of the law,
nor preaches the word, or administreth the holy things, or uses imposition of
hands; or exercises the keys, or lays any ecclesiastical censure on any.
At a word he takes nothing to him that belongs ad Sacerdotale munus to the
priestly function, or is annexed to the power of order. If they understand us
otherwise they detract but will not understand.

These things the king takes.
But in the matter of outward government to command, that he challenges to
himself, and we very willingly acknowledge it. The care of religion belongs
to the kingly office, and not only to the priests; And in kings it is the
chiefest, which they are not only bound to challenge as their own, in keeping
it from external force abroad; but at home from the negligence of men, and
when it is decayed, it is their duties to see it repaired. For when by, the
very law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.18. Joshua. 1.8.
the king is keeper and defender, not of the second table only, but of the
first too; his Majesty doubts not, but that the care of the first table,
does belong unto him, and makes the due regard there of his first study. And
since every soul is said to be subject unto him, he will have care of the
souls of his subjects, more and before the care of their bodies. And
particularly whatsoever in the matter of religion the kings of Israel did, and
did not without praise, the king has power and right to do the same.

Power to make laws by his kingly authority, Tortura Torti, page 381. Power to
make laws. Dan. 3.29. Ion 3 7. Ester. 9 26. 1. Macc. 4 56.59.
that God be not blasphemed; (none I hope will deny it, the king of Babel did
it.) To pacify God by fasting, so did the king of Ninive. To honor him by
keeking solemn feasts, so did Hester with the feast of Purim; And as Judas
Machabeus, when he proclaimed the feast of Tabernacles. Finally he has
supremacy in all those things, touching which, In codice* in Authenticis in
capitulari bus.
laws were made in the Code, in the Authentickes, and the statures, by
Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, and Charles the great.

Then he has power of appointing those that shall determine business
according to the law so made, as Iehoshaphat did. Then he has power of binding
his subjects by an oath, 2. Chr. 15.14. etc. 34. v. 32.
that they violate not the law so made, as Asa, and Josias did. And whosoever
shall offend against the law so made, although he pretend the worship of God,
Deuteronomy. 13.10. and 15. Levit. 24.23. Number. 15.35.
as whether he be a false Prophet, or an Idololater, or blasphemer, or breaker
of the Saboth; in every, and all these cases, the king is to punish him by his
kingly authority.

Power also he has of calling the multitude together, 1. Chr. 13.3.
by his own authority; of bringing back the Arc, and setting it in its own
place, 2. Chr. 19 4.
as did David. And of calling the people back to the worship of God, as did
Iehoshaphat. Of dedicating the temple as did Solomon; and renewing the house of
the Lord, 1. Kings, 8 64. 2. Chr. 24 4. and 29.5.
as Ioas did; And of purging it, when it was pollutted, as Ezechias did.

And albeit the king do not think, that it was for naught, that God charged
him To write out a copy of the law for himself, Deuteronomy. 17.19.
that he might continually have it with him, read it diligently, and meditate
therein day and night, Joshua. 1.8.
and from it to learn the worship of God, even to the ceremonies themselves;
neither that it was said so to him, in respect that he should rest altogether,
upon another man's report, judging nothing of himself: yet in these things he
shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, and willingly ask counsel of him; and
shall require the law of them whose lips preserve knowledge. He shall call
those to the making of laws for the Church, whom it is meet should be called,
and those whom reason does persuade, are the most skillful, and that can in
those things give counsel best. And then, in those things which appertain to
God, command Amarias the Priest, 2. Chr. 19.11.
and not Zabadias the Captain to be chief.

Touching the person, Touching the persons. Tortura Torti. page 381.338. and
376. 1. Sam. 15.17.
it is likewise as clear that the king has supremacy over them. A power of
administering laws to all men, of all degrees, and to speak in the language of
the holy scripture, head of the tribe of Levi, no less then of the rest of the
tribes nor no less head of the clergy, then of the laity. So the Prophet
speaks to the king. When thou wast little in thine own sight, Saul the king,
head of the tribes.
wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel? Now amongst the tribes
of Israel, was the tribe of Levi, therefore the king is head of the Leviticall
tribe, in which Tribe was Ahimelech the Priest, under the king his head. This
is farther expressed by the name of Father and mother, and who head but they,
Judge. 5.7.
over whom they are set? Debora, a woman, is called a mother in Israel.
Ezechias, father; (and hear you papist) of the Priests, so he speaks unto
them. 2. Chron. 29.11. Now my sons be not negligent. A father then was
Ezechias, and a father over the Priests. Look then what honor and supremacy
Princes have, they have it by no other commandment then the Fifth, of honoring
our father, and them for their fatherly care of the Church, as of the country;
And if any shall deal presumptuously against Abiathar, Deuteronomy. 17.12.
the king has power by his laws to punish him; even to the putting out of
Abiathar himself from his Priesthood, 1. Kings. 2 27. Touching the things.
if he deserve it.

Touching the things erected, or used to false worship, power he has of
pulling down the high places, that is, to abolish strange worship; not only
over the Golden Calfe which Aaron made, as Moses had in breaking it to pieces:
Exodus 32.20.
but over the brazen serpent erected by Moses, (...). King. 18 v 4
as had Ezechias, when the Golden Calfe is abused to Idololatry, or the brazen
serpent to superstition, of destroying them both.

In things indifferent.
And for the things, which belong to the Beauty of Gods Church, which be called
indifferent, he has power also to order the^, as Ioas did. 2. Chapter 24. v. 12
And when occasion of schisms and divisions, by trifling and foolish questions
is ministered, by his authority to restrain them, as Constantine did. And this
I hope no man will deny to be his right. Socrat. Eccles. hisi. l. 1. c. 7.


Lastly, if the Romish Catholic had rather have examples from Christians, then
from the common wealth of the Jews; let him know that Chrysostom, Hom. 2. ad
popul. Antioch. Theodosius called head of all men by Chrysostom.
a famous prelate in his time, called Theodosius the Emperor by this name
head, and not only the head, but that which in the head is most high, the top
of the head, and that of all men in the earth. And I make no question, but that
there was a man the^ on the earth who was the Bishop of Rome. If we crave more
examples, I dare truly say the Catholic Church was so far from distasting
this Supremacy in Princes, that it called and entitled, the Emperors Charles
the great, and Lodowike, Rectores religionis, Tortura 7 page 379.
Guiders of religion, in the public acts of their Council. And yet again, if
nothing will serve the turn but the very word Governor, let them that doubt
of it, read it in the eight general Counsel (so called by them) where the
Emperor Basilius is styled Govern our of the universal Church. Gubernator
universalis navis ecclesiasticae.
And Constantine himself doubted not to say of himself that he was a Bishop
without, as others were within the Church.

These duties touching the Church, and titles to Princes belonging, are those
very things, which we say appertain unto the kings Supremacy, by the law of
God. The Kings and princes of the world now are in no worse case, then were the
kings in the old Testament. They are under the same condition, and therefore
the same primacy is due unto them, and the same ought to be yielded unto them.
And therefore I may justly conclude here with that saying of Scaliger to
Lypsius, Scaliger tu Lypsius.
Nos non sumus novatores, sed vos veteratores estis. We are no innovators, but
they that deny this truth are false deceivers. What other exceptio^s they take,
of his Majesty's usurping part of the Priests office in the worship of God, is
a monster of their own begetting, against which they may fight, as with their
shadows, but shall never strike us. The reader that is not wilfully blind,
will herein submit his judgment unto the truth.

Thus I have showed by the old Testament, That the christian Emperors
practiced this supremacy in matters of religion.
by the practice of the kings there, my intended purpose: It shall not be
amiss now to see how the godly Emperors in the primitive Church of Christ,
dealt in the business of religion, according to that Supremacy we speak of; a
great part of which was their calling of general Concells, Calling of
councels, and confirming their decrees. 1. Council of Nice. Socrat. l. 1. c 9.
thereby as by a speedy way to rid the Church from the infection of pestilent
heresies. The Bishops of the first council of Nice confess in their
Synodicall Epistle, that they were called by the authority of the Emperor;
The Synod met together (say they) when Constantine the most beloved of God
gathered us, out of diverse cities and countries. By the authority of
Constantine. Tortura Torti, page 165. Et synodi decreta confirmans, consignavit.
2 Of Constantinople.
They submitted themselves unto him so the words go; And confirming the
decrees of the Synod, he signed them. The second general council held at
Constantinople was called by the authority of Theodosius the elder, we met
together according to the letters of your Majesty. And again, your Majesty
has honored the Church, by your letters of calling us hither. In their
Epistle to him; What soever has bin necessarily done in the holy Synod, we
refer them to your Godliness. We desire also that the sentence of the Synod
may be confirmed by your Majesty's writing. And as you did honor us when you
called us hither by your letters: so we desire that of those things which are
decreed, you would by signing them, put an end to all things The third is the
Council of Ephesus called likewise by the Emperors authority, 3. Of Ephesus.
Theodosius the younger, and Valentinian, wherein there is so plain evidence,
as in none more plainer. For the Council it self confesses seven times in
seven Epistles, that they came together by the appointment of their
authorities. And often times they say, by their sentence, Secundumo raculum man
datum rescriptum.
commandment and letters. In this Epistle they say, whereupon we all fly to
the authority of your highness, be seeching the same, that those things which
are enacted against Nestorius, and those that are gone astray with him, may have
their force and strength; And that those things whereof Nestorius is author may
be void and disanulled. The council of Chalcedon, 4. Chalcedon.
being the last of the first four, witnesses as much; The Synod was assembled
by the decree of the most Godly and faith full Emperors, Valentinian and
Martian. In their Epistle this; The holy and great council was called
together, by the grace of God and decrees of your highness. The same words are
expressed by them when they relate what was done in the council. And of them,
that is, Et ab illis denique missione^ perunt ut and Ephesini.
of the Emperors, the Council crave leave to depart, as those of Ephesus did.
And Martian says, We confirm the reverend Synod by the sacred decree of our
highness..

This truth is so strong, De conc. and eccl. l. 1. c. 13.
that Bellarmine although he purposely intended the overthrow of it, yet does
he plainly confess it. He adds 4 reasons to show, why the first four
General councels (whereof I spoke before) were called by the Emperors, but he
adds to dawbe up the matter, A Gloss besides the text. Our question is by
whose authority, and not by whose consent councels were called.
It was with the consent and mind of the Pope: when our question here is, by
whose authority, and not by whose consent, they were called. As if the question
were, by whose authority is war proclaimed? Bellarmine should say. It is
indeed by the Princes authority, but not without the consent of the nobles and
commons: therefore authority of proclaiming war belongs not to the Prince.
Besides the Emperors required the consent of the other Patriarchs, 4 Reasons
of Bellarmine, to prove that the Emperors called the first 4. general
counsels.
as well as of the Bishop of Rome, but the Supreme right and authority
remains in them. But to leave Bellarmine in his poor excuse, and to come to
his 4. reasons, thus they stand. 1. Because at that time the ancient law
imperial was in force which did forbid al assemblies and companies of men,
without the Emperors authority, because the Emperors feared seditions and
tumults might have arisen. 2, If that law had not been in force, yet seeing
the Emperors governed the world in great peace, a council could not be held,
but in some imperial city, and no reason it is, that an asse^bly should be
made to one city out of the whole world, without the license of the Lord of
that place; From hence it appears that the Pope had not all temporal
Lordship* deminion, and rule, as now they claim for him.
as now at this day, if a council be held out of the territories of the Pope,
as in France, Spain, or Germany, without doubt his consent must be asked, in
whose city or province it is. 3. Because in those times general councels were
made by the public charges; especially touching the bringing of the Bishops to
the place where the council was. For they were carried on horses, or in city
wagons, without charge of the churches. And touching that of Nice, during the
time of the council all the bishops lived at the charge of the Emperor. This
appears also out of Theodoret; Eccl. hist. 2.16.
where, in the conference between Liberius the Bishop of Rome, and Constantius
the Emperor, Liberius for the equity of his cause prayed that a general
council be summoned, answer was made, the public revennues would not serve
for the bringing of the Bishops. 4. Because, although at that time the Pope was
head over all, even Emperors in spiritual things, yet in temporal matters,
The Pope could do nothing against the Emperors mind.
he did subject himself to the Emperors, and therefore he could do nothing
without the Emperors goodwil. And when he might have only prayed aid of the
Emperor for the calling of a Synod, yet because he acknowledged the Emperor
his Temporal Lord, he did beseech him, The pope beseeches the Emperor.
that he would command a Synod to be called. But after those times all those
causes were changed. Factum alterius alij nocere non debet; and therefore ask
quo iure.
For that imperial law first spoken of, does not now stand in force, and the
Pope who is head in spiritual matters, is not now subject to the Emperor in
temporal. Thus far Bellarmine. But O tempora, o mores! O unequal times that
so many things should be then lawful, whereof not one of them shall be now
lawful? Then the Pope entreated the Emperor, now the Pope commandes him, or
at least not entreats him. Then the Pope was subject to the Emperor in
temporal things, now he is not so, that is to say the Emperor is now no
Emperor, nor the Pope no Pope. But in former times (tempora mutantur) The
Emperor was Emperor indeed, and Pope, Pope indeed, that is, he was obedient
to the Emperor, as he ought. Then the Roman Empire stood firm and upright;
now (says Bellarmine) Romanum imperium iam fere deletum est, De nom. Pon. l.
2. c. 2 praedicit.
the Roman Empire is almost extinct. A pleasant time for Antichrist.

Thus have I proved, sufficiently I trust that the first four general Councels
were called by the Emperors authority, and that they were confirmed by them;
not one of them by the Pope, nor any of them in Italy, all without his command,
in places far remote from him in Greece where the world knows he was little
respected.

Other confirmation of this truth there is out of the Ecclesiastical histories
of Eusebius in the life of Constantine; Ecclesiastical histories omitted in
this.
Socrates, Sozomene, Theodoret, and Evagrius, al which do deliver a perfect
summme of the churches infancy, groth, and perfectest estate, for the space of
600 years after Christ; and in most ample manner show, that that supremacy in
Ecclesiastical matters which we now seek for, was then resiant in the
Christian Emperors, and not in the Pope. General councels there are also
somewhat be yond the time spoken of, in the reign of Charles the great, which
might be here brought in, but at this time I will leave the prosequutio^ of
any of those authorities of purpose, because I hasten to an author of great
credit with our adversaries, which is Leo the bishop of Rome, mentioned before,
in whom I desire the^ but to see what he gave to the Emperors in his time, and
how fitly his testimony fitteth our purpose, and request of them but this,
that if they find, that he gave the Emperors as much as we give his Majesty,
and that we give his Majesty no more than he gives them, they would hence
forth surcease, to refuse that which is just, or if it be unjust to condemn
those pious and godly Emperors, of intrusion upon the Popes right, as they do
his Majesty.

For the translation of the Epistles, I must crave pardon, of any curious eye
that shall compare them with the originals, if they find my barren English
short in expressing the elegancie of Leos latin style; Leo epist. 83. ad
Palestinos Monachos. Non valentes in Graecum eloquiurn apt and proprie Latina
transfer, etc.
since in things of this nature, as an unskillful interpreter, I am not able
(as he co^plaineth himself of some other) to put the Latin phrase aptly and
kindly into our English tongue, seeing in expressing hard and difficult things
al men cannot do it in their own language, much less in another. But I have
done all, that I have done of a willing mind to better their judgment, who
have not so much as to understand the Latin. I know the learned know them
better then my self. The meaning of my author, I trust shall not be inverted;
Aucupium syllabarum. Tortura Torti, fol. 8*9. Melius est ut Grammatici nos
reprehe^dant^ quam populi non intelligant.
if any man shall hunt after syllables, in so weighty a cause, he shall with
the wise be held guilty of raising a quarrel without just cause. For who does
not know that to every tongue, there is its own proper phrase and manner of
speech, and that that which is written in one, cannot be so rendered again in
another, that at least there shall be no difference, in any little sentence,
but that one word must answer another wholly and throughout? So the intent be
kept, it is mere folly to languish about words; Unjust taxing. In his return
of untruths. 4. art. 117. b. fol. Instigante diabolo.
an upright and right meaning heart, in these cases should detest that petty
kind of reprehension used by D. Stapleton against B. Iuell for his translation
of Instigante diabolo, they were altogether inflamed and led by the devil. And
thus Stapleton cries out; Lo the ca^cred words of M. Iuels tender heart
instigante diabolo, is says he, the devil pricking them and moving them
forward. Now I appeal to any man, but to him that has indeed a cancred heart
to tell me what difference in substance there is between these two,
altogether inflamed and led by the devil: And, the devil pricking and moving
them forward. Stap. ib. 4 art. 131. a. fol. Contrary to the minds of the most
part of the Bishops.
And where the Bishop says, that the Imperour Gratian made Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople contrary to the minds of the most part of the Bishops: here M.
Iuell overreacheth his author (says Stapleton) for Sozomene says, many of the
Bishops gain saying it. A strong cavil I wisse, and a maine difference there
is no doubt between contrary to the minds of most: And, many gain saying it.
Especially since Christophorson (who both for advantage, and skill for the
Church of Romes cause, was as strong as Stapleton) translateth the Greek,
multis sacerdotibus reluctantibus, many Bishops, or Priests contending,
striving, struggling, or wrestling against it. And what is this, but contrary
to their minds.

Neither would I have any sober minded man, cavil at such alleged sentences
as this. Where B. Iuell alleges Liberatus, Liberatus alleged by B. Iuell.
Brevia, cap. 12.
and alleges him thus, Liberatus says that Leo the Bishop of Rome, with
other more Bishops of Italy, fell on their knees and desired the Emperor
Valentinian, and the Empress Eudoxia, to appoint a Council, and yet could not
obtain it. Staplet ut an te page 142,
In this allegation out of Liberatus two untruths are (says Stapleton)
committed by M. Iuel. For neither Leo the Pope fell on his knees to the
Emperor Valentinian, neither did they desire him to appoint a Council, but to
write to Theodosius the Emperor of the East about it. Now the first untruth,
as Stapleton imagines is, that Leo fell not on his knees, as did the rest; but
that he entreated only, and other Bishops fell on their knees. The second, That
Leo besought not Valentinian for a Council, (as B. Iuell says) But besought
Valentinian and Eudoxia his wife, that they would write to Theodosius about
it. The Bishops of Italy and the Pope, desire the Emperor to call a Council.
A mavelous thing it is to see what a wit wickedness has For what is it to
the substance of the matter, whether Leo prayed a Council of Valentinian, or
prayed him to write to Theosius, that a Council might be called. To an
Emperor he wrote. It is the more sign that Leo could obtain the less at
theodosius hand, but was feign to desire the Emperor of the West, to entreat
for what he desired; And so where B. Iuell made him to entreat but one, it
appears, he is feign to entreat one to entreat another; in effect two. To
coma to the first untruth again, wherewith he charged the Reverend Bishop. of
Leos falling on his knees to the Emperor Valentinian: I see not in the world
how it can be otherwise thought but that he did so. Stapl. ut ante
Thus the words lie as Stapleton has set them down: Valentinianum autem
imperatorem and Eudoxiam vxorem eius ad memoriam beati Petri, cum multis
Episcoporum genibus provolutis Romanus Pontifex deprecatus est. The Bishop of
Rome beseeched the Emperor Valentinian, and Eudoxia his wife, at S. Peter's
Church with many Bishops kneeling on their knees. Can we by this imagine, that
he kneeled not as well as the rest? I protest I see it not. Leo himself made
the suit; Romanus Pontifex deprecatus est: The Roman Bishop besought the
Emperor, with many Bishops falling on their knees. And what can we think but
this, that he fell on his knees as well as they? But what if this keeling be
referred indeed (to put the matter out of doubt) the B. of Rome himself,
Tortura Torti, page 167.
Genibus provolutus Romanus Pontifex deprecatus est. The Bishop of Rome falling
on his knees, besought the Emperor; so reads it a reverend Bishop of very
late days. Howsoever it be, Stapleton by his own evidence does but wrangle;
but by the latter is found a manifest deceiver. These and such other quarrels,
I desire all sorts of Readers whatsoever, may be forborne, because the malice
of man can never work the works of God; being neither material for our
purpose. Or if I should manifestly err in my translation, mistaking one place
for another, or such other of as small consequence, Stapl. ut ante page 21.
mistaketh one place for another.
as Stapleton himself did, when he began to tax others, saying Bizancenus
Primas, the Primate of Bizance (otherwise called Constan tinople) had been
accused, Look the Protestants appeal by D. Morton, l. 1. c. 2. Sect. 28.
etc. where indeed, neither had the Primate of Constantinople, bin then
accused; or does Bizancenus Primas, signify there the Primate of
Constantinople (for some read it Bizacenus) but it is a word taken from
Bizaceum a province in Africa, and not from Bizantium the city of
Constantinople. Such oversightes as these, may alight on any. But I leave these
and come to Leos Epistles.

Leo the Bishop, to Theodosius the Emperor, Epist. 7.
THus he begins, Quontum praesidij Dominus Ecclesiae suae in fide vestrae
clementiae praeparavit, etc. What strength the Lord has gotten for his Church,
by means of the uprightness of your Majesty, is eve^ showed by these letters
which you have now sent unto me, Rex est mixta persona cum Sacerdote.
insomuch that we do rejoice, that you have not only a kingly mind, but also
a priestlike: surely besides the public affairs of the Empire, We place a
part of the kings supremacy in this. True religion is the root of all true
virtues, and the stay of all well ordered commonweals.
your Highness has a most Godly care of the Christian religion, that amongst
the people of God, neither schisms nor heresies do grow, quia tunc est
optimus regnivestri status, because then the state of your kingdoms is in best
temper, when you are served with the confession of one everlasting and
immutable Trinity of one Deity. And so going on, certifying the Emperor what
had happened at Constantinople, touching Eutiches a priest there whom Flavianus
the Bishop had put from the Communion, Flavianus put Eutiches from the
communion.
the cause why, the Bishop of Rome yet knew not, He comes to this: Et quia
causae meritum; And because the necessity of the business, the respect had to
religion, and the laudable care of your Godliness does require it; It is
necessary that a way be not given to these breaches. But first of all we
ought to have been made acquainted with those things whereof Flavianus judges
Eutiches worthy of blame, that of things rightly known, right judgment might
be given. Thus writes he to the Emperor, because his brother Flavianus
Archbishop of Constantinople, had not certified him of the business touching
Eutiches.

Epist 8. Dilectissimo fratri Flaviano Epis copo, Leo episcopus. By this it
appears, that the Emperor sat not idle, when these businesses were a doing.
In the next Epistle, he writes to Flavianus himself, demanding why
Eutiches was separated from the Communion, beginning thus. When the most
Christian and clement Emperor being of an holy and praise worthy faith,
careful for the peace of the Catholic Church, has sent us letters touching
those men, who with you have raised tumults: I marvel that your Brotherhood,
whatsoever the offense was, would let us be ignorant thereof, Flavianus inhis
2. epistle to Leo says he did so much to the Emrour. Et ideo quia dilectio tua
de tanta causa nos videt necessario esse solicitos qua^ plenissime and lucide
vniversa nobis, quod ante facere sestinet. I think that this sentence in my
book is vnperfict.
and not rather have provided, that from you the first report might have come
unto us, least we should doubt of the truth of things done. After this,
coming to tell Flavianus, how Eutiches had both delivered his whole
declaration of the matter in writing and report thereof beside unto Leo, he
comes in the end to conclude thus. And therefore because your lovingnes does
see that we are necessarily careful of so weighty a matter, make have to let
us know all things touching it, fully and clearly, as be fore you should,
least between reports we be deceived with some doubt, and discord which in the
beginning is to be crushed, be nourished: seeing that reverence remains in
our heart God inspiring it, that the ordinance of our reverend Fathers, which
are strengthened from above, be not depraved by the naughty dealing of any one.

The letters of Flavianus to Leo.
Flavianus now upon this, according to Leos desire writes unto him; Of the
slights of the Devil, in one Chapter. 1.
Of the craftiness of heretics in another. 2.
Of the blasphemies of Eutiches, in the third. 3.
And of his just excommunication in the fourth, 4.
in these words. But not to be long, least I make a long letter, what we have
done formerly, we have sent the business to your Godliness by letters, in
which we have expressed, that he is deprived of his Presbytership, because he
is so deceived, Flavianus excommunicated Eutiches before Leo did know it. Then
be the all the bishops of the world lived not under the Pope.
and we have commanded him not to meddle with the Monasteries, and we have put
him from our fellowship, that your holiness knowing thus much what is done
concerning him, would vouchsafe to manifest his impiety to all the Bishops who
live under your holine:, least some of them not knowing what he holds, they
may confer with him as with a right believer, either by their letters, or
some other familiarity. Leo vrbis To mae Episcop Theodosio semper Augusto.


The ninth epistle is again directed unto Theodosius the Emperor: where
recounting, what he had written unto him, of his detestation of heresy, The
Pope relates his faith to the Emperor.
and his standing firm in the decrees of the Niceene Council; with his accurse
given against the impious heresy of Nestorius, and of some others: he comes
to this, Vnde si pietas vestra suggestioni ac supplicationi nostrae dignetur
annuere, etc. The Pope desiveth the Emperor that a counsel may be held within
Italy.
Whereupon if your godliness will vouch safe to favor our motion, and
supplication, that you would command a council of Bishops to be held within
Italy; all scandals which are raised in disturbance of the whole church will
quickly by the help of God be defeated, that so we may rejoice, when the
integrity of the catholic faith thorough all your dominions is kept safe, and
the Christian peace remain, and your glory with God be increased.

Caesari Theodosio religiosissmo and piissimo Augusto, Leo Papa Ecclesiae
catholicae urbis Romae. Next under God, the Emperors care preserved religion*
The 12. epistle is directed to the same Emperor; wherein he begins thus.
Quantum rebus humanis consulere provide^tia divina dignetur, etc. How much the
providence of God vouchsafes to provide for the affairs of men, the care of
your Majesty stirred up by the spirit of God does show; which care of yours,
will suffer nothing in the Catholic Church to be unappeased, or to be unlike
it self, because the faith which is but one, can in nothing be different from
it self. After this, he confesses that the Emperor religiously loving the
Catholic truth; for the suppressing of Eutiches, The Emperous called a
council of Ephesus.
did command a council to be held at Ephesus to which council he sent his
deputies in his stead, to hear the debating of the questions.

Epist 13. to the Empress Pulcheria.
In the 13. he writes to the Godly Empress Pulcheria; beginning thus: Quantum
Praesidij dominus ecclesiae suae praeparavit in vestra clementia, multis saepe
probauimus documentis, etc. Princes are protectors of religion against
heretics.
What protection, God has provided in your highness for his church, we have
often proved by many experime^ts. And whatsoever the industry of Priests has
effected in these times, against the withstanders of the catholic truth has
amounted especially to your honor; whilst as you have learned of the holy
Ghost, you subject all: your authority to him, by whose gift, and under whose
protection you rule. After this, he makes her highness acquainted at large,
with the points of Eutiches heresy, and telling her it is a thing worthy of
her dignity that error be abolished, he comes to tell her, The Pope would
feign have the day of the council altered but could not.
of the time prefixed by the Emperor for the holding of the council, says:
Quia ergo multa mihi fiducia est, de pietatis tuae syncerissima fide, etc. Now
because I have great hope of the sincere faith of your Godliness, I beseech the
glory of your cleme^cie, that as hitherto by your endeavor, the catholic
doctrine has always bin furthered; so now you would be an helper thereof;
which peradventure, it has pleased God to suffer to be shaken with this
temptation, that those who abide in the church might be known; the regard
toward who^, is not to be neglected, least the loss of them become sorrowful
to us. Indeed the most noble and Christian Emperor, desiring as soon as might
be to compound these troubles in a council of Bishops, which he will have to
meet at Ephesus, The Emperor called the council at Ephesus*
has set a very small and short time for their meeting. And the^ telling her
that the Emperor looked for his appeara^ce by the day, which he excuses, he
concludes with exhortation unto her, that according to her accustomed care of
Religion, the heresy of Eutiches might be rooted out of the minds of al men.
And that if the heretic himself did abjure his heresy, he might be received.

Epist. 15. Leo Episcopus, sa^ctae synodo quae apud Ephesum.
The 15. epistle is written to the Bishops assembled at Ephesus, wherein he
exhorts them to condemn the blasphemy of Eutiches, he says, verum quia
etiam non est neglige^da curatio, etc. But because the healing of such
mischiefs is not to be neglected; and the most Christian Emperor very Godly
and religiously will have a council of Bishops held, The judgment of a
council of bishops, is better then the Popes.
that by a more mature judgment error might be extinguished, I have sent
thither such as I think fit who may in my stead be present at the holy
assembly of your brotherhood, and who, with your common consent may ordain
those things which will be pleasing to God.

The 16. is directed unto Flavianus Arch bishop of Constantinople and begins
thus. Epist. 16. Flaviano charissimo fratri, Leo Episcopus Romae.
I have received the letters of your belovednesse, together with those things
which have bin done with you, in the matter of faith. Although there be in his
judgment, no need of a council yet the Emperor will have one summoned.
And because the most Benign Emperor careful for the peace of the church will
have a synod called, although it evide^tly appear, the business which is to be
dealt in, needs not to be handled in a council, yet (my beloved brother) I
do certify you that those will follow, whom in this case it pleased me to
appoint.

Epist. 17. Leo Episcopus Theodosiose^per Augusco,
The 17. is to the Emperor Theodosius to the same effect, that that before is
to the Bishop; Having received (says he) letters from your clemency, I
perceive that the whole church has cause to rejoice, in that you will not
suffer the Christian faith, by which the Godhead is honored and worshipped, in
nullo dissimilem, in nullo vult esse discor them, to be in none unlike or
discordant. A little after this, vnde quamvis ad diem concilij Episcopalis,
quem pietas vestra constituit etc. And although nothing can fall out, which may
give me any occasion to meet at the day of the council which your Godliness
has appointed, The Emperor will have a counsel, although in Leos judgment
the cause require none.
because no example can be brought of any before me, and the leaving of the
city void will not permit me: because also there is such evident reasons,
that the command of a Council, needed not have been: yet because the Lord God
does vouchsafe to further it, Then hitherto it was a lawful Council.
I have been careful, that at the time appointed, your highness
commandments be obeyed.

Epistle, 18 Leo Episcopus Pulcheriae Augustae.
The 18. is to Pulcheria the Empress, to the same effect that he wrote unto her
in the 13. before, relating what hope the Church had promised to it self by
her help, praising the Emperor and her highness that they submitted their
scepters unto God, by whose power and gift they reigned. The Pope acknowledged
that kings reign by God: now the Pope says they reign by him.
A little after. It is a thing worthy of your glory, that error by these
means be taken away. And in the end excusing himself for not coming to the
council, tells her whom he has sent.

In the 22 Epistle written to the Clergy, Epistle. 22. ad Constantino
politanos.
Nobles, and people of Constantinople co^plaining of the indirect courses which
he heard was followed in the council of Ephesus, he comfort himself in
this, Sed hos ausus pio and Christianissimo principi confidimus minime
placituros. The Popes hope rests in the Emperor for reforming of abuses in
Councels. The Emperors constancy a pattern for all. Epistle. 24. to
Theodosius the Emperor.
But our hope is that those enterprises will little please the most Christian
Emperor. And in the end he persuades them to constancy by the example of
the Emperor, in which he knew, he would remain.

The 24. Epistle is directed to the same Emperor Theodosius, in which Leo
desires him, that a special Council might be called within Italy, and in no
other place, because the second Council of Ephesus transgressed against the
Canons, and therefore the acts were rekoned unlawful and void. Thus he says,
Behold most Christian and venerable Emperor; my fellow Priests and my self,
yielding the duty of sincere love toward your Majesty, do beseech the same,
before the inseparable Trinity of one Diety, and before the holy Angels of
Christ, that you would command all things to remain in that state, wherein
they were, until a greater number of Priests may be gathered, out of the
world. And a little after, All the Churches that are on our side, They beseech
the Emperor with tears and sighs that a general council might be held
within Italy but could not obtain it, who had the supremacy then?
all the Priests with sighs and tears beseech your Gentleness, that because
our men have resisted manfully, and Flavianus the Bishop has given his bill of
appeal unto them, that you would command a general Council to be held
within Italy, which may so remove all offenses, or mitigate them that nothing
hereafter be doubtful in faith, or any one divided in charity.

In the 23. Epistle which is directed to the people of Constantinople, Epistle.
23. ad clerum and plebem Constantinopsletanae urb.
after he has largely declared his opinion of the questions debated, he
concludes thus unto the^ Et quoniam oportet vos post divinum auxilium, etiam
Catholicorum principum gratiam promereri. And because it behooves you, next
after the divine help, to deserve the favor of Christian Princes, make your
request humbly and wisely, He prays the to be a mean to the Emperor for a
Council. The benefit of a Council. The Pope had not then all judgment in the
closet of his breast.
that the most courteous Emperor would vouchsafe to grant my humble petition,
whereby I besought him, that a general council might be summoned, by means
whereof the mercy of God helping thereto, the strength of them that are sound
may be increased, and to those that are infected, if they will assent to be
cured, medicine may be used.

In the 26. Epistle unto Pulcheria the Empress against the 2. Council of
Ephesus; Epistle 26. Leo the Bishop and the holy Synod, which met in the
city of Rome to Pulcheria the Empress.
he has these words in the very beginning thereof, Si Epistolae, quae pro
fidei causa per nostros clericos directae sunt, ad vestram pietatem
pervenissent. If the letters which are directed to your Godliness, and sent by
our messengers, touching the matter of faith, had come unto your hands: it is
very sure, that you could have given remedy by Gods inspiration, to those
things which were done against the faith. Catholic princes are never wanting
to promulgate the Catholic faith.
For when were you wanting to Priests? When were you wanting to Christian
religion or faith? But seeing they who were sent could not come unto your
clemency, when scarce one of them returned flying unto us; we think it fit to
write again. And that our prayers may pierce the deeper, we have sent the
samplers of those writings which have not hitherto come unto you, beseeching
you with Larger entreaties, that by how much the more things are made more
bitter, which you ought for your princely place sake to withstand; Princes must
have care of religion: if they have not the he retike will overthrow all,
so should you to your greater glory, have care of that religion in which you
excel, least the soundness of the Catholic faith, be violated by any
occasion of humane strife. A little after complaining of some abuses offered at
the counsel by the Bishop of Alexandria, etc. Dioscorus who was President of
the Council.
We have written (says he) (as we could) to the most glorious Prince (and
which is greatest) Christian, of which letters we have also sent you a copy,
that he suffer not the faith into which he is regenerate and through which by
the grace of God he reigns to be depraved by any novelty, The Emperor must
keep the Catholic faith whole and sound Flavianus the Bishop of
Constantinople was deposed there.
because the Bishop Flavianus remains sound in our communion; and seeing that
no reason gives, that that which was done against the order of all our Canons
should be ratified: And because the Ephesine Synod, took not away the scandal
of dissension; but increased it; by having a council within Italy and time and
place appointed; The Pope would feign have a council to be held within Italy.
all complaints, and exceptions of either parties laid aside, so that all
things which breed offense, may be more diligently handled again, and those
Priests may return to the peace of Christ, without any wound to the faith, or
wrong to religion, who through their own weakness were constrained to
subscribe. Glad of my furtherance to the Emperor. Look before Epist. 23. to
the clergy and people of Constantinople.
The which, that we may the better obtain, we pray your Godliness, which to us
is known to be of most approved faith, which succoureth the grievances of the
Church, to present our supplication to the most clement Emperor. seeing the
message is directed unto him, from the most blessed Apostle S. Peter, that
before this deadly and intestiue war do wax strong in the Church, he yield
means by the help of God, of renewing the union of Peace, knowing that
whatsoever pains he shall bestow with a willing disposition for the good of the
Catholic Church, it will redound to the strength of his Empire.

In the 31 Epistle to the same Pulcheria, Epist. 31. to the Empress Pulcheria
touching those thing for which he entreated before.
he writes thus. Your writings have made much to rejoice, and be glad in the
Lord, by which it plainly appears, how much you love the Catholic faith,
and detest the error of heretics. But because the divine providence, does
never leave his Church, as the Lord himself says, Behold I am with you to the
end of the world, the spirit of God, by one and the same time and work, has
kindled the diligence of your clemency, and the care of mine heart that in
procuring remedies for these mischiefs, both of us should desire the same
thing; for which as before I made suit, so nunc quoque instantius peto, so now
also I crave more earnestly using greater boldness in entreating, after that I
have now received hope by your exhortation, not doubting by the future mercy of
God, your clemency working with it but the disease of wicked error will be taken
away, insomuch that whatsoever by his aid and inspiration could be done, will
be done with the praise of your faith, because the affairs of men cannot
otherwise be safe, except the kingly and Priestly authority protect those
things which appertain to an holy confession. The kings authority and
Priestly function must ioin in one Epist. 33. The Churches hope rests upon the
Emperor, and he commands the Bishops to stand to the Council of Nice Is not
this a part of the Supremacy we seek for?


In the 33 Epistle to Theodosius the Emperor, thus he begins. Your Majesty
has given us great hope of quietness in all your letters; but especially now,
amongst all those cares which we sustain for the faith, in condemning the
council of Nice, because you will not suffer the Priests of the Lord to go
from it. And toward the end thus. And to the end that a speedier and fuller
effect, by Gods help might be brought to our profitable endeavors by the faith
of your clemency, I have sent my Brethren and fellow Bishops to your
highness, whose religion to me is known, by whom you may as it becomes take
notice, They account to the Emperor what their faith is.
what the substance of our faith is, according to those instructions we have
sent; that so if the Bishop of Constantinople do consent with all his heart in
the same confession, we may rejoice in saftie of the Churches peace; and that
nothing seem to remain doubtful, or that peradventure we may nourish vain
suspicions. But if any do dissent from the purity of our faith, and the
authority of the fathers: Let your clemency grant a general council to be
held within Italy, Leo and his Bishops desire the Emperor for another Council.
as the Synod which is met at Rome for the same cause, do desire with me;
that all meeting together, remedies of amendment may be provided forthose that
are fallen eve^ either through ignorance, or fear: and that henceforth it be
free for none so to mention the Nicene Council, The Emperor must see that
none violate the Council of Nice Two religions in one kingdom not to be
suffered.
as to be found contrary to the faith of it, because it is Good for the
Catholic Church and this your Empire, if one God, one faith, one mystery of
man's salvation be held through the world in one confession.

The 35. epistle is written to Pulcheria the Empress, touching those things,
Epist. 25. Leo the Bishop to Pulcheria the Empress.
which he requested before of Theodosius the Emperor; wherein after his
accustomed due praises given her; And his own desire to know what the Bishop of
Constantinople held, in that point of the incarnation of the son of God, as
was meet. He comes to this. To the obtaining therefore of a staidnes in
dispositions; I have sent my brethren and fellow Bishops to offer unto your
clemency a form of faith, They offer a form of faith to the Empress
which according to the do of the reverende fathers we preach; which messengers
after the divine grace it is meet be furthered, Next and immediately under God,
etc.
by the devout help of your godliness, least contention trouble the whole
church: from which faith if some perhaps do disagree, Let there be a general
counsel of Priests called within Italy, with the consent gf your highness,
whereby all deceit laid aside, it may appear, what things ought to be
withstood, or amended by a longer handling.

In the 38. epistle to the Emperor Martianus successor to Theodosius, Epist.
38. Leo Episcopus Martiano se^per Augusto.
he writes, That he is glad that he has received his highness letters for
the good of the church whereof he is so careful, Martianus succeeded
Theodosius.
who^ God has chosen to defend the Catholic faith; from the snares of her
enemies. And this he desires his godliness to accept in brief, promising to
direct his larger letters in those things which belong unto his charge,
touching the affairs of the church, and the agreement of the priests of the
Lord. Epist. 39. In which he gives thanks that she by defending of the faith,
had overthrown the heresy of Nestorius and Eutiches


The 39. Epistle is directed to the Empress Pulcheria, and begins thus.
Quod semper de sancta pietatis vestrae mente praesump simus, id plenissime
experiendo cognovimus, etc. That which we did ever persuade our selves of,
touching the good intent of your Godliness, we know it fully now by
experience, which is, that the Christian faith (although it be invaded with the
many designs of the wicked) yet in your presence, prepared for defense thereof
by the Lord, it cannot be confounded. For the Lord does not forsake the mystery
of his love nor the desert of your labor, The Prince thrust out the heretic;
and restored the Catholic Bishops that were displaced. both which are actions
belonging to that supremacy we seek for.
whereby ere while you expelled the crafty enemy of true religion, out of the
bowels of the church. This is the second victory you have gotten, in slaying
the heresy of Eutiches. It is good therefore to be glad with joy, and for the
prosperity of your clemency, to pay my due vows to the Lord, who through al
parts of the world where the Gospel is preached has gotten you a double
crown, and victory. Let your clemency know thus much, that the whole Roman
church does very much rejoice in all the works of your faith, In what regard
we ought to have the Relics of the Martyrs, Read Rainolds de Romans Eccl.
Idol. l. 1. c. 9. 2. etc. 2 2. Epist. 43. Leo Episcopus Martiano Augusto.
whether it be in that you helped our message with a godly affection; and that
you brought back again the Catholic Priests who were unjustly cast out of the
churches; Or in that you caused the relics, of the innocent and Catholic
priest Flavianus to be brought back with due honor to that church over which
he was set.

The 43. Epistle is directed to the Emperor Martianus touching the message
which in his stead he directed to Constantinople, for having a council at
Chalcedon; and begins thus. I had surely desired of your glorious cleme^cie,
that the synod by us requested, for recovering of the peace of the East
church, which you also thought necessary, should be a little while deferred
till further opportunity; that those Bishops also, might come thither with
freer minds, whom the fear of wrong does withholde. But because with a
religious care, you prefer divine things before humane affairs; and do
religiously and truly believe that it will be profitable for the strength of
your kingdom, if there be no difference in opinion amongst the priests or
discord in the preaching of the Gospel: neither do I withstand your orders,
wishing that the Catholic faith which can be but one, be planted in the hearts
of al men. The former Ephesine counsel, The 1 Council of Ephesus.
did justly and deservedly condemn Nestorius together with his opinion, and
whosoever does continue in that error, can attain to no hope of pardon. But
the second held in the same city cannot be held a counsel, The 2 of Ephesus.
which it is certain was carried to the subversion of the faith, and which
your clemency in love of the truth, as being good for the catholics, Aliud
statue^do cassabit. We ask no other supremacy but this.
will make void by appointing an other most renowned Emperor. Therefore I
heartily beseech and pray your Majesty: through our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the author and governor of your Empire, that you would not suffer the
faith, which our blessed fathers preached as received from the Apostles, to be
handled again as doubtful, in this present synod; or those things which were
of old condemned by the authority of our auncesters, you suffer not to be
stirred afresh, by new endeavors. But that you rather command this, The prince
must strengthen the Council by law
that the constitutions of the ancient council of Nice the interpretations of
heretics being removed, may stand firm.

In the 44. Epistle to the Emperor again wherein amongst other things he
gives him thanks for his defense of the Catholic faith, he writes thus,
Epist. 44* Leo Episcopus Martiano Augusto.
you have showed your protection of the Catholic faith, The divine aid does
grow in you, Pure and unstained religion ought to be the highest of all cares
appertaining to public regiment. These be points of that supremacywe seek for
whereby verily not only the state of the Church, but the strength of your
Empire is fenced; that so o glorious Emperor, you may worthily look for his
protection, whose truth you worship. For that the soundness of my Brother
Anatolius was the sooner manifested. That he that revived again the error
long since condemned could have no place in the Church of Christ. That the
Catholic Bishops, whom the late persecution of the heretics, could not
deprave are called back from their unjust exile. And that the relics of
Flavianus of blessed memory, were preserved with due honor his condemner
acknowledging his own impiety; is a title of your virtue, and a fruit of your
Godliness, upon whom I trust the ensigns of other glories will be heaped;
that as the Church of Constantinople, having received the liberty of the
Apostolic faith, does rejoice: so all men are glad, that all the Churches of
your kingdom are cleansed from the contagion of divelish opinions. A little
after thus it follows, Quae industria in omnibus, quae nequitur gesta sunt
etc. Which labor of ours in amending those things which are wickedly carried,
will by Gods help take effect speedily; if your Majesty vouchsafe to adioine
your help to the repairing of the Ecclesiastical peace; We also do desire
that a Synod may be held, as your clemency mentions. But that the Bishops of
all the provinces should be gathered together at this present, The Emperor had
power to call a Council sooner or later as it pleased him
the necessity of the time does with no reason permit. Therefore your clemency
may reserve it to some fitter opportunity. Of which business those that I have
sent can more fully relate unto your highness.

Epistle 45. Leo Episcopus Pulcheriae Augustae. Not one remedy to all sorts.
In the 45. Epistle to the Empress Pulcheria. After relation of Eutiches
blasphemy, he says. But that toward the persons of such men an upright
course be observed and one manner yielded to those that are amended, and
another to those that are obstinate, we pray your highness to defend them
that we have sent from the Apostolic sea, and that you would further that
business which we have commanded them, that so more sooner and easier, the
Lord aiding us, those things may be done which will further your glory and the
peace of the Church. Touching Eutiches the author of all this wickedness, and
scandal, I pray your clemency, Leos power was not able to remove Eutiches.
that he may be removed further of, from that place which is two near the
city of Constantinople, least he have more often consolations from those,
whom he has drawn to his impiety. Leo desires the Empress that a Catholic
might be placed in Eutiches ^oomes which is a part of that supremacy we dispate
for
Command also that some Catholic Abbot be placed in that Monastery, where he
very dangerously and unworthily sat, who may deliver that company of the
servants of God, both from his false opinion and can instruct them with lessons
of truth.

Epist. 47. Stapl. abuses these words, the honor and right of Peter, or
Peter's sea reserved referring them as though Leo had the right to call a
general council: where as Leo speaks of their decrees that nothing be
enacted against the privileges of that sea. Return of untruths against B.
Iuell, art. 4. fol. 143. b. and 147. a. Epist. 49. The Pope desired that the
counsel might have bin deferred but could not. The Pope would not withstand
the Emperor although the Emperor would not al his request defer the Council*
Epistle, 50.
In the 47. Epistle written unto the counsel of Chalcedon, wherein he
exhorts the^, that they would determine of al things according to the
scriptures; he faith thus. We must embrace the council of the most clement
Prince, which is full of holiness, willing your holy brotherhood to meet to
gither to overthrowe the crafty devises of the devil and settling the peace of
the church, the honor and right of the sea of S. Peter preserved, insomuch
that he also invited us by his letters to be present at the reverend synod
which yet neither the necessity of this time, nor any custom could permit.

In the 49. Epistle to the Emperor Mar tianus he begins thus. We did
think that your clemency could have performed our request, that the present
necessity respected, you would have commanded the council of Bishops to have
bin deferred until fitter opportunity; that so, Priests being called out of all
provinces, it might be indeed an universal council. But because in love to
the catholic faith, you will have meeting to be at this present; Least I should
seem to withstand your holy pleasure, I have sent my legates thither.

In the 50. to the same Emperor thus he writes. The holy desire of your
clemency touching the having of a synod, Leo Episcopus Mart. August.
for the repairing of the churches peace, I took the more willingly; and
although I did desire it might have bin kept within Italy, The Pope desired
that the Council might be deferred or kept within Italy; but could obtain
neither.
and wished that a fitter time had bin sought out, that so, many mo bishops
might have bin gathered together from further regions yet asso one as your
letters came, I addressed some thither in my room. And concludes thus. In
respect that formerly I have desired your Majesty to be gracious unto those,
that brought my letters; so now also I entreat with like assurance, that you
would be favorable in all things toward those that shall be there in my
stead: whereby those things may the more easily and diligently attain and
wholesome effect, which are brought into order by your care and study.

Epist. 51. Leo Epise. Pulche riae Augustae. The Empress had care over the
universal Church, Leo could have no more.
In the 51. to the Empress Pulcheria, thus he writes. I do in all things
acknowledge the religious care of your highness, which you do vnweariably
bestow for the Catholic faith: And do thank God that I see you have such
diligence to further the universal church, that whatsoever I think does
appertain to justice or love, I will boldly move and set forward; that so,
those things which hitherto have bin done by the endevor of your godliness
without bla^e may the speedier be brought to a pleasing end. In that therefore
your clemency, has commanded a council to be held at Chalcedon, The Empress
appointed the Council to be held at Chalcedon, when the Pope would have had
it in Italy.
when I made request to you Majesty: that it might be kept in Italy, that all
the Prelates of our part being called, if security of the time would give
leave, might meet; I have not taken it unpleasantly, but appointed two of my
Bishops to repair thither.

Epistle 53. is written unto Anatolius the Archbishop of Constantinople, Epist.
53. Leo Episcopus Anatolio Episc
wherein he first praises him for his faith in joining with the Council of
Chalcedon; then he expostulateth with him, for going about to subject the
Churches of Alexandria and Antioche unto his jurisdiction contrary to the
Nicene Council; says thus. It is not without cause believed, Flavianus Bishop
of Constantinople next before Axatolius.
thy predecessor of blessed memory being cast out for the defense of the
Catholic truth, that those that did ordain thee. contrary to the order of the
Canons, seemed to consecrate one like to themselves, Anatolius was made
Bishop without Leos consent, yet his ordination stood firm.
but the mercy of God was present directing and confirming thee in this, that
thou should use ill beginnings well, and show thy self not to be carried
with the opinion of men, but with the love of God, which may very well be so
taken, if thou loosest not the praise of that gift with another offense; A
Catholic man, and especially a Priest of the Lord, as he ought to be entangled
with no error; so not to beeled with any ambition. A little after. Therefore
after those blame worthy beginnings, of thy ordinatio^ after the consecration
of the Bishop of Antioche, which consecration thou challengest to thy self,
for which I am grieved, that thou should endeavor to infringe the holy
constitutions of the Nicene canons, as though this time were only beneficial
unto the, whereby Alexandria shall lose the privilege of the second honor,
and the Church of Antioche the right of the third, So, if all be subject to
Rome they all shall loose their honors.
so that these places being subject to thy rule, all Metropolitan Bishops
shall be deprived of their honor; which being unheard of and never before
attempted; you are so overtaken by extremity, that you bring the holy Council
which was gathered together, by the care of the most Christian Prince, only to
extinguish heresy, and confirmation of the Catholic faith into an occasion of
ambition, and constrainest his sufferance to thine own side. A little after O
brother, be not high minded but fear, The Pope feared the Emperor as his
superour.
and surcease to trouble the godly ears of the most Christian Princes, with
unjust Petitions whom I know you shall better please with modesty, then with
pride.

Epist. 54 Leo Episcop. rom and universalis Ecclesiae Martiano August.
The 54 Epistle is to the Emperor Martianus to the same effect that the former
was to the Bishop of Constantinople, wherein he rejoices in the faith of the
Chaloedo^ Council, and further certifieth him of Anatolius, who went about in
the same counsel through ambition to bring under him the Churches of
Alexandria and Antioch, and thus begins. Through the great gift of the
mercy of God, By the care of the Emperor the heresy was suppressed.
the reioycings of the whole Catholic Church are multiplied, seeing by the
holy and religious care of your highness, the pestilent heresy that troubled
the Church is extinguished that so our labor might sooner come to the desired
end, which labor of ours. your excellency serving God in it, has furthered
in faith and power, A little after, I speak to a Christian truly religious,
The Pope is fain to certify the emperor of the dealing of other Bishops.
and sound prince: Anatolius the Bishop does lose so much of his good deserts,
as he does desire to rise by unjust dealing. Let the city of Constantinople
(as we desire) have that which is its due: And the right hand of God
strengthening you, I desire that your Empire may be established in you for ever.
And let each man know Propria perdit, qui in debita co^cu-(...) past,
according to one faith and meaning; and not to suffer them hence forward to be
plucked in pieces by any accusation. As therefore the mercy of God, by the
counsel of his spirit, has instructed the mind of your clemency, first of
all, provide for the peace of the Church of Alexandria, The Emperor commands
the clergy to choose a sound Bishop, the^ the Pope belike did not choose al.
and per catholicos sacerdotes talem provideri iubete Pontificem, and command
that the Catholic Priests provide such a Bishop, in whom for honesty of life,
and soundnes of faith, nothing be found amiss, that all things being rightly
carried, the preaching of the truth be every where kept.

The 74. Epistle to the same Emperor has this tenor; Epist. 74. Leo Episc.
Romae Leoni semper Augusto.
Although lately I directed two letters unto your Clemency, the one whereof
contained the debt of my salutation, the other entreated for the state of the
Church. Notwithstanding by an occasion which has offered it self, God so
ordering it, it is meet I entreat both again. According therefore unto that
trust, which by the inspiration of God you have performed to the universal
Church, The Emperor began to deal in Church matters before any man requested
him as knowing it to be his duty
by setting in order before any man spoke, that which was especially to be
desired, we do not cease to give thanks to God, and to praise his providence
in the earnestness of your faith, who has withstood with an holy and
Catholic spirit (as I understand by conference with my brother and fellow
Bishop Anatolius) the impude^cies of the heretics, that we may acknowledge, to
the quietness of the world that you have bin a preserver of the Chalcedon
council. Which, when it is profitably defined by your sentence, how much more
carefully is it to be published to the universal Church, Disturbers of the
catholic religion to be punished by the magistrate
insomuch that so the quietness of the christian faith may profit your Empire,
and no heretical impiety may glory in its enterprise? Whose crafty stubborn
contention will forthwith be appeased, if it be bridled by the Imperial power.

The 75. Epistle is also to the same Emperor Leo, Epist. 75. Leo Episc. Leoni
Augusto.
where after due congratulation touching the letters he receive from him; and
complaint of the impiety of the 2. Ephesine council which promoted the
heresy of Eutiches; He comes to say this. What more praise worthy, what
more religious thing can your Godliness decree, The Emperor must by laws
provide that those things which in matters spiritual be established be not
infringed.
then that no man any more be suffered to assault those things which are
determined, not only by humane ordinance, but also divine? A little after
relating the doctrine of the council of Nice, and Chalcedon, it follows.
Before a Christian Prince therefore, and one that is to be numbered with due
honor amongst the publishers of Christ, do I use my christian liberty, The
godly Emperor is a publisher of Christ.
and securely exhort you to the fellowship of the Apostles and Prophets; and
that stoutly you despise, and drive those from you, who by their heresy have
lost the name of Christian men: nor suffer murderers, to deal in the faith
with a sacrilegious dissimulation, who would by all means make void the faith.
For when the Lord has enriched your clemency, with the knowledge of such a
mystery, you ought without delay to consider: that your kingly power was not
given you only for the government of the world in civil things but especially
for succor of the Church, Sed maxim ad ecclesiae praesidium.
that by repressing of wicked enterprises you defend those things, that are
well established, The Emperor must reform the Church.
and restore true peace to those things, which are out of order; thrusting out
those who are invaders of other men's right, and reforming the seat of
Alexandria to the ancient faith, that the anger of God being mitigated by your
means, he recompense not the kingly city for the evils it has done but remit
them. Set before the eyes of your heart, renowned Emperor, the priests of the
Lord, dispersed through the world, who entreat you for that faith which is the
redemption of the world, wherein in they specially labor, The Emperors
supremacy is seen in these things.
who being followers of the Apostolic doctrine, are chief in the church of
Alexandria, entreating with your Majesty, not to suffer the heretics, and
those that are justly condemned through their own perverseness, to use their own
courses; seeing whether you look upon the impiety of their error, or consider
the work of their fury done, they cannot only not be admitted to the honor of
Priesthood, but also to have the name of Christian men taken from them. A
little after, after he has spoken of the insolences of the heretics, in
exhibiting their petitions to his highness, he comes to this. It is
therefore an excellent thing for your Majesty, for that a crown is added to
your Diadem by the hand of the Lord yea to your faith, that so you may triumph
over your enemies of the Church, because if it be commendable for you to wage
war against the nations, how great will your Glory be, if you deliver the
Church of Alexandria, The Emperor must deliver the Church from a tyrant.
in whose sorrow, the wrong of all Christians rests, from a grievous tyrant?
Going on, and making mention of the advertisement of other matters, he comes
to this Sacerdotalem namque and Apostolicum tuae pietatis animum etiam hoc
malum ad iustitiam ultionis debet accendere. The Emperor had a priestly and
apostolical mind
For even this mischief also ought to kindle your Priestly and Apostolic
mind, to the equity of revenge, which evil does grievously darken the purity
of the Church of Constantinople, in which there are found some Clerks agreeing
with the heretics, and even in the bowels of the Catholics, aiding by their
assertio^s the parts of the heretics. In thrusting out of whom if my brother
Anatolius, If the Bishop neglect his duty, the Emperor must reform him and
settle the Church.
who spares the^ too favorably, be found slow, vouchsafe you with your
authority to adhibit a medicin to that Church, that such may not only be put
from the order of Clerks, but also thrown out of the city, that so the holy
people of God be no more polluted with the poison of perverse men. Iulianus the
Bishop, and Etius the Priest, who honor your godly affection, I commend with my
petition beseeching you to hear their informations gently for defense of the
Catholic faith, because truly they are things of that nature, that they may
be found profitable for your defense.

The 78. Epistle directed to the same Emperor, Epist. 78. Leo Episc. Leoni
Augusto.
begins thus. My mind reioiceth in the Lord, with much joy, and great reason
have I of reioicing, since I know that the most excellent faith of your
clemency is increased in all things, with the gifts of the heavenly grace; and
by the groath of your diligence, The Emperor had a priestly mind. Much good
toward the church wrought in Italy, by the Emperors means.
I find the devotion of a Priestlie mind in you: for in all the speeches of
your godliness, it does very plainly appear, what good the holy ghost has
wrought in Italy by your means, and how much it is desired by the prayers of
all the faithful, that your Empire may be enlarged in all glory, who above
the care of your temporal business does bestow the service of your wisdom very
constantly in disposing of holy and heave^ly things, that so the catholic
faith which only quickneth mankind, and only sanctifies, may abide in one
confession; and that dissentions which are bred out of the diversity of humane
opinions, may be driven away, by the soundness of that Rock, upon which the
city of God is built. The city of God is built upon a strong rock.
A little after speaking of his own agreement with the church of God against
heretics in the councels of Nice and Chalcedon, he says thus: If I build
again those things, which I have destroyed, I show my self an offender, as
the Apostle says; and bring upon my self all those punishments which not only
the authority of Martianus a prince of blessed memory, Martianus the Emperor
bou^ded in the decrees of councels with imperial laws and penalties to which
the Pope was subject. The Emperor has a perfect judgment to discern the
truth.
established against such, but those also that I have confirmed, with mine own
consent. After this, giving the Emperor his ordinary and due praises, he says.
Now since I know reverend Prince, that you are endued with the clear light of
truth, and to waver in no part of the faith, but are able to discern with an
holy and perfect judgment, truth from falsehood, and to sever things confuted,
from those that are to be embraced; I beseech you blame not my distrust,
thorough my humility; seeing this my taking heed, is done for the whole church,
and serves also your glory, least in the time of your reign, the wickedness of
the heretics be increased, or the peace of the Catholics be troubled. The
Emperor by gods grace was sufficiently furnished with guifis of judgment and
piety, which were his guids in governing the Church so far forth as we speak
of.
And therefore although in all things I am assured of the affection of your
highness, and do perceive by the holy Ghost dwelling in you, that you are
sufficiently instructed, that no error can beguile your vprightnes of
conscience, I endeavor yet in this to obey your command, in directing some of my
brethren, unto you in my steed, who shall show you what is the rule of the
Apostolical faith, The Emperors supremacy in ecclesiaticall causes is seen in
this Epist. 95. Leo Rom Epis. dilectissimis fratribus, vniversis episcopis
catholicis per Gall. and Hispan. constitutis. At Martianus command skillful men
assembled, who appeased the difference which I take is with us about the 24. of
April See the difference of spirits. Victor the Bishop of Rome would have
excommunicated all the Churches in Asia because they would not keep the feast,
as rome did: and now you see that Leo above 200 years after him, consents
with the^ Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
although as I said before, it be known sufficiently unto you. And concludes
thus. Suffer not the lamentable captivity of the church of Alexandria, to
continue any longer, to which by the help of your authority, and vprightnes,
her liberty ought to be restored, that so throughout all the cities of Egypt
the honor of the Fathers, and the priestly right, be repaired.

The 95. Epistle is written to the beloved brethren, and catholic bishops
through out France and Spain, touching the variation in the observing of the
feast of Easter. Tantumme diversitas ista permovit. So much (says he) has the
diversity thereof moved me, that I opened the sorrow of my mind unto the most
benign Emperor Martianus, that at his command, the truth of it might be
found out with diligent search, by those that have the skill, on what day that
holy solemnity might best be celebrated. By whose writing back unto me, I find
that the determinate time is, the 8. of the Calends of May. And therefore,
thorough a desire of unity and peace which I have, I had rather rest in the
definition of the Churches of the East, the^ dissent in the observatio^ of so
great a feast. Your brotherhood therefore shall know, that the feast of the
resurrection of our Lord which is Easter, must be kept by all the 8. day of
the Calends of May. And this by you must be certified to other the brethren,
that as we are joined together in one faith; so we may keep the solemnity
together.

In the 99. Epistle which is my last in this place and for honor of that most
worthy Emperor Leo concludes all the rest, Epist. 99. Leo Episcopus Leoni
Augusto.
I find that thus writes this Leo the Bishop unto him. If we should desire to
give that due praise to the glorious purpose of your godliness in defense of
the faith, as the greatness of things does desire, we should be found unequal
in the matters of giving thanks, if only with the slendernes of our mouth we
should celebrate the joy of the whole Church. But more worthily shall the
Church it self yield praise to your acts and merits, in whose business you
excel, and do triumph in the wished event of glory. Let your Majesty
therefore know that all the churches of God are glad and likewise rejoice to
your honor, The Emperor removed Timotheus Aelurus, who was chosen after the
murder of Proterius.
because that wicked murderer is thrown out of the Church of Alexandria; and
the people of God over whom such a mischievous robber was set, being brought
back to their ancient liberty of faith may be put again by the preaching of
faithful priests into the way of salvation when they shall see a whole seminary
of poison cast out with him. Now there fore because you have done this with an
high purpose, and heroical spirit; The Pope desi^eth the Empe^our to determine
of a catholic Bishop for Alexand. is not this a part of his supremacy, to see
that fit and able men be provided for the people of God?
ioin this to the finished work of your faith that you determine of a catholic
Bishop for that city, which thing will please God, who cannot be touched with
any spot, of the so often condemned heresy, least peradventure the hidden
wound in show, do grow further; and the Christian people, who by your means
are plainly delivered from the perverseness of heretics, be again subject to
deadly poison.

Finis, or conclusion is this, Although they be not all persuaded that it is
the truth which they withstand, yet that to be error which they uphold -- they
might undoubtedly the sooner a great deal attain to know; Hooker
eccles^olitie, l. 5.
that their study is more to defend, what once they have stood in, then to find
out sincerely and simply what truth they ought to persist in for ever.


