A COPY OF THE FIRST ARREST OR DECREE OF THE Parliament of PARIS, against the
Book of Santarellus the Jesuit; Commanding it to be burned, and the
Provincial of the Jesuits, with others, to come to the Court the next morning
to be heard.

WITH, The Parlaments demands, the Jesuits answers, their Declaration of
their detestation of the said Book, with the Censure of the Sorbon Doctors
against the same.

Translated into ENGLISH, according to the French Copies, Printed at Paris with
the Kings Privilege.

LONDON, Printed by R. BADGER, and are to be sold at the Black Bear in Paul's
Churchyard 1634.

A COPY OF THE FIRST Arrest, See the French Mer. tom. 11. ad Ann. 1626. p. 87.
and seq.
or Decree of the Parliament of PARIS, etc.
THe Court of the great Chamber, Criminal, and of the Edict assembled, having
seen a book printed at Rome in the year 1625. entitled, Antonij Santarelli,
etc. containing in the 30. and 31. Chapters many propositions against the
Sovereign powers of Kings, ordained, and established by God, the peace and
tranquillity of their States.

Conclusions of the Kings procuratour General, and all considered.

The Court has declared, and does declare the Propositions, and Maxims of the
said book, to be false, scandalous, and seditious, tending to the subversion
of Sovereign Powers ordained, and established by God, to the insurrection of
Subjects against their Prince, withdrawing them from their obedience, inducing
to attempt against their Persons, and States, to disturb the public peace,
and tranquillity; and the said Book, as such, to be torn, and burned in the
Court of the Palace by the Executioner of High Justice. Injoyneth, and
forbids under pain of Treason all Booke-sellers, and Printers to print,
sell, utter, and all Persons of what state, and condition soever they be, to
have, keep, retain, and communicate, to print or cause to be printed, or to
publish the said Book. Commands all those; who have Copies thereof, or shall
have notice of those, who shall have them in their hands, to notify forthwith
to the Ordinary Judges, to the end that Inquisition be made by the diligence of
the Substitute of the Procuratour General, and to proceed against the
offenders according to Justice. Ordains, that this present Arrest shall be
sent to the Bailywikes, and Stewardships subject to the Jurisdiction of this
Court, to be published, kept, and observed according to the form, and tenor
thereof. And to be signified to the Syndicke of the Booksellers to make it
known to the rest, to the end that they pretend not cause of ignorance.
Ordains, that the Provincial, three Rectours, and three Ancients of the
Jesuits shall be commanded to come to morrow betimes in the morning to the
Court for to be heard, Made, and executed the thirteenth of March, 1626.

Articles of the Parlaments Demands to the Jesuits, with their Answers.
THe twenty fourth of March 1626. the Jesuits being present in the great
Chamber, See the French Mer. p. 8. and seq.
the Parliament asked them, Do you approve the wicked Book of Santarellus?

P. Coton, Provincial of the province of Paris, accompanied with three others,
answered: Messieurs, it is so faulty, that we are ready to write against it,
and to disprove all that he says, and in effect there are come to our Houses
ten Copies of them, all which we have suppressed.

The Parliament, Suppressed, Is it your duty to deal so?


The Jesuits. We thought, that we could not do otherwise then so.


The Parliament. Why brought you not them to Monsieur the Chancellor, or to
Monsieur, the First President?


The Jesuits. Messieurs, we are obliged, and bound to many other obediences,
then are other Religious.


The Parliament. Do not you know very well, that this wicked Doctrine is
approved by your General at Rome?


The Jesuits. Yea Messieurs, but we that are here can not be so imprudent,
but we disprove it with all our might.


The Parliament. Well then, answer to these two things, Do you believe, that
the King is all Powerful within his Estates, and do you think, that any
foreign Power can, or ought enter in, or any then in the Person of the King
can disturb the peace of the Gallican Church?


The Jesuits. No, Messieurs, we believe him all Powerful, as for Temporal.


The Parliament. As for Temporal, speak plainly, and tell us, if you believe,
that the Pope can Excommunicate the King, free his Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance, and expose his Kingdom to spoil?


The Jesuits. O Messieurs, to Excommunicate the King, he that is the Eldest
son of the Church will be careful to do nothing, which may oblige the Pope
to that.


The Parliament. But your General, who has approved that book, does hold for
infallible as above. Are you of a different belief?


The Jesuits. Messieurs, He who is at Rome, could do no otherwise, then to
approve that, which the Court of Rome approves.


The Parliament. Is it your belief?


The Jesuits. It is quite contrary.


The Parliament. And if you were at Rome, what would you do?


The Jesuits. We would do, as they do there.


The Parliament. Well then, answer to that, which we have demanded of you?


The Jesuits. Messieurs, we humbly beseech you, to give us leave to confer
together.


The Parliament. Go into that Chamber.

They being there half an hour returned back again to the Parliament.


The Jesuits. Messieurs, we will be of the same opinion with the Sorbon, and
will subscribe to the same things with the Messieurs of the Clergy.


The Parliament. Make your Declaration there beneath.


The Jesuits. Messieurs, we most humbly entreat you, to give us some days
to confer among our selves.


The Parliament. Go your ways, See the French Merc. page 92.
the Court gives you three days.


A Copy of the Jesuits Declaration against the Doctrine contained in the book
of Santarellus the Jesuit, in that which concerns the Person of Kings, and
their Authority, exhibited to the French King two days after.
WE underwritten do declare, that we disallow, and detest the wicked Doctrine
contained in the book of Santarellus, in that which concerns the Person of
Kings, their Authority, and their States, and that we acknowledge their
Majesty's to depend immediately upon God, that we are ready to shed our blood,
and expose our lives in all occasion for the confirmation of this Truth.
Promising to subscribe to the Censure, which shall be made of this pernicious
Doctrine by the Clergy, or the Sorbon, and never to profess opinions, or
Doctrine contrary to that, which shall be held in this matter by the Clergy,
and the Universities of the Realm, and the Sorbon. Made in Paris by the
undernamed Religious of the Company of Jesus, the sixteenth day of March, 1626.

P. ^oto. Ign. Arman. Chapter de la Toure. I. Souffren. F. Garasse. F. Godullon.
Dion. Gaiatrin. Fr. Grandillon. Dion. Petau. I. Fillault. I. Brossault. Est.
Guerry. Lud. Neyran. Iac. Alemant. Pierre Royer. Est. Louys.


A Copy of the censure of the Sacred Theological Faculty of Paris, This
Censure is printed at Paris in Latin by Joseph Bovillerot, and see it in
French in the French Merc. ubi supra page 95.
of a book entitled Antonii Santarelli, etc.
IF any one perchance make doubt, that the ends of the world are come upon us,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.
let him but consider these latter times, and compare them with the former, and
he will then acknowledge, that the enemy of mankind has left nothing
unattempted, which might serve not only to hurt, but also to clean overthrow
both the Ecclesiastical, and also the Civil policy. There have been wicked
men, who presuming to blaspheme against Heaven, have employed their pens, and
swords against the Church, the Spouse of CHRIST JESUS. But some witless men
perceiving, that it is not without reason, that the Secular power be armed with
the sword, have assaulted the Civil Policy by an other way; and have
attempted to extirpate, and annihilate hereby execrable books, putting in
execution by such ambuscado's more covertly their pernicious designs. The
mark which S. Jude propounds to us to know these men by; is, that they
despise Dominion, and blaspheme Majesty. And would to God, that they had rested
content only with despisall, and reviling speeches; but so great is their
fault, that contrariwise these damnable Writers, under a pretense of
establishing in the Church, a certain temporal power, do teach, and affirm;
that it is in the power of those, who have in their hands the government of
Ecclesiastical affairs, to depose Kings from their Thrones, and the same for
very small and ridiculous causes, and to put in their places other Supreme
Magistrates either Annual, or Iournall; as they shall think good. For this
cause the Theological Faculty of Paris perceiving, that they intend to
overthrow by this means all Civil Policies, especially this of the French
Monarchy, which is governed by our most Christian, most Clement, and most Just
KING, Lewis the XIII. To follow the steps of Her Predecessor, in testifying
the affection, which She bears to His Majesty, and the whole Realm, and to
satisfy also the general desire of all good men, has chosen out among other
books one newly come forth, entitled, Antonii Santarelli Iesuitae de Haeresi,
Schismate, Apostatia, etc. And in the General Congregation held
extraordinarily the sixeteenth day of March last past She committed to
certain Doctors, whom She particularly named, to read, and examine the same.
But for as much as it treats of many things, which do no way appertain to
that, which principally is now questioned, She thought good, that they should
examine only two Chapters, to wit, the thirtieth and thirty one of the
Treatise de Haeresi.

Therefore the first day of April, 1626 after Mass of the HOLY GHOST the
Assembly being kept after the accustomed manner in the Hall of the Sorbon
College, has read the relation of the Doctors appointed by the Faculty, who
have declared, that in those two Chapters are contained these propositions
following: That the Pope can punish Kings, and Princes with temporal
punishments, depose, and deprive them of their Kingdoms for the crime of
Heresy, and free their Subjects from their obedience, and that this has ever
been the custom in the Church. And not only for Heresy, but also for other
causes; to wit, for their sins. If also it be expedient: If Princes be
negligent: If they be unable, and unprofitable. Moreover, that the Pope has
power over spiritual things, and also over all temporal. And that by the Law
of God there is in him both spiritual, and temporal power. That we must
believe, that to the Church, and her Supreme Pastor power is given to punish
with temporal punishments, Princes who offend against divine, and humane
laws, especially if the crime be Heresy. They said also, that the same
Santarellus affirmed in that book. That the Apostles were subject to Secular
Princes de facto, but not de iure. And also, that as soon as the Pontifical
Dignity was ordained, all Princes began to be subject to it. To be short,
they related, that he expounds those words of CHRIST, Whatsoever thou shall
bind upon earth, Matthew. 16.
etc. Not only of spiritual, but also of temporal power. And that he
corrupts the text of Saint Paul in cutting of the negation [ Not] and
imposes upon Authors things, 2 Cor. 10. Our Lord has given us power to
edification, and not to destruction.
which they never thought of. And they concluded, that as well these things, as
many others, which they related, do worthily deserve the Correction, and
censure of the Faculty.

Wherefore the matter being by Monsieur the Deane brought into deliberation,
after the opinions of all the Doctors were heard, and their voices collected,
the Faculty has disproved, and condemned the doctrine contained in these
propositions, and the conclusions of the said heads, as new, false, erroneous,
contrary to the word of God; making the Pontifical dignity to be odious;
opening the way to Schism; which depends only upon God, hindering the
conversion of Infidel, and Heretical Princes, disturbing the public peace,
and overthrowing Kingdoms, States, and Commonwealths, and in brief, with
drawing Subjects from the obedience, which they owe to their Sovereigns, and
inducing them to Factions, Rebellions, and Seditions, and to attempt against
the lives of their Princes. Made in the Sorbon, the day, and year above named,
and reviewed the fourth of April, 1626.

By the commandment of the Messieurs, the Deane, and Doctors of the sacred
Theological Faculty of Paris. Ph. BOVVOT.


