THE HEROICAL DEVISES OF M. CLAUDIUS PARADIN Canon of Beauicu.

Whereunto are added the Lord Gabriel Symeons and others.

Translated out of Latin into English by P. S.

printer's device of William Kearney

LONDON, Imprinted by William Kearney dwelling in Adlingstreete. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE RENOWNED CAPTAIN Christopher Carleill Esquier,
chief Commander of her Majesty's forces in the Province of Vlder in the Realm
of Ireland, and Seneshall there of the Countries of Clandeboy, the Rowte, the
Glins, the Duffre, and Kylultaugh.
RIGHT Worshipful, being mindful of the saying which the ancient poet Hesiod
uses, whereby he does justly admonish (as imitating the earth) to recompense
benefits with increase, though I despair to requite your many courtesies
affoorded me, and so must be checked of that dumb creature, yet I intend to
imitate the the rocks and answer so loud a voice with a resounding Echo, and
though in comparison of the voice I speak but the last syllable, yet I hope
your Worship regarding rather my good meaning than my gift, will afford your
patronage to this little book, and shroud it under the protection of your
Heroical spirit, where I doubt not it shall obtain favor, and thereby find
passage without repulse: seeing also it contains in it that which most men
desire, both delight to the eye and harmony to the ear, pleasure to both and
offense to none. I have the rather presumed to hope of your Worships good
acceptance for two causes: the one for that I see the like to have been done in
the same book being in French and Latin by very honorable and virtuous
personages, to whom in mine account your Worship is nothing inferior. For to
omit al discourse and to touch only the bare names of some things managed by
your self: Let the sundry great proofs of your martial services and worthy
adventures as well by land as by sea witness what your deserts have been, which
the Spanish west India with loss and grief; Muscouia or Russia with worthy
commendation; France, the Low Countries, and Ireland, with renowned fame have
with general voice and consenting occurrencie, even from them all to both
far and near sounded and emblased, wherein can not be forgotten your zeal
always showed toward Christ's Gospel, besides many other your rare virtues
accompanied with a cherefull liberality and a most courteous affability
toward all men, whereof my self among the rest have sufficiently tasted from
time to time. The other for that sometimes I have noted your Worship to be well
delighted with the substance and nature of this work, as well in your
beholding of some other men's Emblemes, which have bin worthy personages, as
also in your devising and setting down some from your own conceit, which if I
could have recovered, as once I was promised, and showed some of them by one
of your servants, who is now in Irelande, I had here adioined them unto the
others. And so fearing I have been somewhat too tedious I humbly take my leave
in recommending my labor to your good favor, and my self to do you service in
any thing I may be able. London the third of January. 1591.

Your Worships most humble to command William Kearney.

To the most worthy knight Theodot of Marze, Lord of Belleroche, Lassenaz,
etc. Claudius Paradin sends greeting.
AS variety of pictures yields great pleasure and recreation unto man: so
likewise the profit and commodity that is reaped from them, is not to be had
in little regard or estimation, forasmuch as by the use of them vexations both
of body and mind (which are otherwise intolerable) are easily mollified
and assvvaged. The truth hereof has been at all times well known to our
ancestors, and amongst them especially to great kings, princes and potentates,
which carrying at all seasons in their hautie and heroical minds, an express
pattern and image of virtue, have hereby continued a perpetual memory of the
same, being very apt in his own nature to decay and be forgotten. The first
and original cause of this practice was this, that diverse men according to
the diversity of their special conceits and inventions, were given to
represent and express the same with sundry forms and pictures, as it stood
most with each man's fancy and good liking. These their devises being thus set
down in picture, are termed their arms, for that they were painted in
their arms and in their bucklers, targets or other military furnitures: for
they took great pleasure to commend and beautify in any sort, that thing in
the which they reposed a great hope of their security: and in their vvarres
where death was alvvaies present before their eyes, they desired continually
to carry about them these devises, vovving as it were thereby as well to die
as live with these monuments and memorials of virtue. This commendable
practice growing by little and little, was at length augmented with the
addition of certain short and pithie sentences for the better information of
such as were learned, which being joined with the former devises are used by
certain noble personages until this present age, as it appears manifestly
in the sumptuous buildings and stately Courts of great kings and princes,
which are so copiously enriched with such Emblemes and monuments, that this
practice seems to be more esteemed in these our days than in any former
ages. Wherefore when I considered all these things with my self and vvithall
at the inestimable benefit and commodity of these pictures, I thought it not
altogether unprofitable to bestow sometime in coupling and gathering together
of such amongst the rest, as either were chiefly commended unto us by our
ancestors, or are specially used amongst great men at this day, or else are
found in the old histories to be most memorarable and of principal note and
regard. And in so doing as the old Aegiptians were wont to express their
intentes and meanings by their Hierographicall letters: so hope I by this
means to stir up diverse men to the apprehension and love of virtue, and for
that cause I have hereunto the rather added* certain scholies or brief notes
for the better understanding of such matters, which otherwise seem to
contain some difficulty. And whereas (right Noble Sir) you are alvvaies
given, according to the natural disposition of your ancestors, to al good
knowledge and virtuous exercise, I am emboldned to offer unto you this small
packet of Devises, as a pledge of the good will and affection that I have to
do you service, assuring my self that you will take no less pleasure in
perusing of them, than you have alvvaies, had delight to see virtue in any sort
reverenced or exalted.

DEVISES.
Nullis praesentior ether. God is more favorable to none.


The letter TAV says Hierome (upon Mark) being one of the Hebrew Alphaber,
Hierome in Eze. 9.
is a most healthful and sacred letter, and also a true note or type of the
cross it self, and because that this letter in the holy tongue signifies a
mark. Some partly, who mourned over the abomination of Jerusalem to be
marked, whereby they were saved in the midst of the wicked, who by the
commandment of God were all suddenly destroyed. Moreover Tau signifies a fall
perfection, and therefore it is the last letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, as both
ending and perfecting the same. Whereof also they make a great mystery,
especially whereas our redeemer Christ being nailed to the cross, before he
gave up the Ghost, burst forth into these words: Consummatumest, it is ended,
or finished: thereby declaring the type of all Prophesies, and holy
scriptures, that is, even the very same hour that he was fastened to the tree,
showing that the accomplishment of this letter was performed. Which letter,
although it surely tend unto a figure; yet described by the manifest character,
it far plainer shows the figure of the cross, than otherwise. And
therefore both the Greeks and Latins to this day do write it in form of a
cross. This letter therefore is a most proper and true badge or cognizance of
all those that being mustered do war in the Church of Christ to the worlds
end.

Manet insontem grauis exitus. Great calamity or affliction abides the godly
in this life.


Orus Apollo writes, Or. Ap^
that the Egyptians counted the figure of two lines one against the other,
that is, of one perpendicular under a diametrall, in signification of the life
to come, amongst the hieroglyphicall notes, or characters, neither could they
render any other reason hereof, then that it seemed to the^ to be a certain
sign of some divine mystery. And therefore they imprinted it upon the breast
of Serapis their Idol, in that temple which under Theodosius the Emperor was
utterly overthrown, and laid louell with the ground. In which Temple were to
be seen every where the hieroglyphicall letters, representing the form of a
cross, Suidas. Isidorus
as Suidas witnesses* Isidorus affirmerh they used to note those in their
Ephemerides orregisters, which either had escaped out of battle alive, or
which had died there with this letter th. noting the slain as it were with a
dart thrust through them, the living with this mark or letter T. Moreover Asc.
Pedian says, Asc. Pedian.
that the lottes which were used in judgments, were marked with three
Characters: those that were condemned to death with th. those that were
absolved with T. and those that were more exactly to be examined with D. Orus
Finally even in the Church of God some have too superstitiously dreamed this
letter to be a sacred and healthful sign, and this fantastical dream has
grown up and continued these many ages. And therefore some have imagined
Moses, whilst he prayed to the Lord in the Mountain, ^xod. 17.
his body upon the ground prostrated and his arms spread abroad in form of a
cross, and lifting up his hands in a mystical type, the Israelites overcame:
when he fainted, the Israelites were put to the worst.

Secum feret omnia mortis. He carries with him the signs of death.


The brazen Serpent erected by Moses the conductor of the Israelites in the
wilderness, (which being looked upon, healed those that were stoong with fiery
Serpents, (...). 21.
and destined to death) did prefigurate and foreshew our salvation and
redemption in Christ.

Hic ratio tentandi aditus. This is the way to enter into glory.


The Key whereof the Prophet Esaias makes mention, Esai. 22.
in th^se words. And I will give unto him the Key of the house of David, he
shall open and no man shall shu^, and he shall shut, and no man shall open, did
signify in like manner the power and authority of our Lord Jesus Christ in his
Church.

Pignora cara sui. The pledges of her remembrance.


Concerning the Cross of our Sauiou^ Christ the redeemer of the world, and
the mystery of his body and blood, the Prophet Jeremy under the person of the
wicked nation of the Jews forespoke, Ier. 11.
saying, Mittamus lignum in panem eius. Let us make woo^ his meat.

Animis illabere nostris. How the wicked spirit enters into our minds.


The wicked spirit at his first beginning is pleasant and plausible, but at the
last, he makes man astonished and altogether forgetful of himself.
Contrariwise, the holy spirit, albeit at his very first entrance he somewhat
terrifieth and shakes the mind, yet notwithstanding he makes it calm, quiet,
and secure, replenishing it with true and inward pleasure. Which thing to have
happened to the apostles upon the day of Penticost, the Acts do wi^nesse, the
holy Ghost coming down (...) likeness of fiery tongues, and lightning vpp^
them.

Fortuna mutata fidem nouanit. When Fortune frowneth, faith is changed.


When Childericus fourth King of France for his infamous life, should give over
his Kingdom, G^imcus a man entirely beloved of him, advertised him to go into
Thuring^a, whilst he staide to perfect the peace, and breaking a piece of gold
in the midst, gave unto him the one part thereof, to the intent tha^ the same
being sent again as he had promised, when opportunity served, and being joined
to the other with equal coniuncture might confirm the certeintie of the thin^
done to Childericus, and of his return. Which thing came to pass, for no
sooner had Guimeus desisted from his enterprise of peacema king, than Gillion a
citizen of Rome wa^ thrust from the possession of the kingdom (...) France,
which he affirmed apperteined (...) him, Childericus being restored to his
form^^ estate again.

Nutrisco, and extinguo. I nourish, and I extinguish.


The Salamander lying in the fire, was the badge or Cognizance of Frances king
of France. Which worm, Pliny writes, Pliny.
is of such a cold nature that she quenches the fire like ise. Others write
that she lives, and is norished in the fire. I remember that I my self have
seen the picture of this King in a small form, engraven in brass: upon whose
back part was placed an effigy of a fiery Salamander with this inscription,
Nutrisco il buono, and spengo il reo, that is, I nourish the virtuous, and
destroy the wicked. The same have I seem also in diverse places upon walls,
and namely a^ Fontem Bellaqueum, most lively polished and adorned in cloth of
Tapestrie, Arrase, and the like, with these verses.

The cruel Bear, the Eagle swift,
and Snake that bites by day:
O Salamander to thy flame,
give place without delay.
Monstrant Regibus astra viam. The heuens declare to men the way to follow.


The order of starred Knights was publicly instituted by King John, in the
Church at Saint Oven in France, about the year of our Lo^d God 1351. which
Knights we are this sign of the Star on their gowns, hats, or other place
where it might easily be seen in Theaters, and Stages. And truly it is to be
thought that this honorable cognizance had his beginning of the commemoration
of that wonderful star, which conducted the wise men from the East, to the
place where Christ was borne. Whither also those verses may be referred,
otherwise dedicate by Virgill the son of Pollio, to Julius Caesar, concerning
the commet which appeared after his death.

Behold the star of Dioneus Caesar,
the star wherein the corns rejoice their fills,
And whereby eke the Grapes do take
their die on shadie hills.
Donec totum impleat orbem. Till he replenish the whole world.


The increase of the moon in the days of the most famous king Henry the
second king of France, was most strange and prodigious. In the holy scriptures,
the moon many times does signify the Church: whereto may be added the consent
of Paulus Aemilius in the histonie of Pope Calixtus the second (whose name
before was Guido, the son of William Earl of the Heduans, or Burgundians.)
who the day before his pontifical creation saw in a vision a Star carried by
a child from the side of the Moon. Furthermore the Moon is always subject
to alteration, (...) both increases and decreaseth at certcine hours and
times. In like manner may we see the Church of God militant, and never
continuing in one and the same state, but one while maintained and defended of
Christian Princes, an other-while tyrannized, put to flight, and sent in funder
with factions of heretics: whereby it comes to pass, that it is never free
from vexation and trouble in this life. Whereto notwithstanding the Majesty of
God the King himself, and his son Jesus Christ have promised certain help
and defense, until it being gathered under one God, one King, and one law, the
most loving unity, and immensitie of the whole flock, acknowledging one only
pastor, may appear.

Immensi tremor Oceani. The trembling fear of the Ocean Sea.


Lodouicus the eleventh King of France, when he was about to institute the
order of Saint Michaell (as they call it) in the year of our Lord 1469. for a
Cognizance or Simbole he ensigned them with a golden chain lineked together
with cockle-stones, and double knots, with circles of gold: in the midst
whereof was a knob or mushrome, as it were a promontorie with the golden image
of Saint Michael hanging down upon their breasts. Which last he did, being
provoked thereto by the example of king Charles the seventh his father, who
used the same image for his ensign in wars, taking the beginning of his
manguration at Rothomage. Which custom was begun, and afterward confirmed
amongst many kings, through a notable miracle or vision (as they
superstitiously dream) of S. Michael appearing in the battle by the bridge of
the city of Orleance, who expulsed and drove away the English men, and set the
City free from their siege. The chain therefore is a type or figure of this
order, a sign of virtue, concord, and of a perpetual league or covenant of
amity and friendship to be continued amongst them, also a cognizance or badge
of those that deserved well, and of the victory obtained. By the gold he would
have to be understood, magnanimity, prowess and honors. By the cockles,
their mutual equality or common condition of fortune: imitating herein the
order of the Roman Senators, who used to wear cockles upon their sleeves: by
the tying of them together with a double knot, he would represent the
indissoluble covenant made betwixt him and the rest, and that with no frivolous
signification. Last of all, by the image, he would should be declared the
victory and triumph which Michaell had over the devil, whom he overcame. The
reason of which sign does greatly appertain as well to the regiment and
majesty of a kingdom, as also to strike fear and terror into the enemy. And
how many he thought good to be admitted into the society of this order, he
himself declared, to wit, 36. as it were patrones of the kingdom, amongst
whom he would be counted the first or chiefest. And therefore the same time,
that he ordained this order to be celebrate, he named fifteen lords, whom for
honors sake, and prerogative of their names, it is not convenient to omit with
silence. The first therefore were these:

Charles Duke of Guienne. John Duke of Burbon and Auergne. Lewis of Luxenburg
Earl of Saint Paul, and Constable of France. Andrew Lauallius, lord of Loheac,
Marshall of France. John Earl Sanserre lord of Bueile. Lewis Beaumont, lord of
Forest and Plessis. Lewis Destouteuille, lord of Torcy. Lewis Lauall, lord of
Chastillon. Lewis bastard of Burbon, Earl, Rosillon Admiral of France.
Anthony Chaban, Earl of Dammartin, chief Steward to the King. John bastard of
Armignia, Earl of Comingies, Marshall of France, governor of Dolphine. George
Trimoille, lord of Craon. Gilbert Chaban, lord of Curton, Seneshall of C^^cone.
Charles lord of Crussol, Seneschal of Poicton. Taneguius of Castle, governor
of the provinces of Rossillon, and Sardinia.
Vltus a^o (...) He has revenged his (...) quarrel, by the example of T^o).


Lewis the 12. King of France, as Duke of Orleance by descent, and earl of
Blofie, gave the Porcupine in his ensign, with which simbole together with the
image of a Wolf, the ancient City of Blofie was wont to blaze their
ensigns. This is to be seen graven in many stones and walls. Pliny.
Which beast nature has so studiously furnished with weapons, that she may
resist al those that withstand her, especially dogs, against whom she
throws her pricks like violent arrows. The interpretation of which
portraiture, the stately houses of a certain noble citizen in that city do
declare, at the entrance whereof, under the Porcupine these verses are found
engraven in stone.

These Darts are peace to humble men,
but war to proud indeed:
For why? both life and death also,
from our wounds do proceed.
Non sine causa. Not without cause.


The just and upright ad ministration of justice, with the due punishment of
the wicked, is a thing so necessary to kingdoms, people, and Countries, that
if they should be taken away, the companies and societies of men would soon
fall to decaie and be destroyed. Wherefore Rulers and Magistrates may righthe
challenge the sword to themselves, with public and private honors, as
warranted by the word of God, that they may be not onclie a help and a
comfort to the godly and meek, but also a fear and terror to the wicked.
Therefore is the most wholesome dectrine of the Apostle Saint Paul to be
embraced. Romans 13.
Wilt not thou^ (says he) fear the powers. Do well then, and thou shall
have praise thereby, for he is the minister of God for thy good. But i^ thou
do evil, fear, for he carries not the sword for naught, for he is the
minister of God to revenge in wrath to him that does evil. Therefore be ye
subject of necessity, not only for fear of anger, but also for conscience
sake. For this cause therefore do ye pa^e tribu^e, they are the n^inisters of
God s^^uing for that purpose. Give therefore to all men that which is due,
tribute to whom tribute belongs, fear to whom fear apperteineth, and honor
to whom honor belongs.

Plus oultre. He conceiueth hope to proceed further.


Charles the fifth of immortal fame, Emperor of Rome, expressing ever in all
his actions and exploites, a certain majesty and authority, manifested his
magnanimity and valiancie in two pillars, which our ancestors called Hercules
pillars, which are two promontories or hills distant one from an other 700.
paces, the one being in Mauritania toward Affrike, called Abila, the other in
the coast of the kingdom of Granalia toward Spain, called Calpe, betwixt
the which runs a gulf of the sea, which men call Gibraltar, or the straight
of Seuille or Hispalense. Poets feign, that in this straight sometime stood a
great rock of a marvelous hugenes, stopping the course of the sea for running
that way, which being taken away by the strength and industry of Hercules,
there was passage made to the Ocean sea. And for the remembrance of so worthy
a benefit, they say two pillars were erected of him there, in the two chiefest
parts of the world, Affricke and Europe. And truly as they in old time had a
great care to keep from oblivion their noble gestes, and valiant deeds,
recording them in their monuments, registers, and the like (as they write,
Alexander did his marshall exploites) so Hercules making an end there of his
iournies and travels, erected (as may be supposed) two memorable pillars, which
whither they were made by nature, by art, or by force, it is not thoroughly
known. But this is certain that there stood a church there, where in it is
said. Hanniball offered sacrifice when he warred against Italy, where it is
manifest, were two pillars of brass, either of them eight cubits high, of an
exellent fairenes. This place is called of the common sort the doore-threshald
of the world, beyond which they say, neither any man sailed, till the time of
Charles the fifth, which being searched out by his navy, together with the navy
of ye Portugals, they found the fortunate isles, and sundry rich nations both
toward the East, and West parts, for which cause, and to the end he might
signify to all posterities the exellency and greatness of his acts, he used
this pozie or Apothegme Plus Oultre, that is further or beyond, conceiving
great hope to go forward further.

Imperium sine fine dedi. I have given him rule without end or measure.


Augustus Ceasar a most quiet and peaceable Emperor, having got into his hands
the whole monarchy of the world, and being borne under the sign of
Capricorn, held the same in such estimation, that he caused the same sign of
Capricornus to be imprinted upon his coin: hereby referring the luckie and
solemn presagie of his fortune to the said star or planet. Yea there are
extant to this day both gold and silver coin, with this inscription of
Capticornus upon them, the feet whereof contain the sphere of the world,
having also upon the backside a band of soldiers or the effigy of Amalthea,
which last is found upon the gold: upon the silver is the stern or forepart of
a ship, in form of an orb (...) circle. Both of them having this inscription
Augustus.

Inextricabilis error. Error is inextricable.


Augustus Caesar, in the beginning of his reign used the Monkey or Marmset, as
a singular secret sign, signifying thereby, that the serious matters of a
Prince, with his weighty affairs are not to be committed to the common
people. Of which sort especially are all holy and divine things, lest through
the want of authority, they become base and contemptible. The same reason in a
manner moved the Egyptians to picture in their temples the Marmset or Monkey.
Celius.
Augustus Caesar (as Pliny witnesses) having found two such Monkeyes or
Marmsets amongst his mothers rings made by such wonderful art, Plinius.
and so like, that the one could by no means be discerned from the other: with
the one whereof, as with a seal his acts and edicts in time of war were
sealed, respect being had as well of the time as of the causes. Dion.
Dion reports that Augustus Caesar being occupied in ye wars of Atty, gave
lisence to Agrippa, and Mecenas chief rulers of ye Roman affairs to seal
writings before they were presented to the Senate: and therefore they received
a seal of Augustus, bearing the image of the Monkey or Marmset. Which thing
notwithstanding was not done without derision, Pliny.
as Pliny records, for the enigmes which the Monkey pretended, a proverb or
byword rising thereof, Sueton.
to wit, it is no marvel if the Monkey utter hard and obscure things.
Therefore Augustus to avoid these jests and flouts, abstained altogether from
his suspected and unjust manner of sealing, changing his seal into the image of
Alexander the great. At the last, he imprinted it with his own natural picture or
image, which afterward Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius Caesar, Domicianus, and
other Emperors succeeding in the same order, did use.

Securitas altera. A second security or safety.


Henry the eight King of England, used a percullice of iron for a simbole, or
sign, which is an engine of defense, used for the most part in gates and
ports of cities and towns. Such an other kind of military stratagem was
there devised at Rome (as Appian writes) in the time of civil discention,
Appian.
when Scilla chalenging the empire to himself, overthrew the army of
Carbonians, pressing to enter in by the gate of Collina: for letting fall the
percullice, many of the Senators, and those that were of the Carbonian faction
were all slain.

Dederitne viam casusue, Deusue. Whether Fortune or God does give the way.


Cronicles of Lorraine.
Cronicles do record the noblenes and excellency of the house of Lorraine: to
wit, three birds thrust through with an arrow, which Godfray of Bullaine shot
against David's tower, being showed in military sign by the besieging of
Jerusalem. Which was sign of his highness, authority, and princely dignity,
with the building of Jerusalem. The dukes of Lorraine being ensigned with this
emblem of the birds thrust through, do testify the same, for in their coin to
this day they keep it very religiously.

Fortitudo eius Rhodum tenuit. His valiancie wan and possessed the Rhodes.


Amatus Vertius ye fifth knight of Subaudia, gave a most royal and magnificall
name to an order of knights first invented by him. These Knights he would have
to be innobled with golden chain, wrought with most subtle, called love
knots, knit together with great cunning, and four letters interlaced of equal
distance one from another, hanging at the end thereof the image and history of
the angels message to the virgin Marie. The letters and the pozie do signify
the greatness of the glory that Amatus the first Knight and his successors had.
For whilst he went to Rhodes with his navy to fight against the enemies of
Christ, he well deserved of Rhodia both of Knighthood, and Religion. And being
made governor of that order, and of the garrisons also, he undertook the
administration of the Rhodian wars, and bequeathed the same to his next
successor, he delivered the castle of Acrense from siege, and removing all
fear both of danger and tyranny, he brought great joy, and liberty to the
Rhodians. Therefore he caused himself to be named the first, in the catelogue
of Knights, constituting fourteen more: all which he dignified with the same
chain of gold. The names of them that he knighted were these.

The said Earl Vert.
Ame Earl of Geneua.
Antonie Lord of Belauieu.
Hugh Challon Lord of Arlay.
Ame of Geneua.
John of Vienne admiral of France.
William of Grandzon.
William of Chalamon.
Rowland Veyssy of Burbon.
Stephen the bastard son of Baume.
Jasper of Monmeur.
Barlus of For As.
Thennard of Menthon.
Ame Bonnard.
Richard Musard an Englishman.
Non inferiora secutus. Following no mean things.


Margaret Queen of Navarre used a most solemn sign, namely the marigold,
whose color resembles so near the color of the son, as almost nothing
more. For what way so ever the sun goes, it follows it: it ope^eth and
shuts it self at the rising and falling of the sun, according to his
ascending or descending. This godly Queen chose this kind of simbole, that she
might evidently express, how that she referred all her cogitations,
affections, vows, words and deeds to almighty God, only wise, and
everlasting, as one that meditated upon heavenly things with all her heart.

Ante ferit, quam flamma micet. The flint is sent before to yield fire.


Philip duke of Burgundy used this ensig^^ of a flint stone striking fire,
which signify the difficulty of wars amongst Kings an^ Princes, whereby it
comes to pass often times that the one is consumed, ouerthrown and
vanquished of the other: whereupon fo^loweth calamity, great losses, and a
heap dangers on every side.

Pretium non vile laborum. He reaped no small reward of his labors.


In the year after the birth of Christ, 1429. Paul. Aemil.
the company of the order of the knights of the Garter, began by the same
Philip duke of Burgundy, having purchased a most maiesticall name by the
donation of the golden fleece. After this he chose four and twenty noble men
of tried fidelity to be of the number of this honorable society, adorning
them with a chain of gold, wherein was the flint stone burning thoroughout the
whole chain, and the golden fleece hanging before the breast: imitating herein
(as may be supposed) the marinal expedition of Jason into Colchos by diligent
observation as it were, of his virtue and godliness, whereof he was said to be
so desirous, that he deserved the name of good, and the praise of an excellent
wit, the order whereof his Epitaph which also shows the invention of the
golden fleece, does declare in these words.

I to the intent the church might be,
both safe and sure likewise,
From tyrants rage, invented have
the goodly golden fleese.
There were admitted into the number or society of these knights, next after
the Duke himself.

William of Vienna, Lord of saint George. Renatus Pottius Lord of Roch. Lord
Remblai. Lord of Montague. Roland Huquerquius. Antonie Virgius Earl of
Dammartine. David Brimeus, Lord of Lignie. Hugo Launoy, Lord of Santes. John
Earl of Cominie. Antonie Thoulongeon marshall of Burgundy. Peter Luxenburg,
Earl of Conuersan. John Trimoille, Lord of Ionuelle. John Luxenburg, Lord of
Beaureuoir. Gilbert Launoy, Lord of Villeruall. John Villiers, Lord of
Isleadam. Antonic Lord of Croy, and Renty. Florimundus Brimeus, Lord of
Massincourt. Robert Lord of Mamines. James Brimeu, Lord of Grignie. Baldwin
Launey, Lord of Molembaesius. Peter Baufremontanus, Lord of Chargny. Philip
Lord of Teruant. John Crequius. John Croy, Lord of Tours on Marne.
Flammescit vterque. Both of them do burn.


Two Laurel boughs rubbed hard together (if we shall credit what Pliny has
recorded yield fire forth by long and continual cha^^ing. Many are of opinion
also, that the bone of a Lion do the same. So likewise most certain it is,
that no little danger falls our, when mighty men meet together, that the
old proverb may be verified which says, Dura duris non quadrare, in plowing
or tilling of the ground, hard things agree not together. The description of
this sinibole or figure appertains to the cross of saint Andrew, as they
term it, and the house of Burgundy were wont to use the same in their
martial ensigns, when they marched forward, and were now come to encounter
with their enemies: albeit in every point they admitted not the like
signification.

Sara a chi tocca. Whom it happens unto.


The ire of a Prince is full of present danger, as a man may learn by the
example of an earthen pot, being now burning on the fire, which if it should
chance to fall, it is impossible but that it should do some great harm to the
standers by. This portraiture or figure, did John duke of Burbon use, as by
observation we may see in most places of his country of Burbon, and of
Elentheropola, or of a village yt the frenchmen inhabited called Beauiolois.

Nil pennased vsus. The feathers are of no force, but use-


If you mark well the monstrous bird called an Ostrich, S. Georg.
you see how with great preparation and ostentation of her feathers, she
endeavors to take a great flight, and yet for all that is not an inch higher
from the ground when she has done all that she can: The very like property
the hypocrites have, which outwardly make a gay glistering show of a zealous
holiness of religion, but let them once lay away their dissembling, and then
search them thoroughly, and you shall find them even stone cold within, and all
the oftentation that they made outwardly to be lies.

Humentia siccis. Moist things and dry agree not together.


The Ensign that Galeaz vicechanceler, the second Duke of Millan was wont to
use, may be verified of those which according to the proverb, are said to
carry fire in the one hand, and water in the other. It was a burning firebrand
or a staff hardened in the fire, with two vessels full of water, above and
beneath. It may have also an other signification, if we more deeply weigh it:
namely, that the passions of a man's mind are by Gods goodness extinguished by
the direction of reason. Moreover, by it the same dukes magnanimity is
signified, for he in a foughten combat, most renowmedly vanquished a Dutch Lord
that at that time bore no small countenance, who was the first man that used the
same emblem or picture, and challenged this his Ensign to himself for a
monument of victory, and for a token of triumph that he got over his enemy,
who then was put to the worst.

Sola viteit in illo. She only lived in him.


The goddess called Diana Pictaniensis a noble woman, of very great godliness,
and the most famous Duchess of the city of Valentia, conceived a very
constant hope touching the resurrection of the dead, which comes by death, in
our removing into an other life, who also by consideration of the saints in
heaven oftentimes comforted her self. Therefore it is most like that by this
picture she endeavored to express her godly affections: for there is (as you
may see here) a sepulcher, and out of it a shining dart beutified with green
boughs.

Restat ex victore Orientis. That only rests of all his victories in the
East.


What time Philip surnamed Augustus was king of France, Of Monstrelet.
Saladinus Sultanus king of Babylon, of Damascus, and of Egypt, lay at the
point of death at Ascalon, he appointed that as soon as he was dead, his shirt
should be carried by his steward thorough out all the city of Ascalon, having
a spear thrust through the middle of it, and that the crier should with a loud
voice proclaim as follows.

He that of late the mighty raines,
of East did rule at will,
Now dead does only this convey,
into the darkish hell.
Let every mighty man take this for a most infallible token, that when death
comes, he spares neither king nor Caesar, and that he shall depart out of this
world, as naked as the poorest and vilest creature does.

Author ego audendi. I am the author of being bold.


This flaming sword that Carolus Borbonius, the Cardinal used for his ensign
under the title of saint Andrew, signifies the true sword of the governors of
the church, and (...) the holy ghost, Ephesians. 6.
which sword as Paul says, represents the word of God.

Non quae super terram. Not those things which are upon the earth.


The food of the spirit is that heavenly bread, Exodus 16
or the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, prefigured under the tipe
of Manna which in former age was s^nt down from heaven to be meat to the
Israelites. This sign or simbole the Cardinal of Turnon uses at this day.

Ab insomni non custodita Dracone. The golden apples were not kept of the
vigilant Dragon.


It was to small purpose or none at all that the Dragon watched so carefully
for Hercules, nevertheless came and stole away the golden apples, that were in
the garden of Hesperus three daughters: By the which is signified, that
virtues, and famous exploits are every where to be found. The same effigy the
Cardinal of Ferrara uses.

Non quam diu, sed quam been. It forces not how long a thing be in doing but
how well it be done.


The most part of men hold opinion that Thomas of Aquine invented the
Philosophical knife, but by continual observation of the planets was made so
perfect through the virtue and force thereof, that it cut a thick and hard
Anuell, even in the midst. By this we must understand, that in performing of
any matter whatsoever as it should be, we must not respect the long tract of
time that we spend in it, so that by line and leuill, as they say, we finish
all our actions. Whereupon Suetonius records that Augustus Caesar used this
proverb: Sat cito, si sat been, Sueton.
which is, any thing is done soon enough, if it be done well enough.

Qua Proceres abiere pii. Which way our godly forefathers have gone.


We read in holy scripture that the Prophet Elias was carried through the air
in body King. 2.
and soul in a fiery chariot. By the same Metaphor, true and unfeigned
worshippers ascend even unto the heavens in spirit and fervent meditation, and
that is the cause wherefore we are persuaded that the minds and souls of
godly men and women are enriched, and recreated with great and heavenly
consolations. Ovid.
Hereunto also alludeth the Poet Ovid, when he makes mention of Pythagoras
upon these words.

To God in mind he had access.
And look what nature hid,
From fleshly eyes, the same with sight,
Of heart he has espied.
Hoc Latio restare canunt. Men say that this is yet extant in Rome


When the Roman Consuls went abroad there were certain men appointed to go
before them adorned with triumphant crowns, Pliny.
and garlands, and with bundles of young and tender rods, having two Pollaxes in
their hands, signifying by this spectacle the triumphs of that most noble
region of Italy, and the whole government of the world, and also that the
Romans by their great wisdom, peace, and affection to the common weal,
purchased to themselves no little praise and dignity. But the iron wreathes,
and chains which you see holding the spears, and staves that they cannot fall
one from another, do signify the bondage and captivity wherewith from that
time to this day, Italy is brought to ruin by the wickedness of sedition and
civil dissension.

Arbitrii mihi iuramei. The rain of will is in my own hands.


The ancient Alanes, Mehodius.
Burgundians, an^ Sueuians used (as Methodius records) (...) carry before
them in their martial ensign^^ a car, which cannot by any means be restra^ned
of her liberty: by which emblem they insinuated their own desire that they
had (...) their will and liberty.

Mihi terra, lacusque. Both the land and water is my own.


Such was the estimation of Augustus Caesar toward his friend Maecenas, Dion.
that he committed unto him the government of his country, as well by land as
by sea: wherefore ^e caused the shape of a frogge to be drawn for his
cognizance. Except peradventure he would signify those frogs in Syriphie,
which (as Pliny says) are mute, and without voice; Pliny.
^or so it may represent a close and hidden secret, and also a faithful
concealing of things committed to ones fidelity. Which virtue this Maecenas so
practiced that Augustus Caesar himself for yt cause highly reverenced him,
Eutrop.
and had him in great admiration for ye hatred that he bore them that used
enuiouslie to give privy scoffs and taunts under pretense of unfeigned
friendship.

PHOS PHEPOI DE TALNN. The rain bow does bring fair weather.


The most fair and bountiful queen of France Katherine, used the sign of
the rain bow for her arms, which is an infallible sign of peaceable
calmenes, and tranquillity.

Vltorem vlciscitur vltor. The revenge lights upon the revenger.


Charles the sixth of that name, king of France, Frossard.
whilst he sought the satiffying of his own wilfulnes, in going about to
revenge his friend Oliuerius Cliffonius his constable^ cause against one Peter
Craonius, had a very unfortunate end, as it was foretold him: the which thing
does most certainly fall out (...) as many as run headlong to revenge,
especially other men's causes. It chanced tha^ he levied an army to go into the
prouinc^ of the Britones, to the intent he might (...) revenged of the
Lieutenant there because he seemed to defend Petrus Craonius cause And so as he
was going through the forest, (...) thicket of the Mansensians or Caenonians,
there met him in the middle betwixt tw^ trees a certain strange man,
pretending great poverty and need, and taking the king^ horse by the bridle,
caused him to stay, and th^^ with loud voice said unto him: Oh king, (...) thou will follow my counsel go no furthe^ forward, but rather turn back again,
for there are of thy own army that have sol^ thee into thy enemies hands.
When the king heard these words, he was maruellously terrified, and so moved
withal, that he was as pa^^ as ashes (as they say) with fear, and with horro^
thereof did even grate with his teeth as it were, and as ill hap was, he was
a very young man, and therefore unskillful of matial fears besides he had a
body of such a constitution that it was always subject to sickness and
agues. But when the captains of his army saw him in that case, they labored
to establish and confirm his mind, that yet was doubtful what was best to be
done, and so they went boldly forward. They were no sooner gone out of the wood,
but two of the kings pages were hard at their horse heels, puffing and
blowing, as coming about some weighty matter, whereof the one ware the kings
helmet, and the other a common soldiers spear. It chanced that whilst the
one of them slept, the king spear fell out of his hand upon his head which
ware the helmet. The king heating a sudden noise, and looking aside, saw a man
at his heels, whom as yet he know not, so he was maruellousty troubled, and in
a great rage leaped down from his horse, and as one that had been besides
himself, drew his sword, and neither regarding the order of his own men,
neither using the advice of reason, laid about him as if he had been in the
thickest of his enemies, using these words: Bestirre you, play the men, and
dispatch me these traitors. When the kings pages heard him say so, they made
all the have they could to save their lives, by running away. But the kings own
brother who was captain of the Aurelians, riding by the kings side, (...) the
brunt of his fury: for the king so forcib^ranne upon him with his naked sword
in (...) hand, that had not the Duke speedily fled^^ away, he had been in
danger of his life. (...) the last the king was even tired with labo^^ and the
horse wearied with many and gre^^ courses that he made, it chanced that onc^
the kings horsemen met him, and by fa^^ means brought both the king and his
ho^^ back to the Caemonians. But the king was (...) mad and so angry in his
mind, that who^^ saw him thought he would never recoue^ And so it fell out that
there was an end of th^^ intended voyage, and the army broke up, a^^ returned.
But after that the king came ho^^ to his palace, he became far weaker than
before he had been, and was so subject to a ki^^ of frenzy, that sometimes
would leave h^^ and then come to him again, that he w^^ brought to great
misery and extremity the^ by. Yea the best thing that he got by that (...)
happy voyage, was a very great mishap a^^ evil fortune that chanced to his
whole kingdom. for even to this day it feels the wounds and bruses of so
great a calamity.

Colligauit nemo. Hitherto no man has conquered me.


There is used to this day certain brazen money with the image of Augustus
Caesar on it, upon the one side whereof is the portraiture of a Crocodile
chained fast to a palm tree, with this inscription: Col. Nem. which is, No man
has ever bound me before. By which sign Caesar would signify that none
before him did ever subdue Egypt, and triumphed over it. For the Crocodile
represents Egypt, which is to be found only in the river Nilus, by the
commodie whereof all Egypt is made fruitful. Besides the Crocodile is fastened
to the Palm tree, that thereby the beholders might be admonished that the
godly Prince Augustus triumphed over all Egypt, by getting of which victory
and peace, he was recreated and refreshed, as a dry and thirsty ground is
with a shower of rain. Finally, this simbole signifies that Augustus got the
victory, and prevailed against Autonius, and Cleopatra of famous memory.

Latet anguis in herba. The adder lurketh privily in the grass.


In gathering of flowers, and strawberies that grow low upon the ground, we
must be very careful for the adder and snake that lies lurking in the
grass, for look whomsoever she stingeth, they hardly recover after. So in
reading of authors, and books, which carry a fair show to the eye, and
yielding small delight to the ear, we must be careful that we run not into
absurd, and wrong judgments, and opinions, and by that means make shipwreck
of our souls.

Labuntur nitidis, scabrisque tenatius haerent. Flies do fall down from
slipperie place, but stick fast upon the hard and rough.


As flies cannot stay themselves on slippery places, Plutar.
as upon glass and such like, but fall down, whereas they rest well upon such
places as be rough and hollow, so it fares with us when we are in prosperity
and have all things at will, we use quickly to fall into diverse and sundry
sins: whereas on the otherside being touched sometimes with crosses and
afflictions, we stay our selves in some measure.

Testante, virebo. While thou stand I shall flourish.


As ye Cardinal of Lorraine should lately enter into his Abbey of Clunie, his
armies were set up before the gates of the house, to wit, a great four squared
pillar, broad beneath, and sharp on the top, having on the higher end the
new moon blased, and from the bottom upward compassed about with green
berries, and garnished with these verses, which were engraven round about.

O Reader tell what thing is meant, Ovid.

By tombs in Memphis town,
Which on the top does bear on high
The bright beams of the moon?
The moon which does continually,
Increase in light so bright,
Till that night come wherein her shine,
From world does take her flight.
And what does mean the sacred Iuy,
Which creepes and binds about,
This tomb, to whose high top he climbs
Although it be full stout.
And what new fashion is this also,
That leaning to it sticks,
Making his stay about the same,
That greenely over creepes.
This tomb it is that mighty king,
Whose majesty honor craves,
For he in heaven triumphs for us,
To satan that were slaves.
And the Iuie a bishop signifies,
Even thee most famous prince,
Who in a godly life do yield,
Not to the best an inch.
For though thy body lie in grave,
Yet such thy virtue was,
That it bears up our laud and praise,
That never away shall pass.
Inter eclipses exorior. I shine in the dark.


That great and mighty cup of gold of i^ princely Dolphin, seems to me to
represent that ancient standing piece of Apolloes Raven, whom the Poets do
feign to be placed amongst the stars: but the inscription, or apothegme which
is written above it, may rather be drawn to his happy birth day. And such is
the interpretation that Paradinus gives of it. But in my judgment he would
thereby allude to his fathers interpretation, which is, Donec totum impleat
orbem, until he fulfill the whole compass of the world.

Fiducia concors. We trust or hope all one thing.


There was always carried before the armies of the Romans, standards which
had the palm of a hand blased after this fashion: you may see the same also in
diverse other places in ancient coins, and money, and ^n other famous
monuments of like antiquity. Therefore this ancient sign does betoken the
benefit, or hand of concord, the picture whereof is to be seen in the very
beginning of the commentaries of the Roman commonwealth, which Wolfangus
Lazius, a ^iligent searcher out of antiquities, and the ^ing of Romans
Physician, and a very cun^ing historiagrapher. besides lately penned, and set
forth.

Scilicet is superis labor est. A high matter in a lo house.


Not far from the gates of Leontychidas house, senator of the Lacedaemonians,
there was a live serpent or snake, that had wrapped himself about the Key of a
lock. When this came to the southsayers cares, they constantly affirmed before
him that it signified some strange wonder that should happen. To whom he thus
replied. Surely to me it seems a thing of no great wonder, if the snake have
wrapped himself about the Key: but rather ^n the contratie part, if the Key
had folded it self about the serpent, then without all doubt, it had been a
thing to be wondered at. And so the wise Senator making but a jest of it,
laughed at their foolish superstition. And surely at this day, the common
peoples credulity is very much infected, about many things which happen
sometimes after an extraordinary manner, yet by as natural means as may be,
yea, when they are I say: if you thoroughly examine them plainly agreeable to
nature. In fine, there is likewise a preposterous judgment or inconstancy
touching matters of faith in these and the like superstitions, which with
wicked traditions bring no small corruption to man's judgment.

Horrent con^m^t^moueri. Things that are fearce of nature are not to be
provoked.


The cruelty of the bear being angered to chafed, is not in any sort to be
provoked, (...) moved, like as the mind of a man is not to be incensed when he
is thoroughly angered for there we may look for nothing else (...) him, but
great and deadly danger.

Si sciens fallo. Evil come to me if I deceive wittingly.


The Romans when they should give over their wars, Fl. Blond.
and make peace with their enemies, used these ceremonies, that he who had
authority given him to deal with the enemy in the behalf of the rest in
those matters, should take a flint or some other stone in his hand, and hit a
pigge, or hog therewith, pronouncing at that instant this sentence: Look
what happens to this pigge that you see here, happen unto me if I deceive you.

Inuitum fortuna fouet. Fortune when he fauneth, heapeth too much upon a man.


Policrates king of the Samions had such success with such perseverance in the
prosperous-waies of smiling fortune, Strabo.
that once he went about either to diminish it, or else to change it: namely,
by casting a very rich ring into the midst of the sea, the which for all
that, was found afterward-in the belly of a fish, which the fishermen amongst
the rest had caught. But mark what came of it. Not long after the king of the
Persians chanced to take this king, and being apprehended, commanded him to be
hanged, and miserably to be strangled. So thus you may see that the flattering
faunings of fortune (which the world compteth great felicity in this life) are
neither certain not constant, nor of any continuance: and the more glorious
and glittering they appear, the more easily and speedily they vanish away,
like a glass, which of it own nature is brickle and frail.

Ecquis emat tanti sese dimittere? Will any man buy so dear, that which is so
full of all kind of cares.


Valerius Maximus makes mention of a certain king, Val. Max. li. 7. ca. 2.
who when there was a rich Diadem offered unto him, paused a while before he
would put it on his head, and studying as it were what were best to do, burst
forth into these words, Oh more noble, then happy orname^t, for if a man knew
thoroughly with how many troubles, perrils, and miseries it is stuffed, he would
not take it up from the ground to have it.

Comminus quo minus. How much the lesset, so much the nearer.


When a certain Lacedemonian was on a time noted of cowardlynesse, because he
had caused a fly to be printed on his target, and such a one as did not exceed
to the common sort of that kind in bigness, as though he should hereby
signify, that he would willingly convey himself out of the battle, and like
a fl^e would not be seen of his enemy, he answered, nay rather, I encounter
with my enemy hand to hand, and so set upon him, that albeit the sign be
small, yet the enemy may well discern.

Transfundit pasta venenum. The Waspes after they have fed of the serpent,
power out their poison.


Some there are in the world so wickedly bent, and of such a despighfull
nature, that they are maruellously delighted in gathering together, all kind of
deadly calumnies yt poisoned tongues can utter, yt afterward if any chance to
be pursued by them, they sting him sore, and if they may by any means, they
will bring him to his grave with sorrow. Wherein they imitate the waspes, which
feeding upon ye serpent with great greedines, make their stings more venomous,
and therefore the wounds received by them are the more perilous and dangerous.

Celsa potestatis species. A special mark or token of his authority and
power.


Upon the signet of Pompeius Magnus which he wore upon his finger (whereon
Iuliu^ Caesar when he was killed happening to fall, Plutar.
being brought to him by one of his soldiers, wept bitterly) there was (as
Plutarch writes) the shape of a Lion shaking a sword between his forefeete
engraven, to signify perhaps a hard and bold voyage or enterprise.

Prostibuli eligantia. The coyness of a whore.


Solomon the wise in his Proverbs, compares the honor of a shameless and
common woman, ^rouer. 11
to a pigge wearing a gold ring in her snowte.

Ardua deturbans vis animosa quatit. Bold force does overcome high things.


To overcome difficult and hard things there is need of great industry, labor,
and diligence, as may appear by the example of the Egle, for when she goes to
set upon the H^rt, she lights down upon his horns, and there fluttereth up
and down, and so fills his eyes with dust (which she had heaped together
before in her feathers for ye same purpose) that at the last he casts himself
down headlong, Pliny.
from some high rock, or hill.

Vias tuas domme demonstra mibi. Lord teach me thy paths. Psalm. 24.



Upon the fourth vessel of that kind which had three ranks of Ores in it, which
Andreas Darius admiral of the Empire, commanded to be made for the Emperor
against he should go to Tunetum, there was placed the shape or form of a
blasing star glittering on every side with arrows as it were in fashion of
a round circle, for a continual admonition to implore and call for Gods
direction and mighty arm in this his voyage and journey.

Vnica semper auis. But always one Phoenix in the world at once.


Like as the Phoenix whereof there is but one at any time to be seen, Theoph.
is a rare bird, so all good and precious things are hard to be found. These
arms the famous and renowned woman, ye L^dy Helionora of Austria used, which
was the widow of Francis king of France.

APAANOS. Without all falsehood or deceit.


The french arming sword in the hands of an armed man, with the inscription of
this Greek word APAANOS does at this day in the place of the arms which the
Lord Constable used, signify faith.

Riens ne est plus, Plus ne est riens. I have no more joy, no more comfort
remains to me.


Valentina of Milan, sometime Dutch^sse of Orleans had great cause to pass her
days in great heaviness and mourning, both for the death of her husband
Lewis, ^^other to king Charles the sixth, as also for the same kings unfortunate
frenzy (whereof we spoke before in the handling of his a^mes) which used to
come on him at certain times, and when it took him, he knew not any of his
friends, no not the queen his wife, but only this Duchess Valentina, whom he
called when he was in this extremity his sister. Whereupon there was a rumor
blown abroad that the Duke the father of this Valentina, having sometimes been
ouerladen with drink, had caused some poison, or charmed potion to be given
him: which report this Valentina took very grievously, yea so grievously
indeed, that in place of all consolation, and ease of her mourning, she used
for her cognizance an earthen pitcher in fashion like a water pot, on the mouth
whereof was the character of this letter S. signifying perhaps these words
concerning the same Duchess: Sola^ saepe seseipsa^ sollicitari, suspirareque,
that is, being alone she accustomed to mourn and to sigh with her self,
together with these words subioyned. Nil mihi praeterea: Praeterea mihi nil
Which is, nothing remains to me, nothing have I more. The which emblemes with
the like inscriptions, are to be seen described in many places in the
Franciscan friars church at Bloyes, and in the same Duchess chapel, where she
lies buried in a tomb of brass, and also in the porch or entry on every
side of the quite of the same church.

Pour un aultre non. To none other.


Andreas Lauallus the french Admiral, was wont to give for his ensign, a
burning Ore, which is yet to be seen in the suburbs of the city Melus. It
is also a signification of fervent and dutiful zeal, toward the king and
country, and especially in that journey that they took by sea through the
great Occean.

Fata viam inuenient. Fortune shall show the way.


This simbole of the Labirinth, which the Lord of Boisdaulphin, archbishop of
Ambrune uses, may perchance signify, that we are lead by the grace of God to
find the way that leads to eternal life, the same giving the thread as it
were of his holy precepts into our hands, which when we have once taken hold
of, and do follow, we turn away from the dangerous wanderings, and fearful by
ways of this world.

Quid non mortalia pectora cogis? Filthy love constrains men to commit all
wickedness.


Cleopatra taking it grievously, Pliny.
and also in great disdain that Marcus Antonius should make trial so often of
her love, upon a time at a banquet and merry meeting, whether it were to give
him occasion never to be distrustful any more after, or for some other cause,
she began to delight him very voluptuously, after her old fashion that she
used: namely, with diverse and sundry garlands of flowers, whose leaves were
all besprinckled with poison. Some of the which she wearing upon her head,
picked them out and brusing them a little, cast them into his cup or goblet,
persuading him to drink it off. But whilst he was about to do it, she putting
her hand to it, said thus, Oh my sweet heart Antonius, I surely am the woman,
which if I could live without thee, have now a just occasion to do that, which
by your curious trials you seem to fear. And hereby we may see what may be
the audacitie, and impudent boldness of a shameless woman.

In sibilo aurae tenuis. In the muttering of the gentle air.


Music is of it own nature an enemy to melancholy, and therefore is able to
qualify any fury that rises of a vehement melancholy. Wherefore she is able
also to drive away heaviness, and dullness, which proceed of black choler,
being overwhelmed and suffocate with phlegm. With the which one has recorded
that once he saw a man sore troubled, and so sound and fast on steep, that you
could by no means get a word of him, but only by a harp sounding in his
ears, at the pleasant harmony whereof, he lifting up his head, laughed, and
answered to their demands. Which thing is an argument that there is no small
affinity betwixt Music and the soul. Elizeus the prophet has plainly
declared the same unto us, 4. King. 2
when to call again his prophetical spirit, and to make supplication to God
for a remedy of his people that then were like to perish with extreme thirst,
he commanded one that had skill to play on the harp to be called for unto him,
and in that sort obtained at the hands of God that which he desired in his
prayers, and supplications. And what say you to David the Musician, who is now
dead and rotten? 1. King. 17
Did not he comfort and recreate King Saul, his soul being vexed with an evil
spirit, when as, so long as he played upon his harp, the wicked spirit left
to molest him. Therefore this consonant music has a certain divine grace in
it, for as much as it does not only restore health to bodies that are sick,
but al^o sti^reth up the soul to contemplation, comfort the same, and
makes it heavenly as it were: wherefore it is an enemy even to the very
devils, which doubtless are nothing else than desperation, deiection of the
soul, fear, and an obstinate desolation. Finally, as in Music of different
voices there is made tunable music, so of men also that are of one mind
there may be made a consent of contrary natures and manners, which God
accepts above all other things that may be observed or kept.

Finem transcendit habendi. He passed the ordinary means of getting and
possessing riches.


The wicked covetousness of Calephas Baldacensis chief bishop of the Mahomets
law, wrought a very evil end for himself: for being taken in wars, Haalon
prince of Tartaria, commanded him to be handled according to bis insaciable
greediness: that is, that insteede of his dainty dishes nothing should be set
before him, but platters and other great vessels full of gold, and as often as
these things should be brought before him, his ministers should deride and
scoff at him with these words, Take, eat that which thou have always
desired, and loved, take and fill thy belly.

Heu cadit in quemquam tantum scelus. Did ever like punishment light upon any.


Coelius.
Thus the young innocent virgins suffered sore punishment for the wicked factes
that their father Dionisius Siracusanus Tyrannus the younger had committed. For
the Locrians when they had driven their father Dionisius out of the kingdom,
revenging his cruelty for the deflowring of their citizens daughters, and
wives, permitted his daughters being yet young tender virgins to be ravished of
as many as would: and at the last, having no regard of their innocence, but
with a barbarous and savage cruelty, pursued them to death, by d^iuing sharp
needles, or pinnes under the nails of their fingers, with so great pain, and
torment, as never before, nor since was heard of the like.

Pressa est insignis gloria facti. The glory of his noble deed is recorded in
writing.


Julian the Apostata sometimes Emperor of Nicomedia made a public decree,
forbidding the Christians the use of schools, and al administration, or
government in the commonwealth, which S. John the Martyr perceiving to be
joined with the destruction of Christian religion more then any kind of
tyranny, or punishment that could be devised, openly pulled it in pieces, and
tore it. By which action of his we are taught that there ought to be no
threatening of man's invention be it never so great, so fearful, that it should
constrain or make our conscience to shrink or dissemble any thing.

Cedo nulli. I give place to none.


Erasmus Roterodamus used for his sim. T. Liuius.
bole the image of Terminus the God of the Romans, which never gave place to
Jupiter himself, for the which thing Caruayalus a Franciscan friar found fault
with him. Laying it to his charge, and obiecting it as a thing done too
arrogantly of Erasmus, for that he thereby signified that he would yield to
no man on earth in any point of learning: although that sentence indeed may
be understood of death which is the last or uttermost bond or limite of all
things, which no man is able, or by any means may escape, or fly from: with
the which answer Caruayalus was satilfied and contented.

En altera quae vehat Argo.



There was in ancient time a nation of the Franques, L. Pacatus. S.
Apollinatis. B. Renanus.
or French that were very cunning shipwrights, and much exercised in that art,
if we shall believe Latinus, Pacatus, Sidonius, Apollinaris, and Beatus
Renanus. And it seemed good to that nation, that in what region so ever they
chose them a place to build them a city and to dwell in, the portrature or
simbole of a goodly great ship should be dedicate to the honor of their
ships, and antiquity. The which thing Lutetia in Paris which is incomparable
by that famous gift, has challenged to it self by ancient name even to this
day. Neither is it any absurdity to think that they borrowed the same custom
of the Gepides which also used the same before, Method.
and were very famous through all the German Ocean: The Trojan nation
perchance coming thither from their long voyage on the sea, after the
subversion of Troy, from whom it is thought of the most part, the nobility of
France took their beginning and original.

Insperatum auxilium. Help unlooked for.


Marcus Valerius a Roman, T. Liuius Pliny. A. Gelliu
fighting a combat on a time hand to hand with a certain adversary of his,
named Gallus, overcame him by the aid that he had unlooked for. For it chanced
that a raven houered a pretty while over his head piece, and at the last
lighting on it, so pecked and smothered his enemies eyes that Valerius at the
last overcame him. Whereupon this Valerius was named of the same raven
Coruinus: although if you respect the victory it self, he can not challenge
the same to him self by his own manhood, but by the providence of God. Yet
nevertheless Augustus Caesar caused a monument to be erected to the same
Coruinus, on the top of whose helmet sat the raven, for a token of so worthy
an exploit.

Tutum telittore sistam. I will set thee safe upon the shore.


We have referred to this place the sign of the anchor, Heb. 6.
in token of the hope of our salvation in Jesus Christ, who is our most
certain and sure resuge, and to whom we are to fly In all extremities. True
it is, that Seleucusking of Siria used the portrature of an anchor in his
signet: but this he did for that cause only, for that the southsayers and wise
men had told hold him, Appian.
the anchor did represent or signify his kingdom. Moreover, Titus the Emperor
used the same cognizance, but in another respect, as afterward we will declare
else where. Finally, many Admirals have used and do to this day use the same
in token (as it should seem) of their office, and authority in the common
wealth.

Quo tendis? Whether go thou?


Besides other discommodities which the tongue brings with it, James. 3.
Saint James says the same is tipped with poison, and brings death,
comparing it to the stearne of a ship by which the whole vessel is ruled and
gotterned. Which sentence agrees with the opinion of Bias, to whom Amasis king
of Egypt sent a whole beast on this condition, that he should send to him
again the best and the woorst piece thereof, who sent the tongue only. Seeing
then that that part of the body is of such great moment, it is no marvel if
nature have compassed it in, with hedges and pales, as it were with double
gates, which we must never use to open without the consent of reason and
wisdom going before, else, where the tongue goes before premeditation, the
entrance into these gates is a fearful thing, and the going out both
dangerous, and unfortunate.

Putrescet Iugum. The yoke of bondage shall rot away.


The prophet Esaie prophesying that the freedom of the spirit should be
restored by the coming of Christ, says, Esaias. 10.
Computrescet iugum a facie olei, that is, al bondage or se ruitude shall fly
away before the anointed of the Lord, which is Christ, by whom the children
of God increasing and going forward in the love of God, and the obedience of
his commandments shall be released and set free from the servile bondage and
yoke of the law. For in this spiritual Iubiley the guilty are absolved from
their sins, and their debts are pardoned, the proscript and banished are
permitted to return to their country, their inheritance is restored them:
servants, that is to say, those that are sold under sin are set at liberty,
and by the benefit of Jesus Christ, the true oil, and ointmen of mercy,
felicity, and grace.

Nec fas est, nec posse reor. It is neither law nor can be I suppose.


Not whosoever is in bands or prison, Acts. 12.
but he that is entangled in vices and sin, is to be judged a bondslaue. For
albeit Peter the Apostle was kept in Herod his prison, bound with two chains,
yet by the ministry of an Angel his chains fell from his hands, and he
escaped, passing through the iron gates, which by the will of God (which by no
man's devise, neither can, nor ought to be impugned) opened of their own
accord, and gave him passage.

Semine ab aethereo. From the heavenly seed.


The same earth which swallowed up Core, Dathan and Abiron with the rest of ye
troublers of the priesthood and ministry of Aaron approved the same thing in
the Leuitical tribe, Numb. 16. and 17.
and that not without a mystery, whilst yt amongst the rods of the Israelites
erected in the tabernacle of the Lord, the second day the rod of Aaron only
budded, and bare fruit or Almons.

Ventura desuper vrbi. To fall upon the crew.


The miserable destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans after the passion of
Christ, Joseph. Egesipp.
was foreshewed before by many wonders and signs, especially by a fiery
commet appearing in form of a sword, and hanging over the steeple for the
space of a whole year together: showing as it were by this sign, that the
justice of God would take punishment of the wicked nation of the Jews by fire
and blood, for their great impiety and wickedness: which thing not only came
to pass, but also most raging famine tormenting them, there was found one who
killed and cate her own child.

In vtrumque paratus. Ready to both.


The Israelites after their return from the captivity of Babylon, 2. Esd. 4.
taking in the one hand a trowell, in the other a sword (such were the
continual troubles of their enemies) built up the walls of Jerusalem. Which
thing in a mystery did represe^t the ministers of the church of Christ, who
are bound to instruct the ignorant, and to bring again those that do err in
the faith (which are very ruins in deed) and to fight manfully with the sword
of Gods word against the enemies thereof, which are vices and sin.

Vindice fato. Destenie being revenger.


David being a little child, but armed with grace from above, 2. King. 17
feared not to enter combat with the great and fearful giant Goliath: neither
would he put on the armor of Saul, but contenting himself with a sling and
five flint stones, overthrew this monster, and triumphed over him. In like
manner that we may overcome that fearful and dangerous enemy of mankind the
devil, the only weapons of a stable faith, firm hope, and constant affiance
in the merits of Christ's passion and death are enough.

Nil solidum. Nothing is firm or continual in this life.


At the time of the creation of the bishops of Rome, when according to the
custom, he that is nominate Pope enters into S. Gregory's church (wherein
many of the Romish bishops are buried, the master of the ceremonies goes
before him, carrying in his hands two reeds, tying to the top of the one a
burning candle, which flaming he puts to the other, whereto are tied hurds,
or flax, and so burns them both, saying these words three times together, Oh
holy fathers, so passes the glory of this world.

Vtrum lubet. Whether pleases him.


Clubbes, or battes compassed about with Olive branches, being a sign as well
of peace, A. Gelliu^
as of war, may be given to those, to whom we give the choice as well of the
one as of the other. Which thing our ancesters portrayed with a white wand,
such as Ambassadors use to carry that entreat for peace; and a spear
adjoined, as the Romans did to the Carthaginians, or else with two spears,
the one whereof had his point tipped with steel, the other blunted with a
knobbe of wood on the end.

Agere and pati fortiae. To do and suffer great things.


C. Mutius when in steed of Porsena King of the Hetruscans, who had besieged
Rome, Liuius lib. 2. Valerius.
he had slain the kings secretary, was so angry with himself that he thrust
his right hand into the fire which he had made to sacrifice withal.

Lex exlex. The law, or ou^ law.


Anacharsis the Philosopher compared laws to cobwebbes, Valerius the great
because they troubled and oppressed the little flies, and such small
volatiles, but never touched the great ones. Which thing we see to be too true
in judgments now adays, whilst the mighty are sauoured, and the poor and
meaner sort taxed, and severely handled.

Tutus ab igne sacer. Being holy I was safe from the violence of the fire.


Plutarch. Valerius the great.
Lituns being a crooked staff, whereupon the southsayers sat when they deuined
of things to come, which Romulus used insteede of an Iuorie scepter, perished
not in the midst of the flame at Rome, but was found safe and sound in the
midst of the same.

Parce Imperator. Pardon me most noble Emperor.


M. Sceua a most valiant knight of Julius Caesats, Appian.
in that battle which he fought against Pompey, lost one of his eyes, and had
his body thrust through seven times, his shield was found also to be pierced
with a hundred and twenty darts. Caesar.
And (as Caesar himself reports) notwithstanding that his shield was struck
through 230. places, Sueton. Valerius
yet he kept the gate still, and the entrance, which he had taken upon him to
defend. And whilst he went in the foreward of the battle in France and fought
hand to hand with his enemies, his hippe being sore hurt, and his face bruised
with great stones, his helmet, and his shield broken, and fallen out of his
hand, and his sword shiuered in diverse pieces, and being armed with a double
breast plate, with great holdnesse cast himself into the sea, and by swimming
through the waters which he had made red with the blood of his enemies, he
came to his own men. Whither when he was come, as soon as he perceived
himself to be unarmed, which by the law of arms was forbidden, he cried out
to the Prince (for he trusted not yet to so many dangers which he had
overcome.) Oh noble Emperor forgive me, I come to thee unarmed. This was the
virtue and manly prowess of Sceua, wherefore for a reward, he was preferred to
the dignity of a Centurion.

Euertit and aequat. It breaks in pieces and makes even or smooth things
that be rough.


William of He^ant Earl of Ostreueant, Frossard.
son of Albert duke Raua^i^, Earl of Ha^au^, Holland, and Zel^n^ about the
year of our Lord, 1390, carried in his frandart the picture of a harrow of
gold, which he showed in the wars and host of the christians to the city of
Barbary called Aphrodisin. For even as the harrow does break in sunder the
hard clods of the fields, so does a good prince with the equity of his laws
and statutes restrain the wicked, rebellious, and seditious, with those that
oppose themselves against his authority and office.

Vlterius tentare veto. I forbid to attempt any further.


Before the coming of Christ, the Pagans and heathen Gentiles had the truth of
the mystery of the trinity revealed unto them, as it was prophesied of the
God of the Sabines, whom they called Sanctum Fidium holy, land. Fla.
and trusty, and Semipater half a father. They carried him into the city,
affirming that he consisted of three names, when in deed he was but one. And
although there was a temple consecrate to that trinity on Quirinal hill, yet
carried it the name but of one only. And of such great estimation was that
three fold image, that in all ages it had the sovereignty, where under was
figured the trinity of the Godhead is one unity, to wit, Deus fidius, Pliny.
which was the midst God. Thus the nation of the Sabins was most religious,
and therefore have they purchased them a name accordingly. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that the old Gentiles to whom religion was more acceptable, had
greater light and knowledge of the true faith.

Seruitus libera. Free service.


The rigor of Moises law toward servants was such, Exodus 21. Deuteronomy. 15.
that he who had fulfilled the exact time of his bondage, a choice should be
given him, either to be set at liberty, or else to be bondsman to his master
as long as he lived. If the servant choose to be bond, his master should bore
his ear with an all, and that was called free will service. The same ought
every christian man to do, who, as it were a free servant under the law of
grace, ought to offer his ear to God, that he may make it capable, and
obedient to his commandments. This great benefit is to be embraced of all men,
which thing the Psalmist seems to insinuate in this place, where he says,
Psalm. 39
thou have bored or made ready my ears. There are others that interpret the
place of Moises otherwise, that such voluntary bondage, did signify those
that gave themselves wholly to earthly pleasures, reserving no time to
amendment, nor yet ever seeking to redeem themselves into the liberty of the
spirit of God (which is our service by faith in Jesus Christ) wherefore their
ears do signify perpetual calamity and misery.

Sic terras turbine perflat. So he troubles the earth with whirlewindes.


God our creator (as Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 5. ^ames. 4. Luke 1.
James and Luke do witness) does resist the proud, the high minded, lovers of
themselves, and the arrogant, but gives grace to the humble and lowly.
Wherein he seems to imitate the lightning, which leaves untouched things
that are low, and striking those that are lofty and high, as Horace in these
words bears record.

The pine apple tree is tossed with winds,
and haughty turrets soon do fall,
The lightning eke does fiercely beat
The mountains high and tall.
Also Ovid.
Envy does often soar aloft,
and winds beat places hie,
And lightnings eke assault the place,
that mounts up, to the sky.
Vel in ara. And that on the holy altar.


Galeatius Marie duke of Milan, the son of Francis Sforce, was of such
effeminate and libidinous disposition of mind, that he offered violence, and
defiled honorable matrones, and chaste virgins. Which extreme wickedness made
him so odious both to his own nation, and to strangers which were subject unto
him also, that in the end it grew to be his destruction. For one Andrew
Lampugnan of Milan a courtier with the assistance of two of his companions,
grievously offended at him (especially for the intolerable oppression, which
the said duke had used against a certain abbot his brother, and that in the
abbey or monastery) conspired his death. Which conspiracy after that
Lampugnan had once conceived in his mind, fearing to set upon the prince, or
to smite him, whose beauty, comelines and majesty, danted and appaled him,
invented a way, whereby he might both persevere, and also bestrengthened and
confirmed in his purpose: to wit he caused an image of the duke to be engraven
very cunning lie in a table, whereunto, as often as he came, he thrust his
sword through it, having used this policy a while, he was greatly confirmed to
perform the deed: and entetering the church with the rest of the same
conspiracy, he meets the duke, guarded with a great train, as it were to
salute him, and giving him three great wounds in the belly, he slew him. Thus
died this miserable and wicked prince, who considered not the saying of
Claudian, that neither watching by night nor garding by day of troops and
bands of men keeps not the person of the prince so sure as love does. And
truly our God a just God of revenge has commended to us amity, friendship and
peace one with another, which whosoever does break and violate, every where,
and to the last breath the Lord will punish him.

Caelitus impendet. The sword of Gods wrath hanging over our heads.


Dionysius the tyran being king of Sici^^ upon a time perecauing himself to be
exceedingly praised of a certain thrasonicall parasite, Cicero.
Damocles by name, for his great riche^ costly ornaments and the like,
accounting him happier then any man that lived besides, (...) answered the
flatterer after this manner, Damocles, quoth he, seeing that our fate does like
thee so well, go to, will thou make trial of our happiness, and taste of our
fortune. Ye^ sir, said the others, if it please your grace with all my heart.
Whereupon the tyran commanded a chamber to be prepared for him, the posts and
bedsteads glistering with gold, (...) cupbordes, and benches furnished with
vessels of silver curiously wrought, and you^^ men of an excellent beauty
standing abo^^ the table bravely attired, as it were ready t^ obey Damocles
commandment. The^^ were also oyntmentes, corolles, garlandes (...) flowers,
and other fragrant odours. The table was furnished with all kind of dainties,
(...) as Damocles thought himself to be in the top of all felicity, until at
the last, the tyra^^ commanded a naked sword to be hanged (...) a small hair
or thread, over the flatterer head, the point thereof touching his nec^^ where
he being admonished, and fearing the eminent danger, lothed that which before
he thought to be the chiefest happiness, despised the beauty of the young men,
and disdained the dainties, the golden vessels, corols, sweet ^dours, and else
whatsoever. And being full ^f fear, besought the king to cease from such
dangerous jesting, and praying that such ^erilous felicity might never happen
unto ^im. In which thing the tyran showed sufficiently, that there was no
felicity, where there was continual fear, and anguish of ex^^ came
destruction. Especially if we refer ^his to the sword of Gods justice,
hanging over the necks of the wicked and ungodly, as ^t were in a most small
and slender thread.

Satis. Enough.


Heraclitus willing to insinuate the Atheniens, that they ought to be content
with the liberal gifts of nature, and that they ought to live together in
peace and tranquillity, if they were wise, cast meal with his hand into ^
glass full of water.

Vis est ardentior intus. The fire that burns inwardly is more to be feared.


As the fire being kindled in the midst ^f a hollow and dry stock,
brings great and inevitable danger by reason of the ^ecret burning within:
So a city set on ^^e with civil dissension, and sedition, through the
secreat treasons of the citizens, brings a fearful danger, which cannot be
easily remedied without great loss to the commonwealth. This allegory may
well be compared to secret love, which burning inwardly does bring great grief
and anguish to the mind, and oftentimes destruction it self.

Premitur, non opprimitur. Pressed, not oppressed.


The Emperor Galba (following in a manner the example of Solomon, 3. King. 3.
who tried the affection of the mothers toward their children) when there was
suit in the law commenced touching the property of a certain beast, with
very slender and weak reasons and witnesses on either side, commanded that
the beast should be carried blindfold to the place where he was wont to be
watered, and uncovering his eyes, Sueton.
to whomsoever he went voluntarily to be his own for ever.

Magnum vecligal. A great revenue.


The Hedghegge or Vrchin seeking his living very carefully, if he find any
thing, he is not content to si^^ is belly full, but tumbling himself up and
down^ (...) d^^g his pricks abroad, ga^h^^^ (...) upon the same, and so
carries them into his dens and holes in the ground. Which beast teaches us,
that it is not enough to have large fields, and great possessions, except we
use also both diligence to get, and sparing of that which we have got. This is
a most sure revenue, and such as both mighty, and rich men ought to follow,
taking an example hereof from this beast, which uses such care and diligence
in getting of her living.

Ingenij largitor. Necessity the minister of policy


Necessity is the chiefest thing that stirs men up to practice subtle ie and
craft: which thing the raven (whereof Pliny speaks) has sufficienth
procued, Pliny.
who laboring with thirst, and spying a vessel wherein was some water, but so
deep as she could not drink, she filled very craftily the vessel with
little stones, until the water which was in the bottom, swelled up to the
top, and so she drank her fill.

Vindictae trabit exitium. Revenge draws with it destruction to him that
seeks to revenge.


Both those that are the authors of conspiracies and those that are accessaries
to the same, do both of them deserve punishment. The which thing we read to
have happened to the 300 Foxes which Samson sent with fire brands tied to them,
Judges. 1
into the fields of the Philistines.

Aequari pauet alta minor. The lower fears the like lot.


Tarquine the proud, T. Liuius later. the great.
desiring to make known his mind closely to his son being absent from him,
and supposing it was not the best to reveal his intent to the noble man whom
his son had sent to him, took him into his garden, as it were to walk,
where he cut off with his staff all the highest heads of the Chesboles: By
which act his son understood, it was his fathers pleasure, that the nobles,
and especially the Gabionits, over whom together with his father he triumphed,
and through policy exercised no small authority amongst them, should be
corrected and punished with extreme punishment. And thus by this subtle
devise, Tarquinius seemed to insinuate to his son his bloody sentence, as
though he supposed (as far as may be coniectured) that a prince ought to subdue
his country, and make both it and all noble men else whatsoever subject and
obedient unto him.

Ecquis discernit vtrumque? Can any man discern both?


The nature of a riddle or sieve does represent the good and honest, for every
sieve deuideth the good corn, and the profitable grain, from the unprofitable:
so in like manner both the good and the evil, have knowledge to judge and
discern betwixt the nature and property of things, which the wicked do not,
but heap up every thing without the ^idle or five of reason.

Hac illac perfluo. I run out on every side.


The Danish hogshead as Poets do report, was so full of holes, and slif^ers,
that whatsoever was powered into it, ran forth again. Wherefore Plutarch,
Plutar. Terence
Tere^ce, and other authors have compared praters, ianglers, ungrateful
persons, and covetous men to the same: for that clatterers or blabbers of their
tongues cannot keep any secrets, but utter all, and more too: the ungrateful
does never thank him that has done him good, the covetous are never
contented, nor satisfied with enough.

Virtutis Fortuna comes. Fortune a companion of virtue.


Certain painters desirous to gratify one Timotheus duke of Athens, Suidas.
or else to flatter him for his great riches and power, purtayed his image in
such sort, Fortune giving him sleeping diverse cities compassed about with
tordes, and sundry nets of thread. Which thing Timotheus took in evil part,
perceiving that they rather attributed his happiness to Fortune, Plutar.
then to virtue. Plutrarch writes that it was done of those that enuyed him in
disdain, and contempt of him.

Prohibere nefas. It is not lawful to restrain her


Amphisbena a most strange serpent found in the deserts of Libia, having a head
at both ends, Aristotle Pliny.
to the end that she may either bite and pursue her enemy, or else at her
pleasure run away. Which may be a figure of double faced traitors, and secreat
domestical enemies, the danger of whom is so much the more to be feared, by
how much the more truer it is, that no pestilence (as Cicero testifies) is of
greater force, Cicero.
than this kind of men. Of whom this prouer be is wont to be used, in this
sense, In the one hand he carries a stone, in the other he shows bread.

Tu decus omne tuis. Thou art a renown to all thy kindred.


Noble deeds, famous enterprises, and illustrious exploites brought forth the
first beginning of true and ancient nobility, Tro. Pomp.
which thing the memorable example of Lisimachus the Macedonian does prove, who
is said to have left to his posterity a most notable monument of the valiancie
and excellency of his mind. For being cast amongst the Lions by the
commandment of Alexander he think his arm into the mouth of the Lion, and
pulling forth his tongue, killed him. The king seeing the valiancie of
Lisimachus gave him great authority, and caused a city which he had built to
be called by his name, Lisimach^^.

Vsque recurrit. It runs together again.


Nature which way soever it be wrested, will yer return again into his own
nature and proper condition. Experience hereof we have in trees, into the which
if thou graffest by art sp^igges or twif^es, or take away the branches by
violence, yet notwithstanding they will bring forth new branches in their own
natural height. The like is in beasts, and other natural things: whereof is
risen that old adage, Thou can not make a good Goshauke of a Bustard, nor a
good Courtier of a country clown: for as Horace says.

The pot a long time does retain,
the smell, and eke the taste,
Of liquor wherewithal it was,
besmeared at the first.
And albeit thou do divide,
dame Fortune with a furke:
Yet she again together runs,
and there she needs will lurk.
Cocumque ferar. Which way so ever I be carried.


The shelf^sh or coc^^^ fish either of his c^^e, or by his form, is always
ready to (...) this c^imie, because which way soever he falls, he has his
pricks upward; So the wicked and ungodly do continually hurt and oppress with
extreme misery those with whom they have to do.

Spe illectat inani. The world delights us with vain hope.


The sweet baits of worldly things if they be considered a far off, do
promise great things to men, and lift them up into a wonderful hope, but if
they be considered near hand, thou shall find that they are nothing but mere
vanity and deceit. Such be the snares of batfowlers cunningly framed to
intrappe the poor birds.

Vlterius ne tend obijs. Go no further for fear of Gods wrath.


The power of man, neither can, nor ought to attempt ought against the power of
God, as it was revealed to Valentinus the Emperor, Gregory Nazianz.
who being infected with the heresy of the Arrians, after that he had writ
with his own hand many things concerning the prescription, and banishment of
Basil, he was not able to make an end, his pen refusing three times to let
down any more ink. Notwithstanding he restrained not himself from confirming
and ratifying his wicked law, and decree, before a great trembling invaded his
hand, wherewith he being strooken, and conceiving great fear withal, what so
ever he had writ, he rent it presently.

Haec conscia numinis aetas. This age knows God aright.


About the reign of Augustus Caesar (as Pliny bears record) there appeared
at Rome a star garland, Pliny.
or crown round about the sun, as it had been of wheat ears, with circles
of sundry colors. Sueton.
Suetonius speaking of this wonder, remembers but of one circle, like the
rainebowe, compassing in the globe of ye same. But Dion following narrowly the
description of Pliny, Dion.
besides that strange star which then appeared, and that unaccustomed,
affirms also that the light of the sun was darkened by reason of three
other greater circles compassing it about, one whereof represented the form of
a garla^d of ears. Dion adds farther that the sun gave somewhat a dim
light, now and then in the night. But this is certain, that our Lord Jesus
Christ the true light, and true son of righteousness was borne in the days of
Augustus Caesar, whose birth and coming into the world, bringing a heap of al
goodness to man, might as well be revealed by the ministry of the angels, as
his passion and death was foreshewed according to the Gospel, to wit, when the
son was obscured, and darkness was throughout all the world. But it ought not
to seem strange although the signs and wonders that went before Christ's
birth, were observed of the heathen, albeit otherwise ignorant, when as those
things which followed his passion and resurrection were had in great
estimation, to wit, the darkness being noted by Dionisius Areopagita, whilst
that wandering through Egypt with Apollophanes his schoolmaster, he studied
Philosophy, and through the greatness of his wit and knowledge, Suidas.
perceiving the sun to be darkened beyond the course of nature: said, either the
God of nature does suffer, or the engine of the world is dissolved. Pliny in
his. 2. book.
Moreover concerning the earthquake before the resurrection of Christ in Pliny
after the just computation of years, we find these verses written and recorded.

An earthquake huge in Caesar's days,
Tiberius did befall,
Where through twelve cities of Asia,
were quite subverted all.
Haud sidit inane. An egg being empty swimmeth aloft.


An egg that is new and full of juice being cast into the deep, Pliny.
Quintil.
sincketh down presently, but a rotten one being cast into the water swimmeth
a loft. So by how much the less wisdom is in a man, by so much the more does
he bewray his folly by his self love, and ambition. Upon the other side, how
much the wiser a man is, so much the humbler, and quieter of mind he is, and
far from all braging, and ostentation.

Infringit solido. He breaks the rock.


He that studieth to reproach or to slander the godliness, or constancy of a
wise man, the evil it self shall light upon his own head, even as an arrow
shot against a hard stone or rock resulteth back again, and hurts him that
cast it.

Sans autre guide. Without any guide.


Brom stalks or other boughs tied to styles, or stuck up by heaps of
stones erected by travelers to direct them in their way, signifies that
virtue is the only guide to everlasting felicity.

Fata obstant. Destenies do withstand.


The getting of riches, and desired happiness is a thing very hard, and
uneasy to be come by. Add hereto, that poverty does greatly hinder the same
good proceeding, and remoueth the access to the same.

Terit and teritur. It wears and is worn.


As a stone sharping of iron, by continual rubbing of the same iron is
consumed, so the wicked, and he that follows contention, vexes and
tormenteth himself, so that he may bring others to destruction.

Sic praedae patet esca sui. So her meat lies open to her own destruction.


The great commodity which the fish called a Purple receives by his tongue,
is so much the more to be esteemed, because thereby she gets her living.
But for that sometimes evil happens to her thereby, there is she so much the
more to fear, because by the same she may incur the danger of death, and
become a pray to the fishers. Even so stands the office or duty of man's
tongue whilst it is wisely governed, it is a most precious jewel, contrarily,
it being given to backbiting, cogging and lying, bretheth forth fearful and
deadly poison: whereof it grows that the common sort call such a tongue
grandem linguam, a broad or large tongue, or a blabbe tongue. Very well
therefore is it compared to the tongue of a great purple fish, because there
cleaves to the palite of her mouth a purple, red humor, signifying
allegorically the cruel poison of an evil speaker, a backbiter, and a bloody
fellow.

Candor illaesus. Brightness that cannot be annoied.


Clemens de Medicis, the seventh of that name Bishop of Rome, used for his
Ensign a blasing star or comet. Aristotle for the explaining thereof says:
Aristotle.
Even as every new comet has never heretofore portended to men either
prosperous success and good fortune, or else some great hurt and detriment: so
by the government of a new prince in a common weal, either abundance of
felicity or final destruction follows thereupon.

Prosper vterque mari. Both appearing together upon the sea, is a a sign of
good luck.


When two fires which our elders called by the name of Castor and Pollux do
appear together, they foreshew a prosperous voyage and good luck, but if one
alone does appear, it is a sign and token of evil luck to ensue: In like
manner if the love betwixt the husband and the wife does flourish in a house,
it is a certain sign of tranquillity and domestical happiness. But upon the
other side, if thorough the frowardnes of either of them they be divided, it
fore shows ruin and destruction to be at hand. Furthermore, under the
solitude or only appearnace of one of them, may be understood how
petillous a thing it is, to have riches and authority without wisdom to
govern well.

Sic spectanda fides. So is faith to be tried.


The goodness of gold is not only tried by ringing, but also by the touchstone:
so the trial of godliness and faith is to be made not of words only, but
also by the action and performance of the deeds.

Sic violenta. So violent.


Iangling and prating out of time, and to small purpose, is very well compared
to the blas^ering noise of a whisking wind.

Terror and error. Fear and terror.


It is to be counted one of the chiefest points of a valiant Captain, if he
know to alter and change danger into virtue. As for example, If he be
inferior unto his enemy in regard of time and place, to conueigh away both
himself and his arm from their violence and force by some kind of device or
policy, and making himself seem terrible to his foes, as Hannib^l that
noble Captain did once, when to fear his enemies withal, he tied firebrandes
to the heads of his oxen in the night season.

Poco apoco. By little and little.


The grass grows and increases upon the ground, and yet no man can
perceive his increase: so honesty and virtue cannot easily be perceived but
by example and practice.

Aemula naturae. And envious imitator of nature.


Diligence and continual exercise doubtless is of such great force, that at
the length it imitateth and matcheth nature her her self, which thing is
verified in Domitianus the Emperor, who had such singular skill and dexterity
in throwing the dart, that casting two at a wild beast, hit him upon the
forehead so cunningly, that the beast seemed to stand as though he had had two
natural horns growing upon his head.

Renouata iuuentus. Youth is to be renewed.


The Goushauke is wont to prune her self, and set her feathers in order against
the beams of the Sun: so he that will come to Christ our Lord, it behooves
him to put off all wickedness and sin, and tobe clothed with new apparel, and
amendment of life.

Praepete penna. With a speedy wing.


The picture of the spread Eagle, after the common opinion, began to be carried
in insignes and standards after this manner. There happened division in the
Empire, and therefore was it translated in Charles the great his days, into
the East and W^st parts, (as Wolfangus Lazius historiographer to the king of
the Romans says) in the days of Constantine the great, who of the common
weal of Rome being one, made two, the one the Roman Empire, the other the
Constantinopolitane Empire.

Attendite vobis. Take heed to your selves.


To establish the state of christian religion, Act. 20.
and to preserve the soundnes and integrity of the same, it shall be
necessary that the faithful preachers of Gods word by their examples and
living do exercise their duty of preaching the word diligently without
ceasing.

Viuit ad extremum. The notch burns to the last piece thereof.


Every ones love and faithfulness toward his prince ought to be most constant
and firm, and such as may not be shaken ot extinguished through any force of
winds or tempests rushing in, to wit, because we seem to keep our watch
round, that the more the winds blow, the surer it keeps fire burning still.

Captive liberte. A captive or servile liberty.


The conspirators of the death of Julius Caesar dissoluing the Senate, Appian.
carried through the streets in Rome a hat or cap upon the point of a spear,
(which was a token of liberty and freedom) because then it was a custom to
give to Saints a cap or a hat, and to make them free: by this device stirring
up the people of Rome against the civil magistrates, promising them undoubted
liberty. But it fell out far otherwise, for the same year all they were put
to the sword that were of that conspiracy. Hereby it appears, that that
licentious liberty to sin, which some suppose to be liberty, is mere
servitude and bondage.

Police souueraine. A perfect common wealth.


To a perfect common wealth these two things be required, the pen and the
swoorde, that is, council and good letters in deliberating of affairs, and
the sword in the execution of the same.

Superstitio religioni proxima. Superstition is next to religion.


This is the study and practice of our ancient enemy the devil, that as often
as he comes to spread abroad any pestilent errors or impiety into the world,
such is his craft and peruersitie, he covers it under the shadow or name of
truth, albeit his intent be nothing else but mere deceit, a counterfeit
iangling, and as it were, a bewitching of men. Which thing he notably brought
to pass, ^it. Liuius.
when he brought in the horrible superstition of divination and south saying,
persuading Priscus Tarquinius the king, and the Romans that Decius Nauius the
augurer divided into two parts a great rock with a little knife.

Demal mepaists. I am nourished in him that is evil.


The boxing glass that Physicians use, which are said to be windy, do suck up
and exhaust the corrupt blood: Plutarch.
but the mind that is wickedly inclined, seeks after nothing but that which
is evil.

Fons inuocantis. The fountain of invocation.


Sampson sometimes troubled or very hard bestead with a marvelous great
thirst, called for help at Gods hands, who presently perceived comfort or ease
of water that issued out of the iawe bone of an ass, Judge. 15.
wherewith not long before he had slain a thousand men. By which miracle we are
to learn that any thing whatsoever, be it never so simple, is capable of ye
grace of God, so that it be implored and desired by his divine word, which is
the true and lively fountain.

Et l'vn, et l'autre. As well the one as the other.


When two men are fighting or contending together in what contention or
exercise so ever, it cannot be with what excellency or strength or equity
either of them strive, but that one side or other catches some vexation or
trouble, if not harm: and so it fares in every point with those that contend
in the place of exercise, and in the handling of the staff, wherein they
contend for strength, where, no not the ouercommet himself carries away the
victory without great forcing and strayning of his members.

Consultori pessimum. Iuill council is worst to the council giver.


It is most certain that the punishment which another deserves by committing
of offense, does always return upon the head of the first counceller. We may
daille see this in standards and Ensigns of war, whereby we muster or gather
soldiers together to their voyage, and in battle, arm our selves by them, as
our guides against the enemy: for they abide the first onset and renting in
pieces. Nay rather the authors of battles and strife in all dissensions and
variances, are worthier of the sorer punishment, and the laws themselves
command, that seuerer punishment be inflicted upon them, than upon the
fighters themselves. And to the present purpose belongs that which Aulus.
Gellius writes of the wicked dealing of the Hetrurian southsaiers. Au. Gel.
For they being called upon by the Romans, that they should in open assembly
consulte about Horatius Cocles image, that was stricken with lightning (as they
were privy enemies of the Romans) after that they had decreed that the image
should be carried into a more desert place, where the Sun could not come to
it at al to benefit it. When accusation of this their device was made, and
their falsehood and treachery in this case made known, they were killed, and
the image it self was translated with a great deal more honor into Vulcans
court or hall. Wherefore the young youth turning this false divination into a
more plausible interpretation for the common wealth (because, as good luck
would have it, it fell out happily for the common wealth) went crying up and
down the City, and in great choler as it were* broke forth into these
speeches: Evil council is worst to the council giver.

Vis nescia vinci. Force that cannot be overcome with force.


Plutarch writes that Scylurus of Chaero^ea lying upon his deathbed, Plutar.
offered to his 80. sons one by one a bundle of darts or arrows, to be
broken in pieces. The which when they went about to do, and could not prevail,
and had answered that it was impossible, their father untied the bundle, and
taking them every one out one after another, broke them with great facility
and ease, teaching them thereby, that they were invincible and unable to be
overcome, as long as they continued in peaceable league, and quietness together,
but if they were once drawn one from another by dissension, and sedition, they
would easily fall into captivity, and into their enemies hands. That which
Pliny notes not much vnilke to this, might hither be adduced, Pliny.
of the stones of Scyrus lying in one of the Cyclades, which being whole, swome
upon the top of the water, but being broken, they suncke by and by. Therefore
let this simbole of darts fast joined together in a bundle, and also of the
forenamed stones signify thus much, that leagues of what covenants soever are
invincible, if you use prudence for the band of the same.

Quis contra nos? If God be with us, who can be against us.


Saint Paul when he was in the Island of Malta a Viper light upon his hand,
Acts. 28.
yet received he no hurt thereby (although the Barbarians thought otherwise)
but shook off the Viper into the midst of the fire, whereof we may see, that
they to whom Gods mercy is ready at hand, nothing can hurt, or annoy.

Mature. Speedily.


Look for what reason Titus Vespasian the Emperor in times past, used an Anchor
with a Dolphin fish for his cognizance or arms, for the same (as I think)
Pope Paul the third used a Camelion with a Dolphin. Meaning thereby that the
like slow celerity, or have making is always to be kept in any manner of thing.

Lex publica Principis ignes. A public law is the fire of the Prince.


The burning firebrands which the Romans were wont to carry before their
princes (as we may see in most of the monuments and coins of ancient kings,
whereof Herodian makes mention, Herodian
where he writes of the divination of Gordianus Caesar) do plainly signify,
that Princes, Emperors, captains, and pretors (unto whom authority under the
king was committed to determine causes) ought to shine before all others in the
brightness of virtue, and equity.

In se contexta recurrit. Being platted together it cleaves fast.


The Psalmist making mention of the unmeasurable bountifulness and liberality
of Gods grace, piety, clemency, and providence, says, Benedices coronae anni
benignitatis tuae, Psalm. 64.
thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy steps drop fatnes.
Whereby he gives us to understand, that a yearly renewing, and a successiue
and continual returning of plentiousnesse of all commodities, and yearly
profits, is given us from the Lord in all abundance, where also by the figure
of a serpent the year is to be understood according to the monuments of the
Egyptians, which they used in steed of letters.

Pythone peremto. The serpent being slain.


The power of the Roman empire began then to decay, when the honor that the
soldiers were wont to have by the authority of ancient laws, decreased by
little and little, in so much that the Egle in their martial ensigns yielded
to the Woolfe, to the minotaure, to the horse, and to the wild bore. The Dragon
had the last place, whom Claudianus famously sets forth in many of his
verses, Claud.
the similitude whereof signifies continual watchfulness.

Caelo imperium iouis extulit ales. The Egle has lifted up the government of
the Empire to the heavens.


The Egle has always been the chiefest ensign amongst the Romans, the
which even at this day belongs to the holy Empire. And this Caius Marius,
after that he had attained to the honor of the second Consulship, dedicating
an Egle altogether to his legions or armies, according to Pliny his relation,
preferred before all other ensigns. Pliny.
And the Egle, because she is formidable and to be feared before all other
birds, and as though (as it is commonly said) she is counted for the king of
all birds, was chosen for a simbole or ensign, to signify a people, or nation
which has subdued all other whatsoever. But this also is true, that in the
Romans ensigns the Egle was wont to carry the similitude of lightning,
either as a bird dedicated to Jupiter, or as carrying his arms and ensigns
foremost, or finally because, as Pliny says, she is never touched with
lightning.

Infestis tutamen aquis. A defense or safeguard in the dangerous waters.


Seruius Galba the Emperor signified by this simbole, Dion.
as well his own act^s, as his ancestor^ Therefore he purtrayed a dog bowing
himself down from the forepart of the ship, like as though he would leap
down: whereby he declared great vigilancie, and constant watching against all
dangers whatsoever.

Antidoti salubris amaror. Wholesome is the Antidotes bitterness.


The sum of our salvation consists chiefly in the imitation of the misery
of the passion, and cross of our redeemer Jesus Christ; namely, as we said
before, if we patiently bear the afflictions of this transitory world, that
so we calling upon the name of Christ, may use our selves thereto, and may
change the bitterness of the cross into the cup of salvation, singing with
the psalmist, What shall I render to the Lord for all the good things which he
has given unto me? Psalm. 116
I will take the cup of salvation, and will call upon the name of the Lord.

Cessit victoria victis. Victory is happened to the overcome.


By this means the bloody effusion of blood is turned in the holy Martyrs and
those that suffer for the name of God, into the form of a crowned Palm tree,
or else an everlasting reward of a victory gotten, that so the crown of an
immortal kingdom might be signified. But not those only which shed their
blood for the confession of their faith, are therefore thought worthy of the
name of Martyrs, but they which following the Lord Christ, for the inheritance
of the kingdom of heaven, take up his cross, patiently bearing the
contumelies, and reproaches of this world, wherein the chiefest kind of
martyrdom is for the most part occupied, and exercised.

Flauescent. In time they will become yellow or ripe.


Horatius Farnesius duke of Camerinum, used the like quaternion of green
sheaues of wheat, whereby he declared or figured, that the young youth of the
noble prince (as I suppose) should in time be turned into a ripe and full age.

Vt lapsu grauiore ruant. That they may fall with the greater ruin.


There is perpetual enimitie betwixt the dragon and the Egle. Pliny.
Whereby it comes to pass that they never meet one the other, without a
fierce conflict, and so dangerously are carried together through the air, that
the Egle wrapped round about in the dragons tail, they fall headlong down
together. The like is wont to happen to proud and hauty persons when they are
at contention amongst themselves.

Victrix casta fides. Pure faith is a conqueror.


In the church of the Franciscanes, the bewtiful ensigns of the famous city
A^^gno^na are engraven, on the tomb of the noble woman Laure, which is so much
commended of Franciscus Petrarcha, with two little laurel bows lying a cross
one over another, with the form of a cross also added to it, standing
overthwart in the middle, and upon them the shape of a Rose fastened to the
middle of the Target. Whereby is signified the integrity of their first faith
and promise joined with chastity, and the subdued affections of this wicked
world.

Ipsa suae testis victoria cladis. Victory it self is a witness of his own
destruction.


There is found even at this day ancient coins, with the inscription of
Vespasianus Caesar upon them, wherein there is engraven the figure of a high
Palm tree abounding with great store of fruit. Furthermore it is most
certain that that most noble and fruitful tree grew in Judea, when it was
subdued, and brought into subjection by the force and power of that mighty
Prince. Wherefore this presaging type of the Palm tree, does signify not only
the region of Jury, but also the destruction of that nation, and Gods
perpetual destruction against the posterity thereof.

Mala vndique clades. Destruction waits for ye wicked in every place


These swords which are placed and stand forth of a round circle, and a
trembling Hare in the midst thereof, do signify unto us, that a safe refuge,
is in no place granted to offenders, either in the field, or in the city, or
in any other place in body or spirit. For so both in infinite other places,
and also in Moses the scripture threatens, saying, Deuteronomy. 31
The sword shall destroy them abroad, and fear at home.

Grandeur, per grand heur. Authority and dignity comes of Fortune.


Dion reports that three monuments of triumph, Dion.
were engraven in the ^ing of Pompeyus, wherewithal he used to s^^le, like as
Scylla used to have. The which simbole without all doubt, foresheweth a
monument of the noble exploits of them both.

Improbitas subigit rectum. Wickedness oppresses the good.


As a tree is kept from growing, and choked as it were by the growing of Iuie
about the same, so a matter in law, although it be never so unjust, through the
art and wit of the cloquent lawier does wrest the law after their own will and
pleasure.

Pacis and armorum vigiles. The watchers of peace and war.


By the watching clock of the cock and the trumpet, it is easy to judge what
difference there is betwixt the condition of war and peace.

De paruis grandis aceruus erit. Great heaps come of small beginnings.


From an ear to a handful, from a handful to a sheaue. So a poor man by good
council, wisdom and diligence ought to use the good gifts that are lawful
for him, and given unto him. Whereto when he is come by Gods benefits, it is
needful that he stay himself sometimes, and six that most f^rtunate
sufficiency of things being a true crown of riches for a mark or scope:
remembering in this case always these verses of a certain french Poet (whose
name if I knew, I would no more conceal it, then I would his worthy praise
which he deserves by it) as follows.

Of nothing, or then nothing less,
if possibly there could be,
To little many often do come,
by Gods permission free.
And force so great this little has,
that it each one permits,
That to that which suffices well,
he often largely hits.
If so that this sufficiency,
of goods him well content,
But if perhaps to attain to much,
he couetously be bent,
Being not content with that which might
full well him satisfy,
Most certain perils bide that mind,
which to and fro does sly.
Lest justly he return again,
(believe contented it is)
To former state (as heretofore)
full bare and poor iwis.
La, le danger. In wars is all mischief and danger.


There stood in Lacedemon the picture of Bacchus, holding a long spear with
Iuie round about it, growing up to the very point thereof, which was covered
with the same. Which signified that wars were to be waged, not by force, or
might, but were to be directed by council, policy, and art: for to such arts
martial force is subject.

Nodos Virtute resoluo. I resolve all doubts only by virtue.


By this Symbol of the Marshal of S. Andrew, being an arm and a sword, which
is said properly to belong to Alexander the great, cutting in sunder Gordius
knot in the ancient pallas of Midas, may be understood (in my opinion) the
prowes of the valyant Prince. And also, that things being otherwise uneasy
and difficult, are by manhod and strength made easy.

Turpibus exitium. Destruction hangs over the heads of the wicked and
unclean.


As the Bittle is bred and nourished in the excrements and dong of a horse, but
being in the midst of roses dies: so these youths that are so nice, and
given over to carnal pleasure, the study of godliness and other good virtues
delights them not, desiring rather to be polluted with the filthy dong of
carnal pleasure and wickedness.

in a martial Ensign, is a perpetual monument of the protection of the
kingdom of France. Eng. de Monst.


Etiam fortunam. Yea, fortune too.


M. Sergius a Roman knight, after that he had many times fought with
Hannibal, Pliny.
and being taken captive by subtitltie, had escaped his hands, at last in a
skirmish lost his right hand: whereupon he was constrained to fight with his
left hand in four other battles. But when he perceived that he could not
use the one hand so aptly as the other, he caused an iron hand to be made, and
set fast to his right arm. The which he so luckily and valiantly used after
in field, that he overcame and discomfited twelve armies in France, that were
sworn enemies to the Romans. For which cause Pliny writes that he knows
not any other that is to be preferred before Sergius in prowes and manhood,
who vanquishing the violence of his fortune, made himself worthy of all the
praise and honor of those victories.

Sic sopor irrepat. So sleep came upon him.


We read it written in the French Chronicles, that one Gontranus king of
Burgundy, being upon a time weary with hunting, Annals of France.
and falling on sleep, his servants watching by him in a certain field, by a
river side running hard by, there came out of the kings mouth a little beast,
and assaied to pass over the river. Which when the kings servant saw, he
drew out his sword, whereupon as on a bridge, the little beast passed over the
river, and went into a hole or cave that was in a hill over against it. From
whence she came forth again by and by, and going over again by the sword as
by a bridge, went again into the kings mouth. When the king awaked, he told
his man the like dreime that he had seen, to wit, that he went over a river
upon an iron bridge, and so into a cave under a hill, where he saw great
treasure hid. When his man heard that, he told him in order what had
happened when he was on sleep. So the king caused the inner part of the hill
to be opened, whereout he dug abundance of gold and silver, which he
bestowed upon the poor and needy, and also gave much to the use of diverse
Churches. And also with the same treasure he caused the coffine of Saint
Marcell near to Chalon at Saona, where he was thought to be buried.

Caecus amor prolis. Love of parents to their children is blind or void of
reason.


The Ape is said to love his young ones so immeasurable, Pliny.
that whilst he clippeth them in his arms more then reason would, he after
kills them with griping them so fast to him. In like manner many parents are
wont to be so lavish in the nice education of their children, that with their
too much cockering of them, at the last they bring them to naught.

Supplicio laus tuta semel. He that was worthy of praise was one free from
punishment.


It is recorded of a certain Indian, that was of such dexterity in throwing
of a dart, that he could cast it a great way off tho^ugh a ring of small
compass. Wherefore ^hen he was commanded by king Alexander to show his
cunning before him, he could not by any means be persuaded to do it. For
the which cause he was condemned by the kings sentence to die. And being
asked therefore he would not do so small a matter for the kings pleasure,
answered, that he fea^ed least he should happily miss of his vsu^all
custom of throwing. When Alexander saw that he did it, not so much for
rebellion ^s for fear and shame, he commanded the condemned man to be set at
liberty, wondering at his disposition, which was very desirous of glory,
desiring rather to die than to diminish or discredit the fame and excellenti:
of his knowledge and cunning.

Omnis caro foenum. All flesh is grass.


If this people which before all other nations vainly vexed and troubled the
whole world, that they might still increase and ad^ance their own power and
glory, and make immortal as it were, had at the last used ^ome good and
wholesome council, and loo^ed into their own state, that they might earnestly
and deeply at the length have weighed that the symbol, and author, and father
as it ^ere, Ovid. Seruius
Romulus (which was a bundell of haie ^anged upon a pik or lance) meant, they
had ^euer sustained so many, and so great vexation both of body and mind,
especially beholding so sudden an alteration of humane affairs, and most of
all, of those things which belong properly to this fleshly and earthly ^ody,
whose mutabilitie and inconstancy the Prophet compares to green grass and
fa^^ing flowers. Esaias. 40


Toll vpluptatum stimulos. Take away the pricks of pleasures.


As we are wont to use a flap made of the eied or starred feathers of a pecocke
to beat away I^^s: S. Jerome
so we ought to drive from us and to purge our selves of pleasure, and all
kind of fleshly lust with great watchfulnes etc re.

Paix outragee se rend vengee. Foolish peace is wont always to render
vengeance.


The Persians in the days of Zeno the Emperor suffered due punishment for
their deserts, for the host of the Persians had thought by subtlety to rushe
headlong upon Caesar's Ensigns (where upon conditions of peace concluded of
betwixt both the nations, Procop.
did hang and was showed) and to rende them in pieces. But ere they were aware,
the Persian king with his children and the chief of his army were taken in a
trench which the Romans had prepared. And also not long after all the rest of
the army that were left by policy were discomfited, and not one left which
was not destroyed.

Rerum Sapientia custos. Wisdom the preserver of all things.


The most gracious Duchess of Berie, Margaret by name, expressed the singular
affection her heart in this Emblem of two serpents, putting forth both their
heads out of the boughs of an Olive tree: showing that the true government of
all things is best held fast, and holden up by the mast of wisdom and
policy.

Discite iustitiam moniti. Learn justice by admonition.


Whither so ever Basanus king of the Scicambrians Diocles son went, he
commanded always a sword to be carried before him, on the top whereof was
fastened a rope or halter, and that for a testimony of inuiolate justice. For
he was a king, besides that he was famous in all other virtues, that was also
a diligent censor and keeper of judgment and equity, insomuch that he spared
not in his own son when he offended, but severely punished him.

Concussus surgo. Being smaller, I mount aloft.


The Admiral Cabotius always used for his arms, a round circle or globe like
a ball, (that I may so term it) swelling with wind, with this inscription, I
shaken and tossed, do arise, which sufficiently unfolds this simbole.

Hac virtutis iter. This is the way to virtue.


A field rake or harrow tied to the letter y (which they call one of the
Pythagoricall characters) which Marcus Petrus Moruillier chanceller of France,
challenged to himself for his arms, as we may see in the Church dedicate to
S. Martin in the fields in the city of Paris, does give us sufficient
admonition, that labor does make the way to at^ine unto virtue.

Hoc Caesar me donauit. Caesar has rewarded me with this chain.


Charles the sixth king of the Francons hunting in the forest of Senliana for a
Heart that had about his neck a chain or wreath of brass burnished with gold,
with an inscription to this effect: This Caesar has me given, and desiring to
leave behind him this memorable pray to the knowledge of his posterity, took
a running Heart for his arms, having his neck compassed about with a crown.

Victo seculo. Christ his victory over the world.


A garland of thorns made fast to a reed or bal brush, resembles a type of
the passion of our savior Jesus Christ, signifieng his heavenly and
everlasting kingdom, and his victory over the world and satan the prince of
this world, whom he vanquished.

Terriculum noxae. The fear of hurt.


Pompeius Magnus being made head governor of the army, Plutarch.
and sent of Scilla into Sicilia, behaved himself not only vigilantly,
stoutly and valiantly, but also showed himself a just captain with marvelous
great equity. So that if he knew of any that went out of the camp on
forraging, and either robbed, or committed any outrageous fact, he would
severely punish them. Moreover that he might restrain and bridle his scouts
and posts from oppressing of those that they met withal, he marked or sealed
their swords with his own signet which he wore.

Hic terminus haerit. Here is the end of all things.


Lest the increase and abounding of dignities, of honors, goods, and finally of
all other things, should by any means hinder noble men, and women, that they
should not sometimes think that they are mor^all as well as others, all of them
for the most part, have invented some certain means or other, which may now
and then put them in mind of death and of their end. The which thing master
Boizius the kings chief taster uses at this day, having for his arms the
form of a block or piece of timber, cast down to the ground, with these
words written about it, Here is the furthest bound or limit.

Mihi pondera luxus. Excess is burdenous to me.


Like as corn (as Seneca says) is diverse times overwhelmed of it self,
Seneca.
and the ears cast down through overmuch rancknes, so also the immoderate
heaping up of commodities and pleasures is hurtful to good wits, and to those
which in other respects carry very good minds.

Nil amplius optat. The contented man wishes for no more.


This tipe or figure of nets or hayes wouen together, may be referred to the
metaphor going before: and does teach us, that he that lives content with
his own goods, does easily despise and contemn the inordinate desire of frail
and transitory things.

Number flatus telluris honor. Is not honor a blast of wind?


There was an ancient custom amongst the Romans, that to every governor of
any country or province newly created, for congratulation sake only as a
sign of good luck to ens^e, should be given, in honor of them seven shillings
to every one, a clot or turfe, a key and a ball or globe. The clot they gave
in token that the Magistrates ought to bestow al their diligence, that meats
should not become dearer, but yt they should remain in the same price that
they were, at that no dearth, want, nor hunger might arise. Moreover, that the
public affairs might be moderate, and executed with such wisdom and
clemency, as in giving of a clot o^ piece of earth, they thanked the deputy
or governor for their fields, and corn. The key they gave in token that he
ought to expend and way of their liberty, and his own authority in bidding
and commanding. The sphere or globe, they gave to signify his puissant right
and authority. So Alexander interpreted a globe or sphere given him of Darius.
Except we had rather that the sphere should signify the government of civil
policy, and martial discipline.

Me pompae prouexit apex. The desire of renown has promoted me, or set me
forward.


The Romans supposed it the chiefest reward of famous deeds, if they adorned
their Emperors, captains, knights, and other common soldiers, every one
notwithstanding according to their dignity, degree and place, with crowns or
garlands, which they called militares coronas, martial crowns, or crowns of
chivalry. And because they were signs and tokens of their virtue, noble
exploits, and invincible minds: the chiefest and famoust had their
purtraitures, with their Apothegmes and posies, and that as well for the
perpetual remembrance of their worship, and ancienty as also for the
oblectation, pleasure, and esperance to those that should come after, attending
and seeking after the honor of virtue, with the reward and praise thereof. Which
things are especially due to those who are the reuengers, the patrons and
redeemers of the common wealth (which ought greatly to be regarded of al me^)
The first crown yt was given, was called triumphall, which being platted with
laurel bows, and berries, was offered to invincible triumphers. To whom it was
lawful, and that by the decree of the senate, to solemn their triumph up and
down the city in great charets, and wagons, as vanquishers, and subduers of
their enemies: the senate being advertised first of 5000. of their enemies to
be slain togitherin one battle. Which triumphant crown, in process of time,
the Empire decreasing, was afterward interlaced with unions, and diverse other
precious stones. And last of all, it was changed from the natural laurel, into
a graven laurel compassed about with a circle of gold, as is to be seen yet
to this day in old coins and pictures.

Merces sublimis honorum. The reward of honor is great.


Those that were delivered, and had escaped in any battle, gave to the
tribune, or governor of the army, who had valiantly subdued their enemies, a
triumphant crown of grass. And albeit this garland, or crown was of grass
only, it is to be thought notwithstanding that it waws compact of all manner
of herbs and flowers that could be found in that place, after the armies were
dispersed, yet nevertheless (as Pliny witnesses) it was the honorablest of
all the rest, and hold in greatest estimation.

Seruati gratia Ciuis. The reward of him that had delivered a city out of
danger,


If any citize^ had delivered his city out of any singular danger in battle,
and had preserved it in safety, he was rewarded by another with a crown or
garland, platted with Oak leaves, because in old time men lived of such meats as
the Oaks yielded.

Excidij turribus honos. The honor done to him had scaled the walls of his
enemies.


A crown of gold representing the form of a wall with pinacles and turrets
upon it, was given by the Emperor or governor, or governor of the army to him
that by force, and arms, should first cl^mbe up upon the walls of his enemies,
or any way enter into their city.

Hoc valli insigne recepti. This was the reward of him that took the valley of
his enemy.


A crown of gold also made in form of a valey was given of the Emperor, or
president of the host, to him that could take the valley from his enemies.

Classis monumenta subactae. The reward of him that boorded his enemies ship.


In the sea fight whosoever could first give charge upon his enemies navy, or
fleet, and enter his ship armed, was crowned with a crown of gold made like
to the forepart of a ship.

In hunc intuens. Look upon this image.


The Egyptians were accustomed in their banquets and feasts to have carried
about with the^ an image or picture of death, and showing it to every one,
repeating these verses.

Mark and behold what thing you see,
a grimly ghost and fell,
Like unto which you once shall be,
in darkesome cave of hell.
Isidorus reports also that at Constantinople there was a custom, Isidorus.
to put the Emperor in mind of his departure hence: The first day that he was
to be crowned a certain Mason should bring unto him three or four forts of
stones, saying unto him these words:

Oh noble Caesar puissant king,
choose thou here presently,
Of which stone shall thy grave be made,
wherein thou once shall lie.
Victoria limes. Victory is the end.


Epictetus the Philosopher being asked upon a time of Adrianus the Emperor
wherefore the dead were crowned with garlands, answered, that they might
declare, how that by death they had overcome the labors, sorrows and imminent
heap of the cares of this life. Pliny also speaks of the same crowning of
the dead, witnessing that they were accustomed to be offered up after the same
manner.

Spes alter a vitae. Hope of another life.


Corn, grain, and seeds of sundry sorts, being dead and cast into the ground
do revive, and spring again: So man's body falling into the ground shall rise
again in glory, in the last and general day of the resurrection of the flesh.

THE PVRTRATVRES OR Emblemes of Gabriel Simeon a Florentine.
Huc cursus fuit. This was the mark he shot at.
HVC CVRSVS FVIT

As a man is greatly to love and esteem him of whom he is delivered from the
danger of shipwreck, and brought into the quiet and safe haven: so (as I
conjecture) the inuentor of this simbole would signify hereby, how fortunate
and happy he thought himself, for that he was received into the service of
the most famous Prince Emanuel Philibertus, duke of Sauoy.

Quis dicere lauds? Who can express his praises.
EL



This picture or sign of the cross (an argument of Gods love and favor
toward us) being the proper ensign of the duke of Sauoy, with this syllable E
L, in Hebrew signifying, God included in a ring of Margarits, and sundry
precious stones fetched from the East, and the Princes crown upon the top
thereof, does aptly signify the princely wisdom and names of Emanuell duke of
Sauoy, and the duchess Margaret, which Princes for their divine gifts, no man
can sufficiently praise or commend.

Festina lent. Make have but flowly.


Augustus Caesar (a man far from that headlong precipitancie, and credulity,
whereby many Princes and Magistrates giving credit at the first assalt to the
false suggestions of they parasites and flatterers, have many times done that
which has been most impious and wicked) protesting to observe a temperance and
just moderation in the government of his common wealth, amongst other
monuments commanded a butterfly cleaning to a sea crabbe to be engraven in
gold, insinuating by the slownesse of the one, a kind of temperancie and cold
deliberation: and by the fast flying of the other a certain rashness or
headlong fury. By both which joined together he signified, that a certain
mean or temperature in all things is very needful for a prince.

Festina lent. Make flow have.


Instead of the sea crab, and the butterfly of Augustus, Vespasian the
emperor commanded a Dolphin and an Ankor in such sort (as here thou see
expressed) to be purtraied.

Pacatum ipsa regam auitis vertutibus orbem. I will rule the world through the
virtue of my ancestors.


By this ripe or figure of a Dolphin bearing the sphere or globe of the world
upon his back, in the form of a ring or circle, marked with a diamant (being
ye peculiar arms of the house of Medicis) with the purtrature of the moon
increasing (being the ensign of king Henry) wherout two branches do bud, one
of a palm, in token of victory gotten, ye other of an Olive in hope of peace,
with this egloge or pofie, Pacatum ipse regam auitis virtutibus orbem, That is,
I will govern the whole world in peace through the virtue and valor of my
progenitors, is signified the famous progeny of king Dolphin, as well on his
fathers fide, as also on his mothers, both their arms being reduced into one.
Insinuating by the moon increasing the sovereignty and excellency of the
kings blood, by the diamant his invincible virtue. Finally, by the sphere or
globe of the world his inexpugnable power and might. After which manner the
ancient Romans in times past did signify the same thing.

Fato prudentia mayor. Wisdom is of greater force then destonie.


I have consecrated the star enclosed with an adder or snake crowned, and
biting her tail, with this inscription, Fato prudentia mayor Wisdom is of
greater force then destenie it self, to the queen of France in token of
honor, and that to signify, that albeit fortune has advanced her highness
greatly, as being the daughter of such noble parents, to wit, duke Vrbin, and
duchess of Bologne, the nephew of such a noble bishop as was Clement the
seventh, and wife of the high and mighty Prince Henry the second king of
France. Finally, the mother of such and so many noble children, yet
notwithstanding, by her admirable virtue, modesty, and clemency, she has
brought to pass that she may worthily challenge the greatest praise of all the
queens of France that ever were.

Mirandum natura opus. Nature is wonderful in her worker.


No purtrature (in my opinion) can better be ascribed to the two Margarets, the
one queen of Navarre, the other of France, than the picture of a lilly
crowned with two Marigolds sprouting out of the sides thereof, with these
words, Mirandum naturae opus. Nature is wonderful in her works.

Simul and semper. Together and for ever.


By the tipe of the diamant is understood the love and invincible power of the
king and queen of Navarre: by the sun and moon, the excellency of their
acts, with the constancy and permanence of their mutual faith, and in
dissoluble amity, with this inscription, Simul and semper, that is, live
peaceably together here, and live for ever there.

APAATHS.

Without deccipt or guile.



The armed hand hearing a sword^ with this greek word APAANOS without deceit
or guile, does signify he high Constable to have been most trusty and
faithful to the king both in peace and in wars, and have always disposed
and ordered the affairs of France very happily and prosperously.

Perimit and tuetur. He flayeth and defends.


Setting before my eyes the wisdom and magnanimity of the duke of Guise, I
have invented for his ensign a round shield marked with a crown, and thrust
through with a sword, with these words written round about the same, Peremit and
tuetur. He punishes the wicked, and saves the godly, that it may be known
how valiant he is as well in defending and expugning of cities, as also in
overthrowing and vanquishing of his enemies in wars and fought^n fields.

Consequitur quodcumque petit. She obtains whatsoever she desires.
CONSEQVITVR QVODCVNQV^ PETIT

Diana of Pictauia duchess of the Valentinensis ascribed a dart to her self
(which was the dart of Diana the goddess) with this inscription, Consequitur
quodcunque petit. That is, she obtains whatsoever she wishes for or desires.

Ex vtroque Caefar. By both these Caesar.


By this Apothegme Caesar is understood, namely, how that by these two things,
to wit, Weapons and good letters, having always a watchful eye to the
execution of justice, he became ruler over all the world.

Solatur conscientia and finis. The conscience and the end do comfort a man.


Melphensis a king caused a Li^^ to be pourtraied and set up on high, with
this sentence or posie, Solatur conscie^tia and finis, that is, a good
conscience does comfort a man in hope of the end. To signify, that although he
were deprived of all his riches, and expulsed out of his kingdom, was
notwithstanding content with his fortune, and lived with a good conscience,
knowing that he had well and godly executed his office. and from thence forth
placing all his hope and trust in the mercy of God, after his departure out of
this life.

Scribit in marmore laesus. The wounded man writes in marble.


Some are so puffed up and swelled with pride, trusting to their authority and
riches, that they esteem the poor nothing at all, mocking, deriding, and
iniuring every one of mean estate, persuading themselves that either by reason
of the poverty of their parents and friends, or their own indigencie and
want, they shall never be able to revenge the same, but must quickly forget it.
But these tyra^ts (for that is their proper name) are notably deceived in this
their madness: for time and occasion shall once teach them, that sero sapiunt
phriges, that they with the Phrigians are sorry too late, or else they shall
learn by this present picture of a man writing these words in marble stones,
scribit in marmore laesus. that is, being hurt, he records the same in marble.

Cosi viuo piacer conduce a morte. So does pleasant delights lead to
destruction.


Under the figure of the butterfly, who so much delights in the brightness of
the fire, that of her own accord she casts her self into the same, and so
is burned: may be signified, how that a man who goes about, or affects
every thing without deliberation and choice, gets many times to himself
shame, reproach and destruction withal.

Amico ficto nulla fit iniuria. No wrong to a fained friend.


To him that by all means and policies does feign and dissemble friendship,
agrees most notably the figure of a masker or disguised, man (which
signifies the deceit of the mind) whom another does so wound with a staff,
that he casts down his counterfeit visage, together with these words, Amico
ficto nulla fit iniuria. It is no wrong done to a counterfeit friend.

Ignis gladio non fodiendus. The fire is not to be stirred with a sword.


This present picture of a man stirring the fire with the point of his sword,
so as the sparkles thereof arising, burn out one of his eyes, does signify
and point out unto us the quarrellous and contentious fellows, with this
apothegme out of the life of Pythagoras, Ignis gladio non est fodiendus. The
fire is not to be stirred with a sword.

Statere aerdo non transiliendus. The balance is not to be ouerladen with
weight.


Those that be wicked and of evil conscience, it is most certain, do neither
keep nor observe any mean, and therefore for the most, they prove their end
to be miserable, even as a pair of balance or waights (which the Latins and
the Tuscans call a Statera) if you lade the one more then is convenient with
weight, it straight way breaks in pieces.

Sic vos non vobis. You have the pains, but others have the profit.


If any man will ascribe the memorable exploits of another man to the rulers
or governors, the same may very aptly be expressed by a yoke of oxen drawing
the plowe. With this verse out of Virgil, Sic vos non vobis.

Solus promeritus. One deserves the praise alone.


Upon the other side, if I should invent a sit symbol, to a gentle, noble,
bold, and wise Captain, who moved thereto of his own valor, has sustained
and borne the whole burden of the battle with his own hands (which thing
many of our age have done) I would pourtraie three or four horses running, of
whom one alone should run before all the rest, and first come to the place
appointed, with these words, Solus promeritus, that is, he alone has deserved
the best Imitating herein the custom of the ancient Romans, who exercised
themselves to running in lists, and also the Flotentines, who upon the great
and solemn feast day of Saint John Baptist, do exercise the like riding and
coursing of horses.

Aut Caesar aut nihil. Either Casar or nothing.


Csar Borgia Duke of Valentia, going about to make it known that he had
decreed to bring destruction to the world, or else to do some what worthy of
remembrance, envying Julius Csar for undertaking such high things, used this
Apothegme, Aut Caesar aut nihil, and yt without any other symbol, whereto we
thought good to add this, as if an armed man should be painted, holding in the
one hand the world, figuring as it were the monarchy of Julius Caesar, in the
other hand a paper filled with ooo, which by it self signifies nothing, but
anexed with another figure of Arithmetike, it imports some thing. And surely
it was very significant. For the bold and unwise man at the length brought
himself to nothing indeed, as he was accustomed to say in his Apothegme, for
almost in the midst of his youth he was slain in the kingdom of Navarre. Upon
whose tomb was written this Epitaph:

Borgia Caesar sometime I was,
A Csar right in deed and name,
Either Caesar or nothing i will bring to pas,
both which he was, then died with shame.
Sola facta solum Deum sequor. Being a lone woman, I will follow God alone.


Bone a most famous and noble woman of Sauoy, and moother to John Galeaz Duke
of Milan, after her husbands deceasse, caused a coin to be made (which the
people there do call a testone) upon the one side whereof was a phenixe
pourtraied with these words: Sola facta solum Deum sequor. Signifieng ^^erby,
that as the Phoenix is alone her self in the world, so she being made a widow
by ye death of her husband, voweth her self to live for ever with God alone.

Pas a pas. Foot by foot.


P^natus king of Scicilie desirous to have it known that he conceived hope to
become a mightier prince thou yet he was, and to escape and overcome all
dangers and difficulties, commanded his Ensign or symbol to be pourtraied in
form of an ox, carrying his cognizance upon his neck, with these words
annexed, Pas a pas, Foot by foot, showing thereby, that the ox, albeit very
slowly, does undertake notwithstanding many a great and tedious journey.

Ditat seruata fides. Fidelity inricheth.


A certain man going about to show what loialtie, obedience, and faithful
service, he had performed toward his master, whereby he was greatly
enriched, for his Ensign, pourtraied two hands embracing a certain herb
called Semper viueus (whereby was signified plenty of all things) with these
words, Ditat seruata fides, that is, Loialtie and truth purchases great
riches.

Virescit vulnere virtus. Verity increases when it is oppressed.


A certain other man of a mo^ne estate, being persecuted of envy, through the
common ignorance of men for his virtue and good deeds (as almost all the
godly are) and desiring to signify, that how much the more he was
persecuted, so much the more he would publish and show forth his virtue and
godlynes, pictured a m^n treading under his feet the plant of an hear be,
which the Apothecaries call Acerosa, the Latins Rumice, the Greeks Oxalida,
the Florentins Agrestina, with this sentence, Virescit vulnere virtus, that is,
virtue how much the more it is suppressed, so much the more it flourishes and
increases: following herein the nature of th t hear be, which how much the
more it is trodden upon, so much the more green it is. Which simbole sometime
the Lord Legate of Prat high Chancellor of France used.

Esto tienne su remedio, y non yo. The Heart has his remedy, but scue has
none.


A Heart stroke thorough with an arrow, and eating of a branch or leaf of
Dictanus (which is an herb growing abundantly in Candia, or the Island of
Creta, which being eaten of a heart, his wounds are immediately healed) with this
inscription, Esto tienne su remedio, y non yo, that is, the heart here has
help, but my wound is incurable, may be a figure or simbole of love that can
never be healed: alluding to that verse of Ovid in his Metamorphosis, wherein
Phoebus bewraieth his love toward Daphnes:

Woe to me that haggard love,
which sets our minds on fire,
Cannot be healed by herbs or roots,
nor druggie potions dire.
Ingenium superat vires. Wit or policy excels strength.


Fernandus Consaluus in the last Neopolitan wars, showed himself not only a
noble and valiant Captain, but also very wise and p l ^ike: insomuch that he
at chieued verieth ^^^^plie many great battles, who was so far from fearing
least his policy which he used should be espied, that he gave for his simbole
a bow which was wont to be bent with strings or cords, this apothogme being
added thereto, Ingenium superat vires, Policy is of greater force then
strength.

Qui me alit, me extinguit. He that nourishes me, kills me.


In the exile or bannishment of the Heluetians near Millan, after the deceasse
of Francis their king, the Lord of Saint Valier, the father of the Lady Diana
of Poitiers, Duchess of Valentinois, and governor over an hundredth noble
knights, carried a standard about, wherein was pictured a burning Torch turned
vpside down, the w^xe mel^ing and quenching the same, with this sentence. Qui
me alit, me extinguit, that is, he that feeds me, kills me. Which simbole
was framed for a certain noble woman's sake, willing to insinuate hereby, that
as her beauty and comelines did please his mind, so might it cast him into
danger of his life.

Furor fit laesa sepius patientia. Patience being moved is turned into anger.


Some men are so foolish and rash bold or hasty, as well in words as in
deeds, that they will not stick to anoie the quietest, the modest, and the
godliest men that be: which thing falls out now and then to their own hurt,
is it did once to a young man, who too vehemently pursuing a Ram, was hurt of
him for hi^ labor, proving in deed that this old Adage is true, Furor fit
laesa saepius patitientia, Patience being moved is turned into fury.

Frons hominem praefert. The face shows a man's disposition.


Those that have writ of the secrets of nature, and of the signs of
phisognomie (as Aristotle bears witness) say, that the forhead does show
every man's disposition or inclination. Therefore a narowe slender forehad is a
sign of a foolish man, unclean, and like unto swine, given altogether to the
belly. A forehead too large like an ox, is a sign of a gross and dull wit
and understanding. A forehead long shows a man to be very gentle and docile,
hanging down over the eyes, effeminate and womannishnes. Being round, it
signifies a wicked man and unconstant. Plain and bare, a man ambicious, and
desirous of vain glory. Bald to the midst, a man furious and angry.
Wrinckled or riueled, a heavy and sleepie man. Soft, a man merry, gentle and
pleasant. Being rough, and in some places full of little freckles, or spots, a
crafty man, covetous, and a malicious fool. Polished and as it were hued, and
even, a man secure or careless. Being four square in a reasonable quantity,
a valiant man, wise, and honest: which indices or tokens of the forehead moved
me to invent this simbole, with this posie: Frons hominem praefert, A man's face
shows what he is.

Bis dat qui tempestiue donat. He gives twice that gives in time.


There are some men so hasty, so unadvised, and so unseasonable in doing of
good turns unto others, that how little a man needs their help, so much the
more ready are they to gratify him with gifts, and take great pleasure in
performing the lest point of their duty toward him: and that (as I suppose)
either for that they stand in hope, afterward of reaping some commodity by
them, or else at the least to be repaid again with the most. But if they
chance to epsy the same man f^llen into misery, th^se curssed men will turn
away their faces from him: and if the poor man ask them their help, either
they w^ll cast in his teeth their former be^efites, or else mock and de^ide
the poor wretch, either else they will invent and feign some reason or other,
so that the poor man dares never after come in their sight again. These men
doubtless are not parents, not true friends, nay not men, but rather brute
beasts unworthy to live, who it behooves to look upon, and to remember this
simbole of a noble man indeed, who seeing a poor man fallen down lifted him
up again himself, with this posie, Bis dat, qui tempestiue donat, that is, he
gives twice that gives in time. Because that ought to be counted a double and
immortal merit, which in time of necessity does profit another without any
hope or expectation of reward.

Improbus a nullo flectitur obsequio. The wicked is moved to mercy with no
entretie.


Those that are so cruel. so hard hearted, so austere and wicked, that although
a man give them all obedience, yet will not vouchsafe to show him any
compassion, are worthy truly to have for their simbole the image of death,
who slays all men, even him that prays and beseeches with his hands lifted
up, and knees touching the ground, with these words, Improbus a nullo slectitur
obsequio. The wicked is not moved to compassion by any diligence, obedi^nce, or
petition.

Sic maiora cedunt. Thus the greater gives place.


The Goshauke carried amongst a company of Falcons with this inscription, Sic
maiora cedunt, so great things give place to the small, does signify that
true nobility does not consist in riches, or authority, but in the
excellency of the mind, for such is the nature and property of the Goshauke,
that she delivers all birds far greater then her self out of all dangers
whereto they are subject.

Male parta, male dilabuntur. Things evil got, are as evil spent.


A certain Ape being brought up in a vsuters house, who was altogether
delighted in counting of his money, spying upon a time his master playing, and
toying with his money upon a table, when his master was at dinner he crept in
at a window, and got him to the heap of money, where imitating his master,
after that he had delighted himself enough with turning and tossing the money
to and fro, at the last he began to throw it out at the window into the street
as fast as he could. With which sight, whether the passingers by were more
delighted, or the Usurer grieved, I list not here to debate, having enough to
do to laugh at this usurer, and the like, who heap up great sums of money,
and leave it either to their brother or nephewe, or else to dicers,
whoremasters, gluttons and the like, scarsely ever remembering this excellent
and golden sentence, Male parta, male dilubuntur, Things evil got, are evil
spent.

Expetendae opes vt dignis largiamur. Riches are to be desired, that we may
give to those that deserve.


I have heard that famous noble man, Lord Matthew Balbanus of Lucquois, report
many times of himself, that he prayed God daily to grant him no excess or
abundance of riches, except it would please him to give him also both will and
reason to use them. A desire and petition doubtless, beseeming not only a
private noble man, but also a prince himself: whose gracious favor is so much
the more to be esteemed, how much the more he perf^rmeth the same in effect,
in deed, and in word: at home keeping and maintaining a great number of
learned men, abroad supporting many with great stipends. Wherefore it s^^med
good to us to dedicate this Simbole to him, to wit, the figure of a hand in
the air, pouring out mon^e out of a cup upon a h^lm^t, and a book lying
upon an altar, with these words, Expetendae opes vt dignis largiamur, Riches
are to be d^sired, that we may give them to those that are worthy. The altar
representing the worthiness of men, either in g^od l^tters or in a^mes (which
thing the ^e^m^t and the book do insinuate) and the cup flowing over, does
evidently signify the liberality of a no^le personage.

More sceptra ligonibus aequans. Death makes King Scep^ers equal to poor
men's mattock^s.


Princes, noble men, rich men, and finally all men of what authority or
condition so eve they be, ought diligently to look into this picture of a
Kings scepter, joined with a poor man's mattocke with a deaths head betwixt
them both, with these words: Mors sceptra ligonibus aequans, Death makes
Kings scepters equal to pore men's mattocks.

Ingratis seruire nefas. It is an evil thing to serve an ungrateful person.


This proverb is common every where* Poison lurketh in the tail. Wherefore I
will here make an end of these simboles with this last: wherein I may compare
the ingratitude of some to the viper, who kills the male in copulation, and
is her self killed of the fruit which she conceiueth in her belly. Wherefore
as well she and many other men have just cause to burst forth, into these or
the like complaints, Ingrat^^ seruire nefas, It is a hell to serve the
ungrateful.

FINIS.

