A DECREE OF THE Court of Parliament at Paris, the second day of January, 1615.

Touching the Sovereignty of the King in temporal matters, and against the
pernicious Doctrine of Attempting against the sacred persons of Kings.

TRANSLATED OVT OF THE FRENCH Coppie, Printed at Paris by F. Morell, and P.
Mettayer, Printers to the King.

LVX POST TENEBRAS

Printed at London for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
entrance into the Royal Exchange, 1615.

AN Abstract out of the Records of the Court of Parliament.
WHEREAS the Kings Aturney general has shown unto this Court (all the
Chambers of the same being Assembled) that notwithstanding by many Orders
heretofore given with great and mature deliberation, the Court has confirmed
the Maxims and general rules time out of mind holden in France, and borne
together with the Crown: That is, That the King does acknowledge no superior
in matters temporal within his Realm, but GOD only. And that no Power has
any right or authority to dispense with or discharge his Subjects from the Oath
of Fidelity and Obedience which they owe unto him, neither to svspend, deprive
or depose him from his said Kingdom, mvch less to attempt or cause to be
attempted by authority either public or private, any thing against the sacred
persons of Kings. Nevertheless the said Attorney General has been
advertised, That by diverse Discourses as well in private as in public, many
persons have given themselves Liberty to call in question such Maxims and
General rules to dispute the saine, and to hold them for Questionable,
whereby may arise great inconveniences, against which it is necessary, and
that with Speed to provide Remedy. The said Attorney requyring, That
considering the Court is assembled, It may please the same (all other affairs
set apart) to ordain that the said Orders and Decrees be renewed and
published again in all Courts of Justice appertaining to the same
Jurisdiction, while the Court is sitting, To the end that the minds of all the
Kings Subjects, of what quality or condition soever they be, may remain
confirmed and assured of the said Maxims and Rules: and for the better
security of the kings life, peace, and public tranquillity. Forbidding all
persons to contradict the same, upon the penalties declared in the said
orders. And that it be enjoined to all the Deputies of the said Attorney, to
cause publication thereof to be made, and thereof to certify this Court within
the month, upon pain to be deprived of their Offices.

The Court, all the Chambers being assembled has ordained and does ordain,
that the Decrees made the 2. of December An. Dom. 1561. the nine and twentieth
of December, An. Dom. 1594. the seventh of January, and the nineteenth of July,
Anno Dom. 1595. the seven and twentieth of May, the eight of June, and the six
and twentieth of November. An Dom. 1614. shall be kept and observed according to
the form and Contents thereof: the said Court prohibiting all persons of what
quality and condition soever to contradict the same upon the penalties therein
contained. And to that intent the said Orders and Decrees shall be published
within the precinct of the Bayliffes and Sheriffs Government, Bailliages,
Seneschalses, and other places of Justice of this jurisdiction, by the
diligence and procurement of the Deputies of the said Attorney general, who
shall certitifie this Court of their proceedings therein within the Month, upon
penalty to answer the same in their own persons.

Given in Parliament the second of January, Anno Dom. 1615.

Signed Voysin Secretary, etc
FINIS.

