THE Method of Curing Wounds made by Gunshot. Also by Arrows and Darts, with
their Accidents.

Written by AMBROSE PARIE of Laual, Counselor and chief Chirurgean to the
French King.

Faithfully done into English out of the French Copy, by Walter Hamond
Chirurgean.



London printed by Isaac Iaggard, and are to be sold in Barbican. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, General CECILL.
MY LORD,
THE Commonwealth has been compared by many (and that very fitly) to a
goodly and well-composed Idifice, which consists of many parts, different
both in use and substance; whereof some serve to sustain the weight of the
Building, as Pillars, and such are the Nobility: Others, to contain or keep
the same in an uniformity, as Beams; and such may be compared to the
Magistracy: Others to defend and cover the frame, from the violence of outward
injuries, as Rafters and Posts, which may be referred to the Comminalty. Now,
we do observe, that as in all private Buildings that consists only of these
three parts, they cannot be said to be perfect without other things for
their finishings; whereof some are Ornaments, and serve but to beautifi^;
Others for use and nec^ssity. Even so, in the Public Weal, besides the three
aforesaid principal parts, there are required other several Adjuncts, which
are to be e^teem^d and respected according to th^^r formal or necessary uses.
Amongst the which (Right Honorable) this following Treatise may hold one
chief rank (es^eci^lly in these times) to continue it for occasion. It
received birth from the lamentable experience of the French Civil Wars, by
that famous and renowned Chirurgean AMBROSE PARIE, cherished by diverse Kings of
France: and having been gratefully accepted in most part of our Christian
World, it does now give it self under your Lordshippes protection: put not
into fine and Rhetorical phrases, but into our homespun English; such as best
suiteth with this rough and boisterous subject. C^ncerning the worthiness of
the Author, or worth of the work, my testimony would rather detract then
add. Only thus much, that as amongst all humane sciences Physic is the most
excellent; and in Physic, Chirurgerie is the most Authenticke and ancient; so
this operation is of Surgery the most urgent and necessary, or rather an
Abstract of the whole Art of Chirurgerie.

Against Objection, I have your Lordshippes patronage for my defense, and
therein I shall think my self as safe as in an Armor of proof; knowing that
it is a point of Greatness, as well to defend the weak, as to resist the
strong.

By your Lordships truly devoted, Walter Hamond, Chirurgian.

To his loving Brethren, the young Students and Apprentises in Surgery: More
especially, those that do their Country service o^ the Seas. WALTER HAMOND One
of their society, wishes all increase of Knowledge.
Loving Brethren, and my kind Companions and fellow-Trauellors, you have here
presented unto your favorable acceptance, a Treatise of the cure of Wounds
made by Gunne-shot: the worthiness whereof, I cannot better express, then to
say Parie wrote it; a Man experienced with forty years practice, at that time
when France did most groan under the burden of the uncivil Civil Factions,
bred by her homebred Enemies; wherein there was not any notable assault, siege,
nor battle fought, but Ambrose Parie was chiefly employed about the cure of
wounded soldiers, as he himself testifies in his own Book of voyages and
travels. Accept it therefore thankfully, as a gift from the Author, as it was
first intended. And although it may be objected, that in these peaceable times
this Treatise is of little use, and therefore unprofitable: true it is, and
with thankfulness to be acknowledged, we live in a calm and quiet age, but is
therefore this so necessary and worthy a Document to be neglected? Because it
happens but sildome, we are the more unacquainted with the cure: And as
amongst all the Engi^es that the malice of Man could ever invent for the ruin
of man, Artillery is the cruellest and most dangerous, because that neither
strength or policy are able to prevent the fury thereof: therefore the Method
that reaches us to cure those wounds after so easy and excellent a way as is
here described, must needs be accounted most needful and beneficial. But
howsoever, I do not doubt, but that you my kind friends, who with Galen
travel to benefit your Country, and enrich your experienccs, that you (I say)
do know the use and necessity of this subject. And although there are diverse
extant at this time; yet nevertheless, this does deserve the best place in
your good opinions, because that the translation hereof, was first undertaken
for your sakes only. Farewell.

Walter Hamond Chirurgean.

To his most Worthy, and ever to be respected Master, Arthur Doughton,
Chirurgean. His servant, Walter Hamond, humbly commends and commits this
Treatise of Gunshot, unto his most judicious censure.
SONET.
NOt for you were my Master (though that Name
Shall sway me more then any other can)
Nor out of any private hope, or aim,
More then my duty, I engaged am:
But only for you are a Chirurgean;
And one whose Practice and Experience
(Two things that Crowns the Artists excellence)
Time and the VVarres, by Sea and Land began.
Then since you are most worthy this respect,
I should be too Ungrateful to neglect
Your wel-tride Judgment (though the envious grudge)
Yet if with mildest c^nsure you suruay
This following Treatise, I dare boldly say,
PARIE will have a favorable Judge.
Your Servant W. H.

The Preface.
BEfore I enter into the Description of Wounds made by Gunshot, and the
Curation of them, Intention of the Author.
it seems unto me to be very convenient, (to bring the Reader into an
appetite, before I place him at this Table, served forth in so many several
dishes, seasoned with Saltpeter) to discourse here briefly of the first
Inuentors of this so pernicious and dangerous an Instrument of War: And into
how many kinds it has been diuersified and varied, every kind thereof
having a name imposed thereon, according to his use and hurtful quality toward
Mankind. Polydorus Virgill in his second Book of the Inuentors of things,
Chap. 2. says, that Artillery was first invented by an Alleman of base
condition: and that by a sudden and unexpected Accident. This man borne for the
ruin and destruction of Mankind, having kept in a Mortar for some certain
intention of the aforesaid Powder (which since by reason of the principal use
thereof has been called Gunpowder) the which he covered with a stone: it
happened, that in striking of fire with his Steel and Tinder, a small spark
fell into this Mortar, and presently the Powder having taken fire, the force
thereof did bear away the stone with violence; the which did both astonish and
amaze him, and also taught the force of that comixture not known before: so
that making a little hollow Instrument or Pipe of iron, and composing of the
aforesaid Powder, he made trial of that Engine, and seeing the effect fall out
according to his desire, The Venetians had the first use of Artillery.
he first taught unto the Venetians the use of this deuillish invention, in the
War which they had against the Genowaies in the year of our redemption 1380.
in a place heretofore called the Clodian Valley, but now Chioggia. Diverse
opinions touching the time when Artillery began.
Nevertheless, according to the opinion of Petrus Massa, in the eight Chapter
of the first part of his diverse Lessons, this invention should be more ancient,
because that in the Chronicle of Alphonsus the eleventh King of Castile, who
Conquered the Argezirian Isles, It is recorded that in those wars, which was
in the year 1343. the besieged Moors shot at their enemies out of certain
Mortors of iron the several reports whereof, caused an exceeding horrible
sound in the air, equal unto that of Thunder. The Lord Don Pedro, Bishop of
Leon, in the Chronicle of King Alphonsus he that Conquered Toledo, writes,
that in a battle by sea, which was betwixt the king of Tunis, and the King of
Seuill, a Moore, (it being four hundred years ago and more) whose part the
King Alphonsus favored: those of Tunis had in their ships certain Engines of
iron or Bombards, with the which they shot against their enemies. By this it
appears that Artillery has been heretofore in use, although it never came to
perfection till this present. The inuenter of this engine has had but little
recompense, for his name and profession are altogether unknown to the world,
as being not unworthy of any memory for such a wicked and damnable invention.
Howbeit Andrew The^et in his Cosmographie speaking of the Sweuians, a people
near about the Low Countries, writes out of the authority of an old written
Book, that the aforesaid German had been in former time a Monk, The Author of
Artillery and his name.
Philosopher or Alcumist by profession, of the Country of Fribourg: his name
Constantine Anelzen. Yet howsoever this engine was first called Bombard, by
reason of the sound that it causes: which the Latins conformably do call
Bombus. Since the time of the first invention thereof, being before rude and
imperfect: The time; Art, What things has since bin added to the Artillery.
but above all, the malice of men have added much unto it. For first of all,
for the matter it self, it being first of iron, they have since been cast of
Brass or Copper, Metals more forcible, and tractable: besides less subject
unto rust. Secondly, at the first they were but simply formed, and as it were
but a rude mass of iron; but since they have been diuersified into an hundred
fashions, yea unto the mounting of them on wheels, to the end that they might
be carried with the more swiftness; and as it were run to the ruin and
destruction of men; The first Mortor pieces not being sufficient or cruel
enough to vomit forth fire and shot.

From thence have proceeded these horrible monsters, as Cannons, doubles
Cannons, Bastards, Muskets, Diners names of the Artillery: and whence they are
taken
Fowlers, and Mortar Pieces, etc. These furious beasts of Culuerings,
Serpentines, Basilisks, Sakers, Falcons, Falconnets, Chambers, Murderers, and
infinite other kinds, all of diverse names, not only drawn and taken from
their figure and quality, but also from their effects and cruelty. Wherein
truly they showed themselves wise and understood well the thing they
undertook. I mean those that first imposed such names which are not only
taken from the most ravenous animals, as from Sakers, and Falcons: but also
from the most dangerous enemies of Mankind, as from Serpents, Snakes, and
Basiliskes, to show, that such Engines have no other use; and were not invented
for any other end or intention, but only to destroy suddenly and cru^lly the
life of man: and that hearing them only named, we should have them in horror
and detestation. I omit to speak of other Pieces less in body and substance,
but in force and cruelty more dangerous. For so much as they can take away our
lives near at hand, and may surprise us by treason, being without all means
of prevention: such are the Pistols, Dags, and such like, which easily may be
hidden in a man's pocket. Betwixt these two kinds before spoken of, the
Harquebuz of Crocke holds a mean, the which cannot be shot off unless it be
first bound or fixed in some piece of wood: the Caliuer which cannot be
discharged at the cheek, by reason of their thick and short stocks, but are
held against the breast. Also the common Muskets all: which have been
invented for the commodity of footmen for shot and bullets. The general word
imposed by the Latins is Sclopus, through the imitation of the sound, and by
the Italians Sclopoterre, by the Frenchmen, Harquebuze, a word also taken from
the Italians, by reason of the touchhole, by which the fire first enters into
the Piece: for the Italians call a hole Buzio* and it is called Arc from the
word Arcus a bow, because they are used at this present instead of bows
formerly used in the time of war. For in former time the Archers held the
same Front in the battle, From w^^^ce the word Arquebuz is taken.
which the Musketeers do at this present. From this miserable shop and
Magazin of cruelty have sprung these Mines, Countermines, Fire bals, Fire pots,
burning arrows, Lances, and Crossebowes, murderers, wild Fires, and other
hellish inventions, Bags, Trains, Torches, Circles, Oranges, Grenados,
Crossebowes, Chaineshot, Winged shot, and such like. A most miserable
invention, by the which we sometimes see thousands of poor men in a Mine
pressed to death, and buried quick in the bowels of the earth; Diverse
Ar^if^cers of Fi^.
others in the heat of battle, being surprised with one of the aforesaid
Engines, does burn them so cruelly in their Armor, insomuch that the water it
self cannot restrain and extinguish the fury of that fire. Thus are both the
iron and fire armed against us, to take away our lives through the malice of
men, for the conservation whereof they were at the first created.

Truly when I hear the engines spoken of, used by our Ancients, either in
their wars or assaults: A comparison of the Engines used by our Ancients,
with those of ou^s.
as their Bows, Darts, Crossebowes; or to force and beat down walls, as
their Rams, Horses, and such like: Me thinks I do hear spoken of children
play-games, in comparison of those now in use. The which, to speak properly
and truly, do surpass in figure and cruelty the dreadfullest and cruellest
thing that can be thought on. The Thun^er is not so cruel as the Artillery.
What can be imagined in this world to be more dreadful and furious then the
Thunder? And yet nevertheless, the ordinary and natural Thunder is nothing in
a manner to these infernal engines: which may easily be comprehended by
comparing the effects of the one with the other. Nature would herein-honour and
privilege man in this above all other creatures; for man only dies not
always being struck with Thunder: but to the contrary, How man may be
prese^^ed from Thunder.
other animals that are subject to the Thunder, being touched therewith, do
die suddenly. For all Animalls being struck with Thunder, do fall on the
contrary side: Man only dies not unless he fall on the side stricken, Plin.
lib. ^ cap. 5^.
or by not being presently turned by force from that side: but the Artillery
spares man no more then beasts, without discretion on what side soever it
happened or struck, on what side soever it does reuerse them, it carries away
life and all. There are many remedies to preserve a man from the violence of
Thunder. Pliny lib. 2^ cap. 55.
For besides those charms wherein the ancient Romans put much confidence,
believing that thereby the force of Thunder might be coniured or diuerted. The
Thunderbolts are never seen to descend lower then five foot into the earth;
from thence it comes that those that are fearful of Thunder do make
themselves Caves or hollow Vaults in the earth, therein to retire themselves as
in a place of saftie. It is said also that the Bay tree is never struck with
Thunder, What things are preserved from the force of Thunder.
and therefore in times past, and is at this day taken for a victory.
Wherefore the Emperor Tiberius fearing Thunder exceedingly above all other
things, caused himself to be crowned with a wreath of Bays, at the least
sound he heared in the Air. Sueto. in Tib.
I have read also that others for the like occasion have made themselves Tents
of the skins of Sea-calues, because that this Animal has this gift in
particular, never to be touched by Thunder. The Eagle is said also to have this
privilege above all other fowls, never to be touched by Thunder, and
therefore he is called Jupiters bird, as says Pliny lib. 2. cap. 54. and 55.
But against the Artillery, Charms, and Incantations prevail nothing: neither
the victorious Bays, nor the Sea Calfe, nor any thing whatsoever: no not an
opposed Wall it self, of ten foot in thickness. Briefly, this shows the
invincible fury of Artillery, in respect of Thunder in this. For the Thunder
may be dissipated by the ringing of Bells, Artillery drives away Thunder.
the sound of Basins, or by the discharging of Ordinance: For the concussion of
the clouds meeting together violently, causes the Thunder: and by the
aforesaid agitation of the Air; they are discipated and dispersed. But the
fury and pride of Artillery will not be appeased by any thing whatsoever. There
are some Times and Regions which are exempt and freed from Thunder; The times
which a^e without Thunder.
for Thunder was never seen in the heart of Winter, nor in the midst of Summer,
the which happens by two contrary reasons. For in Winter the Air is very
thick, as also the clouds; and therefore those exhalations of the earth are
easily dispersed and distinguished, being of themselves but cold and glaciall.
From thence it comes to pass that the country of Scithia, and other cold
countries thereabouts, as Tartary, Liuonia, Muscouia, Russia, and other
neighbor countries are exempt from Thunder, as to the contrary, Egypt is seldom
endamaged by Thunder, by reason of the great heat in those part. For the
exhalations and vapors of the earth, which are hot and dry: are converted
through their vehement heat into small clouds, which have no force, as says
Pliny. But as the invention, Lib. 2. cap. 50.
so is the tempest and damage of Artillery, dispersed as a contagious
pestilence over all the earth, and at all times the heavens are sencible of the
complaining cries of those that feel the furious effects thereof. Thunder for
the most part has but one blow, but one bolt, and never kills but one man at
a time. But Artillery at one blow will massacre an hundred men. The Thunderbolt
oftentimes, as being a natural thing, falls as it happens, sometimes on a
rock, sometimes on a mountain, sometimes on a Tower, seldom on a man. But
the Artillery, Design and end of Artillery.
being guided by the wicked dexterity of man, coueteth nothing but man, has
quarrel to none but man, him alone he slays, him alone he chooses among a
thousand other things. The Thunderbolt does a good space of time give us
warning by the voice of Thunder, the forerunner thereof; to advertise us of the
ensuing tempest: but the Artillery it strikes in Thunder, and Thundereth in
striking; sending as soon his mortal bullet into the bowels, as he does his
sound into the ears. This is the reason why we do, and that justly detest the
Author of such a hurtful and pernicious invention: as to the contrary, we
ought to esteem those worthy of great praises, who either by words have
studied to revoke all Kings and Princes from the practice of such a miserable
invention, or by effects and writings have stvdied to ordain and prescribe
remedies to those that have been wounded thereby: the consideration whereof
has been a principal motive to me to write of this matter and subject. But
before my pen shall run in this carriere, I will for the easier understanding
of the ensuing Treatise, which I intend to publish, The reason that moved the
Author to write of Gunshot.
place two discourses in the beginning of the Book; to extirpate certain
ancient opinions out of the fantasies of many, which seem unto me to be
altogether false. Which errors unless they are first convicted; it is
impossible to understand any thing of the essence of this evil, or to do any
profitable action in the cure thereof. The sum contained in the 1. discourse.
The first discourse is addressed unto the Reader, condemning by manifest
reasons, the errors of Vigo, who teaches to cauterize and burn the wounds
made by Gunshot, thinking that they did participate of a certain venenosity,
to the contrary approving, that those that cure those wounds by suppuratiues,
is as salubrious and healthful at that of Vigo is cruel and dangerous. The
sum contained in the 2 discourse.
The second discourse is addressed to King Charles the ninth; upon special
command from his Majesty: showing that the same wounds do not participate of
any venenosity, but that their malignant effects depend wholly on the
corruption of the Air, and the cacochymie or evil quality of the wounded
bodies.

The first Discourse upon Wounds made by Gunshot, and other fiery Engines.
IN the year of our Lord, 1536. the victorious King Frances sent a great Army
unto Piedmont to victual Thurin, and to recover those Towns and Castles which
had been taken by the Marquess Du Guast, Lieutenant General of the Emperor,
where Mounsieur the Constable, then Great Master, was Lieutenant general of
the Army, and Mounsieur de Monte-jan captain general of the Foote-men (of
whom I was then Chirurgian.) A great part of the army arrived at the Pas of
Suze, Pas of Suze.
where we found the enemy keeping the passage, and had made unto themselves
certain Forts and Trenches; in such sort, that before they could be raised from
thence, we entered into battle: in which conflict there was many hurt and
slain, as well on the one side as on the other. But they were enforced to quit
that passage, and to recover the Castle; which they held not long, but were
compelled to give it up; marching away in their shirts only, having each of
them a white wand in their hands: of whom, the most part went to the Castle de
Villane, The Castle de Villane besie^ed and taken.
where there was about some two hundred Spaniards. To this castle my Lord the
Constable drew his forces, because he would make his way clear before him. It
is situate upon a little Mountain, which gives great assurance to those
within, that there can be no Ordinance planted against it to batter it down.
They were summoned to restore it up, or else were threatened to have it battered
in pieces; which they flatly refused: answering withal, that they were as good
and faithful servants to the Emperor, as Mounsieur the Constable was to the
King his Master. Their answer being understood, the same night there was
mounted two great Cannons, by the force of arms with ropes and cords, by the
Switzers, where (as misfortune would) those cannons being planted, a Gunner by
indiscretion fired a barrel of Gun-pouder, wherewith he himself was
extremely burned, together with ten or twelve soldiers. Moreover, the flame
of the powder was the cause of the discovery of the Ordinance, whereby those of
the castle the night following discharged their Ordinance at that place where
they discovered our cannons; in so much, that we had many of our men hurt and
slain.

The morrow after, very early we began the battery, and in few hours after the
breach was made; which those of the castle perceiving, desired a parley, but it
was too late; for in the mean time some of our footmen perceiving them to be
astonished, mounted the Breach, and entered the castle, putting every man to the
sword, except only a certain beautiful Piedmontese, which a great Lord
entertained into his service. The Captain and Ancient were taken alive, but
were presently after hanged on the gate of the Town, to terrify the rest of
the Emperors soldiers, not to be so foole-hardy to hold such places against so
great an Army. Now the soldiers of the castle seeing our men rushing in upon
them in such great fury, made all the resistance they could to defend
themselves, in killing and wounding a great number of our soldiers with their
Pikes and Muskets; where the Chirurgians had a great deal of work cut out to
their hands.

I was at that time but a young Chirurgian, The Author enters into the matter.
and but little experienced in the Art, because I never (as yet) had seen the
curation of any Wounds made by Gunne-shot. True it is, that I had read John de
Vigo his first book of wounds in general, chap. 8. where he says, That
those wounds made by fiery Engines, do participate of venenosity, because of
the Powder; and for their curation, he commands to cauterize them with the
Oil of Elders mixed with a little Treacle: yet nevertheless, because I would
not be deceived, before I would use of the aforesaid boiling oil, knowing that
it brought with it extreme pain to the Patient, I observed the method of the
other Chirurgians in the first dressing of such wounds; which was by the
application and infusion of the aforesaid Oil as hot as possibly they could
suffer it, with Tents and Setons: wherefore, I became emboldned to do as they
did. But in the end my oil failed me, A remedy found by accident.
so that I was constrained to use in steed thereof, a digestive made of the
yolke of an Egg, Oil of Roses and Terebinth. The night following, I could
hardly sleep at mine ease, fearing lest that for want of cauterizing, I should
find my Patients on whom I had not used of the aforesaid Oil, dead and
impoysoned; which made me to rise early in the morning to visit them: where
beyond my expectation, I found those on whom I had used the digestive Medicine,
to feel but little pain, and their wounds without inflammation or tumor,
having rested well all that night. The rest, on whom the aforesaid Oil was
applied, I found them inclining to Feauers, with great pain, tumor, and
inflammation about their Wounds: then I resolved with my self, never to burn
so cruelly the wounded Patients by Gunshot any more.

When we entered Thurin, I was told of a Chirurgian who was exceeding famous,
especially for his curing wounds made by Gunshot, with whom I found the means
to acquaint my self: yet it was near two years and a half before he would
acquaint me with his Medicine which he called his Balm. In the mean time,
Mounsieur the Marshall of Monte-jan, who was Lieutenant General of the King in
Piedmont died: then I told this Chirurgian, that I had a desire to return to
Paris, withal requesting him, that he would perform his promise; which was, to
give me the receipt of his Balm, which he willingly did, seeing that I was to
leave that country. He sent me to fetch him two young whelps, one pound of
earth-wormes, two pounds of the oil of Lillies, six ounces of the Terebinth of
Venice, and one ounce of Aqua-vitae: and in my presence he boiled the whelps
alive in the said Oil, until the flesh departed from the bones. Afterward,
he took the worms (having before killed and pu^ified them in white wine, to
purge themselves of the earth which they have always in their bodies:) being
so prepared, he boiled them also in the said Oil till they became dry, this he
strained thorough a Napkin, without any great expression; that done, he added
thereto the Terebinth, and lastly, the Aqua-vitae; and called God to witness,
that this was his Balm which he used in all wound^ made by Gunshot, and in
others which required suppuration; withal praying me not to divulge his secret.

From thence I returned to Paris, where shortly after Mounsieur Siluius
Lecturer of the King in Physic, a man greatly esteemed among learned me^,
requested me one day to dine with him, which I did willingly; where he asked
me many Questions, and among the rest, of the essence of wounds made by
Gunshot, and of the combustions made by Gun-pouder. Whereupon, I presently
proved unto him, that the powder was not any thing venomous at all; Gunpouder
not venomous.
because that no Simple that enters therein is any way venomous, much less
the composition. Also I have seen by experience, that some soldiers being
hurt, will take of the said powder in Wine, saying; That powder so taken, does
preserve the body from the ensuing accide^ts, the which I approve not. Also
others having ulcers on their bodies, do commonly use of the said powder dry,
and heal them without any danger at all. And as for the Bullets they cannot
contain any such heat that they should have the faculty of burning: for a
bullet being shot against a stonewall, it may presently be held in the naked
hand, although the collission made against the Stones, Wounds made by gu^shot
are without combustion
should in reason heat it the more: and as for combustions or burnings made by
Gunpowder, I never found any particular accident in it, whereby the cure ough^
to be diuersified from the cure of other combustions. Whereupon, I related
this History. History.
A certain boy of the Kitchen, of Mounsieur the Marshall de Monte-jan, fell
into a Caldron full of Oil almost boiling hot; to dress whom being sent
for, I went presently to an Apothecarie, demanding of him such cooling
Medicines which are commonly applied unto burnings: an ancient country-woman
being by, hearing me speak of this burning, counseled me to apply for the
first dressing (to prevent the rising of Pustules or bladders) of raw Onions,
bruised with a little salt. I demanded of this woman whether she had ever made
experience of that Medicine before: she presently swear unto me in her
language, Yea Sir, by the Faith of God.
Si mess, a lafe de de; which did incite me to make experience hereof on this
Scullion of the kitchen, where truly I found the morrow after, that in those
parts where the Onions had touched, to be altogether free from vessickes or
blisters, and the other parts where the Onions were not applied, to be much
blistered.

Not long after, a certain Dutchman, one of the Guard of the said Lord de
Monte-jan, Histo^ie.
having drunk hard, by indiscretion set his Flaske afire, which caused a great
disaster both to his hands and face; and being called to dress him, I applied
of the said Onions on the one half of his face; and on the other side, of
other common remedies. At the second dressing, I found that part where I had
applied the Onions to be altogether without blisters or any excorlation, and
the other altogether blistred: then I first purposed to write of the effect of
the said Onions.

Moreover, I told unto the said Syluius, How the patient ough^ to be s^tuate
in the extraction of Bullets.
that for the better extraction of bullets which are hidden in any part of the
body, it is requisite the patient should be placed in the same situation that
he was in at that time when he was wounded. Many other things I discovered
unto him, which are contained in this Book following. My discourse ended, he
prayed me very earnestly that I would publish it by writing; to the end, that
that false opinion of Vigo might be altogether abollished the which I willingly
consented unto, and caused many instruments to be cut, such as had not been
divulged, for the extraction of bullets, and other unnatural things out of the
body. And it was first imprinted in the year 1545. and well received, which
caused me to renew it again, and publish it the second time, in the year
1552. and lastly, in the year 1564. where I have enriched it with many other
things, because I have since followed the wars, have been in many battles,
and besiedged Towns, as in Metz and Hedin. Also I have been entertained into
the service of five Kings, where I have always discoursed with the most
excellent Physicians and Chirurgians of those times, to learn and discover if
there were any other Method or way to cure those wounds made by Gunne-shot;
whereof the most part (especially those that have followed the wars, and are
guided by reason and experience) are of my opinion, which is to use
Suppuratiues in the beginning, and not boiling oils. And I did protest
moreover to the said Syluius, that I have found those wounds as easy to cure
(being in fleshy parts) as all other great contused wounds are. But where the
bullet meets with the bones and neruous parts, it teareth, dilacerateth,
breaks, The cause that makes wounds by Gunne shot hard to be cured.
breaks, and shiuereth in pieces, not only where it touches, but also the
circumiacent parts, without any mercy; causing great accidents which happen
specialy in the iounctures or joints, and in bodies of evil constitution, and
in times subject to corruption; that is to say, where the air is hot and
moist, then is the cure most difficult, and oftentimes impossible; not only of
wounds made by Gunshot, but also of those which are made by other instruments,
yea, though they were but in fleshy parts.

Therefore, the aforesaid accidents do not proeeede from the venenosity which
is in the powder, or by the combustion or burning of the Bullet. For proof
whereof, History.
I will allege this observation which I have experimented not long since on
the person of the Earl of Courdon, Lord of Achindon, a Scottishman, whom I
cured by the commandment of the Queene-mother, who was hurt with the shot of a
Pistol clean through both the Thighs, without fracture of the bones; he
standing so near the mouth of the Pistol, that the fire took hold of his
breeches; nevertheless, he was perfectly cured in two and thirty days,
without a Fever or any other evil accident. I dressed him at Sir John de
Latran, in the house of the Arch-byshoppe of Glasco, then Ambassador for
Scotland, who came every day to see him dressed. Moreover for testimony, I could
produce Mounsieur Brigard, Doctor Regent in the Faculty of Physic, who was
an assistant with me: together with James Guillemean Chirurgian to the King,
and sworn at Paris, who was with me until his perfect curation. The same
likewise Mounsieur Hanti^, Doctor Regent in the faculty of Physic can
testify, who sometimes came to see him. Also Giles Buzet, Scotchman and
Chirurgian, every of them meruailing how he became so soon cured without the
application of hot and sharp Medicines. Now the reasons wherefore I have made
this little Discourse, is to demonstrate that it is above thirty years ago,
since I first found out this manner of curing wounds made by Gunne-shot,
without the use of boiling Oils, or any other sharp or burning Medicines,
unless I was constrained to use them for such accidents which happened in
Cacochymed bodies, or through the evil disposition and malignancie of the
air, as I will show more amply in this Discourse following, which I made unto
the deceased King, after the taking of Roan.

Another Discourse, being an Answer unto a certain Demand propounded by the
victorious Prince Charles the ninth, as touching the quality and Essence of
Wounds made by Gunshot at his Majesty's return from the siedge, and taking
of the Town of Roan.
IT one day pleased your Majesty, Occasion of this discourse.
together with the Queen Mother, my Lord the Prince of La Roche-sur Yon, and
many other Princes and great Lords, to demand of me how it came to pass that
in these last Wars, the most part of such Gentlemen and Soldiers, who were
wounded by Gunshot, and other instruments of war died, or were very hardly
recovered from their diseases, although the wounds which they received were but
of small appearance, and the Chirurgians which were employed for their cures,
did perform their duties according to Art; I have been the bolder to publish
this discourse, to satisfy in some measure the duty of my Ar^, and that my
profession might not be spo^ted with the least dishonor, and that your Majesty
might understand the reasons which might have been the cause of the death of
so many valiant men; the most part of whom I have seen (to my great grief) to
finish their days pitifully, without any possibility in me, or any other
more experienced then my self to give them remedy.

^^sinuation into the good accept^nce of those who are of the contrary opi^ion.
I know that this following discourse will astonish some, who reposing
themselves upon their own particular opinions, and not examining the matter
deeply, will find the first front of my disputation very strange, because
that the contrary has been so long imprinted in their fantasies. For I do
hold, that the cause of the malignancy of wounds by Gunshot, not to proceed
from any poison or venomous quality in the powder (as they imagine) or from
the bullet it self, being rubbed or infused in any venomous mixture.
Nevertheless, if their meekness and patience will extend so far, as first to
weigh the motives which first moved me to undertake this subject, which was a
zeal of the public good; toward the which the Law of Nature binds me to
show the utmost of my power in such things which the singular providence of God
has revealed unto me. And secondly, that they will examine with judgment the
reasons which I shall use in this present Treatise, then I shall be sure, they
will both accept my labors thankefully, and free it from all future calumny;
otherwise they will show themselves to be so ^uill affectioned toward me, as
if I should present my self before them, enriched with all the treasures of
the ancient Philosophers, and they should place me in the number of the
poorest and ignorantest men in the world. To prevent therefore all the
arguments of venom and poisoning, which the adversaries here above mentioned
may allege, I will make it plain unto your Majesty, that such as are wounded
by gunshot, The Author proposes two points, which h^e would refute. viz. the
poison of the powder and the Fire of the Bullet.
I say the malignancie of such wounds not to proceed from the venom of the
Powder, being of it self simply considered: and much less from the combustion
or cauterization which the Bullet so heated by the fire of the powder can make
in those parts, which it rendeth and dilacerateth thorough the violence
thereof: although nevertheless some do strive to maintain; alleging for all
reasons, that a certain Tower full of powder has heretofore been seen
ruinated in an instant, only by the means of a Cannon shot. Also of a
Thatcht house set on fire with a Musket shot. Moreover, because that such
wounds which are made by Gunshot, we commonly behold their Orifices and
other circumiacent parts so black, as if an actual Cauter had passed thereon.
As also the fall of a certain escarre, as they say. Al which arguments are so
ill framed, that they deserve no authority being built on so slender a
foundation: much less that the resolution of your demand should be taken from
them, as I trust to give you plainly to understand in the disputation
following. The which (after I had seen a great number of those wounds, and
diligently observed them, handling them according to the Method) I have
collected from the ancient Philosophers, Physicians, The present disputation is
taken from Philosophers, Physicians, and Chirurgians
and Chirurgians to present unto your Majesty, and to withdraw your mind from
the admiration of the lamentable deaths of so many brave Gentlemen and
Soldiers.

Now to enter into the matter proposed, and to answer the arguments before
alleged, we are first to examine whether there be any poison enclosed in the
powder, or no: And if there be, whether it may infect by means of the
pretended poison thereof. Which that it may appear plainly, we must search
into the composition of the said powder; considering that it is not of
substance simple, but compound: and so by examining the nature of such Simple
which enter into the composition thereof; I mean their qualities, effects, and
operations, we shall the sooner attain to the scope and intention pretended.

As for the Simples, it is a most assured thing that there are but three in all
which make the composition thereof, The composition of the powder.
that is to say, Coals of Willow or Birch, Sulphur, and Saltpeter, and
sometimes Aqua-vitae: the which ingredients severally considered, are
altogether exempt and free from poison, or any venomous quality. And first for
the coals, there is not any thing considerable in them, unless it be a drying
quality, of subtle substance, by means whereof it is apt to take fire, even as
a Linen cloth burnt into Tinder does the sparks that fall from a Flint stone.
Sulphur is hot and dry, nevertheless not excessive, and of a more oily and
viscuous substance, yet not so easy to inflame as coals, although it does
retain the fire more forcibly when it is once inflamed, and is very hardly
extinguished. As for the Saltpeter, it is such, Saltpeter is salt of stones.
that many make use thereof insteede of salt. Now let us examine whether there
be any venenosity in the nature of these Simples, namely, in that of Sulphur,
which is the most suspected. Dioscorides in his fifth Book, chap. 37.
prescribes it to be taken in an Egg, in the astmaticke passion, coughes, and
to such which spit matter, and those that have the Iaundise. And Galen in the
9. Book of his Simples, Cap. 36. ordains it as a topicall remedy, unto such
who are bitten with venomous beasts; and in all malignant practices or
itchings; as for the Aquavitae, it is a thing so subtle, that it will euaporate
if it be set in the air, besides it is used by most Chirurgians inwardly in
drinks, and outwardly in embrocations as a most singular Medicines. These
things considered, makes me to affirm, that the whole composition of powder
is altogether free from venom or poison, seeing that the ingredients are
altogether clear from the least touch in that kind. Moreover, I have observed
it to be the practice of the Hollanders being wounded by Gunshot, to dissolve
two charges of powder in wine, and to drink it off, hoping by that means to be
freed from all future accidents which might happen unto their wounds (although
I do not approve thereof, because it is a most insufficient remedy.) Also, such
Ulcers which are made through the combustion of powder, are of no other nature
then those that are made by fire, or scalding water. But wherefore should I
allege any foreign example? Do we not see among our own soldiers, I do
not know on what occasion, but only to show themselves brave fellows, to
empty their charges of powder into their cups, and drink it without any
inconvenience at all; and others likewise being hurt on any part of their
bodies, will apply of the same on their Ulcers to dry them, and find much
profit by it. Refutation of those that affirm the Bullet to be impoisoned.
As for those which do affirm that it is not in the powder, but the Bullet,
which being subtly pierced in many places, or filled up with venom, or
steeped, rubbed, or mixed with any poison, causes the aforesaid dangerous
accidents? To such I answer without further trouble, that the fire set to the
powder, is sufficient to purify the poison of the Bullet, if any there were*
the which cannot be done by impoysoned swords, Pikes, Arrows, and such like,
because they pass not through the action of the fire. Briefly to confirm my
opinion to be true, there is not any one of those that were in your Majesty's
Camp^ at Roan, that does not assuredly know, that those Bullets which were
shot against those of the town to be altogether free from poison.
Nevertheless, the besiedged Townsmen affirmed, that all those Bullets were
poisoned. Also the Soldiers of your Majesty's Camp had the same opinion of
such Bullets which were shot at them out of the Town, that they were all
impoysoned by them; rather believing and judging of the quality of the wounds
by their ill success; then by the Causes whereby they were made.

True it is, that as in Physic according to the sentence of Hippocrates in
the Epidemies; as Gale^ notes on the 20. sentence, and the 71. of the 3 Sect.
of the 3. Book, all diseases are called Pestilentiall and venomous, being excited
from common and general causes of what kind soever they be, and such kill
many persons: so in the like manner, we may call such wounds which are made by
gunshot venomous, which are more difficult to heal then others; not because
they do participate of any venonosity, but from some general cause depending
either from the Cacochimie of the body, putrification of the air, or the
corruption of the victuals, whereby those Ulcers are brought to be more
malignant Cacoethes, and rebellious to al Medicines.

To affirm that it is only the combustion of the Bullet which causes the
aforesaid danger, Refutation of those that affirm that the Bullet causes
co^bustion.
I cannot conceive their reasons, seeing that the Bullet is for the most part
made but of Lead, and therefore unable to endure any great heat, without being
altogether dissolved, the which we nevertheless see to pass through a coat
Armor, and to penetrate the body through and through, and yet to remain
whole. Moreover, we do observe, that if a Bullet be shot against a stone, or
against any solid matter, it may in the same instant be handled of us in our
hands, without feeling any notable heat, although the violent striking and
colli^sion made against the stone, should in reason increase the hea^e, if any
there were. And which is more, if a Bullet be shot against a bag full of
powder, the fire will not endanger it. This I dare be bold to say and affirm
moreover, that if a quantity of powder should take fire being kept in a Tower,
or any other place, by the means of a Bullet shot, it was not the heat of the
Bullet, but rather the violent striking of the Bullet against the stones of the
said Tower, which might cause sparks of fire to fall among the powder, even
as the smiting of a steel against a flint stone. The like we may judge of such
Thatcht houses which have been set on fire by a Musket shot, to have rather
proceeded from some wad either of Tow or Paper, ram'd in with the powder, and
so fired with it. But that which does most confirm me in the assurance of my
opinion, is, that if a bal of wax be shot out of a Muske^, An example of a ball
of wax.
it feels no force of fire at all, for then it would melt; nevertheless it
will pierce an inch board. An argument of sufficient weight to prove that the
Bullet cannot be so extremely heated by the force of the Powder, that they
should cauterize and burn, as many have esteemed. And as for that blackness,
which is ordinarily found to be about the Orifices of such wounds, and other
ad^acent parts. I say that this accident does not proceed from any quality
of fire accompanying the Bullet, but because of the great contusion which it
makes. Whence it p^o^e^deth* that wou^d^ m^de by Gunshot are ^^dinarily black.
For it cannot enter into the body otherwise then by an extreme and incredible
force, because it is of a round figure. Upon this point, if the wounded
persons themselves be demanded, I believe they will testify the truth of my
saying; because they are no sooner struck with the bullet, but they feel in
the same instant, as if a club or some heavy burden were fallen upon the
offended part, in the which they feel a heavy pain, with a benumbed
stupifaction of the part; which dissipateth and sometimes extinguisheth the
natural heat, together with the spirits contained therein: from whence there
follows oftentimes a Gangrene and mortification of the part, yea sometimes of
the whole body. And as for the Escarre which they affirm there to be, and fall
away as they say, they do abuse themselves: for it is only some certain
portion of the Membranes and contused flesh, dilacerated by the Bullet, which
becomes corrupted, and so separateth it self from the sound parts which are
greatly contused.

Although that these Reasons do make it manifest enough, Reasons of those of
contra^y opinion
that there is no venomous quality in the powder, nor action of fire carried
with the Bullet, nevertheless many building their opinions upon natural
Philosophy, do maintain the contrary, affirming that Cannon shot is like unto
the claps of Thunder which burst forth of the clouds in the middle Region of
the air* and so fall violently on the earth. From the which similitude they
would infer and conclude, that there is both fire, and a venomous quality in
the Bullet, as it proceeds out of the mouth of the Cannon. I know (I thank
God) that Thunder being ingendered from a gross and viscuous exhalation, by
means of vapor conjoined with it, does never break forth of the clouds to
penetrate here below, but it draws and brings immediately with it a
certain fire, sometimes more subtle, sometimes more gross, according to the
diversity of the matter, whereof the exhalation is composed. For Seneca
writes in the second book of his natural questions, Seneca. 3. kinds of
Thunders.
chapter 49. that there are three kinds of Thunders all differing the one from
the other, according to the quantity and manner of their inflammation. The
first, by reason of the matter thereof, it being most thin and subtle, it
does pierce and penetrate suddenly the Obiectes which it touches. The second
kind, by reason of the violence thereof, breaks and dissipateth the same
things because that the matter thereof is more violent, and compact as a
Tempest. The third sort being composed of a more earthy matter, burns with
manifest tokens of the heat thereof. I also know, that the Thunder is of nature
Pestilentiall and faetide, because of the gross and slimie matter thereof;
which being burned, leaves behind it such a stinking savor, that all animals
do so much avoid it, that if it do happen to fall into their dens, or other
places of haunt, they will utterly abandon and forsake such places; so much do
they hate the infectious stink of that poison. The same is noted by Olaus
Mag^us, in his Septentrionall History, that in certain places where Thunder
has fallen, presently after the fall thereof, the fields have been found
afterward to be covered and strewed over with sulphur, nevertheless
unprofitable, and almost extinguished. For all these reasons, I must not
confess that the blows of Gunshot are accompanied with poison and fire, as
the claps of Thunder a^e. Answer to the contrary Reasons.
For although they do agree the one with the other, in some similitude, it is
not therefore in their substance and matter, but rather in the manner which they
have to batter, te^re, and dissipate the objects which they mere with, that is
to say, the claps of Thunder through the force of fire; and of the bolt or
stone sometimes engendered therein: and the blows of Gunshot by the means of
the air forced away by impetuosity, and so conducting the Bullet causes the
like disaster. What if I should be convicted by stronger arguments, so that I
were enforced to anouch that* Thunder and the Cannon to be of like substance;
yet I should never be forced to say, that the shot of Cannons and Muskets do
participate of a fiery quality. Pliny says in the second Book of his History,
and the 51. chapter, that among Thunder one kind is composed of a marvelous
dry matter, dissipating all such things it meets withal, nevertheless
without any sign of burning: others, of a more humid nature, which in like
manner burns not: but blacketh and discoloureth much more then the first. And
others are composed of a very clear and subtle matter: the nature whereof is
most marvelous, for so much that it is not to be doubted (as Seneca has well
said) that there is therein a certain divine virtue: A marvelous effe^t of
Thunder.
and it is in melting Gold or Silver in a man's purse, the purse it self not
being so much as touched therewith. Also in melting a sword, the scabberd
thereof remaining whole. Also in dissoluing into drops the Iron head of a
Pike, without burning, or so much as heating the wood. In shedding the wine
out of a vessel, without burning or breaking of the caske. According to the
aforesaid testimony I can assure you, and that without any prejudice, that
those Thunders which only break and dissipate without any burning; and such
which leave effects full of great admiration, not to be much unlike in substance
to the Cannon shot, and not those which carry immediately with them the action
of fire. To prove my saying, this one example shall suffice. Example.
A certain soldier received a wound in his Thigh with a Musket shot, from
when I extracted a bullet; the which being wrapped in the Taffatie of his
breeches, made a very deep wound. Nevertheless I drew it forth of the wound
with the same Taffatie, it being without any sign of burning.

And which is more, I have seen many men, who not being shot, nor any thing
touched therewith, unless it were in their apparel only, have received such
an astonishment by a Cannon shot that only past near them, that their members
thereby have become black and liuid; and shortly after have fallen into a
Gangrene and mortification, whereof in the end they have died.

These effects are like unto those of the thunder before spoken of.
Nevertheless, there is not in them any fire or poison: which makes me
conclude, that there is no poison in the common and ordinary powder. Seeing
therefore that this disaster was common to all those which were hurt in these
last wars, and yet neither by fire or poison that so many valiant men died.
To what cause may we impute this evil? I am so confident of the true cause my
Liege, that I hope presently to make your Majesty understand the same, to the
end that your demand may be fully satisfied.

Those which have consumed their age and study in the secrets of natural
Philosophy, have left us this among other things for authentic and approved
of all times. Which is, that the Elements do symbolize in such sort the one
with the other, that they do sometimes transform and change themselves the
one into the other in such sort, that not only their first qualities, which
are heat, coldness, d^inesse and moisture: but also their substances are
changed by rarification or condensation of themselves; so the fire does
convert it self ordinarily into air, the air into water, the water into
earth; and contrariwise the earth into water, the water into air, and the ai^e
into fire. The which we may daily behold and prove it by those bellows of
Copper which the Dutchman brings us, being composed in the form of a Boll, the
which being filled with water, and having but one hole in the midst of the
Sphericall form thereof, receives the transmutation of the water within it
into air through the action of the Fire, near unto the which the Boll must be
placed; and so thrusts the air forth of it with violence, making a
continual noise or sound until all the air be gone forth of it. The like may
be known by Eggs or Chestnuts: for either of them being put into the fire
before they are cracked, or the Rindes broken, presently the watery humidity
contained in them does convert it self into air, thorough the action of the
fire: and the air in making his passage bursteth the shell, because it
occupyeth more place being in the form of air, into the which it was changed
by rarification caused by the fire, then it did under the form of water; and
not finding passage is constrained to make one by violence, according to the
proposition held for most certain among all Physicians; that is to say, of
that one part of Earth is made ten of water: and of one part of water is made
ten of air, as of one part of air ten of fire. I do say and affirm so much
of the matters contained in the said Gunpowder, which by means of the fire
is converted into a great quantity of air; the which because it cannot be
contained in the place where the matter was before the tran^mutation thereof,
is compelled to issue forth with an incredible violence: by means whereof, the
Bullet breaks, shiuereth and rendeth all that ever it meets with, yet does
not the fire accompany it. Even as we see a Bow, or a Sling shoot forth an
arrow or stone, without any air at all. But the bullet drives before it such
a subtle wind, and so swiftly agitated that sometimes the very wind it self
without the action of the bullet causes strange and wonderful effects. For
sometimes I have known it make a fracture in the bones without any division of
the flesh. The effect ^f Artillery like to the Thunder.
And herein it may be compared as we said before unto the effect of Thunder:
even so we see, that if the said powder be enclosed in Mines and Vaults of
the earth, and being converted into air through the action of the fire set
unto it, how it does ruinate and reuerse huge masses of earth almost as big
as Mountains. Also in this year, in your Majesty's Town of Paris, a certain
quantity of powder, bur newly ma^e in the Arcenall, by taking fire caused such
a great Tempest, that the whole Town shook at it: for with an horrible fury it
leuelled with the Earth all the houses near unto that place, and discovered
and battered down the windows of all those houses that stood within the fury
of it. And to be brief (even as a ^lap of Thu^der) it did reuerse here and
there many men half slain; ta^ing ^way from some their eyes* from others
their hearing, and left others no less torn and mangled in their members,
then if four horses had drawn them in pieces: and all this by the only
agitation of the air, into which substance the powder was converted. The
which, according to the quantity and quality of the matter thereof, and
according to his motion, either mo^e or less violent, has caused so many
won^erfull accidents in our Provinces; altogether like unto those which are
caused through the enclosing of winds in the bowels and cauities of the earth
not being perspirable. The which st^^uing to have vent, blows with such a
strong and violent agitation, that they make the ear^h to tremble and quake
thereat: thereby debo^lishing Cities, and ruinating buildinges, and
transporting them from one place to another. As the Towns of Megara and Egina,
anciently much celebrated in the Country of Greece, perishing by Earthquakes
can witness unto us.

I omit to discover (as but little serving to our purpose) how the wind
enclosed in the Entrails of the Earth, makes a noise of d^uers sounds, and
very strange according to the diverse forms of the conduits and passages through
the which it yssueth by, even after the manner of Musical Instruments; the
which being large, do give a great and base sound, and being narrow do make
high and sharp notes, and being crooked or replied mak^ diverse sounds; as we
see by experience in the Huntsmans horn, and in Trumpets, the which also being
moystened with water, do make a hollow gurguling sound.

In like manner, these noises, murmurings, and clamors are sundry ways
diuersified, according to the places whence they proceed* in such sort, that
sometimes has been hard a clamorous cry, representing (as it seemed) the
assault of a City, the cries and lowings of Bulls, or the neighing of Horses,
roaring of Lions, sound of Trumpets reports of Artillery and many other
dreadful things; yea sometimes humane voices. As it is reported by one, who had
heard a voice (as it were) of a woman a beating, Diverse sounds yssuing out of
the veins of the earth.
which made (as he imagined) such a woeful and grievous lamentation, whereby he
became so greatly affrighted, that he had scarsely breath sufficient to make
this report. But when he had well understood the cause of this plaintiue
voice, he was presently delivered from that fear^, which otherwise might have
killed him.

But some perhaps will say, that these things have always been, and no less
ordinary in the times past, then they are at this present: and therefore it is
a great folly in me to allege them, for efficient causes of the death of so
many men. The which imputation I should freely confess, if I should present
them for such: but seeing that by them I would only parallel and compare the
impetuosity of Artillery with that of Thunder, and the motions of the earth;
which being so, it will appear that it makes nothing against my first
intention, as I hope to demonstrate clearly, that I am slandered without a
cause, if you please to give care to the deduction following. In the which, I
will plainly and briefly describe the true causes of the late mortality which
happened among your Highness Soldiers.

Amongst the things necessary for our lives, there is nothing that can more
alter our bodies then the Air; The true explicauo^ of the question.
the which continually (willing or unwilling) we inspire by those Cond^ites
which Nature has appointed for that end; as the mouth, the nose, and generally
through all the pores of the skin and Arteries therein infixed, whether we
ea^e, drink, watch, or sleep, or do any other action, whether Natural,
Vital, or Animal. From thence it comes, that the air inspir^d into the
Lungs, the Heart, and the Brain, and universally in all the parts of the body
to refresh and in some measure to nourish the same, is the cause that a man
cannot live one minute without inspiration; according to the which wonderful
benefit, the excellent Physician Hippocrates has pronounced and that truly,
Hyp in the Prefa^e of ^is Prognest
that the Air has a kind of Divinity in it; because that in breathing and
blowing over all parts of the world universally, it does circumuolue all things
therein contained; nourishing them myraculously, strengthening them firmly, and
maintaining them in an amiable Union, altogether symbolizing with the stars and
Planets; into the which the divine providence is infused; which changes the
air at his pleasure, and gives it power not only over the mutation of times
and seasons, but also of the alteration of natural bodies. And therefore the
Philosophers and Physicians have expressly commanded, that we should have a
principal regard unto the situation and motions of the heavenly bodies, and
constitutions of the air, when the preservation of health, or the curation of
diseases are in question: but especially the course and mutation of the Air is
of great power, as we may easily judge by the 4. seasons of the year. For the
Air being hot and dry in Summer, Hyp. in the beginning of his book de Aere
locis et aquis.
our bodies in like manner does thereby become heated and dried: and in winter
the humidity and coldness of the air does likewise fill our bodies with the
samequailities; in such order nevertheless, and in so good a disposition of
nature, that although our temperatures seem to be changed according to the
four seasons of the year, we nevertheless receive no harm thereby, if
those times do keep their seasons and qualities f^ee from excess. But to the
contrary, if the seasons be so perverted that the Summer is cold, and the
Winter hot, and the other sea^ons in the like distemperature, this discord
brings with it a great perturbation both in our bodies, and in our spirits,
constrained nevertheless to receive the danger, by reason that the causes are
extreme, and do on every side enco^passe us; so that we are constrained to
lodge it in us by those Organes and Con^uits appointed by nature to that end;
The alienati^n of (...) cause of diseases.
as par^ly, to expel the superfluous excrements of our nourishment, and partly
to receive the said external causes, which is the air or wi^^e, producing in
us diverse effects, according to those parts of the world from whence they do
proceed. For it being so that the Southerly winds are ^ot and moist; that of
the North cold and dry; the Easterly winds for the most part are clear and
pure; and the Westerly cloudy, and subject unto rai^e; yet it is a most assured
thing, that the Air which we do inspire continually, holds in all, and
through all the quality that is most predominant. And therefore we should of
necessity consider in all diseases, and the inconveniences which happen
therein, the quality of the winds and the power which they have over our
bodies; as Hippocrates has learnedly left us by writing, in the 3. Book of
his Aphorisms, Chap. 5. and 17. saying, That our bodies do receive a great
alteration through the vissitude of the times and seasons of the year. As by
the South Wind our bodies are subject to all diseases, because that moisture is
their primitive cause* it also weakeneth our natural heat, the which in the
opposite case is much fortified through a cold and dry wind, which also makes
our spirits more quick and subtle. The verity of which sentence, the
inhabitants of the territory of Narbonne do too much experiment to their
damage. For being themselves between the lustiest and healthfullest people of
all France; yet nevertheless they themselves are very sickely for the most
part, their bodies lean, their countenances sad and heavy; their faces tawny,
or of an Olive color, do manifestly show the same. Also among other diseases,
they are almost all subject to the white Leprosy; and ^he least Ulcers which
they have, which we make no account of at Poictiers or Paris, do ordinarily
continue with them a whole year together. Not for any other cause, as they
themselves confess, and as al strangers k^ow that have lived in their Country*
but only because they are for the most part, blasted and breathed upon with a
Southerly VVinde, which in their language they call A^tan, and makes the air
to be gross and cloudy; causing in their bodies all the effects which are
attributed by Hippocrates to the Southerly winds, in his third Book and 5.
Aphorism, that is to say, when it reigns it dulleth the hearing, ^immeth the
sight, swells and aggrauateth the head, weakneth and abateth all the forces
of the body.

Also, Lib. 3. Ap^or 15.
when Hippocrates compares the temperatures of the one quality with the other,
he resolves upon this point; That the dry seasons are far more healthful then
the humid that have continued for a long succession of time, because excessive
humidity is the true matter of putrefaction, as experience tells us: For we
see, that in those places where the Marine or Sea-winds have blowed long, all
kinds of flesh (though never so new and fresh) will corrupt in less then an
hour. These things being considered, that it is most necessary for the
conservation of our bodies in health; that the seasons should follow their
natural temperatures, without any excess or contrariety, there is no doubt
to be made but that our bodies will fall into many unnatural diseases, when
the natural qualities of the seasons are perverted through the evil disposition
of the air, and wind that predominateth therein. It being so that for these 3.
years space here in France, the seasons of every year have not kept their
ordinary qualities. In the Summer we have had but little heat, in the Winter a
little or no cold at all. Also the other seasons have been continually
distempered with rain and moisture, together with much Southerly winds, whose
nature we hau^ declared before; and this throughout all France.

I know no man so little seen in natural Philosophy, or in Astrology, which
will not find the air to be the efficient cause of so many euilles, which
for these three years space have happened in the kingdom of France. For from
whence should proceed those contagious Pestilences, which happened
indifferently to old and young; to rich and poor, and in so many places, but
from the corruption of the air? From whence should proceed so many kinds of
Feauers, Ple^risies, Aposthumes, Catarres, defluctions of small Pox and Meazels?
So many kinds of venomous Beasts, as Frogs, Toades, Grasshoppers,
Caterpillars, Spiders, Flies, Waspes, Snailes, S^rpents, Vipers, Snakes,
Lizards, Scorpions, and Aspickes; but only from a purrifaction resulting from
the humidity of the air, accompanied with a languishing heat. This is it (I
say) that has engendered in us, and in a^l the Country of France, so many
strange and unknown accidents. Behold therefore how our natural heat has
been weakened, how our blood and humors have been corrupted through the
malignity of the air, which these Southerly winds has caused thorough the hot
and moist quality thereof.

Thus much I have observed, that where there has been need of Phlebotomizing,
there has been but little blood drawn from any, whether they were young, or
old, wounded, or not of so good or evil temperature; but it has been
corrupted, and appeared of white or greenish colors. This I have always
observed in these last wars, and in other places where I have been called to
cure the wounded: such as have been phlebotomized by the prescription of the
Physician, either for the prevention of accidents, or the furthera^ce of the
c^re. In all which, I say indifferently, I have found the blood putrified and
corrupted. This being so, it must needs fol^ow that the fleshy parts of our
bodies cannot be otherwise then euilly disposed: and all our bodies
Cacochymate, seeing that their nourishment which is the blood is putrified, and
the air altogether corrupted. From whence it follows, that those bodies
which were wounded in the fleshy parts were difficult to cure, considering that
there was in them a perdition of substance; the which having need of the
regeneration of the flesh, could not be accomplished neither by Medicines, nor
a^y Art of the Chirurgian, such and so great was the Cacochimy or evil
constitution of their bodies. Even as in an Hydropticke person there can no
flesh be regenerated, A similitude
because the blood is too cold and watery: and in the Elephanticke or leaprous
Disease, the flesh and other parts do abide in putrefaction, because of the
corrupted blood whereby they are nourished. In like manner, in wounds of
Cacochymed bodies, there can be no regeneration made of any good substance,
because that to restore a lawdable flesh in the wounded part, it is required
that the blood should not offend neither in quantity nor quality, and that the
offended part be in its natural temperature. All these things were wanting in
the times of these last wars: and therefore it is not to be wondered at, if
the wounds which were then received (although they were but small and of little
consequence in the noble or ignoble parts) have brought with them so many
tedious accidents, and in the end death; because that the air^ which does
incompasse us, makes the wounds to be corrupt and pu^rified, by reason of the
inspiration and transpiration thereof, especially when it self is corrupt and
putrified by altering and corrupting the humors.

Of this point I have had the experience of many wounds which I have been
called to dress that have rendered a^most insupportable stinking favor,
Intolerable stink proceedi^g from the wounded parts of men.
as a certain witness of corruption and infection, insomuch that the
assistants could hardly endure to be present at their dressings. It need not
be here alleged, that this was for want of being cleanly kept, or often
dressing, or for not administering unto them things necessary: for this
corruption was as common to Princes and great Lords, as unto poor Soldiers;
whose wounds (if by chance one day escaped wherein they were not dressed, so
great was the number of the hurt soldiers) you should find in them the morrow
after, a great quantity of Worms, Venomous. Wounds.
with a marvelous stinking savor. And moreover there happened unto them many
Aposthumes in diverse parts of their bodies opposite to their hurtes. For, if
they were shot in the right shoulder, they should have an Apostume on the left
knee; and if the wound were in the right leg, the Apostume would arise in the
left arm. As it happened to the late King of Nauar, to Mounsieur de Neuers, and
to Mounsieur de Rend^n, and almost to all others. So it seems, that Nature
being so much oppressed with corrupted Humors, could not be sufficiently purged
and discharged of them by wounds only, but sent some part of the corruption
to some other part either hidden or apparent. For if the Apostumes appeared not
outwardly, they should be found in the inward parts, as in the Liver, Lungs,
or Spleen. From those putrifactions were stirred up certain vapors, which
through their commination with the Har^ c^^s^^h continual ^eauers; with the
Liver a let and hinderance of the generation of good blood; and with the
Brain, swoonings, faintings, convulsions, and consequently death.

Now because of those aforesaid accidents, it is impossible for any Chirurgian
(were he never so expert) to correct the malignity of the aforesaid wounds:
nevertheless those that are emplo^ed therein ought not to be reprehended,
because it is impossible for them to war against God, nor against the air,
wherein oftentimes are hidden the rods of his Divine Justice. If therefore
according to the sentence of ancient Hippocrates, who says; That all contused
wounds ought to be b^ought to suppuration, the^eby to be perfectly cured;
which method we are sometimes constrained to change, because of the
putrifactions Gangrenacs and Mortifications which do accompan^e such wounds,
through the corruption of the air; and can any blame or accuse us, because we
are constrained through necessity to change and alter that manner of curation,
and instead of suppuratiue Medicines to use other remedies, to resist such
accidents which not only happen in wounds made by Gunshot, but also by swords
or staves: which remedies shall be described in this present Discourse.
Besides humane causes, that man is ill ^nstructed in the knowledge of
Celestial thing^s, which does not believe for certain, that the wrath of GOD
hangs over us to punnish the faults which ordinarily we commit against his
Majesty; his scourges are prepared ready, his rods and weapons have their
ministers always at hand to execute the commandment of his Divine Justice,
into whose secrets I dare enter no further; but will conclude with the opinion
of the best advised Practioners, that the principal occasion of the aforesaid
mortality, did proceed from the ^ure and determinate will of God, who by the
temperature which he has given to the air and winds (as the Heralds of his
divine Justice) has made us apt to receive the aforesaid inconveniences, which
we have incurred by our iniquities.

THE Method of curing Wounds made by Gunshot, and other fiery Engines. Also by
Arrows, and Darts, and their accidents.
CHAP. I. The division of wounds, according to the diversity both of the
offended parts, and the Bullets whereby they were made.
ALl Wounds made by Gunshot on the body of man, whether they be simple, or
compounded with dilaceration, contusion, distemperature, and tumor, are made
some in the noble parts, others in the ignoble parts; some in the fleshie
parts, and others in the Neruous and bony parts; sometimes with ruption and
dilaceration of the great vessels, as of the Veins and Arteries, and sometimes
without ruption of them. Such kind of wounds are also sometimes superficial,
but most commonly profound and deep, yea, Differenc^s taken from the matter of
Bullets.
even to the penetrating through the body and members of them that receive them.

Another diversity is taken according to the differences of the Bullets:
amongst the which, some are great, some in a mean substance, and some are
small as Hail shot: whereof the matter (which is ordinarily but of Lead) is
sometimes turned into Steel, Iron, or Tin, rarely into Silver, but never into
Gold. According to the which differences, the Chirurgian ought to take diverse
Indications to operate, and according to them to diuersifie the remedies. Now
we ought not to judge those great accidents which happen in these wounds to
proceed from the combustion of the Bullet, nor from the venonosity or other
ill quality of the ponder, because of the aforesaid Reasons alleged in the
precedent Discourses, but because of the contusion, dilaceration, and fraction
which is made thorough the violence of the Bullet in the neruous and bony
parts. For when it happens that the Bullet touches only but the fleshy parts,
and in bodies of good temperature, F^omwhe^ce proceeds the malignity of
wounds made by Gunshot.
I have found those Wounds heretofore to be as little rebellious in their
curations, and as easy to handle as those which are made by any Instrument of
that kind; I mean such which make a round and contused wound, or of such a
figure which the shot makes: and therefore it is most necessary that there be
a greater regard had to the symptoms or accidents of the contusion,
dilaceration, fracture of the bones and evil quality of the incompassing air,
then to the combustion which is thought to proceed from the Bullet, or
venenosity of the powder, because of the reasons a^oresaide. This I thought
good to publish to the world to aid young and new Practitioners in Surgery,
in the same manner and Method which I have my self experimented in following
the wars, (...)
having therein continued for the space of forty years. Wherein I protest I
have followed the counsel of Physicians and people of my profession, such as
were most renowned and approved both by their doctrine and long experience:
concerning whom I do assure my self, that they do know more then my writings
can contain. And therefore I write not for them, but for the young Prentises in
this Art, and for such as want better means to help them in urgent cases
proceeding from these said wounds, whom nevertheless I advise to take the
counsel of the Chirurgian, if his own reason and experience do not guide him
in his operations.

CHAP. II. Of the signs of wounds made by Gunshot.
IN the beginning of the Curation, you ought first to know whether the wounds
was made by Gunshot or no; which is easy to be seen if the figure of the
wound be round and ^uid in color, and the natural color of the part is
changed, that is to say, yellow, azure, liuid, or black. Also at the same
instant that the patient received the blow, if he say that he felt an
agrauating pain, as if he had been struck with a great stone, or with a club,
or as if a great burden had fallen upon the wounded part. In like manner, if
the wound happened not upon any great vessel, if there have issued but little
blood from the wounded parts, which happens because they are contused, and
greatly crushed, and therefore they tumifie presently after the blow received;
insomuch, that sometimes the passage is so stopped, that there can hardly be
conveyed in either tent or Se^on; and thereby it comes to pass, that the flux
of blood is suppressed, which otherwise would flow at their Orifices. Also the
Patient therein feels a great heat, which happens because of the
impetuositie proceeding both from the violent motion of the Bullet, and the
veh^ment impulsion of the air, with the ruption of the flesh and neruous
parts. Sometimes also because of the fractured Bones, which depresse and
prick the said parts; from whence ensues fluxion and inflammation. Also
because of the great contusion which the Bullet makes; which by no means can
enter into any part of our body but by great force, by reason of the round
figure thereof, whereby the place becomes black, and the neighboring parts
liuid: and from thence there follows many great accidents; as Pain, Fluxion,
Inflammation, Apostume, Sspasme, Faintings, Palsy, Gangrena, Mortification,
and finally death. They oftentimes send forth a Sanies virulent, and very
f^etide which proceeds from the great abundance of humors which flow to the
wounded part, because of the vehement crushing, contusion, and dilaceration of
the parts, and for want of natural heat to comfort and govern them. Also by
reason of the Cacochimy of the body, and the neruous parts, as the joints:
also such wounds are found for the most part greater then such which are made
by the punction of a Buckes horn, or the Wound made by a stone or any other
such like Contusions, because that the thing it self was round, anb does
therefore require a greater and more violent impetuosity to make it penetrate
into the inward parts of the body, wherein it seems to equallize the blows
of thunder.

CHAP. III. The manner how to handle the aforesaid wounds at the first
dressing.
FIrst, it is convenient that the Chirurgian should amplify the wound (if the
part offended do permit the same) for these causes: that is, both to give free
^ssue unto the Sanies, as also to give ample passage unto all such strange
bodies which might have been conveyed in with the shot, and to draw them forth
(if any there be) as any portion of the apparel, wad, paper, pieces of
Harness, Maile, Bullets, Shot, Splinters of bones, dilacerated flesh, and
other things that shall be found therein; and this to be done at the first
dressing if it be possible. For the accidents of pain and sensibility are not
so great in the beginning, as they are afterward.

Now for the better extraction of the aforesaid things, The s^tuation of the
Patient to ext^act vnna^urall things.
you ought to place the Patient in the same situation that he was at the time
when he was first shot, because that the Muscles and other parts being
otherways situate, may stop and hinder the way; and for the better finding of
the said Bullets, and other things, it is fitting that search be made with
the finger (if it be possible) rather then with any Instrument, because that
the sense of feeling is more certain then any Probe, or other insensible
thing. But if the bullet have pierced far into the body, there it may be
reached with a Probe, round in the end thereof, for fear of causing pain:
nevertheless it happens sometimes that the Bullet cannot be found by the Probe,
as it happened in the camp of Parpignan, to my Lord the Marshall of Brissac, who
was wounded with a Musket shot near to the right Omopl^^e or shoulder blade,
where many Chirurgians because they could not find the said Bullet, affirmed
that it was entered into the capacity of the body, but I ^ot having that
opinion, came to seek for the Bullet, where first without using any Probe, I
caused him to be placed in the same gesture of body as he was at that time
when he was Wounded: then I began wi^h my fingers gently to compresse about the
neighboring parts of the wound; in doing wh^reof, I found a tumor and
hardness in ^he flesh, with the sense of pain, and liuiditie of color in the
place where the Bullet was, which was betwixt the lower part of the Omoplate,
and the seventh and eight Vertebre or turning joint of the back. In which
place, incision was made to draw forth the shot, whereby he was shortly after
cured. Wherefore it is very convenient to search for the Bullet not only with
the Probe, but (as I said before) with the fingers, by handling and feeling
the part and places about the same where you may conjecture the Bullet to have
penetrated

Chap. 4. A Description of such Instruments which are proper to extract
Bullets, and other strang^ Bodies.
AS for the strange bodies which may be infixed in the wound, they may be
extracted by such Instruments hereafter described, which are different both in
figure and greatness according as need shall require; whereof some are
toothed, and others not. And it is fit the Chirurgian should have of many and
diverse fashions: some greater, and some s^aller of every kind to accommodate
them to the bodies and wounds, and not the bodies and wounds to his Instruments.

The Crows Bill toothed.


A Cranes Bill brought into the form of an Elbow, Cubite, or bowed arm.


This following is called the Cranes bill, because of the similitude it has
thereunto; the which in like manner ought to be toothed; and it is proper to
extract any thing from the bottom of the wound both shot, maile, splinters of
fractured bones, and other things.

The Cranes bill straight.


This Instrument is called the Duckes Bill, having a Cauity in the extremity
or end thereof large and round, and toothed, the better to hold the Bullet;
and it is proper principally when the B^llet happens in the fles^ty parts.

The Duckes Bill.


Another Fashion of draw-Bullet.


Another fashion of Draw Bullet, called the Lizards head to draw the Bullet,
marked with the same Letters as the former.


A. shows the Pipe, or the hollow body of the instrument B. The Rod, which
opene^h and shuts the head of the Instrument. C. The joint.


Another Instrument called the Parrats Bill, and it is proper to draw forth
any pieces of Harness which may be inserted into the ^ottome of the Member, or
also into the bones.


A. shows the stalk of the Vice. B. The Scrue. C. The runner, which by the
means of a Vice, is scrued higher or lower. DD The other part which is fixed
with a Cauitie in the midst thereof, wherein the Runner is placed.


Another Instrument which is callled the Swans bi^l, which opneth wi^h a Vice,
accompanied with a pair of Fo^ceps, which here before we have called the
Cranes bill, and it serves to draw forth any strange body, after that the
wound is dilated with the said Swans Bill.


If the strange bodies, especially the Bullet or shot, be not very deep, they
may be drawn forth by Eleuatories.

An Instrument called the Tire-fond.


Another Instrument called the Tirefond, the which is turned by a Scrue within
a pipe or hollow Instrument; and it is very convenient to extract forth the
aforesaid Bullets when they are penetrated or are infixed in the bones; for the
point thereof is to be served into the Bullet, provided that it be of Lead or
Tin (for it cannot enter in^o a harder body) and by that means it may be
easily drawn forth.

A Dilatorie.


This Instrument is named a Dilatory, which may be used to open and dilate the
wounds, to the end that the strange bodies may the easier be found and
extracted, for by compressing together the two ends thereof, the other two do
open, it may also serve in many places, as the nostrils, fundament; and other
parts.

The Instruments which follow are Needles for the Seton, and are very
convenient when as you would pass in a Seton to keep the wound and the way of
the Bullet open, until you have drawn forth all the strange bodies which
might yet remain therein; besides, they may serve to explora^e or search into
deep wounds to find the Bullet* not causing any pain, because they are round
and pollished toward their extremities.

You must understand that those Probes which are used to search the bullet ought
to be of a mean greatn^sse, Of what bigness the Probes ought to be.
pollished and round on their extreamities, because that the edges of the
wound, and the way whereby the Bullet has passed, does incontinently join
together, and touch the one side against the other. In such manner that the said
wound or way of the Bullet, will appear in sight to be much smaller then it
is: and for that cause those Probes which are slender and sharp, are nothing so
commodious; for they will stop and stay on every part of the reioyned wound,
and cannot so easily be conducted to the place where the bullet is, as those
which are somewhat greater. Also those which are small and slender* do prick
and offend the flesh of the wound whereby the Patient is much mollested, and is
oftentimes a cause that the Bullet cannot be found. Also you ought in like
manner to have those which are greater and longer to pass through the thigh
when necessity shall require. Which length of them ought to be changed and
diuersified according to the greatness of the wounded member. For I am of this
opinion, that one should not strive too much to make them pass always
thorough the wounded parts for fear of enduring pain and other accidents. For
the Patient may be cured as well although the Seton be not passed thorough, as
by experience it has been seen, that a Bullet has been shot through the
body, and yet without the passing through of a Seton, they have nevertheless
been cured.

Probes which may serve for Setons.


CHAP. V. The manner how to handle those wounds at the first dressing, after
that the strange bodies are extracted.
AFter you have drawn forth the strange Bodies by the aforesaid means, the
principal intention shall be to combat against the contusion and alteration
of the air, ^he prin^ipall intention of the Chi^u^gian.
if it be hot and moist, and disposed to putrefaction; which shall be done both
by remedies taken inwardly, as by others applied outwardly; and also put or
infused within the wound. For those which are to be taken inwardly ought to be
administered by the counsel and ordinance of the learned Physician, to whose
doctrine I leave all that may appertain both to the manner of living, and the
purgation of the Patient. But as for the topical medicines, the Chirurgian
(acc^rding to the things aforesaid) ought to consider of the constitution of
the times, and of the air. For if there be no danger of the part to fall into
a Gangrena, he shall use suppuratiues, as in contused wounds, which are Oleum
Catellorum or of a digestive, having a regard to the nature of the part,
because that the neruous parts do require Medicines more drying, then the
fleshye parts do. For in the joints and neruous parts, you may use of the
Terebinth of Venice, or the Oil of wax, of Masticke, the yolks of Eggs,
adding thereto a little Aqua-vitae rectified. Such like things have power to
disiccate and consume the watrish humidity which issues from the neruous
parts, and also eases the pain. Ionbertus Physician in ordinary to the King,
and Chancellor of the university of Montpellier, who has most learnedly
written of the Wounds made by Gunshot, because he has seen many wounded when
he followed the wars, in the Treatise which he has made, he says; that in the
simple wounds made by shot, there ought not to be used any Medicine
Escharoticke, or that causes an escharre, either actual or potentiall,
because they do endure pain, Inflammation, Gangrena, Fever, Why no
escha^aticke Medicine ought to be used.
and other pernicious accidents. Also because that the Eschar or crust
hin^ereth the suppuration which ought presently to be endured, to separate the
contused flesh, together with the Sanies, lest that all should degenerate into
putrefaction, as easily it may when the superfluous humor putrifieth long in
one place, not having free passage; not so much as for the exhalatio^ of the
putrified vapors, because that they are enclosed and covered in with the
eschar: which being enclosed do multiply, insomuch that they do require a
greater place then is permitted them; then they pass and enter from the small
vessels into the greater; and from thence into the noble parts, from whence
most commonly ensues death: neuer^helesse, if there be any suspicion of
putrefaction, then in such a case you ought to pass from suppuratiues, unto
remedies that do resist putrefaction, leaving the proper care ^o come unto the
accidents. Wherefore at the first dressing in the case aforesaid, in the wound
may be used this following unguent.

. puluer. alumin. rochae, vi^idis aeris, vitrioli romani, mellis rosat. an. ij.
aceti boni quantum sufficit, D^scription of ou^ ^gvp ^^a^um proper f^^ the
a^o^esaide wounds
bulliant omnia simul secundum artem, and fiat medicamentum ad formam mellis.
The Virtues of this unguent is, that because of the heat and tenuity thereof,
it inciseth and attenu^teth the humors, reuoketh the natural heat which was
repelled by the vehement impulsion of the blow, and the violent agitation of
the air conducted by the Bullet. Mo^eouer it corrects the putrefaction of
the virulent humor, which presently cleaves unto, and so disposes the
contused flesh in such manner, that it makes an escharre. This unguent when
and as often as it shall be needful may be applied with Tents or Setons,
being first dissolved with a little wine or Aqua-vitae: The which tents ought
to be both great and long for the first dressing, thereby to enlarge and dilate
the wound that the Medicines may thereby the better be conveyed in. But
afterward they ought not to be applied so long or great. Also that the
Medicine may the better be conveyed into the bottom of the wounds, it may be
incited in with a Syringe. Moreover the virtue and strength thereof shall be
diminished according to the temperature of the body, and sensibility of the
hurt. As if the wound be in the neruous parts, it shall be mixed with the Oils
of Terebinth, or of Hypericon, in such quantity as the expert Chirurgian shall
know to be needful. But the Egyptiacum is not to be used at all, unless it
be in such times which are Pestilentiall and dangerous for those said wounds,
and that they do decline to putrefaction. After the use of Egyptiacum you may
separate and make the escharre fall, with remollitiue and lenitiue things, as
the following Oil in using thereof a little hotter then lukewarm.

Olei violati lb iiij. in quibus coquantur catelli duo nuper nati, vsque ad
dissolutionem ossium, addendo vermium terrestrium praeparatorum lb j. coquantur
simul lento igne, deinde fiat expressio ad vsum, addendo Terebinthinae Venetae
iij. aquae vitae j. The said Oil is of great and meruellous efficacy, both to
appease the pain, as also to suppurate the wound, and to make the escharre
fall. But for want thereof this which follows may be applied which is easier
to be had.

Olei semin. lini, and liliorum an. iij. unguent. basilic. j. liquefiant simul,
and fiat medicamentu^, de quo vulneri indatur quantum sufficit. I have known
that the said Oils being applied in the beginning of the hurt reasonable
warm to appease the pain, to lubrifie, relaxe, and moysten the edges of the
wound, disposing it to suppuration, which is the true way to cure those
wounds, as Galen himself recites from Hippocrates, saying; That if the flesh
be contused, crushed, or battered with any Dart, or in any other manner, that
it ought so to be handled that it be brought to suppuration as soon as may
be: For by this means the wound shall be the less mollested with Phlegmon
(or inflammation.) Also it is necessary that the contused flesh be putrified,
liquefied, and converted into pus, that new flesh may afterward be regenerated.

Ioubertus does very much approve this remedy, which I never yet did
experiment, and it this. Take of the powder of Mercury twice calcined j fresh
Hogs grease, or sweet Butter, viij. Camphire dissolved in Aqua vitae, ij. mix
them together, adding thereto a little of the oil of Lillies or Linseed.
Experience does show that this remedy is excellent, and reason does also
confirm it. For the powder of Mercury accompanied with unctious and moistning
things, causes the contused flesh to suppurate easily, and in short time
without enduring any great pain. As for the Camphire, whether it be hot or
cold, it serves greatly because of the excellent tenuitie of the parts
thereof. By reason whereof, every Medicine of what quality soever it be, does
penetrate, and disperse the Virtues thereof the better. Moreover, The virtue of
Campher
the said Camphire does resist all putrefaction. Some do instill into the
wound Aqua vitae, in the which they dissolve calcined Vitrioll; which medicine
is not suppuratiue, but i^ resists putrefaction; of the which you may use in
times and seasons that are hot and moist. Another. Olei Terebinth. iij. Aqua
vitae. ss miscae.

Now, if the wound were given near at hand, then of a certain the wound may
be with burning, by reason of the flaming powder, Combustion joined to wounds
made by Gunshot.
and shall be applied medicines proper unto the combustion thereof,
nevertheless not leaving the contusion: and as for the parts about the wound,
there you shall not apply Medicines which are refrigeratiue and astringent, but
remollitiues and suppuratiues, for they cannot be used at the first dressing,
because they do cool and weaken the part, and hinder suppuration. Also they do
constipate the skin, which is a hinderance to the transpiration of the
fuliginous vapors: from whence ensues Gangrena and mortification, thorough the
unfit application of such like medicines. Where the contusion shall be great,
there you may make many scarifications, thereby to discharge the part of the
bruised bones which is subject to putrify: but in the neighboring parts, and
about the contusion far off from the wound, you ought to apply cooling and
corroborating medicines to prohibit and hinder the defluxion of Humors as is
this.

. Puluer. boli armenis sanguin. Dracon. puluer. myrrh. an j. succi solan.
semperuiui, Portulac. an. j. ss album ouorum iiij. oxyrrh. quantum sufficit,
fiat linimen. vt decet. Or other such like: whereof it is convenient you should
use, until you are assured of the perfect prevention of the accidents. In like
manner, great care ought to be taken in the apt cooling of the member,
situating it in a figure proper, and without pain if it be possible at the
beginning, Time to observe to dr^sse the patient.
until that the wound begins to suppurate, you need not dress the
patient but from 24. hours to 24. hours: and when the suppuration begins,
and by consequence the pain, fever, and disquietnesse shall augment, the
Patient ought then to be dressed every twelve hours. But when there shall be
great quantity of matter which does molest the patient then it is needful that
he be dressed every 8. hours: and when the pu^ begins naturally to diminish,
the once every twelve hours shall suffice. Finally, when the Ulcer begins
to be filld with flesh and sends not forth much matter, then to be dressed
once a day shall be sufficient, as in the beginning.

CHAP. VI. How the said wounds ought to be handled after the first dressing.
AT the second dressing, and in the rest following, if there be no danger of
putrefaction and Gangrena, you may use one of the aforesaid oiles adding
thereunto of the Eggs, with a little Saffron, which shall be continued until
the excrement of the wound be digested and brought to suppuration. Herein it
is to be noted, that in wounds made by Gunne-shot, Pu^ is not so made by
Gunshot, as in all other wounds.
it is longer before they be brought to suppuration then other wounds made by
other instruments, because that the bullet and the air which it thrusts
before it, dissipateth (by reason of the great Contusion thereof) the natural
heat, and the spirits from the part, which causes that the concoction is
neither so soon, nor so well made, for want of natural heat, from whence
there follows an exceeding foetide or stinking savor of the Sanies and other
accidents very dangerous. Nevertheless it is for the most part made in three
or four days, sometimes also sooner or later according to the temperature of
the body, and of the part, and the quality of the air hot or cold. These
things done, it shall be needful to begin to mundify by little and little the
wound, by adding to the aforesaid Medicine, of Terebinth washed in Rose water
or Barley water, or such like, thereby to take away the heat and mordacity
thereof. If the disposition of the time be very cold, then you may add unto it
of Aquavitae, according to the counsel of Galen, who teaches that in winter
ought to be applied hotter medicines then in summer. Afterward you may use of
this Mundificatiue,

. Aquae decoct. hordei quantum sufficit, succi plantaginis, Appij, Agrimoniae,
Centauri minoris, an. j. bulliant omnia simul, in fine decoctionis add
Terebinth. venet. iij. mellis Rosati. ij. far. hord. iij. Croci j. miseantur
omnia simul been agitando fiat mundificatum mediocris co^sistentiae. Another.

. Succi clymeni, plantag. absinth, appij, an. ij. Terebinth. venet. iiij.
syrrup. absinth. and mellis Ros. an. ij. bulliant omnia secundum artem, postea
colentur, in colatura add puluer. Aloes, Mostich, i^e^s, florent. far. hord.
an j fiat mundificat. ad vs^m dictum. Or this;

. Terebinth. venet. lotae in Aqua Ros. v. olei Ros. j. mellis ros. iij. myr^h,
aloes, mastich, aristo^och. rotundae, an j ss far. hord. iij misce, fiat
mundificatiuum. The which shall be applied in the wound with Tents and setons,
neither too long, nor too great; because that then they may hinder the
euacuation of the Sanies or matter, and of the vapors elevated from the wounds;
which if they should be retained, it is most certain that they will heat the
part, and acquire to themselves an acrimony, which afterward will eat into
the edges and other parts of the wound; from whence insueth dolor, fluxion,
inflammation, flux of blood, Apostume, and putrefaction, which are easily
communicated to the noble parts, and cause afterward many pernicious
accidents. And therefore the Chirurgian need not to fear any thing at all,
Advertisement to the young Chirurgian.
of the closing or conglutinating of the aforesaid wounds, because that the
flesh being so greatly contused and dilacerated, cannot consolidate until the
contusion be first suppurated and mundified. And therefore I advise him not to
use any Tents or Setons but those that are very small and slender, to the end
that they may not hinder the issue of the matter contained, and that the
patient may endure them easily, thereby to avoid the aforesaid accid^nts. The
use of Tents and Setons is to carry the medicine unto the bottom of the wounds,
and to keep them open, especially in their Orifices, until that the strange
and unnatural things be expelled: but if the wound be sinuous and deep in
such manner that the medicines cannot be conveyed unto all the offended parts,
then you may make iniection with the decoction following.

. Aquae hordei lb iiij. agrimon. centauris, minoris, Pimpinellae, Absinth.
Plantag. an. m ss. Rad. Aristoloch. rotun. ss. fiat decoctio ad lb j. in
colatura expressa dissolve aloes hepaticae iij. mellis rosat. ij. bulliant
modicum. With this there shall be inuection made three or four times together,
every time that the patient is dressed. And if this remedy be not sufficient to
cleanse the matter, and to consume the spongy and putrified flesh, you may then
mix with the said decoction of Egyptiacum, dissolved in such a quantity as
necessity shall require; as for a pound of the said decoction, an ounce of the
said unguent more or less, the which is of most great efficacy to correct the
spongeous flesh from the bottom of the said wounds: the like also does the
said Egyptiacum, being applied above on the excresence of the spongeous flesh.
I have in like manner experimented the powder of Mercury and Alom burned, mixed
together in equal portions, A Cath^^icke powder.
to have in that case the like virtue unto sublimate or Arsnick (but in working
it is nothing so painful) and it makes also a very great eschar, whereat
sometimes I have much wondered. Some practitioners do use oftentimes to leave a
great quantity of their iniections in the bottom of such sinewous wounds, the
which I approve not. For besi^es the putrefaction and corruption which thereby
it get^eth, it holds the parts extended, and does humid or moysten them:
wher^by it comes to pass, that Nature cannot do her duty to regenerate the
flesh, considering that for the curation of all Ulcers (that being an Ulcer, as
says Hippocrates) the scope or intention ought to be to dissicate them, and
not moisten them.

Many do err also in the too frequent use of Setons, in this; That not
applying themselves to reason, they do use to renew them always, whereby they
rub and fret away the tender flesh on the edges of the woun^; the which rubbing
and chafing does not only cause pai^e, but also brings with it many evil
accidents. And therefore I do very much commend the use of the hollow tent,
which are made either of Gold, Silver, or Lead, such as are described in the
wounds of Thorax: I mean to be used in such places which have lapasity
sufficient, and where there shall be great quantity of Sanies.

Compresses or Boulste^s.
Also it is most needful that there should be applied Compresses or Boulsters
just upon the bottom of the sinus, thereby to comprimate those parts which are
distant from the Orifice, and to expel the Sanies. To which end, it is fitting
that the boulster be perforated just upon the orifice of the sinuous ulcer, and
upon the hollow tents; and that therein there be placed a sponge to receive
the Sanies: for by this means the expulsion, euacuation, and absumption
thereof, shall be much better. In rolling, the Ligature ought to be first
begun on the bottom of the sinus, with a mean combustion, to the end that the
matter be not retained within the Cauity thereof. The Rollers and Boulsters
proper to this operation, shall be first moistened in Oxycrat, or sour Wine,
or in any other astringent liquor, to roborate and strengthen the part, and to
hinder the defluxion. But great heed ought to be taken, that there be not too
great an astriction made upon the part, because that thorough the astriction
or straight binding, extreme pain may be produced by means of the exhalation
of the fuliginous excrements which thereby are prohibited. Also it may cause the
member to become Atrophied or withered thorough the too long continuation of
the said Rollers.

CHAP. VII. Of the means to draw forth such strange bodies, which shall yet
remain to be extracted.
AND where there shall remain any splinters of bones, which at the beginning
were not extracted by the aforesaid Instruments: then you ought to apply this
medicine, which is of great power to draw them forth, and all other strange
bodies.

. Radicis, ireos, florent. panac. and Cappar. an. iij. aristolochiae, rotundae,
mannae, thuris, an. i. in pollinem redecta concorporentur mell. rosar. and
terebinth. venetae. ana ij.

Another remedy to take away the said Splinters, and corrupted bones.

. Resina pini siccae, iij, Pumicis combusti and extincti in vin albo, radic.
ireos, aristolochiae, ana ss thuris j. squamae aeris ss ij. in pollinem
rediganter diligenter, incorporentur cum melle rosato, and fiat medicamentum.

Besides these remedies which have in them, and from their nature, such power
to attract forth strange bodies, there are of others which have the like
effect and v^rtue by putrefaction, Vt omnia stercor^ Animalium. Also Leaven and
such like, as Galen writes.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Indications which ought to be observed in the said wounds.
THE mundification and the extraction of the said strange bodies being done,
it follows then to aid Nature; both to regenerate flesh, and also to
cicatrice it, as well by things taken inwardly, as by outward Medicines hereunto
convenient, and to proceed therein by certain Indications, which are taken
first from the essence of the disease, and from the cause thereof. If it be
present although that from the primitive cause (according to Galen in the third
of his Method) ^here ought no Indication to be taken, no more then from the
time wherein he means from the absent cause, and from the time past. In like
manner Indication ought to be taken from the four universal times of the
cureable disease, that is to say, from the beginning, increasing, state, and
declination: according to the which times, the remedies ought to be diuersied.
Another Indication is taken from the temperature of the Pa^ient, which also
changes the curation. Indication taken from the temperature of the body.
For every rational and Methodicke Chirurgian knows well, that other
remedies are required in a Chollericke body, then in a Phlegmatic; and so of
the other temperatures both simple and compound. Under the which Indication of
the temperature, shall be comprehended that of the Age, which receives not
all remedies alike, but demands some for the young persons, and others for
the old.

Moreover, Indication is to be taken from the custom or manner of living of
the Patient; as whether he has been accustomed to eat and drink much, and
at all hours: for then you ought not to ordain him such an exquisite diet as
unto him that is accustomed to eat and drink but little, and at certain
hours: and therefore the diet of Panades are not so proper unto us as unto the
Italians, because our bodies require more lenitiue things: which effect it
woorketh with them, because of Custom, which is a second Nature. Under this
accustomed manner of living, ought to be understood the condition of the life,
and the exercise of the Patient, forasmuch as you ought to use stronger
remedies unto the robusticke and men of labor, such as have their flesh hard,
then you ought to use upon the delicate, and such which labor but little, and
exercise less. Some there be that had rather comprehend this Indication under
that of the temperature. For my part I will not dispute of it, but will leave
the resolution thereof wholly to the Doctors.

The Indicatio^ taken from the virtue of the patient.
The Indication taken from the virtue of the patient, is above all other things
to be respected, because that it failing or being very weak, all other things
ought necessarily to be best to come unto it. As when we are enforced through
necessity to take off a member, or to make any great incisions, or such like
things, if the patient have not virtue sufficient to endure the pain; it is
necessary to defer such operations (if it possible) until that Nature be
restored, and has recovered her virtues both by good nourishment and rest.

Another Indication may be taken from the Air which does encompasse us: under
the which are comprehended the seasons of the year, the region, the place of
our abiding, and the constitution of the time. For according to the heat,
coldness, dryness, and moisture of the air, also according to the
continuation of these qual^ties, the Medicines ought to be prepared. And
therefore (as says Guido) the wounds in the head are more difficult to heal
at Paris then at Auignon; Sentence of Guido.
and the wounds in the legs are more tedious at Auignon then in Paris; by
reason that in Paris the air is more cold and moist then at Auignon, which is
a contrary thing, especially to all wounds in the head. Contrariwise, in
Auignon, the heat of the incompassing air does melt and subtillize the
humors; whereby such humors more easily and in greater abundance do fall down
into the legs: from whence it comes that the wounds in the legs are more
difficult to cure at Auignon then at Paris. But if any one do allege
experience to the contrary, that the wounds in the head, do more often become
lethall or mortal in hot Regions then in cold. To him I answer, that that
proceeds not by reason of the air, inasmuch as it is hot and dry, but
because of some superfluous humidity or evil vapor communicated with the
air; as in those parts of Prouence and Italy, which are near to the
Mediterranean sea.

The Indication of curation may also be taken from the temperature of the
wounded parts: Indication taken from the wounded part.
for the fleshy parts do require other remedies then the Bones or the Neruous
parts, and so others. The like ought to be observed concerning the
sensibility of the said parts, which in like manner alters the manner of
curation: for it is not sitting to apply such sharp and violent medicines to
the Nerves and Tendons, as to the Ligaments and other insensible parts. The
dignity and action of the wounded parts has no less privilege in the act of
curation then the former. For, if the wound be in the Brain, or in any other
of the vital or natural parts, it behooves that their Medicines diuersified
and applied according to their dignity and action, because that from the
contemplation of these wounds, is oftentimes gathered a certain judgment of
the ensuing accidents. For such wounds which do penetrate into the ventricle
of the Brain, the Heart, or in the great vessels, Aph^ris. 18. Boo^^ 1^.
in the Chest, in the Neruous part of Diaphragma, in the Liver, in the stomach,
in the small guts, and in the bladder, if the wound be great, they are
necessarily mortal. Also such which are in the joints, or near thereunto, and
in bodies Cacochymed or of an ill habitude are oftentimes mortal, as has
been said here before. In like manner, the Indications which are taken from
the position and colligance of the affected part ought not to be forgotten,
neither the figure thereof, as Galan has sufficiently explained in the 7. of
his Method, and in the second to Glaucus.

CHAP. IX. How Diseases become compounded.
Moreover in taking the aforesaid Indication, you ought to consider whether
there be a complication of the disease, or not: For, even as the simple
disease proposes a simple Indication, so the complications of the
indispositions against Nature, do propose mix^d or compounded Indications. Now
the aforesaid complications are made after three manner of ways that is to
say, disease with disease; as a Wound with an Apostume or fracture of the
bones. Disease with cause, as an Ulcer with defluxion. Disease with symptom,
as a wound with pain, or with a Flux of blood. Or all things against Nature
together, as disease, cause, and symptom.

Now that you might know how to handle artificially all these complications,
you must follow the Doctrine of Galen, in the 7. of his Method, who exhorts
us to consider the complicated affections, as that which is the most urgent,
The Urgent the cause, and the necessity
the cause; and that without the which the disease cannot be taken away. And
these are things of great import^nce in the curation of all diseases; and
herein the Empericke becomes wavering and uncertain, without counsel or
resolution, not knowing with which of the affections he ought first to begin
withal for the cure. Bu^ the i^dicious Physician to the contrary is directed
by those three golden word^: from the which depend both the order and method in
all such complicated dispositions and affections. The symptoms inasmuch as
they are symptoms, do not give any Indication at all, neither do they charge
or alter the order of the curation. For in taking away the disease, which is
the cause of the symptom, they are removed, because they depend thereon, as
the shadow does the body: although oftentimes we are constrained to leave the
disease in an irregular care, to come unto the accidents of the Disease; the
which if they are urgent, do hold the place of the cause, and not properly of
the symptoms.

To conclude, all the said Indications are but to attain to two ends, The
vs^ of Ind^^at^^n.
that is to say, to restore the part in its natural temperature, and that the
blood offend not neither in quantity nor quality. That being done (as says
Galen) nothing will hinder neither the regeneration of the flesh, nor the union
of the ulcer. Bu^ sometimes it is not possible to put the aforesaid
Indications in execution, either because of the greatness of the wound, or the
excess and disobedience of the Patient; or because of some other indisposition
which has happened through the ignorance of the Chirurgian, or from the ill or
disordered application of the Medicines. And therefore by means of these
things, there follows great pains, Feauers, Apostumes, Gangrenaes (vulgarly
and abusiuely called Estiomenes) Mortifications, and oftentimes death it self.
Moreover those that receive wounds by Gunshot, do either dye, or else remain
maimed and defective all their life after.

CHAP. X. How the Chirurgian shall proceed in the handling of the said wounds.
IN the beginning therefore, great regard ought to be taken to mittigate the
pain as much as may be, by repercussing the defluxion, by ordayning a diet
according to the six unnatural things, and they annexed, by anoyding all hot
and sharp things, and by diminishing or altogether prohibiting wine, lest it
should heat, subtillize, and make the humors flow to the part. His manner of
living, ought in the beginning to be very slender, thereby to make revulsion.
For when the stomach is not filled sufficiently, it attracteth from all parts
unto it: by means whereof, the externe parts having affinity therewith, do
remain empty. And this is the reason wherefore the patient ought to keep a
slender diet in the first days of his hurt. Venus is altogether contrary unto
them, inasmuch as it enflameth the humors and spirits more then any other
motion: and for this cause it makes the wound to be much enflamed and subject
to defluxion. And it will not be amiss in the beginning if there be a sluxe of
blood, to let it moderately flow, thereby to discharge the body and the part:
and where it has not sufficiently flowed, you ought the day following to use
revulsiue Phlebotomy, Phl^botomy necessary i^ wounds made by Gun^eiho^.
and to take away according to the fullness and virtue of the patient. You
need not fear of making of auersion of the blood toward the Noble part^. For
(as we have said) there is no venomous quality th^rein; nevertheless it is
generally ^bserued, that such wounds at that i^stant do send forth b^t little
blood, Ca^ses why th^^^ h^pn^th (...) alway^ an^le mo^th^g^.
because of the great con^usion made by the Bul^et and the vehemence of the
agitated air, which does repulse and drive back the spirits into the inw^rd
parts, and into the circumiacent parts of the wound, as we have said before.

This is ordinarily known in those who have had a member carried away with a
great shot: for at the instant of their hurts, there issue^h but little blood
forth of their wounds, although that there be many great Veins and Arteries
broken and dilacerated. But a certain time afterward, as in the fourth, fifth,
or sixth day, and sometimes later, the blood will issue forth in great
abundance: by means of the returning of the spirits, and natural heat into
the affected pa^ts. As for the purgative Medicines. I leave them to the
Doctors. Nevertheless in their absenc^, it is necessary to relaxe and move
the belly of the patient at the least once a day, either by a^t or by Nature,
which shall be done r^ther by Custers then Purgations, especially in the first
days, because that the agitation of the humors in that case is to be
suspected, least they should ma^e a greater defluxion to the wounded part.
N^uerthelesse Galen in the fourth book of his Method. Cap 6. speaking of the
Indications of bleeding and purging, where he says; That bleeding and purging
are necessary, according to the greatness of the disease, although that the
pati^nt be without repletion or cacochymy, or evil constitution.

Pain ought to be appeased, according to the intention and remission thereof,
which to do if it happen that there is an inflammati^n, you may apply thereto
as a local medicine Vnguentum nutritum, composed with the i^yce of Plantane,
Housleeke, and Nightshade, and such like. Also the Emplaister Diachalciteos
describ^d by Galen in his first Book of the Composition of Medicines according
to their kinds, chap. 6. dissolved with the oil of Poppy, of roses, and a
little Vinegar, and it is of no little efficacy for that purpose. Also vng. de
bolo, and many others of that faculty, if they be not properly anodins (for
all Anodins are hot in the first degree, or at the least agreeing in heat with
our bodies, as says Galen in his first Book and 19. chap. of Simples) and
the aforesaid medicines are cold, yet not so much as that thereby they should
become Naucotick, the which are cold in the fourth degree. But to be short,
the aboue-mentioned in the aforesaid case, do appease the pain very
comm^diously, Hot humors are ap^er to slow then cold.
because they are contrary unto hot dist^mperatures, and do prohibit the
defluxions of humors, which oftentimes are sharp and chollericke, which are
more apt to flow then the cold, and do cause a greater pain. After the usage
of repercussiues, I do meruellously approve this Cataplasme.

. Micae panis infusae in lacte vaccino lb j. ss. bulliant parum addendo olei
violacei and ros^. an. iij vitellos ouorum numer quatuor. pull. rosar. rubr.
florum chamemel. and melior an. ij. far. fabar. and hord. ana j. misce, and
fiat cataplasma secundum artem. Or for a Medicine sooner prepared, thou must
take of the crummes of bread, and so let it be a little boiled with Oxycrat,
and the Oil of Roses.

As concerning the curation of such Apostumes which happen in these Woun^es, it
is expedient that their Medicines should be diuersied according to their
times. For some medicines are proper in the beginning, others in the
augmentation, and others in other times; as has been sufficiently declared by
Galen in his third Book and ninth chapter of the faculty of Medicines. And by
Guido in the curation of Apostumes; and by those that have written thereof. And
where Nature shall incline to suppuration, it is most needful to attend her,
Apho^. 31. B^oke 2.
as says Hippocrates: for the Physician and Chirurgean, are but the ministers
and helpers of Nature, to aid her in those things whereunto commodiously she
enclineth.

CHAP. XI. Of such Bu^lets which have remained in certain parts a long time
after the Curation of the wounds.
SOmetimes the Bullets of Lead have remained a long time within the members, as
for the space of seven or eight years and more, An aduertis^ment.
there following nevertheless not any evil accident, nor hinderance of the
consolidation of the wound: and they have continued there so long, till they
have been thrust forth by the expulsive virtue, discending down by means of
their gravity and heaviness into the inferior parts, in the which they will
manifest themselves, and then ought to be drawn forth by the operation of the
Chirurgean. Now this continuation of them so long in the body, without any
corruption or evil accident (in my opinion) does proceed from no other thing
but from the matter of the Lead, whereof the said Bullets were composed. For so
it is, that Lead has a certain familiarity and agreement with nature,
especially of the fleshy parts: even as we see by ordinary experience, which
teaches us, that Lead being outwardly applied, has the virtue to close and
cicatrise old ulcers: but if the bullet were of stone, of Iron, or of any other
metal, it is a most assured thing, that they could not abide long in the body,
because that the Iron Bullet would rust, and thereby corrode the part where it
lies; from whence would ensue many pernicious accidents. But if the bullet be
in the neruous or noble parts, although it were but of Lead, it could not
continue there long, without bringing with it many great inconveniences:
therefore when it comes to pass that it remains a long ti^e in the body, it
is in the fle^^y parts, and in bodies of good temperature and habitude,
otherwise it cannot st^y there, without inducing pain and many other accidents,
as has b^ne said.

CHAP. XII. Of the great Contusions and d^^acerations made by the Bull^ts of
great shot.
Moreover if the Bullet of a great piece of Ordinance do strike against any
member* it (for the most part) does either carry it away, or else break and
batter it in such a fashion, through the great veheme^cy there^f, that it
shiuereth and breaks the bones, not only of those which it touches, but
also of those that are farther off, because that the bonebeing hard does in
some sort make a little resistance, by which means the Bullet has the greater
force against it. That this is true, we see ordinarily that ^he said
Ordinance has much more action and effect against a strong wall, then against
a rampire of earth, or a Woolsacke, and other soft things, as we have said here
before. Therefore, it is no marvel if after such wounds made by Gunshot,
there follow dolor, inflammation, fever, spasme, Apostume, Gangrena,
Mortification, and oftentimes death. Causes of petillous accidents in wounds
mad^ by Gunshot.
For those great contusions of the Neruous parts, the breakings or vehement
concussions of the bones made by the said Bullets, do cause grievous
accidents, and not the combust^on and venenositie of the powder, as many do
think, not considering the matter of the said ^owder: the which (as I have
said) it is not venomous; for if the wound be made in a fle^^y part, without
touching the Neruous parts, it only requirech such remedies for their
curati^n, a^ a^l other contused wo^ndes do, without they degenerate (as I have
said here before) into an evil quality, through the corruption of the ai^e;
the which cause^ (not many years since) the wounds that were then received to
be much altered and corrupted, with a great putrefaction in the fleshy and
bony parts. From the which (as I said before) were elevated many vapors into
the Brain, the Heart, and the Liver: from whence proceeded many evil
accidents, and death to the most part.

CHAP. XIII. Of the means which ought to be observed to rectify the air, to
r^borate the noble parts, and to fortify the whole body.
AND therefore the Chirurgian ought to have a great care to administer all
things which have power to rectify the air, and to roborate and strengthen
the noble parts: also to fortify the whole body, which shall be done by the
ensuing things; which are to be administered both inwardly and outwardly. For
the Patient shall take inwardly in the morning, three hours before he ^ate
any thing, of the Tabul. Diarrhodon abatis, or de aroi^. ros. de triasant.
diamoschi, de Laetificans Gal^nt, and other of the like virtue. Outwardly shall
be used Epithemes upon the Region of the heart and Liver, a little more then
lukewarm, applied with a piece of Scarlet, or Sponge, Felt, or a fine linen
cloth. This following may serve for a form unto every Chirurgian.

. Aquae rosarum iiij. Aquae buglo. aceti boni, an. ij. Coriand. praeparat.
iiij. Garyophyllor, Corticum citri, an. j. santali rub. ss. coral, vtriusque
j. camph. j. croci ss pull. diarrho. abbatis ij. theria. and mithridat. an. ss.
pulu. florum camomillae, melilio ana j. misce and fiat Epithema.

Moreover, you ought to give the patient odorifferous and refrigerant things to
smell to often, to roborate the animal faculty, as this which follows. R
Aqua rosaceae, aceti boni, ana iij. garyophyl. nucis mosca. cinamoni
conquatassorum, therica Galeni ana j. And therein let a Handkercher or sponge
be dipped, which the Patient shall aiwayes hold to his nose. He may use also
an aromaticke Apple or Pomander for the same intention, as is this.

. Rosar. rubrar. violar. ana iij. baccarum myrrhi and Iuniperi, santali rubr.
ana ij ss. benioin i. camph. ij. fiat puluis. Postea Olei Ros. and nenuph. ana
ss styracis calamitae, ij. aquae rosarum quantum satis est, liquefiant simul
cum cera alba quantum suffic. fiat Ceratum ad comprehendendos supra dictos
pulueres cum pistillo calido, and fiat pomum. Another.

Radic. ireos florent. maioranae, calami ariomatici, ladani, ben^oin, rad. cyp.
garyoph. ana ij. mosci g. iiij. fiat puluis, et cum gummi tragachan. quantum
sufficit, fiat pomum.

Another.

Ladani puri ij. benioin ss. styrac. calam vi. ireos Florentiae ss garyophil.
iij maiora, rosarum rubrarum calami aromat ana ss. puluerisentur omnia, et
bulliant cum aqua rosarum quantum sufficit, et colentur, et colata liquefiant
cum cer. alb. quantu^ sufficit, styracis liquidae, j. fiat ad modum Cerati,
comprehendantur per pistillum, addendo moschi j. fiat pomum.

In like manner you may apply of your Frontals to roborate the animal faculty,
to provoke sleep, and to mitigate and ease the pain of the head, as this
following. aqua rosaceae ij. Olei rosar. et papaueris, ana j ss. aceti boni,
trochiscorum de Camphora ss. fiat Frontale. The way to apply it is thus. Take a
linen cloth, and fold it up five or six times double; that done, dip it in
the aforesaid commixtion, and so apply it on the Temples a little warm, which
being dry ought to be renewed again. Herein note, that in this case the head
ought not to be bound hard, lest that thereby the free pulsation of the arteries
of the temples be hindered, whereby the pain of the head might be augmentrd.
There are many other exterior remedies whereby the air might be corrected; as
to make a good fire in the Chamber of the patient with the wood of Juniper,
Hyp. lib. de vnla. Cap.
of Bays, vine branches Rosemary, of Flower de Luce roots: also by things
sprinkled in the chamber, as water and vinegar; if the patient be rich, Damask
water herein is very proper. Or this which follows;

Maiorauae, menthae, radicis cyperi, calami aromatici, saluiae, lauandule,
foeniculi, thymi, stoechados, florum camo. melil. satureiae, baccarum lauri et
Iuniperi an. m. iij. pulu. garyoph. et Nucis moscatae an. j. aquae ros. et
vitae lb ij. vini albi boni et odoriferi lb x. bulliant omnia in balneo Mariae
ad vsum dictum. Moreover perfumes may be made to perfume the said Chamber, as
these following. Carbonis salicis viii-labdani puri ii. thuris masculi, lini et
baccarum Iuniperi ana j. xylaloes, benioin, styracis calamitae an. ss. Nucis
moscatae, santali lutei ana iij. garyoph. styracis liquidae ana ij. zedoariae,
calami aromatici ana i gummi tragach. aqua rosac. soluti, quod sit satis: fiant
auiculae Cyprinae, seu suffitis, qua forma libebit. As for the putrefaction and
corruption of the bones, we will speak thereof hereafter more amply.

CHAP. XIIII. Memorable Histories.
OFtentimes the aforesaid wounds are accompanied with many indispositions, as
oedemateus tumors, fracture of the bones, and the like, History.
as (for the young Chirurgians sake) I will relate this history for an example,
of the hurt of the Earl of Mansfelt, Governor of the Duchy of Luxembourg,
Knight of the order of the King of Spain, who was hurt at the battle of
Moncontour, with a Pistol shot upon the joint of his right arm or elbow,
which fractured the bones; whereof there were many that were fractured in such
small pieces as if they had been broken with a Mallet, because he received the
blow so near at hand, and through the violence and force of the blow, there
happened unto him many accidents; as extreme dolors, inflammation, fever, an
oedemateous Tumor; a flateous or windy tumor all the arm over, yea even to the
ends of the fingers, together with a preparation unto a Gangrena. Which to
prevent, and also the total mortification thereof, M. Nicholas Lambert, and M.
Richard Hubert, Surgeons in ordinary to the King, had made many and deep
scarifications. Now by the Commandment of the King, I was sent for to come
unto the aforesaid patient to dress him: where being arrived, seeing the
aforesaid accidents to be accompanied with a most faetide putrefaction, we
were resolved to apply on the said scarifyed parts, of Aegyptiacum fortified
and dissolved in vinegar and Aqua-vitae and such remedieswhich are proper for
the cure of Gangrenaes. Over and besides these accidents, the said Lord had a
flux of the belly, by the which he expelled of the fanie quitture which came
from the Ulcers of his arm. This many will not believe, forasmuch (as they
say) that if it should descend by the belly, it follows of necessity that
the said matter should be mixed with the blood. Also that in passing near
unto the heart, and through the Liver, it would cause many accidents, yea
death it self. Nevertheless I doubt not but that I have sufficiently answered
all these Objections, how and in what manner it is done in my book Of the
suppression of the urine; wherefore, if any desire to know the reason thereof,
he may have recourse to the said Book.

In like manner, the said Lord fell of^entimes into a Syncope, by reason of the
putrified vapors which ascended up from the ulcers, which vapors by the
Nerves, Veins, and Arteries, were communicated to the stomach, Aqua-vitae with
a little Trea^le recall (...) presenthe the spirits, and comfort the vital
faculty.
and other noble parts. For which cause I gave him sometimes a spoonefull of
Aqua vitae to drink, wherein I dissolved a little Treacle. Mounsieur
Bellanger, Physician in ordinary to the King, and Mounsieur le Bon Physician to
my Lord the Cardinal of Guize, men of understanding, and expert in Physic
and Chirurgerie, employed all their skill (as much as was possible) to resist
his Fever, and other accidents which happened to him. As for the Oedemateous and
flatulent tumor which wholly occupied all the arm, I applied thereon staples wet
in Oxycrat, with salt, and a little Aqua-vitae, and other remedies, which
shortly shall be showed. Then with double clothes I ^ewed them up as strong
and hansomly as I could possible, that is to say, as much as the said Lord
could endure it. This compression serves both to contain the fractured Bones
in their places, and also to expel the sanies from the ulcers, and to repel
the humors toward the center of the body. And when the binding and rolling
of his arm was omitted, the tumor did increase in such manner, that I very
much feared the natural heat of his arm would be suffocated and extinguished.
Now for to make any other manner of Ligature it was altogether impossible,
because of the extreme pain that he felt, if his arm had been removed never
so little. There happened unto him also many Apostumes about the joint of his
elbow, and in other parts of his arm: wherefore to give issue to the Sanies,
I made him many incisions; all which the said Lord endured willingly,
telling me that if two would not serve, make three, yea four; such was the
desire that he had to be out of his pain, and to be cured. Then (smiling to my
self) I told him that he deserved to be hurt, and not these tender and
delicate persons, who will rather suffer themselves to rot, yea to endure the
pains of death, then to endure any necessary incision to be made for the
restoring of their healths.

Now, to shorten his cure, he used of a Vulnarie potion, and sometimes there was
incerted with a Syringe into his ulcers of Aegyptiacum dissolved in wine, or
else in the said Potion, or rather Mel Rosarum instead of the Egyptiacum to
mundifie them, and to correct their putrefaction; and other remedies which
would be too tedious here to recite: and among others, of the powder of Alome
combusted, to dry up and consume the high and spongeous flesh. Also for the
mundification of the said ulcers, I used a long time nothing but dry Lint,
which was as much in quantity every dressing, as a Man's fist. And on a day,
seeing that he was without pain, and that the flesh began to regenerate, I
told him that now he began to be well: then he said to me laughing, I know it
very well, for now I see you do not use the fourth part of the Lint you did
before. In the time of his curation, I protest that I took from him more then
threescore pieces of bones. Of the which, some were as great as my finger
broken in a very strange figure, yet notwithstanding the said Lord (thanks be
to God) was perfectly cured: only it remains that he cannot, nor never will,
bow or stretch forth his arm.

History.
Mounsier de Bassompierre, Colonel of two hundred horse, the day of the
aforesaid battle, was hurt with such another shot, and had a great part of
the aforesaid accidents: whom also I dressed until his perfect curation, which
(thanks be to God) he attained. True it is, that he continues impotent as
the other Lord is.

After that I had cured the aforesaid Lords, the Earl of Mansfelt, and
Bassompierre, Another history.
I was commanded by the King to employ all my diligence in the curation of
Charles Phillippes de Croy, Lord of Hauret, Brother to my Lord the Duke of
Ascot, nere to Mons in Haynault, who had already kept his bed seven months
and more, by reason of a wound that he received by a Musket Shot, three fingers
above the knee, whom I found with these accidents following; namely, extreme
pains, a continual Fever, cold sweatings, loss of sleep, that part situate
upon Os Cauda, Meruellous accidents.
vlcerate in compass as much as the palm of my hand (because he had lain so
long time on his back) he took not any rest day nor night, with loss of
appetite of meat, but drank enough. He was sometimes surprised in his bed
with the fits of the Epilepsie, and had oftentimes a desire to vomit, with a
continual shaking, insomuch that he could not bring his hand to his mouth
without the help of another; he fell oftentimes into a Syncope or fainting of
the heart, because of the putrified vapors that were communicated to the
stomach and the noble parts, by the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves: the which we
elevated from his ulcers, and from the corruption of the bones. For the
Thigh Bone was fractured and shiuered both long wise and overthwart, with
diverse splinters; whereofsome were already separated, others not. He also had
an hollow ulcer near unto the groine, which ended about the middle of the
thigh. Moreover he had other sinuous and caniculous Ulcers about the Knee. All
the Muscles both of the thigh and leg were extremely tumified and imbued with
a flegmaticke, cold, moist, and flatulent humor, in such sort, that the natural
heat was very near suffocated and extinguished. Seeing al these accidents,
and the strength and virtue of the patient greatly decayed and abated, I was
stroke with an exceeding sorrow, because that I was sent unto him, and seeing
little hope of recovery, for I feared greatly that he would die under my hands.
Nevertheless, God and Nature effect marvelous things.
considering his youth, I had some small hope, for God and Nature brings
sometimes such things to pass, which seems impossible to the Chirurgian.

I then demanded of the said Lord, if he had a good courage: and told him
likewise, that if he would endure the making of certain incisions, the which
for his curation were very necessary, by that means his pains and his other
accidents would cease. He answered, that he would willingly endure whatsoever I
thought convenient, yea, to the amputation of his leg, if I thought it
necessary. Then I was very joyful, and presently after I made two Orifices to
give issue to the Matter that lay about the bone, and in the substance of the
Muscles, whereby there issued forth a great quantity. Afterward, iniection was
made with wine, and a little Aqua-vitae, wherein there was dissolved a good
quantity of Egyptiacum, to correct the putrefaction, and to dissicate the loose
and spongeous flesh, and to resolve and consume the ordemateous and flatulent
tumor, and to ease his pains, to refocillate and fortify the natural heat
which was greatly prepared to be altogether suffocated, because the parts could
not concoct nor assimilate the nourishment necessary for them, by reason of the
great quantity of matter therein contained. His Chirurg^an, named M. Anthony
Maucler, an honest man, of great experience in Surgery, dwelling at Mons in
Haynault, and my self, we concluded to make him fomentations, with the
decoctions of Sage, Rosemarie, Time, Lauander, Camomile flowers, Melilot, and
red Roses boiled in white wine: and so a lexiue made with the ashes of oak, a
little portion of vinegar, and an handful of salt. This decoction so made,
has virtue and power to subtilize, attenuate, incise, resolve and to dissicate
the cold, gross, and ^legmaticke humor, and to roborate the wounded parts.
The said fomentations were used a long time together, to the end that the
resolution may thereby be made the greater. For being applied long together, it
resolved more, by liquifying of the humor which was in the profound parts:
whereas otherwise it would have but rarifyed the skin, or the fleshy parts of
the Muscles.

And for this intention we made him many frications with hot Kerchiefes in all
manners, Galen in the 6 of the Method.
that is, from the higher parts downwards, and from the left side to the
right: also circular wise, and this a long space together. For the brief
Frications, I mean those that are made in short time, makes attraction, but
resolves nothing at all. In like manner every other day, there was applied all
about his Thigh and legs, even to the sole of his foot, of Brickes heated and
sprinkled with vinegar and white wine, with a little portion of aqua vitae; and
through this euaporation, you should perceive many Aquosities to proceed
forth of the pores of the skin by sweating, whereby the tumor diminished, and
the natural heat was revoked. Also there was applied compresses or Boulsters
on the tumified parts, dipped and infused in a levine made of the ashes of
oak; with the which, was boiled Sage, Rosemary, Lauander, Salt, Aqua vitae
and Cloves; and Ligature was made with such dexterity as the patient could well
endure it: and to so good purpose, that if it had bin but one day omitted, we
might easily perceive the tumor. Also there was applied good big Bolsters on
the bottom of the sinus of the ulcers, to depresse and expel away the Sanies.
And sometimes for the better accomplishing thereof, the orifices of the ulcers
were kept o^en with hollow Tents. Sometimes also to resolve the tumor, there was
applied a Cataplasine thereon made thus:

. Far. hord. fabar. orobi an. vj. Mellis com. Terebinth. an. ij. pull. flor.
Camomel. Mellioliti, rosar. rubrar. an. ss. pull. radic. ireos, florent. Cyperi
Mast. an. ij. oxymellis simplic, quantum sufficiat fiat cataplas. ad formam
pultis satis liquidiae.

In like manner, The Emplaster of Vigo is resolutiue.
we made use of the Emplaisters of Vigo sine mercurio, which helped greatly to
ease his pains, and to resolve the said Tumor. Nevertheless it was not
applied until the parts were first heated, by the means of fomentations,
Frications, and euaporations, or otherwise that Emplaster could never have
wrought that effect thorough the cold distemperature of the parts. Now for the
Mundification of the ulcers there was applied remedies proper thereunto,
changing and alteting them according as we found occasion. Also the
Catagmaticke powders to separate the bones, and to correct their putrefaction
were not spared him: he used also for the space of fifteen days of vulnary
potion.

I may not here omit to speak of the Frications which he suffered every
Morning universally over the whole body, which was greatly extenuated and
weakened both by reason of his dolors, and other accidents (as we have said)
and also for the want of exercise. The benefit of universal Frications.
The said Frications did revoke and attract the spirits and the blood, and
resolved such fuligenous humors which were detained between the skin and the
flesh. And therefore the parts were afterward better nourished and refreshed;
so that so soon as his pains began to pass away, as also the Fever, he
began to sleep well, and to have a good appetite, and therefore we caused him
to use good Meats, and to drink good wine and good be^r^; and we brake our
fasts together, he and my self every Morning, with good nourishing Br^thes:
and by this means he became fat and lasly, and perfectly cured. Only it
remains that he cannot well bend his knee.

Now the reasons that moved me to recite these Histories, is only to
instruct the young Chirurgian to the practice thereof, and not that any glory
of praise might be attributed to me: but to restore them to God, knowing that
all goodness proceeds from him as from an everlasting fountain, and nothing
of our selves. And therefore we ought to give thanks unto him for all our good
works; humbly beseeching him to continue and augment them more and more in us,
through his infinite goodness.

CHAP. XV. An Apology touching wounds made by Gunshot.
THere happened into my hands not many days past, A just occasion of the Author
for his Apology
a certain Book written by a Physician; wherein he very openly contradicts
that which I have written heretofore, as concerning wounds made by Gunshot and
their curations. I protest that if there were no other cause, or that there
were no other interest herein then the contemning of me and my Book, I would
let these things alone, and pass them away under silence; knowing well, that
all answers and replies whereby we strive to stop the Mouths of evil speakers,
do oftentimes rather give them a further occasion of speaking then otherwise;
and that there is no better way to stay such Controversies, then by not
answering one word. Even as we see that the fire is extinguished when the
combustible matter cease, by taking away the wood. But when I did consider
the evident danger that many would fall into, if they came to follow those rules
and instructions that the said Physician sets down for the cure of the
said wounds, I therefore thought it my duty to prevent this evil, and to
hinder it as much as lies in me, in regard of my profession. The which beyond
that common affection which all men owe to the public weal, does bind me
particularly to this, in such manner, that I could not with a good conscience
become deaf and dumb, when both my particular and general duties, do bind
and constraineime to speak. This therefore was the true cause that did
solicit me to make this Apology, rather then any passionate or boiling desire
in me, to have my revenge of him who has truly assaulted me.

Now in this book, he pretends to despise and contemn the application of
suppuratiue Medicines, as Bassilicon, and others of that nature. Basilicon
liquefied into an oil, is proper in all woundsthat ^equire suppuration.
Also of those that are sharp, as Egyptiacum, and such like. For (says he)
such remedies have been the cause of the deaths of an infinite number of men,
whereunto they have been applied; yea, although that their wounds were but
superficial, and in fleshy parts. And that herein the counsel of Hippocrates
ought not to be followed, Hyp. in his ^^^ke of vl^e^s.
who says, that all contused wounds ought to be brought to suppuration,
because (says he) this is a new disease, and unknown to the Ancients, and
therefore it requires new remedies. Also that thunder and the violent effect
thereof, ought not to be compared to the reports of Artillery.

Now seeing that he strives to contradict all that I have written before in my
book of wounds made by Gunne-shot, Arrows* and Darts, I am constrained for my
defense, to repeat somewhat of that which I have heretofore divulged, to
reprove all these points (as I hope) one after another.

First of all, that suppuratiue Medicines are not proper in such wounds, it is
against reason, authority, and experience: for every one knows that the
Bullet being round and massiue, cannot make any entrance into our bodies,
without great contusion and bruising; the which cannot be cured without
suppuration, according to the authority not only of Hippocrates, but also of
Galen, and all other Authors both Ancient and Modern. And what does it serve
him to call such new wounds, to derogate from the saying of Hippocrates whom
we hold to be the Father, Author, and Founder of the Laws of sacred Medicine,
which are worthy of all esteem and praise above all others, because they are
not subject to change, as all others that are established by Kings and Princes,
neither are they tied to the prescription of times, nor the customs of
Regions. Therefore if I have herein followed the Hippocratick Doctrine, which is
always found true and st^ble, I persuade my self to have done well. And
therein I have not been in that conceit alone; for Mounsieur Botall, Physician
in ordinary to the King, and Mounsieur Ioubert Physician to the King also, and
his Lecturer in ordinary in the university of Mont-pellier, men well
experimented both in Physic and Surgery, have lately written of this
matter. Commending, and commanding the application of Bassi^ic^n and other
suppuratiues in the beginning of such wounds.

These men, because they have followed the wars, have seen more wounded by
shot, then our Physician has done all his life time. As for experience, there
is an infinite number of other good Chirurgians, and greatly experimented, who
have and do use of these remedies in the beginning, to bring those wounds to
suppuration, if there be no Indication that does contradict it. I know moreover
that an Empericall Chirurgean, a neighbor of his called Doublet, Doubles an
Empirick.
has many and sundry times done marvelous cures, by applying only in those
wounds a suppuratiue Medicine, composed of melted Bacon, the yolke of an Egg,
terebinthinae, with a little Saffron, and this he held for a great secret.

There was also another at Thurin in the year 1538. (I being then in the
service of the late Marshall of Monte-ian, Lieutenant General of the King at
Piedmont) who had the report above all the Chirurgeans in those parts, for his
excellent cur^ng of those wounds with Oleu^ Catellorum; the description
whereof, I procured of him thorough my earnest entreaty. This oil is of power
to lenisie and appease the pain, and to suppurate those wounds being applied
a little more then lukewarm, and not boiling hot, as many will. This an
infinite number of Chirurgeans have used, after that I had described it in my
Book of wounds made by Gunshot with good and happy success. As for that
which he writes against the Unguent Egyptiacum, certainly I believe that he
abides in that opinion and heresy alone, Answer^ t^ the (...) of Igyptia^um.
because there has not bin yet discovered a more singular remedy to correct
and prevent the putrefaction which happens most commonly in those wounds, the
which do degenerate oftentimes into virulent, corrosiue, ambulatiue, and
malignant Ulcers, casting forth a stinking Sanies, whereby the part salleth
into a Gangrena, unless it be prevented by Egyptiacum, and other sharp
medicines. And for this cause they have been very much approved by the said
Botal and Ioubert, and of all good Chirurgeans; yet nevertheless our Physician
maintains that they are venomous, because (says he) that being applied in
wounds by Gunne shot, they have been the cause of the death of many persons;
which is a thing so absurd and against reason, that I will leave the resolution
thereof to the Towne-Barbers, who I am sure are of skill sufficient to confute
the grossenes of that imputation; or if their want of judgment be such that
they cannot, yet the consideration of every one of the ingredients of the
said Aegyptiacum would suffice to show, that it is so free from any venomous
quality, that it does resist, and is directly contrary to all sorts of poisons
and putrifactions which may happen in the fleshy parts, by reason of any wound
or ulcer.

He says moreover, that the disposition of the air cannot be the cause to
infect or restore wounds more dangerous at one time then at another. Herein
also he is of this opinion alone. But if he had well read and understood
Hippocrates, he had not so lightly contemned the constitution of the seasons,
and the infection proceeding from the air not simple and Elementary (for being
simple, it never acquireth any putrefaction) but by addition and commixtionwith
other corrupted vapors, as I have written in my treatise of the Pestilence: For
inasmuch as the air that does incompasse and enclose us, is perpetually
necessary unto our lives; it follows therefore, that according to the
indisposition thereof, our bodies also altered in many and sundry manners,
because we do draw it continually by means of the Lungs and other parts,
serving unto respiration; and also by the pores and every little invisible hole
throughout the body, and by the Arteries dispersed in the skin. And this is
done both for the generation of the spirit of life, and also to refresh and
foment our natural heat. For this cause, if it be immoderately hot, cold,
moist, or dry, or otherwise distempered, it alters and changes the
temperature of our bodies unto its own quality. This is clearly seen: for
when it is infected by the putrified and Cadaueruous vapors produced from a
great multitude of dead bodies that have not been buried soon enough; as of
men, of ho^ses, and other beasts. As it happens after any battle, or when
many men have perished by shipwreck, and have been cast ashore through the
violence of the waves. As for example, the memory is yet f^esh, of the
corruption of the air which proceeded from dead bodies at the castle of Pene,
situate upon the river of Lot, in which place, in the year 1562. in the month
of September, whiles the first troubles happened about Religion, there was a
great number of dead bodies fell into a pit of an hundred fathom deep, or
thereabouts: from whence, two months after, there was elevated such a stinking
and venomous vapor, which dispersed it self over all the countries of Agenois,
and the neighboring places within the compass of thirty miles round, that
thereby many were infected with the pestilence, whereof we need not wonder; for
the wind blowing* and driving the exhalations and corrupted vapors from one
country to another, does infect them with the said pestilence.

In like manner, the evil constitution of the air, whether the cause be
manifest or hidden, may make wounds to become putrified, alter the spirits and
the humors, and cause death. This therefore ought not to be attributed unto the
wounds, because that they which are hurt, and those that are not, are both
equally infected, and fall into the same inconveniences.

Mounsi^^r d' Alechamps in his French Surgery spea^^ng o^ these things
which hinder the c^^^t^on of Ulcers, has not omitted, that when either the
pes^^lence, or any Epidemicall Disease reigns in any Proui^ce through the
corruption of the Air, it ma^^th Ulcers become incureable, or of most
^^fficult curation.

The good old man Guido, in his Treatise of Ulcers has also writ, that the
wounds of the head were more h^r^er to cure at Paris then at Auigno^, and that
the Ulcers of the legs were more difficult at Auignon then at Paris,
for so much as at Paris the air is cold and moist, which is a contrary thing,
especially to wounds in the head. Likewise in Auignon, the hear of the air
do liquefie and subtilize the humors: and therefore, more easily and in
greater abundance do the humors fall into the Legs, whereby the curation of
the Ulcers in those parts, is more difficult at Auignon then at Paris. But if
any one alleging experience shall say the contrary, that the wounds in the
head are for the most part mortal in hot countries: To him I answer, that
that proceeds not from the air, as it is more hot and dry, but rather
because of some superfluous humidity and evil vapor communicated with the air,
as in the places about Prouence, and of Italy near unto the Mediterrenean sea.
Now, there is not a Chirurgean of so little understanding, that knows not but
if the air be hot and moist, the wounds do easily degenerate into a Gangrena
and putrefaction. As for experience, I will give him a familiar example. We see
that in hot and moist weather, and when the Southerly winds blow, that flesh
does putrify in less then two hours, though it were never so lately killed,
in such fort that Butchers in those times do kill no meat but even as they
sell it. Also there is no doubt to be made but that humane bodies do fall into
affections against Nature, when the qualities of the seasons are perverted
through the evil disposition of the air: as has been seen, that in some
years, wounded persons have bin most hard to cure, and oftentimes dyed of very
small wounds, what diligence soever the Physicians and Chirurgians could use.
The which I noted well at the siedge which was planted before Roan: for the
corruption of the air did alter and corrupt the blood and humors in such sort,
by the means of inspiration and transpiration, that the wounds became so
putrid and faetide, that they sent forth a Cadauerueous smell: and if it happened
that one day had been omitted wherein they had not been dressed, you shall find
the next day a great company of worms in them, with a meruellous stench; from
whence were elevated many putrified vapors, which by their communication with
the heart caused a continual F^uer, with the Liver hinderance of the generation
of good blood, and with the Brain they produce alienation of the spirits,
fainting, convulsion, vomitings, and by consequence death: and when their
bodies were opened, you should find Apostumes in many parts of their bodies
full of a green stinking Sanies, in such sort that those that were within the
Town seeing these things, that their wounded persons could not be cured, said
that those without had poisoned their bullets: and they without said the like
of those within: and then perceiving that those wounds did rather turn to
putrefaction then unto any good suppuration, I was constrained, and with me
the most part of all the Chirurgea^s to leave suppuratiues, and insted of them
to use the Unguent Aegyptiacum, and other such like remedies, to prevent the
said putrefaction and Gangrena, and other of the aforesaid accidents.

Moreover, if the diverse courses of the heavens have power and force to imprint
a pestilence in us thorough the influence thereof, why is it not possible that
the like may be done in a wound, to infect it after many ways? Experience it
self gives us a good and sufficient testimony, not only in hot weather, but
also in winter. For we see that every patient whether he be wounded, or
otherwise disposed against Nature, are tormented more of their greefes when the
weather is subject to rain, then when it is fair weather. And the reason is,
because the vapor and moist air, and southern winds, do inwardly move and
agitate the humors which afterward do discharge themselves upon the afflicted
parts, and thereby increase their pains.

Our Physician has also written, that in the battles of Dreux and of S. Denis,
which were fought in the winter time, there dyed a great number of men, that I
confess too; but I deny that it was by the application of suppuratiue
medicines, or of Corrosiues, but thorough the vehemency of their wounds, and
the disorder that the Bullets made in their members, whereunto the nature of
the wounded parts helped greatly, and the temperature of the patient, but above
all the cold. For the cold causes wounds to be of most difficult curation;
yea, sometimes it causes a Gangrena and total mortification, as witnesses
Hippocrates. And if he had been with me at the siedge of Metz, he should have
seen many soldiers having their legs eschiomened by reason of the cold, and
an infinite company of others that died of the cold, although they were not
wounded at all. If he will not believe this, I will but send him to the top of
the Mount Senis in the winter time, where many have lost their lives, and were
benumbed and frozen in a moment; witness the chapel of Transis, which from
thence had that Name given it.

He has in like manner calumnied me, because I compared thunder with Artillery.
Truly it may be said that they have like effects: for this Diabolical 1
Similitude
gunpowder does such merueilous things that it is easy to prove a great
similitude the one with the other. And first of all, we may compare the fire
that we behold to issue forth of the Cannon to the lightning in this, because
it is seen before the Thunder is heard, so is it with the other: and this
happens, because the ear is not so quick as the eye to receive their
objects. We may also compare the dreadfulnes of the reports of great Ordinance
to that of Thunder. 2 similitude
For when there is made any notable battery with great Ordinance, their reports
are heard sometimes twenty leagues off, more or less, according as the winds
carries the echo of their noise. The first reports are not heard so plain,
as those that follow; and the cause is, for that the multiplication of the
reports following and succeeding one another, that which is nerest does drive
or thrust forward that which is next him, and that in like manner thrusts
forwards the other, and that other the other, until it comes to our ears.
In like manner the Bullets are carried by the force of the powder, with such an
inestimable swiftness, that they break and batter all that they meet with; 3
similitude
yea, they have more force against hard and irresistable things then against
soft things: therein also they do resemble Thunder, which shiuereth the sword
in the scabberd, and yet the scabberd remaining whole, melting Silver in a
purse, the purse unburned. In like manner (as I have said here before) has been
seen many whom the Bullet has never touched, yet nevertheless thorough the
impetuosity of the air caused by the violence of the powder issuing out of the
mouth of the canon; has broke and shiuered the bones, without any manifest
appearance of solution of continuitie in the flesh; yea, to have battered and
killed them out right, as if it had been with a thunderclap. Gunpowder also
has a stinking smell, 4 ^imi^itude
senting of Brimstone; imitating therein that odor that continues in that
place where a Thunderbolt has lately fallen; which smell, is not only
abhorred of men, but also all Animalles are therefore constrained to abandon
and forsake their dens and caves when it has fallen nere thereunto: so great
is that sulphurous stink that it leaves b^hind it. But yet their similitudes
is more manifested by the effects of the said powder; 5 similitude
the which being enclosed in a Mine, and converted into wind or air by
means of the fire that is put thereunto, it ouer-whelmeth pieces of earth as
great as mountains* breaks and demollisheth strong towers, reuerseth
mountains vpside down. This I have already manifested by that history which I
have elsewhere written, which was that at Paris; there was seen not long since
a sudden disaster by reason of the powder in the Arcenall, which taking fire,
it caused such a great tempest, that it made the whole Town to shake, over
whelming those houses that were near thereunto, Hor^ible effects of gunpowder.
uncovering and vnglasing those that were further from the fury thereof.

To be brief, even as the thunder does massacre and reuerse men half dead
here and there; taking from some their sight, from others their hearing, and
leaves others so torn in their members, as if four horses had drawn them to
pieces: and all this through the agitation of the air into whose substance the
said powder was converted. The like act happened in the Town of Malignes, in
the year 1546. by the fall of a thunderbolt, within a great and strong Tower,
wherein there was a great quantity of Gunpouder, the which did overthrow and
reuerse almost the one half of the Town, and killed a great number of
persons, whereof I saw a while since many remarkable tokens.

These examples in my opinion are sufficient to content our Physician, and to
show him that there is a great similitude between the effects of Gunpowder
and Thunder. Nevertheless, I will not for all that confess that Gunshot is
accompanied with poison and fire as the claps of Thunder: for although they do
agree the one with the other, as does appear by the former similitudes, it is
not in the substance and matter, but in their manner of breaking, battering,
and dissipating of the objects which they meet, that is to say, the
thunderclaps by the means of the fire, and the stone engendered therein, and
Gunne-shot by the air impetuously agitated, which guiding the bullet, causes
the like tempestuous disaster, that the thunder does. These things considered,
may we not therefore confess, that those who have written that the Cannon
shot and Thunder to have a great similitude together, have had reason so to do?
Finally, this Physician has not taken much pains to prove that Gun-pouder
was not venomous, and that the bullets are without any burning at all. Neither
in like manner to invent and name the Instruments proper for the extraction of
all strange bodies, because he has found them already digested in my book,
with many other things which he has written, as every one may know by
comparing his book with mine. He has also enriched his Book with many
sentences and reasons which he has collected from an Italian Author, named
Bartholomaeus Magius, Physician of Bolognia, who has written sufficiently
thereof in a Treatise called De Vulnerum sclopetorum curatione, although he
does not acknowledge him for his guide. But having traduced him almost word for
word, has made it nevertheless his own, and of a Translator, would be
called Author.

Now let us come to his goodly practice and new method to cure wounds made by
Gunshot. A new kind of suppuratiue.
First of all, he would have applied suppuratiue Medicines, the which
nevertheless he does not understand to be hot and moist, nor of an
emplasticke substance; but to the contrary, he ordains them to be hot and
dry, because (says he) that this is not of the nature of an Apostume, wherein
there is required no other cure but only to suppurate them. But here where the
wounds are with contusion, many and diverse Indications arise from thence; for
so much as the contusion would be concocted and digested, and the wound
desiccated. To answer to this, I would send him to learn the nature and
quality of suppuratiues in Galen in the 5. of Simples, and to take all in his
way, until he come to the tenth of his Method, which will teach him, that in
complicated diseases he ought to consider the cause, the order, and the vigent.

Moreover, I would willingly ask of him if he can heal that wound made by
gunshot, unless the Contusion be first suppurate? I think not: and herein I
refer my self to the judgment of al good practitioners; and therefore our
Basi^icon and Oleum Catellorum, and other such suppuratiue medicines, are
proper to suppurate such wounds as are made by Gunshot. Secondly, he would
have Oxycratum put into the wound to stanch the flux of blood: and if by that
means it cannot be stopped, to apply thereon a medicine made of the white of an
Egg, Bole Armoniacke, Rose-vinegar and Salt. I leave you to consider whither
such like remedies have power to stay the flux of blood or no, they being put
with in the wound. Truly they will rather make it flow more, because that the
vinegar is of a gnawing and subtle quality, causing pain, defluxion,
inflammation, and other evil accidents, as I have known by experience: and I
know no Chirurgean that has been exercised in his Art, will follow such a
kind of practice, least he find himself deceived in the end. To this purpose
I do remember that I had a Moor in cure, who belonged to Mounsieur the Earl of
Roissy, who was hurt before Bologne by an English man, who gave him a wound
with a Lance through the back: whereupon, to stay the Flux of blood, I put
into the wound a restrictiue, wherein there was Vinegar insted of another, but
presently after he came to me again, telling me that he thought he had had
fire in his arm, which caused me to dress him anew, and to change the
medicine of his wound, and to apply the said restrictiue upon it. I believe
that this Physician knew not so much, otherwise I esteem him so honest a man
that I think he would not have put it in his Book for a good restrictiue.

Moreover, he commends above all other things his Balm made of the oil of
wax and mirth beaten together with the yolke of an Egg, or rather the natural
Balsome which is brought from Peru, and says, that they do consume the
superfluous humidity of those wounds, whereby they prevent the happening of any
perilous accident. Nevertheless, he says, that they do unite and consolidate
those kind of wounds, as they do which are incised. Truly it seems very
strange to me, to see that any would go about to dress and cure contused
wounds, as simple wounds which demand nothing but union. Over and besides,
these Balmes cannot be proper in wounds made by gunshot, because that by reason
of their siccitie they do hinder suppuration, without the which they cannot
be cured. And if they be needful at all, it is only after that the contusion
is suppurated, and the wound mundified: and then I know not where we should
find so many extractors of quintessences to extract and prepare so many Balmes
as shall be needful to dress those soldiers which shall be hurt in the assault
of a Town, A pleasant answer, and to the purpose.
or a skirmish in battle? Neither where they shall get money sufficient to
counteruaile the charge thereof.

Let us come to the rest. He ordains that these Balmes should be instilled
into the vvounds without Tents, yet afterward remembering himself, he says,
that it would be very good to put within them a little short one, only to
keep the Orifice of the wound open. How is it possible that these Balmes and
Unguents should be conveyed into the bottom of the wound without Tents or
Setons, whose use is principally to carry medicines unto the bottom of wounds,
and to keep them open to give issue unto all strange bodies? All good
practisers will never agree with him in this point, nor those which know what
it is to handle such wounds.

Now there is yet another thing worthy to be well noted, and that is this:
After that he had reproved the Unguent of Egyptiacum, he nevertheless
forgetting himself, commands it to be applied from the beginning until the
wound be altogether suppurated, and to be thus used. Take (says he) of
Egyptiacum dissolved in a decoction on made of the tops of Wormwood, and of
Hypericon, and of the lesser Centaury and Plantan, and this to be iniected into
the wound. H^ describes after that another, made of Plantane water, and honey
of Roses boiled together unto the thickness of honey, and then scumming of it
well, therewi^hall mix Egyptiacum in equal parts: and (says he) this unguent
does suppurate those Wounds which are made by Gunshot, I leave the
experimented Chirurgicall Readers to judge whether such remedies be suppuratiue
or not. As for me I do esteem them to be proper to mundifie and cleanse, and
not to suppurate. He finally writes, that the wound ought not to be dressed
but once in four days, and where there shall be fracture of the bones once
in eight days. He says moreover in another place, that it is convenient to
instill every day ten or twelve drops of balm into the wound. Truly this
doctrine serves rather to confound the young Chirurgean, as not knowing what
manner of practice he should follow: Evil p^actisers do open both the
heaue^^ and the earth.
for whosoever should follow his, I am well assured he will open often both the
heavens and the earth; the heavens to receive their souls, and the earth their
bodies.

But we have spoken enough of this matter for this time, inasmuch as I am well
assured, that these small caui^lations shall nothing at all diminish the
reputation of my Book, which is by strangers so much esteemed, that they have
translated it into their own mother tongues, thereby to have communication
therewith. Therefore now we will bid our Physician farewell, but first would
pray him to review and correct his Book as soon as he could, to the end that
the young Chirurgean be no longer retained in those errors which they may
apprehend by reading therein: for the shortest follioes are the best.

CHAP. XVI. Another Discourse about the question of the venenosity of wounds
made by Gunshot.
NOt many months since, I chanced to be in the company of many learned
Physicians and expert Chirurgeans, who by way of discourse began to put the
venenosity of wounds made by Gunshot; they principally striving by five
Reasons to prove that venenosity may be conioined with those wounds, not
because of the powder, which they confess with me to be free from venom or
poison both in the composition and essence thereof, but by reason of the
bullet, within the which poison may be infused, mixed, and incorporated.

The first reason is, 1 Reason.
because that Lead is very rare and spongeous, as the facility of the
dissoluing and softness thereof do show, and therefore by consequence very
easy to receive the imbibition or infusion of any venomous liquor. I answer
that that consequence seems to me to be but of small assurance: for in all
artificial mixtions, Answer.
as is that whereof we speak, there are two things to be considered; the
matter of the bodies which enter into the commixtion; and the form according
to the matter. Such bodies ought either to be liquid, or soft, or brittle, and
easy to be divided into small portions; to the end, that altogether and on
every part, they may meet, ioy^e, and unite. According to the form they ought
to be alliable and computible the one with the other. This is evidently known
by the water, which though it be easy to mix with an infinite number of other
things, yet nevertheless they cannot be mixed together, by the reason of the
antipathy of their forms. So Gold and Silver are so amorous of Lead, that
when they are to be dissolved, they are mingled therewith; but Brass does
fly from Lead as much as gold and silver do fly from Tin. If therefore Lead
and Brass be melted together, they can by no means be mixed together, though
both are contained under Metallicke kinds. How then can there be incorporated
with Lead any venomous thing, being different both in form and kind?

Let us come to the second reason. Iron (they say) which is more hard, 2 Reason.
solid and compact, may nevertheless receive a certain venomous quality, as
we see by impoysoned Arrows, whereof our Ancestors have heretofore used; and
therefore Lead (by more reason) may receive the like venomous quality. Answer.
To answer to that, I confess that the poison may well be received on the
superficies of the Iron, but not in the inward substance thereof, by way of
commixtion. Now here the question is of incorporation, and not of a simple
infusion or Unction.

Let us hear the third reason. 3 Reason
Although that Lead (say they) when it is melted, does leave behind it a
kind of gross excrement: nevertheless, it is not therefore made unapt to
receive the infusion of any strange substance. For, even as steel a metal
amongst all others the most solid, does receive in the woorking thereof, a
temper which does harden it of a clean contrary substance. For answer (I
say) that when the temper is given to steel, it is not received within the
inw^rd substance thereof; for, Answer
if such a thing were necessary for the hardening thereof, it might be easier
done at that time when it is first drawn and melted, then to give it the
Temper, it would better incorporate therewith then afterward when it is taken
and consolidate into a bar. This answer shall likewise serve to confute the
fourth reason, 4 Reason
by the which (say they) that the juice of Napellus and Rhododendron of Apium
risus, and such like, who of their whole substance, do hurt and corrupt ours
being mingled with Lead, there may thereby be made such a venomous commixtion;
that those wounds which it makes, must of nec^ssity become venomous. I say to
the contrary, Answer
that the mixture is only of things which may not only be applied, but also
fixed, incorporated, and united the one to the other. Now how can water or any
other liquid juice only be made to adhere and cleave to Lead which is hard and
solid, I mean in that fashion that they may be united: the variety hereof may
be judged better by experience, then by reason. Cause Lead to be melted within
the juices heretofore recited, or any other that you will choose (having first
weighed them severally) and you shall find the just measure of the juices, and
the true weight of the Lead, as they were before: a most evident sign, that no
part of the Lead is incorporated with the iuyces, nor the iuyces to have lost
any of their substance.

The first reason is this; The Bullet shot out of a Musket against a stone or
any body of the like hardness, 5 R^ason.
is not thereby so much heated, but that it may nevertheless be handled in the
bare hand though it be taken presently after it was shot: and therefore it is
false to affirm, that the poison infused in the Bullet, may be consumed by the
fire of the flaming powder. I answer, you must note that when I said that
although the Bullet may be handled, nevertheless, the fire would consume the
force of the poison; my meaning was, not the fire of the flaming powder, Answer.
when the Musket is shot off, but that fire which is used to incorporate the
molten Lead with the said poison, the which immediately working upon the
poison, being not yet wholly enwrapped and covered in any strange body* and
having time and leisure to work that effect, and not at an instant and
altogether, it may if not consume, yet at the least greatly abate the forces of
the said poison. Those that will not content themselves with these reasons, let
them read Matthiolus upon the Preface of his sixth Book of Di^scorides. There
are (says he) of late men so ignorant and fool^sh, A great Anotation.
that they do cause to cast amongst their Gold and Silver when it is melted,
wherewith they intend to make any drinking vessell^s of Treacle, Methridate,
and other Antidotes, to the end these metals having acquired even at the
beginning the virtues of the aforesaid Antidotes may resist all poisons. But
how ridiculous and foolish this opinion is, they themselves may judge, if they
have but any mean knowledge of natural things, and principally of Metals. And
therefore, there shall not need a more evident refutat^on. Behold the reasons,
behold the authority, which have retained in my first opinion, that wounds made
by Gunne-shot are not conjoined with any venenosity.

Here let not the Reader build too much on the opinion of Ambrose Parie; for
I think there is not any Chirurgean that will deny but that a bullet may be
poisoned, notwithstanding the former reasons, which I leave to be considered by
the judicious and experimented Chirurgean.

CHAP. XVII. The differences between such wounds which are made by arrows,
and those made by Gunshot.
THese wounds which are made by Arrows, Crosse-bow shot, or such like
Instruments, do differ in two things from those which are made by Gunshot and
other fiery Engines. For sometimes they are found without Contusion, which
never happens to wounds made by Gunne-shot. Oftentimes also they are
empoysoned, and according to these two differences, their curations ought to be
diuersified. Now let us consider the differences of Arrows and Darts, because
that consideration serves greatly unto the knowledge and curation of the said
wounds.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the differences of arrows and Darts.
A Rrowes and Darts do differ in matter, in form or figure, in magnitude, in
number, in manner, and faculty or virtue. Their differences in matter is, some
of them are of Wood, others of Canes or Reeds: some of them have their
extremities or heads garnished with Iron, Tin, Lead, Brass, Horn, Glass,
or of bone, and others not. Their differences in form are, some of them are
round, others angular, others sharp, others barbed; some of them having their
points turned backwardes, and some have it divided into two parts: some are
made broad in their heads and cutting like a knife, and in many other forms and
fashions inumerable. As for their magnitude, some of their heads are of three
fingers in length; others of a smaller size. Their number causes a difference
herein; because that some are simple, having but one point only; others are
composed into two or many. Also in them their manner is to be confidered; for
some of them have the Iron or head inserted within the wood of the Arrow, and
of others the Arrow is inserted into the head. Some heads are sixed and nailed
unto the shaft, and others not; but have so little hold, that in drawing them
forth, their heads remain behind in the wounds, whereby they become more
dangerous. Their faculty makes them also to differ in this, because that some
are (as has been said) empoysoned and others not. Such are the special and
proper differences of Arrows and Darts: according to the which, the
dispositions which they leave behind them, does diuersifie their curation.
Thou may behold by this following figure the aforesaid differences.

CHAP. XIX. Of the differences of the wounded parts.
THese d^fferences exposed. Now we must consequently speak of the diversity of
the affected parts, which are either fleshy or bony; some of them are near the
joints, others within them. Some with a great Flux of blood, and fracture of
the bones, others not. Some of them in the princall members, or in parts
serving them; some are deep, Ne^essarie iudg^ment to avoid scandal.
others but superficial. And if in any of these wounds there appear any
manifest signs of death, you ou^ht to make a true and sure judgment thereof,
before you meddle therewith, to the end that there be no occasion given unto
the ignorant people to speak evil of our Art. Now, to leave the Arrow in the
body, would cause inevitable death, and the Chirurgean would be esteemed
vnpittiful and inhumane, and by drawing it forth the Patient may peradventure
escape. For, as we have said* it is better to attempt a doubtful remedy, then
to let the Patient dye, without any succor at all.



CHAP. XX. Of the extraction of Arrows.
AS touching the extraction of Arrows, you ought to avoid the incising,
dilacerating, and breaking of the Veins, and Arteries, Nerves and Tendons, if
it be possible. For it would be an ignominious thing and against Art, to offend
Nature more then the Arrow.

The manner to draw them forth is twofold; the one of them is by extraction,
and the other by thrusting it through the member. Therefore, even at the
beginning, and at the first dressing, it is fittest to take forth all strange
bodies (if any there be) as the heads of the Arrows, the shafte or wood, and
other such like things, as has already been said of wounds made by Gunne
shot, and by the same means. And for their better extraction, it is convenient
that the Patient be situate in the same figure and posture, as at that time
when he was hurt, because of the Re^sons aforesaid (if it be possible) and
then to use instruments proper to that effect. as principally this following,
which has an hollow quill or pipe divided in the middle, the outwar^e part
toothed; into the which is inserted a rod, like unto the Tirefond of Gunshot,
as has been figured here before, excepting only that this is not made with
a Scrue in the extremity or end thereof. Also it is made greater, to dilate
the hollow pipe, thereby to fill the cauity of the Iron head. This other
Instrument also is very proper, which dilateth by compressing the two
extremities together, being toothed also on the outward part; as you may see by
these following Figures on the other side the leaf.



The first Instrument is opened by means of a Vice, which is inserted within
the hollow Pipe thereof.

The second Instrument does dilate, by compressing the two ends together.

The signs whereby you may know where the Iron head is, that if you feel with
your hand on that part where it is, you shall perceive an asperity and
inequality. Also the flesh will appear contused, liuid, and black, and the
Patient will feel an heaviness and continual pain in the wounded part.

The other two Instruments are called Tenacles, with a Vice, together with a
Crows bill: and is very commodious to draw forth the heads of Arrows, and to
extract forth Maile and other smaller bodies.

This Instrument underneath, is another small Hook to draw forth Maile, or any
other strange body, that it cannot meet with: which also may serve thy turn
for the same effect, in the wounds of Gun-shor.



But if it come to pass that the head be barbed, whether it be of an Arrow,
Pike, Dart, or Lance, and shall abide in any part of the body. As for example,
in the Thighe or Leg, together with some portion of the wood broken therein,
in that case the Chirurgean shall cut away the wood or shaft as close as he
can, with incising or cutting Tenacles. Afterward he may draw forth the head
with Tenacles that are toothed, as you may see by the figure before going.

Hippocrates in the fifte of his Epidemies says, That he has drawn forth the
head of an Arrow six years after it was shot, it being lodged nere unto the
Groine.



CHAP. XXI. How you ought to proceed in drawing forth broken Arrows.
BUT if it come to pass, that the head is broken, in such sort that it cannot
by any means be apprehended by the aforesaid Tenacles, let it be extracted
then (if it be possible) with the Cranes bill, or Crows bill, or other
Instruments, that have been described here before: but if the shaft be broken
off so near the head, that there can be taken no hold, neither of the head
thereof, nor of the shaft, with the Cranes bill, then let it be drawn forth
with the Tirefond of Gunshot, for if it will insert it self into Lead, by a
greater reason it may easily enter into wood. In like manner, if the head be
barbed, as most commonly your English men's Arrows are, then if it be possible,
thrust it thorough the member, with an Instrument proper thereunto. For, by
that means you shall avoid greater danger, because that in drawing it forth,
the Barbils may rend both the Nerves, Veins, Arteries, and the other parts,
the which you ought to avoid carefully. And therefore it is better to make a
counter Orifice on the other part, just oueragainst the wound, and so to thrust
it clean through. For, it may be supposed, that there is but a little
thickenesse to incise; so by this means, and with less danger the wound will
have a double issue; the one on the former part, and the other on the hinder
part; and will therefore heal sooner, because you may apply your medicines
both on the one side, and on the other, and it will also mundifie better. To
the contrary, if the barbed head happen upon a bone, or be inserted therein,
which oftentimes comes to pass in the bottom of the Muscles of the Thigh,
of the Arm, or Leg, or other parts of great distance, there it is not
convenient to thrust them through, but rather to dilate the wound, avoiding the
Nerves and great vessels, as the good and expert Anatomical Chirurgean ought to
do, and then gently and orderly to apply therein a Dilatory hollow in the
inward part thereof, and so to place it, that it may apprehend the two Barbils
of the Iron head: then with the Cranes bill it may be held steady, and so draw
them forth all three together, as this figure following shows thee.

A ^ilatory which has a certain cauity in the inward part thereof, with the
Cranes ^ill holding a barbed head.


CHAP. XXII. What ought to be done when the Arrow is inserted into the bone.
NOw, if it happen that the Arrow is so inserted and fixed in the Bone, that it
cannot be taken soorth by thrusting it thorough the member, but by drawing it
forth by the same way that it entered in, you ought then to move and stir
it too and fro discreetly if it stick fast in the bone, wherein an especially
care ought to be taken that you break not the Arrowe, and so leave some part
thereof sticking in the bone; from whence might ensue many dangerous accidents.
This operation may be done by the Instrument named the Crowesbill, or by others
here before figured presently after the extraction of the Arrowe. Suffer the
wound to bleed sufficiently, taking your Indication from the strength or virtue
of the Patient, to the end that the part may thereby be discharged, and less
mollested with inflammation, putrefaction, and other evil accidents. The
extraction being done, at the first dressing, if the wound be simple, thou
shall handle it as a simple wound: but if it be with complication, thou shall
then cure them according as you shall find the dispo^tions complicated, to
appease the pain, thou may to thy great profit apply Oleum Catellorum of
our description here before declared, and to overcome other accidents which
may happen in thy cure, thou shall have recourse unto our former Books of
wounds in genenerall, and of those made by Gunshot.

CHAP. XXIII. Of venomous or empoysoned wounds.
NOw there remains to understand and consider, that these wounds are
sometimes empoysoned (as we have said) and that it proceeds from the
primitive cause of the Arrows so prepared by the enemy. This may easily be
known both by the report of the hurt person, saying, that he feels a great
and pricking pain as if he had been stung with Bees (especially if the poison
were hot, which is most used in that case) and also by the flesh of the wounded
part, which presently after becomes pale and liuide, with a certain
appearance of mortification: whereunto also there does happen many other
g^oefes, and greater accidents, which are not accustomed to happen in all other
wounds, wherein there is not any venenosity. Wherefore at the beginning (after
that you have extracted forth all the strange bodies, if any there be) you
ought to make diverse deep scarifications all about the wound, and to set
ventoses thereon with a great flame, thereby to make attraction and euacuation
of the virulent matter. In like manner, the said attraction may be done, by
causing the wound to be sucked by another man, having in the mean time a
little Oil in his mouth, wherein you must have a care that he have not any
Ulcer therein, for fear left that the poison so sucked and attracted cleave
not thereunto. Also attraction may be made by the application of Unguents,
Cataplasmes, Emplaysters, Vesiccatories, Cauteries, and other things, which
shall be declared hereafter in our particular Book entreating of the bitings
and stingings of venomous Beasts.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 9. line 17. for Sir, read Saint. p. 15. l. 20. for practices r.
prurities. p. ^2. l. 22. for enduring, read inducing. p. ^ 5. l. 11. for
Escharotick, r. Escharcotick. p. ibid. l. 16. for endured, r. induced. p. 59.
l. 30. for cooling r. rolling. page 60. l. 21. r. the yolke of Eggs p. 75. l.
23. for naucotick r. narcotick. p. 85. l. 3. for staples r. Stuphes. p. 90. l.
15. for Lerine, r. lexiue. p. 104* l. 19. for eschiomened r. estiomened.

A Table of all the Chapters contained in this following Treatise.
THe diu^sion of wounds according to the diversity of the parts offen^ed, and
the Bullets wherewith they were made. Chap. 1. Of the signs of the wounds
made by Gunshot. Chap. 2. The manner of handling those wounds at the first
dressing. Chap. 3. A description of such Instruments which are proper to
extract Bullets, and other unnatural things of the body. Chap. 4. The manner
to handle those wounds at the first dressing after the unnatural things are
forth. Chap. 6. The manner to extract such unnatural things which shall be left
in the body after the first extraction. Chapter 7 Indications which ought to be
observed in the said wounds. Chap. 8 How and in what manner diseases are
complicated Chap. 9. How the Chirurgean ought to prosecute the handling of the
aforesaid wounds. Chap. 10 Of Bullets which do remain in the certain parts of
the body, a long time after the curation of the wounds. Chap. 11 Of the great
Contusions and dilacerations made by the aforesaid Bullets of Artillery. Chap.
12 Of the means which should be observed ^n rectifying of the air, and
corrobating the noble parts, and to fortify the whole body. Chap. 13 Memorable
Histories. Chap. 14 An Apology touching the wounds made by Gunshot. Chap. 15
Another Discourse upon that question of the venenosity of wounds made by
Gunshot. Chap. 16. The differences between wounds made by arrows and those
made by Gunshot. Chap. 17. The difference between Arrows and Darts. 18 Of the
difference of the wounded parts. Chap. 19 Of the extraction of Arrows. Chap.
20 How you ought to proceed in drawing forth broken Arrows. Chap. 21 What
ought to be done then when the Arrow is infixed in the bone. Chap. 22 Of
venomous or empoysoned wounds. Chap. 23





