An Admonition to all such as shall intend hereafter to enter the state of
Matrimony, godlily and agreeably to Laws.
FIrst, that they contract not with such persons as be hereafter expressed, nor
with any of like degree, against the law of God, and the laws of the Realm.

Secondly, that they make no secret contracts, without consent or counsel of
their Parents or Elders, under whose authority they be: contrary to Gods laws
and man's ordinances.

Thirdly, that they contract not anew with any other upon divorce and
separation made by the Judge for a time, the Laws yet standing to the contrary.

MArriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled. But whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13.

To avoid fornication let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her
husband. He that cannot contain, let him marry: For better it is to marry,
than to burn. 1 Cor. 7.

Unto the married I command, not I, but the Lord; let not the wife depart from
her husband. But if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or he reconcited unto
her husband. And let not the Husband put away his (...)

LEVITICUS. XVIII. and XX. None shall come near to any of the kindred of his
flesh to uncover her shame: I am the Lord.


A Man may not marry his
Secundus gradus in linea recta ascendente. Con. Avi. 1 Grandmother af. Avi
relicta. 2 grandfathers wife af. Prosocrus, vel socrus magna. 3 Wives
Grandmother Secundus gradus, inaequalis, in linea transversa ascendente. Con.
Amita 4 Fathers sister Con. Matertera 5 Mothers sister af. Patrui relicta 6
Fathers brothers wife af. Avunculi relicta 7 Mothers brothers wife af. Amita
uxoris. 8 Wives fathers sister af. Matertera uxoris. 9 Wives mothers sister
Primus gradus in linea recta ascendente. Con. Matter 10 Mother af. Noverca 11
Stepmother af. Socrus 12 Wives mother Primus gradus in linea recta descendente.
Con. Filia 13 Daughter af. Privigna. 14 Wives daughter af. Nurus. 15 Sons
wife Primus gradus aequalis in linea transversali. Con. Soror 16 Sister af.
Soror uxoris 17 Wives (...) af. Fratris relicta. 18 Brothers wife Secundus
gradus in linea recta descendente Con. Neptis ex filio 19 Sons daughter Con.
Neptis ex filia 20 Daughters daughter af. Pronurus. i. relicta nepotis exfilio
21 Sons sons wife af. Pronurus. i. relicta nepotis ex filia 22 Daughters
sons wife af. Privigni filia 23 Wives sons daughter af. Privignae filia. 24
Wives daughters daughter Secundus gradus in aequalis in linea transversali
dese^de^te Con. Neptis ex fratre 25 Brothers daughter Con. Neptis ex sorore 26
Sisters daughter af. Nepotis ex fratre relicta 27 Brothers sons wife af.
Nepotis ex sorore relicta 28 Sisters sons wife af. Neptis uxoris ex fratre.
29 Wives brothers daughter af. Neptis uxoris ex sorore. 30 Wives sisters
daughter.

A woman may not marry with her
Secundus gradus in recta linea asce^dente. 1 Grandfather Con. Avus 2
Grandmothers husband. af. Aviae relictus 3 Husbands grandfather. af. Prosocer,
vel socer magnus. Secundus gradus inaequalis in linea transversali ascendente.
4 Fathers brother Con. Patruus 5 Mothers brother Con. Avunculus 6 Fathers
sisters husband. af. Amitae relictus 7 Mothers sisters husband af. Materterae
relictus 8 Husbands fathers brother af. Patruus mariti 9 Husbands mothers
brother. af. Avunculus mariti. Primus gradus in linea recta descende^te 10
Father Con. Pater 11 Stepfather af. Vitricus 12 Husbands father af. Socer.
Primus gradus in linea recta descende^te 13 Son Con. Filius 14 Husbands son
af. Privignus 15 Daughters husband af. Gener Primus gradus aequalis in linea
transversali. 16 Brother Con. Frater 17 Husbands brother af. Le vin 18 Sisters
husband. af. Sororis r(...)ctus Secundus gradus in linea recta descendente. 19
Sons son Con. Nepos ex filio 20 Daughters son Con. Nepos ex filia 21
Sons daughter husband. af. progener. i. relictus neptis ex filio 22 Daughters
daughter husband af. Progener. i. relictus neptis ex filia 23 Husbands son
son af. Privigni filius 24 Husbands daughters son af. Privignae filius.
Secu^dus gradus inaequalis, in linea transversali descendente. 25 Brothers
son Con. Nepos ex fratre 26 Sisters son Con. Nepos ex sorore 27 Brothers
daughters husband af. Neptis ex fratre relictus 28 Sisters daughters husband
af. Neptis ex sorore relictus 29 Husbands brothers son af. Liviris filius. i.
nepos maritiex fratre. 30 Hsubands sisters son. af. Gloris filius. i. nepos
mariti ex sorore

1 IT is to be noted, that those persons which be in the direct line,
ascendant, and descendant, cannot marry together, although they be never so
far asunder in degree.

2. It is also to be noted, that consanguinity and affinity (letting and
dissolving Matrimony) is contracted as well in them and by them, which be of
kindred by the one side, as in and by them, which be of kindred by both sides.

3. Item, that by the Laws, consanguinity and affinity (letting and dissolving
Matrimony) is contracted as well by unlawful company of man and woman, as by
unlawful marriage.

4. Item, in contracting betwixt persons doubtful, which be not expressed in
this Table, it is most sure, first to consult with men learned in the Laws* to
understand what is lawful, what is honest and expedient, before the finishing
of their contracts.

5. Item, that no Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall solemnize Matrimony on of
his, or their Cure, or Parish Church or Chapel, and shall not solemnize the
same in private houses nor lawless nor exempt Churches, under the pains of
the Law, forbidding the same And that the Curate have the Certificates when the
parties dwell in diverse places.

6. Item, the bands of matrimony ought to be openly denounced in the Church, by
the Minister, three several Sundays, or festival days, to the end, that who
will and can allege any impediment, may be heard, and that stay may be made
till further trial, if any exception be made there against it upon sufficient
caution.

7. Item, who shall maliciously object a frivolous impediment against a lawful
matrimony to disturb the same, is subject to the pains of the Law.

8. Item, who shall presume to contract in the degrees prohibited, (though he
do it ignorantly) besides that the fruit of such copulation may be judged
unlawful, is also punishable at the Ordinaries discretion.

9. Item, if any Minister shall conjoyn any such, or shall be present at such
contracts making, he ought to be suspended from his Ministry for three years:
and otherwise to be punished according to the laws.

10. Item, it is further ordained, that no Parson, Vicar or Curate do preach,
treat or expound of his own voluntary invention, any matter of controversy in
the Scriptures, if he be under the degree of a Master of Art, except he be
licensed by his Ordinary thereunto, but only for the instruction of the people,
read the Homilies already set forth, and such other form of doctrine as shall
be hereafter by authority published: and shall not innovate or alter any thing
in the Church or use any old Rite or ceremony, which be not set forth by
public authority.

Set forth by the most reverend Father in God, Matthew Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of England, and Metropolitan.
Imprinted at London, by I. Oaks, for John Harrison, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Unicorne in Paternoster Row. Anno 1639.


