The Case of SHIPMONY Briefly Discoursed, ACCORDING TO THE Grounds of Law,
Policy, and Conscience.

AND MOST HVMBLY presented to the Censure and Correction of the High Court of
PARLIAMENT, Nov. 3. 1640.

Printed Ann. Dom. 1640.

THE Case of SHIP MONEY Briefly discoursed,
GREAT ^ Fires happening in Towns or Cities, are sometimes the cause that
other contiguous houses are spoyld and demolisht, besides those which the flame
it self ceazes: So now, in the case of Shipmony, not only the judgment it
self which has been given against the subject, does make a great g^p and
breach in the rights and Franchises of England, but the arguments and pleadings
also, which conduced to that judgment, have extended the mischief further,
and scarce left anything unviolated. Such strange contradiction there has
been amongst the pleaders, and dissent amongst the Judges, even in those Laws
which are most fundamental, that we are lef^ in a more confused uncertainty of
our highest privileges, and those customs which are most essential to
Freedom then we were before. To introduce the legality of the Ship-scot, such
a Prerogative has been maintained, as destroys all other Law, and is
incompatible with popular liberty: and such art has been used to deny,
traverse, avoid, or frustrate the true force or meaning of all our Laws and
Charters, that if we grant Ship Money upon these grounds, with Ship Money we
grant all besides. To remove therefore this uncertainty, which is the mother of
all injustice, confusion, and public dissension, it is most requisite that
this grand Council and Tres^ault Court (of which none ought to think
dishonourably) would take these Ard^a Regni, these weighty and dangerous
difficulties, into serious debate, an solemnly end that strife, which no other
place of Judicature can so effectually extinguish.

That the King ought to have aid of his subjects in time of danger, and common
aid in case of common danger, is laid down for a ground, and agreed upon by all
sides, But about this aid there remain^s much variety and contrariety of
opinion amongst the greatest Sages of our Law; and the principal points
therein controverted are these four: First, by what Law the King may compel
aid. Secondly, when it is to be levied. Thirdly, how it is to be levied.
Fourthly, what kind of aid it must be.

1 Some of the Judges argue from the Law of Nature, that since the King is
head, and ^ound to protect, therefore he must have wherewithal to protect: but
this proves only that which no man denies. The next Law insisted upon is
Prerogative; but it is not punctually explained what Prerogative, whether the
Prerogative natural of all Kings, or the Prerogative legal of the Kings of
England. Some of the Judges urge, that by Law there is natural allegiance due
to the King from the subject; and it does not stand with that allygeance that
the Princes cannot compel aid, but must require the common consent therein.
Others press, that the Law has ^etled a property of goods in the subject, and
it does not stand with that property, that the King may demand them without
consent. Some take it for granted, that by Royal Prerogative, as it is part of
the Laws of England, the King may charge the Nation without public consent,
and therefore it being part of the Law, it is no invasion upon Law. Others take
it for granted, that to levy money without consent is unjust, and that the
Kings prerogative cannot extend to any unjust thing: So many contrary points of
war do our Trumpets sound at once, and in such confusion do our Judges
leave us, whilst either side takes that for granted, which by the other is
utterly denied. By these grounds Royal prerogative, and popular liberty may
seem things irreconciliable; though indeed they are not; neither does either
side in words affirm so much, though their proofs be so contradictory. King
Charles his maxim is, that the peoples liberty strenghteus the Kings
prerogative, and the Kings prerogative is to maintain the peoples liberty; and
by this it seems that both are compatible, and that prerogative is the more
subordinate of the two. The Kings words also since have been upon another
occasion, That he ever intended his people should enjoy property of good^, and
liberty of persons, holding no King so great, as he that was King of a rich and
free people: and if they had not property of goods, and liberty of persons,
they could be neither rich nor free. Here we see, that the liberty of the
subject is a thing which makes a King great; and that the Kings prerogative
has only for its ends to maintain the peoples liberty. Wherefore it is
manifest, that in nature there is more favor due to the liberty of the
subject, then to the Prerogative of the King, since the one is ordained only
for the preservation of the other; and then to salve these knots, our dispute
must be, what prerogative the peoples good and profit will bear, not what
liberty the Kings absoluteness or prorogative may admit^ and in this dispute
it is more just that we appeal to written Laws, than to the breasts of Kings
themselves. For we know National Laws are made by consent of Prince and
people both, and so cannot be conceived to be prejudicial to either side; but
where the mere will of the Prince is Law, or where some few Ministers of his
may allege what they will for Law in his behalf, no mediocrity or justice is
to be expected: we all know that no slave or villain can be subjected to more
miserable bondage than to be left merely to his Lords absolute discretion* and
we all see that the thraldom of such is most grievous, which have no bounds
set to their Lord discretion. Let us then see what Fortescue writes, not regard
what Court-dependants do interpret, and his words are, ^ol. 84. cap. 36. Rex
Angliae nec per se, nec per suos Ministros Tollagia subsidia, aut quaevis onera
alia impo^it l^gis suis, aut leges little (...), aut nova condit sine
concessione vel asse^su totius regni sui in Parliamento suo expresso. These
words are full and general, and plain, and in direct affirmance of the ancient
Law and usage of England, and it is not sufficient for the Kings Counsel to
say, that these words extend not to Ship Money: for if there were any doubt,
the interpretation ought rather to favor liberty than Prerogative.

It is not sufficient for Judge Jones to say, that it is proprium quarto modo
to a King, and an inseparable natural Prerogative of the Crown to raise
moneys without assent, unless he first prove that such Prerogative be good and
profitable for the people, and such as the people cannot subsist at all without
it: nay, such as no Nation can subsist without it. This word Prerogative has
diverse acceptions: sometimes it is taken for the altitude of Honor, sometimes
for the latitude of Power. So we say the Prerogative of an Emperor is greater
than that of a King; and that of a King greater than that of a Duke, or petty
Poten^ate: and yet of Kings we say that the King of Denmark has not so great a
Prerogative as the King of England, nor the King of England as the King of
France, etc. For here though their honor and title be the same, yet their
power is not. Sometimes Prerogative signifies as much as Sovereignty; and in
this general consideration we say, that all supreme Commanders are equal:
and that they all have this essential inseparable Prerogative, that their power
ought to be ample enough for their perfection, and good of the people, and no
ampler: because the supreme of all humane Laws is salus populi. so this Law
all Laws almost stoop; God dispences with many of his Laws, rather than
salus populi shall be endangered; and that iron-law, which we call necessity
itself, is but subservient to this Law: for rather then a Nation shall perish,
any thing shall be held necessary, and legal by necessity: But to come to the
Prerogative of England, and to spe^ke of it in general, and comparatively; we
say it is a harmonious composure of policy, scarce to be paralleld in all the
world, it is neither so boundless as to opresse the people in unjust things,
nor so strait as to disable the King in just things; by the true fundamental
constitutions of England, the beam hangs even between the King and the
Subject: the Kings power does not tread under foot the peoples liberty, nor the
peoples liberty the Kings power. All other Countries almost in Christendom,
differ from us in this module of policy: some, but very few, allow a greater
sphere of Sovereignty to their Princes; but for the most part now adays the
world is given to republistes, or to conditionate and restrained forms of
government: howsoever we ought not to condemn any Nation as unjust herein,
though differing from us; for though they seem perhaps very unpolitick, yet it
is hard to be affirmed that God and Nature ever ordained the same method of
rule, or scope of loyality to all States whatsoever: besides, what dislike
soever we take at other regiments, yet except it be in very great excesses or
defects, we must not think change always necessary, since custom in those
great and general points obtains the force of another nature, and nature is
not to be changed. Divines of late have been much to blame here in preaching
one universal form of government, as necessary to all Nations, and that not
the moderate and equal neither, but such as ascribes all to Sovereignty,
nothing at all to popular liberty: Some Lawyers also and Statesmen have
deserved as ill of late, partly by suggesting that our English Laws are too
in^urious to our King; and pa^^ly by informing, that this King is more limited
by Law then his Progenitors were, and that till he be as the King of France is,
Rex As^^orum, he is but a subject to his subjects, and as a Minor under the
command of guardians: bnt what has ensued out of the Kings jealously of his
subject, and overstraining his Prerogative? nothing but irrepairable loss and
mischief both to King and Commonwealth: and indeed the often and great
infections and insurrections which have happened of late, almost all over Europe,
may suffice to warn all wise Princes, not to overstraine their Prerogatives too
high; not to g^ve ear to such Counselors as some of out Judges are, who
affirm our Kings Prerogative to be in all points unalterable, and by
consequence not depending upon Law at all: by another exception of this word
Prerogative in England, we mean such Law here established, as gives the King
such and such preheminences and privileges before any subject; such as are not
essential to royalty, but may be annulled by the same power by which they
were created. That a King shall defend and maintain his subjectes, is a duty
belonging to the Office, not a privilege belonging to the Crown of a King;
this obligation nature lays upon him, and no other power can dissolve it. Also
that subjects shall afford aid, and join with their Princes in common defense,
is a duty arising from the allegiance of the people, and not an honor
redounding only to the Prince; natures law has made this a tie, not to be
changed or infringed: for that which is annexed by an eternal superior power
cannot be made severable by a temporal humane power: but that such an
Emperor, King or Potentate, shall have such or such aid, and compel it by
such or such means, at such or such times, as to the particular modes and
circumstances of his aid, particular municipall Laws must direct, and these it
would be as dangerous to alter, as it is absurd to hold unalterable. In a
Parliament held by King James, it was debated, whether or no Tenures in Capite,
and allowance of Purveyor^ might be repealed and divided from the Crown, and
it was held that by ^o Act or statute they could be taken away, because they
were naturally inherent to the Crown.

This resolution seems very strange to me, since the Law of Tenures and
Purveyors is not so natural and essential to Monarchy, that it cannot; or may
not subsist without it. For if in other Countries it be held a mere political
way, perhaps an inconvenient thing, then why may not the Princes Royalty, and
the peoples safety (...) preserved entire without it in England: And if so,
then why shall not the same authority have vigor to rep^ale it, which wanted
not vigor to info^^ it. I cannot conceive that the Parliament herein reflected
upon what was formal in Law to be done, but rather upon what was convenient:
such i^signia supremae, Majejestatis as these; I did not hold it fit to be
dismembered from the Crown in policy, I only hold it a thing possible in law,
nay though the King enjoyes diverse such like prerogatives more, as I. Jones
thinks, then any Prince in Christendom, yet should not I desire or advise to
pl^^^ke away one the least Flower out of the Regal Garland, nor would it be
(perhaps) Profitable for the State, to suffer the least diminution thereof. We
know also, that in England the Prerogative has been bound in many cases, by
Statutelaw, and restrained of diverse such privileges, as were not essential,
but merely political. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi: this was one of the
English Royalties, and very beneficial many ways, yet we know this is in
diverse cases limited by Act of Parliament, and that very justly, as I. Hutton
argues, The great and ancient Tax of Dangelt, it was a Subsidue taken by the
Kings of England* for the common defense of the Kingdom, yet this was first
released by King Stephen, and after abolished for ever by the statutes of
Edward the first: and there is no reason why an Act of Parliament should not
be as valid in our case as it was in that. Wherefore it is to be admired, that
J. Jones should account this way of and by ship money, or any other, without
public consent, to be Proprium quarto modo to the Kings of England* and since
irrepe^lable, since our Kings have in all ages done such noble acts without it;
and not only defended, but also enlarged their Dominions. The last kind of
accept^^on of this word Prerogative is improper. Thus to pardon malefactors, to
dispense with penal Laws, to grant Non obstantes, to be free from attainders,
to call or discontinue, to prorogue or dissolve Parliaments, etc. are not truly
and properly called Prerogatives: these all in some sense may be called
Munities, or indemnities belonging to the sacred person of the King, as he is
inviolable, and subject to no force and compulsion of any other, And as he is
the soul of Law, in whose power alone it is to execute Law, and yet not to be
constrained thereto. To grant a pardon for some malefactors for some crimes,
may perhaps be as heinous as to commit them; and that which draws a guilt upon
the King, cannot be said to be his privilege. If it might be termed a
Royalty, that the King is not questionable, or punishable, or to be forced to
such acts as tend to the obstruction of justice, it might as well be so termed
in acts tending to the transgression of Law: for in both he is alike free from
any coercive or vindicative force. For it is out of necessity, not honor or
benefit, that the King has a freedom from constraint, or restraint in these
cases; and that this freedom is inseparable, because no force can be used but
by superiors or equals, and he which has either superiors or equal, is no
King. If a King should shut up the Courts of ordinary Justice, and prohibit all
pleadings and proceedings between man and man, and refuse to authorize Judges
for the determining of suits, he would be held to do a most unkingly thing:
and yet this may be as truly called a Prerogative, as to difuse and dissolve
Parliaments. But it may be objected, that the King, besides such negative
privilege and freedom from force, has also a positive and siezing subjects
lands, etc. in diverse cases, as in making Bulwarks upon any man's land for
common defense, etc. To this it may be answered, That to such power the King is
not entitled by his Prerogative, nor is it any benefit to him, necessity
herein is his only warrant: for either this private inconvenience must happen,
or a public ruin follow; and in nature the less and private evil is to be
chosen: and here the party trespassed enjoyes safety by it, and shall after
receive satisfaction for his detriment. Were there such apparent unavoidable
necessity in the Ship-scop, that either that course must be taken, or the
community inevitably pep^rish, or where the King wholly disinteressed in point
of profit, or were there hope of restitution, it could not be without consent,
and so not against Law. So then, for ought that is yet alleged, Prerogative,
except that which is essential to all Kings, without which they cannot be
Kings, is alterable, and it ought to be deducsed out of the written and known
Laws of the Kingdom, and Law is not to be inferred out of that* we ought not
to presume a Prerogative, and thence conclude it a Law, but we ought not to
cite the Law, and thence prove it to be Prerogative. To descend then to our
own Laws, yet there our Judges vary too. What the Common Law was in this
point is doubted by some* and some say if the Common Law did allow the King
such a Prerogative, to lay a general charge without consent, then Statutes
cannot alter it.

Some do not accept against the force of Statute Law, but avoid our particular
Statutes by diverse several evasive answers. Some say our Great Charter was but
a grant of the King, extorted by force; some except against the 25. of Ed. 1.
because there is sal^o in it: some against the 34. of Ed. ^. as made in the
Kings absence; some object against the 14. of Ed. 3. as if it were temporary,
and because it is not particularly re^ited in the Petition of Right: and the
common evasion of all beneficial Statutes, and of the Petition of right, is,
that they bind the King from imposing pecuniary charges for the replenishing
of his own coffers, but not from imposing such personal services, as this
Ship-scot is, in time of danger and necessity. J. Crawly maintains this
Ship-scot to be good by Prerogative at the Common Law, and not to be altered by
Statute. What the Common Law was, this Court can best determine; but it is
obvious to all men, that no Prerogative can be at the Common Law, but it had
some beginning, and that must be from either King or Subject, or both: and in
this, it is not superior to our Statute Law, and by consequence not
unalterable. The Medes and Persians had a Law, that no Law once past, should
ever be repealed; but doubtless this Law being repealed first, all others
might after suffer the same alteration, and it is most absurd to think that
this Law might not be repealed by the same authority by which it was at first
enacted. J. Jones says, our Statutes restrain tollages in general terms,
and cites diverse cases, that a special interest shall not pass from the King,
but in special terms: but his cases are put of private grantees, over whom the
King ought to retai^e a great pre-eminence: but the Law is, that where the
whole state in grantee, that grant shall have the force of a Statute, because
it is pro bono publico, and because the whole State is in value and dignity as
much to be preferred before the King, as the King is before any private
grantee. But J. Jones says further, if general words shall extend to these
extraordinary public levies, then they may as well extend to his ordinary
private rights and intradoes, and so cut off Aid pur fair filz Chivalier,
etc. The contrary hereof is manifest, for the intent of all our Statutes is to
defend the subject against such public tollages and impositions, as every man
is equally liable to, and as are not due in Law otherwise, or recoverable by
ordinary action. Now these aids, etc. and the Kings ordinary revenues and
services, are not such as are due from every man, but recoverable by ordinary
action. Howsoever in all these doubts the Law would now be made clear, and not
only the virtue of Statutes in general, but also the true meaning of our
particular Charters would be vindicated from these exceptions.

2 I come now to our second difficulty, when a public charge may be laid. Here
the favorers of Ship Money yet agree, that the King may not charge the subject
merely to fill his own coffers; or annually, or when he will invade a
foreign enemy, or when Pirates rob, or burn Towns and Buroughs, for these
ordinary defense is sufficient: and when there is imminent and eminent danger
of public invasion, we agree that the subject may be charged.

The quaere then is, whether the King be sole Judge of the danger, and of the
remedy, or rather whether he be so sole Judge, that his mere affirmation and
notification of a danger foreseen by him at a distance, or pretended only to
be foreseen, shall be so unquestionable that he may charge the Kingdom
thereupon at his discretion, though they assent not, nor apprehend the danger
as it is forewarned. J. Crook proves the contrary thus: If danger, says he,
be far distant, if it be in report only of French Armadoes, and Spanish
preparations, etc. though it be certain, and not pretensive, yet Parliamentary
aid may be speedy enough: and if it be imminent, then this way of Ship-scot
will not be speedy enough; for either the design^ is really to have new Ships
built, and that will require longer time than a Parliament; or else money only
is aimed at, whereby to arm other Ships, and for this the Law has provided a
more expedite way than by Ship-scot, in case of imminent danger.

If then the King have power to press all men's persons and Ships, and all are
bound exponere se, and sua, and to serve propriis sumpti^us, when imminent
danger is, and this defense has always been held effectual enough, it is
consequent, that if he be not destitute of competent aid in present distresses,
he cannot pretend a greater necessity in dangers more remote, when they are but
suspected, or perhaps pretended only.

My Lord Bramston says here, that there is a necessity of preventing a
necessity: and that the Sea is part of the Kingdom, and therefore of necessity
to be guarded as the Kingdom. The answer is, That the safety of the Kingdom
does not necessarily depend upon the Ship-scot, and so this necessity being
removed, the necessity grounded upon this, falls off of it self. For if the
Kingdom may escape ruin at hand when it is a storm, without Ship Money, it
may much more escape it afar off being but a cloud. But grant the Sea to be a
part of the Kingdom to some purposes, yet how is it a part essential, or
equally valuable; or how does it appear that the fate of the Land depends
wholly upon the dominion of the Sea? France subsists now without the regiment
of the Sea, and why may not we as well want the same? If England quite spend it
self, and pour out all its treasure to preserve the Seigniory of the Seas, it
is not certain to exceed the Navall force of France, Spain, Holland, etc. And
if it content if self with its ancient strength of shipping, it may remain as
safe as it has formerly done. Nay, I cannot see that either necessity of
ruin, or necessity of dishonor can be truly pretended out of this, that
France, Spain, Holland, etc. are too potent at Sea for us.

The dominion of the Seas may be considered as a mere right, or as an honor,
or as a profit to us. As a right, it is a theme fitter for scholars to whet
their wits upon, then for Christians to fight and spill blood about: and since
it does not manifestly appear how or when it was first purchased, or by what
Law conveyed to us, we take notice of it only as matter of wit and disputation.
As it is an honor to be masters of the Sea, and to make others strike sail to
us as they pass; its a glory fitter for women and children to wonder at, then
for Statesmen to contend about. It may be compared to a chaplet of flowers,
not to a diadem of gold: but as it is a profit to us to fence and enclose the
Sea, that our neighbors shall not surprise us unawares; its matter of moment,
yet it concerns us but as it does other Nations: by too insolent contestations
hereupon, we may provoke God, and dishonor our selves: we may more probably
incense our friend^, then quell our enemies, we may make the land a slave to
the sea, rather than the sea a servant to the land; but I pray Master Seldom to
pardon me for this transition, and I return my matter* if the Kingdom could
not possibly subsist without Ship Money in such a danger, yet there is no
necessity that the King should be so sole Judge of that danger, as that he may
judge therein contrary to the opinion, and perhaps, knowledge of other men. I
allow the King to be supreme, and consequently sole Judge in all cases
whatsoever, as to the right, and as to the diffusion of Judgment; but as to
the exercise and restraint of judgment, he is not, nor ought not to be
accounted sole Judge. In matters of Law the King must create Judges, and swear
them to judge uprightly and impartially, and for the subject against himself,
if Law so require, yea, though he be of contrary judgment himself, and by his
Letters solicit the contrary. The Kings power is as the disgestive faculty in
nature, all parts of the body contribute heat to it for their own benefit,
that they may receive back again from it a better concocted and prepared
supply of nourishment, as it is their office to contribute, so it is the
stomachs to distribute.

And questionless sole judgment in matters of State, does no otherwise belong
to the King, then in matters of Law, or points of Theology. Besides as sole
judgment is here ascr^bed to the King, he may affirm dangers to be foresee^e
when he will, and of what nature he will: if ^e say only, Datum est nobis
intelli^i, as he does in his Writ, etc. To his sole indisputable judgment it
is left to lay charges as often and as great as ^e pleases. And by this means
if he regard not his word more than his profit, he may in one year draine all
the Kingdom of all its treasure, and leave us the most despicable slaves in
the whole world.

It is ridiculous also to allege, as J. Jones does, that it is contrary to
presumption of Law to suspect falsity in the King: for if Law presume that the
King will not falsely pretend danger to vex his subjects, of his own mere
motion, yet no Law, nor reason, nor policy will presume, that the King may not
be induced by misinformation to grieve the people without cause. The Sun is
not more visible than this truth, our best Kings, King Charles, King James,
Queen Elizabeth, and all the whole ascending line, have done undue illegal
things sometimes, contrary to the rights and Franchises of England, being
misinformed, but having consulted with the Judges or States in Parliament,
they have all retracted and confessed their error. Nay, there is nothing more
known, or universally assented to than this, that Kings may be bad; and it is
more probable and natural, that evil may be expected from good Princes, than
good from bad. Wherefore, since it is all one to the State, whether evil
proceed from the King mediately or immediately, out of malice or ignorance: and
since we know that of all kinds of government Monarchical is the worst, when
the Scepter is wielded by an unjust and unskillfull Prince, though it be the
best, when such Princes as are not seduceable (a thing most rate) reign, it
will be great discretion in us not to desert our right in those Laws which
regulate and confine Monarchy, merely out of Law-presumption; if we must
presume well of our Princes, to what purpose are Laws made: and if Laws are
frustrate and absurd, where in do we differ in condition from the most abject
of all bondslaves?

There is no Tyranny more abhorred than that which has a controlling power
over all Law, and knows no bounds but its own will: if this be not the utmost
of Tyranny, the Turks are not more servile than we are: and if this be Tyranny,
this invention of ship money makes us as servile as the Turks. We must of
necessity admit, that our Princes are not to be misled, and then our Laws are
needless; or that they may be misse-led, and then our Laws are useless. For
if they will listen to ill council, they may be moved to pretend danger
causlesly; and by this pretense defeat all our laws and liberties, and those
being defeated, what does the English hold, but at the Kings mere discretion,
wherein does the excel the Captives condition? if we shall examine why the
Mohammedan slaves are more miserably treated, then the Germans, or why the
French Pesants are so beggarly, wretched, and bestially used more then the
Hollanders, or why the people of Millaine, Naples, Sicily are more oppressed,
trampled upon, and inthralled then the Natives of Spain? there is no other
reason will appear but that they are subject to more immoderate power, and
have less benefit of law to releeve them.

In nature there is no reason, why the meanest wretches should not enjoy
freedom, and demand justice in as ample measure, as those whom law has
provided for: or why Lords which are above law should be more cruel then
those which are more conditionate: yet we see it is a fatal kind of necessity
only incident to immoderate power, that it must be immoderately used: and
certainly this was well known to our incestors, or else they would not have
purchased their charters of freedom with so great an expense of blood as they
did, and have endured so much so many years rather then to be betrayed to
immoderate power, and prerogative: let us therefore not be too careless of
that, which they were so jealous of, but let us look narrowly into the true
consequence of this ship-scot, whatsoever the face of it appear to be. It is
vain to stop twenty leakes in a ship, and then to leave one open, or to make
laws for the restraynt of loyalty all other ways, that it may not overflow
the estates of the comminalty at pleasure, and yet to leave one great breach
for its irruption.

All our Kings hitherto have been so circumscribed by law, that they could not
command the goods of their subjects at pleasure without common consent: but now
if the King be but persuaded to pretend danger, he is uncontroleable Master of
all we have, one datum est intelligi, shall make our English Statutes like the
politic hedge of Go^e^ham, and no better: I do not say that this King will
falsify, it is enough that we all, and all that we have are at his
discretion if he will falsify; though vast power be not abused, yet it is a
great mischief that it may, and therefore vast power it self is justly
odious, for diverse reasons. First, because it may fall into the hands of ill
disposed Princes, such as were K. John, Henry the third, Edward the second,
Richard the second. These all in their times made England miserable, and
certainly had their power been more unconsineable they had made it more
miserable. The alterations of times do not depend upon the alteration of the
people, but of Princes: when Princes are good it fares well with the people when
bad ill.

Princes often vary, but the people is always the same in all ages, an^
capable of small, or no variations: If Princes would endure to hear this truth
it would be profitable for them, for flatterers always raise jealousies
against the people; but the truth is, the people as the sea, have no turbulent
motion of their own, if Princes like the winds do not raise them into rage.
Secondly, vast power if it find not bad Princes it often makes Princes bad: It
has often charged Princes, as it did Nero from good to bad, from bad to worse:
but Vespasian is the only noted man which by the Empire was in melius mutatus:
daily experience teaches this. Dangelt in England within 20. years increased
unto a fourfold proportion.

Subsidies were in former times seldom granted, and few at a time, now
Parliaments are held by some to be of no other use then to grant them.

The Fox, in Esop, observed that of all the Beasts which had gone to visit the
Lion, few of their footsteps were to be seen retrorsum, they were all printed
adversum. And we find at this day, that it is far more easy for a King to
gain undue things from the people, then it is for the people to re-gaine its
due from a King: This King has larger Dominions, and has reigned yet fewer
years, and enjoyed qu^^ter times then Queen Elizabeth: And yet his taxations
has been far greater, and his Exploits less honorable, and the yet people
is still held in more jealousy.

To deny Shippe-mony which sweeps all, is ^eld and accounted a rejection of
natural Allegiance. I speak not this to render odious the Kings blessed
government, God forbid, I hold him one of the mildest, and most gracious of our
Kings: And I instance in him the rather, that we may see, what a bewitching
thing flattery is, when it touches upon this string of unlimitable power: if
this ambition and desire of vast power were not the most natural, and forcible
of all sins, Angels in Heaven, and man in Paradize had not fallen by it; but
since it is, Princes themselves ought to be the more cautious and cautilous of
it.

Thirdly, vast power if it neither find nor make bad Princes, yet it makes the
good government of good Princes the less pleasing, and the less effectual,
for the common and public good: And therefore it is a rule both in Law, and
Policy, and Nature, Non recurrendum est ad extraordinaria, in jis quae fieri
possunt perordinaria: All extraordinary aides are horrid to the people, but
most especially such as the Ship-scot is, whereby all liberty is over-throwne,
and all Law subjected unto the Kings mere discretion.

Queen Elizabeth in eighty eight was victorious without this Taxation, and I
am fully persuaded she was therefore Victorious the rather, because she used it
not. Her Art was to account her subjects hearts as her unfailing Exchequer,
and to purchase them by doing legal just things, and this Art never failed
nor deceived her, and in that dismal gust of danger, it was good for her and
the whole State, both that she did not rely upon forced aides of money, or the
Swords of grieved Soldiers; For this Ship Money, nothing can be pretended but
necessity, and certainly necessity is ill pretended; when the mere doing of
the thing, is as dangerous as that for which it is done: did not this Ship-scot
overthrow all p^polar Liberty, and so threaten as great a mischief as any
Conquest can? And were not the people justly averse from it? Yet merely for the
peoples (...) to it, it is dangerous to be relied upon in case of great danger.

We know Nature teaches us all, Of two Evils to choose that which we think
the least, though it be not so; therefore if the people apprehend this Remedy
as a Thing worse then the Disease, though they be mistaken therein, yet that
very mistake may prove fatal.

The Roman Army being harshly treated by the Senators, and their proud
General, did refuse to charge upon the Enemy, or to resist the charge of the
Enemy, they chose rather to be slaughtered by Strangers, then Enthralled by
their Countrymen. The English also in the late Scotsh invasion, by reason of
this and many other causes of Discontent, made so ^aint resistance, that they
did almost in a manner Confess, That they held themselves as miserable
already, as the Scots could make them.

Thus we see there is no necessity of levying Ship Money, there is rather
necessity of Repealing it: And we see that presumption of Law does no^ ^bet
this Necessity, but rather cross it. And whereas I. Jones further says, That
the Kings Majesty has no benefit by Ship Money, and therefore presumption is
the str^nger, that the King will not take it causelessly. We may answer: the
Ship money is a ^ery great benefit unto the King: For i^ not immediately, yet
(...) it is become a Revenew, inasmuch as by this (...) al other Re^enues of
the Crown, nay* and Tunnage and (...), which were not designed only for
ordinary Expenses, but for extraordinary employments, and public Charges
also, are now become d^scharged of that tie, and the Commonwealth has quite
lest all its intrest and property in them. In point of benefit therefore it is
all one to the Kings Majesty, and in point of burden, it is all one to the
Subject, whether Ship Money be acc^unted of as part of the Kings annual Rents,
or no, since by it his rents are enlarged: And as to the Subject there is no
obligation, that this (...) shall not hereafter incorporate with the rest of the
Kings Majesty's Intradoe^, and be swallowed up as Tunnage and Poundage now are.
Thus we see what the Necessity is, and presumption of Law, which was so much
insisted upon; and yet for a further confutation of both, Time, the mother of
Truth, has now given us more light Now that great danger which was pretended
so many years together for the necessity of raising so great supplies of
treasure, is a small cloud blown over, making it apparent that Kings may be
mis informed; and by mis information take Molehils for Mountains, and cast
heavy burthen^ upon their subjects. 3.


But I come now to my third D^fficulty, how a public charge is to be laid upon
the kingdom. The law runs generally, that in England no Tollage or pecuniary
charge may be imposed Forsque per common assent de tout la Realm, or Si non
per common consent de Parliement. Some presidents, or matters of fact appear,
wherein some Kings have diverse times invaded this right of the subject, but
upon conference had with the Judges, or petition in Parliament, redress was
ever made, and the subjects right re-established. All the color which can be
brought to answer the Law in our case, is, that the words of the law are
general Taxes and Tollages, but do not by special mention restrain
extraordinary impositions, in time of extraordinary danger. But we know the
Petition of Right, 3. Car. is grounded upon former Statutes, and recites diverse
of them, and is a clear affirmance of the common right of England; and yet by
that the commissions for Loanes were damned: and it is evident that those
Loanes were demanded for the general defense of the Kingdom in time of
imminent danger; and by the same Statute, not only Loanes, but all other
levies of money upon what pretense of danger soever, Si non per common consent,
are condemned as illegal, and contrary to the Laws and Rights of England. Two
things therefore are objected against Parliaments: First, that they are of slow
motion, and so most of the Judges allege. Secondly, that they may be perverse,
and refuse due aid to the King, and so I. Crawley boldly suggests. For answer
we say in general: First, that it is the wisdom of Kings to be always
vigilant, and to have their eyes so open upon foreign Princes, and to
maintain such intelligence that no preparation from abroad may surprise them
before recourse had to Parliament; and this is very easy to insular Princes,
who have a competent strength of shipping, Secondly, to have always in
readiness against all sudden surprises, a sufficient store of ammunition and
arms both for sea and land-service: and the revenues of the Crown of England
are sufficient for this purpose, and have been held more then sufficient in
former times, when hostility was greater, and the Kingdom smaller. Thirdly, to
seek advise and assistance from Parliaments, frequently in times of quiet, as
well as of danger, as well when war is b^t smoking, or kindling, as when it
is blown into a flame. Before the conquest this was held policy, and since in
Edward the thirds time, a statute past to this purpose; and if parliaments of
late be grown into dislike, it is not because their virtue is decaid, it is
because the corruption of the times cannot endure such sharp remedies.
Fourthly, to speak particularly of this case of ship money, we say that it is
a course more slow then by parliament: there was more expedition used in
parliament to supply King Ch^rles, since he came to the Crown, then can this
way. And we say moreover, that as the extremity of the Kingdom was when
ship money was demanded, whatsoever was pretended to the contrary, a parliament
might have been timely enough called, and seasonably enough supplied the King.
As to the second objection of I. Crawly, too unfit to come out of any honest
wise man's mouth, but much more for a Judges, Judge Crook replies, that as
there is nullum iniquum in Lege, so neither in parliamento. The three noted
factions which are adverse to Parliaments, are the papists, the prelates, and
Court parasites; and these may be therefore supposed to hate parliaments,
because they know themselves hateful to parliaments. It is scarce possible
for the King to find out any other that thinks ill of Parliaments, or is ill
thought of by Parliaments. Of Papists little need to be said, their enmity is
confessed, they have little to pretend for themselves, but that parliaments are
grown puritannicall. The prelates think themselves not to have jurisdiction
and power enough* and they know that Parliaments think they have too much,
and abuse that which they have much more: therefore to uphold themselves, and
to crush their ill-willers, they not only tax Parliaments of puritanisme, but
all puritans of sedition: as much as in them lies, they wed the King to their
quarrel, persuading him that Parliaments out of puritanisme, do not so much
aim at the fall of Episcopacie, as Monarchy, and that Episcopacie is the
support of Monarchy, so that both must stand and fall together. Howbeit because
they cannot upbraide Parliaments of attempting any thing against Monarchy
further then to mainetaine due liberty, therefore they preach an unlimitable
prerogative, and condemn all law of liberty as injurious to Kings and
incompatible with Monarchy. M^n^arring denies Parliamentary power and honor,
C^well denies propriety of goods, further then it the Kings discretion, and
Harrison accuses Judge Hutton of delivering law against G^ds Law, in the case
of Ship Money. And the common Court doctrine is, that Kings are boundless in
authority, and that they only are Cesars friends which justify that doctrine;
and from this doctrine has grown all the jealousies of late between the King
and his best subjects; and this is that venomous matter which has laien
burning, and ulcerating inwardly in the bowels of the commonwealth so long.
The other enemies of Parliaments, are Court dependants, and projectors, which
have taken advantage of this unnatural dissension betwixt the King and his
Subjects; and have found out means to live upon the spoil of both, by siding
with the King, and being instruments to extend his prerogative to the
purchasing of preferment to themselves, disaffection to the King, and vexation
to the commonwealth. These three factions excepted, and some few Courtiers
which are carried with the current of example, or are left to speak unpleasing
trueths, there is scarce any man in all the Kings dominions, which does not
wish for parliaments, as the States best physic, nay almost as its natural
necessary food: but I will instance in three things wherein parliaments excel
all other Counsels whatsoever.

1. For wisdom, no advice can be given so prudent, so profound, so
universally comprehending, from any other author; it is truly said by Sir
Robert Cotton, that all private single persons may deceive and be deceived;
but all cannot deceive one, nor one all.

That an inconsiderable number of Privadoes should see or know more then whole
Kingdoms, is incredible: v^x populi was ever reverenced as vox Dei, and
Parliaments are infallble, and their acts indisputable to all but Parliaments.
It is a just law, that no private man must be wiser then Law publicly made.
Our wis^st Kings in England, have ever most relied upon the wisdom of
Parliaments.

Secondly, no advice can be so faithful, so loyal, so religious and sincere,
as that which proceeds from parliaments, where so many are gathered together
for Gods service i^ such a devout manner, we cannot but expect that G^d should
be amongst them: and as they have a more especial blessing promised them; so
their ends cannot be so sinister: private men may thrive by alterations: and
common calamities, but the common body can effect nothing but the common good,
because nothing else can be commodious for them.

Sir Robert Cotton in the life of Henry the third, according to the Court
Doctrine at this present, says, that in Parliament Kings are ever less then
they should be, and the people more. If this be spoken of irregular Kings,
which will endure to hear of nothing but prerogative government, it may carry
some semblance of truth: but sure i^ is, good and wise Kings are ever greatest
when they sit immured, as it were, in that honorable Assembly: as the History
of Queen Elizabeth and many of her progenitors testifies. It Is true, K. Henry
the third, met with diverse oppositions in Parliament: He was there upbrayded,
and called dilapidator regni; it was true that he was ^o, and the most
unworthy of rule that ever sat sat in this Throne; yet those words became not
subjects: I do not just^fie, but in some part extenuate such misdemeanors; for
the chief blame of those times is not to be thrown upon the (...) and
commons, but upon the King and his out-landi^^ parasites. It is without all
question also that in those bloody unjust ^imes, had it not been for frequent
parliaments, and that sovereign remedy which thereby was applied to the
bleeding wounds of the Kingdom, no other help could have stanched them.

Even then, when Parliaments were most prevalent, and when they had so much
provocation from so variable an incapable a Prince, they did not seek to
conditionate prerogative, or to depresse Monarchy for the future, though they
were a little to injurious to him in person for the present.

Since that time also many Parliaments h^ve had to struggle for due liberty
with insolent princes, and have had power to clip the wings of Royalty; and the
custom of all Europe almost besides has seemed to give such countenance to
such attempts; but the deep wisdom, and inviolable loyalty of Parliaments to
this composure of government has bin such, that they never made any invasion
upon it. As it was in all former ages, so it now remains entire with all its
glorious ensigns of honor, and all the complements of power; and may he be
as odious which seeks too alter or diminish Monarchical government for the
future, as he which seeks to make it infinite, and slanders Parliaments as
enemies to it, or endeavors to blow such jealousies into the Kings ears.

3. No advice can be so sit, so forcible, so effectual for the public
welfare, as that which is given in Parliament: if any Cabinet Counselors
could give as wise sincere advice as Parliaments, yet it could not be so
profitable, because the hearts of the people do not go along with any other,
as with that.

That King which is potent in Parliament, as any good King may, is as it were
so inskonsed in the hearts of his subjects, that he is almost beyond the trayns
or aims of treason and rebellion at home, nay foreign hostility cannot pei^ce
him, but through the sides of all his people.

It ought to be noted also, that the English have ever been the most devoted
servants coequall, sweetly-moderate Sovereignty; so in our English Parliaments,
where the Nobility is not too prevalent, as in Denmark, nor the Comminalty, as
in the Netherlands, nor the King, as in France, Justice and policy kiss and
embrace more lovingly then elsewhere. And as all the three States have always
more harmoniously born their just proportionable parts in England then
elsewhere, so now in these times, in these learned, knowing, religious times,
we may expect more blessed counsel from Parliaments then ever we received
heretofore. May it therefore sink into the heart of our King to adhere to
Parliaments, and to abhor the gross delusive suggestions of such as
disparage that kind of Council. May lie rather con^ide in that Community
which can have no other end but their own happiness in his greatness, the^
in Papists, Prelates, and Projectors, to whom the public disunion is
advantageous. May he affect that gentle Prerogative which stands with the
happiness, freedom, and riches of his people, and (...) that terrible Scopter
which does as much avert the hearts, as it does deb^lita^e the hands, and
exhaust the purses of his Subjects. May he at last learnd by (...); that the
grievance of all (...), that that mischief which makes all mischiefs (...),
and almost hopeless in England at this day, is that Parliaments are clouded,
and disused, and suffered to be (...) by the ill boding incendi^ries of our
State. May it lustly enter into his belief, that it is impossible for any
Kingdom to deny public assent for their (...) when public danger is (...),
and when it is fairly required, and not by projects extorted: that no Nation
can unnaturally seek its own (...) may make their Subjects purses their own
private coffers, if they will demand due things, at due times, and by due
means.

4. I come now to the last difficulty, about the condition and nature of such
aids as are due by Law from the Subject to the King, Though much have been
argued both at the bar and on the Bench, for the King, that he may raise
moneys from his Subjects, without consent by Law, Prerogative, and necessity.
Yet at last, because the Petition of Right absolutely crosses this tenet, it is
restored to us back again, and yielded, that the King may not impose a
pecuniary charge by way of Tollage, but only a personal one by way of
service. And now all our controversy ends in this, that we must contest,
whether the Ship-scot be a ^ecuniary, or a personal charge: For though the
intent of the Writ, and the office of the Sh^^iffe be to raise moneys only,
yet the words of the Writ, and the pretense of State, is to build and prepare
Ships of war. The Kingdom generally takes this to be a (...) delusion and
imposture, and doubtless it is but a pick lock trick, to overthrow all
liberty and propriety of goods, and it is a great shame that so many Judges
should be abetters to such fraudulent practice contrived against the State. It
is not lawful for the King to demand moneys as moneys, but it is lawful to
demand moneys under another wrong name, and under this wrong name all former
Laws and Liberties shall be as absolutely cancelled, as if they had been
mere cobwebs, or enacted only out of mere derision. If former laws made to
guard propriety of goods were just, and grounded upon good reason, why are they
by this gross fallacy, or childish abuse defeated. If they were not just, or
reasonable, what needs such a fond subtlety as this? why should they not be
fairly avoided by Law? Why were they made at all? But be this invention what
it will, yet we see it is new; if it be quashed, the State is but where it was,
we are still as our Ancestors left us; and since our preceding Kings never
heretofore put it in use in the most necessitous calamitous times, we may from
hence infer^e, that the plea of State necessity falls off of it self; if we
admit not of this innovation, then the State suffers not; but if we admit it,
no necessity being of it, we can frame no other reason for our so doing, but
that our former franchises and privileges were unjust, and therefore this way
they must be annulled. Some of our Judges do prove, that if this were a
personal service, yet it were void; and they cite the case of Barges, and
Ballingers vessels, built truly for War in time of Imminent danger, and yet
these charges upon complaint made by the Subject, were revoked, and disclaimed.
But here in this case many other enormities and defects in Law Lare, for if
ships be intended to be built in Inland Countries, a thing impossible is
enjoined; and if moneys be aimed at, that very aim is against Law: and if the
Kingdom were to be disfranchised, it were not to be done by all illegal way.

Besides, in the Writ, in the Assessement, in the Sheriffs remedy against
Recusants of it, in the execution of Law, by, or after judgment, many
inconveniences, errors, and mischiefs arise many ways: and sure take the
whole case as it is, and since the Creation no whole Kingdom was ever cast in
such a cause before.

Besides, though the Judges ought wholly to have be^^ themselves upon this, to
have proved this a personal service, and no pecuniary charge, they have roved
after necessity, presumption of Law, and Prerogative, and fearce said any thing
at all hereof.

My Lord Brainston argues very eagerly, that personal services by Sea and Land
are due to the King in cases of extremity, and all their records, case, and
presidents prove no more, and that men may be arrayed, and ships pressed, and
that sumptibus populi; but there is nothing proved that the mere raising of
moneys in this case, is a personal service. I. Jones indeed argues to this
purpose: If the Law entrust the King with so great a power over men's persons,
why not over their estates? There is clear reason for the contrary: because
the King, if he should abuse men's personal aides, could not enrich or profit
himself thereby, and we know it is gain and profit, it is Auri sacra sames
which has power over the breasts of men. It is not ordinary for Tyrants to
imbattaile hoasts of men, and make them charge upon the Sea-billowes, and then
to gather up Cockles and Piwinckle shells in lieu of spoil, as one did once:
but the World abounds with stories of such Princes, as have offended in abusing
their power over men's estates, and have violated all right divine and humane,
to attain to such a boundless power.

Good Kings are sometimes weak in coveting boundless power; some affect
rivality with God himself in power, and yet places that power in doing evil,
not good: for few Kings want power to do good, and therefore it misbecomes not
sometimes good Subjects to be jealous in some things of good Kings. But J.
Jones farther says, that Ships must be built, and without money that cannot be
done: ergo. This necessity has been answered, and disproved already: and I
now add, that for the good of the Kingdom there is more necessity that
Ship Money be damned then maintained. Such unnatural slavery seems to me to
be attendant upon this all-devouring project, and such in^amy to our Ancestors,
our Laws, and our selves, nay, and such danger to the King and his posterity,
that I cannot imagine how any foreign conquest should induce any thing more
to be detested and abhorred.

Those Kings which have been most covetous of unconfined immoderate power,
have been the weakest in judgment, and commonly their lives have been poor
and toylsome, and their ends miserable, and violent: so that if Kings did
rightly understand their own good, none would more shun uncontrollable
absoluteness then themselves.

How is the King of France happy in his great Prerogative? or in that terrible
style of the King of Asses? ^ee see that his immoderate power makes him
oppress his poor Pesants, for their condition is most deplorable, and yet set
his power aside, and there is no reason why he should not be as a Father to
cherish them, as a God to comfort them, not as an enemy to impoverish them, as
a tormentor to afflict them.

2. His oppression makes him culpable before God: he must one day render a sad
account for all the evil which he has imposed, for all the good which he has
not procured to them. That the Vicegerent of God should do the office of a
tyrant, will be no light thing one day.

3. His sin makes him poor: for were his Pesants suffered to get wealth and
enjoy it, the whole Land would be his treasury, and that treasury would
contain twice as much as now it does.

4. His poverty makes him impotent, for money being the sinews of war, how
strong would his joints be, if all his subjects were abounding in money, as
doubtless they would, if they wanted not liberty, and propriety? besides,
poverty depresses the spirit of a Nation: and were the King of France, King of
an Infantery, as he is only of a Cavalrie, were he a King of men, as he is
only of beasts, had he a power over hearts as he has over hands, that Country
would be twice as puissant as it is.

5. His impotence, together with all other irregularities, and abuses is like
to make his Monarchy the less durable. Civil wars have ever hitherto infected
and macerated that goodly Country, and many times it has been near it is
ruin: it now enjoyes inward peace, but it does no great exploits abroad, nor
is ever likely to do, unless by practicing upon the distemper of other
Nations: should some other Prince practice in the like manner upon that, and
propose liberty to the grieved people, much advantage might be taken: but these
avisoes would better proceed from that most heroic, most terrible, most
armipatent Churchman, which effects such great wonders here: we see hence that
Princes by some gain lose, as the whole body pines by the swelling of the
spleen: we see that Reh^^oam caught an immoderate power, as the Dog in the
fable at a shadow, but in stead of an uncertain nothing, he let fall and lost a
certain substance; and yet flatterers have scarce any other bai^e then this
shadow of immoderate power, whereby to poison the fantasies of weak humors,
undiscerning rash Princes.

My humble motion therefore is: First, that the judgment given in the Chequ^r
Chamber for Ship Money, may be reversed, and damned, as contrary to the right
of the Subject.

Secondly, that those Judges which adhered to equity and integrity in this
case, might have some honorable guerdon designed them.

Thirdly, that some dishonorable penalty may be imposed upon those Judges
which ill advised the King herein, and then argued as Pleaders, not as Judges;
especially if any shall appear to have solicited the betraying of the Kingdom.

Fourthly, that the meaning of our Laws and Charters, may be fully and
expressly declared, and the force and virtue of Statutes and public Grants,
may be vindicated from all such exceptions and objections as have been
particularly or generally made against them.

Fifthly, that a clearer solution may be given in the four maine points
stirred, how far prerogative is arbitrary and above Law; and how far
natural Allegiance binds to yield to all demands not of Parliament: next, how
the King is sole Judge of danger, as that his mere cognizance thereof shall be
sufficient, though there be no appearance or probability thereof. Next, how a
necessity of public ^^ine must be concluded now, if Ship Money be not levied,
when no such ruin has been formerly, when this new plot was not devised.
Lastly, how this Ship-scot pretending ships, but intending money, and really
raising the same, can be said to be no pecuniary tollage within our Statutes,
but a mere personal service.

Sixthly, that any Officers, or Ministers of State, which shall attempt to lay
the like taxes hereafter upon the Subject, by virtue of the like void warrants,
may be held and taken as Felons, or Traitors, or forcible Intruders.

Seventhly, that something may be inacted against foreign and domestical
Forces also, if they shall be congregated for the like purposes; and that the
subject may be enabled by some fit and timely remedy to be given against a
military kind of government.

Eighthly, that the due way of public defense, in case of imminent and
eminent danger, or actual necessary war, for the pressing of men, and other
charges of war, such as Cote and Conduct money, and all doubts thereabouts,
may be made more certain and settled for the time to come.

Ninthly, that if the Kings ordinary (...) now taken for the Crown, be not
sufficient to maintain him, as our great Master, some legal order may be
taken therefore, and that he may be sensible of his Subjects loyalty, and his
Subjects live safe under him, that his enemies may find him considerable, and
his true friends useful.

FINIS.

