depiction of Harry White

Harry White his humor, So near as may be set forth by M.P.

In which is expressed,
Both earnest and jest:
Let honest men buy,
And knaves let it lie:
This is not for them,
Who virtue contemn*
Not every man in's humour's promised here,
Yet in one's humor many more appear.
Printed at London for Thomas Lambert, at sign of the Hors-shoo in Smithfield

To that great Promulgater,
And neat divulgater,
Whom the city admires,
And the Suburbs desires,
M.P. wishes happy
Success, and Ale nappy,
That with the ones pain,
He the other may gain.

Honest Harry,
Feign I would say something, yet I know not (nor indeed care not much) what to
say to thee; I know thou art one armed for all sayings. For to speak truly,
praise of thee would be counted but phantasmie; and admiration mere
adulation: how can thou want worth, who have such an ample faculty in
emblazoning, and (indeed sometimes) adding to the worth of other men? It likes
my humor well to describe thine so well as I could: the best on it is, thy
humor is my privilege; therefore if what is here written slightly, be ill
read, and worse understood, I can excuse my self, (as many men do their own
faults by other men's) saying, it is Harry Whites humor. Surely I think I have
fitted thy humor in general, if not I pray thee let thy particular humor
pardon escapes. I have assaid to humor thee, invited by this benefit, that by
humouring thee I shall humor a thousand: now if any be in the humor to be
vexed at thy humor: tell them thy humor is armed against the assault of any
humor: thus wishing that thy humor may be satisfied with ten thousand two
penny customers, I commit thee to thy humor, and thy humor to thy custody,
desiring ever to rest, but never to be arrested.

Thine at a pot and a pipe, M.P.

Harry VVhites humor.
VEry good Sir, but why Harry Whites humor? pray what humor has Harry White,
that another man is not guilty of? why sir to satisfy your inquisitiue humor,
I Will tell you what Harry Whites humor is: but beforehand I pray be not angry,
yet if you be, Harry White cares not; that is part of his humor, he had rather
see a whore want painting for her face than an honest. Woman want bread for her
children.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He had rather that thieves and cut-purses (and consequently the hangman)
should want employment than honest tradesmen should lack work or money.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He would have fewer bawdy houses, and more almeshouses: also he wishes
that rich people were more charitable: or that the poor had less need.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He can (when he is hungry) ver^ thankfully eat a red herring: but yet he
prefers a Hen or a Capon before it, and holds either of them to be better merit.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He loves (and honors) all good qu^lities in men, yet he esteems h^n^sty
as the Master-p^ece.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He delights much to hear a good ring of Bells, yet he could wish rather
to show you a gold (or Diamond) Ring of his own, though upon another man's
finger.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He can (in case of necessity) drink upon free cost, yet he is better
pleased when he has money to pay for his liquor.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He loves to ride when he is weary yet (at certain times) he holds it
ominous to ride (...) Holborne.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He is offended at nothing so as at swearing, cursing, or blasphemy,
especially when an old hawd swears she is an honest Woman.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He takes more pleasure to see a Knight of the Post, play at boe peep
upon a scaffold, than to behold a Carriers horse to fall under his load.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He prefers a Cooks shop before a fencing school: and what is the reason
think you? why, because he had rather break his face than his head.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He cares not much for a dancing-schoole, because if need be (rather than
fall) he can eat Mutton without Capers.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He thinks Millers and Mizers are more correspondent in trade than in
name: and why so? because as the one grinde^ (...): (...), the other grindes
the poor.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He troubles not his head much with learning Arithmeticke, for (when he is
at the best) he can calculate his money without either pen or Counters.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item Of all men living he regards Lawyers. A reason for that prithee? why I Will
tell you sir their attractiue policy draws him an Iron audience out of the
Country: for he thinks it is never so well with London as when the hobnayles
strike fire out of the stones.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item It goes to his very heart to hear the man that cries buy a brush, for it
puts him in mind of his holy day cloak that lies in Long-Lane to be brusht:
for though his knavery be but little, yet a stronger cloak would do well to
cover it, least one that has much should steal away his little: for now
adays no knavery no living.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He is loath to marry a Widow because he will not taste of that which
another man dyed after.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He is confidently conceited that if all men would abstain from immoderate
drinking, quarrelling, wenching, and gameing: Physicians, Surgeons, and
catchpoles, should have far less employment than they have.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He is also verily persuaded that if Women could but govern one little
piece of flesh (the tongue I mean) so many of them would not go with party
coulerd faces.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He will not be troubled with paying Alehouse scores: no, no, he has a
fine trick to prevent that: as how sir I prithee? why by calling in no more
than he is able to pay for.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He scorns to be comited a shifting companion, for where he meets with
good liquor and good company, he seldom departs willingly, until Peter
poverty puts him out of the door.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He hates of all (humane) things to be ouerseene in bread: for he had
rather the Brewer should thrive than the Baker.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He holds it necessary and convenient, by order of equity (and indeed
warranted by his own exemplary practice) that he who is drunk ouer-night,
shall (in satisfaction to the Bachinalian statute) pay a groas on the next
morning.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item Having lately read the rare history of patient Grizell, out of it he has
drawn this Phylosophicall position, that if all women were of that Woman's
condition, we should have no employment for cuckinstooles.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He is of this opinion, that if the histories of Garragantua and Tom
Thumb be true: by consequence Bevis of Hampton, and Scoggins Jests must needs
be Authentical.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He is an excellent Orator, and I think he carries some glue upon his
tongue that joins the ears of his auditors so fast unto him, that they cannot
depart til they are pleased or vexed: for you shall see the people flock about
him, like Bees to a honey pot: he tells them his mind, and is in a manor
indifferent whether they be angry or pleased.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He has more mind to go to Billingsgate to eat Oysters, (though he
purchase friendship with a box on the ear) than to interpose himself in an
idle quarrel, when he may gain a broken pate for his good will.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He professes himself an open enemy to double dealing, and yet in cold
weather (provided it be at your own charges) you may easily persuade him to
wear two shirts.

This is Harry VVhites humor.

Item He never will be sparing in other men's praises, for he extolles a good
work (done by any man) to the highest: and this is not only done in corners,
for he tells it openly in the streets.

This is Harry, etc.

Item He is to much addicted (and that is both a mad humor, and a bad humor)
to any Sycophants that will flatter his fancy: and by their tongues (being
giulded with deceit) draw silver out of his pockets in expenses.

This is Harry VVhites humor, by no wise man to be followed.

Item He has an admirable faculty in judging the minds of others, for if he
sees a maid of her own accord to kiss a young man he dares almost be sworn
sh^^ loves him.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He holds it an odious object to see a man drunk: but a Woman to go
reeling in the streets, cut upon her beast.

This is Harry, etc.

Item Besides this, he thinks it may be probably conjectured (without any
prejudice to art or nature) that a Woman who will be commonly drunk, does now
and then (when her senses are intoxicated) mistake another man for her husband.

This is Harry, etc.

Item He loves good company with all his heart, and had rather spend a shilling
on a good fellow, than a penny on a whore.

This is Harry, etc.

Item He cannot abide to whisper out his mind, as though he were either
afraid, or ashamed of his profession: no, no, you shall hear him, if you be
near him: he will not lack money, if speaking for it can procure it.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He is seldom or never afraid of aresting: for poverty preuents
borrowing, and if nothing be borrowed, there is nothing to pay: then a fig
for the catchpole.

This is Harry, etc.

Item He loves no kind of gaming, his reason is this, that although the game
of it self may be lawful enough (being lawfully used for honest recreation)
yet there are so many absurdities and inconueniencies derived from the same,
(as swearing, cursing, quarrelling, between nearest friends: and many other
evils) that he will not play with any man, no not for shooe-buckles.

This is Harry, etc.

Item He holds it unnecessary that a horsecourser and a broker should dwell
near together: why so sir? why sir, because the proverb says, that a crafty
knave needs no broker.

This is Harry, etc.

Item He had rather see a pick-pocket carried to Newgate (look to your purses
Gentlemen) than a poor man to the Compter for debt.

This is Harry Whites humor.

Item He esteems it a point of no good husbandry for any man to loyter and be
drinking all the working days, and to follow his labor on Sundays, or
holy days: neither does he commend the custom of those Iourneymen, or
laborers, who having received their wages on the Saturday night, do spend all
(or the most part of it) on Sunday: and the next week following are forced to
make more fasting-daies than the Church commands.

This is Harry etc.

Item He deemes that a preposterous government where the wife predominates, and
the husband submits to her discretion; that is just Hystoron and Proteron, the
Cart before the horse.

A woman's counsell's ofttimes fit,
For many of them have sudden wit:
But where the wife bears greatest sway,
That house can be at no good stay.
This is Harry, etc.

Item On the contrary he counts it a base inhumane part, for any man to beat
his Wife: nay and besides, it is an absurd fully, for if she be good, ill usage
may pervert her: if she be bad, blows will not mend her: for being a weak
vessel she will rather break with beating: what a simplicity is it for a man
(in his fury) to give his Wife a black eye: and then to cogge and flatter,
look babyes in her eyes, call her his pigges nigh, and cry Peccavi (for his
fault) a fortnight, or three weeks after.

This is not Harry VVhites humor.

Lastly, Harry White is glad at the heart to see the young men laughing, the
maids smiling, some drawing their purses, others groping in their pockets,
some pretty lasses feeling in their bosoms for odd parcells of money wrapped in
clouts: for these are evident presages of his good fortune: ah what dulcid
music it is to his ears, when he hears his audience cry, jointly, give me
one, give me two: change my money says one, here is a single two pence says
another.

This fits Harry VVhites humor.

Postscript.
1
NOw worthy friends if what is here expres^^^
of Harry White his humor, yours have pleas^^
The author and the Subject will contest
about their shares of Joy; yet soon appeasd,
Shall jointly join in their congratulation,
While in your loves both has participation.
2
IN his one humor many are comprised
then take your choice, as every man shall fi^^
In his own heart: what here is epitomis'd,
you may exemplify in your own mind.
Let fame, (times harold) daign to blaze this rum^^
When Harry whites not here, yet here is his humo^
An applause by L.P. Of the Author M.P.
THe Author of this little book,
which he in love has pend,
Is 'cause some may behold their faults,
and practice to amend.
He flatters not as many do,
to win himself a praise,
But boldly paints abuses forth
that is used now adays
Amongst men of sound discretion, sure
these lines will breed no jarre,
But it may make gauld jades to kick,
because they spurred are,
The Author in a recompense,
to them that angry be,
Bequeaths a gift that is called
old Gillians legacy.
FINIS.
depiction of Harry White


