THE WORKS of that famous Surgeon Ambrose Parey Translated out of Latin
and compared with the French.

by Th: Johnson.

Ne fallare vide, neu quae sunt partasaluti,
Vertat in exitium, non solers cum medentis.
London, Printed by Th: Cotes and R. Young Anno 1634.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR EDWARD HERBERT, KNIGHT OF THE BATH, Lord Herbert
of Castle Island, and Baron of Cherbury.
SIR,
IT is not the far fetched pedigree of noble Ancestors, nor those Honors your
Lordship deservedly possesses, that make me crave your Patronage to this my
Labor; but it is that Heroic mind, enriched with the choice endowments of
Nature and Art, and that earnest affection wherewith your Honor entertaines
all Sciences, Arts, and Artists, with that exquisite Judgment which sees into
the inner man, which embolden and incite me to sue for your Honors assistance,
in protecting the fame of him, who by your many favors is made yours. I know
the seeming and selfe-pleasing Wisdom of our times, consists much in
cavilling, and unjustly carping at all things that see light, and that there
are many who earnestly hunt after the public fame of Learning and Judgment,
by this easily trod, and despicable path, which notwithstanding they tread with
as much confidence as folly; for that oft-times which they vainly and unjustly
brand with opprobrie, out-lives their Fate, and flourishes when it is forgot
that ever any such as they had being.

I know your Lordships disposition to be far dissenting from those men, and
that you rather endeavor to build up the fame of your learning and Judgment
upon a strong laid foundation of your own, than Herostratus like, by pulling
down any howsoever fair built fabric of another. I heartily wish that your
Honor could propagate this good, and that all Detractors might be turned into
Actors, and then I know it would much mitigate their rigor in censuring
others, when as they themselves were also exposed unto the same Hazard.

I think it impertinent to acquaint your Honor with the Nature of the Work,
my Pains in translating, or the Benefit that may ensue thereon, for that I
know your Honor ignorant of nothing in this kind; neither doubt I of your
favorable acceptance of the good will of him, that thinks himself much
honored by being

Yours, THOMAS JOHNSON.

To The Reader.
I Have here for the public good taken pains to subject my self to common
censure, the which I doubt not but to find as various as the faces of the
Censurers; but I expect no thanks, nor hunt after other praise, than that I
have labored for my Countries good, if that deserve any. I fear not
Calumniation (though sure to hear of it) and therefore I will not Apologize,
but inform thee of some things concerning the Author his work, and the reason
that induced me to the translation thereof, with some few things besides. For
the Author, who was principal Surgeon to two or three Kings of France, he was
a man well versed in the writings of the ancient and modern Physicians, and
Surgeons, as you may evidently find by sundry places alleged in his works.
For his experience, or practice (the chief help to attain the highest
perfection in this Art) it was wonderful great, as you may collect by his
voyages recorded in the last part of this work; as also by that which James
Guillemeau, Surgeon to the French King, a man both learned and judicious in his
profession, averres, speaking of his own education and progress in the Art of
Surgery. I so laid ( In his Epistle prefixed before the Latin edition of this
author.
says he) the first foundation of this Art in the Hospital of Paris, being,
as it were, an ample Theater of wounds and diseases of all kinds, that for two
whole years, during which time I was there conversant, nothing was consulted
of, nothing performed, the Physicians, and Surgeons being present, whereof I
was not an Auditor of Actor. There flourished at these times, and yet does,
Ambrose Parey, principal Surgeon to the most Christian King, the Author of
this great work, most renowned for the gracious favor of Kings, Princes and
Nobles toward him, for his Authority amongst his equals, for his Chirurgical
operations amongst all men. Therefore I earnestly endeavored to be received
into his family, as unto another Machaon, or Podalitius: once admitted, I so by
all dutifulness and due respect acquired his favor, that he, unless I were
present and assisting, did nothing (such is his natural gentleness and
courtesy to all such as are studious of the Art) at home or abroad, in the
field, in the tents, or lastly in this famous City of Paris, about the bodies
of Dukes, Noblemen, or Citizens, in whose cure, he by the ardent desire of them
all, had still the prime place.

Now for this work, hear what this same man in the same place affirms
further: I not content with these means, which may seem sufficient, and too
much, as desirous to satisfy my long thirst, determined to try whether I could
draw, or borrow any thing from strangers, which our men wanted, to the fuller
knowledge of Surgery. To this purpose I travailed over Germany, and then for
four years space I followed the Spanish Army in the Lowcountries; whereas I
did not only carefully cure the wounded Soldier, but also heedfully and
curiously observe what way of curing the renowned Italian, Germane, and Spanish
Surgeons observed, who together with me were employed in the Hospital, for the
healing of the wounded and sick. I observed them all to take no other course
than that which is here delivered by Parey. Such as did not understand French,
got some pieces of this work for large rewards, turned into Latin, or such
Languages as they understood, which they kept charily, and made great store of;
and they esteemed, admired, and embraced this work alone, above all other
works of Surgery, etc. Our Author also himself, not out of a vainglorious
ostentation, but a mind conscious of the truth of his assertion, affirms thus
much of this his work. I have (says he) so certainly touched the mark
whereat I aimed, that Antiquity may seem to have nothing wherein it may exceed
us, besides the glory of invention, nor posterity any thing left, but a
certain small hope to add some things, as it is easy to add to former
inventions. Thus much concerning our Author, and the excellency of his work.

Now come I to my translation, the which, as desiring more a public good, than
private praise, I have performed plainly and honestly, laboring to fit it to
the capacity of the meanest Artist; for these are they to whom I chiefly
commend this work, and from whom I expect acceptance. I being by the earnest
persuasions of some of this profession, chiefly, and almost wholly persuaded
and incited to take this pains, who knowing the disability of understanding
this Author in Latin or French, in many of the weaker members of the large
body of their profession, dispersed over this Kingdom, and the rest of his
Majesty's Dominions, whose good, and increase in knowledge may be wished, that
so they may be the better enabled to do good to such as shall implore their
aid in their profession.

There are some (I know) will blame me for Englishing this work, as laying
open the mysteries of a worthy Art, to the unworthy view of the vulgar. To such
I could answer as Vide Aul. Gel. l. 20. c. 4.
Aristotle did to Alexander: but for the present I will give them these, which
I think may satisfy any but the purposely malicious: the first is drawn from
the goodness of the thing, as intended for those that want such guides to
direct them in their Art; for it is commonly granted, that, Bonunm quo
communius eo melius. Secondly, it has been the custom of most Writers in all
Ages and Countries thus to do: Hippocrates, Galen, and the other Greeks, writ
in their mother tongue the mysteries of their Art: thus did Celsus, Serenus,
and others in Latin: Mesue, Avicen, Serapio, and others, in Arabicke; as also,
to go no further, our Author writ this work in his native French, and learned
men have done the like in this, and all other Arts. And it is a great
hinderance to us in these days, that we must be forced to learn to
understand two or three tongues, before we can learn any science, whereas the
Ancients learned and taught theirs in their mother tongue: so that they spent a
great deal less time about words, and more upon the study of that Art or
Science they intended to learn and follow. Thirdly, I must tell you, that, Ex
libris nemo evasit Artifex, No man becomes a workman by book: so that unless
they have had some insight in the Art, and be in some sort acquainted both with
the terms of Art, as also with the knowledge and use of the instruments
thereto belonging, if by reading this, or any other book of the like nature
they become Surgeons, I must needs liken them (as Galen does another sort of
men) Gal. de simp. l. 6. (...).
To Pilots by book only: to whose care, I think, none of us would commit his
safety at Sea, nor any if wise, will commit themselves to these at land, or sea
either, unless wholly destitute of other.

The other things whereof I must also give you notice, are these. The figures
in the Anatomy are not the same used by my Author (whose were according to
those of Vesalius) but according to those of ^auline, which were used in the
work of Dr. Crook; and these indeed are the better and more complete. Also
Page 807. I thought it better to give the true figure of the Helmet floured
Aconite, mentioned out of Pliny, than to reserve the feigned picture of
Matthiolus, which in our Author was increased with the further fiction of a
Helmet. I have in some few places in the margent, which you shall find marked
with a star, put short annotations, for the better illustration of that which
is obscure, etc. I have also in the Text to the same purpose, here and there
put two or three words, contained in these limits [], which I find here and
there turned into a plain Parenthesis, especially toward the latter end of the
book, but the matter is not great. Further, I must acquaint you that the
Apology and Voyages, being the last part of this work, and not in the Latin,
but French editions, were translated into English out of French by George
Baker, a Surgeon of this City, since that time, as I hear, dead beyond the
Seas.

This is all, Courteous Reader, that I have thought necessary to acquaint thee
withal concerning this, which I would desire thee to take with the same mind
that it is presented to thee, by him that wishes thee all happiness,

THOMAS JOHNSON.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE DEDICATORIE To Henry the third, the most Christian King of
France and Poland.
EVen as (most Christian King) we see the members of man's body by a friendly
consent are always busied, and stand ready to perform those functions for
which they are appointed by nature, for the preservation of the whole, of which
they are parts: so it is convenient that we, which are, as it were, Citizens of
this earthly Commonweal should be diligent in the following of that calling
which (by Gods appointment) we have once taken upon us: and content with our
present estate, not carried away with rashness and envy, desire different and
diverse things whereof we have no knowledge. He which does otherwise, perverts
and defiles with hated confusion the order and beauty, on which this Universe
consists. Wherefore when I considered with my self, that I was a member of this
great Mundane body, and that not altogether unprofitable, I endeavored
earnestly, that all men should be acquainted with my duty, and that it might be
known how much I could profit every man. For God is my witness, and all good
men know, that I have now labored fifty years with all care and pains in the
illustration and amplification of Surgery; and that I have so certainly
touched the mark whereat I aimed, that Antiquity may seem to have nothing
wherein it may exceed us, beside the glory of invention; nor posterity any
thing left but a certain small hope to add some things, as it is easy to
add to former inventions. In performance whereof, I have been so prodigal of
my self, my watchings, faculties and means, that I spared neither time,
labor, nor cost, whereby I might satisfy and accomplish my own desires, this
my great work, and the desires of the studious Neither may we doubt but their
studies would at the length wax cold, if they only furnished with the
Theoricke and Precepts in Schools and that with much labor, should see no
manual operation, nor manifest way of performing the Art. For which cause I
seeking the praise and profit of the French Nation, even with the hinderance of
my particular estate, have endeavored to illustrate and increase Chyrurgerie
hitherto obscure either by the infelicity of the former ages, or the envy of
the Prosessors; and not only with precepts and rules, but being alover of
carved works I beautified it with 300. forms, or graven figures and apt
deliniations, in which whosoever shall attentively look shall find five
hundred anatomicall, or organicall figures belonging to the Art, (if they be
reckoned particularly). To every of these I have given their names and showed
their use, least they should seem to have been put in vainly for ostentation
or delight. But although there be few men of this profession which can bring so
much authority to their writings either with reason, or experience as I can;
notwithstanding I have not been so arrogant, but intending to publish my
work, I first communicated it with men the most excellent in the Art of
Physic, who gave me greater encouragement to perfect and publish it, that it
might be in common use: professing they wished nothing more, than that it might
be turned into Latin, so by which means it should be known to foreign
Nations, that there is no kind of Learning which is not delivered with great
dexterity of wit in this kingdom over which you rule. And thus much I dare
boldly affirm, that there is scarce any, be he never so stately or
supercilious, but that he may here find something which may delight him, and by
which he may better his knowledge. Therefore I doubted not to consecrate this
book unto your Majesty both as a Pattern and treasury of my labors as well
in respect of my duty, who am yours by nature and education, as that I might
manisest to all, your Highness exceeding bounty toward me, in placing me,
(having heretofore enjoyed the office of principal Surgeon under 3 Kings
your Majesty's predecessors) in the same dignity, and that of your own accord.
And moreover I did conjecture that it would fall out, as now it does, that this
my work carried through the world by the fame of your Majesty name, should
neither fear the face nor veiw of any, supported by the favor and Majesty of
a most invincible Monarch and most excellent and renowned Prince. Neither did
King Charles the ninth of happy memory, incited by the relation of the most
gracious Queen his Mother, refuse to read it, being he under stood it
proceeded from him, who having happily passed all his time in private and
publik employments, and conversed with all men of all sorts, was judged most
worthy to obtain this favor, as to have the front of this work adorned and
beautified with the splendour of his prefixed name. I encour aged by this hope,
desired that my request should pass as by a certain continuation and
succession from a most powerful, to a most Invincible King; and do wholly
consecrate these my labors taken for my Countries good unto your sacred
Majesty. God grant that your Majesty may have happy success of all your
enterprises abundantly added to Nestors years.

Paris. 8. Feb. Anno Dom. 1579. Your most Christian Majesty's faithful Servant
Ambrose Parey.

The Preface.
MOst men derive the Original of Physic from heaven; for those who hold the
best opinion of the Creation of the world, affirm, the Elements being created
and separated each from other, man being not as yet made; incontinently by the
divine decree, all herbs and plants with infinite variety of flowers, endewed
with various sents, tastes, colors and forms, grew and sprung forth of the
bowels of the Earth, enriched with so many and great virtues, that it may be
thought a great offense to attribute to any other than the Deity, the benefit
of so great a blessing so necessary for so many uses: Neither could Man's
Capacity ever have attained to the knowledge of those things without the
guidance of the divine power. For God the great Creator and fashioner of the
world, when first he inspired Adam by the breath of his mouth into a living and
breathing man, he taught him the nature, the proper operations, faculties and
virtues of all things contained in the circuit of this Universe. So that if
there be any who would a scribe the glory of this invention to man, he is
condemned of ingratitude even by the judgment of Pliny. But this knowledge was
not buried in oblivion with Adam: but by the same gift of God was given to
those whom he had chosen and ordained for Physic, to put their helping hands
to others that stood in need thereof. Which opinion was not only received in
the common manner and by the tacit consent of al Nations, but confirmed by
Moses in the Scripture: Which thing Jesus the son Genes. 1. Ecclesiast. 38. 1.
of Sirach the wisest amongst the Jews, has confirmed saying; Honor the
Physician with the honor due unto him, for the most High has created him
because of necessity: and of the Lord comes the gift of healing. The Lord
has created Medicines of the Earth and he that is wise will not abhor them.
Give place and honor to the Physician, for God has created him, let him not
go from thee, for thou have need of him. The Graecians who first seem more
fully and with greater fame to have professed the Art of Physic, do in a
manner consent with this opinion, in acknowledging Apollo to have been the
Inventor thereof, neither did they it without a reasonable cause. For whether
by Apollo they may understand the Sun who by its gentle and vital heat does
bring forth, temper and cherish all things; or else some Heroes, who incited by
an excellent and almost divine understanding first taught and put in practice
the Medicinal virtues of Herbs; in which sense Ovid brings him in speaking
thus: Herbs are of mine invention, and through all
The world, they me the first Physician call.


The original of Physic arising from those beginnings shall always be
celebrated, as celestial, and was increased principally after this manner.
After Apollo, Aesculapius his son instructed by his father reduced this Art
being as yet rude and vulgar into alitle better and more exquisite for me, for
which cause he was reputed worthy to be accounted as one of the Gods. At the
same time flourished Chiron the Centaure who for that he excelled in knowledge
of Plants, and taught Aesculapius, (as many report) their faculties, is thought
by Pliny and some others to plin. l. 7, c. 2.
have bin the inventor of Physic. Aesculapius had two sons Podalirius and
Machaon who following their fathers steps and professing Physic, did
principally beautify and practice that part there of which is called
Surgery, and for that cause were accounted the Inventers thereof. After
those Asclepiades left this Art much enlarged as hereditary to his posterity:
by whose study and diligence, that part of the Art was invented and annexed,
which by a more curious skill searches out and cures those diseases which lie
hid within the body. Hippocrates the Coan the son of Heraclidas, borne of the
noble race of Asclepiades, Prince of the Physicians that were before him,
perfected Physic and reduced it into an Art and wrote diverse books thereof
in Greek. Galen succeeded him six hundred years after, who was a man most
famous not only for his knowledge in Physic, but also in all other sciences,
who faithfully interpreting every thing that was obscure and difficult in the
writings of Hippocrates, enlarged the science with many volumes. Thus therefore
was the beginning, thus the increase and perfecting the Art of Physic, as
much as can be hoped for from man's industry Although indeed we cannot deny but
that Experience has much profited this Art, as it has and does many other.
For as men perceived that some things were profitable, some unprofitable for
this or that disease, they set it down, and so by diligent observation and
marking of singularities, they established universal and certain precepts and
so brought it into an Art. For so we find it recorded in ancient Histories,
before the invention of Physic, that the Babilonians and Assyrians had a
custom amongst them, to lay their sick and diseased persons in the porches
and entries of their houses, or to carry them into the streets and market
places, that such as passed by and saw them, might give them counsel to take
those things to cure their diseases, which they had formerly found profitable
in themselves or any other in the like affects, neither might any pass by a
sick man in silence. Also Strabo writes that it was a custom in Graece that
those which were sick should resort to Aesculapius his Temple in Epidaurum,
that there as they slept, by their dreams they might be admonished by the God
what means they should use to be cured; and when they were freed from their
diseases, they writ the manner of their infirmities and the means by which they
were cured in tables and fastened them to the pillars of the Temple, not only
for the glory of the God, but also for the profit of such, as should afterward
be affected with the like maladies. All which tables (as fame reports)
Hippocrdtes transcribed, and so from those drew the Art of Physic. Beasts
also have added much to this Art. For one man was not only instructed by
another, but learned also much from brute beasts, for they by the only
instinct of nature have found out diverse herbs, and remedies, by which they
freed and preserved themselves from infirmities, which might presently be
transferred to man's use. Wherefore considering that such and so many have
co^curred to bring this Art to perfection, who hereafter dare call in question
the excellency thereof? chiefly if he respect the subject thereof, Man's body, a
thing more noble than all other Mundane thing, and for which the rest were
created. Which thing moved Herophilus in times past to call Physicians The
hands of the Gods. For as we by putting forth our hand, do help any man out of
the water or mud into which he is fallen: even so we do sustain those that
are thrown down from the top of health to the gates of death by violence of
diseases, with happy medicines, and as it were by some special and divine gift
deliver them out of the jaws of death. Homer the prince of Greek Poets
affirms that one Physician is far more worthy than many other men. All
Antiquity gave Physicians such honor, that they worshipped them with great
veneration as Gods, or the sons of their Gods. For who is it which is not much
delighted with the divine force of health full medicines, with which (we see by
daily experience) Phisitio^s, as armed with Mercuries rod, do bring back those
languishing souls which are even entering the gates of death? Hence it comes
to pass that the divine Poets of ancient times, as Orpheus, and Musaeus and
Hesiode; and the most renowned Philosophers, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle,
Theophrastus, Chrysippus, Cato Censorius, and Varro esteemed nothing more
excellent than to excel in the knowledge of Medicines, and to testify the
same by written monuments to Posterity. For what can be more noble or worthy of
a generous disposition than to attain to that by the benefit of Physic, that
adorned with the ornaments of dignity thou may have power over other men,
and favored of Princes, Kings and Emperors, may appoint and prescribe to
them those things which are profitable to preserve health, and cure their
diseases? But if you look for benefit by sciences; then know that the
Professors here of have besides sufficient gain, acquired much honor and many
friends. Hippocrates In what esteem Physicians have formerly been.
coming to Abdera to cure Democritus of his madness, not only the men of the
city, but also the women, children and people of every age, sex and rank went
forth to meet him, giving him with a common consent and loud voice the title of
a Tutelary Deity and father of their Country. But the Athenians, for freeing
their Country from the plague, with triumphant pomp celebrated plays to his
honor, and bountifully set upon his head as if he had been a king, a Crown of
gold weighing a 1000. pieces of their golden coin, and erected his statue, for
a perpetual monument of his piety and Learning. Erasistratus the Nephew of
Aristotle by his daughter, received, freely given him by Ptolomy king of Egypt,
for the cure of his son, 100. Talents of gold. The Emperor Augustus honored
Antonius Musa with a golden statue. Quintus Stertinius yearly received out of
the Emperors Treasury 12000. 500. pieces of gold. In the time of our
Grandfathers Petrus Aponensis called Conciliator was so famous through all
Italy for his knowledge in Physic, that he could scarce be entreated to come
to any man of fashion that was sick, unles he gave him 50. crowns, for every
day he was absent from home: but when he went to cure Honorius the Bishop of
Rome, he received 400. crowns for every day he was absent. Our French
Chronicles relate in what credit and estimation James Cotterius the Physician
was with Lewis the 11. King of France; for they report he gave him monthly out
of his Treasury 10000. crowns. Physic in times past has bin in such esteem
with many famous and noble personages, that diverse Kings and Princes delighted
with the study thereof, and desirous to attain glory and credit thereby, called
sundry herbs after their own names. For so Gentian took Names given to Plants.
its name of Gentius king of Illyria; the herb Lysimachia of Lysimachus the
king of Macedon, the Mithridatick herb or Scordium, of Mithridates the king of
Pontus and Bithinia; Achillea of Achilles; Centorie of Chiron the Centaure;
Arthemisia of Arthemisia the Queen of Caria. Attalus king of Pergamus, Solomon
of Judea, Evax of Arabia, and Juba the king of Mauritania, were not only
inflamed with a desire of the knowledge of plants; but either they have written
books of it, or for the great commodity of posterity, invented by their skill
many choice Antidots compounded of diverse simples; neither the desire of
learning this noble science is yet altogether extinct. As may appear by that
India^ plant Tobaco, called by some the noble herb, Catherines herb and Medices
herb, but commonly the Queens herb, because Catherine Medices the mother of our
kings, by her singular study and industry made manifest the excellent virtue it
has in curing malign ulcers and wounds, which before was unknown to the
French. For these worthy men understood that their glory, thus fastened and
ingrafted into the deep, and as it were everliving roots of plants, would
never decay; but should be propagated to al posterity in many succeeding ages,
growing up with their sprouting and budding shouts, stalks, flowers and fruits.
Neither did these famous men whilst they adorned this part of physic suffer
the other, which treats of the dissectio^ of man's body, be buried in oblivion,
and without their knowledge; as instructed with the precepts and learning of
the wisest men, how artificial and unimitable by mortal hand this fabric of
our body is. Neither is it probable that Apis, Osiris and Ptolomy kings of
Egypt, Solomon, Alexander the great, Mithridates, Attalus, seeing they
dedicated themselves wholly to the co^templation of natural things; neglected
the use of Anatomy, and being men most desirous to know themselves, to have
been ignorant of the structure of there own bodies being the habitations of
their souls immortal and made to the Image of God: seeing they observed with
certain judgment the different lights of the Sun, Moon and stars; and passed
over so many lands, so many seas, so many regions so far remote one from
another, by ways so terrible by reason of cold, uncouthnes, darkness, by rocks,
by fire and sword, with great labor, charge and danger of life, only that they
might satisfy their minds thirsting after the knowledge of things; and to have
left untouched a thing truly noble, admirable, and most worthy of knowledge,
easy to be attained by any, and to be acquired without any danger of life, or
fortunes.

Seeing there be 3 parts of that Physic which at this time we profess,
Physic is divided into 3 parts.
Surgery which by the use of the hand, Diet which with a convenient manner
of feeding and ordering the body, and Pharmacy that by medicines attempt to
expel diseases, and preserve health; The prime Physicians do not without
reason contend which of these may be accounted the chief. Certainly Herophilus
had Pharmacy in such esteem, that he thought medicines were first mixed and
administered to the sick by Apollo (whom Antiquity thought a great Deity.) And
Pliny had so good an opinion of Diet, that he exclaimes; The true remedies and
Antidotes against diseases are put into the pot and eaten every day by the
poor people. Verily al learned men confess that the manner of curing which is
performed by diet, is much more facile and prosperous, than that which is done
by medicines; as those things which sought with much labor and cost, are taken
with much loathing, and taken are scarce retained' but retained they often work
with much labor and pain: Which things long ago moved Asclepiades to exclude
the use of medicines, as hurtful to the stomach. Yet if we will believe Celsus
neither of these parts merit the prehemine^ce, but both of them give place to
Surgery. For seeing that fortune is very powerful in diseases, and the same
Meats and Medicines are often good and often vain, truly it is hard to say,
whether the health is recovered by the benefit of Diet and Pharmacy, or by the
strength of the body. Moreover in those cases, in which we most prevail with
medicines; although the profit be more manifest, yet it is evident that health
is often sought in vain even by these things, and often recovered without
them. As it may be perceived by some troubled with sore eyes, and others with
Quartaine fevers, who having bin long troubled by Phisitio^s are sometimes
healed without them. But the effect of Surgery as it is very necessary, so
it is the most evident amongst all the parts of physic. For who without
Chirgery can hope to cure broken, or luxated parts, who wounds and ulcers, who
the falling of the Matrix, the stone in the bladder, a member infested with a
Gangrene, or Sphacele? Besides, this part also is the most ancient; for
Podalirius and Machaon following their General Agamemnon to the Trojane wars,
yielded no small comfort to their fellow Soldiers. Whom notwithstanding Homer
affirms not to have given any help in the pestilence, nor in diverse other
diseases, but only were accustomed to heal wounds by instruments and
medicines. And if the difficulty of learning it argue the excellency The
excellency of Surgery.
of the Art, who can doubt but Surgery must be the most excellent, seeing
that none ought to be accounted a Surgeon or which can perform his duty,
without the knowledge of Diet and Pharmacy? But both the other can perform
their parts without Surgery if we may believe Galen. But if we consider the
matter more nearly according to truth; we shall understand those three parts
have a certain common bond, and are very near of kindred, so that the one
implores the aid of the other; neither can the Physician do any thing praise
worthy without the conspiracy and joint consent of these three; therefore in
ancient times there was but one performer and user of all the three parts. But
the multitude of men daily increasing, and on the contrary man's life
decreasing, so that it did not seem able to suffice for to learn and exercise
all the three, the workmen divided themselves. Wherefore that which happens to
any man either by lot, or counsel, that let him follow, maintain and only
use, as mindful how short his life is, and how long the Art.

A Catalogue of the Works of AMBROSE PAREY, the King of France his Chief
Chyrurgion, which were set forth in Latin, by James Guillemeau.
1. AN Introduction, or compendious way to Surgery. 2. Of living creatures
and man's excellency. 3. Of the Anatomy of man's body. 4. Of the vital parts
contained in the Chest. 5. Of the Animal parts placed in the head. 6. Of the
Muscles and Bones, and other extreme parts of the body. 7. Of Tumors contrary
to nature in general 8. Of Tumors contrary to nature in particular. 9. Of
wounds in general. 10 Of the green and bloody wounds of each several part.
11 Of wounds made by Gunshot, and other fiery Engines, and all sorts of
weapons. 12. Of Contusions and Gangreenes. 13. Of Ulcers, Fistulaes, and
Haemorroides. 14. Of Ligatures, or Bandages. 15. Of Fractures. 16. Of
Luxations, and Strains. 17. Of diverse affects of the parts not agreeable to
nature, whose cure commonly is performed by the hand. 18. Of the Gout. 19. Of
the Lues Venerea, and those Symptoms that happen by reason thereof. 20. Of the
small Poxes and Measels and also of Worms, and the Leprosy. 21. Of Poisons,
and of the biting of mad dogs, and the stinging and biting of venomous
creatures. 22. Of the Plague. 23. Of the Arts to repair those things which are
defective, either by nature or accident. 24. Of the generation of Man. 25. Of
Monsters and Prodigies. 26. Of the Faculties of simple medicines, together with
their composition and use. 27. Of Distillations. 28. A Treatise of reports, and
the embalming of dead bodies. 29. An Apology, and Voyages; being not in the
Latin, but translated out of the last French Edition, whom also I have
followed in the number of the Books, least any should think some wanting,
finding but 26. in the Latin, and 29. in the French.
AN INTRODVCTION OR COMPENDIOUS Way to Chyrurgerie.
CHAP. I. What Chyrurgerie is.
CHYRVRGERIE is an Art, which teaches the way by reason, how by the operation
of the hand we may cure prevent The definition of Chirurgerie.
and mitigate diseases, which accidentally happen uuto us. Others have thought
good to describe it otherwise, as that; it is that part of Physic which
undertaketh the cure of diseases by the sole industry of the hand; as by
cutting, burning, sawing off, uniting fractures, restoring dislocations, and
performing other works, of which we shall hereafter treat. Chyrurgery also is
thus defined by the Author of the medicinal Definitions; The quick motion of
an intrepide hand joined with experience: or an artificial action by the hands
used in Physic, for some convenientintent. Yet none must think to attain to
any great perfection in this Art, without the help of the other two parts of
Physic; I say of Diet and Pharmacie, and the diverse application of proper
medicines, respecting the condition of the causes, diseases, sypmtomes, What
necessary for a Surgeon.
and the like circumstances, which comprehended under the names of things
natural, not natural, and besides nature (as they commonly call them) we
intend to describe in their proper place. But if any reply, that there be many
which do the works of Surgery, without any knowledge of such like things,
who notwithstanding have cured desperate diseases with happy success; let them
take this for an answer, that such things happen rather by chance, than by the
industry of the Art, and that they are not provident that commit themselves to
such. Because that for some one happy chance, a thousand dangerous errors
happen afterward, as Galen (in diverse places of his Method) speaks against
the Emperickes. Wherefore seeing we have set down Surgery to be a diligent
operation of the hands, strengthened by the assistance of Diet and Pharmacie,
we will now show, what, and of what nature the operations it are.

CHAP. II. Of Chirurgicall operations.
FIve things are proper to the duty of a Chirurgian; To take away that which
The nature of a Surgeon.
is superfluous; to restore to their places, such things as are displaced; to
separate those things which are joined together; to join those which are
separated; and to supply the defects of nature. Thou shall fare more easily and
happily Experience more necessary for a Surgeon, thau Art.
attain to the knowledge of these things by long use and much exercise, than
by much reading of Books, or daily hearing of Teachers. For speech how
perspicuous and elegant soever it be, cannot so vively express any thing, as
that which is subjected to the faithful eyes and hands.

We have examples of taking away that which abounds, in the amputation, or
Examples of taking away that which is superfluous.
cutting off a finger, if any have six on one hand, or any other monstrous
member that may grow out: in the lopping off a putrified part inwardly
corrupted; in the extraction of a dead child, the secondine, mole or such like
bodies out of a woman's womb; in taking down of all Tumors, as Wens, Warts,
Polypus, Cancers, and fleshy excrescenses of the like nature; in the pulling
forth of bullets, of pieces of maile, of darts, arrows, shells, splinters, and
of all kind of weapons in what part of the body soever they be. And he takes
away that which redounds, which plucks away the hairs of the eyelids which
trouble the eye by their turning in toward it: who cuts away the web,
possessing all the Two tunicles of the eyes.
Adnata, and part of the Cornea: who lets forth suppurated matter; who
takes out stones in what part soever of the body they grow; who pulls out a
rotten or otherwise hurtful tooth, or cuts a nail that runs into the flesh;
who cuts away part of the uvula, or hairs that grow on the eyelids; who
takes off a Cataract; who cuts the navill or fore-skinne of a child newly
borne, or the skinnie caruncles of women's privities.

Examples of placing those things which are out of their natural site, are
manifest in restoring dislocated bones; in replacing of the guts and kall
fallen into the Examples of replacing.
cods, or out of the navill or belly by a wound, or of the falling down of the
womb, fundament, or great gut, or the eye hanging out of its circle, or proper
place.

But we may take examples of disioyning those things which are continued from
Example of separating things joined together.
the fingers growing together, either by some chance, as burning, or by the
imbecilitie of the forming faculty: by the disjunction of the membrane called
Hymen, or any other troubling the neck of the womb, by the dissection of the
ligament of the tongue, which hinders children from sucking and speaking, and
of that which hinders the Glans from being uncovered of the foreskinne; by the
devision of a varicous vein, or of a half cut nerve or tendon, causing
convulsion: by the division of the membrane stopping the auditory passage, the
nose, mouth, or fundament, or the stubborn sticking together of the hairs of
the eyelids. Refer to this place all the works done by Causticks, the Saw,
Trepan, Lancet, Cuppingglasses, Incision Knife, Leaches, either for evacuation,
derivation or revulsion sake.

The Surgeon draws together things separated, which heals wounds by
stitching them, by bolstering, binding, giving rest to, and sit placing the
part: which Examples of uniting things dissoyned.
repaires fractures; restores luxated parts; who by binding the vessel,
staieth the violent effusion of blood: who cicatriseth cloven lips, commonly
called hare-lips; who reduces to equality the cavities of Ulcers, and
Fistula's.

But he repaires those things which are defective, either from the infancy, or
afterward Examples of suplying defects.
by accident, as much as Art and Nature will suffer, who sets on an ear, an
eye, a nose, one or more teeth; who fills the hollownesse of the palate eaten by
the Pox, with a thin plate of gold or silver, or such like; who supplies the
defect of the tongue in part cut off, by some new addition; who fastens to a
hand, an arm or leg with fit ligaments workemanlike: who fits a doublet
bumbasted, or made with iron plates to make the body straight; who fills a
shoe too big with cork, or fastens a stocking or socke to a lame man's girdle
to help his gate. We will treat more fully of all these in our following
Work. But in performing those things with the hands, we cannot but cause
pain: (for who can without pain cut off an arm, or leg, devide and tear
asunder the neck of the bladder, restore bones put out of their places, open
ulcers, bind up wounds, and apply cauteries, and do such like?)
notwithstanding the matter often comes to that pass, that unless we use a
judicious hand, we must either die, or lead the remnant of our lives in
perpetual misery. Who therefore can justly abhor a Surgeon for this, or
accuse him of cruelty? or desire they may be served, as in ancient times the
Romans served Archagatus, who at the first made him free of the City, but
presently after, because he did somewhat too cruelly Archagatus the Surgeon.
burn, cut and perform the other works of a good Surgeon, they drew him
from his house into the Campus Martius and there stoned him to death, as we
have read it recorded by Sextus Cheroneus Plutarche's Niece by his daughter.
Truly it was an inhumane kind of ingratitude, so cruelly to murder a man intent
to the works of so necessary an Art. But the Senate could not approve the act,
wherefore to expiate the crime as well as then they could, they made his Statue
in gold, placed it in Aescislapius his Temple and dedicated it to his
perpetual memory. For my part I very well like that saying of Celsus; A
Surgeon must have a strong, stable, and intrepide In prafat. lib. 7.
hand, and a mind resolute and merciless, so that to heal him he takes in
hand, he be not moved to make more haste than the thing requires; or to cut
less than is needful; but which does all things as if he were nothing
affected with their cries; not giving The properties of a good Surgeon.
heed to the judgment of the vain common people, who speak ill of
Chirurgions because of their ignorance.

CHAP. III. Of things Natural.
THat the Surgeon may rightly and according to Art, perform the foresaid
works, he must set before his eyes certain Indications of working: Otherwise
he is like to become an Empericke, whom no Art, no certain reason, but only a
blind temerity of fortune moves to boldness and action. These Indications From
when (...) we must draw Indications.
of actions are drawn from things (as they call them) natural, not natural,
and besides nature, and their adjuncts, as it is singularly delivered of the
Ancients, being men of an excellent understanding. Wherefore we will prosecute
according to that order, all the speculation of this Art of ours. First
therefore things natural are so termed, because they constitute and contain
the nature of man's body, which wholly What things are called natural.
depends of the mixture and temperament of the 4. first bodies, as it is showed
by Hippocrates in his Book de Natura humana: wherefore the consideration
thereof belongs to that part of Physic which is named Physiologia; as the
examination of things not natural to Diaetetice, or Diet, because by the use
of such things it endeavors to retain and keep health: but Therapeutice or
the part which cures the diseases, and all the To what part of Physic things
not natural pertain. To what things besides nature.
affects besides nature, challenges the contemplation of those things which are
not agreeable to nature. But the things which are called natural may be
reduced to seven heads: besides which there comes into their fellowship, those
which we term annexed.

The seven principal heads of things natural are, Elements. Temperaments.
Humors. Parts or members. Faculties. Actions. Spirits.
To these are annexed and somewhat near, Age. Sex. Color. Composure. Time or
season. Region. Vocation of life.


CHAP. IIII. Of Elements.
AN Element (by the definition which is commonly received amongst Physicians)
What an Element is.
is the least and most simple portion of that thing which it compeseth: or that
my speech may be the more plain: the four first and simple bodies are called
Elements; Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; which accommodate and subject
themselves as matter to the promiscuous generation of all things which the
Heavens engirt, whether you understand thingsperfectly, or unperfectly mixed.
Such Elements Elements are understood by reason, not by sense.
are only to be conceived in your mind, being it is not granted to any
external sense to handle them in their pure and absolute nature. Which was the
cause that Hippocrates expressed them not by the names of substances, but of
proper qualities; saying, Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry; because some one of these
qualities is inherent in Why he expressed the Elements by these names of
qualities.
every Element, as his proper and essential form, not only according to the
excess of latitude, but also of the active faculty; to which is adjoined
another simple quality, and by that reason principal, but which
notwithstanding attaines not to the highest degree of his kind, as you may
understand by Galen in his first Book of Elements. So, for example sake, in
the Air we observe two qualities, Heat, and Moisture, both principal, and
not remitted by the commixture of any contrary quality, Two principal
qualities are in each Element.
for otherwise they were not simple. Therefore thou may say, what hinders
that the principal effects of heat show not themselves as well in the Air, as
in the Fire? because as we said before, although the Air have as great a heat
according to his nature, extent and degree, no otherwise than Fire has, yet it
is not so great in its active quality. The reason is, because that the
calfactorie force in the Air is hindered, Why the Air heats not so
vehemently, as the Fire.
and dulled by society of his companion and adjoined quality, that is,
Humidity which abateth the force of heat, as on the contrary, dryness
quickneth it. The Elements therefore are endewed with these qualities. Names of
the substances; Fire is Hot and dry. Names of the qualities. Air Moist and
hot. Water Cold and moist. Earth Cold and dry.

These four Elements in the composition of natural bodies, retain the
qualities How the Elements may be understood to be mixed in compound bodies.
they formerly had, but that by their mixture and meeting together of
contraries, they are somewhat tempered and abated. But the Elements are so
mutually mixed one with another, and all with all, that no simple part may be
found; no more than in a mass of the Emplaister Diacalcitheos you can show any
Axungia, oil, or litharge by it self; all things are so confused and united
by the power of heat, mixing the smalleft particulars with the smallest, and
the whole with the whole, in all parts. You may know and perceive this
concretion of the four Elementary substances in one compound body, by the
power of mixture, in their dissolution by burning a pile or heap of green
wood. For the flame expresses the Fire, the smoke the Air, the moisture that
sweats out at the ends, the Water, and the ashes, the Earth: You may easily
perceive by this example so familiar and obvious to the senses what dissolution
is, which is succeeded by the decay of the compound body; on the contrary, you
may know that the coagmentation, or uniting and joining into one of the first
mixed bodies is such, that there is no part sinceere, or without mixture. For
if the heat which Why of the first qualities, two are accounted active, and two
passive.
is predominant in the fire, should remain in the mixture in its perfect
vigor, it would consume the rest by its pernicious neighborhood; the like may
be said of Coldness, Moisture, and Dryness; although of these qualities, two
have the title of Active, that is, Heat, and Coldness, because they are the
more powerful; the other two Passive, because they may seem more dull and
slow, being compared to the former. The temperaments of all sublunarie bodies
arise from the commixture of these substances and elementary qualities, which
has bin the principal cause that moved me to treat of the Elements. But I
leave the force and effects of the Elementary qualities to some higher
contemplation, content to have noted this, that of these first qualities, (so
called, because they are primarily and naturally in the four first bodies) Why
the first qualities are so called. What the second qualities are. What Elements
light, what heavy.
others arise and proceed, which are therefore called the second qualities: as
of manythese, Heaviness, Lightness, variously distributed by the four
Elements, as the Heat, or Coldness, Moistness or Dryness, have more power
over them. For of the Elements, two are called light, because they naturally
affect to move upwards: the other two heavy, by reason they are carried
downward by their own weight. So we think the fire the lightest, because it
holds the highest place of this lower world; the Air which is next to it in
site, we account light; for the water which lies next to the Air, we judge
heavy; and the earth the center of the rest we judge to be the heaviest of them
all. Hereupon it is, that light bodies, and the light parts in bodies, have
most of the lighter Elements; as on the contrary heavy bodies have more of the
heavier. This is a brief description of the Elements of this frail world,
which are only to be discerned by the understanding, to which I think good to
adjoyne another description of other Elements, as it were arising or flowing
from the commixture of the first; for besides these, there are said to be
Elements of generation and What the Elements of generation are.
Elements of man's body. Which as they are more corporal, so also are they more
manifest to the sense. By which reason Hippocrates being moved, in his Book de
Natura humana, after he had described the nature of Hot, Cold, Moist and Dry,
he comes to take notice of these by the order of composition. Wherefore the
Elements of our generation, as also of all creatures which have blood, are seed
and menstruous blood. What the Elements of mize bodies.
But the Elements of our bodies are the solid and similar parts arising from
those Elements of generation. Of this kind are bones, membranes, ligaments,
veins, arteries, and many others manifest to the eyes, which we will describe
at large in our Treatise of Anatomy.

CHAP. V. Of Temperaments.
A Temperament is defined a proportionable mixture of hot, cold, moist and What
a Temperament is.
dry; or, it is a concord of the first disagreeing faculties. That harmony
springs from the mixture of the four first bodies of the world. This whether
Temperame^t or concord is given to Plants and brute beasts for the beginning of
their life, and so consequently for their Anima. What the life performs in
Plants.
life and form. But as Plants are inferior in order and dignity to beasts, so
their life is more base and infirm, for they have only a growing faculty by
which they may draw an Alimentarie juice from the Earth, as from their mothers
breasts, to preserve them and their life, by which they may grow to a certain
bigness; and lastly, by which they may bring forth their like for the
perpetual continuance of their kind. But the Anima. What in beasts.
life of beasts have to the three former the gift of sense annexed; by benefit
whereof, as by a certain inward knowledge, they shun those things that are
hurtful, and follow those which profit them, and by the power of their will,
they move themselves whither they please. But the soul of Man's soul comes
from above.
man far more perfect and noble than the rest, arises not from that earthly
mixture and temper of the Elements, but acknowledges and has a far more
divine offspring, as we shall teach hereafter. The manifold division of a
Temperament.


They devide a Temperament at the first division into two kinds; as one a
temperate, another an untemperate. The untemperate is of two sorts; the one
wholly vicious, which has altogether exceeded the bounds of mediocritie: the
other which has somewhat straied from the mediocritie of temper, but
notwithstanding is yet contained within the limits of health: as that which
brings no such evident harm to the actions, but that it somewhat hinders them,
so that they cannot so well and perfectly A Temperament, ad Poudus.
perform their duties. But the vicious Temperament does three manner of ways
corrupt the functions, either by weaking, depraving or abolishing them. For so
stupor, or astonishment, diminishes and sloweth the quickness of motion;
convulsion depraves it; the Palsy abolisheth it, and takes it away. The
temperate Temperament is also divided into two kinds; which is either to
equallity of weight, or Justice. It is called a temperature to weight which
arises from the equal force of (...) Ad poudus, vel ad jus^^ti^.
exactly concurring qualities, and as placed in a perfect balance, draws
down neither to this nor that part. They think the example of this
Temperament to appear in the inner skin of the fingers ends of a man
tempered to Justice. For seeing the most exquisite touch resides there, they
ought to be far from all excess of contrariety; for otherwise being
corrupted by too much heat or cold, moisture or dryness, they could give no
certain judgment of the tangible qualities. For which thing nature has
excellently provided in the fabric and coagmentation of the parts of which
the skin consists. For it is composed of hot and moist flesh, and therefore
soft, and of a tendon and nerve cold and dry, and therefore hard, which are
not only equally fitted and conjoined, but wholly confused and mixed together,
by which it comes that removed from all extremes of opposition, it is placed in
the midst, as a rule to judge of all the excesses that happen to the touch. So
it was fit the eye, which was to be the instrument of sight, should be
tinctured with no certain color, that it might be the less deceived in the
judgment of colors. So it was convenient the hearing should not be troubled
with any distinct sound, whereby it might more certainly judge of equal and
unequal sounds, not distinguished by a ratable proportion; neither was it fit
the tongue should have any certain taste, lest the access of that taste
should deceive it in knowing and judging of so many different tastes. The
Temperature tempered to A temperament ad justitiam.
justice is that, which although it is a little absent from the exact and
severe parility of mixed qualities, yet has that equality which does fully
and abundantly suffice for to perform all the functions fitly and perfectly
which nature does require, wherefore we can judge no otherwise of it than by
the integrity of the Actions. For hence it took its name, for as distributive
Justice equally gives to every one rewards, or punishment according to their
deserts; so nature having regard to all the parts of the body, gives them all
that temper which may suffice to perform those duties, for which they are
ordained. Let us for an example consider a Bone; no man doubts but that, The
temperament of a bone.
like as the other similar parts of the body proceeds from the mixture of the
four Elements: but nevertheless nature waighing the use of it, and ordaining
it to support the rest of the body, would have more of the terrene and dry
Element infused into it, that it might be the stronger and firmer to sustain
weight. But a Ligament, seeing it was made for other uses, has less of that
earthly drienesse than the bone, but more than the flesh, altogether fitted to
its nature. So it has seemed good to nature to endue all the parts of the
body, not only with an equal portion, but also proportion of Elements and
qualities; we call that a temperament to Justice: and we say that it is in
Plants, Brute beasts, and all natural bodies, which enjoy that temper and
mediocritie, which may be agreeable to their nature. Hereupon by comparison
arise eight kinds of intemperate tempers, as

Four simple The kinds of untemperate tempers.
Hot temperate in Dryness and Moisture. Cold temperate in Dryness and
Moisture. Moist temperate in Heat and Cold. Dry temperate in Heat and Cold.


Four compounds Hot and moist. Hot and dry. Cold and moist. Cold and dry.


But these temperaments are either of the whole body, or of some part thereof

and that either principal, as the Brain. the Heart. the Liver. the Stones.
or of the rest of the parts composed of other which have no principality in
the body.


Again, such temperaments are either healthful, which suffice perfectly to
perform their actions; or unhealthfull, which manifestly hurt them, the signs
whereof may be read described by Galen. And you must observe that when we say
the body, or Lib. 2. de Temper. and in Art medica.
any part of it is hot, we understand more hot than is fit for one of that
kind which is tempered to justice; as when we say a man has a hot liver, we
mean his liver is hotter, than a man justly tempered should have; for all
other tempers, whether of the whole body, or any of the parts thereof, are to
be referred to this; and in the cure of diseases we must look upon it, as the
mark, and labor to preserve it by the use of convenient things, as much as
lies in our power. Wherefore because it is very necessary to know the
distinction of temperaments, I have thought good in this place, briefly to
handle the temperaments of the parts of the body, ages, seasons of the year,
humors, and medicines. Therefore the temperaments of the parts of our body are
of this nature, not only by the judgment of the touch of a man's hand which is
justly tempered (who is often deceived by flowing heat, which spread from the
heart into all What the temperament, of man's body are.
the body, imparts a certain kind of heat to all the parts,) but also by the
rule of their reason, composure and sustance, as

A Bone is the most dry and cold. A Gristle less than it. A Ligament less
than a Gristle.
A Tendon is so much drier and colder than the membrane, by how much it in the
same temper exceedes a Vein and Artery. Then follow the harder veins, for
the softer are in a middle temper of dryness and moisture, like as the skin;
although all both soft and hard, are of a cold temper. Wherefore all these
parts of their own nature are cold and without blood: although the veins and
arteries wax hot, by reason of the heat of the blood they contain, which
notwithstanding also borrows that heat from the heart, as a part most hot,
and softer than the skin; the liver next follows the heart, in the order of
the hotter parts, which is far softer than the skin it self: for if,
according to Galens opinion, the heart is somewhat less hard than the skin,
and that is far harder than the liver, as appears by touching them, it must
Ad finam lib* de temper.
necessarily follow that the liver much exceedes the skin in softness; I
understand the skin simple, and separated from the flesh lying under it, to
which it firmly cleaves. The flesh is more moist and hot than the skin, by
reason of the blood dispersed in it. The spinall marrow is colder and moister
than the skin; but the brain so much exceeds it in moisture, as it is
exceeded by the fat. The lungs are not so moist as the fat, and the spleen,
and kidneys, are of the like nature, and nevertheless they are all moister
than the skin.

According to the diversities of ages, the temperaments both of the whole body,
The temperaments of ages.
and all its parts, undergo great mutations; for the bones are far harder in
old men than in children, because our life is, as it were a certain progress
to dryness, which when it comes to the height consequently causes death.
Wherefore in this place we must speak of the Temperaments of ages, when first
we shall have defined what an age is. Therefore an age is defined, a space of
life in which the constitution of the body What an age is.
of its self and own accord, undergoeth manifest changes; the whole course of
life has four such ages. The first is childhood, which extends from the birth
to the eighteenth year of age, and has a hot and moist temper, because it is
next to the hot and moist beginnings of life, seed and blood: Youth follows
this which is prolonged from the eighteenth, to the twenty fifth year, and is
temperate, and in the midst of all excesses; Man's estate succeeds youth,
which they deny to extend beyond the thirty fifth year of age, in its proper
temper it is hot and dry: whereby it comes to pass that then the heat is
felt more acride and biting, which in childhood seemed mild; because the
progress of the life to dryness has much wasted the native humiditie.

Then succedes old age ever divided into two parts; the first whereof extends
from Old age divided into two parts.
the thirty fifth, to the forty ninth year; those of this age are called old
men ( Three degrees of the second part of oldage.
but we commonly call them middle aged men.) The latter is as it were divided
by Galen into three degrees; the first whereof are those, who having their
strength sound and firm undergo civil affairs and businesses: which things
those which are in the second degree of old age cannot do, because of the
debilitie of their now decaying strength: but those which are in the last
degree are afflicted with most extreme weakness and misery, and are as much
deprived of their senses and understanding, as of the strength of their bodies;
whereof arose this Proverb, Old men twice children. Those old men of the first
rank are pleasant, and courteous, and those we say are beginning to grow old,
or in their green old age; those of the second sort delight in nothing but the
board and bed; but old decreepit men of the last order, think of nothing else,
than their graves and monuments. Their firm and solid parts are of a cold and
dry temperature, Old men have their solid parts dry.
by reason of the decay of the radical moisture, which the inbred heat
causes in the continuance of so many years. Which thing may happen in a short
space, by the vehement flame of the same natural heat, turned by feavours into
a fiery heat. But if any to prove old men moist, will object, that they cough
up, and spit much, I will answer him, as an old Doctor once said; That a
pitcher filled with water may power forth much moisture; yet no man will deny
but that such a vessel of its own terrene nature and matter is most dry; so
old men may plainly be affirmed to be moist, by reason of their defect of
heat, and abundance of excrements. But this description of ages, is not to be
taken so strictly, as always to be measured by the spaces and distances of
years, for there are many which by their own misdemeanour, seem elder at
forty, than others do at fifty.

Lastly, the famous Philosopher Pythagoras, divided man life into four ages,
and by a certain proportion compared the whole course thereof to the four
seasons of A comparison of the four ages to the four seasons of the year.
the year; as childhood to the Spring, in which all things grow and sprout
out, by reason of plenty and abundance of moisture. And youth to the Summer,
because of the vigor and strength which men enjoy at that age. And man's
estate, or constant age to Autumn, for that then after all the dangers of the
forepassed life, the gifts of discretion and wit acquire a seasonablenesse, or
ripeness, like as the fruits of the earth enjoy at that season. And lastly, he
compares old age to the sterile and fruitless Winter, which can ease and
consolate its tediousness by no other means, than the use of fruits gathered
and stored up before, which then are of a cold and troublesome condition. But
for extreme old age, which extends to eighty, or a hundred years, it is so
cold and dry, that those which arrive at that decrepit age are troublesome,
harsh, touchy, froward, crabby, and often complaining, until at the length
deprived of all their senses, tongue, feet, and understanding, they doting,
return again to childishness, as from the staff to the start. And thus much
of the Temperaments of ages.

But now in like manner we will explain the temperatures of the seasons of the
The tempers of the seasons of the year.
year, which are four, the Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter. The Spring
continues almost from the twelth or thirteenth day of March, to the midst of
May, Hippocrates seems to make it hot and moist; which opinion seems not to
have sprung from the thing it self, but from an inveterate error of the
ancient Philosophers, who would fit the temperaments of the four seasons of
the year, as answering in proportion to the temperatures of the four ages.

For if the matter come to a just trial, all men will say the Spring is
temperate, as that which is in the midst of the excess of heat, cold,
moisture and dryness; not How the Spring is temperate.
only by comparison because it is hotter than Summer, and colder than Winter;
but because it has that quality of its own proper nature. Wherefore it is
said of Hippocrates: Aphor. 9. sect. 3
The Spring is most wholesome and least deadly; if so be that it keep its
native temper, from which if it decline, or succeed a former untemperate
season, as Autumn, or Winter, it will give occasion to many diseases described
by Hippocrates; not that it breeds them, but because it brings them to sight,
which before lay Aphor. 20. sect. 3^
hid in the body. Summer is comprehended in the space of almost four months;
it is of a hot and dry temper, a breeder of such diseases as proceed from
choler, because that humor at this time is heaped up in many bodies by adustion
of blood bred in the Spring; but all such diseases do speedily run their
course. The beginning of Autumn, is from the time the Sun enters into Libra,
and endures the like space of Autumneunequall.
time as the Spring. But when it is dry, it has great inequality of heat and
cold; for the mornings and evening being very cold, the noondayes on the
contrary are exceeding hot. Wherefore many diseases are in Autumn, and then
long and deadly especially if they incline to wards winter: because all daily
and sudden changes to heat and cold are dangerous. The winter possesses the
remnant of the year, and is cold and moist, it increases natural heat, stirs
up the appetite, and augments Phlegm. It How Winter increases the native heat.
increases heat by Antiperistasis, or contrariety of the encompassing air,
which being then cold prohibites the breathing out of heat: whereby it happens
that the heat being driven in and hindered from dissipation, is strengthened by
couniting its forces. But it augments Phlegm, for that men are more greedy,
the Appetite being increased by the strengthened heat: from whence proceeds
much crudity and a large store of diseases, especially Chronicke or Long which
spread and increase rather in this winter season than in any other part of the
year. To this discourse of the temper, of the seasons of the years, is to be
revoked the variety of tempers which happens very day, which certainly is not
to be neglected, that there may be place of election, especially if nothing
urge. For hither belongs that saying of Hippocrates; When in the Aphor. 4 sect.
3
same day it is one while hot, another cold, Autumnall diseases are to be
expected. Therefore an Indication taken from hence is of great consequence to
the judgment of diseases; for if it agree with the disease, the disease is
made more contumacious, and difficult to cure. Whereupon the Patient and
Physician will have much trouble; but if on the contrary it reclame and
dissent, the health of the Patient is sooner to be expected. Neither is it a
thing of less consequence to know the customs and habits of the places and
Countries in which we live, as also the inclination of the Heavens and
temperature of the Air; but let us leave these things to be considered by
Natural Philosophers, that we may deliver our judgment of the temperaments of
Humors. The temperaments of Humors.
blood, as that which answers to the Air in proportion, is of a hot and moist
nature, or rather temperate, as Galen testifies; for, says he, it is certain
and sure that the The blood is neither hot, nor moist, but temperate as in its
first composure none of the 4 first qualities exceeds other by any manifest
excess, as he repeats it upon the 39. sentence. Phlegm, as that which is of a
waterish nature, is cold and moist; no other-wise than Choler being of a fiery
temper, is hot and dry. But Melancholy affimulated to Earth, is cold and dry.
This which we have spoken in general of Phlegm Lib. de natura humana ad sent.
36. Sect. 1 The temperature of the blood. From whence we judge of the
temperature of medicines.
and Melancholy, is not always true in every kind of the said humors. For
salt Phlegm is of a hot and dry temperature, as also all kinds of Melancholy
which have arose, or sprung by adustion from the native and Alimentary, as we
will teach in the following Chapter. Now the Temperaments of Medicines have not
the same form of judgment, as those things which we have before spoken of; as,
not from the Elementary quality which conquering in the contention and mixture,
obtaines the dominion; but plainly from the effects which taken or applied they
imprint in a temperate body. For so we pronounce those things hot, cold, moist,
or dry, which produce the effects of Heat, Coldness, Moisture or Drynes. But we
will defer the larger explication of these things to that place, where we have
peculiarly appointed to treat of Medicines; where we will not simply enquire
whether they be hot or cold, but what degree of heat and cold, or the like
other quallity: in which same place we will touch the temperature and all the
Nature of tastes, because the certainest judgment of medicines is drawn from
their tastes. Hitherto of Temperaments, now we must speak of Humors whose use
in Physical speculation is no less than that of Temperaments.

CHAP. VI. Of Humors.
TO know the nature of Humors is a thing notonely necessary for Physicians, but
also for Surgeons, because there is no disease with matter which arises The
knowledge of the Humors is necessary. Lib. de natura Hum.
not from some one, or the mixture of more Humors. Which thing Hippocrates
understanding, writ, every Creature to be either sick or well according to the
Condition of the Humors in the body. And certainly all putride fevers proceed
from the putrefaction of Humors. Neither do any acknowledge any other
original or distinction of the differences of Abscesses or Tumors: neither do
ulcerated, broken or otherwise wounded members hope for the restoration of
continuity, from other than from the sweet falling down of humors to the
wounded part. Which is the cause that often in the cure of these affects, the
Physicians are necessarily busied in tempering the Blood, that is, bringing to
a mediocrity the 4 humors composing the mass of blood, if they at any time
offend in quantity, or quality. For whether if any thing abound, or digress
from the wonted temper in any excess of heat, cold, viscosity, grossenes,
thinnes, or any such like quality, none of the accustomed functions will be
well performed. For which cause those chief helps to preserve and restore
health have been divinely invented; Phelebotomy, or bloodletting which amends
the quantity of too much blood; and purging which corrects and draws away the
vicious quality. But now let us begin to speak The helps of Health.
of the Humors, taking our beginning from the definition.

An Humor (is called by Physicians) what thing so ever is Liquide and flowing
in the body of living Creatures endued with Blood, and that is either natural,
or againstnature. What an humor is.
The natural is so called because it is fit to defend, preserve and sustain
the life of a Creature. Quite different is the nature and reason of that which
is against nature. Again the former is either Alimentary, or Excrementitious;
The Alimentary which is fit to The manifold division of Humors.
nourish the body, is that Humor which is contained in the veins and arteries
of a man which is te^perate and perfectly well; and which is understood by the
general name of blood which is let out at the opening of a vein. For blood
otherwise taken is an Humor of a certain kind, distinguished by heat and
warmness from the other Humors comprehended together with it, in the whole
mass of the blood. Which thing that it may the better be understood, I have
thought good in this place to declare the generation of Blood by the efficient
and material causes, All things which we eat or drink, are the The material
and efficient causes of blood
materials of blood, which things drawn into the bottom of the ventricle by
its attractive force, and there detained, are turned by the force of concoction
implanted in it, into a substance like to Almond Butter. Which thing although
it appear one and like it self, yet it consists of parts of a different
nature, which not only the variety of meats, but one and the same meat yields
of it self. We term this Chylus (when it is perfectly What the Chylus ^s.
concocted in the stomach). But the Vena porta
Gate-veine receives it driven from thence into the small guts, and sucked in
by the Meseraicke veins, and now having gotten a little rudiment of Change in
the way, carries it to the Liver, where by the blood-making faculty which is
proper and natural to this part, it acquires the absolute and perfect form of
blood. But with that blood at one and the same time and action all the humors
are made whether Alimentary or excrementitious. Therefore the Where the blood
is perfected.
blood that it may perform its office, that is, the faculty of nutrition, must
necessarily be purged and cleansed from the two excrementitious humors. Of which
the bladder of Gall draws one which we call Yellow Choler, and the Spleen the
other The receptacles of Choler and Melancholy.
which we term Melancholy. These two humors are natural, but not Alimentary,
or nourishing, but of another use in the body, as afterward we will show more
at large. The blood freed from these 2. kinds of excrements is sent by the
veins and Arteries into all parts of the body for their nourishment. Which
although then it seem to be of one simple nature, yet notwithstanding it is
truly such, that four different and unlike substances may be observed in it,
as blood properly so named, Four unlike Humors in the Bloody.
Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy, not only distinct in color, but also in
taste, effects and qualities. For as Galen notes in his book De Natura humana,
Melancholy is acide or sour, choler bitter, Blood sweet, Phlegm unsavory. But
you may know the variety of their effects, both by the different temper of the
nourished parts, as also by the various condition of the diseases springing
from thence. For therefore such substances ought to be tempered and mixed
amongst themselves in a certain proportion, which remaining, health remains,
but violated, diseases follow. For all acknowledge that an Oedema is caused by
Phlegmatic, a Scirrhus by Melancholic, an Erysipelas by Choleric, and a
Phlegmone by pure and laudable blood. Galen teaches A comparison of blood and
now wine.
by a familiar example of new wine presently taken from the press, that these
4 substances are contained in that one Mass, and mixture of the blood. In
which every one observes 4. distinct Essences; for the flower of the wine
working up swims at the top, the dregs fall down to the bottom, but the crude
and watery moisture mixed together with the sweet and vinous liquor, is every
where diffused through the body of the wine; the flower of the wine represents
Choler, which bubling up on the superficies of blood, as it concretes and
grows cold, shines with a golden color; the dregs Melancholy, which by
reason of its heavines ever sinketh downward, as it were the Mudd of the blood;
the crude and watery portion Phlegm: for as that crude humor, except it be
rebellious in quantity, or stubborn by its quality, there is hope it may be
changed into wine, by the natural heat of the wine; so Phlegm which is
Phlegm is blood half concocted. Why it has no proper receptacle.
blood half concocted, may by the force of native heat be changed into good
and laudable blood. Which is the cause that nature decreed, or ordained no
peculiar place, as to the other 2. humors, whereby it might be severed from
the blood; But the true and perfect liquor of the wine represents the pure
blood, which is the more laudable and perfect portion of both the humors of the
confused Mass. It may easily appear by the following scheme, of what kind
they all are, and also what the distinction of these four humors may be.

NATVRE CONSISTANCE COLOVR TASTE USE. Blood is Of Nature aerie, hot and moist,
or rather temperate, Of indifferent consistance, neither too thick nor too
thin, Of Color red, rosy or Crimson, Of Taste sweet, Of such use, that it
chiefly serves for the nourishment of the fleshyparts, and carried by the
vessels imparts heat to the whole body. Phlegm is Of Nature watery, cold and
moist, Of Consistance liquid, Of Color white Of Taste sweet, or rather
unsavory, for we commend that water which is unsavory, Fit to nourish the
brain and all the other cold and moist parts, to temper the heat of the blood,
and by its slipperines to help the motion of the joints. Choler is Of Nature
fiery, hot and dry, Of Consistance Thin, Of Color yeallow, or pale, Of Taste
bitter, It provokes the expulsive faculty of the guts, attenuates the Phlegm
cleaving to them, but the Alimentary is fit to nourish the parts of like temper
with it. Melancholy is. Of Nature earthly, cold and dry. Of Consistance gross
and muddy, Of Color blackish Of taste acide, sour or biting. Stirs up the
Appetite, nourishes the spleen and all the parts of like temper to it, as the
Bones.

Blood has its nearest matter from the better portion of the Chylus: and being
begun to be labored in the veins, at length gets form and perfection in
the liver; but it has its remote matter from meats of good digestion and
quality, seasonably eaten after moderate exercise; but for that, one age is
better than another, and one time of the year more convenient than another.
For blood is made more copiously in the Spring, because that season of the
year comes nearest to the temper of the blood, by reason of which the blood is
rather to be thought temperate, than hot and moist, for that Galen makes the
Spring temperate, and besides, at that time bloodletting Lib. 1. de temp.
is performed with the best success: youth is an age very fit for the
generation of blood; or by Galens opinion, rather that part of life, that
continues from the 25. to the 35. year of our age. Those in whom this humor
has the dominion, are beautified with a fresh and rosy color, gentle and
well natured, pleasant, merry, and facetious. The generation of Phlegm is not
by the imbecility of heat, as some of the ancients thought; who were persuaded
that choler was caused by a raging, blood by a moderate, and phlegm and
melancholy, by a remiss heat. But that opinion is full of manifest error:
for if it be true that the Chylus is labored and made into blood in the One
and the same heat is the efficient cause of all humors at the same time.
same part, and by the same fire, that is, the liver; from whence in the same
moment of time should proceed that strong and weak heat, seeinge the whole
mass of the blood different in its four essential parts, is perfected and
made at the same time, and by the same equal temper of the same part, action,
and bloud-making faculty; therefore from whence have we this variety of
humors? From hence, for that those meats by which we are nourished, enjoy the
like condition that our bodies do, from the four Elements, and the four
first qualities; for it is certain, and we may often observe in what kind
soever they be united or joined together, they retain a certain hot portion
imitating the Fire, another cold, the water; another dry, the earth, and
lastly, another moist like to the Air. Neither can you name any kind of
nourishment, how cold soever it be, not Lettuce it self, in which there is not
some fiery force of heat. Therefore it is no marvel, if one and the same
heat working upon the same matter of Chylus, varying with so great
dissimilitude of substances, do by its power produce so unlike humors, as from
the hot, Choler; from the cold, Phlegm; and of the others, such as their
affinity of temper will permit.

There is no cause that any one should think that variety of humors to be
caused The heat of the Sun alone does melt wax and harden clay.
in us, rather by the diversity of the active heat, than wax and a flint
placed at the same time, and in the same situation of climate and soil, this
to melt by the heat of the Sun, and that scarce to wax warm. Therefore that
diversity of effects is not to be attributed to the force of the efficient
cause, that is, of heat, which is one and of one kind in all of us; but
rather to the material cause, seeing it is composed of the conflux, or meeting
together of various substances, gives the heat leave to work, as it were out
of its store, which may make and produce from the hotter part thereof Choler,
and of the colder, and more rebellious Phlegm. Yet I will not deny but that
more Phlegm, or Choler may be bred in one and the same body, according to the
quicker, or slower provocation of the heat; yet nevertheless it is not
consequent, that the original of Choler should be from a more acride, and of
Phlegm from a more dull heat in the same man. Every one of us naturally have a
simple heat, and of one kind, which is the worker of diverse operations, not
of it self, seeing it is always the same, and like it self, but by the
different fitness, pliablenesse, or resistance of the matter on which it
works. Wherefore phlegm is generated in the The diverse condition of the
matter alone, is the cause of variety.
same moment of time, in the fire of the same part, by the efficiency of the
same heat, with the rest of the blood, of the more cold, liquide, crude, and
watery portion of the Chylus. Whereby it comes to pass, that it shows an
express figure of a certain rude or unperfect blood, for which occasion
nature has made it no peculiar receptacle, but would have it to run friendly
with the blood in the same passages of the veins, that any necessitiehappening
by famine, or indigency, and in defect of better nourishment, it may by a
perfecter elaboration quickly assume the form of blood. Cold and rude
nourishment make this humor to abound, principally in winter, and in those
which incline to old age; by reason of the similitude which phlegm has with
that season and age. It makes a man drowsy, dull, fat, and swollen up, and
hasteneth gray hairs. Choler The effects of Phlegm.
is as it were a certain heat and fury of humors, which generated in the
liver, together with the blood is carried by the veins and arteries through
the whole body. That of it which abounds, is sent, partly into the guts, and
partly into the bladder of the gall; or is consumed by transpiration, or
sweates; It is somewhat probable that the Arteriall blood is made more thin,
hot, quick and pallid, than the blood of the veins, by the commixture of this
Alementarie choler. This humor is chiefly bred and expeld in youth, and acrid
and bitter meats give matter to it: but great labors of body and mind give
the occasion. It makes a man nimble, quick, ready for all The effects of
Choler.
performance, lean, and quick to anger, and also to concoct meats. The
Melancholicke humor, or Melancholy, being the grosser portion of the blood, is
partly sent from the Liver to the Spleen to nourish it, and partly carried by
the vessels into the rest of the body, and spent in the nourishment of the
parts endued with an earthly dryness; it is made of meats of gross juice,
and by the perturbations of the mind, turned to fear and sadness. It is
augmented in Autumn, and in the first and crude The effects of Melancholy.
old age; it makes men sad, harsh, constant, froward, envious and fearful.
All men ought to think, that such humors are wont to move at set hours of the
day, as by a certain peculiar motion or tide. Therefore the blood flows from
the ninth hour of What motions are in each quarter of the body.
the night, to the third hour of the day; then Choler to the ninth of the day;
then Melancholy to the third of the night, the rest of the night that remains,
is under the dominion of Phlegm. Manifest examples hereof appears in the
French-Poxe. From the elaborate and absolute mass of the blood (as we said
before) two kinds of humors, as excrements of the second concoction, are
commonly and naturally separated, the one more gross, the other more thin.
This is called either absolutely choler, or with an adjunct, yellow choler.
That is called Melancholy; which drawn by the Spleen in a thinner portion,
and elaborate by the heat of the Arteries, which in that part are both many
and large, becomes nourishment to the part; the remnant thereof is carried by
the veiny vessel into the orifice of the ventricle, whereby it may The
Melancholy humor does not cause, but whet the appetite.
not cause, but whet the appetite, and by its astriction strengthen the actions
thereof. But yellow Choler drawn into the bladder of the gall, remains there
so long, till being troublesome, either in quantity or quality, it is
excluded into the guts, whereby it may cast forth the excrements residing in
them; the expulsive faculty being provoked by its acrimony, and by its
bitterness kills the worms that are bred there. This same humor is accustomed
to die the urine of a yellow color. There is another A Serous or wheyish humor.
serous humor, which truly is not fit to nourish, but profitable for many other
things, which is not an excrement of the second, but of the first concoction.
Therefore nature would that mixed with the Chylus, it should come to the Liver,
and not be voided with the excrements, whereby it might alay the grossness of
the blood, and serve it for a vehicle; for otherwise the blood could scarce
pass through the capillary veins of the Liver, and passing the simous and
gibbous parts thereof, come to the hollow vein. Part of this serous humor
separated together with the blood which serves for the nourishment of the
Reins, and straight carried into the bladder, is turned into that urine which
we daily make; the other part therefore carried through all the body together
with the blood, performing the like duty of transportation, is excluded by
sweats into which it degenerates. Besides the forenamed, the Arabians have
mentioned four other humors, which they term Alimentary and secondary,
Secundary humors.
as being the next matter of nourishment, as those four the blood contains,
the remote. They have given no name to the first kind, but imagine it to be
that humor, which hangs ready to fall like to little drops in the utmost
orifices of the veins. They call the second kind, Ro^.
Dew; being that humor, which entered already into the substance of the part,
does moisten it. The third they call by a Barbarous name Cambium, which already
put to the part to be nourished, is there fastened. The fourth named Gluten, or
Glue, is only the proper and substance-making humidity of the simular parts,
not their substance. The distinction of the degrees of nutrition recited by
Galen in his Books of Natural faculties, answer in proportion to this
distinction of humors. The first is, that the blood flow to the part that
requires nourishment; then that being there arrived, it may be agglutinated;
then lastly, that having lost its former form of nourishment, it may be
assimulated.

Those humors are against nature, which being corrupted, infect the body and
the Humors against nature.
parts in which they are contained by the contagion of their corruption,
retaining the names and titles of the humors, from whose perfection and nature
they have revolted, they all grow hot by putrefaction, although they were
formerly by their own nature cold. And they are corrupted, either in the
veins only, or within and without the veins; In the veins Blood and
Melancholy; but both without and within the veins, Choler and Phlegm. When
blood is corrupted in its thinner portion, Into what humors the blood when it
corrupts does degenenerate. The Melancholy humor corrupted, is of three kinds.
it turns into choler, when in its thicker, into Melancholy; for the blood
becomes faulty two manner of ways, either by the corruption of its proper
substance by putrifactio^, or by admixtion of another substance by infection.
The Melancholy humor which is corrupted in the veins, is of three sorts: the
1. is of a Melancholy juice putrefying, and by the force of a strange heat,
turned as it were into ashes, by which it becomes adust, acride and biting. The
other arises from that Choler which resembles the yolks of eggs, which by
adustion becomes leeke-coloured, then aeruginous, or of a bluish green, then
red, and lastly black, which is the very worst kind of Melancholy, hot,
malign, eating and exulcerating, and which is never seen or voided with
safety. The third comes from Phlegm putrefying in the veins, which first
degenerates into salt Phlegm, but straight by the strength of extraneous
heat degenerates into Melancholy.

Phlegm not natural is bred, either In the veins, and is either Acide and
very crude, as which has had none or very little impression of heat, but that
which it first had in the stomach. Salt, which is bred by the sweet,
putrefying and adust, or mixture of adust and salt particles.
or without the veins, and is of 4. sorts, either Waterish, as is that thin
moisture which distills from the brain by the nostrills. Mucous, as when that
waterish is thickened into filth by the help of some accidental or small
heat. Glassie, or Albuminca.
Albuminous, resembling molten glass, or rather the white of an egg, and is
most cold. Gypsea, or Plaister-like, which is concrete into the hardness and
form of chalk, as you may see in the joints of the fingers in a knotty gout,
or in inveterate distillations upon the Lungs.



Choler not natural is bred, either In the veins, as the Vitellina.
vitelline (like in consistance to the yolke of a raw egg) which the acrimony
of strange heat breeds of yellow choler, which same in diseases altogether
deadly, degenerates into green, aeruginous, and lastly into a blue, or
colourlike that which is dried by woad. Or in the capacity of the upper belly
as the ventricle, and this is of five kinds The first is called Porracea or
leek-coloured, resembling the juice of a leeke in greenenesse. The 2.
agruginosa, or aeruginous, like in color to verdigreasse. The 3. bluish, or
woad-coloured, like the color died by woad. The 4. red, differing in this from
blood, whose color it imitates, that it never comes into knots, or clods
like blood. The 5. very red, generated by the excess of the former, which
causes burning fevers.



The kinds of such choler, are often cast forth by vomit in diseases, the
strength of the disease being past; being troublesome to the parts through
which they are evacuated, by their bitterness, acrimony and biting.

The Signs of a Sanguine Person.
I Think it manifest, because the matter and generation of flesh is
principally from blood, that a man of a fleshy, dense, and solid habit of
body, and full of a sweet and vaporous juice, is of a Sanguine complexion. And
the same party has a flourishing and roasie color in his face, tempered as
with an equal mixture of white and Such as the humor is, such is the color.
red; of white, by reason of the skin lying utmost; of red, because of the
blood spread underneath the skin; for always such as the humor is, such is
the color in the face. In manners he is courteous, gentle, easy to be spoken
to, not altogether The manners and diseases of Sanguine persons.
estranged from the love of women, of a lovely countenance and smoothe
forehead, seldom angry, but taking all things in good part; for as the
inclination of humors is, so also is the disposition of manners. But blood is
thought the mildest of all humors; but the strong heat of the inward parts
makes him to eat and drink freely. Their dreams are pleasant, they are
troubled with diseases arising from blood, as frequent Phlegmons, and many
Sanguine pustles breaking through the skin, much bleeding, and menstruous
fluxes. Wherefore they can well endure bloodletting, and delight in the
moderate use of cold and dry things; and lastly, are offended by hot and moist
things. They have a great and strong Pulse, and much urine in quantity, but
mild of quality, of an indifferent color and substance.

The Signs of a Choleric Person.
Choleric men are of a pale or yellowish color, of a lean, slender and
rough Choleric are not commonly fat.
habit of body, with fair veins and large Arteries, and a strong and quick
Pulse: their skin being touched, feels hot, dry, hard, rough and harsh, with
a pricking and acred exhalation which breathes forth of their whole body. They
cast forth much choler by stool, vomit and urine. They are of a quick and
nimble wit, stout, hardy and sharp vindicaters of received injuries, liberal
even to prodigality, The manners and diseases, of Choleric persons.
and somewhat too desirous of glory. Their sleep is light, and from which they
are quickly waked; their dreams are fiery, burning, quick and full of fury;
they are delighted with meats and drinks which are somewhat more cold and
moist, and are subject to Tertian and burning fevers, the Frenzy, Iaundise,
Inflammations, and other choleric pustules, the Laske, Bloody flux, and
bitterness of the mouth.

The Signs of a Phlegmatic Person.
THose in whom Phlegm has the dominion, are of a whitish colored face, and
The manners and diseases of Phlegmatic persons,
sometimes livide and swollen, with their body fat, soft and cold to touch.

They are molested with Phlegmatic diseases, as oedematous tumors, the
Dropsy, Quotidians fevers, falling away of the hairs, and catarrhes falling
down upon the Lungs, and the Aspera Arteria, or Weason; they are of a slow
capacity, dull, slothful, drousie, they do dream of raines, snowes, floods,
swimming, and such like, that they often imagine themselves overwhelmed with
waters; they vomit up much waterie, and Phlegmatic matter, or otherwise spit
and evacuate it, and have a soft and moist tongue.

And they are troubled with a dogge-like hunger, if it at any time should
happen that their insipide Phlegm become acide; and they are slow of
digestion, by reason of which they have great store of cold and Phlegmatic
humors, which if they be carried down into the windings of the cholicke-gut,
they cause murmuring and From whence ^oise, or rumbling in the belly proceeds
noise, and sometimes the Cholicke.

For much wind is easily caused of such like Phlegmatic excrements wrought
upon by a small and weak heat, such as Phlegmatic persons have, which by
its natural lightness is diversely carried through the turnings of the guts,
and distends and swells them up, and whiles it strives for passage out, it
causes murmurings and noises in the belly, like wind breaking through narrow
passages.

Signs of a Melancholic person.
THe face of Melancholy persons is swart, their countenance cloudy and often
Diseases familiar to Melancholy persons.
cruel, their aspect is sad and froward; frequent Schirrhous, or hard
swellings, tumors of the spleen, Haemorroids, Varices (or swollen veins)
Quartaine fevers, whether continual or intermitting, Quintaine, Sextaine, and
Septimane feavours; and to conclude, all such wandering fevers or agues set
upon them. But when it happens the Melancholy humor is sharpened, either by
adustion, or commixture of Choler, then Tetters, the black Morphew, the Cancer
simple and ulcerated, the Leprous and filthy scabbe, sending forth certain
scaly and branlike excrescenses, (being vulgarly called Saint Manis his evil)
and the Leprosy it self invades them: They have small veins and arteries,
because coldness has dominion over them, whose property is to straiten, as
the quality of heat is to dilate. But if at any time their veins From or by
what their veins are swollen.
seem big, that largeness is not by reason of the laudable blood, contained
in them, but from much windiness; by occasion whereof it is somewhat difficult
to let them blood; not only because that when the vein is opened, the blood
flows slowly forth, by reason of the cold slownesse of the humors; but much
the rather, for that the vein does not receive the impression of the Lancet,
sliding this way and that way, by reason of the windiness contained in it, and
because that the harsh dryness of the upper skin, resists the edge of the
instrument. Their bodies seem cold and hard to the touch, and they are
troubled with terrible dreams, for they are observed to seem Their dreams
to see in the night Devils, Serpents, dark dens and caves, sepulchers, dead
corpses, and many other such things full of horror, by reason of a black
vapor, deversly moving and disturbing the Brain, which also we see happens
to those, Hydrophobi.
who fear the water, by reason of the biting of a mad dog. You shall find
them froward, fraudulent, Their manners.
parsimonious, and covetous, even to baseness, slow speakers, fearful, sad,
complainers, careful, ingenious, lovers of solitariness, man-haters,
obstinate maintainers of opinions once conceived, slow to anger, but angered
not be pacified. But when Melancholy has exceeded natures and its own bounds,
then by reason of putrefaction and inflammation all things appear full of
extreme fury and madness, so that they often cast themselves headlong down
from some high place, or are otherwise guilty of their own death, with fear
of which notwithstanding they are terrified.

But we must note that changes of the native temperament, do often happen in
the course of a man's life, so that he which a while agone was Sanguine, may
now be From whence the change of the native temper.
Choleric, Melancholic, or Phlegmatic; not truly by the changing of the
blood into such humors, but by the mutation of Diet, and the course or vocation
of life. For none of a Sanguine complexion but will prove Choleric if he eat
hot and dry meats, How one may become choleric.
(as all like things are cherished and preserved by the use of their like, and
contraries are destroyed by their contraries) and weary his body by violent
exercises, and continual labors; and if there be a suppression of Choleric
excrements, which before did freely flow, either by nature, or art. But
whosoever feeds upon meats generating How melancholic.
gross blood, as Beef, Venison, Hare, old Cheese, and all salt meats, he
without all doubt sliding from his nature, will fall into a Melancholy temper;
especially if to that manner of diet, he shall have a vocation full of cares,
turmoiles, miseries, strong and much study, careful thoughts and fears; and
also if he sit much, wanting exercise, for so the inward heat as it were
defrauded of its nourishment, faints, and grows dull, whereupon gross and
drossie humors abound in the body. To this also the cold and dry condition of
the place, in which we live, does conduce, and the suppression of the
Malancholy humor accustomed to be evacuated by the Haemorrhoides, courses, and
stools.

But he acquires a Phlegmaricke temper whosoever uses cold and moist
nourishment, How Plegmatick^.
much feeding, who before the former meat is gone out of the belly, shall
stuff his paunch with more, who presently after meat runs into violent
exercises, who inhabit cold and moist places, who lead their life at ease in
all idleness; and lastly, who suffer a suppression of the Phlegmatic humor
accustomely evacuated by vomit, cough, or blowing the nose, or any other way
either by nature or art. Certainly it is very convenient to know these
things, that we may discern if any at the present be Phlegmatic,
Melancholicke or of any other temper, whether he be such by nature, or
nec^ss^^y. Having declared those things which concern the nature of
Temperaments, and deferred the description of the parts of the body to our
Anatomy, we will begin to speak of the faculties governing this our life, when
first we shall have showen by a practical demonstration of examples, the use
and certainty of the aforesaid rules of Temperaments.

CHAP. VII. Of the Practice of the aforesaid rules of Temperaments.
THat we may draw the Theoricke of the Temperaments into practice, it has
seemed good for avoiding of confusion, which might make this our Introduction
Four bounds or Regions of the world.
seem obscure, if we would prosecute the differences of the Tempers of all men
of all Nations, to take those Limits, which nature has placed in the world; as
South, North, East and West, and as it were the Center of those bounds, that
the described variety of Tempers, in color, habit, manners, studyes, actions,
and form of life of men that inhabit those Regions situated so far distant
one from another, may be as a sure rule, by which we may certainly judge of
every The forces of temperatures in particulars. The temperature of the
Southerene people. Of the Northern.
man's temperature in particular, as he shall appear to be nearer, or further
off from this, or that region. Those which inhabit the South as the Affricans,
Aethiopians, Arabians and Egyptians, are for the most part deformed, lean,
dusky colored and pale, with black eyes and great lips, curled hair, and a
small and shrill voice. Those which inhabit the Northren parts as the
Scythians, Muscovites, Polonians and Germans, have their faces of color
white, mixed with a convenient quantity of blood, their skin soft and delicate,
their hair long, hanging down and spreading abroad, and of a yellowish, or
reddish color; of stature they are commonly tall, and of a well proportioned,
fat and compact habit of body, their eyes gray; their voice strong, loud and
big. But those who are situated between these two former, as the Italians
and French, have their faces somewhat swart, are well favored, nimble, strong,
hairy, slender, well in flesh, with their eyes resembling the color of
Goates-eyes, and often hollow eyed, having a clear shrill and pleasing voice.

The Southern people are exceeded so much by the Northern in strength and
abillity of body, as they surpass them in wit and the faculties of the mind.
Hence The Southern people prevail in wit, the Northern^ in strenght.
is it you may read in Histories, that the Scythians, Goths and Vandals vexed
Affricke and Spain with infinite incursions, and most large and famous Empires
have been founded from the North to the South; but few or none from the South
to the North. Therefore the Northren people thinking all right and law to
consist in Arms, did by Duel only determine all causes and controversies
arising amongst the inhabitants, as we may gather by the ancient laws, and
customs of the Lumbards, English, Burgonians, Danes and Germans; and we may
see in Saxo the Grammarian that such a law was once made by Fronto king of
Denmark. The which custom at this day is every where in force amongst the
Muskovits. But the Southern people have always much abhorred that fashion,
and have thought it more agreeable to Beasts than Men. Wherefore we never heard
of any such thing used by the Assyrians, Egyptians, Persians or Jews. But
moved by the goodness of their wit, they erected Kingdoms and Empires by the
only help of Learning and hidden sciences. For seeing by nature they are
Melancholicke by reason of the dryness of their temperature, they willingly
addict themselves to solitariness and contemplation, being endued with a
singular sharpness of wit. Wherefore the Aethiopians, Egyptians, Africans,
Jews, Phaenicians, Persians, The Southern people learned and religious.
Assyrians, and Indians, have invented many curious sciences, revealed the
Mysteries and secrets of Nature, digested the Mathematiques into order,
observed the motions of the heavens, and first brought in the worship and
religious sacrifices of the gods: Even so far that the Arabians who live
only by stealth, and have only a Wagon for their house, do boast that they
have many things diligently and accurately observed in Astrology by their
Ancestors, which every day made more accurate and copious, they, as by an
hereditary right, commend to posterity, as it is recorded by Leo the Africane.
But the Northern people, as the Germans, by reason of the abundance of
humors and blood, by which the mind is as it were oppressed, The Northern
famous Warrious, and Artificers.
apply themselves to works obvious to the senses, and which may be done by the
hand. For their minds oppressed with the earthly mass of their bodies, are
easily drawn from heaven and the contemplation of Celestial things, to these
inferior things, as to find out Mines by digging, to buy and cast metals, to
draw and hammer out works of Iron, steel and brass. In which things they
have proved so excellent, that the glory of the Invention of Guns and Printing
belongs to them.

The people who inhabit the middle regions between these, are neither
naturally The endowments of such as inhabit between them.
fit for the more abstruse sciences, as the Southern people are, nor for
Mechanicke works, as the Northern, but intermeddle with civil affairs,
commerce and Merchandising. But are endued with such strength of body as may
suffice to avoid and delude the crafts and arts of the Southern Inhabitants;
and with such wisdom as may be sufficient to restrain the fury and violence
of the Northern. How true this is, any one may understand by the example of the
Carthaginians and Africans, who when they had held Italy for some years by
their subtle counsels, crafty sleights and devices; yet could not escape but
at the length their Arts being deluded, and they spoiled of all their fortunes,
were brought in subjection to the Romans. The Goths, Hunnes and other The
Northren know how to overcome, but not how to use the victory
Northern people have spoiled and overrun the Roman Empire by many incursions
and inroades, but destitute of counsel and providence, they could not keep
those things which they had gotten by Arms and valor. Therefore the opinion
of all Historians is agreeing in this, that good laws, the form of governing
a Commonwealth, all politic ordinances, the Arts of disputing and speaking,
have had their beginning from the Greeks, Romans and French. And from hence in
times past and The abundance of counselors and Lawyers from France and Italy.
at this day a greater number of Writers, Lawyers and Counselors of State have
sprung up, than in all the world besides. Therefore that we may attribute their
gifts to each Region, we affirm that, The Southern people are borne and fit
for the studies of learning; the Northern for wars, and those which be
between them both for Empire and rule. The Italian is naturally wise, the
Spaniard grave and constant; the French quick and diligent, for you would say
he runs when he goes, being compared to the slow and womanish pace of the
Spaniard, which is the cause that Spaniards are delighted with French servants
for their quick agillity in dispatching business. The Eastern people are
specially endued with a good, firm and well tempered wit, not keeping their
counsels secret and hid. For the haste is of the nature The manners of the
Eastern people
of the Sun, and that part of the day which is next to the rising of the
Sun is counted the right-side and stronger; and verily in all living things
the right side is always the more strong and vigorous. But the Western people
are more tender and effeminate, and more close in their carriage and mind, not
easily making any one partaker The manners of the Western people.
of their secrets. For the West is, as it were subjct to the Moon, because at
the change it always inclines to the West, whereby it happens, that it is
reputed as nocturnall, sinister and opposite to the East; and the West is less
temperate and wholesome. Therefore of the winds none is more wholesome than the
Eastwinde which blows from The East wind healthful.
the west with a most fresh and healthful gale, yet it seldom blows, and but
only at Sunset.

The Northern people are good eaters, but much better drinkers, witty when
they The Northern people great eaters and drinkers.
are a little moistened with wine, and talkers of things both to be spoken and
concealed, not very constant in their promises and agreements, but principal
keepers and preservers of shamefastnes and chastity, far different from the
inhabitants of the South, who are wonderful sparing, sober, secret and subtle,
and much addicted to all sorts of wicked Lust. Aristotle in his Problemes says
that those nations are barbarous and who are to be counted Barbarous.
cruel, both which are burnt with immoderate heat, and which are oppressed with
excessive cold, because a soft temper of the Heavens softens the Manners and
the mind. Wherefore both, as well the Northern, as Scythians and Germans; and
the Southern, The North^ne and Southern have each their Cruelties.
as Africans are cruel; but these have this of a certain natural stoutnes,
and souldierlike boldness, and rather of anger, than a wilful desire of
revenge; because they cannot restrain by the power of reason the first violent
motions of their anger by reason of the heat of their blood. But those of a
certain inbred and inhumane pravity of manners, wilfully and willingly
premeditating they perform the works of cruelty, because they are of a sad
and melancholy nature. You may have an example of the Northern cruelty from
the Transilvanians against their seditious Captain George, whom they gave to
be torn in pieces alive and devoured by his Soldiers, (being kept fasting for
three days before for that purpose) who was then unbowelled, and roasted, and
so by them eaten up. The Cruelty of Hannibal the Captain of the Carthaginians
may Valor. Man. lib. 9. cap. 2.
suffice for an instance of the Southern cruelty. He left the Roman Captives
wearied with burdens and the lenght of the way, with the soles of their feet
cut off; But those he brought into his tents, joining brethren and kinsmen
together he caused to fight, neither was satisfied with blood before he brought
all the victors to one man. Also we may see the cruel nature of the Southern
Americans, who dip their children in the blood of their slain enemies, then
suck their blood, and banquet with their broken and squeased Limbs.

And as the Inhabitants of the South are free from diverse Plethoricke diseases,
The diseases of the Southern people.
which are caused by abundance of blood, to which the Northern people are
subject, as Fevers, Defluxions, Tumors, Madness with laughter which causes
those which have it to leap and dance (The people commonly term it S. vittus
his Evil) which admits of no remedy but Music: So they are often molested
with the Frenzy invading with madness and fury; by the heat whereof they are
often so ravished and carried besides themselves that they foretell things to
come; they are terrified with horrible dreams, and in their fits they speak
in strange and foreign tongues, but they are so subject to the scurfe and all
kind of scabbs and to the Leprosy as their homebread disease, that no houses
are so frequently met withal by such as travel through either of the
Mauritania's, as Hospitalls provided for the Lodging of Lepers.

Those who inhabit rough and Mountainous places, are more brutish, tough and
able Mountainers,
to endure labor: but such as dwell in plains, especially if they be moorish,
or fennish are of a tender body, and sweat much with a little labor; the truth
of which is confirmed by the Hollanders and Frizlanders. But if the plain be
such as is scortched by the heat of the Sun, and blown upon by much
contrariety of winds, it breeds men who are turbulent, not to be tamed,
desirous of sedition and novelty, stubborn, impatient of servitude, as may be
perceived by the sole example of the inhabitants of Narbon a province of France.

Those who dwell in poor and barren places are commonly more witty and
diligent and most patient of labors; the truth of which the famous wits of
the Athenians, Ligurians and Romans, and the plain country of the Boeotians
in Greece, of the Campanians in Italy, and of the rest of the inhabiters
adjoining to the Ligurian sea, approves.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Faculties.
A Faculty is a certain power, and efficient cause, proceeding from the
temperament What a faculty is. 3. Faculties.
of the part, and the performer of some actions of the body. There are three
principal Faculties governing man's body as long as it enjoyes its integrity;
the Animal, Vital and Natural. The Animal is seated in the
propertemperament of the Brain, from whence it is distributed by the Nerves
into all parts of the body which have sense and motion. This is of three kinds,
for one is Moving, another sensative; the third principal The sensative
consists in the five external senses, sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch.
The Moving principally remains in the Muscles and nerves, as the fit
instruments of voluntary motion. The Principal comprehends the Reasoning
faculty, the Memory and Fantasy. Galen would have the Common or inward sense
to be comprehended within the compass of the Fantasy, although Aristotle
distinguishes between them.

The Vital abides in the Heart, from whence heat and life is distributed by the
Arteryes to the whole body: this is principally hindered in the diseases of the
Breast; as the Principal is, when any disease assailes the Brain; the prime
action of the vital faculty is Pulsation, and that continued agitation of the
Heart and Arteryes, which is of threefold use to the body: for by the
dilatation of the Heart and Arteryes the vital spirit is cherished by the
benefit of the Air which is drawn in; by the The triple use of the Pulse.
contraction thereof the vapors of it are purged and sent forth, and the
native heat of the whole body is tempered by them both.

The last is the Natural faculty which has chosen its principal seat in the
Liver, it spreads or carries the nourishment over the whole body; but it is
distinguished into 3. The natural faculty is threefold.
other faculties; The Generative which serves for the generation and forming of
the Issue in the womb; the Growing or increasing faculty which flourishes
from the time the Issue is formed, until the perfect growth of the solid parts
into their full dimensions of Length, height and breadth. The nourishing
faculty which as servant to both the other repaires and repayes the continual
effluxe, and waste of the threefold substance; for Nutrition is nothing else
but a replenishing, or repairing whatsoever What Nutrition is.
is wasted or emptied This nourishing faculty endures from that time the
Infant is formed in the womb until the end of life. It is a matter of great
consequence in Physic to know the 4 other faculties, which as servants attend
upon the nourishing Four other faculties attend upon the nourishing faculty
faculty; which are the Attractive, Retentive, Digestive, and Expulsive
faculty. The Attractive draws that juice which is fit to nourish the body,
that I say which by application may be assimulated to the part. This is that
faculty which in such as are hungry draws down the meat scarce chawed, and
the drink scarce tasted, into the gnawing and empty stromacke. The Rententive
faculty is that which retains the nourishment once attracted until it be
fully labored and perfectly concocted; And by that means it yields no small
assistance to the Digestive faculty. For the natural The necessity of the
retentive faculty.
heat cannot perform the office of concoction, unless the meat be embraced by
the part, and make some stay therein. For otherwise the meat carried into the
stomach never acquires the form of Chylus, unless it stay detained in the
wrincles thereof, as in a rough passage, until the full time of Chylification.
The Digestive faculty assimulates the nourishment, being attracted and
detained, into the substance of that part whose Faculty it is, by the force of
the inbred heat and proper disposition or temper of the part. So the stomach
plainly changes all things which are eat and drunk into Chylus, and the Liver
turns the Chylus into blood. But the Bones and Nerves convert the red and
liquid blood which is brought down unto them by the capillary or small veins,
into a white and solid substance. Such concoction is far more laborious in a
Bone and nerve, than in the Musculous flesh. For the blood being not much
different from its nature, by a light change and concretion turns into flesh.
But this Concoction will Two excrements of every concoction.
never satisfy the desire of Nature and the parts, unless the nourishment
purged from its excrements, put away the filth and dross, which must never
enter into the substance of the part. Wherefore there do not only two sorts of
excrements remain of the first and second Concoction, the one thick, the
other thin, as we have said before; but also from the third Concoction which is
performed in every part. The one of which we conceive only by reason, being
that which vanishes into Air by insensible Transpiration. The other is known
sometimes by sweats, sometimes by a thick fatty substance stayning the shirt;
sometimes by the generation of hair and nails, whose matter is from
fuliginous and earthly excrements of the third Concoction. Wherefore the fourth
Faculty was necessary which might yield no small help to nourishment; it is
called the Expulsive, appointed to expel those superfluous The work of the
expulsive faculty.
excrements which by no action of heat, can obtain the form of the part.
Such faculties serving for nutrition are in some parts twofold; as some
common, the benesit of which redounds to the whole body, as in the ventricle,
liver and veins; Others only attending the service of those parts in which
they remain, and in some parts all these 4. as well common as proper, are
abiding and resident, as in those parts we now mentioned: some with the 4.
proper have only two common, as the Gall, Spleen, Kidneies and Bladder.
Others are content only with the proper, as the simular and Musculous parts,
who if they want any of these 4. faculties, their health is decayed either by
want of nourishment, an ulcer, or otherwise. The like unnatural affects happen
by the deficiency of just and laudable nourishment. But if it happen those
faculties do rightly perform their duty, the nourishment is changed into the
proper substance of the part, and is truly assimulated, as by these degrees.
First it must flow to the part, then By what degrees the nourishment is
assimulated.
be joined to it, then agglutinated, and lastly as we have said, assimulated.
Now we must speak of the Actions which arise from the faculties.

CHAP. IX. Of the Actions.
AN Action or Function is an active motion proceeding from a faculty; for as
What an Action is.
the faculty depends on the Temperament, so the Action on the faculty, and the
Act or work depends upon the Action by a certain order of consequence. But
although that the words Actions and Act or work are often confounded, yet
there is this difference between them, as that the Action signifies the motion
used in the performance of any thing; but the Act or work, the thing already
done and performed: for example, Nutrition and the Generating of flesh are
natural Actions; but the parts nourished, and a hollow ulcer filled with flesh
are the works of that motion, or action. Wherefore the Act arises from the
Action, as the Action An Action and an Act are different.
arises from the faculty, the integrity or perfection of the instruments
concurring in both. For as, if the faculty be either defective, or hurt, no
Action will be well performed: so unless the Instruments keep their native
and due conformity (which is their perfect health, the operator of the Action
proper to the instrument) none of those things, which ought to be, will be well
performed. Therefore for the performance of blameless and perfect actions, it
is fit a due conformity of the Instrument concur with the faculty. But
Actions are twofold; for they are either Natural, or Voluntary. They are
termed Natural, because they are performed not by Natural Actions.
our will, but by their own accord and against our will: As are that
continual motion of the Heart, the beating of the Arteryes, the expulsion of
the Excrements, and such other like which are done in us by the Law of Nature
whether we will, or no. These Actions flow either from the Liver and veins, or
from the Heart and Arteries. Wherefore we may comprehend them under the names of
Natural and Vital Actions. For we must attribute his Action to each faculty,
lest we may seem to constitute an idle faculty, and no way profitable for use.
The unvoluntary vital actions are the dilation and contraction of the Heart
and Arteryes, the which we comprehend under the sole name of the Pulse: by that
they draw in, and by this they expel, or drive forth. The unvoluntary vital
actions be,

Generation Growth and Nutrition which proceed from the Generative, Growing,
and Nourishing faculty.
Generation is nothing else than a certain producing, or acquiring of matter,
and Generation what it is.
an introducing of a substantial form into that matter; this is performed by
the assistance of 2. faculties; of the Altering which does diversely prepare and
dispose the seed and menstruous blood to put on the form of a Bone, nerve,
spleen, flesh and such like: of the Forming faculty which adornes with figure,
site and composition, the matter ordered by so various a preparation.

Growth is an enlarging of the solid parts into all the dimensions, the
pristine and What Growth is.
ancient form remaining safe and sound in figure and solidity. For the
perfection of every growth is judged only by the solid parts; for if the body
swell into a mass of flesh, or fat, it shall not therefore be said to be
grown: but then only when the solid parts do in like manner increase,
especially the bones, because the growth of the whole body follows their
increase, even although at the same time it wax lean, and pine away.

Nutrition is a perfect assimulation of that nourishment which is digested,
into the What Nutrition is.
nature of the part which digests. It is performed by the assistance of 4.
subsidiary or helping actions, Attractive, Retentive, Digestive and Expulsive.

The voluntary actions which we willingly perform, are so called, because we
Action voluntary.
can at our pleasure hinder, stir up, slow or quicken them. They are three in
general, the sensitive, mooving, and principal Action. The sensative Anima
sentiens.
Soul comprehends all things in fine senses, in Sight, Hearing, Smell, Taste
and Touch. Three things must necessarily concur to the performance of them,
the Organe, the Medium or mean, and the Object. The principal Organe, or
Instrument, is the Animal spirit diffused by the nerves into each several
part of the body, by which such actions are performed. Wherefore for the
present we will use the Parts themselves for their Organes. The Mean is a
body, which carries the Object to the Instrument. The Object is a certain
external quality, which has power by a fit Medium or Mean to stir up and
alter the Organe. This will be more manifest by relating the particular
functions of the senses by the necessary concurring of these three.

Sight, is an action of the seeing faculty, which is done by the Eye fitly
composed How sight is performed.
of its coats and humors, and so consequently the Organicall body of this
Action. The Object is a visible quality brought to the Eye. But such an Object
is twofold; for either it is absolutely visible of its self, and by its own
Nature, as the Sun, the fire, the Moon and Stars: or desires as it were the
help of another that it may be actually such, for so by the coming of light
the colors, which were visible in power only, being brought to the Eye do
seem and appear such as they actually (...). But such Objects cannot arrive
at the Eye, but thorough a clear and ^inate Medium, as the Air, Water, Glass
and all sorts of Crystal.

The Hearing has for its Organe the Ear and Auditory passage, which How
hearing.
goes to the stony bone furnished with a Membrane investing it, an Auditory
Nerve, and a certain inward spirit there contained. The Object is every sound
arising from the smitten or broken Air, and the Collision of two bodies
meeting together. The Medium is the encompassing Air which carries the sound
to the Ear.

Smelling (according to Galens opinion) is performed in the Mamillary processes
How smelling
produced from the proper substance of the brain, and seated in the upper part
of the nose: although others had rather smelling should be made in the very
foremost ventricles of the brain. This Action is weak in man in comparison of
other Creatures: the Object thereof is every smell, or fumide exhalation
breathing out of bodies. The Medium by which the Object is carried to the noses
of Men, Beasts and Birds, is the Air, but to Fishes the Water it self. The
Action of taste is performed by the tongue being tempered well and according to
nature, and How the taste
furnished with a nerve spread over its upper part from the third and fourth
conjugation of the Brain. The Object is Sapor.
Taste, of whose nature and kinds we will treat more at large in our
Antidotary. The Medium by which the Object is so carried to the Organ, that it
may affect it, is either external, or internal: The external is that spattle
which does as it were anoint and supple the tongue; the internal is the Spongy
flesh of the tongue it self, which affected with the quality of the Object
does presently so possess the nerve that is implanted in it, that the kind
and quality thereof by the force of the spirit may be carried into the common
sense. All parts endued with a nerve enjoy the sense of touching, which is
chiefly done, when a tractable quality does How touching.
penetrate even to the true and nervous skin, which lies under the Cuticle,
or scarfe-skinne; we have formerly noted, that it is most exquisite in the
skin which invests the ends of the fingers. The Object is every tractable
quality, whether it be of the first rank of qualities, as Heat, Cold,
Moisture, Dryness, or of the second, as Roughness, Smoothness, Heaviness,
Lightness, Hardness, Softness, Rarity, Density, Friability, Vnctuosity,
Grossness, Thinness. The Medium by whose procurement the instrument is
affected, is either the skin or the flesh interwoven with many Nerves.

The next Action, is that Motion, which by a peculiar name we call voluntary;
Of motion.
this is performed and accomplished by a Muscle, being the proper Instrument of
voluntary Motion. Furthermore every motion of a member possessing a Muscle is
made either by bending and contraction, or by extention. Although generally
there be so many differences of voluntary motion, as there are kinds of site in
place; therefore Motion is said to be made upward, downward, to the righthand,
to the left, forward and backward; Hither are referred the many kinds of
motions, which the infinite variety of Muscles produce in the body. Into How
Respiration may be a voluntary motion.
this rank of Voluntary Actions, comes Respiration, or breathing because it is
done by the help of the Muscles; although it be chiefly to temper the heat of
the Heart. For we can make it more quick, or slow as we please, which are
the conditions of a voluntary Motion.

Lastly, that we may have somewhat in which we may safely rest and defend our
selves against the many questions which are commonly moved concerning this
thing, we must hold, that Respiration is undergone and performed by the Animal
faculty, but chiefly instituted for the vital.

The Principal Action and prime amongst the Voluntary is absolutely divided in
The third principal Action,
three, Imagination, Reasoning and Memory.

Imagination is a certain expressing, and apprehension which discernes and
distinguishes between the forms and shapes of things sensible, or which are
known by the senses.

Reasoning is a certain judicial aestimation of conceived or apprehended
forms or figures, by a mutual collating, or comparing them together.

Memory is the sure storer of all things, and as it were the Treasury which
the mind often unfolds and opens, the other faculties of the mind being idle
and not employed. But because all the forementioned Actions whether they be
Natural, or Animal and voluntary, are done and performed by the help and
assistance of the Spirits; Therefore now we must speak of the Spirits.

CHAP. X. Of the Spirits.
THe spirit is a subtle and Aerie substance, raised from the purer blood What a
spirit is.
that it might be a vehicle for the faculties (by whose power the whole body is
governed,) to all the parts, and the prime instrument for the performance of
their office. For they being destitute of its sweet approach do presently cease
from action, and as dead do rest from their accustomed labors. Spirits
threefold.
From hence it is that making a variety of Spirits according to the number of
the faculties, they have divided them into three; as one Animal, another
Vital, another Natural.

The Animal has taken his seat in the brain; for there it is prepared The
Animal spirit.
and made, that from thence conveyed by the Nerves is may impart the power of
sense and Motion to all the rest of the members. An argument hereof is, that
in the great Cold of Winter., whether by the intercepting them in their way, or
by the concretion, or as it were freezing of those spirits, the joints grow
stiff, the hands numme, and all the other parts are dull, destitute of their
accustomed a gillity of motion, and quickness of sense. It is called Animal
not Why so called
because it is the Anima.
Life, but the chief and prime instrument thereof; wherefore it has a most
subtle and Aerie substance: and enjoyes diverse names according to the various
condition of the Sensoryes or seats of the senses into which it enters; for
that which causes the sight, is named the Visive: you may see this by night,
rubbing your eyes, as sparkling like fire. That which is conveyed to the
Auditorie passage, is called the Auditive or Hearing; That which is carried to
the Instruments of Touching, is termed the Tactive; and so of the rest.

This Animal spirit is made and labored in the windings and foldings of the
How it is made.
veins and Arteryes of the brain, of an exquisite subtle portion of the
vital brought thither by the Carotidae Arteriae, or sleepy Arteryes, and
sometimes also of the pure air, or sweet vapor drawn in by the Nose in
breathing. Hence it is, that with Ligatures we stop the passage of this
spirit, from the parts we intend to cut off. An Humor which obstructs or stopps
its passage, does the like in Apoplexies and Palsies, whereby it happens that
the members situate under that place do languish and seem dead, sometimes
destitute of motion, sometimes wanting both sense and motion.

The Vital spirit is next to it in dignity and excellency, which has its
chief The Vital spirit.
mansion in the left ventricle of the Heart, from whence through the Channells
of the Arteryes it flows into the whole body, to nourish the heat which
resides fixed in the substance of each part, which would perish in short time
unless it should be refreshed by heat flowing thither together with the
spirit. And because it is the most subtle next to the Animal, Nature (lest it
should vanish away) would have it contained in the Nervous coat of an Artery,
which is five time more thick, than the Coat of the veins, as Galen, out of
Herophilus, has recorded.

It is furnished with matter from the subtle exhalation of the blood, and that
air What the matter of it is.
which we draw in breathing. Wherefore it does easily and quickly perish by
immoderate dissipations of the spirituous substance, and great evacuations; so
it is easily corrupted by the putrefaction of Humors, or breathing in of
pestilent air and filthy vapors, which thing is the cause of the so sudden
death of those which are infected with the Plague. This spirit is often hindered
from entering into some part by reason of obstruction, fullness, or great
inflammations, whereby it follows that in a short space, by reason of the
decay of the fixed and inbred heat, the parts do easily fall into a Gangrene
and become mortified.

The Natural spirit (if such there be any) has its station in the Liver and
Veins. It is more gross and dull than the other, and inferior to them in the
There is some doubt of the Naturallspirit.
dignity of the Action, and the excellency of the use. The use thereof is to
help the concoction both of the whole body, as also of each several part, and
to carry blood and heat to them.

Besides those already mentioned, there are other spirits fixed and implanted
in the simular and prime parts of the body, which also are natural, and
Natives Fixed spirits.
of the same place in which they are seated and placed. And because they are
also of an Aerie and fiery nature, they are so joined or rather united to the
Native heat, that they can no more be separated from it, than flame from
heat; wherefore they with these that flow to them are the principal
Instruments of the Actions, which are performed in each several part; And
these fixed spirits have their nourishment and maintenance from the radical
and first-bred moisture, which The radical moisture.
is of an Aerie and oily substance and is as it were the foundation of these
Spirits and the inbred heat. Therefore without this moisture no man can live a
moment. But also the Chief Instruments of life are these Spirits together with
the native heat. Wherefore this radical Moisture being dissipated and wasted,
(which is the seat, fodder and nourishment of the Spirits and heat) how can
they any longer subsist and remain? Therefore the consumption of the natural
heat follows the decay of this sweet and substance-making moisture, and
consequently death, which happens by the dissipating and resolving of natural
heat. Natural death


But since then these kind of Spirits with the natural heat, is contained in
the substance of each simular part of our body (for otherwise it could not
persist) it must necessarily follow, that there be as many kinds of fixed
Spirits, as of simular parts. For because each part has its proper temper and
increase, it has also its proper spirit, and also its own proper fixed and
implanted heat, which here has its abode, as well as its Original, Wherefore
the spirit and heat which is seated in the bone, is different from that, which
is impact into the substance of a Nerve, Vein or such other simular part;
because the temper of these parts is different, as also the mixture of the
Elements from which they first arose and sprung up. Neither is this
contemplation of spirits of small account, for in these consist all the force
and efficacy of our Nature.

These being by any chance dissipated or wasted, we languish, neither is any
The use and necessity of the Spirits.
health to be hoped for, the flower of life withering and decaying by little and
little. Which thing ought to make us more diligent, to defend them against the
continual effluxe of the threefold substance. For if they be decayed, there is
left no proper Indication of curing the disease, so that we are often
constrained, all other care laid aside, to betake our selves to the restoring
and repayring the What the remedy for the dissipation of the spirits.
decayed powers. Which is done by meats of good juice, easy to be concocted
and distributed, good Wines and fragrant smells.

But sometimes these Spirits are not dissipated, but driven in and returned to
What the remedy for oppression of the spirits is.
their fountains, and so both oppress and are oppressed; whereupon it happens
we are often forced to dilate and spread them abroad by binding and rubbing the
parts. Hitherto we have spoke of these things which are called Natural,
because we naturally consist of them; it remains that we now say somewhat of
their Adjuncts and associates by familiarity of Condition.

The Adjuncts and Associates to things Natural, are Age: of which, by reason
of the similitude of the Argument, we were constrained to speak when we
handled the Temperatures. Sex. Color; of which we have already spoken. The
Conformation of the isntrumental parts. Time, whose force we have also
considered. Region. Order of Diet and Condition of life.


CHAP. XI. Of the Adjuncts of things Natural.
Sex is no other thing than the distinction of Male and Female, in What sex
is,
which this is most observable, that for the parts of the body, and the fire of
these parts, their is little difference between them; but the Female The nature
of weomen.
is colder than the Male. Wherefore their spermaticall parts are more cold,
soft and moist, and all there natural actions less vigorous, and more
depraved.

The Nature of Eunuchs is to be referred to that of weomen, as who may seem
Of Eunuchs.
to have degenerated into a womanish nature, by deficiency of heat; their
smooth body and soft and shirle voice do very much assimulate weomen.
Notwithstanding you must consider that there be some Manly weomen, which their
manly voice and chinne covered with a little hairinesse do argue; and on the
contrary, there are some womanizing, or womanish men, which therefore we term
dainty and effeminate.

The Hermaphrodite as of a doubtful nature and in the middle of both sexes
seems to participate of both Male and Female. Of Hermaphrodites.


The Color which is predominante in the habit and superficies of the body and
Color the bewrayer of the Temperament
lies next under the skin, shows the temperament of what kind soever it be;
for as Galen notes in Comment. ad Aphor, 2. sect. 1. Such a color appears in
us, as the contained humor has. Wherefore if a rosy hew color the cheeks,
it is a sign the body abounds with blood, and that it is carried abroad by the
plenty of Spirits. But if the skin be dyed with a yellow color, it argues
Choler, is predominante; if with a whitish and pallide hew, Phlegm; with a
sable and dusky, Melancholy. So the color of the excrements which are
according to Nature is not of the least consideration. For thus, if an ulcer
being broken send forth white matter, it argues the soundness of the part from
whence it flows; but if sanious or bloody, green, blackish, or of diverse
colors, it shows the weakness of the solid part, which could not assimulate
by concoction the color of the excrementitious humor. The like reason is of
unnatural Tumors; For, as the color, so the Dominion of the Humor causing or
accompanying the swelling commonly is.

The Conformity, and integrity of the Organicall parts is considered by their
The perfection of the organicall parts consists in 4. things.
figure, greatness, number, situation and mutual connection. We consider the
figure, when we say almost all the external parts of the body are naturally
round, not only for show, but for necessity, that being smooth, and no way
cornered, they should be less obnoxious to external injuries; we speak of
Greatness, when we say, some are large and thick, some lancke and lean. But
we consider their number, when we observe some parts to abound, some to want,
or nothing to be defective or wanting. We insinuate site and connection when
we search, whether every thing be in its proper place, and whether they be
decently fitted, and well joined together.

We have handled the varyeties of the four seasons of the year, when we
treated of Temperaments. But the consideration of Region (because it has the
same judgment that the Air) shall be referred to that disquisition, or enquiry
which we entend to make of the Air, amongst the Things not natural.

The Manner of life and order of Diet are to be diligently observed by us,
because they have great power either to alter, or preserve the Temperament.
Diet.
But because they are of almost infinite variety, therefore they scarce seem
possible to fall into Art, which may prosequute all the differences of Diet
and vocations of life. Wherefore if the Calling of Life be laborious, as that
of husbandmen, Mariners, and other such trades, it strengthens and dryes the
parts of the body. Although those which labor much about Waters, are most
commonly troubled with cold and moist diseases although they almost kill
themselves with labor.

Again, those which deal with Mettalls, as all sorts of Smithes, and those
which cast and work brass, are more troubled with hot diseases, as fevers.
But if their Calling be such as they sit much, and work all the day long
sitting at home, as shooemakers; it makes the body tender, the flesh effeminate
and causes great quantity of excrements. A life as well idle and negligent in
body, as quiet in mind, in all riotousnes and excesses of Diet, does the same.
For from hence the body is made subject to the stone, gravel and Gout.

That calling of life which is performed with moderate labor, clothing and
diet, seems very fit and convenient to preserve the natural temper of the
body. The commodities of an indifferent Diet.
The Ingenious Surgeon may frame more of himself that may more particularly
conduce to the examination of these things. Therefore, the things natural, and
those which are near or Neighboring to them being thus briefly declared, the
Order seems to require that we make enquiry of Things not Natural.

CHAP. XII. Ofthings not Natural.
THe things which we must now treat of, have by the latter Physicians Why
they are called things not natural.
been termed, Not natural; because they are not of the number of those which
enter into the constitution, or composure of man's body; as the Elements,
Humors, and all such things which we formerly comprehended under the name of
Natural: Although they be such as are necessary to preserve and defend the
body already made and composed. Wherefore they were called by Galen Preservers,
because by the due use of them the body is preserved in health. Also they may
be called doubtful; and Neuters, for that rightly and fitly used they keep
the body healthful; but inconsiderately, they cause diseases. Whereby it comes
to pass that they may be thought to pertain to that part of Physic which is
of preserving health, not because some of these things should be absolutely and
of their own nature wholesome, and others unwholesome, but only by this, that
they are, or prove so by their convenient, or preposterous use. Therefore we
consider the use of such like things from 4 conditions, quantity, Galen. 1. ad
Glauconem.
quality, occasion, and manner of using; if thou shall observe these, thou
shall attain and effect this, that those things which of themselves are as it
were, doubtful, shall bring certain and undoubted health. For these 4.
Circumstances do so far extend, that in them as in the perfection of Art,
the Rules which may be prescribed to preserve health are contained. But Galen
in another place 1. de sanitattnenda.
has in 4. words comprehended these things not Natural; as things Taken,
Applied, Expelled, and to be Done. Things Taken are those which are put into
the body, either by the mouth or any other way, as the Air, meat and drink.
Things Applied are these which must touch the body, as the Air now mentioned,
affecting the body with a diverse touch of its qualityes of heat, cold,
moisture or dryness. Expelled are, what things soever being unprofitable are
generated in the body and require to be expelled. To be Done are labor, rest,
sleep, watching and the like. We may more distinctly and by expression of
proper names revoke all these things to six; which are

Air, Meat and Drink, Labor and Rest, Sleep and Watching, Repletion and
Inanition, or things to be expelled, or retained and kept, Perturbations of the
Mind.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Air.
Air is so necessary to life, that we cannot live a moment without it, if so
be How necessary for life the air is.
that breathing, and much more transpiration, be not to be separated from life.
Wherefore it much conduces to know, what Air is wholesome, what unwholesome,
and which by contrariety of qualities fights for the Patient against the
disease; or on the contrary by a similitude of qualities shall nourish the
disease, that if it may seem to burden the Patient by increasing or adding to
the disease, we may correct it by Art. So in curing the wounds of the head,
especially in Winter, we labor by all the means we may to make the air warm.
For cold is hurtful to the Brain, Bones, and the wounds of these parts; and
heat is comfortable and friendly. But also the air being drawn into the body
by breathing when it is hotter than ordinary, does with a new warmth overheate
the heart, lungs and spirits, and weaken the strength by the dissipation of the
spirits too much attenuated; so being too cold, in like manner the strength of
the faculties faints and grows dull, either by suppression of the vapoures, or
by the inspissation, or thickning of the spirits.

Therefore to conclude, that Air is to be esteemed healthful, which is
clear, subtle, What Air is huttfull.
and pure, free and open on every side, and which is far remote from all
carrion-like smells of dead carcasses, or the stench of any putrefying thing
whatsoever: the which is far distant from standing pooles, and fennes and
caves, sending forth strong and ill vapors; neither too cloudy nor moist by
the nearenesse of some river.

Such an Air, I say, if it have a vernall temper, is good against all
diseases. That air which is contrary to this is altogether unhealthfull, as
that which is putrid, shut up, and pressed, by the straitness of neighboring
mountains, infected with some noisome vapor. And because I cannot prosecute
all the conditions of aires, fit for the expelling of all diseases, as which
are almost infinite, it shall suffice here to have set down, what we must
understand by this word Air.

Physicians commonly use to understand three things, by the name of Air; The
Three things are understood by the name of the aires
present state of the Air; The Region in which we live; and the season of the
year. We spoke of this last, when we treated of Temperaments. Wherefore we
will now speak of the two former. The present state of the Air, one while for
some small time, is like the Spring, that is temperate; otherwhiles like the
Summer, that is hot and dry; otherwhiles like the Winter, that is cold and
moist; and sometimes like the Autumn which is unequal; and this last
constitution of the Air, is the cause of many diseases. When upon the same
day, it is one while hot, another Aphor. 4. sect. 2. The force of the winds.
cold, we must expect Autumnall diseases. These tempers and varieties of
constitutions of the Air, are chiefly and principally stirred up by the
winds; as which being diffused over all the Air, show no small force by their
sudden change. Wherefore we will briefly touch their natures: That which
blows from the East, is called the Eastwinde, and is of a hot and dry nature,
and therefore healthful. But the Western wind is cold and moist, and
therefore sickly. The South wind is hot and moist, the Author of putrefaction
and putride diseases. The North wind is cold and dry, therefore healthy:
wherefore it is thought, if it happen to blow in the dogge-dayes, that it makes
the whole year healthful, and purges and takes away the seeds of
putrefaction, if any chance to be in the air. But this description of the
four winds, is then only thought to be true, if we consider the winds in
their own proper nature, which they borrow from these Regions, from which they
first proceed. For otherwise they affect the How the winds acquire other
faculties, than they naturally have. The Westwinde of it selse unwhosesome.
air quite contrary, according to the disposition of the places over which
they came, as snowie places, Seaes, Lakes, Rivers, Woods, or sandy plains,
from whence they may borrow new qualities, with which they may afterward
possess the air, and so consequently our bodies.

Hence it is we have noted the Western wind unwholesome, and breeding
diseases, by reason of the proper condition of the Region from whence it came;
and such, that is cold and moist; the Gasconies find it, truly to their so
great harm, that it seldom blows with them, but it brings some manifest and
great harm, either to their bodies, or fruits of the earth. And yet the
Greeks, and Latins are wont to commend it for healthfulnesse, more than the
rest. But also the rising and setting of some more What force stars have upon
the air.
eminent stars, do often cause such cold winds, that the whole air is
cooled, or infected with some other malign quality. For vapors and
exhalations are often raised by the force of the stars, from whence winds,
clouds, storms, whirlewindes, lightnings, thunders, hail, snow, rain,
earthquakes, inundations, and violent raging of the sea; have their original.
The exact contemplation of which things, although it be proper to Astronomers,
Cosmographers, and Geographers, yet Hippocrates could not omit it, but that he
must speak something in his book De aere and aquis, where he touches by the
way, the description of the neighboring Regions, and such as he knew.

From this force of the air, either hurtful, or helping in diseases, came
that famous observation of Gnido of Caulias, That wounds of the head are more
difficult to cure at Paris, than at Avignion, and the plain contrary of
wounds of the legs; for the air of Paris compared to that of Avignion is
cold and moist, wherefore hurtful How the air of Paris comes to be ill for
wounds of the head, and good for those of the leg.
and offensive to the wounds of the head. On the contrary, the same air,
because it obscures the spirits, incrassates the blood, condensates the humors,
and makes them less fit for defluxions, makes the wounds of the legs more
easy to be healed, by reason it hinders the course of the humors, by whose
defluxion the cure is hindered. But it is manifest, that hot and dry places
make a greater dissipation of the natural heat, from whence the weakness of
the powers; by which same reason the Inhabitants of such places do not so well
endure bloudletting; but more easily suffer purgations, though vehement, by
reason of the contumacie of the humor, caused by dryness. To conclude, the
air changes the constitutions of our bodies, either by its By what meames the
air changes our bodies.
qualities, as if it be hotter, colder, moister, or drier; or by its matter, as
if it be grosser, or more subtle than is fit, or corrupted by exhalations from
the earth; or by a sudden and unaccustomed alteration, which any man may
prove, who makes a sudden change out of a quiet air into a stormy and
troubled with many winds. But because, next to the air, nothing is so
necessary to nourish man's body, as meat and drink, I will now begin to
speak of them both.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Meat and Drink.
THat this our Treatise of meat and drink may be more brief and plain, I
have thought good to part it into these heads, as to consider the goodness and
illness of both of them, their quantity, quality, custom, delight, order,
time, and to accommodate them all to the ages and seasons of the year. We
judge of the goodness and pravity of meats and drinks, from the condition
The goodness of nourishmentes.
of the good or vicious humors, or juice which they beget in us. For evil
juice causes many diseases. As on the contrary, good juice drives away all
diseases from the body, except the fault happen from some other occasion, as
from quantity, or too much excess. Wherefore it is principally necessary, that
those who will preserve their present health, and hinder the access of
diseases, feed upon things of good nourishment and digestion, as are good
wine, the yolks of eggs, good milk, wheaten bread well baked, the flesh of
Capons, Pertridge, Thrushes, Larkes, Veale, Mutton, Kid, and such like other,
which you may find mentioned in the Books which Galen writ de Alimentorum
facultatibus; where also he examines those which are of evil juice by their
manifest qualities, as acrimony, bitterness, saltness, aciditie, harshnesse
and such like.

But unless we use a convenient quantity and measure in our meats, howsoever
laudable Their quantity.
they be, we shall never reap these fruits of health we hoped for. For they
yield matter of diseases, by the only excess of their quantity; but we may
by this know the force of quantity on both parts, because often the poisonous
quality of meats of ill nourishment does not hurt, by reason they were not
taken into the body into a great quantity. That measure of quantity is
chiefly to be regarded in diseases: for as Hippocrates says, if any give
meat to one sick of a fever, he gives strength to the well, The quantity of
meats must be esteemed, according to the nature o^ the disease, and strength
of the Patient.
and increases the disease to the sick, especially if he do not use a mean.
Wherefore it is a thing of no small consequence, to know what diseases require
a slender and what a large diet; of which thing there is large relation made in
the 1. Section of the Aphorisms of Hippocrates; where he teaches, the sick
must feed more largely in the beginnings of long diseases, whereby they may be
enabled to endure the length of the disease, and last to the state thereof. But
in sharp and violent diseases, which presently come to their height, we must
use a slender diet; but most slender, when the disease is in the height; and
besides, all our consultations in this kind, must be referred to the strength
of the patients. But those who enjoy their perfect health, must use a quantity
of meat, agreeable to their evacuation and transpiration; for men by reason of
the strength of their heat, and the more copious dissipation of the triple
substance, have greater appetite, than women; altogether by the same reason,
that young people, and such as grow, need more frequent and plentiful
nourishment, than old men; and also amongst young men of the like age, some do
rightly require more copious nourishment than othersome, that is, according to
the quantity of their evacuations and custom. Certainly for gluttony, it is
such as may be extended to all; but we all should take so much meat and
drink, that our powers may be refreshed and not oppressed: for by the decree
of Hippocrates, these be the two compendiary ways of preserving health; not to
be over-filled with meat, and to be quick to work; and thus much of the
quantity of meats. Neither must these who are either sound, or sick, have
less regard to the qualities of their meats; and those are either the first,
as heating, The qualities. of meat.
cooling, moistening, drying; or the second, attenuating, incrassating,
obstructing, opening, or some other like, working according to the condition of
their nature. The manner of our diet is not only to be framed according to
these, but also to be varied; for the present state of such as be in health,
requires to be preserved by the use of like things. As hot and moist
nourishment is to be prescribed to children, as to those which are hot and
moist: and cold, and dry, to old men, as to those who are cold and dry; if so
be that vulgar saying be true, that, Health delights in the use of like things.
Yet because old age how green and new begun howsoever it be, is of it Old age
is a disease.
self as it were, a disease, it seems to be more convenient, both to truth
and for health, that old people should eat meats contrary to their nature,
that is, hot, and moist, that so we may defer as much as we can, the causes
of death, cold and dryness, which hasten the destruction of that age. For we
must resist diseases by the use of their contraries, as those things which are
contrary to nature. For otherwise, as much meat as you give to the sick, you
add so much strength to the disease. And the same is the cause why Hippocrates
said, that a moist diet is convenient for all such Aphor. 16. sect. 1.
as are sick of fevers, because a fever is a dry distemperature. Therefore
we must diligently pry into the nature of the disease, that knowing it, we
may endeavor to abate its fury by the use of contraries.

But if custom (as they say) be another nature, the Physician must have a
great care The force of Custom.
of it, both in sound and sick. For this sometimes by little and little and
insensiblely, changes our natural temperament, and instead thereof gives us a
borrowed temper. Wherefore if any would presently or suddenly change a custom
which is sometimes ill, into a better, truly he will bring more harm, than
good; because all sudden changes (according the opinion of Hipocrates) are
dangerous. Wherefore if necessity Aphor. 91. sect. 2.
require, that we should withdraw any thing from our custom, we must do it by
little and little, that so nature may by degrees be accustomed to contraries
without violence, or the disturbance of its usual government. For that meat
and drink which is somewhat worse, but more pleasant and familiar by custom,
is to be preferred (in Hippocrates opinion) before better, but less pleasant
and accustomed. Hence Aphor. 38. sect. 2.
is it, that Countrie-men do very well digest Beef and Bacon, which commonly
they use; but will turn into nidorulent vapors, Partridge, Capons, and other
meat of good nourishment, sooner than change them into good and laudable
Chylus. The cause of which thing is not only to be attributed unto the
property of their stronger, and as it were burning heat, but much more to
custom, which by a certain kind of familiarity, causes that meats of hard
digestion are easily turned into laudable blood. For the force of custom is so
great, that accustomed meats are more acceptable; whereby it comes to pass,
that while the stomach delights in them, it more straightly embraces them, and
happily digests them, without any trouble of loathing, vomiting, or heaviness.
All the contrary meet and happen in the use of meats which are unpleasant to
the taste and stomach. For the ventricle abhorring Accustomed meats are more
grateful, and so by that means more nourishing.
those things, makes manifest how it is troubled by its acide and nidorulent
belchings, loathing, nauseousnesse, vomit, heaviness, pain of the head, and
trouble of the whole body.

Wherefore we must diligently enquire, what meats the Patient chiefly
delighted in, that by offering them, his appetite languishing by reason of some
great evacuation, vomit, or the like, may be stirred up. For it will be better
and more readily restored by things acceptable, though they be somewhat worse,
as we noted a little before out of Hippocrates. By which words he plainly
taught, that it is the part of a good and prudent Physician to subscribe to,
and please the palate of his patient.

But seeing that order is most beautiful in all things, it is truly very
necessary in The order of eating our meats.
eating our meat: for how laudable soever the meats be in their quantity and
quality, howsoever familiar by use, and grateful by custom, yet unless they
be eaten in due order, they will either trouble or molest the stomach, or be
ill, or slowly and difficultly concocted; wherefore we must diligently observe,
what meats must be eaten at the first, and what at the second course; for
those meats which be hard to concoct, are not to be eaten before those which
are easy of digestion; neither dry and astringent things, before moistening
and loosing.

But on the contrary, all slippery, fat, and liquid things, and which are
quickly changed We must begin our meals with moist or liquid meat.
ought to go before, that so the belly may be moistened; and then astringent
things must follow, that the stomach, by their help, being shut, and drawn
together, may more straightly comprehend the meat on every side, and better
perform the Chylification by its proper heat united and joined together.

For this cause Hippocrates Lib. de victu in acutis, commands those things to
be always eaten in the morning, which are fit to loosen the belly, and in the
evenings such as nourish the body. Yet notwithstanding drink ought not to
preceede, orgoe before meat, but on the contrary meat must preceede drink,
by the order prescribed by him.

Whether ought we in our eating to have less care of the time, than we have
of The time of eating.
the order: for the time of cating of such as are healthful, ought to be
certain and fixed; for at the accustomed hour, and when hunger presses, any
sound man, and which is at his own disposure may eat, but exercise and
accustomed labors ought to The profit of labor before meat.
go before; for it is fit, according to the precept of Hippocrates, that
labor preceed meat, whereby the excrements of the third concoction may be
evacuated, the native heat increased, and the solid parts confirmed and
strengthened, which are three commodities of exercise very necessary to the
convenient taking of meat. But in sick persons we can scarce attend, and give
heed to these circumstance of time, and accustomed hour of feeding; for that
Indication of giving meat to the sick, is the best of all, which is drawn
from the motion of the disease, and the declining of the fit: for if you give
meat in fevers, specially the fit then taking the Patient, you nourish not
him, but the disease. For the meat then eaten, is corrupted in the stomach,
and yields fit matter for the disease. For meat (as we noted before out of
Hippocrates) is strength to the sound, and a disease to the sick, unless it
be eaten at convenient time, and diligent care be had of the strength of the
Patient, and greatness of the disease.

But neither is it convenient that the meat should be simple, and of one
kind, but We must not give meat in a fit of a Fever.
of many sorts, and of diverse dishes dressed after different forms, left
nature by the continual and hateful feeding upon the same meat, may at the
length loath it, and so neither straightly contain it, nor well digest it; or
the stomach accustomed to one meat, taking any loathing thereat, may abhor
all other: and as there is no desire of that we do not know, so the dejected
appetite cannot be delighted and stirred up, with the pleasure of any meat
which can be offered. For we must not credit those superstitious, or too nice
Physicians, who think the digestion is hindered by the much variety of meats.

The matter is far otherwise, for by the pleasure of what things soever the
stomach Variety of meats.
allured does require, it embraces them more straightly, and concocts them more
perfectly. And our nature is desirous of variety.

Moreover, seeing our body is composed of a solid, moist, and airy substance,
and Why variety of meatsis good.
it may happen, that by so many labors, which we are compelled to undergo,
and sustain in this life, one of these may suffer a greater dissipation and
loss than another; therefore the stomach is necessarily compelled to seek
more variety, lest any thing should be wanting to repair that which is wasted.
But also the age and season of the year, yield Indications of feeding, for
some things are convenient for a Indications of feeding, taken from the age.
young man, some for an old, some in Summer, some in Winter. Wherefore we
ought to know what befits each age and season. Children need hot, moist, and
much nourishment, which may not only suffice to nourish, but increase the
body. Wherefore we ought to know what befits each age and season. Children need
hot, moist, and much nourishment, which may not only suffice to nourish, but
increase the body. Wherefore they worst endure fasting, and of them, especially
those who are the most lively and spiritfull. With old men it is otherwise, for
because their heat is small, they need little nourishment, and are
extinguished by much. Wherefore old men easily endure to fast, they ought to be
nourished with hot and moist meats, by which their solid parts, now growing
cold and dry, may be heated and moistened, as by the sweet nourishment of such
like meats. Middle aged men delight in the moderate use of contraries to
temper the excess of their too acride heat. Young people as temperate are to
be preserved by the use of like things.

The manner of diet in Winter must be hot and inclining to dryness. Wherefore
Indication From the time of the year.
then we may more plentifully use rost-meates, strong wines and spices; because
in the Winter season we are troubled with the cold and moist air, and at the
same time, have much heat inwardly; for the inner parts, according to
Hippocrates, are naturally most hot in the Winter and the Spring, but feverish
in Summer; so the heat of Summer is to be tempered by the use of cold and moist
things, and much drink. In the temperate Spring all things must be moderate;
but in Autumn, by little and little, we must pass from our Summer, to our
Winter diet.

CHAP. XV. Of Motion and Rest.
HEre Physicians admonish us, that by the name of Motion, we must understand
What motion signifies.
all sorts of exercises, as walking, leaping, running, riding, playing at
tennis, carrying a burden, and the like. Friction or rubbing is of this kind,
which in times past was in great use and esteem, neither at this day is it
altogether neglected by Physicians. They mention many kinds of it, but they may
be all reduced to three, as one gentle, another hard, a third indifferent; and
that of the whole body, Three kinds of frictions.
or only of some part thereof. The friction is called hard, which is made by
the Hard.
rough, or strong pressure of the hands, spunges, or a course and new linen
cloth: it draws together, condensates, binds and hardens the flesh, yet if it
be often and long used, at length it rarifies, dissolves, attenuates and
diminishes the flesh, and any other substance of the body; and also it causes
revulsion, and draws the defluxion of humors from one part to another. The
gentle friction which is performed by the light rubbing of the hand, and such
like, does the contrary, as softens, relaxes, and Gentle.
makes the skin smooth and unwrinckled, yet unless it be long continued it
does none of these, worthy to be spoken of. The indifferent kinds consisting in
the mean betwixt the other two, increases the flesh, swells or puffes up the
habit of the body, Indifferent.
because it retains the blood and spirits which it draws and suffers them not
to be dissipated.

The benefit of exercise is great, for it increases natural heat, whereby
better digestion The use of exercises.
follows, and by that means nourishment, and the expulsion of the excrements,
and lastly, a quicker motion of the spirits, to perform their offices in the
body, all the ways and passages being cleansed. Besides, it strengthens the
respiration, and the other actions of the body, confirms the habit, and all
the limbs of the body, by the mutual attrition of the one with the other;
whereby it comes to pass they are not so quickly wearied with labor. Hence we
see that Country people are not to be tired with labor.

If any will reap these benefits by exercise, it is necessary that he take
opportunity What the fittest time for exercise.
to begin his exercise, and that he seasonably desist from it, not exercising
himself violently and without discretion; but at certain times according to
reason.

Wherefore the best time for exercise will be before meat (that the appetite
may be increased by augmenting the natural heat) all the excrements being
evacuated, lest nature being hungry and empty, do draw and infuse the ill
humors contained in the guts, and other parts of the body, into the whole
habit, the liver, and other noble parts. Neither is it fit presently, after
meat, to run into exercise, left the crude humors and meats not well
concocted be carried into the veins. The measure and bounds of exercise must
be, when the body appears more full, the face looks red, sweat begins to
break forth, we breathe more strongly and quick, and begin to grow weary; if
any continue exercise longer, stiffness, and weariness assayles his joints,
and the body flowing with sweat suffers a loss of the spirituous and humid
substance which is not easily repaired; by which it becomes more cold, and
lean even to deformity.

The quality of exercise which we require, is in the midst of exercise, so
that the exercise The quality of ex^^cise.
must be nether too slow and idle, neither too strong, nor too weak, neither
too hasty, nor remiss, but which may move all the members alike. Such exercise
is very fit for sound bodies. But if they be distempered, that sort of exercise
is to be made choice of, which by the quality of its excess, may correct the
distemper of the body, and reduce it to a certain mediocritie. Wherefore such
men as are stuffed with cold, For whom strong exercises are convenient.
gross, and viscous humors, shall hold that kind of exercise most fit for
them, which is more laborious, vehement, strong, and longer continued. Yet so,
that they do not enter into it before the first and second concoction, which
they may know by the yellowness of their urine. But let such as abound with
thin and choleric humors choose gentle exercises, and such as are free from
contention, not expecting the finishing of the second concoction, for the more
acride heat of the solid parts delights in such half concocted juices, which
otherwise it would so burn up, all the glutinous substance thereof being
wasted, that they could not be adjoined, or fastened to the parts. For the
repeating, or renewing of exercise, the body should be so often exercised, as
there is a desire to eat. For exercise stirs up and revives the heat which
lies-buried and hid in the body: For digestion cannot be well performed by a
sluggish heat; neither have we any benefit by the meat we eat, unless we
use exercise before.

The last part of exercise begun and performed according to reason, is named
(...).
the ordering of the body, which is performed by an indifferent rubbing, and
drying of the members; that so the sweat breaking forth, the filth of the body,
and such excrements lying under the skin, may be allured and drawn out; and
also that the members may be freed from stiffness and weariness. At this time
it is commonly used by such as play at tennis.

But, as many and great commodities arise from exercise conveniently begun
What discommodities proceed from idleness.
and performed, so great harm proceeds of idleness; for gross and vicious
juyces heaped up in the body commonly produce crudities, obstructions, stones
both in the reins and bladder, the Gout, Apoplexy, and a thousand other
diseases.

CHAP. XVI. Of Sleep and Watching.
THat this our speech of Sleep and Watching, which we now intend may be more
plain, we will briefly declare, what commodity or discommoditie they bring,
what time and what hour is convenient for both, what the manner of lying must
be, and the choice thereof; what the dreams in sleeping, and what pains or
heaviness and cheerfulness after sleep may portend.

Sleep is nothing else than the rest of the whole body, and the cessation of
the What sleep is.
Animal faculty from sense and motion. Sleep is caused, when the substance
of the brain is possessed, and after some sort overcome and dulled by a
certain vaporous, sweet and delightsome humidity; or when the spirits almost
exhaust by performance of some labor, cannot any longer sustain the weight of
the body, but cause rest by a necessary consequence, by which means nature may
produce other from the meat by concoction turned into blood. Sleep fitly
taken much helps the digestion of the parts, because in the time of rest, The
use of sleep.
the heat, being the worker of all concoction, is carried back to them,
together with the spirits. Neither does sleep only give ease to the wearyed
members, but also lessens our cares and makes us to forget our labors.

The night is a fit time to sleep and to take our rest in, as inviting sleep
by its moisture, Fit time for sleep and the nature of the night.
silence and darkness. For the Heat and Spirits in the thick obscurity of
night, are driven in and retained in the center of the body; as on the contrary
by the daily and as it were friendly and familiar light of the Sun, they are
allured and drawn forth into the superficies, and outward part of the body;
from whence they leave sleeping and begin to wake. Besides also, which makes
not a little, to that opportunity and benefit which we look for from sleep,
the night season suffices for the Sleep on the daytime.
work of just and perfect concoction. Which is one reason amongst many that
sleep on the day time may be hurtful. For we are wakened from our sleep by
the heat and spirits called forth to the skin either by the light, or noise
on the day time, before that the concoction which was begun be finished. But
that sleep cannot but be light which comes without necessity of sleeping.
Wherefore the concoction being attempted, but not perfected, the stomach is
filled with crudities, distended with acide or sour belchings, and the brain
troubled with gross vapors and excremc^titious humidities. From whence
proceeds pain and heavines of the head, and store of cold diseases. But
although sleep on the night time be wholesome, yet There ought to be a
moderation of our nights sleep.
it is fit, that it be restrained within the limits of an indifferent time. For
that which exceeds hinders the evacuation of excrements both upwards and
downwards: but in the mean time the heat which is never idle, draws from
them some portion or vapor into the veins, principal parts and habit of the
body, to become matter for some disease. We must measure this time, not by the
space of hours, but by the finishing the work of concoction, which is
performed in some, sooner than in other some. Yet that which is longest is
perfected and done in seven, or eight hours. The ventricle subsiding and
falling into its self and its proper coats, and the urine tinctured yeallow,
gives perfect judgment thereof. For on the contrary the How to be known.
extension of the stomach, acide belching, pain of the head, and heavines of
the whole body, show that the concoction is unperfect.

In sleeping we must have special care of our lying down, for first we must
lie on our right side, that so the meat may fall into the bottom of our
stomach, which What the form and site of our body ought to be while we sleep
being fleshy and less membranous, is the hotter, and more powerful to
assimulate. Then a little after we must turn upon our left side, that so the
Liver with its Lobes, as with hands may on every side embrace the ventricle,
and as fire put under a Kettle, hasten the concoction. Lastly, toward morning
it will not be unprofitable to turn again upon our right side, that by this
situation the mouth of the stomach being opened, the vapoures which arise
from the elixation of the Chylus may have freer passage. Lying upon the back
is wholly to be avoided; for from hence the Reins The harm of lying on our
backs.
are inflamed, the Stone is bred, Palsies, Convulsion, and all diseases which
have their original from the defluxion into the spinall marrow, and to the
Nerves taking beginning from thence. To lie upon the belly is not unprofitable
for such as have Upon our bellies.
used to lyeso, if they be not troubled with defluxions into the eyes; for so
the humor will more easily flow into the part affected. But thus the work of
concoction is not a little furthered, because by that form of lying, not only
the inward heat is contained and gathered together about the ventricle, but
the encompassing warmenesse of the soft feathers of the bed, aides and assists
it.

Neither are the Dreams which we have in our sleep to be neglected, for by
the The consideration of dreams.
diligent consideration of these, the affections and superfluous humors which
have chief power in the body are marvailously known. For those who have
raging Choler running up and down their bodies while they sleep, all things
to them appear bright, shining, fiery, burning, full of noise and contention.
Those who abound with Phlegm dream of floods, snowes, showers and inundations
and falling from high places. Those who are Melancholy dream of gapings and
gulfes in the earth, thick and obscure darkness, smokes, caves, and all
black and dismal things. But those whose bodies abound in blood dream of
marriages, dances, embracings of women, feasts, jests, laughter, of orchards and
gardens; and to conclude, of all things pleasant and splendent.

Also we must observe how the Patient does after sleep, whether more lively
and cheerful, or more heavy, for by the opinion of Hippocrates,

Cum labor a sommo est, laethalem collige morbum: Aphor. 1. sect. 2.

Sinprosit somnus, nihil hinc laethale timendum est.
Pain sleep ensuing, an ill disease does show:
But if sleep profit bring, no harm from thence will flow.
And as sleep so watching, if it exceed measure, is hurtful; for it hurts
the temperature of the brain, weakens the senses, wastes the spirits, breeds
crudities, heaviness of the head, falling away of the flesh, and leanenesse
over all the body, and to conclude, it makes ulcers more dry, and so
consequently rebellious, difficult to heal, and malign. There are many other
things may be spoken of sleep and watching, but these may suffice a Surgeon.

CHAP. XVII. Of Repletion, and Inanition, or Emptiness.
THere are, to be short, two sorts of Repletion, or of all excess; one is The
kinds of Repletions or rather of Excesses.
of a simple quality, without any defluxion, or society of any humor, as
appears in distempers without matter: the other is of quantity and mass, the
body being distended with too much meat, or too great quantity of humors;
from whence proceed an infinite number of diseases. They call the Repletion of
meats, satietie or fullness, and it is of two kinds; the one which is called
Repletio advasa advires

Repletion or Fullness to the vessels; the other Repletion to the strength.

We judge of satietie to the vessels, by the distention and swelling of the
veins and intrailes, as the stomach. We call satietie to the strength, when
the body is loaded with more meats, than it can well bear. But also there is
a double Repletion of humors. For either it is of some one humor, or of all the
humors; they call this by a peculiar name Plethora. For Galen defines Plethora
an equal excess Gal. Meth. 13. cap. 6.
of all the humors. For if at any time he define a Plethora to be an excess of
blood only, then verily by the name of blood, he understands an equal
comprehension of the four humors; as it is taught in Physic schools.

The Repletion which is caused by some one humor, is termed by Galen What
Cacochymia.
in the place before mentioned, Cacochymia, (that is, an evil juice) whether
the Repletion proceed of a Choleric, Melancholicke, Phlegmatic, or serous
humor.

Now Inanition, or evacuation is no other thing than the expulsion, or
effusion, The kinds of evacuation. (...)
of humors which are troublesome, either in quantity, or quality. Of
evacuations, some are universal, which expel superfluous humors from the
whole body; such are purging, vomiting, transpiration, sweats, phlebotomie.
Some particular which are performed only to evacuate some part, as the brain
by the nose, palate, eyes, ears; the lungs by the weazon; the stomach by
vomit and stool, the guts by stool, the liver and the spleen by urine and
ordure. These evacuations are sometimes performed by nature, freeing it self
of that which is troublesome to it; otherwhiles by the Art of the Physician in
imitation of nature.

And again, one of these is good and requisite, when only the humor which is
hurtful, either in quantity or quality, is evacuated; The other not
requisite, or immoderate, when the profitable humors together with the
unprofitable, are expclled.

But what evacuations soever these be, they are performed and done, either by
the The commodities of moderate scratching.
scratching and rubbing of the skin, as when a choleric, salt, or serous
humor, or some windiness lying between the skin and the flesh, cause
itehing. For by scratching the skin, it gets passage out, which is manifest
by the effluxe of a serous matter burning, or causing scabbs and ulcers, if the
humor be somewhat gross, but insensible and not so manifest, if it be
windiness, the skin by that rubbing being rarefied, and the gross
flatulency attenuated. Wherefore they do ill who hinder their Patients from
scratching, unless they scratch so cruelly and hard, that there may be
danger, (by reason of the great heat and pain thereby caused) of some
defluxion or falling down of humors into the part.

Or these evacuations are performed by much matter evacuated frow an opened
Bile, or running ulcer, a Fistula, or such like sores. Or by sweats which are
very good and healthful, especially in sharp diseases, if they proceed from
the whole body, and happen on the critical days. By vomit, which often
violently draws these humors from the whole body, even from the utmost joints,
which purging The force of vomits.
medicines could not evacuate, as we may see in the Palsy, and Sciatica, or
Hip-goute. By spitting, as in all who are suppurated either in the sides or
lungs. By Salivation, or a Flegmaticke flux by the mouth, as in those who are
troubled with the French Pockes. By sneesing and blowing the nose; for by these
the brain oppressed Salivation.
with moisture, disburdeneth its self, whether it be done without, or with the
help of sternutatories and errhines; wherefore children, and such as have
somewhat moist brains purge themselves often this way. By hicket and belching;
for by The whole body is also purged by urines.
these the windiness contained in the stomach, is often expelled. By urine,
for by this not only Fevers, but which is more to be admired, the
French-Pockes has often been terminated and cured.

For there have been some troubled with the Pockes, in whom a flux of the
vicious and venenate humor could not by unctions of quicksilver be procured,
either from the mouth, or belly; yet have been wonderfully freed by abundance
of urine, both from danger of death and their disease. By bleeding; for nature
has often found a way for grievous diseases, especially in young bodies, by
bleeding at the nose, and by their courses in women. By a ^uxe, or laske,
purgation, sweats, insensible evacuation and transpiration; for so tumors, the
matter being brought to suppuration, do sometimes vanish away and are
dissolved, both of their own accord, as also by dissolving, or discussing
medicines. We do the same by exercise, diet, hot-houses, long sleep, waking,
and shedding of tears. By sucking, as with cupping glasses and horse-leaches
in wounds made by venomous bitings.

In all such kinds of evacuations, we must consider three things, the
quantity, quality, and manner of evacuation. As for an example, when an Empyema
is opened, We must observe three things in every evacuation.
the matter which runs out, ought to be answerable in proportion to the
purulent matter, which was contained in the capacity of the breasts; otherwise,
unless all the matter be emptied, there may happen a r^e; the matter should
be white, soft, equal, and nothing stinking: Lastly, you must let it forth not
altogether, and at one time, but by little and little, and at several times,
otherwise not a little quantity of the spirits and heat does flow out
together, with the unprofitable matter, and so consequently a dissolution of
all the powers.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Perturbations, or Passions of the mind.
THe Perturbations, are commonly called the accidents of the mind; because, as
bodily accidents from the body, so may these be present and Why the Passions of
the mind, are called Accidents. Their force.
absent from the mind, without the corruption of the subject. The knowledge of
these must not be lightly passed over by the Surgeon; for they stir up great
troubles in the bodies, and yield occasion of many and great diseases; of which
things, Joy, Hope and Love, may give a apparent testimony. For by these motions
the heat and spirits are sometimes gently, sometimes violently diffused over
all the body, for the enjoying of the present, or hoped for good. For then the
heart is dilated, as to embrace the thing beloved, and the face is died with a
rosy and lively color. For it is likely, that the faculty it self is stirred
by the object, by whose power the heart it self is moved.

For it is first necessary, before we be moved by any Passions, that the
senses in From whence they have their force.
their proper seats, in which they are seldom deceived, apprehend the
objects, and strait as messengers carry them to the common sense, which sends
their conceived forms to all the faculties. And then, that each faculty, as a
Judge may a fresh examine the whole matter, how it is, and conceive in the
presented objects some show of good, or ill, to be desired, or shunned. For
what man that was well in his wits, did ever fall into a laughter, unless he
formerly knew, or saw somewhat said or done, which might yield occasion of
laughter? Therefore Joy proceeds from the The reason of Joy.
heart, for the thing causing mirth or joy, being conceived, the faculty moves
the heart, which shaken and moved by the faculty which has dominion over it,
is dilated and opened, as ready to embrace the exhilarating object. But in the
mean time by the force of that dilatation, it sends forth much heat, and
spirits together with the blood into all the body. A great part of which
coming to the face, dilates it, the forehead is smooth and plain, the eyes
look bright, the cheeks become red, as died with Vermilion, the lips and
mouth are drawn together, and made plain and smoth; some have their cheeks
dented with two little pits (which from the effects are called laughing
cheeks) because of the contraction or curling, which the muscles suffer by
reason of their fullness of blood and spirits, all which to be brief is
nothing but to laugh.

Joy recreates and quickens all the faculties, stirs up the spirits, helps
concoction, makes the body to be better likeing, and fattens it, the heat,
blood, The effects of Joy.
and spirits flowing thither, and the nourishing dew or moisture, watering and
refreshing all the members; from whence it is, that of all the Passions of the
mind, this only is profitable, so that it exceed not measure; for immoderate
and unaccustomed joy, carries so violently the blood and spirits from the
heart, into the habit of the body, that sudden and unlookt for death ensues,
by a speedy decay of the strength, the lasting fountain of the vital humor
being exhausted. Which thing principally happens to those who are less
hearty, as women and old-men.

Anger causes the same effusion of heat in us, but far speedier than joy;
therefore the spirits and humors are so inflamed by it, that it often causes
putrid Anger.
fevers, especially if the body abound with any ill humor.

Sorrow, or grief dries the body by a way quite contrary to that of anger,
because Sorrow.
by this the heart is so straitened, the heat being almost extinct, that the
accustomed generation of spirits cannot be performed; and if any be generated,
they cannot freely pass into the members with the blood; wherefore the vital
faculty is weakened, the lively color of the face withers and decaies, and
the body wastes away with a lingering consumption.

Fear in like sort draws in and calls back the spirits, and not by little
and little Fear:
as in sorrow, but suddenly and violently; hereupon the face grows suddenly
pale, the extreme parts cold, all the body trembles or shakes, the belly in
some is loosed, the voice as it were stays in the jaws, the heart beat with
a violent pulsation, because it is almost oppressed by the heat, strangled by
the plenty of blood, and spirits abondantly rushing thither; The hair also
stands upright, because the heat Hippocrat. lib. 4. de morb.
and blood are retired to the inner parts, and the utmost parts are more cold
and dry than stone; by reason whereof the utmost skin and the pores, in
which the roots of the hairs are fastened, are drawn together.

Shame is a certain affection mixed, as it were, of Anger and Fear; therefore
Shame.
if, in that conflict of, as it were, contending passions, Fear prevail over
Anger, the face waxes pale, (the blood flying back to the heart;) and these
or these Symptoms rise, according to the vehemence of the contracted and
abated heat. But if on the contrary, Anger get the dominion over Fear, the
blood runs violently to the face, the eyes look red, and sometimes they even
some at the mouth.

There is another kind of shame, which the Latins call Verecundia (we
Shamefastness) Shamefastness.
in which there is a certain flux, and refluxe of the heat, and blood first
recoiling to the heart, then presently rebounding from thence again. But that
motion is so gentle, that the heart thereby suffers no oppression, nor defect
of spirits; wherefore no accidents worthy to be spoken of, arise from hence:
this affect is familiar to young maid es and boys; who if they blush for a
fault committed unawares, or through carelessness, it is thought an argument of
a virtuous and good disposition.

But an agony, which is a mixed passion of a strong fear, and vehement anger,
involves An agony.
the heart in the danger of both motions; wherefore by this passion, the vital
faculty is brought into very great danger. To these six Passions of the
mind, all other may be revoked, as Hatred and Discord to Anger: Mirth and
Boasting, to Joy; Terrors, Frights and Swoundings, to Fear; Envy, Despair and
Mourning, to Sorrow.

By these it is evident, how much the passions of the mind can prevail, to
alter and overthow the state of the body; and that by no other means, than
that by the compression and dilatation of the heart, they diffuse and contract
the spirits blood, and heat; from whence happens the dissipation, or
oppressions of these spirits.

The signs of these Symptoms quickly show themselves in the face; the heart,
Why the first signs of passions of the mind appear in the face.
by reason of the thinness of the skin in that part, as it were painting
forth the notes of its affections. And certainly the face is a part so fit to
disclose all the affections of the inward parts, that by it you may manifestly
know an old man from a young, a woman from a man, a temperate person from an
untemperate, an Ethiopian from an Indian, a Frenchman from a Spaniard, a sad
man from a merry, a sound from a sick, a living from a dead. Wherefore many
affirm that the manners, and those things which we keep secret and hid in our
hearts, may be understood by the face and countenance.

Now we have declared what commodity and discommoditie may redound to The use
of passions of the mind.
man from these forementioned passions, and have showed that anger is
profitable to none, unless by chance to some dull by reason of idleness, or
oppressed with some cold, clammy and phlegmatic humor; and fear convenient for
none, unless peradventure for such as are brought into manifest and extreme
danger of their life by some extraordinary sweat, immoderate bleeding, or the
like unbridled evacuation, Wherefore it behooves a wise Surgeon to have a
care, lest he inconsiderately put any Patient committed to his charge into any
of these passions, unless there be some necessity thereof, by reason of any
of the forementioned occasions.

CHAP. XIX. Of things against Nature, and first of the Cause of a Disease.
HAving entreated of things natural, and not natural, now it remains we
What things against nature are.
speak of things (which are called) against nature, because that they are such
as are apt to weaken and corrupt the state of our body. And they be three in
number; The cause of a disease, a Disease, and a Symptom. The What, and how
many the causes of diseases be. The primitive cause.
cause of a disease is an affect against nature, which causes the disease.
Which is divided into Internal and External. The External, original or
primitive comes from some other place, and outwardly into the body, such be
meats of ill nourishment, and such weapons and hostilely wound the body.

The Internal have their essence and seat in the body, and are subdivided
into Internal anterecdent.
antecedent and conjunct. That is called an antecedent cause, which as yet does
not actually make a disease, but goes near to cause one; so humors copiously
flowing, or ready to flow into any part, are the antecedent causes of diseases;
The conjunct Internal conjunct.
cause is that which actually causes the disease, and is so immediately joined
in affinity to the disease, that the disease being present, it is present, and
being absent, it is absent.

Again, of all such causes, some are borne together with us, as the overgreat
quantity, and malign quality of both the seeds, and the menstruous blood,
from diseased Parents are causes of many diseases, and specially of those which
are called Hereditary.

Other happen to us after we be borne, by our diet and manner of life, a
stroke, fall, or such other like. Those which be bred with us, cannot be wholly
avoided or amended; but some of the other may be avoided, as a stroke and fall;
some not, as those which necessarily enter into our body, as Air, Meat,
Drink, and the like.

But if any will reckon up amongst the internal, inherent, and inevitable
causes, The congenit, or inevitable cause of death.
the daily, nay hourly dissipation of the radical moisture, which the
natural heat continually preyes upon; I do not gain say it, no more than
that division of causes celebrated and received of Philosophers, divided into
Material, Formal, Efficient, and Final; for such a curious contemplation
belongs not to a Surgeon, whom I only intend plainly to instruct.
Wherefore that we have written may suffice him.

CHAP. XX. Of a Disease.
A Disease is an affect against nature, principally and by it self, hurting
What a disease is, and I ovv various.
and depraving the action of the part in which it resides. The division of a
Disease is threefold; Distemperature, ill Conformation, and the Solution of
Continuity.

Distemperature is a disease of the simular parts dissenting, and changed from
their A Distemperature.
proper and native temper. That digression from the native temper, happens two
ways; either by a simple distemperature from the excess of one quality; and
this is fourefold; Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry; or by a compound distemperature,
by the excess of two qualities, which also is fourefold, Hot and Moist; Hot
and Dry, Cold and Moist; Cold and Dry. Again, every distemper is the fault
of one simple and single quality, as an inflammation; or has some vicious
humors joined with it, as a Phlegmon; Again, a Distemperature is either
equal, as in a Sphacele; or uneequall, as in a Phlegmon, beginning, or
increasing.

Ill Conformity is a fault of the organicall parts, whose composure Ill
conformation.
is thereby depraved. This has four kinds; the first is when the figure of
the part is faulty, either by nature or accident, or some cavitie abolished,
as if a part, which nature would have hollow for some certain use, do grow or
close up; or lastly, if they be rough, or smooth otherwise than they should, as
if that part which should be rough, be smooth, or the contrary. Another is in
the magnitude of the part increased, or diminished contrary to nature. The
third is in the number of the parts, increased, or diminished; as if a hand
have but four or else six fingers. The fourth is in the site and mutual
connection of the parts, as if the parts which should be naturally united and
continued be plucked asunder, as happens in luxations; or the contrary. The
third general kind of disease, is the solution of continuitie, Solution of
Continuitie.
a disease common, both to the simular and organicall parts, acquiring
diversity of names, according to the variety of the parts in which it resides.

CHAP. XXI. Of a Symptom.
WE do not in this place take the word Symptom in the most general
acceptance, for every change or accident which happens to man besides his What
a Symptom is.
own nature; but more reservedly and specially, only for that change which
the disease brings, and which follows the disease, as a shadow does the body.

There be three kinds of a Symptom properly taken. The first is, when the
action is hurt; I say hurt, because it is either abolished, weakened, or
depraved; so blindness Three kinds thereof.
is a deprivation, or abolishing of the action of seeing; dullness of sight, is
a diminution, or weakening thereof; and a suffusion, such as happens at the
beginning of a Cataract, when they think flies, hairs, and such like bodies
fly too and fro before their eyes, is a depravation of the sight.

The second is a simple affect of the body, and a full fault of the habit
thereof being changed, happening by the mutation of some qualities, such is the
changing of the native color into a red by a Phlegmon, and into a livide and
black by a Gangrene; such is the filthy stench the nose affected with a
Polypus sends forth; the bitter taste, in such as have the Iaundise; and the
rough and rugged skin in them which are Leprous.

The third is the fault of the overmuch retention of excrements which should be
expelled, and expulsion of such as should be retained; for the evacuation of an
humor profitable both in quantity and quality, is against nature, as bleeding
in a body not full of ill humors, nor Plethoricke; and also the retention of
things hurtful in substance, quantity and quality, as the Courses in women,
the urine, and the stone in the bladder.

CHAP. XXII. Of Indications.
THe knowledge and exercise of Indications befits that Surgeon, whom no
blind rashness of fortune, but reason; no chance, but counsel directs What
an Indication is.
in the undertaking and performing the works of his Art. For an Indication is
a certain safe and short way, which leads the Physician, as by the hand, to
the attainement of his purposed end, of preserving the sound, or curing the
sick.

For Galen does define an Indication to be a certain insinuation of what is to
be done, See. method. Cap. 7. lib. de opt. secta, Cap. 11.
or a quick and judicious apprehension of that which may profit or hurt. And as
Faulconers, Mariners, Plowmen, Soldiers, and all manner of Artizans, have their
peculiar terms and words, which are neither known, nor used by the vulgar; so
this word Indication is proper and peculiar to Philisitions and Surgeons, as
a Term of Art not vulgar; by consideration of which, as by some sign, or
secret token, they are admonished what is to be done to restore health, or
repel an imminent danger.

There are three prime and principal kinds of Indications, every of which is
subdivided The kinds of Indications.
into many other. The first is from things natural. The second from these
things which are termed not natural. The third from those things which are
contrary to nature. Things natural show they must be preserved by their like,
and in the compass of these are contained all the Indications which are drawn
from the nature of the Patient, that is, from his strength, temper, age, sex,
habit, custom, diet.

Things not natural may be doubted as uncertain, for one while they indicate
the same things with things natural, that is, they coindicate with the
strength, temper and the rest; otherwhiles they consent with things against
nature, that is, they coindicate Lib. 9. Method. cap. 9.
with the disease. Wherefore Galen when he says, that Indications are drawn
from three things; The disease; The nature of the Patient, and the encompassing
air, by proposing the familiar example of the air, he would have us to
understand the other things not natural; because we may shun, or embrace them
more or less as we will our selves, but we must, whether we will or no, endure
the present state of the air. Therefore the air indicates something to us, or
rather coindicates; for if it nourish the disease, as conspiring with it, it
will indicate the same that the disease, that is, that it must be preserved in
the same state.

Things contrary to nature indicate they must be taken a way by their
contraries; Indications drawn from things natural.
Therefore that we may more accurately and fully handle all the Indications
drawn from things natural, we must note, that some of these are concerning
the strength of the Patient, by care to preserve which, we are often compelled
for a time to forsake the cure of the proper disease: for so a great shaking
happening at the beginning of an ague or fever, we are often forced to give
sustenance to the Patient, to strengthen the powers shaken by the vehemence of
the shaking, which thing notwithstanding lengthens both the general and
particular fitts of the ague. Other pertain to the temper, other respect the
habit, if the Patient be slender, if fat, if well flesht, if of a rare, or
dense constitution of body. Other respect the condition of the part affected in
substance, consistence, softness, hardness, quick or dull sense, form,
figure, magnitude, site, connection, principallity, service, function and use,
From all these, as from notes the skillful Surgeon will draw Indications
according to the time and part affected: for the same things are not fit for
sore eyes, which were convenient for the ears, neither does a Phlegmon in the
jaws and throat admit the same form of cure, as it does in other parts of the
body. For none can there outwardly apply repercussives, without present danger
of suffocation. So there is no use of reprecussives What the conditions of the
parts affected do indicate.
in defluxions of those parts which in site are near the principal. Neither
must thou cure a wounded Nerve and Muscle, after one manner. The temperature of
a part, as Moisture, always indicates its preservation, although the disease
be moist and give Indication of drying, as an ulcer. The principallity of a
part always insinuates an Indication of astringent things, although the
disease require dissolving, as an Obstruction of the Liver; for otherwise
unless you mix astringent things with dissolving, you will so dissolve the
strength of the part, that hereafter it cannot suffice for sanguification. If
the texture of a part be rare, it shows it is less apt, or prone to
obstruction; if dense, it is more abnoxious to that disease; hence it is that
the Liver is oftener obstructed than the Spleen. If the part be situate more
deep, or remote, it indicates the medicines must be more vigorous and liquid,
that they may send their force so far. The sensiblenesse, or quicke-sense of
the part, gives Iudication of milder medicines, than paradventur the signs, or
notes of a great disease require. For the Physician which applies things
equally sharp to the Horny tunicle of the eye being ulcerated, and to the
Leg, must needs be accounted either Indications from the ages.
cruel, or ignorant. Each sex and Age has its Indications, for some diseases
are curable in youth, which we must not hope to cure in old age; for
hoarsenesse and great distillations in very old men, admit no digestion, as
Hippocrates says; Aphor. 40. li. 2.


Nunquam decrepitus Branchum coquit, atque Coryzam.
The feeble Sire, for age that hardly goes,
Never well digests, the hurtful Rheum or pose.
Moreover according to his decree the diseases of the Reins, and whatsoever
pains molest the bladder, are difficultly healed in old men; and also reason
persuades that a Quartaine admits no cure in Winter, and scarce a Quotidian,
and Aphor. 6: sect. 6.
ulcers in like manner are more hard to heal in Winter; that hence we may
understand certain Indications to be drawn from time; and to increase the
credit of the variety and certainty of Indications, some certain time, and
seasons in those times command us to make choice of Medicines; for as
Hipocrates testifies; Ap hor. 5. sect. 4.


Ad Canis ardorem facilis purgatio non est.
In Dogdayes heat it is not good,
By purging for to cleanse the blood.
Neither shall thou so well prescribe a slender diet in Winter, as in the
Spring, for the air has its Indications. For experience teaches us, that
wounds of the head are far more difficultly and hardly cured, at Rome,
Naples, and Rochell in Xantoigne. But the times of diseases yield the
principal Indications, for some Medicines are only to be used at the
beginning and end of diseases, others at the increase and vigor of the
disease. We must not contemn those Indications which are drawn From our Diet.
from the vocation of life, and manner of Diet; for you must otherwise deal
with the painful Husbandman (when he is your Patient) which leads his life
sparingly and hardly, than with the Citizen who lives daintily and idly. To
this manner of life and Diet may be referred a certain secrt and occult
property, by which many Hatred arising from secret properties.
are not only ready to vomit at eating of some meats, but tremble over all
their bodies when they hear them but spoken of. I knew a prime Nobleman of the
French Nobility, who was so perplexed at the serving in of an Eele to the Table,
at the middst of dinner and amongst his friends, that he fell into a swound,
all his powers failing him. Galen in his book de Consuetudine tells that Arius
the Peripateticke died suddenly, because compelled by the advice of those
Physicians he used, he drank a great draught of cold water in the intolerable
heat of a Fever. For no other reason says Galen, than that, because he
knowing he had naturally a cold stomach from his childhood, perpetually
abstained from cold water.

For as much as belongs to Indications taken from things against nature; the
Length Indications taken from things against nature.
and depth of a wound or ulcer indicates one way; the figure cornered, round,
equal and smooth, unequal and rough, with a hollownesse straight or winding,
indicate otherwise; the site right, left, upper, lower in an other manner, and
otherwise the force and violence of antecedent and conjunct causes. For
oftentimes the condition of the cause indicates contrary to the disease, as
when abundance of cold and gross humors cause and nourish a Fever. So also a
Symptom often indicates contrary to the disease, in which contradiction, that
Indication must be most esteemed, which does most urge; as for example sake, if
swounding happen in a Fever, the feverish burning shall not hinder us from
giving wine to the Patient.

Wherefore these Indications are the Principallest and most noble which lead
us, as by the hand, to do these things which pertain to the cure, prevention
and mitigating of diseases. But if any object, that so curious a search of so
many Indications is to no purpose, because there are many Chirurgions, which
setting only one before their eyes, which is drawn from the Essence of the
disease, have the report and We do not always follow the Indication which is
from the disease.
famce of skillfull Chirurgions, in the opinion of the vulgar; but let him know
that it does not therefore follow, that, this indication is sufficient for the
cure of all diseases; for we do not always follow that which the Essence of
the disease does indicate to be done. But chiefly then, where none of the
fore-recited Indications does resist or gainesay; you may understand this by
the example of a Plethora, which by the Indication drawn from the Essence of
the thing requires Phlebotomy; yet who is it, that will draw blood from a child
of three months old? Besides, such an Indication is not artificial but
common to the Surgeon with the common people. For who is it that is
ignorant, that contraries are the remedies of contraries? and that broken bones
must be united by joining them together? but how it must be performed and done,
this is of Art and peculiar to a Surgeon, and not known to the vulgar.
Which the Indications drawn from those fountains we pointed at before,
abundantly teaches, which, as by certain limits of circumstances, encompasse
the Indication which is taken from the Essence of the disease, lest any should
think, we must trust to that only. For there is some great and principal
matter in it, but not all. For so the meanest of the common people is not
ignorant, that the solution of continuity is to be cured by repairing that
which is lost. But in what parts we may In what parts we cannot hope for
restoring of solution of continuity.
hope for restitution of the lost substance, and in which not, is the part of a
skillful Surgeon to know and pronounce. Wherefore he will not vainly bestow
his labor to cure the Nervous part of the Diaphragma, or Midriffe being
wounded, or the Heart, small Gutts, Lungs, Liver, Stomach, brain or bladder;
and that, I may speak in a word, Emperickes are not much more skillful than
the common people, although they do so much extol themselves above others by
the name of experience. For although experience be another instrument to find
out things with reason, yet Exherience without reason, is like a blind man
without a guide.
without reason, it will never teach, what the substance of the part in which
the disease lies, may be; or what the action, use, site, connection, from whence
special and proper Indications are drawn; With which the Surgeon being
provided and instructed shall not only know by what means to find out a
remedy, but also, lest he may seem to mock any with vain promises, he shall
discern what diseases are uncureable, and therefore not to be meddled withal.

But implicit, or intricate diseases require each to be cured in their
several order, Indications in implicit diseases.
except some one of them be desperate, or so urge and press that the Physician
think it necessary after a preposterous order, to begin with it, although often
he be forcedto make some one of these diseases incureable, or give occasion of
causing some new one, into which straits we are necessarily compelled to fall,
when, (for example) we determine to pull, or take away some extraneous body;
for the performance whereof we are compelled to enlarge the wound. So we are
forced by necessity to open the neck of the bladder, (that so we may draw
forth the stone therein contained) with a wound which often degenerates into an
uncurable Fistula. For that disease which threatens danger of present death is
of such moment, that to shun that, it may be counted a small matter, and
commodious for the sick to bring in other diseases, though uncureable. For if
a convulsion happen by pricking a Nerve which we cannot heal by any remedies,
then by cutting the Nerve asunder we end the convulsion, but deprive the part
into which that Nerve did go, of the use of some voluntary motion. So if in
any great joint there happen a Luxation with a wound, because there is danger
of convulsion by trying to restore and set right the Luxated part, we are
forcte for shunning thereof, to attend the wound only, and in the mean time
to let alone the Luxation. Otherwise in implicit diseases if there be nothing
which may urge, or call us from the ordinary cure, we must observe this order,
that beginning with that affect, which hinders the cure of the principal
disease, we prosecute the rest in the same and their proper order, until all
the diseases being overcome we shall restore the part affected to its
integrity. Therefore let us take for an example, an ulcer in the Leg, a An
example of Indications in implicit diseases.
Varix (or big swollen vein) and a Phlegmonous tumor round about it; and
lastly, a body wholly plethoricke and filled with ill humors; order and reason
require this, that using the advice of some learned Physician we prescribe a
convenient diet, and by what means we may, bring him to an equality by purging
and blood-letting, and then we will scarifie in diverse places the part where it
is most swollen, then presently apply Leaches that so we may free it from the
burden of the conjunct matter; then use Cauteryes to help the corruption of
the bone, and in the mean time change the circular figure of the ulcer into an
ovall, or triangular; then at the length we will undertake the cutting of the
Varix, and cure the ulcer which remains according to Art, and so at the
length cicatrize it. In all this whole time the Patient shall neither walk,
nor stand, nor sit, but lie quietly, having his Leg orderly and decently rolled
up. But if (as it often happens) the temper of the hurt part, be different from
the temper of the whole body, the manner of curing must be so tempered, that we
increase the What we must do when the temper of the part is different from the
temper of the whole body.
Dosis of hot or Cold medicines, according to the ratable proportion of the
Indications requiring this, or that. Therefore imagine the part ulcerated to be
such, as that it is two degrees dryer than the just temper; but the whole body
to exceed the same temper in one degree of humidity: reason and Art will
require, that the medicine applied to the ulcer be dryer by one degree than
that which the part would other-wise require if it were temperate; but on the
contrary let us suppose thus. The whole body to be one degree more moist than
the temper requires, and the ulcerated part to be one degree dryer, truly in
this case the medicine that is applied to the ulcer by reason of the part it
self, shall not be increased in dryness, but wholly composed and tempered to
the Indication of the ulcer, because the force of the moisture exceeding in the
like degree, does counterpoise the superfluous degree of dryness. But it is
more easy by an artificial conjecture to determine of all such things, than
by any rules or An artificial conjecture is of much force in Indications.
precepts.

To these so many and various Indications, I think good to add two other; the
One from similitude; the Other of a certain crafty device, and as the latter
Physicians term it, of a certain subtle stratageme. We draw Indication from
similitude, in diseases which newly spring up and arise, as which cannot be
cured by Indications Indication from similitude.
drawn from their contraries, as long as their Essence is unknown and hid;
wherefore they think it necessary to cure them by a way and Art like those
diseases, with which they seem to have an agreeing similitude of Symptoms and
Accidents; Our Ancestors did the same in curing the French Pockes, at the first
beginning thereof, as long as they assimulated the cure to that of the
Leprosy, by reason of that affinity, which both the diseases seem to have.
But we follow crafty devices and subtle counsels, Indication of a subtle
device.
when the Essence of the disease we meet with is wholly secret and hid, either
because it is altogether of a hidden and secret nature, and which cannot be
unfolded by manifest qualities, or else resides in a subject which is not
sufficiently known to us, nor of a Physical contemplation, as the Mind. For
then we being destitute of Indications taken from the nature of the thing, are
compelled to turn our cogitations to impostures and crafty counsels; and they
say this Art and Craft is of chief use in Melancholy affects and fictions,
which are often more monstrous and deformed than the Chimera so much mentioned
in the fables of the Ancients; to which purpose, I will not think much to
recite two Examples. A certain man troubled with a Melancholic Examples.
disease, I know not by what error of opinion, had strongly persuaded himself
that he was without a head; the Physicians omitted nothing, by which they might
hope to take this madd opinion out of his mind. But when they had in vain
tried all medicines, at length they devised this crafty, but profitable device,
they fastened and put upon his head a most heavy helmet, that so by the pain
and trouble of his head nodding and drawn down by that weight, he might be
admonished of his error.

It is reported, another molested by the obscurity and darkness of the same
disease, did verily believe, that he had horns upon his head; neither could he
be drawn or diverted from that absurd and monstrous opinion, until that
binding up his eyes, they miserablely bruised and scratched his forehead with
the bony roughness of the lower parts of an oxes horns, that so he begun to
believe by the painful drawing of the blood that ran down his face, that
those bloody horns, were forciblely plucked from him. Ingenious Chirurgions in
imitation of these examples may in like cases do the A Physician should be of
a quick apprehension.
like. For that case requires a man of a quick apprehension and advice, who
may give manifest proof of his diligence and skill by medicinal stratagems,
as who forthwith can politikly device stratagems of diverse sorts.

But, now coming to the end of this our tract of Indications, we must chiefly
and Indications indicative.
principally observe; That of Indications some are Indicative; which absolutely
and of themselves command this to be done; other coindicative, which indicate
the same with the Indicative, and jointly show it to be done, but in some sort
secundarily Coindicative.
and not primitively; some are repugnant, which of themselves and their own
nature persuade quite contrary to that the indicative primitively did; or which
dissuade Repagnant.
us from doing that, to perform which the indicative did persuade us; other
correpugnant, which give their voice after the same form and manner with the
repugnant Correpugnant
against the indicative, as the coindicative consent to and maintain them. Let
this serve for an example of them all.

A Plethora, or plenitude of humors of its own nature, requires and indicates
blood-letting, the Springtime persuades and coindicates the same, but to this
counsel is quite opposite and repugnant, a weak faculty, and childhood is
correpugnant.

Wherefore these four must be diligently waighed and considered when we
deliberate what is to be done, and we must rather follow that which the
indicative, or repugnant show and declare, as what the disease and strength of
the Patient require, than that which the coindicative, or correpugnant shall
persuade, becausethey have a weaker and but secundary power of indicating, and
not essential and primitive. But because the kinds of Indications are so many
and diverse, therefore that the knowledge of them may be more perspicuous and
less confused, I have thought good to describe and distinguish them by this
following scheme.

A Table of Indications.
An Indication is a certain plain and compendious way which leads the
Surgeon to a certain, determinate and proposed end for the cure of the
present disease; of which there are 3. kinds, The first is drawn from things
natural which indicate their preservation by their like; of this kind are many
other which are drawn, either From the strength and faculties of the patient.
For whose preservation, oftentimes the proper cure of the disease must be
neglected; for where these fail, it is impossible the Surgeon should
perform what he desires and expects.
From the te^perament, as if the Patient shall be -- Sanguine, Choleric,
Flegmaticke Of preservatio^ of which the Surgeon must have care, and if they
swarve from equallitie, to reduce them to that which formerly they naturally
were.
Melancholicke
From the habit of the body, as the patient shall be Dainty and delicate,
Slender and weak. Low of stature. Rare, or else dense and compacte.
From the native condition of the hurt or affected part, in which we consider,
either The substance thereof, as for as much as it is simular' we connider
whether it be hot, cold, moist, dry, or as it is organicall, and then whether
it be a principal and noble part, or a subordinate and ignoble part. Or, the
sense whether quick, or dull, by reason whereof the eye cannot endure such
sharp and acrids medicines, as simple flesh can. Or the form, figure,
magnitude, number, site, connection, action, use.
From the Age, for each age yields his peculiar Indications, hence you may
observe most diseases to be incureable in old men, which are easily cured in
young, others which in youth admit of no cure, unless by the change of age and
the ensuing temperament. From Sex, for medicines work upon weomen far more
easily than upon men. From the time of the year, for some meats and medicines
are fit in Winter, some in Summer. From the Region, for as there are
diversities of situations and habits of places, so also there are motions of
humors, and manners of diseases: hence it is that wounds on the head at Paris,
and sore shinns at Avignion are more difficult to be cured. From the times of
diseases, for some things in the beginings, others in the increase, state and
declining of the disease, are more convenient. From the manner of diet, for
this, as the proper temper, must be preserved. Wherefore such must be fed
otherwise who live daintily, than those who lead their lives sparingly and
hardly. Hereunto add certain peculiar natures, which by a certain hidden
property are offended at this, or that kind of meat. For there are some which
not only, cannot concoct Ptisane, Apples, Soles, Pertrige, Water and such
like, but can scarce behold them without Nauseousnes.
The second is drawn from things not natural, which one while indicate their
preservation by their like, another while their change by their contraries; for
so If the Air, have as it were conspired with the disease by a certain
similitude of qualities to the destruction of the Patient, it must be corrected
by its contraries according to Art. But if by the disagreement of qualities it
resist the disease, it must be kept in the same temper.
The third from things contrary to nature which show they must be taken away by
the use of their contraries, as The disease, the Indication being drawn from
these The greatness The complication or commixtion with other; so In
implicit, or mixed diseases we may draw Indications from these 3. heads. From
that which is most urgent From the cause and From that, without which the
disease can not be taken away such are Bitterness of pain, a defluxion into a
part, a Varix, or big swollen vein, a distemperature if they be joined with
a disease.




Cause of the disease which two often indicate and require medicines contrary
to the disease.
Symptoms


CHAP. XXIII. Of certain wonderful and extravagant ways of Curing diseases.
AS Monsters sometimes happen in nature, so also in diseases, and in the events
Monstrom diseases.
and cures of diseases. I understand by monsters certain mavelous successes
in diseases, or certain ways of curing them, which swarve from Art, and
happen besides reason, nature, and common use.

Alexander ab Alexandro, and Peter Gilius tell, that in Apulia a part of Italy,
they The wonderful force of the bite of a certain Spider.
have a certain kind of Spider very frequent, the natives call it Tarentula,
Petrus Rhodius calls it Phalangium; The Inhabitants find these Spiders in the
first heat of Summer so venenate and deadly, that whomsoever they touch with
their virulent biting, he presently, without he have speedy remedy, deprived of
all sense and motion falls down, or certainly if he escape the danger of
death, he leads the remnant of his life in madness. Experience has found a
remedy by Music for this so speedy Music the remidy thereof.
and deadly a disease; Wherefore as soon as they can they fetch Fiddlers and
Pipers of diverse kinds, who by playing and piping may make Music, at the
hearing whereof, he which was fallen down by reason of the venomous bite,
rises cheerfully and dances so long to their measures and tunes, until by the
painful and continued shaking and agitation of the whole body, all the
malignity is dissipated by transpiration and sweates.

Alexander adds that it happened once in his sight, that the Musitions their
wind and hands failing them ceased playing, and then the Danser presently fell
down as if he had been dead; But by and by the Music beginning anew, he
rise up again and continued his dansing till the perfect dissipation of the
venom. And that it has happened besides, that one not so perfectly healed,
certain relics of the disease yet remaining, when a long time after he heard
by chance a noise of Musitions, he presently fell a leaping and dansing,
neither could he be made to leave before he was perfectly cured.

Some affirm according to the opinion of Asclepiades, that such as are
Frantic Music gives ease to pain.
are much helped with a sweet and Musical harmony. Theophrastus and Aulus
Gellius say that the pain of the Gout and Sciatica are taken away by Music.
And the Sacred Scripture testifies, that David was wont by the sweet sound of
the Harp to refresh and ease King Saul when he was miserablely tormented by
his evil spirit. Herodotus in Clio tells, that Craesus the King of Lydia had a
Son, which of a long time could not speak, and when he came to man's estate
was accounted dumb: but when an Enemy with his drawn sword invaded his
father (overcome in a great fight, and the City being take in which he was)
not knowing that he was the King, the young man opened his mouth endeavoring
to cry out, and with A strong perturbation of the mind helps by moving the
spirits.
that striving and forcing of the Spirit he broke the bonds and hindrances of
his tongue, and spoke plainly and Articulately, crying out to the Enemy that
he should not kill King Craesus. So both the Enemy withheld his sword, and
the King had his life, and his Son had his speech always after. Plutarch in
his book, Of the benefit to be received from our Enemies, tells that a
Thessalian called Proteus, had a certain inveterate and incurable ulcer in a
certain part of his body, which could not be healed, before he received a
wound in a conflict in the same place, and by that means the cure being begun
afresh, the wound and ulcer were both healed.

Quintus Fabius Maximus, as Livye writes, was long and very sick of a
quartaine Chance sometimes exceeds Art.
Ague, neither could have wished success from medicines administered according
to Art, until skirmishing with the Allobroges he shaked off his old
feverish heat, by a new heat and ardent desire of fighting. It was
crediblely reported to me of late by a Gentleman of the Lord of Lansackes
Chamber, that there was a French Gentleman in Polonia who was greivously
tormented with a quartaine Fever, who on a time walking upon the bank of the
River Wixell to take away the irkesomenesse of his fit, was thrust in jest
into the River by a friend of his that met him by chance, by which (although
he could swim, as he also knew that thrust him in) he conceived so great
fear, that the Quartaine never troubled him after. King Henry the second
commanded me to go from the Camp at Amiens to the City Dorlan, that I might
cure those that were hurt in the conflict with the Spaniards, the Captain S.
Arbin although at that time he had a fit of a quartaine ague, yet would he be
present at the fight, in which being shot through the side of his neck with a
Bullet, he was stricken with such a terror of death, that the heat of the
Fever was assuaged by the cold fear, and he afterward lived freed from his
Ague.

Franciscus Valleriola the famous Physician of Arles, tells that John Berlam
his Observat. 4. lib. 2.
fellow Citizen troubled with a Palsy of one side of his body for many years,
his house taking fire, and the flame coming near the bed in which he lay, he
stricken with a great fear, suddenly raised himself with all the force he
had, and presently recovering the strength of his body, leapes out at the
window from the top of the house, and was presently cured of his disease, sense
and motion being restored to the part, so that afterward he went upright
without any sense of pain, who lay unmovable for many years before. He
tells the like in the same place of his cosen John Sobiratius; he was a long
time lame at Auignion, by reason that the nerves of his hams were shrunk and
drawn up so that he could not go; being moved with a vehement and sudden
passion of anger against one of his servants whom he endeavored to beat, he
so stirred his body that forthwith the Nerves of his hams being distended, and
his knees made plyant he began to go and stand upright without any sense of
pain, when he had been crooked about the space of six years before, and all
his life after he remained sound.

Galen tells he was once fetched to stanch the bleeding; for one who had Cap
ult. lib. de cur. rat. per sanguinis miss.
an Artery cut nere his ancle, and that by his means he was cured without any
danger of an Aneurisma (i) a relaxation of a veinous vessel; and besides by
that accidental wound he was freed from most grievous pain of his hippe,
with which he was tormented for four years before: but although this easing
of the pain of the Sciatica happened according to reason by the evacuation of
the Galen by a dream cures the Sciatica.
conjunct matter, by the artery of the anckle of the same side being opened;
yet because it was not cut for this purpose, but happened only by chance, I
judged it was not much dissenting from this argument.

Pliny writes that there was one named Phalereus, which casting up blood at his
mouth, and at the length medicines nothing availing, being weary of his life,
went unarmed in the front of the battle against the enemy, and there receiving
a wound in his breast, shed a great quantity of blood, which gave an end to his
spitting of blood, the wound being healed, and the vein which could not
contain the blood being condensate.

At Paris Anno 1572. in July a certain Gentleman being of a modest and
courteous carriage fell into a continual Fever, and by that means became
Frantic, moved with the violence of which he cast himself headlong out of a
window two stories high, and fell first upon the shoulder of Vaterra the Duke
of Alenzons Physician, and then upon the pavement; with which fall he cruelly
bruized his ribbs and hippe, but was restored to his former judgment and
reason. There were present with the Patient besides Valterra, witnesses of this
accident these Physicians, Alexis, Magnus, Duretus, and Martinus. The same
hapened in the like disease, and by the like chance to a certain Gascoyne
lying at the house of Agrippa in the Pavedostreete.

(...) Doctor of Physic of Mompelier and the Kings professor, told me that a
certain Carpenter at Broquer a village in Switzerland, being frantic cast
himself headlong out of an high window into a river, and being taken out of
the water was presently restored to his understanding.

But if we may convert casualties into counsel and Art, I would not cast the
Patient headlong out of a window. But would rather cast them suddenly and The
cause of the last recited cures.
thinking of no such thing into a great cesterne filled with cold water, with
their heads foremost, neither would I take them out until they had drunk a
good quantity of water, that by that sudden fall and strong fear; the matter
causing the Frenzy might be carried from above downwards, from the noble parts
to the ignonoble; the possibility of which is manifest by the forerecited
examples, as also by the example of such as bit by a mad Dog, fearing the
water are often ducked into it to cure them.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Certain juggling and deceiptfull ways of Curing.
HEre I determine to treat of those Impostors, who taking upon them the person
of a Surgeon, do by any means either right or wrong put themselves upon
the works of the Art; but they principally boast themselves amongst the
jgnorant common sort, of setting bones which are out of joint and broken,
affirming as falsely as impudently that they have the knowledge of Sciences are
not hereditary
those things from their Ancestors; as by a certain hereditary right; which is
a most ridiculous fiction; for our minds when we are borne, is as a smoth
table, upon which nothing is painted. Otherwise what need we take such labor
and pains to acquire and exercise sciences? God has endued all brute beasts
with an inbred knowledge of certain things necessary for to preserve their
life, more than man.

But on the contrary he has enriched him with a wit furnished with incredible
celerity and judgment, by whose diligent and laborious agitation he subjects
all things to his knowledge. For it is no more likely, that any man should have
skill in Surgery because his father was a Surgeon, than that one who
never endured sweat, dust nor Sun in the field, should know how to ride and
govern a great horse, and know how to carry away the credit in tilting, only
because he was begot by a Gentleman and one famous in the Art of War.

There is another sort of Impostors far more pernicious and less sufferable,
A most impudent sort of Impostors.
boldly and insolently promising to restore to their proper unity and seat,
bones which are broken and out of joint, by the only murmuring of some
conceited charms, so that they may but have the Patients name and his girdle.
In which thing I cannot sufficiently admire the idleness of our Countrymen so
easily crediting so great and pernicious an error; not observing the inviolable
law of the ancient Physicians, and principally of Divine Hippocrates, by which
it is determined, that three things are necessary to the setting of bones
dislocated and Three things necessary for the cure of a Luxation.
out of joint; to draw the bones asunder; to hold the bone receiving, firmly
immovable with a strong and steady hand; to put the bone to be received into
the cavity of the receiving. For which purpose the diligence of the Ancients
has invented so many engines, Glossocomies and bands, lest that the hand
should not be sufficient for that laborious work; What therefore is the
madness of such Impostures to undertake to do that by words, which can scarce
be done by the strong hands of so many Servants, and by many artificial
engines?

Of late years another kind of Imposture has sprung up in Germany, they bear
into fine powder a stone within there mother tongue they call Bembruch, and
give it in drink, to any who have a bone broken, or dislocated, and affirm
that it is sufficient to cure them. Through the same Germany there wander
other Impostors who bid to bring to them the Weapons with which any is hurt;
they lay it up in a secret place and free from noise, and put and apply
medicines to it, as if they had the patient to dress, and in the mean time
they suffer him to go about his business, and impudently affirm that the wound
heales by little and little by reason of the medicine applied to the weapon,

But it is not likely that a thing inanimate which is destitute of all manner
of sense, should feel the effect of any medicine; and less probable by much,
that the wounded party should receive any benefit from thence. Neither if any
should let me see the truth of such jugdling by the events themselves and my
own eyes, would I therefore believe that it were done naturally and by reason,
but rather by charms and Magic.

In the last assault of the Castle of Hisdin the Lord of Martigues the elder
was shot through the breast with a Musket bullet. I had him in cure together
with the Physicians, and Chirurgions of the Emperor Charles the fist and
Emanuel Philibert the Duke of Savoy, who because he entirely loved the wounded
prisoner, caused an assembly of Physicians and Chirurgions to consult of the
best means for his cure. They all were of one opinion, that the wound was
deadly and incureable, because it passed through the midst of his lungs, and
besides had cast forth a great quantity of knotted blood into the hollownesse
of his breast.

There was found at that time a certain Spaniard, a notable Knave, and one of
those Impostors who would pawn his life, that he would make him sound;
wherefore this Honorable Personage being in this desperate case was committed
to his care. First of all he bid they should give him the Patients shirte,
which he tore into shreds and pieces, which presently framing into a Cross,
he laid upon the wounds whispering some conceived or coined words, with a low
murmr. For all other things he wished the Patient to rest content, and to
use what diet he pleased, for he would do that for him, which truly, he
did. For he eat nothing but a few Prunes, and drunk nothing but small beer,
yet for all this the wounded Prince died within two days; the Spaniard slipped
away, and so escaped hanging. And whilst I opened the body in the sight of the
Physicians and Chirurgions to embalme him, the signs and accidents of the
wound did evidently and plainly appear to be as we had pronounced before.

And there be also other Iugling companions of this tribe, who promise to cure
all wounds with linte, or Tents either dry, or macerated in oil, or water,
What wounds may be cured only by lint, or by tents and water.
and bound to the wound, having murmured over some charm or other, who have
had sometimes, good success, as I can witness. But the wounds upon which
trial was made were simple ones, which only required union, or closing for to
perfect the cure. So verily the bones of beasts when they be broke, grow
together by the only benefit of Nature. But when the affect shall be compound
by diversity of Symptoms, as a wound with an ulcer, inflammation, contusion
and fracture of a bone, you must hope for no other from Tents or Lints, nor
charms than death. Therefore the common sort who commit themselves to these
Impostors to be cured, do not only injure themselves, but also hurt the
Commonwealth, and the common profit of the Citizens; for whose good and
justice sake a prudent Magistrate ought to deprive impostors of all freedom in
a free and Christian commonweal.

Witches, Conjurers, Diviners, Soothsayers, Magitians and such like, boast of
curing many diseases; but if they do or perform any thing in this kind, they
do it all by slights, subtilties and forbidden Arts, as Charms, conjurations,
Witcheries, Characters, Knots, Magical Ligatures, Rings, Images, Poisons,
laces tied a-crosse, and other damnable tricks, with which they pollute,
pervert and defame the prime and sacred Art of Physic and that with the
danger of menslives. Who certainly are to be banished by the laws of our
country, especially seeing it is decreed in Moses Law. Let none be found among
you that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of Deuteron. 18.
times, or a marker of the flying of Fowls, or a Sorcerer or a Charmer, or
that counsels with Spirits, or a Soothsayer, or that asks counsel at the
dead; for all that do such things, are abomination to the Lord, and because of
these abominations the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee. But the
Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and of his Saints and
Apostles in curing diseases beyond nature and all Art, are of another kind,
which we ought to believe so firmly and constantly, that it should be counted
an impiety for a Christian to doubt of them. All holy writings are full of
these; as to give sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, power to go to
those sick of the Palsy, to drive forth Devils, to cure the Leprosy, to give
fruitfullnesse to weomen, to raise the Dead, and perform by the holy Ghost
other Miracles which exceed the condition and law of Nature; whom here we
earnestly entreat to free and protect us from unclean Devils and the spirits
of diabolical deceit, and to give us the mind that we may will and be able
always to aspire to Heaven and fasten the hope, safety and anchor of all our
fortunes in God alone.

Amen.
The End of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF LIVING CREATVRES, AND OF THE EXCELLENCY Of Man.
BEfore I come to speak of the Anatomy of man's body; The difference of brute
beasts.
I have thought fit to say a little of the nature of brute Beasts. There is
between beasts a great deal of difference by nature; for of these, some are
hardy and bold, others fearful; some wild and savage, others tame; some
walking in herds, others wandering alone; some covered and defended with shells
and scales, as the Crocodile, the Tortois and many kinds of fish, others have
stings and prickles.

The Horse has his hard and strong hoofes, his crest (as being a generous
beast) beset with a thick and harsh mane, The defense of the magnanimous Lion,
are his teeth, his crooked paws and tail; Bulls are formidable by their
horns; the Bear by his tuskes standing out, as it were natural hunting
spears. The Hare being a timorous creature, is naked and unarmed, but in
recompense thereof nature has made her nimble and swift of foot. For what the
more noble and courageous beasts have in arms, is supplied in the fearful by
nimblenesse and celerity. Infinite are the other endowments of brute beasts,
and such as can hardly be imagined, or described. For if we diligently search
into their nature, we shall observe the impressions and Some shadow of virtue
in beasts.
shadows of many virtues, as of magnanimity, prudence, fortitude, clemency,
and docillitie: for they entirely love one another, follow those things that
are good, shun those that are hurtful, and gather and lay up in store those
things that are necessary for life and food. Lastly, they give undoubted
presages of the weather, and Air. They have taught men many things, and are of
a most exquisite and quick sense; of rare* Art in vocal music, prdent and
careful for their young, and faithful lovers of their native soil. They are
religiously observant of the rights of friendship and chastity. They have
their weapons whereby they are prepared, both to invade, and to defend
themselves being invaded; they submit themselves to the discipline of man,
practice and imitate his speech, and mutually prattle and chant one to another.
They have a kind of weale-puklicke amongst themselves, and know how to preserve
their present welfare, and to depell the contrary, being in this their own
Counselors, and not tutored by man. Yea man is beholden to them for the
knowledge of many wholesome things. The consideration of which bred so great a
doubt amongst the ancient Philosophers, that it was a question amongst them,
whether beasts had use of reason, or no? Therefore also the wise Solomon sends
us for examples of parsimonie and diligence unto the Ant or Pismire; and Esaias
in exprobration of the people of Israel for their ingratitude and rebellion
against God, sends them to the Ox and Ass; for they do not only know, but
reverence their Masters.

But from whence is the knowledge of these medicines, wherewith the Art of Lib.
8. cap. 27.
Physic is so richly adorned, but from brute beasts, as Pliny affirms. The
infallible virtue of the herb Dictamnus, in drawing darts out of the flesh,
was taught usby the Heart, who wounded with the Huntsmans darts or arrows, by
means hereof draws out the weapons which remains sticking in her. Which is
likewise practiced by the Goats of Candie, as Aristotle writes. The
wonderful effect which Celandine has upon the sight, was learnt by the
practice of Swallows, who have bin observed with it to have besmeared, and so
strengthened the eyes of their young. Serpents rub their eyelids with
fennel, and are thought by that means to quicken and restore the decaying
sight of their eyes. The Tortois does defend and strengthen her self against
the biting of Vipers, by eating of savorie. Bears by eating of Pismires,
expel that poison that they have contracted by their use of Mandrakes. And for
correction of that drowzinesse and sloth which grows upon them by their long
sleep in their dens, they eat the herb Aron (i) Cuckopint. But the Art they
use in the The craftiness of Bears.
entising and catching of Pismires is very pretty; They go softly to the holes
or hills of the Pismires, and there lay themselves all their length upon the
ground, as if they were dead, hanging out their tongue wet with their foame,
which they draw not again into their mouth, before they feel them full of
Pismires, which are intised by the sweetness of the foame: And having taken
this as a purging medicine, they expel by the guts, those ill humors wherewith
they were offended. We see that Dogs give themselves a vomit, by eating of a
kind of grass, which is from thence called Dogge-grasse. Swine, when they
find themselves sick, will hunt after smalt or river lobsters. Stockdoves,
Blackbirds, and Partridges, purge themselves by bay leaves. Pigeons, Turtels,
and all sort of Pullen, disburden themselves of gross humors, by taking of
Pellitory of the wall. The bird Ibis (being not much unlike the Storke) taught
us the use of Clisters. For when he finds himself oppressed with a The bird
Ibis the first inventer, or shewer of Clysters.
burden of hurtful humors, he fills his bill with saltwater, and so purges
himself by that part, by which the belly is best discharged. The invention of
the way of removing the Cataract of the eye, we must yield unto the Goat, who
by striking by The invention of removing a Cataract.
chance against the thorny bushes, pulls off the Cataract which hinders the
sight, and covers the ball of the eye, and so recovers his sight. The benefit
of Phlebotomie, we The invention of Phlebotomie.
owe unto the Hippotamus or River-horse, being a kind of Horse, and the
inhabitant of the river Nilus; who being a great devourer, when he finds
himself surcharged with a great deal of blood, does by rubbing his thigh
against the sharp sands on the bankeside, open a vein, whereby the
superfluous blood is discharged, which he stops likewise when it is fit, by
rolling himself in the thick mudde. The Tortois having chanced to eat any of
the flesh of a Serpent, does make origanum and marjerom her Antidote. The
ancients found help from brute beasts, even against the dreadful and
none-sparing force of lightning; for they were of opinion A preservative
against thunder.
that the wings of an Eagle were never struck with lightning, and therefore
they put about their heads little wreathes of these feathers. They were
persuaded the same thing of the Seal, or Sea-calfe, and therefore were wont to
encompasse their bodies with his skin, as a most certain safeguard against
lightning. It were a thing too long, and laborious, to speak of all those
other muniments of life and health (observed here and there by Aristotle and
Pliny) which we have learnt of brute beasts. I will therefore end this
Chapter, after that I have first added this; That we are beholding to beasts
not only for the skill of curing diseases, and of preservation of health, but
for our food, our raiment, and the ornament and beautifying the bodies.

Of the Faculty of brute Beasts in Presaging.
THe first knowledge and skill of Prognostication, and observation of weather
by the Air, was first delivered unto us from beasts of the land and water, and
from foul. For we see in daily observation, that it is a sign of change of
weather, when What the butting of Rams signifies.
Lambs and Rams do butt at one another with their horns, and playing
wantonly do kick, and keep up their heels. The same is thought to be
presaged when the Ox lickes himself against the hair, and on the sudden
fills the Air with his lowing, and smells to the ground, and when he feeds
more greedily than he used to do. But if the Pismires in great multitudes
fetch their prey so hastily, that they Presages of rain.
run and tumble one upon another in their narrow paths, it is thought a
sign of rain; As is also the busy working of Moales, and the Cats rubbing
and stroaking of her head and neck, and above her ears, with the bottom of
her feet. Also when Fishes play and leap a little above the water, it is
taken for a sign of rain. But if the Dolphins do the same in the sea, and in
great companies, it is thought to presage The sign at sea of a storm at hand.
a sudden storm and tempest. Whereby the Mariners forewarned, use all care
possible for the safety of themselves and their ships, and if they can, cast
Anchor. And it is sufficiently known what the louder croaking of Frogs than
ordinary portends.

But the faculty of birds in this kind of presaging is wonderful. If Cranes
fly through the air without noise, it is a sign of fair weather, and of the
contrary, if they make a great noise and fly stragglingly. As also if
Sea-fowle fly far from the sea, and light on the land. The cry or
scritching of Owls portends a change of the present weather, whether foul or
fair. Plutarch says, that the loud cawing of the Crow betokens winds and
showers, as also when he flappes his side with his wings. Geese, and Duckes,
when they dive much, and order, and prune, and pick their feathers with their
beakes, and cry to one another, foretell rain; and in like manner Swallows
when they fly so low about the water, that they wet themselves, and their
wings. And the Wren, when he is observed to sing more sweetly than usual, and
to hop up and down. And the Cock when he chants, or rather crows presently
after the setting of the Sun. And Gnats, and Fleas, when they bite more than
ordinary. If the Herne soar aloft into the air, it betokens fair weather,
if on the contrary he fly close by the water, rain. If Pigeons come late
home to the Dove-house, it is a sign of rain. If Bats fly in the evening,
they foreshew wet weather. And lastly, the Crocodile lays his eggs in that
place, which must be the The Crocodile by laying her eggs, shows the b^^^^s
of the increase of the river Nilus.
bounds of the overflowing of the river Nilus; And therefore he that first
meets with these eggs, tells the rest of the country people, and shows them
how high the flood will rise, and what inundation it will make upon their
grounds. A thing most worthy of admiration, that in this monster, there should
be that strong faculty of presaging.

Of the Industry of Fishes.
MAny sea-Fishes, when they feel a tempest coming, do gravel or balast How
Fishes provide for their safety against a storm.
themselves, to the end they may not be tossed up and down at the pleasure of
the waves. Others when the fury of the sea is at the hight, hide themselves in
the holes of rocks. But in that they swim against the stream, they do it,
for this cause and reason, that the force of the stream, and the flood may not
take from them, How they swim against the stream.
and strike off their scales, and that their gills may not fill with water
which would hinder their swimming, and intercept their respiration. As by the
same advise Cranes fly against the wind, whereas if they should fly down
the wind, their feathers would be displaced and broken, and they would not be
able to fly.

Of the industry of Birds in the building of their neasts.
THe industry of Birds in the building of their neasts, is such, that it does
far Of what things birds build their neasts.
exceed the art and skill of all Masons, and Architects. From whence it is
become a Proverb, That men know, and can do all things but make Birds neasts.
They are built within with wool, and feathers, and such kind of soft things,
which are as a kind of a pallet for the young ones. Swallows build their
neasts in a round form, In what shape.
that they may be the more firm, and less subject to be hurt by any thing
that shall strike against them, and likewise more capacious. They choose their
matter out of dirt and chafe (interlacing it with many strawes) as it were
their plaster, or lime. Those that build in trees, do make choice of the
soundest boughs, as if they meant to have them as a sure foundation for the
building which they should erect thereon. The Cock and the Hen do by turns
sit over their eggs, and likewise fetch With what care Sparrowes breed their
young.
their meat, interchanging each others labor, neither do they ever forsake
their young, before they are able to get their own living. I had at my house a
great number of Sparrowes neasts in earthen pots, And when the young ones begun
to wax pretty big, and to be covered with feathers, I made the whole neast
be taken down, and set upon the ground, that I and my friends might delight our
selves in beholding the care of the old ones in the feeding of their young; for
they feed them every one in order, skipping none, neither will they (to the
wrong of the rest) give one two parts, although he gape, and be importunate for
it.; dividing most justly to every one his own share, according to the exact
rule of distribution. And often times for experiment, I would make trial with
a strange Sparrow of the same age, laid near, or put among the rest of the
young ones, whether the old ones would feed the stranger, as if it were
legitimate. But this as a stranger and a bastard they would suffer to starve,
skipping it when it gaped after the meat. And in like manner Lambs and young
Kiddes do in the fields, in the midst of a great flock, run every one to
his own damme, who being most certainly able to distinguish between the
legitimate and a bastard, will not suffer her self to be sucked but by her own
young.

Of the industry of Spiders.
THe Spider spinnes her web with wonderful artifice, hanging and fastening it
to How the Spiders weave
every tacke or stay that is nigh, drawing of his thread, and running upwards,
and downwards, and every way. And although the diligence of the chamber maid
beats down, and marres this pendulous and new begun work, yet her seat
and her hold, the Spider keeps still, neither is she, or will she desist from
the work she has begun, but in a very short time, weaves a great deal
more unto the ruins of her former work, than can be unweaved again with
much labor. So that from hence all cloth and linen Weavers, all imbroiderers,
and workers with the needle, (you will easily think) have learnt their Arts,
if either you observe the exactness of the weaving, the finenesse of the
thread, or the continuation and indissoluble knitting together of the whole web;
for being abrupt and troubled with no ends of threads at all, it resembles a
thin membrane, anointed with a kind of glue, wherewith How they catch their
prey.
when the prey is entangled, the Spider runs presently in, and as it were
drawesher nets, and infolds, and takes the captive after the manner of
huntsmen. If this were not daily seen with our eyes, it would be thought
fabulous.

Of Bees.
I cannot pass in silence the great industry of Bees. For having established a
kind of Weale-publique, they make election of a King, who is such a one, as in
proceri^ Bees choose themselves a King
of body, and excellency of feature, exceeds all the rest. He is remakeable
by his short wings, his straight legs, his grave gate, and in stead of a
Diadem or regal Crown, either he has no sting, or else does not use it,
which is the Artillery of the rest. He never goes unattended out of the hive,
but always environed with a princely retinue, the rest of his train following
after, neither goes he at any time abroad, but upon urgent affairs which
concerns the whole state. His progress is forewarned by the voice and sound
of trumpets, and as it were with singing, and they all draw nigh. Every one
gets as near to his person as he can, and when he is weary with flying, they
all bear him up with their own bodies.

On what place soever he alighteth, there they forthwith pitch their tents. If
he Their pitching their tents.
chance to die, they go not abroad to feed, but stand all mourning round
about the corpse; then carry him out of the hive, and (as it were) follow his
hearse and bury Their obsequies for their dead King.
him; and lastly, having with solemnity performed all the funeral rites and
obsequies, they choose themselves another King, for without a King they cannot
live. He then takes care of all things, having his eye every where, whilst
that the rest intend the performance of the work. And supervising all, gives
them encouragement, and chastises negligence. For their time of going forth
for food, they choose a clear and fair day; for they have a natural faculty
of presaging of the weather. They are Their justice.
such observers of justice and equity, that never, either with their sting, or
by any other way, do they molest any creature, neither do they exercise and
prepare their spears against any, but for the safeguard of themselves and their
hives.

Of the care of Bees.
THey manage and order their affairs in this manner, in the day time they
appoint before their gates a station of watchmen, and guarders. In the night,
they Their watch.
rest from their labors, so long, till that one (who is appointed to this
charge) by one or two hummes, as by a sound of a Trumpet, rowseth all the rest.
Then Their diverse employments.
come they together to observe what is the state of the weather, which if they
foresee will be fair, then abroad go they into the fields, and pastures.
Some therefore bring into the hive little fascicles of flowers on their
thighs, others water in their mouth, and others a dewey moisture gathered on
their bodies. These are met by others, who receive their burdens, which they
dispose in their due and proper places. Those that are sent out into the fields
for food, are the youngest and the smallest. And therefore if the wind chance
to rise any thing high, they expect until it cease, and that the force and
violence thereof be over. But if it continue violent, then do they ballast
themselves with a little stone flying close by the ground, to prevent their
being driven too and fro by the force of the wind. They are exceeding diligent
in all their business, and do punish the sloth of the lazy oftentimes with
death. Some of them are the builders, others polish the building, and the rest
bring in their materials.

The building in their arched hives is with wonderful artifice, being made
with two doors, one to come in, and the other to go out at. They have all
things alike, least that the inequality, either of their food or labor,
should give occasion of dissension. Their care is, that their houses may show
both state and handsomeness, Idle droanes, borne for nothing but to eat, and
consume the fruits of their labors, They punish sloth with banishment.
they chase from their hives. Those that chance to lose their stings, are
utterly disabled, and in a short time their guts come out that way, and they
die. They bring to their owners wonderful increase of wax and honey.

Aristomachus the Philosopher does boast, that for fifty eight years
together, he Aristomachus a diligent observer of Bees.
had with great care been a nourisher of Bees, only that he might the better
attain to the knowledge of their state and condition.

Of Pismires, and Ants.
NEither truly is the industry, diligence, and experience of the Pismire less
worthy of admiration, than that of the Bees. Insomuch as that Solomon bids the
sluggard to take an example of diligence from the Pismire. Truly if experience
did not witness it, it would seem incredible, that so small a creature should
be able to store up such abundance of corn, to dispose and manage her
affairs in that good order that we see she does. Pliny says, that they have
among them the form of a well Lib. 11. and. 30
governed and well ordered common weal. For how pretty a sight it is to see
them, when they seize upon a grain which they have a mind to carry away, how
they set to it, and lift it with head and shoulders. And how least the corn
which they carry Wonderful care.
to their storehouse, should put forth and grow, they bite it at one end. If
it be so big that they cannot carry it into their little hole, they divide it
in the middle. If it be dampish, they lay it out to dry in the Sun and open
air. When the Moon is at the full, they follow their work in the night, when
she does not shine, they take their rest, whereby they show themselves to have
some knowledge of heavenly things. Pliny affirms that they have their set
Faires and Markets, whither they come in great companies, and where they use to
establish leagues of amity and friendship one with another. And when one
marks them well, would he not think that they were in conference one with
another, and that they did discourse among themselves of their business? Do
we not see that the often trampling of their little feet does wear a path
even upon hard flint stones?

From whence we may note, what in all kind of things is the effect of
assiduitie. There is nothing but may be attained by diligence.
They say also that they perform the rites of burial one unto another, after
the manner of men. What words shall I use (says Plutarch) to express
sufficiently the diligence and industry of the Pismires. There is not among all
the great things in nature, a sight of greater wonder than these. For in the
Pismires are seen the marks of all virtue. Their great meetings argue that
they maintain a kind of friendship.

Their alacrity in the undergoing of their labors, seems to show their
fortitude The forms of all virtues expressed in Pismi^^s.
and magnanimity; and lastly, they are eminent examples of temperance,
providence, and justice. Their mutual charity appears in this, that if one
of them that is not laden meets another (in one of their narrow paths) that
is, he will give him the way, that he may the better go on in his intended
journey. They say that the first entrance into their hole, is not straight, but
full of many diverticles and crooked paths, which all end, which will bring you
to three little cells; in one of which they have their conventicles, in the
other they lay up their provisions, and in the third they bury the carcasses of
their dead. This does Plutarch speak concerning Pismires.

Of Silke-Wormes.
WIth the industry of these creatures, I shall not unfitly join that of the
Silkewormes, of whose pains and care, both in the making of their neasts, and
the spinning of their thread and bottomes (wherewith Kings are so magnificently
adorned) Philosophers have written very strange things.

And who can choose but wonder at those great endowments of skill and knowledge,
and that exceeding industry, (the mother of so much wealth) in the little
Diligence the mother of wealth.
body of so small a creature? The providence therefore of God, does not only
appear in this, that he has adorned each creature with a peculiar and proper
endowment, but in this especially, that on the least creatures of all, he has
bestowed the greater portion of skill, industry, and ingenuity to supply their
defect of bodily strength.

Of the love of Beasts one toward another and to their young.
PLutarch writes; That all kind of creatures bear a singular love, and have
a kind of care of those thatt are generated of them, and the industry of the
The industry of Partridge in preserving their young.
Partridges, this way is much commended; for during the time that their young
ones are weak and unable to fly, they teach them to lie upon their backs,
and to hide themselves among the cloddes on the ground, that so being almost of
the same color, they may not be discerned by the Faulkoner. But if
notwithstanding, they see any body, coming, and that he is near them, they
do with a hundred dodges and stoopings of themselves, as if they were weary
with flying, entise him away from their young to follow after them, and when
they have their purpose, they then, as if they had recovered some fresh
strength, fly quite away; who can but wonder at this both affection and
subtilty?

Neither are those things less wonderful that are reported of Hares, for when
How Hares provide for themselves and their young, for fear of hunters.
they would go to their seat, they sever their young, and commit them to the
trust of diverse places, it may be two acres asunder one from another, least
peradventure, a Huntsman, a dog, or any man should chance to come that way,
and they might be in danger to be lost at once. And then after they have traced
up and down, hither and thither, and every way that the dogs may not trace
them, nor the Huntsman prick them, they take a leap or two, and leap into
their forms.

Nor inferior to this is the craft of the Hedghogge, for when the Fox pursues
him, and is now at his heels, he rowles himself up in his prickles like a
chestnut in the outward shell, so that every part being rounded and encompassed
with these sharp and dangerous pricks, he cannot be hurt. And so saves
himself by this trick; for his young he provides in this manner.

In the time of Vintage he goes to the vines, and there with his feet he
strikes off the boughs and the grapes, and then rolling his body makes them
stick upon his The care of the Hedg-hogge to provide for her young.
prickles, and so does as it were take his burden upon his back, and then
returns to his hole; you would think that the grapes did move of themselves;
the prey he devides between himself and his young.

In Florida part of the West Indies they have a beast, which for the variety
and deformity of it I cannot pass over in silence; The natives call it
Succarath, the Canibals, Su. It keeps for the most part about the rivers, and
the seashore, and lives by prey. When he perceives that he is pursued by
the Huntsman, he gets his young Tom. 2. lib. 23 cap. 1.
ones upon his back, and with his tail, which is very long and broad, he
covers them, and so flying, provideth both for his own, and their safety;
neither can he be taken by any other way but by pits, which those Savage men
use to dig in the places near which he is to run, into which at unawares
he tumbles headlong. This Picture of him here, I drew out of Thevets
Cosmographie.

Of the affection of Birds, and of Dogs, toward their Masters.
THe young Storke provides for the old which is disabled by age, and if any one
The piety of Storkes.
of their equals come to any mischance, that he is not able to fly, they
will give him their assistance, and bear him on their backs and wings. And
therefore this affection and piety toward the old ones, and as it were
brotherly love toward their equals, is commended in the Storke.

The Hen in any kind of danger gathers her chickins under her wings, and as
it were with that guard, defends them as well as she can. For their sake she
exposes her self to the cruelty of the fiercest beasts, and will fly in the
eyes of a dog, a Wolf or a Bear, that by chance offers to meddle with her
chickins.

But who is there that does not admire the fidelity and love of dogs toward
their Masters, whereby they recompense them for their keeping? A dog will The
fidelity of Dogg^.
never forsake his Master, no, if he be never so hardly used. For there is no
man can find a stick hard enough to drive that dog clean away from him
which has once taken a love to him. There is no kind of creature that does
more certainly and readily remember his master, he will know the voice of all
the household, and of those which frequent the house. There cannot be a
trustier keeper (as Cicero himself says) than a Dog is; I speak not of
their faculty of smelling, whereby they follow their Masters by the foot, and
find them, neither do I speak of those infinite examples of the fidelity of
Dogs, which were too long to rehearse.

Pigeons, as well the Cock as the Hen, although they are all very
venereous, Doves free from adultery
yet they know no adultery, yea and the Hen will bear with the frowardness
of the Cock, neither will she ever leave him, but reconciling him unto her by
her officious diligence, bring him to his wonted dalliance and kisses, neither
is the love of either of them less toward their young.

There is the like mutuallbond of love between Turtles, for if one of them
die, the surviver never solicites Hymen more, neither will he ever choose other
seat than Turtles never couple twice.
a dry withered bough.

Of the strength, piety, docilitie, clemency, chastity, and gratitude of
Elephants.
AMong the beasts of the field there is none more vaste, more strong, or more
to be feared, than the Elephant. His strength is sufficiently shown by those
towered Castles of armed men, which he carries, and fiercely rusheth with into
the battle. The Roman soldiers being otherwise of undaunted spirit, yet in
that battle which they fought against Antiochus being terrified with the
vastness and immanity of these bodies which they had never before seen,
presently turned their backs and fled, which notwithstanding, it is a
wonderful thing what stories natural Philosophers tell of the virtues of the
Elephant.

Pliny writes, that an Elephant comes very near to the understanding that
Lib. 8. cap. 1.
men have, and that he has a rude kind of knowledge of language; that his
facility and obsequiousness is wonderful, that his memory in the performance
of his wonted duties, is no less wonderful. And for Religion (Plutarch says)
that The religion of the Elephant.
they pray unto the gods, and sprinckle and purge themselves with salt water,
and that with great reverence, they worship the Sun at his rising, lifting
their trunkes up toward heaven, for want of hands. Pliny adds, that they
do with the like reverence worship the Moon and the Stars. For it is
related in the Histories of the Arabians, that at a new Moon the Elephants go
by troops down unto the rivers, and there wash themselves with water, and
being thus purged, kneel down and worship the Moon, and then return to the
woods, the eldest going first, and the other following after according to
their age.

Plutarch reports, that it happened once, that among the Elephants which were
taught at Rome against the Panegyricke shows, there was one that was something
dull, and not so docile as the rest, which made him be despised by his
fellows, and often beaten by his master. But that this Elephant, that he might
supply by diligence what he wanted in wit, was oftentimes observed in the
night, by the light of the Moon, to be practicing and conning what he had
learnt of his Master in the day Pliny lib. 8. cap. 5.
time. For they were wont to be taught to make letters, and also to present
garlands to the spectators; and other such like tricks. But they can never be
brought to go aboard a ship, to be carried over the sea into any strange
land, unless their Master give them his word to assure them that they shall
return again to their own native soil. They never hurt any one that does
not first provoke them. They never gender but in private out of sight, an
argument of their modesty.

Of the Lamprey.
LEast that the heat of affection may seem to lie quenched under the waters,
let us by one example, (it were an infinite thing to speak of all) see in what
kind of mutual love the creatures of the water come short of those of the
land. The Lamprey of all the creatures of this kind does worthily bear the
praise for its piety toward those of whom it was generated, its affection
toward those that are generated of her; for first she breeds eggs within her,
which in a short time after are spauned. But she does not as soon as her
young ones are formed and procreated, bring them straight way forth into the
light after the manner of other fishes, that bring forth their young alive, but
nourishes two within her, as if she brought forth twice, and had a second
brood. These she does not put forth before they are of some bigness, then she
teaches them to swim and to play in the water, but suffers them not to go
far from her, and anon gapes and receives them by her mouth into her bowels
again, suffering them to inhabit there, and to feed in her belly so long as
she thinks fit.

That Savage, or brute beasts may be made tame.
THevet reports, that the Emperor of the Turks has at Caire (it was once
called Cosmograph. Tom. 2. lib. 19. cap 7.
Memphis) and at Constantinople, many savage beasts kept for his delight, as
Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Antilopes, Camels, Elephants, Porcupines, and many
other of this kind. These they use to lead about the city to show. The
masters of them are girt with a girdle, hung about with little bells, that by
noise of these bells the people may be forewarned to keep themselves from
being hurt by these beasts. But in hope of reward and of gifts, they show them
to Ambassadors of strange nations, before whom they make these beasts do a
thousand very delightful tricks, and in the interim, they play their country
tunes and music upon their pipes, and other instruments, and make many sports
in hope of gain.

That Fishes also may be tamed.
But it is far more wonderful, that the creatures of the water should be made
tame, and be taught by the Art of man. Among which, the chiefest are held to be
the Eele. The same things also are reported of the Lamprey. For we have it
recorded, that Marcus Crassus had a Lamprey in his Fish-poole, that was so
tame, and so well taught, that he could command her at his pleasure. Therefore
as a domestical and tame beast he gave her a name, by which when he called
her, she would come. And when this Lamprey died, he mourned for her in black,
as if she had been his daughter. Which when his Colleague, Cnaeus Domitius
objected to him, by way of reproach, he replying, told him, that he had buried
three wives, and had mourned for none of all them three.

That men were taught by beasts to polish, and to whet their weapons, and to
lie in ambush.
Soldiers are careful to keep their weapons from rust, and therefore they
carry them to the Armorers tobe polished. But in ths care, many beasts are
nothing inferior unto them; for Boares whet their tuskes against they fight.
And the Elephant knowing that one of his teeth is doubled with digging at the
roots of trees to get meat, keeps the other sharp, and touches nothing
with it, preserving it for his combat with the Rihnocerot his enemy; but the
craft of the Rhinocerot is very remarkable, that being in continual enmity
with the Elephant, at the time when he prepares for the battle, he whets his
horn against a rock, as if it were Tke craft of the Rhinocerot about to fight
with the Elephant:
with a whetstone; nor (if he can choose) will he strike any other part of the
Elephant but the belly, because he knows that part of the Elephant is so
tender, that it may be easily pierced. This beast is in length equal to the
Elephant, but i^ height he is inferior unto him, by reason of the shortness
of his feet; he is of a palish yellow color, and full of many sports.

Of the Lion, the Ichneumon, and those other beasts which are not easily
terrified.
THe Lion when he goes, has his claws always clutched, and as it were put
up in their sheathes, not only because he would leave no mark of his feet,
The providence of the Lion in his going.
whereby he may be traced and so taken, but because by continual walking,
he should wear off, and blunt the points of his claws. Bulls when they fight
charge one another with their horns, and like valiant soldiers, provoke, and
animate one another to the battle.

The Ichneumon seems to imitate the most valiant soldier in his preparation,
and access to battle, for he bedawbes himself with mudde, and does as it
were buckle and make tite his armor; especially when he is to encounter with
the Crocodile; who although he be a vaste beast, is put to flight by this
little creature. And this truly has been observed to be by the singular
providence of nature, The greatest are terrified by the least.
that the most vaste creatures are terrified by the least things, and such from
whence there can arise no danger; so they say the Elephant does startle at the
grunting of an hog, and the Lion, at the crowing of a Cock; although it be
reported of the Lion that no fear can make him turn his face. These kind of
fears, terrors, and affrightments, arising upon light, and most ridiculous
occasions, we find as well in the ancient as modern Histories of our times,
to have dispersed and put to flight mighty legions of soldiers, and most
potent armies.

Of Cocks.
Cocks are kingly birds, and therefore nature has adorned them with a comb,
Cocks are Kingly and martial birds.
as with a princely Diadem, and wheresoever they come, their magnanimity and
courage makes them Kings. They fight with their beakes and their spurs; and
with their martial voice they fright the Lion who is otherwise the King of
beasts.

Of Conies.
COnies have taught us the Art of undermining the earth, whereby the most
lofty Cities, and structures reaching the very skies, are by taking away their
Conies have taught us undermining.
foundation levelled with the ground.

Marcus Varro writes, that in Spain there was a town, and that no mean one,
which standing on a sandy ground was so undermined by a company of Conies, that
all the houses tumbling and falling down to the ground, the inhabitants were
feign to depart and seek new dwellings.

Of Wolfes.
MEn have learnt the arts of waging war from the Woulfes, for they The
deceits and ambushes of Wolfes.
come out by troops, and lie in ambush near the towns which they have
appointed, and then one of them runs unto the town and provokes the dogs.
And making as if he run away incites the dogs to follow him, until he
has gotten them unto the place where their ambush lies, which on a sudden
appears, and rusheth out upon them. And so they kill and eat all, or as many
of the dogs as they are able to catch.

Of the Fox.
IN subtilty and craft the Fox exceeds all other beasts; when in the chase
the The craft of the Fox.
Dogs are at his heels, he berayes and bepisses his tail, and swings it in
the face and eyes of the Dogs that follow him, and so blinding them, in the
mean time getts ground of them. To fetch the Hens down from their perch he
has this devise, he shakes and swings his tail upwards and downwards, as if
he meant to throw it at them; which they fearing tumble down, and he takes up
one of them for his prey. His wariness when he passes over a River that is
frozen is wonderful, for he goes softly to the banck, and lays his ear to
listen, if he can hear the noise of the water running under the ice. For if he
can, back he goes, and will not venture to pass over. The knowledge of which
thing he could never merely by his subtilty and The Fox seems to reason with
himself.
craft attain unto, but that of necessity he must have some faculty of
reasoning. joined with it, which by discourse and by proving one thing by
another arrives at this Conclusion: Whatsoever is liquid and makes a noise is
in motion, whatsoever liquid is in motion is not concrete and frozen, that
which is not concrete and His Sorit^^
frozen is liquid, whatsoever is liquid will not bear a heavier body,
whatsoever will not bear a heavier body, cannot with safety be adventured on;
And therefore back again must I go, and not pass over this River.

Of Swine.
SWine, if in the woods, they hear any one of the same Heard with them crying
out, they straight make a stand, and marshalling their forces haste all, as if
they had been warned by the sound of a martial trumpet, to the assistance of
their fellows.

Of the fishes Scarus and Anthia.
PLutarch reports of the Scari, that when one of them chances to swallow a
hook and be taken, the rest of the same kind come in to his reskue, and
shearing the The love of Fishes one to another.
Line with their teeth set him at liberty. But the readiness of the Anthiae to
the mutual assistance of one another, is yet more manifest, for by casting the
Line upon which the hook hangs, on their back, with the sharpness of their
fins they cut it asunder, and so set free themselves and their captived
fellows.

Of the Pilot Fish.
THere is great kindness between the Pilot Fish and the Whale. For although
in bulk of body the Whale so far exceed him, yet he leads the Whale and goes
always before him as his Pilot, to keep him from running himself into any
straight or muddy place, whence he might not easily get out. And therefore the
Whale always follows him, and very willingly suffers himself to be led by
him, it being for his own good. And in like manner he getts into the Whales
mouth, and there The Whales pilot or g^^d.
lodging himself sleeps when he sleeps, and leaves him not either by day, or
night.

Of Cranes.
CRanes when they are to take a long journey into some Country cross the
seas, put their company in so good order, that no Captain can put his soldiers
in Cranes order themselves in ranks.
better. For before they stir out of any place, they have as it were their
trumpets to call them together, and encourage them to fly. They come together
and then fly up on high, that they may see a far off, choosing a Captain whom
they are to follow. They have their Serjants to take care of their ranks, and
keep their nightly watches by turns. Plutarch tells us that the Crane, which
is appointed to stand The sentinel Crane.
Sentinel for all the rest, holds a stone in her foot, to the end that if she
chance to give way to nature and sleep, she may be waked by the noise of the
falling stone. The leader lifting up his head, and stretching out his long
neck, looks about him far and wide, and gives warning to the rest, of any
danger, that may befall them. The strongest lead the way, that they may the
better with the flapping of their wings break the force of the air, and this
they do by turns. And that they may the easilier prevail against the force
and opposition of the winds, they dispose their company into a wedge in the
form of the Greek letter D or a triangle; and being skillful in the stars
they foresee when tempests are coming, and fly down to the ground to keep
themselves from the injury of the approaching storm.

Of Geese.
THe Geese of Sicilie do with great wariness take care that by their ceeking
and their noise, they do not expose themselves to the rapacity of Birds of
prey: (for Plutarch says) that when they are to fly over the hill Taurus, for
fear of the Eagles that are there, they hold stones in their mouths to keep
themselves from The care of the Geese, that their gagling, do them no harm.
gaggling, until that they come unto a place where they may be secure.

Of Dragons.
NEither are the Dragons less crafty; for thus do they overcome those vaste
and otherwise invincible beasts the Elephants. They lie in ambush and suddenly
The craft of Dragons fighting against the Elephant.
set upon the Elephants where they fear no such matter, and involve their
legs with the twines of their tail, in such sort, that they are not able to
go forward; and stop their nosthrils with their heads so that they cannot
fetch their breath, they pull out their eyes, and wheresoever they find the
skin most tender, there they bite and suck the blood until they make them
fall down dead. Pliny says, that there are Dragons found in Aethiopia of ten
Cubits long, but that in India there are Dragons of an Lib. 8. cap. 11. and 12.
100. foot long, that fly so high, that they fetch Birds and take their prey
even from the midst of the clouds.

Of the Fish called, the Fisherman.
THis Fish is called the Fisherman, because he hunts and takes other Fishes,
which The craft of the Fisherman-fish in taking her prey.
he does almost by the same cunning which the Cuttell uses; for he has hanging
at his throat a certain bag like the Wattells of a Turckycocke. This when
he lists he casts out, and lays before the little fishes for a bait,
and then by little and little draws it up again until he catch for food the
little fishes seazing upon it as a prey.

Of the Cuttell Fish.
VVOnderfull is the craft of the Cuttell Fishes, for they carry a bladder at
their The craft of the Cuttell to save her self.
neck full of a black juice or Ink, which they pour forth as soon as they
feel themselves taken; that so they may blind the eyes of the Fishermen, as
Plutarch says; and as Aristotle witnesses, they with their long fangs do not
only Lib. 9. de Hist. animal. Cap. 37.
hunt and take little Fishes, but oftentimes also Mullets.

Of the Arms or weapons of brute beasts.
BRute beasts are naturally so furnished with arms, that they have no need to
get, make or borrow in any other place.

And some of them nevertheless are so furnished with such arms that they
captivate those which hold them prisoners; an example of this is the Torpedo,
which does not only hurt by touch, but also by the net being between, he
breathes such a quality from him, as stupifies the hands of the Fishermen, so
that they are forced to let go their nets, and so let him go; moreover if it
touch a ship it makes it stay. Thevet writes, that the Persian bay toward
Arabia nourishes a Fish equal in length and Cosmog. Tom. 1. lib. 10. cap. 10.
thickness to a Carpe, on every side encompassed with sharp and strong
pricks, like our Porcupine, with which he fights against all kinds of fish. If
a man chance but to be lightly hurt either with these or his teeth, he will dye
within 24. hours.

Of the fish Vtelif.
He says moreover, that as he was carried by force of tempest through the
Atlanticke Ocean, he saw this fish having as it were a Saw in his forehead of
three foot long, and four fingers broad, armed on each side with sharp
spikes; They call it Vtelif in their Country speech.

Of the fish Caspilly.
THere is another fish to be seen in the Arabian Gulf, which the Arabians
call Caspilly, its two foot long and as many broad, it has a skin not much
unlike a Dogfish, but armed with spikes, one whereof he carries in his forehead
a foot and half broad, in sharpness and force of cutting not much short of a
graver or chissell: with this weapon when she is oppressed with hunger she
assailes the first fish she meets, neither does she give over before she carry
her as a prey, Tom. 1. lib. 5. cap 2.
whither she please, as Thevet says he has seen.

Of Crabs.
CRabs and Lobsters though in the quantity of their body they be but small, yet
they use their forked claws before, not only in feeding but also in defending
themselves and assailing others.

Of the Docility of Beasts, and first of the Dog.
BEasts are apt to learn those things which men desire, whereby they show
themselves not wholly void of reason. For Dogs, Apes and Horses learn to
creep thorough the Iuglers hoopes, and rise on their hinder feet as though
they would dance. Plutarch tells, that a Iugler had a Dog which would represent
many things The wonderful docillity of Dogs.
upon the stage befitting the occasion and argument of the play; amongst the
rest, he exceeded all admiration in that, that taking a soporificke medicine,
he excellently feigned himself dead; for first as taken with a giddiness in
his head he begun to tremble, then presently fell down, and lying on the
ground, as it were contracted his dying members, and lastly as if truly dead
he waxt stiff; and moreover suffered himself diversely to be fitted according
to diverse parts of the Theater, the fable so requiring. But when he, by those
things that were said and done, A spectacle full of admiration and mirth
knew it was time to rise, he first begun to move his legs by little and little,
as if he had been wakened from a sound sleep; then presently with his head a
little lifted up, he looked this way and that way to the great admiration of
all the beholders, and finally rise up and went familiarly and cheerfully to
him he should; the which sight the Emperor Vespatian (who was then present in
Marcellus his Theater) never saw any which more delighted him.

Of the Ape.
AN Ape is a ridiculous Creature, and which makes men much sport, in imitating
Gal. lib. 1. de us^ partium.
their actions. There has been seen an Ape which would pipe and sing, and
besides dance and write, and endeavor to perform many other things proper to
men. I remember I saw in the Duke of Somes house a great and cursed Ape, who
because he much troubled many, had his hands cut off, who suffering himself to
be cured, when the wound was cicatrized, he grew more mild and docile.
Wherefore clothed in a green coat, and girt over his loins with a girdle,
he carried hanging thereat a case of spectacles, a pair of knives and a child's
handkercheife. He was committed to the charge of the Master Cook to teach,
because he had taken up his lodging in the Chimney corner, he was taught many
pretty tricks and feats. If at any time he swarved from his doctrine and
precepts, in a trice the whip was upon his back and loins, and much was abated
of his daily allowance, for as Persius says, The belly is the master of Arts
and sharpener of wit. By these means be profited so, in a short time, that he
much exceeded all the Apes of his time in the glory of his wit; and there was
none counted more skillful in leaping and dancing to the pipe, running up a
pole and nimbly leaping through his Masters legs. To conclude; he performed all
the actions of a strong Ape, and very reverently carried up dishes with the
waiters and servingmen, and made clean the dishes and platters by licking, and
did much other drudgery, so that he was commonly called Master John Do-all. At
dinner and supper sitting in a chair he said grace, and cast his eyes up
toward heaven, and rouled them this way and that way, and smote his breast
with the stumpes of his hands with much lamentation, and imitated prayer by the
gnashing, or beating together of his teeth. He would turn up his tail to any
that offended him (for his coat scarce covered half his buttocks lest he
should have filed it) he made much other pastime, always going upright by
reason of the cutting away of his hands, unless at any time through weariness
he were forced to sit on his buttocks.

Of Ravenous birds.
But let us take a view of Faulconers teaching ravenous birds, how with swift
wings The diligence of Faulconers in training up their Hawks.
carried aloft into the Air, they may seize upon other Birds and cast them
down dead to the ground; in performance whereof, they often too freely soar
up to the clouds so that they carry themselves out of the Faulconers sight,
with a desire to sun themselves, neglecting in the mean time their designed
prey.

The Herne when she sees her self kept under and below the Falcon carried up
by The fight of the Herne and Faulcon,
his strong wings with a merveilous swiftness, with her beak, which is long
and sharp, hid under her wings and turned upwards, she receives the Falcon
blinded with the heat of fight and desire of prey, carelessly flying down and
rushing upon him; so that he often strikes him through the gorge, so that often
times they both fall down dead to the ground. But if the Falcon without harm
escape the deceits by Art and the happy turning of his body, and the Herne be
not cast down, the Faulconer calling her back with never so loud a voice, yet
by setting up her Feathers she dares her to the pretended fight.

Of the Camels.
THe Camel is a very domestical and gentle beast, and which is easily tamed
Camel both tame and wild.
and taught all kind of obedience and service; although some of them are cruel
wild and troublesome by biting and striking such as they meet, no less than
untamed horses. There is no need to house them in the night, for they may be
left in the plain fields in the open and free air, feeding upon the grass
and trees and cropping the tops of the thistles, neither in the morning do
they any whit the worse undergo or carry their burdens. They are not put to
carry burdens before they be four year old. The Arabians geld them young,
that they may enjoy their labor the The easy and not chargeable keeping of
Camels.
longer, neither being gelt do they rage for love or desire of venery. At the
putting in of the Spring they endure hunger and thirst for eight days; they
are so dutiful, that at the beck of the Turkish slaves, or but touched on the
neck with a twigge, they presently kneel on the ground to take up their
burden, neither do they lift themselves up before that they find they have a
sufficient load laid upon them. Those which have but one bunch on their back
are of Afric; but such Camels know when they have a sufficient load.
as have two bunches are of Asia, or Scythia. Those kind of Camels that are
the bigger are used to carry packes, but the lesser are used to ride upon, as
our horses are. They love nothing so well as beans, and yet they live content
with four Camels both ^o carry burdens and to ride upon.
handfulls of beans for a day. The greatest wealth of the Arabians consists in
Camels, and so they estimate their riches, not by the quantity of silver, or
gold, but by the number of Camels. The Turkish Emperor (Thevet being the
reporter) made a Captain over the herds of his Camels, giving him a great
troop, of African and Christian slaves, that they might be the better looked
unto. I have heard it reported (says Thevet) by certain Arabian, African and
Jewish Merchants who were present, at that time when Sultan Selim the first of
that name, beseiged Caire in Egypt (which in former times was called (...))
that there, Mighty troop of Camels.
was then in that Emperors army sixty thousand Cammels, besides a mighty
company of Mules.

That Birds have taught us musical tunes.
THe Nightingales are sweet and excellent singers, tuning rheir notes with
infinite To sing like a Nightingale
quaverings, and diversities of sounds, so pretily and sweetly, that humane
industry can scarce equal the sweetness thereof, by so many musical
instruments; so that we say he sings like a Nightingale, who varies his voice
with much variety. In which thing Birds much excel men, because they have
that admiral sweetness of singing from nature it self without any labor of
learning; which men can scarce attain to in any school of music, by having
their ears a thousand times plucked by the hand of a cursed master.

That Beasts know one another voice.
BEasts know one another by their voice, so that they may seem to talk and
The voice to beasts is of the same use, as speech is to men.
to laugh together, whilst flattering with their ears, they pluck in their
noses, with a pleasant aspect of their eyes; and as speech is given to men, so
Birds have their natural voice which is of the same use to them, as speech is
to us. For all birds of the same species, as men of the same country, chant
and chirpe to one another, when men understand not the speech of other men,
unless of the same nation. Wherefore the Scythian tongue is no more profitable
to one living in Egypt, than if We are as ill as deaf, when we hear an
unknown language.
he were dumb; nor the Egyptians understand it no more than if they were
deaf: Wherefore an Egyptian is dumb and deaf to a Scythian. This those which
travel well understand how many dangers, how many troubles they undergo,
because they cannot express their minds, and require things necessary for
life. Wherefore to the assistance of this unprofitable tongue, we are compelled
to call the rest of the members, and to abuse the gestures of the head, eyes,
hands, and feet. Truly the condition of brute beasts is not so miserable,
seeing that all of the same kind wheresoever they be, may answer each other
with a known voice. Truly if any should hear a Germane, Briton, Spaniard,
Englishman, Polonian, and Greek, speaking amongst themselves in their native
tongues, not understanding any of them, he could scarce discern, and
certainly judge, whether he heard the voice of men or of beasts.

That Birds may counterfeit Man's voice.
LInets, Larkes, Pies, Rookes, Dawes, Crows, Stares, and other such like
Birds, speak, sing, whistle, and imitate the voices of men, and other
creatures. In this Parrots are wonderful imitaters of man's voice.
Parrots excel all other, being wondrous skillful imitaters of men's voices,
and very merry, but specially when they have drunk a little wine.

Plutarke reports that there was a Barber at Rome, who kept a Pie in his shop,
which spoke exceeding well, and that of her own accord, none teaching her,
when A talking Pie.
she first heard men talking together; she imitated the voice or cry of all
beasts she heard, as also the sound of Drums, and the noise of Pipes, and
Trumpets; to conclude, there was nothing which she did not endeavor to
imitate. There have been Crows that have spoken and articulately sung songs,
and Psalms, and that of some length. To which purpose the History of
Macrobius is notable; for he tells that Lib. 2. Saturn. cap. 4.
there was one amongst those, who went forth for luck sake to meet with
Augustus Casar, returning from the war against Antonius, who carried a Crow,
which he had taught plainly to pronounce this salvation; Salve Caesar
Imperator augustissime, that is, God save thee, O most sacred Emperor Caesar.
Caesar taken with the noveltie of this spectacle, bought this obsequious Bird
with a thousand pieces of silver. Pliny and Valerius have reckoned up amongst
prodigies, Oxen and Asses that have spoken. I omit infinite. other things
recorded by the ancients, Plato, Aristotle Pliny, Plutarch, and other
Philosophers of great credit, of the docilitie of beasts, and their admirable
felicity of understanding. Which things, if untrue, these learned men would
never have recorded in writing, lest so they might brand with vanity, (then
which nothing is more base,) the rest of their writings to posterity in all
ensuing ages.

Of the Sympathy and Antipathy of Living creatures amongst themselves.
HAving briefly described the understanding of brute beasts, it seems not
impertinent to set down some things more worthy of knowledge, happening unto
them by reason of Sympathy and antipathy; that is, mutual agreement and
disagreement, which happens not only to them living, but also dead, by a
certain secret and hidden property, through occasion whereof some desire,
other shun, and others prosequute one another even to death. In testimony
whereof; The Lion fears a cock,
The Lion the king of beasts excelling all other in courage and magnanimity,
fears the Cock, for he is not only terrified by his presence, but also by
his crowing being absent. So an Elephant fears a Hog; but he is so afraid
of Mice and Ratts, that he will not touch the meat that is given him, if he
smell that it has been defiled with such creatures. There is deadly hatred
between the Elephant and Rhinocerot; yet when the Elephant is furious and
angry, he becoms quiet and calm at the sight of a Ram. A horse is so afraid
of a Camel, that he cannot endure A horse fears a Camel
his sight. The Dog hates the Wolf, the Heart flies the Dog. The Snake flies
from and fears a naked man, and follows him being clothed. There is deadly
hatred between the Aspis and Ichneumon, for he when he has rolled himself in
the clay, dryes himself in the Sun, and so being covered over (by doing thus
diverse times) as it were with shells, or armor, he enters into Combat,
stretching out his tail and presenting his back, until he get opportunity to
choke his adversary, by leaping and fastening on her jaws, by which
stratageme he also kills the Crocodile. The green Lizard is a capital enemy to
the Serpent, but most friendly to man, as Erasmus witnesses by many historyes
concerning that matter, in his dialogue of Sympathy and Antipathy. There is a
great deal of hatred between a man and a Wolf, which is most manifest by
this, that if the Wolves first see a man, his voice is taken away, and his
intended cry hindered. If the Weasell intend to set upon the Aspis that most
venomous Serpent, she arms her self by eating Rue, as a most certain
Antidote. The Ape fears the Torpedo, as Erasmus manifests by a pleasant
history in the fore mentioned Dialogue; where also he pretily shows the deadly
Water foul fear the Falcon.
hatred between the Serpent called Areus and the Toad. The like hate is
between the Owl and Crows, so that the Owl dares not go out, fly abroad, or
seek her food unless by night. The water or River foul are afraid of the
Falcon; that if they but hear her bells, they had rather be killd with staves
and stones, than take wing to fly into the air. So the Lark yields her self
to be taken by a man, least she fall into the tallents of the Hobby. The
Castrill, or Merlin is naturally a terror to Hawks, so that they both shun
his voice and presence.

The Kites are all at perpetual enmity with the Crows, wherefore the Crow
always The enmity between the Kites and Crows.
gets away the Kites provision. All kind of Pullen fear the Fox. The Chicken
fears neither a Horse, nor an Elephant, but scarce hatched, it presently runs
away at the voice or sight of a Kite, and hides it self under the hens wings.
The Lamb and Kid fly from the Wolf when they first see him, nether does The
discord between the Lamb and Wolf is not ended by deal.
death give an end to that hatred, but it superviues their funeral. An
Experiment whereof (they say) is, that if one drum be headed with Wolves
skins and another with Sheep, and beaten up together, you shall scarce
hear the sound of the Drum covered with sheep skins. And besides, if you
string one Harp with strings made of sheep gutts, and another with strings
of Wolves gutts, you cannot bring it to pass, by any Art, to make them agree
and go in one tune. It is reported from the experiments of many men, that if a
Wolves head be hanged up on high in the place where Sheep are, that they will
not touch the grass how good and fresh soever it be, nor rest quiet in any
place, but tumultnously run up and down, until all such kind of terror be
taken away; The hate betwixt Mice and Weasells appears by this, that if you
mix never so little of the How to make these that Mice will not gnaw.
brains of a Weasell in the rennet, with which you crudle you Cheese, the Mice
will never gnaw or touch that cheese. The Linnet does so hate the bird Florus,
that both their bloods put into one vessel cannot be mixed together. A Wolves
head hung up in a dovehouse, drives away Poll. Cats and Weasells. The Panther
and Hyaena burn with so great hatred, that if both their skins be laid one
against the other, the Panthers will shed the hair, the hairs of the Hyaena
remaining entire and not moved, which thing, they say, happens to the feathers
of other birds if any one chance to tie them up in a bundle with the Eagles.
Let these suffice for some few examples of many, of the Antipathy amongst
beasts. But of the Sympathy, and consent of beasts amongst themselves, I think
needless to write any thing, being it is sufficiently known to all, that one
Iay associates another, and the cruel Bears agree amongst themselves; and
beasts of the same species do wonderfully consent one with another.

That Man excells all beasts.
I Now think it fit to assay to write of that excellency of man over beasts,
which I have so long intended. Neither would I that Epicures and other too much
natural and materiate Philosophers, so take those things I have written of the
endowments of beasts, as though we should think, there were no difference
between man and beast. I had no such meaning, no such intention; but only
that man should not become too stately, or too ingrate in less acknowledging
God to be the Author of so many benefits with which he abounds. For whatsoever
we have largely spoken of beasts, yet there is no comparison between beasts
and man, for there is too great a difference between them. For man's mind is
adorned with religion, justice, prudence, magnanimity, faith, piety, modesty,
clemency, fortitude and other virtues as lights, which shine much more bright
in man than in beasts. For they are sometimes all in some one man, each whereof
are thought great in beasts. For seeing that man is made to the Image of God,
it cannot be, how much soever he Man bears Gods image:
defile himself with the pollution of vices, that he can so obscure that
inbred light, but that always some beam of the divine wisdom will be
inherent and shine in him. But although by collation to some beasts, he may
seem a defective and weak Creature; yet no fortitude nor strength of beasts
can be so great as to equal the fortitude of man. For God has engraven in man
the character of his divine virtue, by the assistance whereof, he might have
all beasts under and obedient to him. And though by that we have formerly said,
beasts may seem to have a certain shadow of reason, yet that small light is
not fit for many and diverse uses, but there is only given them so much
providence, as should be sufficient for them and the preservation of their
bodies. But men have reason given them to crop or gather the fruits of eternal
life, (as Lactantius says) whereby it comes to pass, that man only, amongst
so many creatures, has sense and understanding of divine things. Which Cicero
thought to be known by that, because man only had a certain knowledge of God
in his mind. Wherefore he was enriched by God with reason, speech and hands as
helps for the performance of all his actions; moreover by his singular and
almost divine wit he easily excells all brute beasts. For first, reason being
his guide, he invented Man has given names to things.
things necessary for life, firly imposed names on the things invented
befitting their natures, framed letters and Characters, invented all liberal
Art and handy-crafts, and found means to measure the Land and Sea. He has
observed and drawn into an Art the spaces of the Celestial Globe, the
distinctions of the Stars, the changes and orders of days and nights, of
times and seasons, the risings and settings of Stars, and their power and
effects over these lower bodies. Lastly, he records in writing to perpetual
memory that which concerns his own nature, or the nature of other things, the
precepts and ordinances of life and manners, by which singular gift, we can now
confer with Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and other Philosophers of ancient
times, as if they were living.

What benefit man has by reason of his native nakedness and ignorance.
But as Man's body is by nature naked and unarmed, so is his mind like a smoth
Gal. cap. 4. lib. 1. de usu part^um.
table in which nothing is painted, nothing graven; but for help of his
nakedness he has hands, and for supply of his ignorance, reason and speech.
And by these three being as it were the ministers of infinite variety of
things, he clothes and defends his body with all things needful: and inriches
his mind with the knowledge of Arts and sciences. Now if he had certain
weapons borne with him, he should use them only; if he should be borne skillful
in any Art, he would meddle with none else. Therefore because it was more
expedient to use all sorts of weapons with the hand, and be skillful in all
Arts; therefore he must be borne wanting and ignorant of all. Aristotle very
wittily As the hand is the instrument of instruments so Reason is the Art of
Arts.
called the hand the instrument of instruments: in imitation of which speech,
one may rightly affirm, That Reason is the Art of Arts: for as the hand in
worth exceeds the other instruments, because it can make, handle and fit them
for use; so reason and speech, though names of no Art, yet comprehend and
increase all Arts. Therefore man seeing he has his mind instructed by Art,
that is, by reason; it is fit he should have his body defended with a weapon,
or instrument, that is, the hand, which in agillity and excellency should
excel all other instruments. For so Man has his hands in stead of all
weapons, which he may use in war and peace as the instruments of all Arts; he
wants not the Bulls horns, the Boares tuskes, the horses hoves, nor to
conclude, any arms of any other beast. For by the benefit of his hands he can
handle other arms far more profitable and safe, as a Lance, Sword, Spear,
halberd; but man also can use at some distance the bow, sling and handgun, when
the horn and the hoose cannot be used but near at hand. But some may say; A
Lion exceeds a man in swiftnes of foot; what then? is man therefore inferior
to him? no for by the means of his hands and the guidance of his reason he
bridling and riding upon a horse, out runs the Lion, and being victor follows
him to and again as he himself pleases, or vanquished flies away, and from
the horses back as from a tower wounds the Lion with what weapons he pleases.
To conclude, man is abundantly provided with means, to defend himself from
the violence of all other beasts. For this purpose he does not only harness
himself as with brazen walls, but also makes ditches and Bulwarks; he makes
by the ministry of his hands all kind of weapons, weaves himself graments,
casts into the water and draws forth nets to catch fish; and to conclude, he
performs all things to his own contentment, and having that privilege
granted him by God, Man under God is the king and Emperor of the world.
he rules over all the earth; all things which lie hid in the bowels of the
earth, which go, or creep upon the earth, which swim in the sea, and fly
through the air, or are any where shut up in the compass of the sky, are in
man's dominion.

How wonderful God has showed himself in making man.
GOds Deity and providence has principally showed it self in the creation of
man; Men is the end of all mundans things.
neither his so admired light has so shone in the production of other
creatures, seeing that God would have them to live and have theit being, only
for man's sake, that they might serve him. Therefore man is, if we diligently
consider all his endowments, a certain pattern and rule of the divine majesty
and (if If I may so say) Artifice. For being made to Gods image, he is as it
were his coin, exceeding the capacity of all Man a little world, yea almost a
great world.
humane understanding. Which seemed a just reason to the ancient Philosophers,
that he should be called Microcosmos, or a little world, because the particles
of all things contained in the compass of heaven and earth, are contained in
his mind and body, that in the mean time I may in silence pass over his
soul more great and noble than the whole world.

Why Nature has not given Man the faculty of persaging.
THis seems the reason, that men by the instinct of nature do not foresee the
future seasons and dispositions of the heaven and air; because, seeing they
have Man is not obnoxious to the Air and stars.
received certain sparks of prudence from God, by whose care and guidance they
are led to the knowledge of things by no deceiptfull but certain judgment,
being not obnoxious to the conditions and changes of times and seasons, as
beasts are. Wherefore knowing all these airy changes to be placed under them,
that is to say their minds, according as occasion serves, and their minds
desire, they give themselves to mirth when the Air is wet, stormy and dark,
and on the contrary in a clear and fair season to a sincere and grave
meditation of things sublime and full of doubt. But beasts accommodating
themselves to that disposition of the air which is present and at hand, are
lively, or sad, not from any judgment as men, but according to the temper and
complexion of their bodies following the inclinations of the air, and of the
humors one while diffused, another while contracted. Neither ought we to blame
man, because he can imitate the voice of beasts, but rather much commend him,
that he can infinitely One man will counterfeit the voices of infinite
varietyes of beasts.
wrest and vary one thing, that is his voice; for men can bark like Foxes and
dogs, grunt like hogs; whet and grind their teeth like boares; roar like
Lions; bellow like Bulls; neigh like horses; knacke their teeth like Apes;
houle like Wolves; bray like Asses; bleate like Goats and Sheep; mourn like
Bears, Pigeons and Turtles; Keeke and gaggle like geese; hiss like Serpents;
cry like Storkes, caw like a Crow, and crow like a Cock, clock like Hens;
chatter as Swallows and Pyes; sing like Nightingales; croake like Frogs;
imitate the singing of Waspes and Humming of Bees; Mew like Catts: The singing
of Birds scarce seems to merit the name of Musical, compared to the harmony
of men fitted and tuned with The power of Music.
infinite variety of voices. For with this they possess the ears of Kings and
Princes; provoke and temper their wrath, and carry men's minds beyond
themselves, and transform them into what habits they please. But if those
cruel beasts have any humanity, they owe it all to man. For he tames Lions,
Elephants, Bears, Tigers, Leapards, Panthers and such other like.

Of the Crocodile.
PLutarch reports of the Crocodile (whose figure is here deliniated) that being
tamed, and taught by man, he does not only hear man's voice, and answers A
^ame Crocodile.
to his call, but suffers himself to be handled, and opening his throat, lets
his teeth be scratched and wiped with a towell. How small a part of Physic is
that, which beasts are taught by nature? Certainly nothing in comparison of
man, who by the study and practice of a few years can learn at his fingers
ends all the parts of Physic: and practice them not only for his own, but
also for the common good of all men. But why cannot beasts attain unto the
knowledge of Physic so well as men? I think, because so great an Art as
Physic is, cannot be attained unto by the dull capacities of Beasts.

But for that I have written of the Religion of Elephants, if I must speak
according to the truth of the matter, we cannot say they worship God, or In
what sense we said Elephants had religion.
have any sense of the divine Majesty. For how can they have any knowledge of
sublime things or of God, seeing they wholly following their food, know not how
to meditate on celestial things? Now for that they behold and turn themselves
to the Moon by night, and to the Sun in the morning, they do not that as
worshipping, or for that they conceive any excellency or divinity in the
Sun; but because nature so requiring and leading them, they feel their
bodies to rejoice in that light, and their entralls and humors to move and
stir them to it. Therefore when we attributed religion to Elephants, we said
it rather popularly, than truly, and more that we might exhort men to the
worship of God, than that we thought Elephants had any knowledge of divine
worship implanted in their minds.

That man may attain unto the knowledge of all voices and tongues.
THe docility of man's wit is so great, and the facillity of the body obeying
that divine gift of wit such, that he is not only able to learn to understand
and speak the tongues of diverse nations differing in so many peculiar
languages; and not only to imitate and counterfeit the voices of all beasts
though so much different from Man not only the imitater, but the interpreter
of the voices of beasts and birds.
man, which many flattering and juggling companions, followers of other men's
tables, will do; but also may be able to know and understand both what they
pretend and signify. In confirmation of which thing they cite the Philosopher
Apollonius most famous in this kind of study and knowledge. He walking on a
time amongst a company of his friends thorough the field, and seeing a Sparrow
come flying and chirping much to diverse other Sparrowes sitting upon a tree,
is reported, to have said to those which were with him: That bird, which came
flying hither, told the other in her language; that an Ass laided with corn
was fallen down at the City gate, and had shed the wheat upon the ground.
Wherefore Apollonius and all his friends which were with him went thither to
see whether it were so, and found that it was so, as he had told them, and
observed that the Sparrowes moved thereto by the coming of the other, were
eating up the grains of Corn shed on the ground.

But for Crows and Pyes artificially taught to counterfeit men's voices, it is
too small a thing, that for that cause they should contend with men. For they
have quickly babled all they have learnt with longer cost and labor, tediously
singing still the same song, and whatsoever they prate they do it without
sense, understanding or any reason for what they say. But man always
contemplating somewhat more high, still thinks of greater things than these
present, and never rests. But burning with an The unquenchable desire of
learning in ^an.
infinite and endless desire of knowledge, he does not only covet to know
these things which appertain to food and clothing, but by casting up his eyes
toward heaven, and by the light of his mind, he learnes and understands
things divine. Which is so certain an argument of the celestial original of
our soul, that he which considers those things can no ways doubt, but that
we have our minds seasoned, by the universal divine understanding. But now it
is time for us to set upon the description of the body, the habitation and fit
instrument of all the functions of that divine mind.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK TREATING OF THE Anatomy of Man's body.
I Following custom and the manner of such as before me have written of
Anatomy, will first, (that I may make the minds of the Readers more attentive
and desirous of these studies) declare how necessary it is, and also how
profitable, and then show the order to be observed in it, before I come to the
particular description of man's body.

Furthermore, how Anatomy may be defined, and the manner of the definition of
the parts. For the first, the knowledge The necessity of the knowledge of
Anatomy.
of Anatomy seems in my judgment very necessary to those that desire to
excel, or attain to perfection of Physic; that is, whereby they may be able
to preserve the present health of the body, and the parts thereof, and drive
away diseases. For how can either Physician or Surgeon preserve health by
the use of the like things, which consists in the temperament, conformation,
and natural union of the parts; or expel the disease which hurts those three,
by the like use of their contraries, unless he shall know the nature and
composure of the body, and understand as by the rule of this knowledge, how
much it swerves from the nature thereof? Wherefore it is excellently said of
Hippocrates; that Initio lib. de Offic. ^edici,
the Physician called to cure the sick Patient, ought diligently to consider,
whether those things that are in him, or appear to be in him, be like or
unlike, that is, whether the Patient be like himself and his own nature in
all his parts and functions, temperature, composure and union; that he may
preserve those which are yet contained in the bounds of nature, and restore
those that are gone astray. Which thing Galen has also confirmed, specially
where he says; he must well know the Lib. de cssibus.
nature and structure or composure of the bones, who takes upon him to restore
them broken or dislocated to themselves and their proper seats or places.
Moreover seeing that healing does not only consist in the knowledge of the
disease, but as well in prescribing fit medicines and like application of them
to the body and the parts thereof, all which by their natural dissimilitude,
do require unlike medicines, according to Galens opinion: I prithee tell me,
who can perform this, which is ignorant 1. de loc. affectis, and lib. 3. M^^h.
of the description of the whole and the parts thereof, taught by Anatomy? We
may say the like of the Apothecarie, who ignorant of the situation of the
parts in the body, cannot apply Emplaisters, Ointments, Cataplasmes,
Fomentations, Epithemes, bags to the fit places, as to the sutures of the
skull, to the Heart, Liver, Stomach, Spleen, Reins, Womb or Bladder. For
example, let us imagine the Liver to be troubled with a hot distemperature, but
on the contrary the stomach with a cold (which commonly happens, seeing the
Liver hotter than it ought to be, Why when the liver is hot, the stomach is
commonly cold.
sends up many vapors to the head; from whence cold humors fall into the
stomach) if hot things to be applied to the stomach by the Physicians
prescription, be by the Apothecarie making no difference, applied both to the
stomach and neighboring Liver (which may chance if he be ignorant that the
stomach bends somewhat to the left side under the breast-blade; but the liver
so takes up the right side of the body that with a great parr thereof, it
covers almost all the stomach) will not he much offend by increasing the hot
distemper of the liver, and not thereby giving case, or help to the disease?
Shall not by this his ignorance, the Patient be frustrated of his desire, the
Physician of his intent, and the medicine of its effect? By these examples I
think it most manifest, that the Anatomicall knowledge of the parts of the
body is exceeding necessary to all Physicians, Chirurgions, and Apothecaries,
who will practice Physic with any praise to the glory of God, and the benefit
and good of man, for whose sake we have writ these things, and illustrated
them by figures, subjecting the parts to the eye, and fitly put them in their
proper places,

But Anatomy is commodious four manner of ways; the first is, because thus
The knowledge of Anatomy, is commodious four manner of ways.
we are led to the knowledge of God the Creator, as by the effect to the cause;
for as we read in Saint Paul, The invisible things of God are made manifest by
the visible. The second is, That by means hereof we know the nature of man's
body, and the parts thereof, whereby we may more easily and certainly judge
and determine of sickness and health. The third is, that by the knowledge of
the body and its parts, and together therewith its affections and diseases, we
may prognosticate what is to come, and foretell the events of diseases. Lastly,
the fourth is, that considering the nature of the diseased part, we may fitly
prescribe medicines, and apply them in their due places.

Now we must declare in what order Anatomy may be fitly delivered; but first
we must observe there is a threefold Method; The first is called of
Composition, being There is a threefold method.
very commodious for the teaching of Arts, which Aristotle has used in his
Works of Logic, and natural Philosophy, the order and beginning taken from
the least and most simple to the more compound. The second of Division, fit for
the inventing or finding out of sciences. Galen has followed this order in his
Books of Anatomicall Administrations, and of the use of the parts. The third
of Definition, which shows the nature and essence of things, as appears by
Galen in his Book De Art parva. And because this order does also prosecute
the divisions, therefore it is commonly accustomed to be comprehended in the
compass of the second. Therefore I will follow this in my Anatomicall
Treatise, deviding man's body into The Authors intent.
its parts, which I will not only subject to the eye in the way of knowing
them, but also to the mind in the faithful understanding them. For I will
adjoyne those things that are delivered of them by Galen in his Book of
Anatom. Administrations, with those which he has taught in his Books of the
use of the parts. For there he fitly lays the parts of man's body before our
eyes, to the sense. But here he teaches to know them, not to see them; for he
shows why, and for what use they are made. Having briefly handled these
things, we must declare what Anatomy is; that as Cicero says out of Plat^es
Phaedro, it may be understood of what we dispute. And because we attain that
by definition (which is a short and plain speech, consisting of the Genus and
difference of the things defined, being the essential parts, by which the
nature and essence of the thing, is briefly and plainly explained) first we
define Anatomy, then presently explain the particular parts of the definition.

Wherefore Anatomy, (if you have regard to the name) is a perfect and absolute
devision, or artificial resolution of man's body into its parts, as well
general as particular, What Anatomy is.
as well compound as simple. Neither may this definition seem illegitimate,
specially amongst Physicians and Chirurgions. For seeing they are Artizans
humiliated to the senfe, they may use the proper and common qualities of things
for their essential differences and forms. As on the contrary, Philosophers
may refuse all definitions How a definition differs from a description.
as spurious, which consist not of the next Genus and the most proper, and
essential differences. But seeing that, through the imbecilitie of our
understanding, such differences are unknown to us, in their places we are
compelled in defining things, to draw into one many common and proper
accidents, to finish that definition which we intend, which for that cause we
may more truly call a description, because for the matter and essential form
of the thing, it presents us only the matter adorned with certain accidents.
This appears by the former definition, in which Division and Resolution stand
for the Genus, because they may be parted into diverse others, as it were into
species. That which is added over and besides, stands in place of the
difference, because they separate and make different the thing it self from
all other rash and unartificiall dissections. We must know an artificial
division, is no other than a separation of one part from another, without the
hurt of the other, observing the proper circumscription of each of them; which
if they perish or be defaced by the division, it cannot be said to be
artificial; and thus much may suffice for the parts of the definition in
general.

For as much as belongs to the explication of each word; we said of Man's body,
because, as much as lies in us, we take care of, preserve the health, and
depell the ^iseases thereof, by which it may appear that man's body is the
subject of Physic, The Subject of Physic.
not as it is man's, or consists of matter and form, but as it is partaker of
health and sickness.

We understand nothing else by a part, according to Galen, than some certain
Gal lib. 1. de. vsu pars. lib. 1. Meth.
body, which is not wholly disioyned, nor wholly united with other bodies of
their kinds; but so that, according to his opinion, the whole being composed
therewith, with which in some sort it is united, and in some kind separated
from the same, by their proper circumscription. Furthermore by the parts in
general, I understand the head, breast, belly, and their adjuncts. By the
particular parts of those, I understand, The simular parts are 9.
the simple parts, as the similar, which are nine in number, as a gristle,
bone, ligament, membrane, tendon, nerve, vein, artery, musculous flesh; some
add fibers, fat, marrow, the nails and hairs; other omit them as excrements;
but we must note that such parts are called simple, rather in the judgment of
the sense, than of reason. For if any will more diligently consider the nature,
they shall find none absolutely simple, because they are nourished, have life
and sense, either manifest or obscure, which happens not without a nerve,
vein, and artery.

But if any shall object, that no nerve is communicated to any bone, except the
teeth; How the bones come to feel.
I will answer, that nevertheless the bones have sense by the nervous fibers,
which are communicated to them by the Periosteum, as by whose mediation the
Periosteum is connext to the bones, as we see it happens to these membranes,
which involue the bowels. And the bones, by this benefit of the animal sense
expel the noxious and excrementitious humors from themselves into the spaces
between them and the Periosteum, which as endued with a more quick sense,
admonishes us, according to its office and duty, of that danger which is
ready to seize upon the bones, unless it be prevented. Wherefore we will
conclude according to the truth of the thing, that there is no part in our body
simple, but only some are so named and thought, according to the sense;
although also otherwise some may be truly named simple, as according to the
peculiar and proper flesh of each of their kinds. Those parts are called The
compound, or organicall parts.
compound which are made or composed by the mediation, or immediately of these
simple, which they term otherwise organicall or isntrumental; as an arm,
leg, hand, foot, and others of this kind.

And here we must observe, that the parts are called simple and similar,
because they cannot be divided into any particles but of the same kind; but
the compound are called dissimular from the quite contrary reason. They are
called isntrumental and organicall, because they can perform such actions of
themselves, as serves for the preservation of themselves and the whole; as the
eye of it self, without the assistance of any other part, sees, and by this
faculty defends the whole body, as also it self. Wherefore it is called an
instrument or organe, but not any particle o^ it, as the coats, which cannot
of it self perform that act. Whereby we must understand, Four particles to
be observed in ^a^^ organicall pa^^.
that in each isntrumental part we must diligently observe four proper parts.
One by which the action is properly performed, as the Crystalline humor in the
eye; another without which the action cannot be performed, as the nerve and the
other humors of the eye. The third, whereby the action is better and more
conveniently done, as the tunicles and muscles. The fourth, by which the action
is preserved, as the eyelids and circle of the eye. The same may be said of
the hand, which is the proper instrument of holding, for it performs this
action; first by the muscle, as the principal part; Secondly, by the ligament,
as a part without which such action cannot be performed. Thirdly by the bones
and nails, because by the benefit of these parts, the action is more happily
performed. Fourthly by the veins, arteries and skin, for that by their
benifite and use, the rest, and so consequently the action it self is
preserved.

But we must consider, that the isntrumental parts have a fourefold order.
They Four sorts of isntrumental parts.
as said to be of the first order, which are first and immediately composed of
the simple, are only the authors of some one action, of which kind are the
muscles and vessels. They are of the second which consist of these first
simple, and others besides, as the fingers. They are counted of the third
rank, which are composed of parts of the second order and some besides, as
the hand taken in general. The fourth order is the most composed, as the whole
body, the organ and instrument of the soul. But you must observe, that when we
say the muscles and vessels are simple parts, we refer you to the sense and
sight, and to the understanding, comparatively to the parts which are more
compound; but if any consider their essence and constitution, he shall
understand they are truly compound, as we said before. Now it remains, that
we understand, that in each part, whether simple or compound, nine things are
to be considered, as substance, quantity or magnitude, figure, composition,
number, connection, (by which name, we also understand the orginall and
insertion) temperature, Nine things to be considered in each part.
action, and use; that by the consideration of these things, every one may
exercise the art of Physic, in preserving health, curing diseases, or
foreseeing their events and ends.

But also we must note, that of the organicall parts, there be three, by whose
power the body is governed; which for that cause they call regent and
principal; Why the three principal parts are so called.
because they govern all the rest; they are the liver, heart, and brain. But
they are called principal, not only because they are necessary for life (for
the stomach, winde-pipe, lungs, reins, bladder, and such like parts perhaps
are equally as necessary for life) but because from each of these three, some
force, power, and faculty, or also matter necessary for the whole body, flow
over all the body, when no such thing proceeds from the rest of the parts. For
from the liver a matter fit for nourishment, is distributed by the veins
through all the body; from the heart the vital force diffused by the arteries,
imparts life to the whole body; from the brain by the nerves a power or
faculty is carried through all the parts of the body, which gives them sense
and motion.

Galen would have the Testicles to be of this kind, not for the necessity of
the individual, (...) de Art^ medica.
or peculiar body, but for the preservation of the Species or kind. And
moreover in his book de Semine comparing the Testicles with the heart, he makes
them the more noble by this reason, that by how much it is better to live well
and happily, than simply and absolutely to live, by so much the testicles are
more excellent than the heart, because with them we may live well and
pleasantly, but with this simply live, as we see by the example of Eunuchs,
and such as are gelt, by which the Testicles seem rightly to be accounted
amongst the principal parts; for nature seeing it desired, that this its work
should be immortal, for the attaining of that immortality which it intends,
frames those parts, like as prudent founders of a City, who do not only
procure to furnish their city with many inhabitants, so long as they are in
building it, but also that it may remain in the same state and condition for
ever, or at least for many ages. And yet notwithstanding of so many cities
built in the first memory of man, there remains none, whose fame and state,
together with the builders The use and function of the parts serving for
generation.
name is not decayed and perished. But this humane work of nature, stands yet
secure for this many thousand of years, and shall endure hereafter, because it
has found a way, by which every one may substitute another in his place before
he depart. Hence it is that all creatures have members fit for generation, and
pleasures inserted in those members, by which they might be enticed to mutual
embraces and copulations. But the mind, which has dominion over those members,
has an incredible desire of propagating the issue, by which also brute beasts,
incited, desire to propagate their kinds for ever. For seeing that nature
understands all these her works considered particularly by themselves, are
frail and mortal, it has done what it could to recompense that fatal
necessity of dying, by a perpetual succession of individuals.

Hitherto we may seem to have abundantly showed what necessity of knowledge
in Anatomy belongs to all Artizans in Physic, and also what order is to be
observed in the same. And lastly, how it is defined, and the reason of the
parts of the definition. Wherefore it remains that we prosecute what we have
taken in hand; which is, that we show and declare how to know all and every
the parts of man's body, how many, and what they be, and to understand wherefore
they be. For although the true knowledge of Anatomy may be perfected by the
sight of the eye, and touching and handling each part with the hand, yet
nevertheless the labor of describing Anatomy is not unprofitable. For by
reading, such as have often exercised themselves in the dissecting of men's
bodies may refresh and help their memories, and such as have not, may make
plain and easy the way to the understanding of dissections.

CHAP. I. The Division or partition of Man's body.
BY reason the partition of man's body can hardly be understood, if the
distinction of the proper faculties of the soul be not understood, for whose
cause the body enjoyes that form (which we see) and devision into diverse
instruments; Therefore I thought good in few words to touch that distinction of
the faculties of the soul, for the better understanding of the partition of
the body which we intend. Wherefore the soul, the perfection of the body, and
What the soul^ is, and with how many faculties it is endewed.
beginning of all its functions, is commonly distinguished and that in the
first and general division, into three faculties, which are the Animal,
vital, and natural. But the Animal is divided into the principal,
sensitive, and motive; Again, the principal is distinguished into the
imaginative, reasonable, and memorative. And the sensitive into Seeing,
Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Touching. But the motive into progressive and
apprehensive. And the vital is divided into the dilative, and contractive
faculty of the heart and arteries, which we know or understand by the
pulsificke faculty. But the natural is parted into the nutritive, auctive,
and generative faculties; which three perform their parts by the help and
ministry of five other faculties, which are, the Attractive, Retentive,
Concoctive, Assimulative, and Expulsive.

After the self same manner, the organ or instrument of the soul, to wit,
Man's body, All the parts of man's body are distinguished into three.
at the first division is distinguished into three parts, which from their
office they call Animal, vital, and natural. These again, according to the
subdivision of the subalternall faculties, are divided particularly into other
parts; so that any one may know the organe of each faculty, by the property
of the function. For while other Anatomists devide man's body into four
universal and chief parts, they distinguish from the three first, those which
they call the Extremities; neither do they teach to what rank of the three
prime parts each extremity should be reduced. From whence many difficulties
happen in reading the writings of Anatomists; for shunning whereof, we will
prosecute, as we have said, that distinction of man's body, which we have
touched before.

Wherefore, as we said before, man's body is divided into three principal and
What parts are here called Animal.
general parts, Animal, Vital, and Natural. By the Animal parts; we
understand not only the parts pertaining to the head, which are bounded with
the crown of the head, the coller-bones, and the first Vertebra of the breast,
but also the extremities, because they are organs and instruments of the motive
faculty; (...) seems to have confirmed the same, where he writes; Those who
have a thick and Lib. 6. Epidem.
great head, have also great bones, nerves, and limbs. And in another place:
h^^ ^aith, those who have great heads, and when they stoop show a long neck,
such have all their parts large, but chiefly the animal. Not for that
Hippocrates would therefore have the head the beginning and cause of the
magnitude and greatness of the bones, and the rest of the members; but that he
might show the equallity, and private-^are or government of nature, being most
just and exact in the fabric of man's body, as if she has well framed the
head, it should not be unlike, that she idly or carele^y neglected the other
parts which are less seen. I thought good to dilate this passage, least any
might abuse that authority of Hippocrates, and gather from thence, that not
only the bones, membranes, ligaments, gristles, and all the other animal
parts, but also the veins and arteries depend on the head as the original.
But if any observe this our distinction of the parts of the body, he will
understand we have a far other meaning.

By the vital parts, we understand only the heart, arteries, lungs,
winde-pipe, and What parts are called vital.
other particles annexed to these. But by the natural, we would have all
those parts understood which are contained in the whole compass of the
Peritonaeum or Rim of the body, and the processes of the Erythroides, the
second coat of the Testicles. For as much as belongs to all the other parts,
which we call containing; they must be reckoned in the number of the animal,
which notwithstanding, we must thus devide into principal, sensitive, and
motive; and again, each of these in the manner following. For first the
principal is divided into the imaginative, which is the first and upper part
of the brain, with its two ventricles and other annexed particles; into the
The devision of the animal parts.
reasoning, which is a part of the brain, lying under the former, and as it
were the top thereof with its third ventricle. Into the memorative, which is
the cerebell^ or afterbraine, with a ventricle hollowed in its substance.
Secondly, the sensitive is parted into the visive, which is in the eyes; the
auditive, in the ears; the smelling* in the nose; the tasting, in the tongue
and palate; the tactive, or touching which is in the body, but most exquisite
in the skin which invests the palms of the hands. Thirdly, the motive, is
divided into the progressive, which intimates the legs, and the
comprehensive, which intimates the hands. Lastly, into simply motive, which are
three parts, called bellies, for the greatest part terminating and containing;
for the vital, the instrument of the faculty of the heart, and dilatation of
the arteries, are the direct or straight fibers, but of the constrictive the
transverse; but the three kinds of fibers The devision of the vital parts.
together, of the pulsificke; or if you please you may devide them into parts
serving for respiration, as are the lungs, and weazon, and parts serving for
vital motion, as are the heart and arteries, furnished with these fibers,
which we formerly mentioned. The devision of the natural parts remains, which
is into the nourishing, auctive and generative, which again are distributed
into attractive, universal, and particular; The devision of the natural parts.
retentive, concoctive, distributive, assimulative, and expulsive. The
attractive, as the gullet and upper orifice of the ventricule; the retentive,
as the Pylorus or lower passage of the stomach; the concoctive, as the body of
the ventricle, or its inner coat; the distributive, as the three small guts;
the expulsive, as the three great guts; we may say the same of the liver, for
that draws by the mesaraicke and gate veins, retains by the narrow orifices
of the veins dispersed through the substance thereof; it concocts by its
proper flesh; distributes by the hollow vein, expels by the spleen, bladder
of the gall and kidneies. We also see the parts in the testicles divided into
as many functions; for they draw by the preparing vessels; retain by the
varieous crooked passages; in the same vessels they concoct the seed by the
power of their proper substance and faculty; they distribute by the
ejaculatorie, at the glandules called Prostata, and the horns of the womb,
supplying the place of prostates; Lastly, they expel or cast forth by the
prostates, horns, and adjoining parts. For as much as belongs to the
particular attraction, retention, concoction, distribution, assimulation of
each part, that depends of the particular temper, and as they term it, occulte
property of each similar and simple part. Neither do these particular actions
differ from the universal, but that the general are performed by the
assistance of the three sorts of fibers, but the special by the several
occult property of their flesh, arising from their temperature, which we may
call a specificke property. Now in the composition of man's body, nature
principally aims at three things. The first is, to create parts necessary for
life, as are the heart, brain, and liver. The second, to bring forth other for
the better and more commodious living, as the eyes, nose, ears, arms and
hands. The third is, for the propagation and renewing the species or kind, as
the privy parts, testicles, and womb. And this is my opinion, of the true
distinction of man's body, furnished with so many parts, for the performance of
so many faculties; which you, if you please, may approve of and follow. If not,
you may follow the common and vulgar, which is, into three bellies, or
capacities, the upper, middle, lower (that is, the head, breast and lower
belly) and the limbs or joints. The vulgar division of man's body.
In which by the head we do not understand all the Animal parts, but only
those which are from the crown of the head to the first vertebra of the neck,
or to the first of the back, if according to the opinion of Galen Lib. de
ossibus, where he makes mention of Enarthrosis and Arthrodia, we reckon the
neck amongst the parts of the head. By the breast, whatsoever is contained from
the collar bones to the ends of the true and bastard, or short ribbs, and the
midriffe. By the lower belly, the rest of the trunk of the body, from the ends
of the ribbs to the share-bones; by the limbs, we understand the arms and
legs. We will follow this division in this our Anatomicall discourse, because
we cannot follow the former in dissecting the parts of man's body, by reason
the animal parts are mutually mixed with the vital and natural, and first of
the lower belly.

Nature would not have this lower belly bony, because the ventricle might be
Why the belly is not bony.
more easily dilated by meat and drink, children might grow the better, and
the body be more flexible. It is convenient we begin our Anatomicall
administration from this, because it is more subject to putrefaction than the
rest, both by reason of its cold and moist temperature, as also by reason of
the feculent excrements therein contained. Yet before we go any further, if
the Anatomicall administration must be performed in public, the body bring
first handsomely placed, and all the instruments necessary for dissection made
ready, the belly must be divided into its parts, of which some contain, and
othersome are contained.

They are called containing, which make all that capacity which is terminated
by the Peritonaeum or Rim of the belly. The upper part whereof is bounded by
Galen The devision of the lower belly.
within the compass of the direct muscles, and by a general name is called
Epigastrium, or the upper part of the lower belly. That again is divided into
three parts, that is, into that which is above the navell, and which carries
the name of the whole, into that which is about the navell, and is called the
umbilicall or middle part; and lastly, into that which is below the navell,
called the Hypogastrium, or the lower part of the lower belly.

In every of which three parts there be two laterall, or side parts to be
considered, as in the Epigastrium, the right and left Hypochondria, which are
bounded above and The Hypochondria.
below, in the compass of the midriffe, and the short ribbs. In the vmbilicall
the two Lumbares (some call them Latera sides) which on both sides from the
lowest parts of the breast, are drawn to the flanks, or hanch-bones; in the
Hypogastrium, the two Ilia, or flanks, bounded with the hanch and share-bones.
Neither am I ignorant, the Ilia or flanks, which the Greeks call (...)
signify all the empty parts, from the ends of the ribs, even to the
hanch-bones, whereupon they also call them (...) as if you should say, empty
spaces, because they are not encompassed with any bone. Yet I thought good that
this doctrine of deviding the belly should be more distinct, to call the parts
which are on each side the navell Lumbares, and those on the lower part of the
lower belly Ilia, flanks. But we must observe that the Ancients have been so
diligent in deciphering the containing parts, that as exactly as might be, they
designed the bowels contained in the belly, which being diverse lie in sundry
places; for the greater portion of the liver lies under the right
Hypochondrium; under the left almost all the ventricle and spleen. Under the
Epigastrium the lower orifice of the ventricle, and the smaller portion of the
liver; In the Lumbares, or fides, in the right and upper part the right kidney,
in the lower part toward the flancke, the blind gut; in the middle part
thereof the collicke and empty guts. In the upper part of the left side lies
the left kidney, in the middle part, the rest of the empty and collike guts.
Under the region of the navell, lies the girdle or upper part of the kall, the
collike gut thrusting it self also through that way. Under the Ilia or
flanks, the right and left, lie the greater part of the gut Ileon, the horns
of the womb in women big with child, and the spermaticke vessels in men and
women. Under the Hypogastrium in the lower part lies the right, or straight
gut, the bladder, womb, and the rest of the kall.

If we know, and well understand these things, we shall more easily discern
the A most certain note of the part affected, by the place where the pain is.
parts affect by the place of the pain, and cure it by fit application of
remedies, without the hurting of any part. The distinction of such places, and
the parts in those places, as seeming most profitable, I have thought good to
illustrate by the placing these two following figures, in which thou have
deciphered, not only the forefaid parts, containing, and contained, but also
of the whole body, and many other things which may seem to conduce to the
knowledge of the mentioned parts. The Figures are these.

The Figure showing the foreparts of the body.
A The hairy Scalp, called (...).

b the forehead called Frons. (...).

c the temples called te^pora, (...).

From b to d The compass of the face.

e The greater or inward corner of the eyes, called Canthus internus.

f The lesser or external angle of the eye, called Canthus externus,

* The lower eyebrow which is immovable, Palpebra.

g The cheek-ball called mala, (...).

h The chek-puf called bucca, (...).

i The ridge of the nose called Nasus externus, (...).

k The nosthrils called nares, (...).

l The outward care; auris externa.

m The mouth made of the two lips, Os.

n The chin called mentum, (...).

o The neck, collum (...) and (...).

From o. to e. the pillar of the neck, truneus, and (...).

pp The hollow of the neck, called iuguli, (...).

qq The patel bones, claves (...).

r The chest pectus, (...).

s The right breast.

ss The left breast: to this Region we apply cordial Epithemations moist and
dry.

tt The nipples of the breasts, Papillae (...).

u The trench of the heart which the Ancients called (...). The Latins
scrobiculus Cordis. This part is anointed for the mouth of the stomach.

From u to E, the lower belly, (...).

chapter The Epigastirum or upper part. of the lower belly.

yy. The Hypocondria or Praecordia.

* The outward Liver-remedies are applied to this place.

Z. The region of the navill, c^llep umbilicalis, or the middle part of the
lower belly.

A. The navill umbilicus. The root of the belly (...).

BB. The side, Latera, (...). and in our Author, Lumbi seu Lumbaris regio.

C. Hypogastrium, the watercourse, Aqualiculus, the lower part of the lower
beelley, (...).

DD. The flanks called Ilia and (...).

E. The Groine called pubes or pecten, (...).

FF. The Leske called inguen, where those tumors are called Bubones.

G. the yard with the foreskinne, penis cumpraeputi^.

H. the stones or testicles, with the cod or scrotum.

II. the shoulders humeri, (...).

KK. the arms Brachia, (...).

L. the bowt of the arm, called Gibber, (...).

M. the out side of the lower part of the arm called cubitus (...).

N. the wrest called Brachial^ (...).

O. the after-wrest postbrachiale, (...).

P. the Palm called Palma or volo manus, (...).

Q the back of the hand Dorsum manus, (...).

QQ. the fore ann middle part of the thigh, where we apply cuppingglasses to
bring down women's courses, (...).

RR. the knee, genus (...).

SS. the leg, Tibia (...).

TT. the calfe of the leg sura, (...).

VV. the instep, tarsus,

XX. the top of the foot Dorsum pedis, (...).

YY. the inner Ankles, (...) ZZ. the outward anckles. (...) the toes of the
feet, (...) the place under the inward anckle, vvher^ the vein called Saphe^^
is opened.



The Figure of the back parts of a man.
A The forepart of the head, synciput, (...).

B. the top or crown of the head vertex, (...).

C. the hinder-part of the head, occiput, (...).

From D. to D. the face, Facies. (...).

* E. the eyebrowes supercilia, (...).

F. the upper eyelid, (...).

* The tip of the nose called globulus nasi.

H. the back part of the neeke, called cervix, (...). and the nuke or nape of
the neck. There is a hollownesse at the top of this cervix, where we apply
Seatons.

I. the back part of the shoulder top, called axilla, (...).

KK. the shoulder blades scapulae, (...).

1, 2, 3. On this place we set cupping glasses.

4, 5, 6, 7. the back dorsum, (...).

8, 9. the ridge, spina dorsi, (...).

L the arm hole, ala, (...).

* the elbow, Gibber brachij.

M M M M. the sides, Latera.

N N the loins Lumbi, or the region of the kidneyes, (...).

O O. the place of the hips, coxendices, where we apply remedies for the
Sciatica.

P. the place of the holy-bone, or Os sacrum where we apply remedies in the
diseases of the right gut.

Q. the place of the Rumpe or Coccyx.

RR. the buttocks Nates, (...).

SS. the back parts of the thigh, Femen.

TT. the ham, Poples, (...).

VV. the calfe of the leg, sura.

XX. the foot or paru^s pes, (...).

YY. the utter ancle, Malleolus externus.

ZZ. the heel, calx or calca^eus, (...).

aa the sole of the foot Planta pedis, (...).

b the inside of the lower part of the arm called Vlna, (...).

c. the outside of the same, Cubitus (...).

dd the wrest, Carpus

ee the back part of the hand, dorsum manus. g. the forefinger index (...). h,
the thumb, pollex, (...).

i. the middle finger, medius, (...).

k the rig-finger Annularis, medicus, (...).

l. the little finger, Auricularis, minimus, (...).



CHAP. II. Of the containing parts of the Epigastrium, and the preparation to
Anatomicall administration.
THe containing parts of the Epigastrium are the Epidermis or thin outward
The containing parts of the lower belly.
skin, the true skin, the fleshie or fatty Pannicle, the eight muscles of
the Epigastrium with their common coat, the Rim of the belly, the five
vertebra's of the loins, all the holy-bone, the hanch-bone, share-bone, the
white line, and midriffe. Of these parts some are common to the whole body, as
the three first; the other proper to the parts contained in the Epigastrium
taken in general. Which that you may see in their order, first you must cut
round about the navell, to the upper superficies of the muscles, that so we
may keep it, till such time, as occasion shall offer it self, to show the
vmbilicall vessels lying in that place, which are one vein, two arteries, and
the vrachus (if it be there.) Which being done, you must draw a straight line
from the chest, over the breast-blade, even to the share-bone, which may divide
the common containing parts, even to the white line.

Then presently it will be convenient to draw two other lines acrosse, or
overtwhart, of the like depth on each hand, from the circumference of the
navell, even to the sides, that so on each part we may draw the skin more
commodiously from the parts lying under it; the sight of which otherwise it
would hinder. These things being done, the skin must be divided from the
parts lying under it from the designed circumference left about the navell. We
must teach how the skin is twofold, the true and false, and render a reason
of the name, which we will every where do, as far as the thing will suffer,
and it shall lie in our power. And in doing or examining these things, it will
be convenient diligently to inquire into the nine things mentioned in the
preface. We will begin with the skin, because that part is first obvious
to our senses.

CHAP. III. Of the utmost skin or Cuticle.
THe skin being the first part, and spread over all the body, is twofold, that
The skin twofold. From what parts the skin cannot be separated.
is, the true, and bastard skin. The true is called by the Greeks Derma,
which may almost every where be pulled from the parts lying under it, which it
invests; except in the face, ears, the palms of the hands, soles of the
feet, fingers, and privities, where it sticks so close that it cannot be
separated.

The bastard (which first of all we will declare, because it first presents it
self to our sight) is by the Greeks called Epidermis; because it covers the
true skin, they term it commonly the Cuticle. The substance of it is
excrementitious, and as it The matter of the Cuticle.
were a certain dry flouring, or production of the true skin. That it
draws not its substance from the seed is apparent by this, that as it is
easily lost, so it is easily repaired, which happens not in parts truly
spermaticall. This utmost thin skin, or cuticle, may two manner of ways be
made apparent by it self, and separated from the other, as by burning with
fire, or ardent heat of the Sun (in some delicate bodies, and such as are
not accustomed to be conversant in Sunshine.) The quantity in thickness is
very small; but the extent is most large, because it covers The quantity.
all the skin; the figure of it is round, and long, like those parts which it
invests. The figure. The composure.
The composure of it is obscure; yet because this Cuticle is the excrement of
the true skin, we say it has its matter from the excrementitious
superfluity of the nerves, veins, arteries, and substance of the true skin.

It is in number one, like as the true skin which it outwardly covers, that
it might be a medium between the object, and fixed faculty of touching,
diffused over The number.
all the true skin which every where lies under it. For the temperature, by
the common consent of Physicians, it is in the midst of all excess; for that
seeing it is The temperatuer.
the medium between the object and faculty, if it should be hotter, colder,
moister, or drier, it would deceive the faculty by exhibiting all objects, not
as they are of themselves, but as it should be; no otherwise than as to such as
look through red or green spectacles, all things appearered, or green.
Wherefore for this reason it was convenient the cuticle should be void of all
sense. It has no action in the body; but it has use, for it preserves and
beautifies the true skin; for it seems to be given by the singular indulgence
of nature, to be a muniment and ornament, to the true The use
skin. This providence of nature, the industry of some Artizans (or rather
Curtizans) does imitate, who for to seem more beautiful, do smooth and
polish it. By this you may understand; that not all the parts of the body have
action, yet have they their use, because, according to Aristotle's opinion;
Nature has made nothing in vain. Also you must note that this thin skin,
or cuticle being lost, may every where be regenerated, unless in the place
which is covered with a scarre. For Why the cuticle cannot be restored in scars.
here the true skin being deficient, both the matter and former faculty of
the cuticle is wanting.

CHAP. IIII. Of the true skin.
THe true skin called by the Greeks Derma, is of a spermaticke substance,
The substance
wherefore being once lost, it cannot be restored as formerly it was. For in
place thereof comes a scarre, which is nothing else but flesh dried beyond
Magnitude.
measure. It is of sufficient thickness, as appears by the separating from
the flesh.

But for the extent thereof it encompasses the whole body, if you except the
eyes, ears, nose, privities, fundament, mouth, the ends of the fingers where
the nails grow, that is, all the parts by which any excrements are evacuated.
The figure of it Figure.
is like the cuticle round and long, with its productions, with which it covers
the extremities of the parts.

It is composed of nerves, veins, arteries, and of a proper flesh and
substance Composure,
of its kind, which we have said to be spermaticall, which arises from the
process of the secundine, which lead the spermaticke vessels even to the
navell, in which place each of them into the parts appointed by nature, send
forth such vessels, as are spread abroad and diffused from the generation of
the skin. Which also the similitude of them both, that is, the skin and
membrane Chorion do argue. For as the Chorion is double, without sense,
encompassing the whole infant, lightly fastened to the first coat which is
called Amnios; so the skin is double, and of it self insensible (for
otherwise the nerves were added in vain from the parts The skin of it self
is void of sense.
lying under it) ingirting the whole body, lightly cleaving to the fleshie
Pannicle. But if any object that the Cuticle is no part of the true skin,
seeing it is wholly different from it, and easily to be separated from it, and
wholly void of sense: I will answer, these arguments do not prevail. For that
the true skin is more crasse, thick, sensible, vivide, and fleshie, is not
of it self, being rather by the assistance and admixture of the parts, which
derived from the three principal it receives into its proper substance; which
happens not in the cuticle. Neither if it should happen would it be better for
it, but verily exceeding ill for us, because so our life should lie fit and
open to receive a thousand external injuries, which encompasse us on every
side, as the violent and contrary access of the four first qualities.

There is only one skin, as that which should cover but one body, the which it
every The number.
where does, except in those places I formerly mentioned. It has connection
with the parts lying under it by the nerves, veins, and arteries, with those
subjacent parts Connection:
put forth into the skin investing them, that there may be a certain
communion of all the parts of the body amongst themselves.

It is cold and dry in its proper temper in respect of its proper flesh and
substance, Temperature,
for it is a spermaticall part. Yet if any consider the finewes, veins,
arteries, and fleshie threads which are mixed in its body, it will seem
temperate, and placed as it were in the midst of contrary qualities, as which
has grown up from the like portion of hot, cold, moist, and dry bodies. The
use of the skin is to keep safe and sound the continuitie of the whole body,
and all the parts thereof, from the Use.
violent assault of all external dangers, for which cause it is every where
indewed with sense, in some parts more exact, in others more dull, according to
the dignity and necessity of the parts which it ingirts, that they might all
be admonished of their safety and preservation. Lastly, it is penetrated with
many pores, as breathing places, as we may see by the flowing out of sweat,
that so the arteries in their diastole might draw the encompassing air into
the body, for the tempering and nourishing of the fixed inbred heat, and in
the Systole expel the fuliginous excrement, which in Winter suppressed by the
cold air encompassing us, makes the skin black and rough. We have an
argument and example of breathing through these, by drawing the air in by
transpiration, in women troubled with the mother, who without The reason why
the skin is blacker and rougher in Winter.
respiration live only for some pretty space by transpiration.

CHAP. V. Of the fleshie Pannicle.
AFter the true skin, follows the membrane, which Anatomists call the fleshy
Pannicle, whose nature that we may more easily prosecute and declare, we must
first show what a membrane is, and how many ways the word is taken. Then
wherefore it has the name of the fleshie Pannicle. A membrane therefore is a
simple part, broad and thin, yet strong and dense, white and nervous, and the
which may easily, without any great danger be extended What a membrane is.
and contracted. Sometimes it is called a coat, which is, when it covers and
defends some part. This is called the fleshie Pannicle; because in some parts
it degenerates Why it is sometimes called a coat, sometimes the fleshie and
fattie Pannicle.
into flesh, and becomes musculous, as in a man from the collar bones, to the
hair of the head, in which part it is therefore called the broad muscle, where
as in other places it is a simple membrane, here and there entangled with the
fat lying under it, from whence it may seem to take or borrow the name of the
fatty Pannicle. But in beasts (whence it took that name, because in those a
fleshie substance makes a Why beasts have this pannicle wholly, fleshie or
musculous.
great part of this Pannicle) it appears manifestly fleshie and musculous over
all the body, as you may see in Horses, and Oxen; that by that means being
moveable, they may drive and shake off their flies, and other troublesome
things, by their shaking and contracting their backs. These things considered,
we say the fleshie Pannicle in its proper body, is of a nervous or membranous
substance, as that which has its original The substance
from the coat Amnios, (which is next to the infant) dilated near to the
navell and stretched forth for the generation of this Pannicle; in which thing
I think good to note, that as the membranes Chorion and Amnios mutually
interwoven with small nervous fibers, encompasse and invest the child, as long
as it is contained in the womb; so the skin and fleshie Pannicle knit
together by such like bands, engirt the whole body.

Therefore the fleshie Pannicle is equal in magnitude and like in figure to
the The magnitude and figure.
true skin, but that it lies under it, and is contained in it, in some places
mixed with the fat, in others increased by the flesh interwoven with it, and in
other some is only a simple membrane. Number. Composure.


The composition of it is such, as the sight of it presents to our eye, that
is, of veins, arteries, nerves, and the proper flesh, some whites mixed and
interlaced with fat, and sometimes with musculous flesh. It is but one, by
reason of the use we shall presently show; It is situated between the skin
and fat, or common coat of the muscles, annexed to these and the other parts
lying under it, by the veins, nerves, and arteries ascending from these inward
parts, and implanting themselves into the substance thereof, and then into the
true skin.

The temperature thereof is diverse, according to the variety of the parts
interwoven with it. The use of it is, to lead, direct, and strengthen in their
passage, the The temperature. The use.
vessels which are disseminated into the true skin, and the whole superficies
of the body. But in beasts it has another commodity, that is, it gives a
shaking or trembling motion to their skin and back, for that cause we
formerly touched.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fat.
THe fat coming near the condition of an excrement, rather than of a The fat
is rather an excrement than a part. The substance
part (as we said, when we treated of the simular parts) is of an oily
substance, bred of the aerie and vaporous portion of the blood, which sweating
through the pores of the coats, or mouths of the vessels, becomes concreate
about the membranes, and nerves, and cold bodies, and turns into fat by the
coldness of the place. Whereby we may know that cold, or a more remiss heat,
is the efficient cause of fat, which is manifest by contemplation not only of
creatures The efficient cause of fat.
of diverse kinds, but also by those of the same species and sex, if so be
that the one be colder than the other.

By which we may understand that the fat is the more or less in quantity
according The quantity.
to the different temper of the whole body, and of its particular parts; for
its composition, it consists of that portion of the blood which we formerly
mentioned, intermixed The composure.
with certain membranes, nervous fibers, veins and arteryes. The greatest
part of it lies between the fleshy pannicle and the common coat of the The
site.
Muscles, I was pres^at the opening a body, Feb: 1630* (...) which the ^at, in
the lower part of the lower belly was in thickness above 8, inch^s, upon the
breast between a and 5 nche which I thought good to remember in this place
both for the rarity of the thing, as also because it was increased by report,
and the place m^staken some saying the O^um or Call was so thick, which was
false, for it did not much exceed the quantity of that part, in other fa^men.
The Temper. The use. The solider fat, or seame.
Otherwiseit is diffused over all the body, in some places more, in some less,
yet it is always about the nervous bodies, to which it delights to cleave.
Most Anatomists enquire whether the fat lie above or beneath the fleshy
pannicle. But me thinks this question is both impertinent and idle; being we
often see the fat to be on both sides. It is of a middle temper between heat
and cold, being it arises of the more aerie portion of the blood; although it
may seem cold in respect of the efficient cause, that is, of cold by which it
concreats. For the rest, moisture is predominant in the fat. The use thereof is,
to moisten the parts which may become dry by long fasting, vehement exercise or
immoderate heat, and besides to give heat, or keep the parts warm. Although it
do this last rather by accident, than of its own nature, as heated by
exercise, or by some such other chance; it heats the adjacent parts, or may
therefore be thought to heat them, because it hinders the dissipation of the
native and internal heat; like as cold heats in winter, whereby the bellyes
are at that time the hotter. I know some learned Physicians of our time stiffly
maintained, that the fat was hot, neither did they acknowledge any other
efficient cause thereof, than temperate heat and not cold. But I think it best
to leave the more subtle agitation of these questions to natural Philosophers.
But we must note, that at the joints which are more usually moved, there is
another sort of fat, far more solid and hard, than that which we formerly
mentioned, often found mixed with a viscid and tough humor like the whites of
Eggs, that so it might be sufficient for a longer time to moisten these parts,
subject to be hurt by dryness, and make them slippery and so fitter for
motion, in imitation whereof they usually grease hard bodies, which must be in
frequent motion, as coach wheels and axeltrees. And there is another kind of
fat, which is called Sevum, seame, in one thing differing from the ordinary
fat, that is much dryer; the moister and softer portion of the fat being
dissipated by the raging heat of the place. For it is found principally about
the midriffe, where there are many windings In what parts and for what cause
the fat is more dense.
of arteryes and veins, and it is also about the reins, Loins, and basis of
the heart. The fat is wasted by long fasting; is dried and hardened by vehement
exercise and immoderate heat. Hence it is that it is much more compact in the
palms of the hands, and soles of the feet, about the eyes and heart, so that
it resembles the flesh in densitie and hardness; because by the continual
motion and strong heat of these parts, the thinner portion being dissipated and
diffused, the more Gross and terrestrial remain.

CHAP. VII. Of the common coat of the Muscles.
NExt under the fat, appears a certain coat, spread over all the Muscles, and
called the common coat of the Muscles, it is of a nervous substance; The
substance
as all other membranes are. The quantity and breadth thereof is bounded The
quantity
by the quantity of the Muscles which it involves, and fits it self to, as
that which encompasses the Muscles of the Epigastrium, is of equal largnesse
with the same Muscles. The figure of it is round: It is composed of veins,
nerves, arteryes and its The Composure.
peculiar flesh consisting of three sorts of fibers; the beginning of it is
from the Periostium, in that part where the bones give ligaments to the
Muscles; or according to the opinion of others, of the nervous and ligamentous
fibers of the Muscles, which rising up and diffused over the fleshy superficies
thereof, are united for the generation of this coat. But this membrane arising
from the Periostium (as every membrane which The Original
is below, the head takes its original from the Periostium either primarily,
by the interposition of no Medium, or secondarily) is stretched over the
Muscles by their tendons. But if any object, that this membrance pluct from the
belly of the Muscle, may seem to end in a ligament. I will answer, that it is
the condition of every nervous part, so to bind or fasten it self to another
part of his own kind as to a stay, so that it can scarce be plucked from
thence. We see the proof hereof, in the Peritonaeum or Rim in the Epigastrium
or lower part of the lower belly. That which covers the Muscles of the
Epigastrium is but one, unless you had rather part it in two, the right and
the The number.
left distinguished by the interposition of the Linea Alba, or white Line. It
is situate betwixt the fat and Muscles; for it is fastened above and below to
these parts with The site.
fibers, which in smallness and fitness exceed the Spiders web. But by its
vessels, it participates with the three principal parts, and is of a cold and
dry temper. The use The use,
of it is, to contain the Muscles in their natural union, and to keep them
as much as in it lies, from putrefaction, which may happen to them from pus or
matter, which is often cast forth of the simular parts into the empty spaces
and distances of the Muscles. Wherefore going about to separate the fat of the
Epigastrium (where thou must begin the dissection of man's body) you must have a
care, that you hurt it not with your knife, but that, before you touch the
Muscles, see you artificially take it away, that you may the more easily
separate the Muscles lying under it, distinguished by a manifest space at the
white Line, which is made by the meeting together What the white lime is.
of the proper coats of all those muscles.

CHAP. VIII. What a Muscle is, and how many differences there be thereof.
A Muscle is the instrument of voluntary motion; and simple voluntary motion is
performed six manner of ways, upwards, downwards, forwards, What a Muscle is.
backwards, to the right hand and to the left; but the compound one How the
circular motion is performed.
way, which is circularly, the which is performed by the continual succession
of the motion of the Muscles ingirting the part. Such a Motion Falconers use
when they stretch forth their hand and Lure their Hawk. We have some parts,
which have motion without a Muscle, but that motion is not voluntary; such
parts be the heart, stomach, gutts, both the bladders (that is, that of the
Gall and that of the urine) and diverse other which have the motions of
attraction, expulsion and retention, by the means of the three sorts of
fibers; for they draw by the right, expel by the transverse; and retain by
the oblique. The differences of Muscles which are many From whence the
differences of muscles are drawn.
and diverse, are taken from their substance, original, insertion into the
part which they move, for me or figure, holes or openings, magnitude, color,
site, kind of fibers, their conjugation or connection, heads, bellyes, tendons?
opposition in action and office. Some in substance are nervous, venous,
arterious, because they have manifest Differences of muscles from their
substance.
nerves, veins and arteryes, as the Midriffe, the Intercostall and
Epigastricke Muscles and many more, and that for their difference from other
Muscles, into which neither nerve nor vein, or Arteryes are manifestly
inserted, although secretly they admit them all for sense and motion, life and
nourishment, such are the Muscles of the wrest, the wormy muscles of the hands
and feet; for if there be any nerves observed in them, they are very small.
Some had rather make the difference of Muscles thus, that some of them are
fleshy, some nervous, others membranous. From their Original, Differences of
Muscles from their original.
some arise from the bones, as these which move the hands, arms and Legs;
others from gristles, as the Muscles of the throat; others from membranes which
invest the tendons, as the wormy Muscles of the hands and feet; others from
ligaments as the Extenders of the fingers; others from other muscles, as the
two lower Muscles of the yard which proceed from the Sphincter Muscle of the
fundament. Others have no original, as the membrane which we call the fleshy
pannicle assumes flesh in certain places, and degenerates into a Muscle; such
are the Cremaster or hanging Muscles of the testicles, the large Muscles of the
face, and if you please the Midriffe, as that which is composed of two coats,
the one in compassing the ribbs and the Peritonaeum, has flesh in the midst
between the two membranes. And moreover some Muscles have their original from
one only bone, as these which bend and extend the Cubite, others arise of many
bones as the oblique descending, the Dorsall and many Muscles of the neck,
with arise together from many spondyls and sides of spondyls. There be others
according to the opinion of some men, both from the bones and gristles of the
Pubis at the right or direct Muscles of the Epigastrium, yet by their favor I
think otherwise. Because by the Anatomicall and received axiom, A Where a
muscle has its original.
Muscle is there thought to take his beginnings from whence he receives a
nerve; but these Muscles take a nerve from the intercostall muscles, wherefore
their original ought to be referred to the sides of the breast blades, as shall
be showed in due place. Differences of muscles from their insertion
From their insertion arise these differences, some are inserted into a bone,
as those which move the head, Arms and Legs; others into a gristle, as those
of the Throtle, eyelids, nose and the obliqueascendant muscles of the
Epigastrium; some into a bone and gristle both, as the right muscles of the
Epigastrium and the Midriffe; some into the skin, as the muscles of the lips;
others into the Coats as the muscles of the eyes; others into Ligaments, as
the muscles of the yeard. But these differences following may be drawn both
from their insertion and original. For some muscles arising from many parts,
are inserted into some one part, as diverse of these which move the arm, and
the shoulder, which arising from many spondiles are inserted into the bone of
the shoulder and the shoulder blade. Others arise from one part, and insert
themselves into more, as those which arise from the bottom of the shoulder
blades, are extended and inserted into some eight or nine of the upper ribbs,
to help respiration; and the benders and extenders of the fingers and toes;
Others arising from many bones are inserted into as many, as some of those
which serve for respiration, to wit those which we call the hinder Saw-muscles
and the Semispinatus, which sends a tendon into all the ribbs. Others have
their original from many bones, and end in gristles of the seven ribbs, as
those two which lie under the Sternon. Moreover also these differences of
muscles may be drawn from the original and insertion, that some proceed from
bones and are inserted into the next bone, to help and strengthen the motion
thereof, as the three muscles of the Hip; others arise from an upper bone and
are not inserted into the next, but into some other, as the long muscles. Some
are named from the part they move, as the temporal muscles because they move
the temples; others from their office, as the grinding muscles, because they
move the skin as a mill, to grind asunder the meal. From their form or
figure, because some are like Differences of muscles taken from their figure.
Mice, other like Lizards which have their Legs cut off, for that they imitate
in their belly, body or tendon, the belly or tail of such creatures, and from
whence the names of Musculus and Lacertus are derived. Such are those which
bend the wrest, and which are fastened to the bone of the Leg, and which extend
the foot; Others are triangular, as that which lifts up the arm, called Epomis
or Deltoides, and that which draws the arm to the breast, called the
Pectorall muscle. Others quadrangular as the Rhomboides, or Lozenge muscle of
the shoulder blade and the two hindesum-muscles serving for respiration, and
two of the wrests which turn down the hand; Others consist of more than four
angles, as the oblique descending, and that muscle with joins it self to it
from the shoulder blade; others are round and broad, as the Midriffe, others
circular as the Sphincter muscle of the fundament and bladder; others are of a
pyramidall figure, as the seventh muscle of the eye, which compasses the
opticke nerve in beasts but not in men. Others have a semicirculer form, as
that which shuts up the eye feated at the lesser corner thereof. Others
resemble a Monks cowle, or hood, as the Trapezius of the shoulder blade.
Besides others at their first original are narrow, but broad at their
insertion, as the Saw-muscle of the shoulder and the transverse of the
Epigastrium; others are quire contrary, as the three Muscles of the Hippe;
others keep an equal breadth or bigness in all places, as the intercostall
muscles and these of the wrest; others are long and slender, as the long muscle
of the thigh; others are long and broad, as the oblique descending muscles of
the Epigastrium; others are directly contrary, as the Intercostall, which are
very narrow. From their perforations, Differences from their perforations.
for some are perforated, as the Midriffe which has three holes, as also the
oblique and transverse of the Epigastrium, that so they may give passage forth
to the preparing spermaticke vessels, and to the ejaculatory vessels, the
Coat Erythroides associating and strengthening them; others are not
perforated. From their magnitude From their magnitude.
for some are most large, as the two muscles of the Hipp, others very small, as
the eight small muscles of the neck, and the proper muscles of the Throtle,
and the wormy muscles. Others are of an indifferent magnitude. From their
color, for From their Color,
some are white and red, as the Temporal muscles, which have Tendons coming
from the midst of their belly; others are livide, as the three greater muscles
of the calfe of the leg, which color they have by the admixtion of the white,
or tendinous nervy coat with the red flesh, for this coat by its thickness
darkning the color of the flesh, so that it cannot show its redness and fresh
color, makes it seem of that livide color. From their situation, for some
are superficiary, as those which appear From their site.
under the skin and fat; others deep in and hid, as the smooth and four twin
muscles; some are stretched out and as it were spread over in a straight and
plain passage, as the muscles of the thigh which move the leg, except the
Ham-muscle; others oblique, as those of the Epigastrium; other some transverse,
as the transverse of the Epigastrium, where you must observe; that although all
the fibers of the muscles are direct, yet we call them oblique, and transverse
by comparing them to the right muscles, as which by the concourse of the fibers
make a straight or acute angle.

From the sorts of fibers; for some have one kind of fiber; yet the greatest
part enjoy two sorts running so up and down, that they either are crossed like
the letter From their fibers.
X, as happens in the pectorall and grinding muscles; or else do not concur,
as in the Trapezij. Others have three sorts of fibers, as the broad muscle of
the face.

From their coherence and connection, or their texture of nervous fibers; for
From thire connection.
some have fibers somewhat more distant and remote immediately at their
original, than in other places, as you may see in the muscles of the buttocks;
Others in their midst and belly, which by reason thereof in such muscles is
more big or tumid, their head and tail being slender, as happens in most of
the muscles of the arm and leg, in which the dense mass of flesh interwoven
with fibers, disioynes the fibers in so great a distance; in other some the
fibers are more distant in the tail, as in the greater Saw-muscle arising from
the bottom of the shoulder blade; in others they are equally distant through
the whole muscle, as in the muscles of the wrest and between the ribbs.

From their head; for in some it is fleshy interwoven with few fibers, as in
the muscles of the buttocks; in others it is wholly nervous, as in the
most-broadmuscle From their head.
common to the arm and shoulder blade, and in the three muscles of the thigh
proceeding from the tuberosity of the hucle bone; in some it is nervous and
fleshy as in the internal and external muscle of the arm. Besides some have
one head, others two, as the bender of the elbow and the external of the
leg, others three as the Threeheaded muscle of the thigh. But we must note
that the word nerve or sinew is here taken in a large signification, for a
ligament, nerve and tendon, as Galen says (Lib de Ossibus) and moreover we
must observe, that the head of a muscle, is one while above, another while
below, otherwhiles in the midst as in the Midriffe, as you may know by the
insertion of the Nerve, because it enters the muscle by its head.

From their belly also, there be some differences of muscles taken; for some
have From their belly.
their belly immediately at their beginning, as the muscles of the buttocks,
others at their insertion, as the Midriffe. Others just at their head, as those
which put forth the Calfe of the leg; in others it is somewhat further off, as
in those which draw back the arm, and which bend the leg; in others the
belly extends even from the head to the tail, as in the intercostall muscles
and these of the wrest; in others it is produced even to their insertion, as in
those of the palms of the hands and soles of the feet; some have a double
belly, distinguished by a nervous substance; as those which open the mouth, and
those which arise from the root of the lower process of the shoulder blade.

Moreover the differences of muscels are drawn also from the Tendons, for some
From their Tendons.
have none, at least which are manifest, as the muscles of the lips and the
sphincter muscles, the intercostall and those of the wrest; others have them in
part; and want them in part, as the Midriffe; for the Midriffe wants a Tendon
at the ends of the shorter ribs, but has two at the first Vertebra of the
Loins in which it is terminated; Others have a Tendon indeed. But some of
these move with the bone, some not, as the muscles of the eyes, and besides,
some of these have broad and membranous tendons, as the muscles of the eyes and
Epigastrium, except the right muscles; in others they are thick and round, as
in the benders of the fingers; in others they are less round, but more broad
than thick, such is the Tendon arising from the twin muscles and Soleus of the
leg: others have short Tendons, as the muscles which turn down the hand;
othersome long, as those of the plames of the hands and soles of the feet;
besides others produce Tendons, from the end of their belly which Tendons are
manifest, others from the midst, as the Temporal muscles.

Besides also others diffuse many tendons from their belly, as in the hands the
benders of the fingers, and the extenders of the feet. Othersome put forth but
one, which sometimes is divided into many, as those which bend the third
articulation of the foot; otherwhile many muscles by their meeting together
make one Tendon, as the three muscles of the Calfe of the leg, and those which
bend the cubit and leg. All tendons have their original, when the nerves and
ligaments dispersed through the fleshy substance of a muscle, are by little and
little drawn and meet together, until at last carried to the joint they are
there fastened for the fit bending and extension From their Action.
thereof. From the contrariety of their Actions, for some parts have contrary
muscles, benders and extenders; Other parts have none, for the Cods and
fundament have only lifters up. From their function, for some are made for
direct motions as those From their function.
which extend the fingers and toes; others for oblique, as the Supinators of
the hand and the Pronators; others perform both, as the pectorall muscle,
which moves, the Arm obliquely upward and downward, as the upper and lower
fibers are contracted; and also out right, if all the fibers be contracted
together, which also happens to the Deltoides and Trapezius. I have thought it
good to handle particularly these differences of muscles, because that by
understanding them the prognosticke will be more certain; and also the
application of remedies to each part; and if any occasion be either to make
incision, or suture, we may be more certain, whether the part affected be
more, or less nervous.

CHAP. IX. Of the parts of a Muscle.
HAving declared the nature and differences of a muscle, we must note that The
compound and simple (...) of a muscle.
some of the parts thereof are compound, or universal, others simple or
particular. The compound are the head, Belly and tail. The simple are
ligaments, a nerve, flesh, a vein, artery and coat. For the compound parts,
by the head we understand the beginning and original of a muscle, which is one
while ligamentous and nervous, otherwhiles also fleshy. By the belly, that
portion which is absolutely fleshy; But by the tail, we understand a Tendon
consisting partly of a nerve, partly of a ligament promiscuously coming forth
from the belly of the muscle. For as much as belongs to the simple, which are
six in number, three are called proper, and three common. The proper are a
Ligament from a bone, a nerve proceeding from the Brain, or spinall marrow,
and flesh compact by the concretion of blood. The Common are, a vein from the
Liver or trunk arising from thence; an artery proceeding from the Heart, a
Coat produced by the nervous and ligamentous fibers spreading over the
superficies of the muscle. But for the simple use of all such parts, the nerve
is as it were the principal part of a muscle, which gives it sense and motion,
the Ligament gives strength, the flesh contains the nervous and ligamentous
What use each simple particle has in a muscle.
fibers of the muscle and strengthens it filling up all the void spaces, and
also it preserves the native humidity of these parts and cherishes the heat
implanted in them; and to conclude, defends it from all external injuries; for
like a fan it opposes it self against the heat of the Sun; and is as a
garment against the cold; and as a cushion in all falls and bruises, and as a
buckler or defense against wounding weapons. The vein nourishes the muscle,
the artery gives it life, the coat preserves the harmony of all the parts
thereof, lest they should be any ways disioyned or corrupted by purulent
abscesses breaking into the empty or void spaces of the muscles, as we see it
happens in a Gangrene, where the corruption has invaded this membrane by the
breaking out of the more acride matter or filth.

CHAP. X. A more particular inquisition into each part of a muscle.
HAving gone thus far, it remains, that we more particularly inquire into
each part of a muscle, that (if it be possible,) nothing may be wanting to this
discourse. Wherefore a Ligament properly so called, is a simple part The nature
of a Ligament.
of man's body, next of a bone and gristle, the most terrestrial, dry, hard,
cold, white, taking its original immediately, or by the interposition of some
Medium from the BOnes, or Gristles (from whence also the Muscles have their
beginning) whereby it comes to pass that a ligament is void of sense, unless
it receive a nerve from some other place; (For so the Ligaments which compose
and strengthen the Tongue and yeard, are partakers of sense) and it inserts it
self into the bone and gristle that so it may bind them together, and
strengthen and beautify the whole joint or connection; (for these three be the
principal uses of a Ligament) then diffusing it self into the membranes The
three fold use of a Ligament.
and muscles to strengthen those parts. A nerve to speak properly, is also a
simple part of our body, bred and nourished by a gross and Phlegmatic
humor, What a nerve is.
such as the brain, the original of all the nerves, and also the Spinall
marrow endewed with the faculty of feeling and oftentimes also of moving. For
there be diverse parts of the body which have nerves, yet are destitute of all
voluntary motion, having the sense only of feeling, as the membranes, veins,
arteries, guts and all the entrails. A nerve is covered with a double cover
from the two membranes of the brain, and besides also with a third proceeding
from the ligaments which fasten the hinder part of the head to the Vertebra's,
or else from the Pericranium. We understand no other things by the fibers of a
nerve, or of a Ligament, than long and slender threads, white, What we mean by
the nervous and Ligamentous fibers.
solid, cold, strong more or less according to the quantity of the substance,
which is partly nervous and sensible, partly Ligamentous and insensible. You
must imagine the same of the fleshy fibers in their kind; but of these threads
some are straight for attraction, others oblique for retention of that which is
convenient for the creature, and lastly some transverse for the expulsion of
which is unprofitable. But when these transverse threads are extended in length,
they are lessened in breadth; but when they are directly contracted, they are
shortened in length. But when they are extended all together as it were with an
unanimous consent, the whole member is wrinkled as contracted into it self, as
on the contrary it is extended when they are relaxed. Some of these are
bestowed upon the animal parts, to perform voluntary motions; others upon the
vital to perform the agitation of the Heart and Arteries; others upon the
natural for attraction, retention and expulsion. Yet we must observe, that the
attraction By what power the simular parts principally draw, or attract. What
and of how many sorts the flesh is.
of no simular part is performed by the help of the foresaid fibers or threads,
but rather by the heat implanted in them, or by the shunning of Emptiness, or
the familiarity of the substance. The flesh also is a simple and soft part
composed of the purer portion of the blood insinuating it self into the spaces
between the fibers, so to invest them for the uses formerly mentioned. This is
as it were a certain wall and Bulwark against the injuries of heat and cold,
against all falls and bruises, as it were a certain soft pillow or cushion
yielding to any violent impression. There be three sorts of flesh; one more
ruddy, as the musculous flesh of perfect creatures and such as have blood; for
the flesh of all tender and young things having blood, as Calves, and also of
all sorts of fish, is whitish, by reason of the too much humidity of the blood.
The second kind is more pallid, even in perfect creatures having blood, such
is the flesh of the heart, stomach, weasond, guts, bladder, womb. The third
is belonging to the entrails, or the proper substance of each entrail, as that
which remains of the Liver (the veins, arteries and coat being taken away)
of the bladder of the Gall, brain, kidneys, milt. Some add a fourth sort of
flesh which is spongy, and that they say is proper to the tongue alone.

A vein is the vessel, pipe or channel of the blood, or bloody matter; it has
a What a vein is.
spermaticke substance, consists of one coat composed of 3 sorts of fibers.

An Artery is also the receptacle of blood but that spirituous and yellowish,
consisting What an artery is.
in like manner of a spermaticke substance; But it has two coats, with three
sorts of fibers, the utmost whereof is most thin, consisting of right fibers
and some oblique: But the inner is five times more thick and dense than the
utmost, interwoven with transverse fibers; and it does not only contain blood
and spirit, but also a serous humor, which we may believe because there be
two emulgent Arteryes, as well as veins.

But the inner coat of an Artery is therefore more thick, because it may
contain Why an Artery is more thick and dense than a vein.
blood which is more hot, subtle and spirituous; for the spirit, seeing it is
naturally more thin and light and in perpetual motion, would quickly fly
away, unless it were held in a stronger hold. There is other reason for a
vein, as that which contains blood gross, ponderous and slow of motion.
Wherefore if it had acquired a dense and gross coat, it could scarce be
distributed to the neighboring parts; God the maker of the universe,
foreseeing this, made the coats of the vessels contrary to the consistance of
the bodies contained in The mutual Anastomosis of the veins and arteryes.
them. The Anastomosis of the veins and Arteryes, that is to say, the
application of the mouths of the one to the other, is very remarkable, by
benefit of which they mutually communicate and draw the matters contained in
them, and so also transfuse them by insensible passages, although that
anastomosis is apparent Where it is manifest.
in the vein and artery that meet together at the Joint and bending of the
Arm, which I have sometimes showed in the Physic schools, at such time as I
there dissected Anatomyes.

But the action or function of a muscle is either to move, or confirm the
part From whence a muscle has its beginning or head.
according to our will, into which it is implanted; which it does when it
draws it self toward its original, that is to say, it is head. But we
define the head by the insertion of the nerve, which we understand by the
manner of the working of the Muscle.

CHAP. XI. Of the Muscles of the Epigastrium, or lower belly.
NOw seeing that we have taught, what a muscle is, and what the differences
thereof are, and what simple and compound parts it has, and what the use,
action and manner of action in each part is; it remains that we come to the
particular explication of each Muscle, beginning with those of the lower belly,
as those which we first meet withal in dissection.

These are 8 in number, 4 oblique, 2 on each side, two right or direct one, on
eight muscles of the Epigastrium.
the right, another on the left side; and in like manner 2 transverse. All
these are alike in force, magnitude and action, so mutually composed, that the
oblique descendant of one side, is conjoined with the other oblique descendant
on the other side, and so of the rest.

We may add to this number the 2 little. Supplying or Assisting muscles, which
are of a Pyramidal form and arise from the share-bone, above the insertion of
the right muscles; Of the oblique muscles of each side the one ascends, the
other descends, whereupon it comes to pass, that they are called the Oblique
descendant and The Oblique descendant. Their substance. Their greatness and
figure.
Ascendant Muscles. Those oblique which we first meet with, are the
descendant, whose substance is partly sanguine, partly spermaticke; for they
are fleshy, nervous, ligamentous, veinous, arterious and membranous. Yet the
fle shy portion is predominant in them, out of which respect Hippocrates is
wont to express the muscles by the name of fleshes; their greatness is
indifferent between the large and the small muscles; Their composur and fite.
their figure 3 square. They are composed of the forementioned parts, they are
two in number; their site is oblique taking their beginning, from the touching
of the great saw Muscle and from the sixth and seventh true ribs, or rather
from the spaces between the six lower ribs, and rather on the forepart of
the muscles than of the ribs themselves, from whence shunning the Veriebra's
of the loins, the fleshy parts of them are terminated in the external and
upper eminency of the Haunch-bone, and the Membranous end in the lower eminency
of the share-bone and the White-line. Yet Columbus dissenting from this common
description of the oblique Muscles, thinks that they are only terminated in
the White line and not in the share-bone. For (says he) wherefore should they
be inserted into the share-bone which is not moved? But because it would be an
infinite labor and trouble to set down at large the several opinions of all
Authors of Anatomy, I have thought it sufficient for me to touch them lightly
by the way. Their connection is with the oblique ascendant Their connection.
Their temperament. Their action.
lying under them, and with the direct, or right. Their temperament is twofold,
the one hot and moist by reason of the belly and the fleshy portion of them;
the other cold and dry in respect of their ligamentous and tendinous portion.
Their action is to draw the parts into which they are inserted toward their
original, or else to unite them firmly. Yet each of these privately and
properly draws the hip in an oblique manner toward the Cartilago Scutiformis
or brest-blade. Then follow the oblique ascendant, The oblique ascendant.
who have the same substance, quantity, figure, composure, number and temper
the descendant have. They are situate between the descendant and transverse
with whom Their site and connection.
they have connection, especially by the vessels which are brought from the
parts beneath. All the fleshy parts arise from the rackbones of the Haunch to
the ends of the bastard ribs, which they seem to admit above and below, being
fleshy even to the fourth, and then becoming membranous they take their way to
the white line, with a double aponeurosis, which passes through the right
Muscles above and below, as we may plainly see from the navill downwards. In
their fleshy part they draw their original from the spine of the Haunch bones
a little lower than the descendent end in their fleshy part. But for their
membranous parts, they arise before from the share bone, but behind from the
spondiles of the Holy bone, and Vertebra's of the loins obliquely ascending
upwards to the white line, into which they are terminated by an aponeourosis or
membranous tendon (which seems to penetrate the right Muscle upwards and
downwards, especially under the navil) but by their fleshy part at the ends of
all the bastard ribs, which they seem to receive above and below. And
because these muscles are terminated in the white line, they have also another
use, yet such as is common to all the muscles of the Epigastrium, that is, to
press down the Guts. Their action is (if they perform it together) to draw
Their Action
down the chest, and dilate the breast; but if their actions be separate, they
draw the chest to the hip with an oblique motion. After these follow the right
muscles, so called The right muscles of the Epigastrium.
because they descend according to the length of the body, and because they
have right or straight fibers.

We will say nothing (to shun prolixitie, which in all other places we will
avoid, of their substance and other conditions, which they have common with the
fore mentioned Muscles. They are situate in the eminentest or extuberating
region of the belly, bounding the Epigastrium taken in general, (or the
superficiary belly,) they Their site.
are divided by the manifest intercourse of the white line, even to the Navell,
in which place they seem to be united even to the place of their insertion.
They draw their original not from the share bone, as some would have it, but
according to the insertion Original.
of their nerves, from the sides of the Cartilago scutiformis and the ends of
the sixth seventh and eight ribbs; but they end in the share bone where they
make a common tendon sufficiently strong and short. Syluius, Vesalius and
Columbus think they arise from the share bone, because they cannot be inserted
into that bone, because it is immovable. You may perceive in these Muscles
certain nervous and transverse intersections, often times three in number for
the strength of these Muscles (of which Galen makes no mention, although they
may be seen in Apes.) And also in the inner side of these muscles you may see
four veins and as many arteryes, of which some creep upwards, others run
downwards. The upper called the Mamillary descend from the Axillarie by the
side and lower parts of the Sternon, the slenderer portions thereof being
distributed by the way, to the Mediastinum, and about the fourth and fifth rib
to the Dugges, from whence they take their name.

That which remains breaking out by the sides of the Brest-blade inserts it
self into those muscles creeping along, even almost to the navell; in which
place The meeting together of the Epigastrick and mamillary veins and arteryes.
they are manifestly united (that is the veins with the veins, and arteries
with the arteryes) with the Epigastricke, which ascend from the upper part of
the Iliackes on each side under the said muscles until they meet with these 4
mamillary vessels. That you may find this concourse of the veins and arteryes
about the navill, you must follow both the upper and the lower somewhat deep
into the flesh: pressing the blood on both sides from above downwards, and
from below upward; until you shall find the exosculation of these vessels,
which will appear by this, that the blood will flow from this into that and
from that into this; otherwise you can scarce perceive it, by reason of the
smallnes of such vessels which want blood. But that by the benefit of such
concourse of the vessels, the matters may be communicated and transported both
from the womb to the dugs, and again from the dugs to the womb, appears in
Nurses, who want their courses, when the milk comes into their dugs, and on
the contrary lose their milk when their courses flow plentifully. Otherwise to
what purpose should there be such concourse between the vessels of the pappes
and womb, for there are veins and arteries diffused to the sides of the womb
from the root of the Epigastrickes; for indeed the Epigastrickes which in
their ascent meet with the mamillary, go not to the womb, though they be
next to them, and arise from the same truncke with the Hypogastricke vein of
the womb. The Action of these muscles is, to move or draw near together the
parts of the Hypogastrium to the praecordia or Hypochondryes. Their use, in
Their action.
Columbus opinion is, to draw the Breast downwards so to dilate it. At the
Their use.
ends of these Nature has produced two other small Muscles from the upper part
of the share bone, of a triangular figure for the safety of the thick and
common tendon of the right Muscles, whereupon they are called Succenturiati, or
assisters.

Some (moved with I know not what reason) would have these two small Muscles
The Pyramldal or assisting muscles.
to help the erection of the yeard. Columbus thinks they should not be
separated from the right, and that they only are the fleshy beginnings of the
right. But on the contrary Fallopius manifestly proves them different and
separate from the right and shows their use. The Transverse remine to be
spoken of, so called by The transverse muscles of the Epigastrium.
reason of their fibers which make right angles with the fibers of the right
Muscles.

They have a quadrangular figure situate upon the greatest part of the
Peritonaeum, Their figure and site.
to which they stick so close that they scarce can be separated. They take
their original from the production of the loins, the Eminency of the
Haunch-bone, the transverse productions of the vertebra's of the loins and the
ends of the bastard ribs; contrary to the opinion of many, whom the insertion
of the nerve convinces, but they end in the white line, as all the rest do.

Their action is to press the guts, especially for the expulsion of
excrements. Their Action.


But all the 8 recited Muscles, besides their proper use, have another common,
The common use and action of the eight muscles of the Epigastrium.
that is, they stand for a defense of Bulwark for all the parts lying under
them, and serve for the expulsion both of the excrements, infant, and vapoures,
and also for the strenghtening of the voice, as experience shows in those who
sound Trumpets and Cornets.

Therefore these Muscles do equally on every side press the Belly; But the
Midriffe, the intercostall Muscles assisting it, does drive from above
downe-wards, from which conspiring contention follows the excretion of the
excrements by the fundament; but unless the Midriffe should assiste, these
Muscles would press the excrements no more downwards, than upward to the
mouth.

Although to this excretion of the excrements, it is not sufficient that the
Epigastricke, Midriffe and intercostall Muscles press the belly, but the
Muscles Why when the mouth is open the excrements go more slowly forth.
of the throtle must be also shut. For the mouth being open the excrements
never go well forth; because the vapors that pass out of the mouth, which
being restrained and driven to the Midriffe, by stretching it powerfully
thrusts down the excrement. Wherefore Apothecaryes when they give glisters,
bid Why when the mouth is open the excrements go more slowly forth.
the Patient to open his mouth, that the glister may easilyer go up, which
otherwise would scarsely go up, the mouth being shut, because so we should have
no place empty in us, into which the glyster might be admitted.

The first Figure of the Lower belly.
AABCD. The upper, lower and laterall parts of the Peritonaeum.

EE. The white Line from the Gristle of the Breast Bone, called the
Brest-blade, to the Commissure or meeting of the Share-bones,

F. The Gristle of the Breast Bone Cartilago ensi-formis or the Breast-Blade.

G. The Navill which, all the Muscles being taken away, must be kept for the
demonstration of the Vmbilicall Vessels.

H H. The productions of the Peritonaeum which contain the Seminary Vessels on
either side.

**. The hole which gives way to the Seminary Vessels of Men.

II. A Vein and an Artery from the Epigastricke, which being carried upward
under the right Muscles, do here hang down, and are distributed into the lower
part of the Abdomen.

KK. A Vein and an Artery from the internal Mammarie proceeding from under
the Bone of the Breast, are carried downward through the right Muscles and are
disseminated into the upper part of the Abdomen.

1, 2. The place wherein the right Muscles arise, which being here cut off, do
hang down, that their Vessels may the better be scene.

3, 4. The Anastomosis or inocculation of the foresaid Vessels, making the
consent of the Abdomen and the Nose, and of the Womb with the Breasts, as some
think.

LL. Branches of Veins running into the sides of the Peritonaeum. N. The place
of the Haunch Bone bared, to which the Oblique and the Transverse Muscles do
grow.



Of the whiteline, and Peritonaeum or Rim of the belly.
The white line is nothing else, than the bound and extremities of the Muscles
of the Epigastrium distinguishing the belly in the midst into two parts, the
right What the white line is
and left. It is called white, both of its own color, and also for that no
fleshy part lies under it, or is placed above it. It is broader above the
navill, but narrower below, because the right muscles do there grow into one,
Now we must treat of the Coat or membrane, Peritonaeum or Rim of the belly; it
is so called, because it is What the Peritonaeum is.
stretched over all the lower belly, and particularly over all the parts
contained in the ventricle, to which also it freely lends a common coat. It
has a spermaticke substance as all other membranes have; the quantity of it in
thicknes is very small, (for it is almost The substance and quantity.
as thin as a spiders web) yet differing in diverse places in men, and women;
for men have it more thick and strong above the Navil, that so it may contain
the extension of the stomach, often stretched beyond measure with meat and
drink. On the contrary women have it so thick and strong below their navell
that it seems double, that so they may more easily endure the distention of
their womb caused by the child contained in it. But above the navell men and
women have the Peritonaeum of an equal strength, for the self same reason.
The longitude and latitude of it is known by the circumscription of the belly.

The figure is round and some what long; it puts forth some productions, The
figure.
like finger stalles, both for the leading and strengthening the spermaticke
vessels and the Cremaster muscles of the Testicles, and besides it the
eiaculatory vessels, as also to impart a coat to the testicles and all the
natural parts.

It is composed of slender, membranous and nervous fibers, certain small The
composition.
branches of veins and arteries concurring with them, which it receives for
life and nourishment from the adherent parts. The number.


This membrane is one in number, and besides every where one and equal,
although Galen would have it perforated in that place where the spermaticke
vessels Lib. de (...).
descend to the Testicles; But in truth we must not think that a hole, but
rather a production as we said before.

The latter Anatomists have observed, the Coat Peritonaeum is doubled below
the Navell, and that by the spaces of these reduplications the vmbilicall
arteryes ascend to the Navell.

It is situate nere the natural parts and compasses them about, and joined by
The fite and connection.
the coat, which it gives them, as also on the sides, it is joined to the
vertebra's of the loins, from whose ligaments, (or rather periostium) it takes
the original: on the lower part it cleaves to the share bone, and on the upper
to the midriffe whose lower part it wholly invests; on the fore or outer part
it sticks so close to the transverse muscles, that it cannot be plucked from
them but by force, by reason of the complication and adhaesion of the fibers
thereof with the fibers of the proper membrane of these muscles, which membrane
in Galens opinion proceeds Lib. 6, Meth,
from this Peritonaeum, that so it is no marvel that we may more easily
break, than separate these two coats. It is of temperature cold and dry, as
all other membranes are.

It has many uses, the first whereof is, to invest and cover all the parts of
the Use.
lower belly, specially the kall, least it should be squeesed by great
compressures and violent attempts into the empty spaces of the muscles, as it
sometimes happens in the wounds of the Epigastrium, unles the lips of the ulcer
be very well united: for then appears a tumor about the wound by the Guts and
kall thrusting without the Peritonaeum into those spaces of the muscles; from
whence proceeds cruel pain.

Another use is to further the casting forth of the excrements by pressing the
ventricle and gutson the foreside, as the Midriffe does above, as one should
do it by both their hands joined together.

The third use is, it prohibites the repletion of the parts with flatulency
after the expulsion of the excrements, by straitening and pressing them down.

The fourth and last is, that it conteines all the parts in their seat and
binds them to the backe-bone, principally that they should not fly out of
their places by violent motions, as leaping and falling from on high.

Lastly we must know, that the Rim is of that nature that it will easily
dilate it self, as we see in Dropsies, in women with child, and in tumors
against nature.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Epiploon, Omentum, or Zirbus, that is the Kall.
AFter the containing parts, follow the contained, the first of which is the
Epiploon, (or Kall) so called, because it as it were swims upon all the guts.
The substance, magnitude, figure.
The substance of it is fatty and spermaticke, the quantity of it for
thickness is diverse in diverse men according to their temperament. The
latitude of it is described by the quantity of the gutts. It is in figure like
a Purse, because it is double. It is composed of veins, arteries, fat and a
membrane, which sliding The composure.
down from the gibbous part of the ventricle, and the flat part of the Gut
Duodenum and spleen over the Gutts, is turned back from the lower belly to the
top of the Colon. It is one as we said covering the Gutts. It has its chief
connection with the first Vertebra's of the loins, from which place in beasts
it seems to take a coat, as in men from the hollow part of the spleen and
The connection.
gibbous of the ventricle and depressed part of the Duodenum, from whence
doubled it is terminated in the fore and higher part of the Collicke gut. Which
moved Galen to write that the upper part of the membrane of the Kall was Lib.
Anatom. ^dminist.
annexed to the ventricle, but the lower, to the laxer part of the Collicke
Gut. From the vessels of which parts it borrowes his, as also the nerves, if
it have any. The temper of it in lean bodies is cold and dry, because their
Kall is without fat; but in fat bodies it is cold and moiste by reason of the
fat. The use of it is twofold: The tempor.
The first is to heat and moisten the Guts, and help their concoction, although
The use twofold.
it do it by accident, as that which through the density of the fat hinders
the cold air from piercing in, and also forbiddes the dissipation of the
internal heat. Another use is, that in want of nourishment in times of great
famine, for sometimes it cherishes, and as it were by its dew preserves the
innate heat both of the ventricle and the neighboring parts, as it is written
by Galen. Moreover we must observe, that in a rupture or relaxation of the
Peritonaeum the Lib. 4 de usu partium.
Kall falls down into the scrotum, from whence comes that rupture we call,
Epiplocele. But in weomen that are somewhat more fat it thrusts it self
between the bladder and the neck of the womb, and by its compression
hinders, that the seed comes not with full force into the womb, and so
frustrates the conception. Besides, when by a wound or some other chance, any
part of it be defective, then that part of the belly which answers to it, will
afterward remain cold and A cause of frustrating conception.
raw, by reason of the forementioned causes.

The second figure of the lower belly.
A, A, B, B. The inner face of the Peritonaeum cut into four parts, and so
turned backward.

B. The upper B shows the implantation of the Vmbilicall Vein into the Liver.

C. The Navell separated from the Peritonaeum.

From D to the upper B. the Vmbilicall Vein.

E, E. The fore part of the stomach blown up, neither covered by the liver nor
the Kall.

F, F. A part of the Gibbous side of the Liver.

G. Vessels disseminated through the Peritonaeum.

* The Brest-blade.

H. The bottom of the Bladder of Urine.

I. The connection of the Peritonaeum to the bottom of the Bladder.

K, K, K, K. The Kall covering the Guts.

M. N. Vessels and Sinn^ embracing the bottom o^ the Stomach. O. The meeting
of the Vessels of both sides, so that M, N, and O, show the seame which
Aristotle mentions 3. hist. and 4 de part. Anim. where he says; that the Kall
arises and proceeds from the midst of the belly. P. P. Branches of vessels
r^ing along the bottom of the stomach. Q Q. Q. Q. Certain branches of the
Vessels distributed to the upper membrane of the Omentum, and compassed with
Fat. a, a. The two Vmbilical arteries, going down by the sides of the bladder
to a branch of the great artery. b. The Ligament of the Bladder which is
showed for the Vrachus.



CHAP. XIIII. Of the Ventricle or Stomach.
NOw we must speak of the Stomach, the receptacle of the food necessary for
the whole body, the seat of appetite, by reason of the nerves dispersed into
its upper orifice, and so into its whole substance. The substance What the
ventricle is.
thereof is rather spermaticke than sanguine, because that for one fleshie
membrane, it has two nervous; The quantity or magnitude of The substance
the ventricle is diverse, according to the various magnitude of bodies, and
gluttony of men. The figure of it is round and somewhat long, like a Bagpipe.
The stomach The magnitude.
is composed of two proper coats, and one common from the Peritonaeum,
together The figure. The composure.
with veins, sinews, and arteries; the innermost of its proper coats is
membranous woven with right fibers, for the attraction of meats, it is extended
and propagated even to the mouth thereof, whereby it comes to pass that the
affections of one part may easily be communicated to the other by sympathy, or
consent. This coat has its original from the membranes of the brain which
accompany the The cause of the consent of the mouth and stomach.
nerves descending from the third and fourth conjugation to the mouth thereof.
And in like sort from other productions descending by the passages of the head,
from whence also another reason may be drawn from that, which they commonly
bring from the nerves of the sixth conjugation; why in wounds of the head, the
stomach does so soon suffer by consent with the brain. The exterior, or
outer is more fleshie and thick, woven with oblique fibers, to retain and
expel. It draws it original from the Pericranium, which as soon as it comes
to the gullet, takes unto it certain fleshie fibers. There be nerves sent into
the stomach from the sixth conjugation of the brain, as it shall be showed in
its proper place. Veins and arteries are spread into it from the Gastrica, the
Gastrepiploides, the Coronaria and splenicke, from the second, third, and
fourth distribution of the vena Porta, or gate-veine; and the third of the
descendent artery to the natural parts, as soon as it passes forth of the
midriffe.

It is one in number. The greater part of it is situated on the left side
between the spleen, the hollownesse of the liver, and the guts, that assisted
by the heat of such The number.
neighboring parts, it may more cheerfully perform the concoction of the
meat. Neither am I ignorant that Galen has written, that a great part of the
stomach lies Lib. (...) vsu partium.
on the left side. But inspection it self, and reason makes me derogate from
Galens authority, for because there is more empty space on the left side, by
reason the spleen is less than the liver, it was fit it should lie more on
the left side. The more The connection.
proper connection of it is with the gullet and guts, by its two orifices; with
the brain by its nerves; with the liver and spleen by its veins; with the
heart^ its arteries; and with all the natural parts by its common membrane.

The temper of the ventricle in men of good habit, is temperate, because it is
almost composed of the equal commixture of sanguine and spermaticke parts; or
The temper.
according to Galens opinion, it is cold of its self, and by the parts
composing it; Lib. 9. Meth.
and hot by the vicinitie of the bowels. But in some it is hotter, in others
colder, according to the diverse temper and complexion of diverse bodies. That
stomach is to be thought well tempered, that powerfully draws down the
meat and drink, and embraces and retains them so drawn, until by
concoction and elixation, they shall be turned into a juice like cream (which
the Greeks call Chylos;) and lastly, which does strongly send from it, and
repel the excrem^nts of this first concoction.

The stomach is known to be hotter by this, that it better concocts and
digests Notes of a hot stomach,
course and hard meats, as beef, hard eggs, and the like, than soft ^
digestion, which it corrupts and turns into belchings. For so a young, (...)
sooner burnt than well roasted at a great fire. The stomach which is colder,
(...) much meat, but is slow in concocting them, especially if they be cold
and (...) of digestion, which for that cause quickly turn sour. The action of
a well conditioned stomach, is twofold, one common, another proper. The common
is to attenuate The action twofold.
mix and digest the meats taken in at the mouth, for the nutrition of it
self and the whole body, after the liver has performed its duty, which
before it be done, the ventricle only enjoyes the sweet pleasure of the
Chylus, and comforts its self against the heat and impuritie of the adjacent
parts, wherefore it is called the worke-house of concoction. Its first action
is to attract, retain, and assimulate to it self that which is convenient;
but to expel whatsoever shall be contrary, either in quantity, or quality,
or in the whole substance.

It has two orifices, one above, which they commonly call the stomach and
heart, the other lower, which is called the Pylorus, or lower mouth of the
stomach. The two orifices of the stomach.
The upper bends to the left side near the back bone; it is far more large
and capacious than the lower, that so it may more commodiously receive meats
half chewed, hard and gross, which Gluttons cast down with great
greediness; it has an exquisite sense of feeling, because it is the seat of
the appetite, by reason of the nerves incompassing this orifice, with their
mutual embracings; whereby it happens that the ventricle in that part is
endued with a quick sense, that perceiving the want and emptiness of meat,
it may stir up the creature to seek food. For albeit nature has bestowed
four faculties on other parts, yet they are not sensible of their wants, but
are only nourished by the continual sucking of the veins, as plants by juice
drawn from the earth.

This orifice is seated at the fifth Vertebra of the chest, upon which they say
it almost The (...).
rests. Yet I had rather say that it lies upon the twelfth Vertebra of the
chest, and the first of the loins; for in this place the gullet perforates the
midriffe, and makes this upper orifice. The lower orifice bends rather to the
right side of the body, under the cavitie of the liver. It is far straiter
than the upper, lest any thing should pass away before it be well attenuated
and concocted; and it does that by The glandudulous ring of the Pylorus.
the help or assistance of, as it were a certain ring, like to the sphincter
muscle of the fundament, which some have thought a glandule made by the
transposition of the inner and fleshie membrane of the ventricle into that
which is the outer of the guts. I know Columbus laughes at this glandulous
ring, but any one that looks more attentively shall perceive that the Pylorus
is glandulous. The stomach in its lower and inner side, has many folds and
wrinckles, which serve to hold and contain the meats, until they be
perfectly concocted. In the ventricle we observe parts gibbous and hollow; the
hollow is next to the liver and midriffe; the gibbous is toward the guts. Now
we must note, that the ventricle when it is much resolved or loosed, may slide
down even to the navell near the bladder, the which we have The falling
down of the stomach.
observed in some bodies dissected after their death:

The third and fourth Figure.
The first figure shows the fore-side of the stomach and gullet.

A. shows the orifice of the gullet cut from the throat.

B. the straight and direct course of the gullet from A. to B.

C. how the gullet above the first rack bone of the chest, from B. to C.
inclines to the right hand.

D. his inclination to the left hand, from C. to D.

EE. the two glandules called the Almonds, set close to the gullet in the end
of the throat, called also Paristmia, Antiades, Tonsilla and Salviares
glandulae. FF. Another glandulous body in the midst of the gullet, about the
fifth rack bone, from which place the gullet gives place to the great artery,
somewhat declining to the right side: Vesalius, Lib. 5, Cap. 3. and Columbus
Cap. vlt. lib. 9. write, that those Glandules are filled with a certain
moisture, with which the gullet is moistened, that the meats may slide down
more easily into the stomach, as through a slippery passage. No otherwise than
the Glandula prostata, filled with a kind of gross and oily moisture, smooth
the passage of the urine, that so it may flow through it, with a more free and
less troubled course. G. the connection of the gullet with the stomach, where
the upper orifice of the stomach is fashioned. H. the lower orifice of the
stomach called Pylorus. I. K. the upper part of the stomach at I. the lower
at K. LL. the foreside of the stomach. P. the gut called Duodenum. T. V. the
right and left nerves of the sixth pair encompassing about the gullet and the
uppermost left orifice of the stomach.

The second Figure shows the back parts of the Ventricle and Gullet.

A. EE. FF. G. H: P. TV. show the like parts as in the former. From C. to D.
the inclination of the stomach to the left hand. M. N. O. the backeside of the
stomach. M. shows the prominence of the left side. N. of the right. O
shows the docke or impression, where it rests upon the rack bones. Q. R.
the passage of the bladder of the gall into the Duodenum at R. S, a glandulous
body growing under the Duodenum, bearing up the vessels. X. Y. a nerve on the
left side* creeping up to the top of the stomach, and so running out to the
liver.



CHAP. XV. Of the Guts.
THe Guts thc instruments of distribution and expulsion, are of the same Their
substance.
substance and composure with the stomach, but that the site of the coats of
the stomach is contrary to those of the guts. For that which is the innermost
coat of the stomach is the outermost of the guts, and so on the contrary. The
figure of the guts is round, hollow and capacious, some more, Figure.
some less according to the diverse bigness.

But for the quantity of the guts, some are small, some great, more or less,
according to the variety of bodies. But they are six in number, for there be
three small; Their number
the Duodenum, the Iejunum, or empty gut, and the Ilion. Three great, the
Blind, the The Duodenum.
Collicke, and the Right gut. All which have had their names for the following
reasons; the first, because it is extended the length of twelve fingers, like
another stomach, without any turning, or winding; of which greatness it is
found in great bodied men, such as were more frequenly to be met withal in
Galens time, than in this time of ours, in which this gut is found no longer
than seven, eight, or nine fingers at the most, The cause of this length is,
that there may be a free passage to the gate vein, coming out of the liver,
as also to the artery and nerve which run into it. For seeing that this gut
may sometimes rise to the top of the liver, it would possess the space under
the bladder of the gall (with which it is often tinctured) if it had any
revolutions that way, which is the passage for such like vessels. Others give
another reason of this figure, which is, that there should be nothing to
hinder the easy and fit distribution of the perfectly concocted Chylus to the
liver.

The second is called Iejunum, or the empty gut, not because it is absolutely
so, The Iejunum.
but because it contains little in comparison of the other. There is a triple
cause of this emptines; the first the multitude of the meseraick veins and
arteryes which are about it, whereupon there is a greater and quicker
distribution of the Chylus. The second is the vicinity or neighborhood of the
liver strongly drawing the Chylus contained in it; the third is the flowing
down of the choleric humor from the bladder of the Gall into it, which ever
and anon by its acrimony cleanses away the filth, and by continual flowing
sollicites it to expulsion. The third is called Ileon because it Ileon.
lies between the Ilia or flanks, it differs nothing from the rest in
substance and magnitude, but in this one thing, that there is more matter
contained in it than in the rest, by reason of the paucity of the vessels
terminated in it, that it is no marvel that there can be no exact
demonstration made of them. The fourth is called Caecum or the Blind, because
it has but one passage to send out and receive in the matter. Caecum.
This gut has a long and strait production, which according to the opinion of
some (though altogether erroneous) often falls down into the Scrotum in the
rupture, or relaxation of the Rim of the Belly; for that production in the
lower belly strongly sticks to the Peritonaeum or Rim, which hinders such
falling down. But Galen seems by such a blind gut to have meant this long and
narrow production, and certainly so thinks the common sort of Anatomists, but
here Vesalius justly reprehended Galen. Wherefore Sylvius that he might free
Galen of this fault, would have us by the blind gut to understand the beginning
of the collicke gut. The fifth is called Colon (or collicke Colon.
gut) because it is greater and more capacious than the rest. The sixth and
last, Rectum:
the Right gut, by reason of the rightnes or straightnes of the passage. This
in beasts especially, has a certain fatness in it to make the passage
slippery, and lest the gut should be exulcerated in the passage, by the
sharpness of hard and acrid excrements.

The site of these guts in thus, The Duodenum upon the backebone bends to the
right hand; the Ieiunum possesses a great part of the upper umbilicall region,
diffuses Their site,
it self into both sides with windings, like to these of the gut Ileum, even
to the flanks. The gut Ileon is situate at the lower part of the umbilicall
region, going with many turnings and windings, even to the hollownesses of the
holy-bone above the bladder and side parts of the Hypogastrium, which they call
the flanks.

The Blind bends to the right hand, a little below the kidney, above the first
and fourth Vertebra of the loins. The Colon or Collicke gut is crooked and
bent, in the form of a Scythian bow, filling all the space from the blind gut,
below the right kidney, even to the hollownes of the liver, and then it goes by
the gibbous part of the stomach above the small guts, even to the hollownesse
of the spleen; from whence sliding under the left kidney, with some turnings,
it is terminated upon the Vertebra's of the loins.

By all which turnings and windings of the collicke gut, it is easy to
distinguish the The distinction between the collicke and the stone in the
kidneys. Their connoxion.
pain of the stone of the kidneies, which remains fixed in one certain place,
from the collicke wandering through these crooked passages we mentioned. The
right gut tends with an oblique site toward the left hand, upon the holy bone
even to the very fundament. They have all one and a common connection; for they
are all mutually joined together by their coats, because there is but one way
from the gullet even to the fundament, but they are joined to the principal
parts by their nerves, veins, and arteries.

But a more proper connection is that, where the Duodenum on the upper part of
it, is joined with the Pylo^us; but on the lower part, to the Ieiunum, and the
parts lying under it, by the coat of the Peritonaeum. The Ieiunum, or empty
gut, is joined to the Duodenum and Ileon. The Ileum with the emprie and blind
guts. The blind with the Ileon and Colon, and with the right side of the
backebone where it is tied more straightly. The Colon with the blind and right
guts, and in his middle part, with the kidneies and the gibbous part of the
stomach; whereby it comes to pass, that being distended with wind in the
collike, it overturnes and presses the stomach, and so Why vomiting ha^pens in
the collicke.
causes vomiting.

Lastly, the right gut is annexed with the collicke gut and fundament. At the
end whereof there is a muscle fastened, of figure round and circular called the
Sphincter, The S^incter muscles of the fundament.
arising from the lower Vertebra's of the holy bone and rump, by the benefit of
which as of a door or gate, the excrements are restrained at our will, lest man
borne for all honest actions, without all shame, in every time and place,
should be forced every where to ease his belly. For such as have lost the
benefit of this muscle by the palsy, Gal. lib. 5. de usu partium. ^ap. (...)*
have their excrements go from them against their wills. There is a body
situate at the end of the right gut, of a middle substance between the skin
and flesh, as it were arising from the mixture of them both, like the
extremities of the lips, of the same use with the Sphincter, but that it is
not altogether so powerful. But there are also certain veins situate about
it called the Haemorrhoidall, of which we will speak in their place.

Besides, there are two other muscles that descend to the end of this gut,
being broad and membranous on each side, one arising from the side and inner
parts of the share and hippe-bones, which inserted above the Sphincter pull up
the fundament falling down, wherefore they are called Levatores Any, or the
lifters up of the fundament. Levatores Any.
Wherefore when as either they are too weak, or resolved, or the fundament
oppressed with the weight of flegmaticke, salt, chollericke and sharp humors,
the gut is scarce restored into its place, that there is need of the help of
the fingers for that purpose.

The guts follow the temper of the stomach. Their action is the distribution
of The action of the guts.
the Chylus by the meseraicke veins (which of duty belongs to the three small
guts) and the receiving the excrements of the Chylus, and retention of them,
till a fi^ime of expulsion, which belongs to the third quarter. Besides, these
small guts finish up the work of concoction, begun in the stomach, although
they be not altogether made for that use. But nature is often accustomed to
abuse the parts of the body for some better use.

The fisth figure of the lower belly.
A. The breast blade, Cartilago Ensiformis.

BB. The Rim, with the midriffe and broken ribs bent outward.

CC. the gibbous part of the liver.

D. a ligament tying the liver to the midriffe.

E. part of the umbilicall vein.

FF. the stomach filled full of meat.

G. a part of the spleen.

H. the blind gut of the late writers, for the Ancients took the top of the
colon for it.

I. the beginning of the great or thick guts.

I. and so to K. shows the passages of the collicke gut from the right kidney
to the liver. And so the collicke and the stone on this side are in one place,
and therefore hardly distinguished.

K. to L. the same collicke gur lies under the whole bottom of the stomach,
which is the reason that those which are troubled with the collicke cast so
much.

L. to M. The passage of the Colon from the spleen to the share bone, by the
left kidney, a way, which makes the pain of the stone and the Colic on the
left side very hard to distinguish. N. The Colon ending in the right gut. O.
The beginning of the right gut unto the bladder. P. Q. The sunken or fallen
side of the Colon at P. and his Chambers or Cells at Q. R. S. T. The lesser
guts, especially lying under the Navil. a. a. The two umbilicall arteryes. b.
The bottom of the bladder. * The connection of the bladder and the Peritonaeum.



But we must note, that for the composure of the guts, they have only
transverse fibers, for expulsions sake, unless that at the beginning of the
Colon, and the end Their fibers.
of the right gut, you may see certain right fibers added to the transverse to
strengthen them, left these guts should chance to be broken and torn by the
passage of hard excrements, and the laborious endeavor of expulsion (specially
in brute beasts.)

But if any ask, how they have retention, being they want oblique fibers, he
may know that the faeces are retained in the right gut, by the force of the
Sphincter muscle, How the guts become fit to retain.
but often times in the blind, by their hardness and abundance, whereby they
stick in the passage; but in the rest, by reason of their conformation into
many windings and turnings. The length of the guts, is seven times more than
the length of the whole body; to this length they have windings, least the
nourishment should quickly slide Their length.
away, and least men should be withdrawn by gluttony from action and
contemplation. For so we see it comes to pass in most beasts, which have one
Gut, stretched straight out from the stomach to the fundament; as in the Lynx
and such other beasts of insatiable gluttony, always, like plants, regarding
their food.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Mesentery.
AFter the Guts follows the Mesentery, being partly of a fatty and partly of a
spermaticke substance. The greatness of it is apparent enough, although The
substance
in some it be bigger, and in some lesser according to the greatness magnitude.
of the body. It is of a round figure and not very thick. It is composed of a
double coat arising from the beginning and root of the peritonaeum. Figure,
Composure.
In the midst thereof it admits nerves from the Costall of the sixth
conjugation, veins from the Vena Porta or Gate vein; Arteries from the
descendant artery, over and besides a great quantity of fat and many glandulous
bodies, to prop up the division of the vessels spread over it, as also to
moisten their substance. It is in number one, situate in the middle of the
guts, from whence it took its name. Yet some divide it into two parts, to wit,
into the Meseraeum, that is, the portion interwoven Number.
with the small guts, and into the Mesocolon which is joined with the Great. It
has connection by its vessels with the principal parts, by its whole
substance with the The connection.
guts, and in some sort with the kidneies, from whose region it seems to take
its coats.

It is of a cold and moist temper, if you have respect to his fatty substance;
but if to the rest of the parts, cold and dry. The temper.


The action and use of it is, to bind and hold together the guts, each in his
place, least they should rashly be folded together; and by the Meseraicke
veins (which they The action and use.
term the hands of the Liver) carry the Chylus to the liver.

In which you must note, that all the Meseraicke ueines come from the liver, as
we understand by the dissection of bodies; although some have affirmed, that
there be All the meseraicke veins come from the liver.
some veins serving for the nourishment of the guts, no ways appertaining to
the Liver, but which end in certain Glandulous bodies, dispersed through the
Mesentery, of whose use we will treat hereafter.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Glandules in general, and of the Pancreas, or sweet bread.
AGlandule is a simple part of the body, sometimes of a spongye and soft
substance, sometimes of a dense and hard. Of the soft Glandules are the
Tonsillae, or Almonds, like in substance to blanched Almonds; the Thymus,
Substance of the glandules.
Pancreas, Testicles, Prostata. But the dense and hard are the Parotides and
other like. The Glandules differ amongst themselves in quantity and figure, for
some Quantity and figure.
are greater than other some, and some are round and others plain, as the
Thymus and Pancreas.

Others are compounded of veins, nerves, arteries, and their proper flesh, as
the Composition.
Almonds of the ears, the milkie glandules in the breasts and the testicles.
Others want nerves, at least which may be seen, as the Parotides, the
axillarie, or those under the armeholes and others. The number of glandules is
uncertain, by reason of the infinite multitude and variety of sporting nature.
You shall find them always in these Number,
places, where the great divisions of vessels are made; as in the middle
ventricule of the brain, in the upper part of the Chest, in the Mesentery and
other lik places.

Although othersome be seated in such places, as nature thinks needful to
generate and cast forth of them a profitable humor to the creature; as the
almonds at the roots of the tongue, the kernells in the dugs, the spermatick
vessels in the scrotum and at the sides of the womb; or where nature has
decreed to make emunctoryes for the principal parts, as behind the ears,
under the armeholes, and in the groines. The connection of glandules is not only
with the vessels of the parts concurring to their Connection.
composition, but also with those, whose division they keep and preserve. They
are of a cold temper, wherefore Physicians say the blood recrudescere, (i) to
become raw again Temper.
in the dugs, when it takes upon it the form of milk. But of these some have
Action and use.
action, as the almonds, which pour our spattle useful for the whole mouth,
the dugs milk, the Testicles seed; others, use only as those which are made
to preserve, underprop and fill up the divisions of the vessels. Besides this
we have spoken of glandules in general, we must know that the Pancreas is a
glanduleus, and flesh-like body, The substance of the Pancreas. The ^ite.
as that which has every where the shape and resemblance of flesh. It is
situate at the flat end of the liver, under the Duodenum with which it has
great connection, and under the gate-veine, to serve as a bulwark, both to it
and the divisions thereof, whilst it fills up the empty spaces, between the
vessels themselves, and so hinders, that they be not plucked asunder, nor hurt
by any violent motion, as a fall, or the like.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Liver.
HAving gone thus far, order of dissection now requires, that we should
treat of the distribution of the gate vein; but because it cannot well be
understood unless all the nature of the liver from whence it arises, be well
known, therefore putting it off to a more fit place, we will now speak of the
Liver. Wherefore the liver (according to Galens opinion, lib. de form. fatus)
is the first of all What the liver is.
the parts of the body, which is finished in conformation, it is the shop and
Author of the blood, and the original of the veins; the substance of it, is
like the concrete Its substance and quantity.
mudde of the blood, the quantity of it is diverse, not only in bodies of
different, but also of the same species; as in men amongst themselves, of whom
one will be gluttonous and fearful, another bold, and temperate, or sober;
for he shall have a greater liver than this, because it must receive and
concoct a greater quantity of Chylus: yet the liver is great in all men,
because they have need of a great quantity of blood for the repairing of so
many spirits and the substantificke moisture, which are resolved and dissipated
in every moment by action and contemplation. But there may be a a twofold
reason given, why such as are fearful have a larger liver. The first, is
because Why coward^ have great livers.
in those the vital faculty (in which the heat of courage and anger resides)
which is in the heart, is weak; and therefore the defect of it must be
supplied by the strength of the natural faculty. For thus nature is
accustomed to recompense that which is wanting in one part, by the increase and
accession of another. The other reason is, because cold men have a great
appetite, for by Galens opinion In art parva, coldness increases the
appetite; by which it comes to pass that they have a greater quantity of
Chylus, by which plenty the liver is nourished, and grows larger. Some beasts,
as Dogs, and swine, have the liver divided into five or more Lobes, but a man
has but one Lobe, or two, or three at the most; and these not so much
distinguished, as which chearish the upper and hollow region of the ventricle,
with embracing to help forward the work of concoction. Therefore the liver is
almost content with one Lobe, although it is always rent with a small
division, that the umbilicall vein pearcing into the roots and substance of
it, may have a free passage; but also oftentimes there is as it were a certain
small lobe of the liver, laid under that umbilicall vein, as a cushion.

The figure of the liver is gibbous; rising up and smooth toward the Midriffe;
toward The figure.
the stomach is the simous or hollow side of it somewhat unequal, and rough
by reason of the distance of the Lobes, the original of the hollow vein, and
the site of the bladder of the Gall.

The composition of the liver is of veins, nerves, arteryes, the coat and
proper The composure. The vessels.
substance thereof which we call the gross and concreet blood, or Parenchyma.
Veins and arteryes come to it from the navell; but nerves immediately from
these which are diffused over the stomach according to Hippocrates; yet they
penetrate not very deep into its substance, for it seems not to stand in need
of such exact sense, but they are distributed upon the coat and surface there
of, because this part made for distribution over the whole body, keeps to it
self no acrid or malign humor, for the perception of which it should need a
nerve, although the coat investing it, sends many nervous fibers into its
substance, as is apparent by the taking away of the coat from a boiled liver;
we must think the same of the other entrals. The coat of the liver is from
the Peritonaeum, waxing small from the umbilicall vein, when it divides it
self for the generation of the gate and hollow veins, as is observed by
Galen, lib. de format* Fatus. The liver is only one, situate in the greater
part on the right side, but with the The number and site. The connection.
lesser part on the left, quite contrary to the stomach. Its chief connection
is with the stomach, and guts, by the veins and membranes of the Peritonaeum;
by the howllow vein and artery, with the heart; by the nerve with the brain,
and by the same ligatu res with all the parts of the whole body. It is of a hot
and moist temper, The temper.
and such as have it more hot, have large veins and hot blood; but such as
have it cold, have small veins, and a discolored hew. The Action of the Liver
is the The action.
conversion of the Chylus into blood, the work of the second concoction. For
although the Chylus entering into the meseraicke veins, receive some
resemblance of blood, yet it acquires not the form and perfection of blood,
before it be elaborate, and fully concoct in the liver. It is bound and tied
with three strong ligaments, two The ligaments
on the sides in the midst of the bastard ribs, to bear up its sides, and the
third more high and strong, descending from the breast-blade, to sustain its
proper part, which with its weight would press the lower orifice of the
stomach, and so cause a falling or drawing down of the sternon and collar
bone. And thus much may suffice for is proper ligaments, for we before
mentioned its common, the veins, arteries, nerves, and coat of the
Peritonaeum, by which it is knit to the loins, and other natural parts. But
we must note, that besides these three proper ligaments, the liver is also
bound with others to the bastard ribs, os Sylvius observes in his Anatomicall
observations, and Hollerius in his Practife, Cap. de Pleuritide.

CHAP. XIX. Of the bladder of the Gall.
NOw we must come to the bladder of the Gall, which is of a nervous substance,
and of the bigness of a small pear; it is of figure round, with the The
substance, greatness, and figure thereof The composition.
bottom more large, but the sides and mouth more narrow and strait. It is
composed of a double coat, one proper, consisting of three sorts of fibers,
the other from the peritonaeum. It has a vein from the Porta or gate vein,
and an artery from that which is diffused into the liver, and a nerve from the
sixth conjugation. It is but one Number and connection.
and that hid on the right side under the greater lobe of the liver, it is knit
with the touching of its own body, and of the passages and channels made for
the performance of its actions with the liver, and in like manner with the
Duodenum, and not seldom with the stomach also, by another passage; and to
conclude to all the parts by its veins, nerves, atteries, and common coat. It
is of a cold temper, as every nervous part is. Temper.
The action of it is to separate from the liver the choleric humor, and that
excrementitious, but yet natural by the help of the right fibers, for the
purifying of the Action.
blood, and by the oblique fibers, so long to keep it being drawn, until it
begin to become troublesome in quantity, quality, or its whole substance, and
then by the transverse fibers, to put it down into the Duodenum to provoke the
expulsive faculty of the guts. I know Fallopius denies the texture of so many
fibers, to be the minister of such action to the gall. But Vesalius seems
sufficiently to have answered him. The bladder of the gall has diverse
channels, for coming with a narrow neck, The channels of the gall.
even to the beginning of the gate vein, it is divided into two passages, the
one whereof suffering no division is carried into the Duodenum, unless that in
some it send another branch into the bottom of the stomach, as is observed by
Galen; which Lib. 2. de temper.
men have a miserable and wretched life, being subject to choleric vomitings,
especially when their stomachs are empty, with great pains of their stomach
and head, as is also observed by Galen Cap. 74. Artis Med. The other coming
out of the body of the liver devides it self into two or three passages,
again entering the substance of the liver, is divided with infinite branches,
accompanying so many branches of the gate vein through the substance of the
liver, that so the blood unless it be most elaborate and pure, may not rise
into the hollow vein, all which things Dissection does manifestly teach.

The sixth Figure of the bladder of the Gall.
M. The Pylorus joined to the Duedenum.

N. the Duodenu^ joined to the Pylorus

P. shows the bottom of the bladder of the gall.

QQ. the holes of the bladder of gall dispersed through the liver, betwixt the
roots of the hollow and gate veins. R. the root of the gate vein in the
liver. S. the root of the hollow vein in the liver.

a. the concourse or meeting of the passages of choler into one branch. b. the
neck of the bladder into which the passage is inserted. c. the passage of the
gall into the Duodenum. d. the Duodenum opened, to manifest the insertion of
the porus biliaris. e. anarterie going to the hollow part of the liver, and the
bladder of the gall. f. a small nerve belonging to the liver and the bladder of
gall, from the ribbe branch of the sixth pair. gg. the cysticke twins from the
gate vein.



CHAP. XX. Of the Spleen or Milt.
But because we cannot well show the distribution of the gate vein, unless
the spleen be first taken away, and removed from its seat: therefore before
we go any further, I have thought good to treat of the spleen. Therefore The
substence
the spleen is of a soft, rare, and spongious substance (whereby it might more
easily receive and drink up the dreggs of the blood from the liver) and of a
flesh more black than the liver. For it resembles the color of its muddy
blood, from which it is generated. It is of an indifferent greatness; but
bigger in some, Magnitude.
than in othersome, according to the diverse temper and complexion of men. It
has, Figure.
as it were, a triangular figure, gibbous on that part, it sticks to the
ribs and midriffe, but hollow on that part next the stomach. It is composed
of a coat, Composition.
the proper flesh, a vein, artery, and nerve. The membrane comes from the
peritonaeum, the proper flesh from the foeces or dregs of blood, or rather of
the natural melancholy humor, with which it is nourished. The fourth branch of
the venaporta, or gate vein, lends it a vein; the first branch of the great
descendant artery presently after the first entrance without the Midriffe,
lends it an artery. But it receives a nerve from the left costall, from the
sixth conjugation on the inner part, by the roots of the ribs; and we may
manifestly see this nerve, not only dispersing it self through the coat of
the liver, but also penetrating with its vessels the proper flesh thereof,
after the selfsame manner, as we see it is in the heart and lungs. It is one
in number, situate on the left side, between the stomach and the bastard
ribs, or rather the midriffe Number, and site.
which descends to their roots. For it often times cleaves to the midriffe on
its gibbous part, by a coat from the peritonaeum, as also on the hollow part
to the stomach, both by certain veins which sends it into the ventricle, as
also by the kall. It has connection, either primarily, or secundarily, with all
the parts of the body, by these its Connection,
vessels.

It is of a cold and dry temper; the action and use of it is to separate the
melancholicke Temper and use.
humor, which being feculent and drossie, may be attenuated by the force of
many arteries dispersed through its substance. For by their continual motion,
and native heat, which they carry in full force with them from the heart,
that gross blood puts off its grossness, which the spleen sends away by
passages fit for that purpose, retaining the subtler portion for its
nourishment. The passages by which it purges it self from the grossness of
the melancholy blood, are a vein ascending from it into the stomach to stir
up the appetite by its soreness, and strengthen the substance thereof by its
astriction; and also another vein, which sometimes from the spleen branch,
sometimes from the gate vein, plainly under its orifice, descends to the
fundament, there to make the Haemorrhoidall veins.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Vena Porta, or Gate-veine, and the distribution thereof.
THe gate-veine, as also all the other veins, is of a spermaticke substance,
The substance and figure.
of a manifest largeness, of a round and hollow figure, like to a pipe or
quill. It is composed of its proper coat, and one common from the perit^naeum.
It is only one, and that situate in the simous or hollow part of the
Compositiors. Number end Site.
l^ver, from whence it breaks forth (or rather out of the umbilicall vein)
into the midst of all the guts, with which it has connection, as also with the
stomach, spleen, sphincter of the fundament and Peritonaeum, by the coat which
it receives from thence. It is of a cold and dry temper. The Action of it is,
to suck the Chyl^^ out Temper and Action.
of the ventricle and guts, and so to take and carry it to the Liver, until it
may carry back the same turned into blood for the nutriment of the stomaeke,
spleen and guts. This Gate vein coming out of the simous part of the liver,
is divided into six Division thereof into 6 branches of which 4 simple. 1^
Cysticae genellae.
branches, that is 4 simple and two compound, again divided into many other
branches. The first of the simple ascends from the fore part of the truncke to
the bladder of the Gall by the passage of the Choler (and are marked with g.
g.) with a like arterye for life and nourishment, and this distribution is
known by the name of the Cystica gamellae or Cysticke twins. The second is
called the Gastrica or stomach 2 Gastrica.
vein arising in like manner from the fore part of the truncke, is carried to
the Pylorus and the simous or back part of the stomach next to it.

The third is called Gastrepiplois, the stomach and kall vein, which coming
from 3 Gastrepiplois.
the right side of the gate vein goes to the gibbous part of the stomach next
to the Pylorus and the right side of the kall.

The fourth going forth from behind and on the right hand of the gate vein,
ascends 4 Intestinalis.
above the root of the Meseraicke branch, even to the beginning of the gut
Ieiunum, along the gut Duodenum, from whence it is called Intestinalis, or the
gut-veine. And Two compound. 1 Ramu^ splenicus sending ^orch. 1 Coronali^. (...)
these are the four simple branches. Now we will speak of the compound.

The first is the spleenicke, which is divided after the following manner. For
in its first beginning and upper part, it sends forth the Coronalis, or crown
vein of the stomach, which by the back part of the stomach ascends into the
upper and hollow part thereof; to which place, as soon as it arrives, it is
divided again into two branches, the one whereof climbs up even to its higher
orifice, the other descends down to the lower, sending forth by the way other
branches to the fore and back parts of the stomach. These engirt on every
side incompasse the body of the ventricle, for which cause they are named the
crown veins.

I have sometime observed this coming forth of the truncke, a little above the
orifice of the splenicke branch. But this same splenicke branch on its lower
part, produces the branch of the Haemorroidall veins, which descending 2
Haemorrhoidal* interna.
to the fundament above the left side of the loins, diffuses a good portion
thereof into the least part of the collicke gut, and the right gut, at the end
whereof it is often seen to be divided into five Haemorrhoidall veins,
sometimes more, sometimes less.

Sylvi^^ writes that the Haemorrhoidall branch descends from the mesentericke,
and truly we have sometimes observed it to have been so. Yet it is more
suitable to reason, that it should descend from the splenicke, not only for
that we have seen with our eyes that it is so, but also because it is
appointed by nature for the evacuation of the excrementitious melancholic
humor. But this same spl^^ick branch out of the 3. Gastrepiplois maj^r ^stra.
middle almost of its upper part produces the third branch going to the gibbous
part of the stomach, and the kall; they term in the greater, middle and left
Gastrepiplois. But on the lower part toward the spleen it produces the simple
Epiplois, or kall-veine, 4. Epiplois simplex.
which it diffuses through the left side of the kall. Moreover from its upper
part, which touches the liver, it sends forth a short branch called vas breve,
or venosum, to 5. Vas breve scu venosum.
the upper orifice of the ventricle for stirring up the appetite.

We have oftentimes and almost always observed, that this veinie vessel,
which Galen calls vas breve, comes from the very body of the spleen, and is
terminated in Lib. 4. de ^s^ partium.
the midst of the stomach on the left side, but never peirces both the coats
thereof. Wherefore it is somewhat difficult to find, how the melancholy juice
can that way be powered, or sent into the capacity of the stomach. Now the
splenicke branch, when it has produced out of it those five forementioned
branches, is wasted and dispersed into the substance and body of the spleen.

Then follows another compound branch of the vena porta; called the
mesentericke, which is divided into three parts; the first and least whereof
goes to the blind 2 Ramus mesentericus, divided into three parts.
gut, and to the right and middle part of the collicke-gut, divided into an
infinite multitude of other branches. The second and middle is wasted in the
Ileon; as the third and greater in the Ieiunum or empty gut. It is called
Mesentericke because it is diffused over all the Mesentery; as the splenicke is
in the spleen. And thus much we have to say of the division of the gate vein,
the which if at any time thou shall find to be other-wise, than I have set
down, you must not wonder at it; for you shall scarce ^inde it the same in two
bodies, by reason of the infinite variety of particular bodies, which (as the
Philosophers say) have each their own, or peculiar gifts. Our judgment is the
same of other divisions of the vessels. Yet we have set down that which we
have most frequently observed.

CHAP. XXII. Of the original of the Artery, and the division of the branch,
descending to the natural parts.
THose things being thus finished and considered, the guts should be pulled
aaway, but seeing that if we should do so, we should disturb and loose the
division of the artery descending to the natural parts; therefore I have
thought it better to handle the division thereof, before the guts be plucked
away. Therefore we must suppose, according to Galens opinion, that as all the
veins come from the liver, so all arteries proceed from the heart. This
presently at the beginning is divided into two branches, the greater whereof
descends downwards to The original of arteries. The division of the great
descendant artery, is into these. 1 Arteria inter^.
the natural parts upon the spine of the back, taking its beginning at the
fifth vertebra thereof, from whence it goes into the following arteries. The
first called the intercostall, runs amongst the intercostall muscles, and the
distances of the ribs, and spinall marrow, through the perforations of the
nerves on the right and left hand from the fifth true, even to the last of the
bastard ribs.

This is going this progress makes 7. little branchings, distributed after the
forementioned manner, and going forth of the truncke of the descendant over
against each of the intercostal Muscles.

The second being parted into two goes on each side to the midriffe, whence it
2 Phrenica. 3. Caeliaca.
may be called, or expressed by the name of the Diaphragmatica or Phrenica (i)
the midriffe arterye. The third being of a large proportion, arising from the
upper part of the artery presently after it has passed the midriffe, is
divided into two notable branches, whereof on goes to the stomach, spleen,
kall, to the hollow part of the liver and the gall; the other is sent forth to
the mesentery and guts after the same manner, as we said of the meseraicke
veins, wherefore it is called the (...), (...) stomach artery. But we must
note all their mouths penetrate even to the innermost coat of the guts, that
by that means they may the better and more easily attract the Chylus contained
in them.

The fourth is carried to the reins, where it is named the reinall o^
emulgent, because it suckes fit matter from the whole mass of blood. 4.
Emulgent. 5. Spermatica.


The fifth is sent to the testicles with the preparing spermaticke veins,
whence also it is named the spermaticke artery, which arises on the right side,
from the very trunk of the descendant artery; that it may associate the
spermaticke vein of the same side, they run one above another, beneathe the
hollow vein, wherefore we must have a great care whilst we labor to lay it
open, that we do not hurt and break it.

The seventh Figure of the lower belly.
A. A. the midriffe turned back with the ribs and the perito^^^m.

BB. the cave or hollow part of the liver, for the liver is lifted up that the
hollow part of it may be better seen.

C. the least ligament of the liver.

D. the umbilicall vein.

E. the hollownesse in the liver, which gives way to the stomach.

F. the left orifice of the stomach.

GG. certain knubs, or knots, and impressions in the hollow part of the liver.

H. the bladder of gall.

I. the gate-veine, cut off, and branches which go to the bladder of gall.

K. a nerve of the liver coming from the stomachicall nerve.

L. an artery common to the liver and bladder of gall.

M. a nerve common also to them both, coming from the right costall nerve of
the ribs.

N. the passage of the gall to the guts cut off.

OO. the hollow of the fore parts of the spleen.

P. they line where the vessels of the spleen are implanted. Q. the trunk of
the hollow vein. R. the trunk of the great artery. S. the Coeliacall artery
cut off. T. V. the kidneies yet wrapped in their membrane. X. Y. the fatty
veins called venae adiposa. a. b the emulgent veins with the arteries under
them. cc. dd. the ureter from either kidney to the bladder. c. f. the
spermaticall veins to the testicles, the right from the hollow vein, the left
from the emulgent. g. g. veins coming from the spermaticall to the
peritonaeum. h. i. the spermaticall arteries. k. the lower mesentericall
artery. l. the ascending of the great artery above the hollow vein, and the
division of it, and the hollow vein into two trunkes. m. the artery of the
loins called lumbaris. n. the holy artery called sacra. o. a part of the right
gut, p. the bladder of urine. * the connection of the bladder with the
peritonaeum. q. a part of the vessels which lead the seed from the testicles,
is here reflected. r. s. the scrotum, or cod, that is, the skin that invests
the yard and testicles. t. the fleshie pannicle or membrane which is under the
cod. u. the coat which is proper to the testicles with his vessels. x. a part
of the yard excoriated or flayed, and hanging down.



The sixth going from the fore and upper part of this descendant artery,
descends Haemorrhoidali^ seu mesen^^rica inferior.
with the Haemorroidall veins to the fundament; presently from his beginning,
sending forth certain br^nches along the collicke gut, which by (...) (...)
united with other branches of the Coel^call arteries; for whosoever shall lock
more attentively, he shall often observe that veins are so united amongst
themselves, and also arteries, and sometimes also the veins with the arteries.
For an ^s is a communion and communicating of the vessels amongst themselves,
by the application of their mouths, that so by mutual supplies they may ease
each others defects. But they call this the lower meseraicke artery.

The seventh proceeding from the truncke with so many branches as there be
vertebra's 7. Lumbaris.
in the loins, goes to the loins and the parts belonging to them, that is,
the spinall marrow of that part, and other parts encompassing these Vertebra's,
whereupon it is styled the Lumbaris or Loine Artery.

The eight makes the Iliacke arteries, until such time as it departs from the
Peritonaeum 8 Iliaca.
where the Crurall Arteryes take their original. This Iliacke Artery sends
many divarications toward the Holy bone where it takes its beginning, and to
the places lying nere the Holy bone, which because they run the same course as
the Iliacke veins, for brevities sake, we will let pass further mention of
them, till we come to treat of the Iliacke veins.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the distribution of the Nerves to the natural parts.
IT remains, that before the bowels be taken away, we show the nerves The
original of the nerves which are carried to the natural parts.
sent to the entrails and natural parts, that as wise and provident men we
may seem to have omitted nothing. First we must know that these nerves are of
the sixth conjugation, which descend as well to the stomach all along the
Gullet and the ^ides thereof, as those at the roots of the ribs on both sides
within. But when they are passed through the Midriffe, those which are
distributed amongst the natural parts follow the turnings of the veins and
arteryes, but specially of the arteryes. Wherefore if you have a mind to follow
this distribution of the nerves, you must chiefly look for it in those
places, in which the artery is distributed amongst the Guts above the loins.

These nerves are but small, because the parts serving for nutrition, needed
none Their magnitude and use.
but little nerves, for the performance of the third duty of the nerves, which
is in the discerning and knowing of what is troublesome to them. For unless
they had this sense, there is nothing would hinder, but these bowels necessary
for life, being possessed with some hurtful thing, the creature should
presently fall down dead; but we have this benefit by this sense, that as
soon as any thing troubles and vellicates the bowels, we being admonished
thereof may look for help in time.

And besides if they were destitute of this sense, they might be gnawne,
ulcerated and putrified by the raging acrimony of the excrements falling into
and staying in them; but now (by means hereof) as soon as they find
themselves pricked, or plucked, presently by the expulsive faculty they
endeavoure to expel that which is troublesome, and so free themselves of
present and future dangers.

CHAP. XXIIII. The manner of taking out the Guts.
WHen the Guts are to be taken out, you must begin with the Right Gut. And you
must divide it, being first straightly tied in two different places, at a just
distance about four fing^is from the end, with (...) between the two
ligatures. Th^^ you must she proper coats, and fibers, and that common one
which it has from the Peritonaeum. This being done, you must in like manner
bind the truncke of the gate vein as near the original as you can; that so
all his branches being in like manner tied there may be no fear of effusion of
blood: you must do the like with the Caeliacke Arterye at the left kidney, and
in the lower Mesentericke, which descends to the Right gut with the
Haemorrhoidall veins. This being done, pull away the guts even to the Duodenum,
which being in like manner tied in two places, which ought to be below the
insertion of the Porus Cholagogus or passage of the Gall, that you may show the
oblique insertion thereof into that gut, for the obliquity of its insertion is
worth observation, as that which is the cause that the Gall cannot flow back
into its bladder, by the compression of this Gut from below upwards. Then all
these windings of the Guts may be taken away from the body.

CHAP. XXV. The Original and distribution of the deseendent Hollow vein.
BEcause the rest of the natural parts, do almost all depend upon the
descendent Hollow vein, therefore before we go any further, we will show its
original and distribution. We said before that all veins proceeded from the
Liver, but yet in diverse places. For the gate vein goes out of the hollow The
original of the hollow vein. It is divided into two trunkes,
part, and the Hollow vein out of the Gibbous part of the liver, which going
forth like the body of a tree, is divided into two great branches, the lesser
of which goes to the vital and animal parts, and the extremities of these
parts, as we shall show in their place. The greater descending from the back
part of the Liver above the Vertebra's of the loins to the parts beneath, goes
in the manner following. The first division The division of the greater branch
of the hollow vein. 1. Adipos,
thereof is to the membranes of the reins, which come from the Peritonaum.
Wherefore there it produces the Venaeadiposae, or fatty veins, so called
because they bring forth a great quantity of fat in those places; Of these
fatty veins, there is a diverse original, for the right does oftentimes arise
from the right emulgent because it is higher; but the less comes from the very
truncke of the hollow vein, because the emulgent on that side is lower, and
you shall scarce see it happen otherwise.

The second being the Kidney or Emulgent veins, go to the Reins, Which at 2.
Emulgent.
their entrance, or a little before, is divided into two branches, like as the
Artery is, the one higher, the other lower; and these again into many other
through the substance of the Kidneys, as you may learn better by ocular
inspection, than by book. They are thick and broad that the serous humor may
without impediment have freer passage. Their original is different, for the
right Emulgent, often times comes forth of the Hollow vein somewhat higher
than the left; that seeing their office and duty is to purge the mass of blood
from the chollericke and serous humor, that if any part thereof slide by the
one, it may not so escape, but fall as it were into the other. Which certainly
would not have happened if they had bin placed the one just opposite to the
other. For the Serous or wheyish humor would have stayed as equally balanced
or poised, by reason of the contrariety of the action and traction, or drawing
thereof. But we must remember that in dissecting of bodies, I have often times
found in such as have been troubled with the stone, seven Emulgent veins and
so many arteries; four from the left side coming from diverse places, of
which the last came from the Iliacke; three from the right hand likewise in
diverse places.

The third division is called the spermaticke or seed vein, it goes to the
Testicles; the original thereof is thus, that the right arises on the fore
part of the trunck of the 3 Spermatica.
hollow vein; but the left most commonly from the emulgent. Besides you shall
sometimes find that these have companions with them, to the right emulgent;
but to the left another from the hollow vein, in some but on one side, in
others on both. But also I have sometimes observed the left emulgent to proceed
from the sper^ or seed vein.

The forth because it goes to the loins, is called Lumbaris; which in his
original 4. Lumbaris.
and insertion is wholly like the Artery of the loins. But there are 4 Lambares
or Loine veins on each side, that is, one in each of the 4 spaces of the 5
Vertebras of the loins.

The fifth division makes the Iliacae, until passing through the Peritonaeum,
they take 5 Iliacae, which are divided into.
the name of Crurall veins; These are first divided into the Musculous, so
called, because they go to the oblique ascendent and transverse muscles, and
to the Peritonaeum. Sometimes they have their original from the end of the
Trunck. And then the same 1 Musculosae.
Iliacae are divided into the Sacrae, or holy, which go to the spinall marrow
of the 2 Sacrae.
Holy bone, through those holes, by which the nerves generated of this marrow,
have their passage. 3 Hypagastrica, which produce the Haemorrhoidales externae.


Thirdly the Iliacae are divided into the Hypogastricae so called, because they
are distributed to all the parts of the Hypogastrium, or lower part of the
lower belly, as to the right Gut, the muscles thereof, the musculous skin, (in
which place they often make the external Haemorrhoidall, ordained for the
purging of such blood as offends in quantity, as those other [that is, the
inward Haemorrhoidall] which descend to the right Gut from the Gate vein by
the spleenicke branch, serves for cleansing of that which offends in quality)
to the bladder and the neck thereof even to the end of the yard, to the womb,
and even to the neck of the womb and utmust parts of the privities; from
whence it is likely the courses break forth in weomen with child and virgins.
But this same vein also sends a portion of it without the Epigastrium by that
perforation which is common to the share and haunch bones, which strengthened
by meeting of the other internal Crurall vein descends even to the Hamme, but
in the mean time by the way it is communicated to the muscles of the thigh
called Obturatores and other parts within. Fourthly, the Iliaca produce the
Epigastrica which 4 Epigastrica.
on both sides from below ascend according to the length of the right muscles,
spreading also by the way some branches to the oblique and transverse muscles
and also to the Peritonaum. Fifthly, these Iliacae produce the Pudendae or
veins of the privities 5 Pudenda,
because they go in women to their privityes, and into men to the Cods, where
they enter that fleshy coat filled with veins, and go to the skin of the
yeard, they take there beginning under the Hypogastricae.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Kidneyes or Reins.
NOw follow the Kidneyes, which that they may be more easily seen, (after
that you have diligently observed their situation) you shall dispoile of there
fat, if they have any about them, as also of the membrane they have from the
Peritonaeum. First you shall show all their conditions, beginning at their
substance.

The substance of the Kidneyes is fleshy, dense and solid, least they should be
hurt Their substance. Magnitude. Figure. Composition.
by the sharpnes of the urine; Their magnitude is large enough, as you may see.
Their figure is somewhat long and round almost resembling a semicircle, and
they are lightly flatted above and below. They are partly hollow and partly
gibbous; the hollow lies next the hollow vein, and on this side they receive
the emulgent veins and Arteryes, and send forth the ureters; there gibbous
part lies toward the loins. They are composed of a coat coming from the
Peritonaeum, their own peculiar flesh, with the effusion of blood about the
proper vessels (as happens also in other entrails) generates a small nerve,
which springing from the Costall of the sixth conjugation is diffused to each
Kidney on his side into the coat of the kidney it self, although others think
it always accompanies the vein and arterye.

But Fallopius that most diligent Author of Anatomye has observed, that this
nerve is not only oftentimes divaricated into the coat of the kidneyes, but
also pierces into their substance. They are two in number that if the one of
them should by Number.
chance be hurt, the other might supply those necessityes of nature, for which
the Kidneys are made. They lie upon the loins at the sides of the great
vessels, on which Site,
they depend by their proper veins and arteries; and they stick to them, as
it were by a certain second coat, lest that they might be shaken by any
violent motions. Wherefore we may say that the Kidneyes have two coats, one
proper adhering to their substance, the other as it were coming from the
Peritonaeum on that part they stick to it. The right Kidney is almost always
the higher, for those reasons I gave, speaking of the original of the Emulgent
vessels. Columbus seems to think the contrary, but such like controversies
may be quickly decided by the Eye. They have connection Connection.
with the principal vessels by the veins, nerves and arteries, by the coats
with the loins and the other parts of the lower belly, but especially with the
bladder by the ureters. They are of a hot and moist temper, as all fleshy parts
are. Their action Temper, Action.
is to cleanse the Mass of the blood from the greater part of the serous and
choleric humor. I said the greater part, because it is needful that some
portion thereof should go with the alimentary blood to the sollid parts, to
serve in steed of a vehicle lest otherwise it should be too thick.

Besides you must note that in each kidney there is a cavitye bounded by a
certain Their strainer.
membrane, encompassed by the division of the emulgent veins and arteryes,
through which the urine is strained partly by the expulsive faculty of the
kidneies, partly by the attractive of the ureters, which run through the
substance of the kidneyes on the hollow side, no otherwise than the Porus
cholagogus through the body of the Liver.

The ninth and tenth figure of the vessels of seed and urine.
The first figure shows the foreside, the second the hinder-side.

a. a. a. 1. The forepart of the right kidney.

b. b. b. 2. The back part of the left kidney.

c. 1. the outside.

d. d. 1. 2. The inner side.

e. e. 1. 2. The two cavities wherinto the emulgent vessels are inserted.

f. f. 1. 2. The trunk of the hollow vein.

g. g. 1. 2. The trunk of the great artery*

h. i. 12. The emulgent vein and artery.

k. k. 1. 2. The right fatty vein.

l. 1. The left fatty vein.

*. 1. The Coeliacall artery.

m. n. 1. 2. The ureters:

o. p. q. 1. 2. The right spermaticke vein which arises near p. the left
near q.

r. i. The place where the Arteryes of seed arise. s. 1. 2. Small branches
distributed from the spermaticall veins to the Peritonaeum. t. 1. 2. The spiry
varicous body, called Varicosum vas pyramidale. u. 1. 2. The Parastatae, or
Epididymis. x. 1. The testicle yet covered with its coat. y. 1. 2. The place
where the leading vessel called vas deferens does arise a. 1. 2. The descent
of the same leading vessel. b. 1. 2. The revolution of the same leading
vessel. g. 1. 2. The passage of the same vessel reflected like a recurrent
nerve. d. 2. The meeting of the same leading vessels. g. 1. 2. The bladder of
urine, the first figure shows it open, the second shows the back parts.
33. 1. The small bladder of the seed opened. e. e. 2. The Glandules called
Glandulae Prostatae. th. 2. The sphincter muscle of the bladder. (...). 1. 2.
The two bodies which make the substance of the yard. chapter chapter 1. The vessels
which go unto the yard and neck of the bladder. l. 1. The passage which is
common to the urine and seed, cut open. ps. 2. The implantation of the ureters
into the bladder.



CHAP. XXVII. Of the spermaticke Vessels.
NOw we should have spoken of the ureters, because as we said before, they are
passages derived from the Kidneyes to carry the urine to the bladder. But
because they cannot be distinguished and showed unles by the corrupting and
vitiating the site of the spermaticke vessels; therefore I have thought it
better to pass to the explication of all the spermatick parts.

And first of all you must gently separate them, (that so the declaration of
them may be more easy and manifest) and that from the coat which comes from
the peritonaeum, and the fat which invests them even to the share-bone, having
diligently considered their site before you separate them. Then you shall teach
that the substance Their substance. Quantity.
of these vessels, is like to that of the veins and arteryes. Their quantity
is small in thicknes, but of an indifferent length, by reason of the distance
of their original from the Testicles. They arelonger in men than in weomen,
because these have their Testicles hanging without their belly, but weomen have
them lying hid within their belly. Their figure and composure is wholly like the
figure and composition of the veins Figure and composure.
and arteries, except in this one thing, that from that place where they go
forth of the great capacity of the Peritonaeum, they are turned into many
intricate windings, like crooked swollen veins, even to the Testicles. That the
spermaticke matter in that one tracte, which yet is no other than blood, may be
prepared to concoction, or rather be turned into seed in these vessels, by the
irradiation of the faculty of the Testicles. These vessels are six in number,
four preparing, and two ejaculatory, of which we will speak hereafter.
Therefore on each side there be two preparing Number.
vessels, that is, a vein and an artery, arising as we told you when we spoke
of the distribution of the hollow vein. They are inserted into the Testicles
through that coat which some call Epididymis, others Darton. Their site is
oblique above the loins and Site.
flanks, whilst they run down between the ends of the share and hanch
bone, they are knit to the parts lying under them, both by certain fibers
which they send from them, as also by the membrane they have from the
Peritonaeum. They have like temperature as the veins and Arteries have. Their
action is to carry blood to the Testicles, for generating of seed.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Testicles, or Stones.
THe Testicles are of a Glandulous, white, soft and loose substance, that Their
substance.
so they may the more easily receive the spermaticke matter: their magnitude
and figure equal, and resemble a small pullets Egg somewhat Magnitudeand
figure. Composition.
flatted; Their composure is of veins, arteries, coats and their proper flesh.
Their veins and arteries proceed from the spermaticke vessels, their nerves
from the sixth conjugation, by the roots of the ribs and out of the holy
bone. They are wrapped in four coats, two whereof are common, and two proper.
The common are the Scrotum or skin of the Cods, proceeding from the true skin;
and the fleshy coat, which consists of the fleshy Pannicle in that place
receiving a great number of vessels, through which occasion it is so called.
The proper coats are first the Erythroris arising from the process of the
Peritonaeum, going into The Coa^ Erythr^is
the Scrotum together with the spermaticke vessels which it involues and
covers; this appears red both by reason of the vessels as also of the
Cremaster muscles of the Testicles; Then the Epididymis or Dartos which takes
its original of the membrane The Epididymis, or Darte^.
of the spermatick preparing vessels. The flesh of the Testicles is as it were
a certain effusion of matter about the vessels, as we said of other entrails.
But you must observe that the Erythrois encompasses the whole stone, except its
head, in which place it sticks to the Epididymis which is continued through the
whole substance of the Testicle. This Epididymis or Dartos was therefore put
about the stones, because the Testicles of themselves, are loose, spongeous,
cavernous and soft, so that they cannot safely be joined to the spermaticke
vessels which are hard and strong. Wherefore Nature that it might join
extremes by a fit Medium, or mean, formed this coat Epididymis. This is
scarce apparent in weomen by reason of its smallness. The two forementioned
common coats, adhere or stick together by their vessels not only amongst
themselves, but also with the Erythrois. You must besides observe the Cremaster
muscles are of the said substance with other muscles, small and thin, of an
oblique The Cremaster muscles.
and broad figure, arising from the membrane of the Peritonaeum, which (as we
said before) assumes flesh from the flanks. Their composition is like that of
other muscles. They are two, one each side on. They are situate from the ends
of the flanks, even to the stones. They have connection with the process of the
Peritonaeum and Testicles. Their temper is like that of other muscles. Their
action is to hang and draw up the Testicles toward the belly, whence they are
called, hanging muscles. The Testicles are most commonly two in number, on each
side one, sometimes there be three, sometimes one alone, as it happens also in
the Kidneies; for some have but one Kidney. They lie hid in the Serotum at the
very roots of the share bone, connexed to the principal parts of their
vessels, with the neck of the bladder and yard; but by their coats they adhere
to the parts from whence they have them. They are of a cold and moist temper,
because they are glandulous; although they may be hot by accident by reason of
the multitude of the vessels flowing thither. Those whose testicles are Temper.
more hot are prompt to venery, and have their privities and the adjacent parts
very hairy, and besides their testicles are more large and compact. Those on
the contrary that have them cold are slow to venery, neither do they beget
many children, and those they get are rather female than male, their priuities
have little hair upon them, and their testicles are small, soft and flat.

The action of the testicles is to generate seed, to corroborate all the parts
of the body, and by a certain manly irradiation to breed or increase a true
masculine courage. Action.
This you may know by Eunuchs or such as are Gelt, who are of a womanish
nature, and are oftentimes more tender and weak than weomen. As Hippocrates,
teaches by the example of the Scythians, lib. de Aere, locis et aquis.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the varicous bodies or Parastat's, and of the ejaculatory
vessels and the glandulous or Prostates.
THe varicous Parastatae are nervous and white bodies, like as the nerves,
round and close woven amongst themselves, they are stretched even from Their
substance.
the top to the bottom of the testicles, from whence presently by their
departure they produce the Vasa ejaculatoria, or trading vessels. But unless
we do very well distinguish their names, we shall scarce shun confusion. For
that which I call Parastatae, that is, as it were the head of the testicle,
being as it were Here the Author speaks otherwise then Galen.
like another stone, is called Epididymis by Galen lib-i. de semine. But I by
the example and authority of many Anatomists, understand by the Epididymis the
proper coat of the testicles, of which thing I thought good by the way to
admonish you of. Their Action is by their crooked passages to hinder the seed
from departing out of the preparing into the leading vessels, before it shall
be most perfectly labored Action.
and concocted in these vessels by the power and force of the testicles. For in
the first windings, the blood looks pure; but in the last it is not so red,
but somewhat whitish. For Nature commonly does thus delay the matter in its
passage either by straitness, or obliquity, which it desires to make more
perfect and elaborate by any new concoction; this we may learn by the foldings
of the Rete mirable, the windings of the Guts, the wrinckles in the bottom of
the stomach, the straitness of the Pylorus, the capillary veins dispersed
through the body of the Liver; certainly nature has intended some such thing
in the making of the spermaticke vessels. Their Their quantity, figure and
composure.
quantity is visible, and figure round tending some what to sharpness. They
are composed of veins, nerves and arteryes (which they enjoy from the vessels
of the testicles, from the Epididymis, or the coat, from the Peritonaeum and
their proper substance. Their temper is cold and dry. They be two in number,
one to each testicle. But these Their temper and number.
varicous bodies are called Parastatae, Assisters, because they superficially
assist, and are knit to the testicles according to their length, or long-wayes.
Out of the Vasa ejaculatoria the ejaculatory or leading vessels.
Parastatae proceed the Vasa ejaculatoria, or leading vessels, being of the
same substance as their progenitors, that is, solid, white and as it were
nervous. Their quantity is indifferent, their figure round, and hollow, that
the seed may have a free passage through them, yet they seem not to be
perforated by any manifest passage, unless by chance in such as have had a
long Gonnorrbaea. They have like temper as the Parastats, between which and
the Prostates they are seated, immediately knit with them both; as both in the
coat and the other vessels with the parts from whence they take them.

But we must note, that such like vessels coming out of the parastats ascend
from the botom of the stones even to the top, in which place meeting with the
preparing vessels, they rise into the belly by the same passages, and bind
themselves together by nervous fibers, even to the inner capacity of the belly;
from whence turning back, they forsake the preparing, that so they may run to
the bottom of the share-bone, into the midst of two glandulous bodies which
they call prostats situate at the neck of the bladder, that there meeting
together they may grow into one passage.

For thus of three passages, that is, of the 2 leading vessels and 1 passage of
the bladder, there is one common one in men for the casting forth of seed and
urine. A Caruncle rising like a crest at the beginning of the neck of the
bladder argues this uniting of the passages, which receiving this same passage
which is sufficiently large, is often times taken by such as are ignorant in
anatomy for an unnatural Caruncle, then especially when it is swollen through
any occasion. These leading vessels are two in number, on each side one. Their
action is to convey the seed made by the testicles Their number and action.
to the Prostats and so to the neck of the bladder, so to be cast forth at the
common passage. But if any ask whether that common passage made by the two
leading vessels between the two glandulous bodies be obvious to sense or no?
We answer it is not manifest, though reason compel us to confess that that
way is perforated by reason of the spe^maticle, gross and viscous matter
carried that way. But peradventure the reason why that passage cannot be seen
is, because in a dead carcass all small passages are closed and hid, the heat
and spirits being gone, and the great appear much less, by reason all the
perforations fade, and fall into themselves. Yet certainly these passage must
needs be very strait, even in a living man, seeing that in a dead they will
not admit the point of a needle. Wherefore we need not fear, least in
searching, whilst we thrust the Catheter into the bladder, it penetrate into
the common passage of the leading vessels which runs within the Caruncle,
unless peradventure by some chance, as a Gonnorr^aea, or some great Phlegmon,
it be much dilated besides nature. For I have sometimes seen such passages so
open, This Caruncle must be observed and distinguished from a Hypersarcosis or
fleshy excrescence.
that they would receive the head of a Spatherne; which thing should admonish
us, that in searching we take great care, that we do not rashly hurt this
Caruncle, for being some what rashly handled with a Catheter it casts forth
blood, especially if it be inflamed. But also the concourse of the spirits
flowing with great violence together with the seed, much helps forward such
ejaculation thereof performed through these strait passages by the power of
the imaginative faculty in the Act of generation.

After the leading vessels follow the Prostatae, being glandulous bodies of the
same The Prostatae. Their quantity and figur^.
substance and temper that other Glandules are. Their quantity is large enough,
their figure round, and some what long, sending forth on each side a soft
production of an indifferent length. They are composed of veins, nerves,
arterics, a coat (which they have from the neighboring parts) and lastly
their proper flesh, which they have from their first conformation. They are two
in number, situate at the root of the Number and site.
neck of the bladder, some what straightly bound, or tied to the same, to the
leading vessels, and the parts annexed to them. But always observe, that every
part which An anatomicall axiom.
enjoyes nourishment, life and sense, either first or last has connection with
the principal parts of the body, by the intercourse of the vessels which they
receive from thence.

The use of the Prostats is, to receive in their proper body the seed labored
in Their use.
the testicles, and to contain it there, until it be troublesome either in
quantity or quality or both. Besides they contain a certain oily and viscide
humor in their glandulous body, that continually distilling into the passage of
the urine, it may preserve it from the acrimony and sharpness thereof. But we
have observed also on each side other Glandules, which Rondeletius calls
Appendices glandylosae, Glandulous Roud. in method. med. ad morbos.
dependances to arise from these Prostats, in which also their is seed reserved.

The 10. figure, where in those things showed in the former figure, are more
exactly set forth.
aa A part of the Midriffe and of the Peritonaum with the ribs broken.

bb cc The Unequal or gibbous part of the Liver marked with bb. the hollow or
concavous part with cc.

d e The right and left ligaments of the Liver.

f The trunk of the gate veire.

g The trunk of the hollov vein.

h l The fatty veins both left and right.

i The ascent of the great ^^ery above the hollow vein, and the division
thereof.

k The Caliacall artery.

n n The emulgent vessels.

oo pp The fat tunicles or coats torn from both the kidneys.

qq The ureters that go unto the bladder. t u. The right spermaticall vein
which arises near to u. x y. The double original of the left spermaticall
vein. x. from the emulgent, y from the hollow vein. a The original of the
spermaticall arteries b Certain branches from the spermaticke arteries which
run unto the Peritonaeum g The passage of the spermaticall vessels through
the productions of the Peritonaeum, which must be observed by such as use to
cut for the Rupture. and d The spirie bodden bodies entrance into the testicle,
it is called Corpus varicosum pyramidale. The Parastatae. z The stone or
testicle covered with his inmost coat. (...) The descent of the leading
vessel called Vas deferens. V y. The Bladder. * The right gut. x The glandules
called prostatae into which the leading vessels are inserted. r The muscle of
the bladder. tu Two bodies of the yard, (...) and t and n his vessels. phch.
The coat of the Testicle. (...) The muscle of the Testicle ps. his vessels o.



CHAP. XXX. Of the Vreters.
NOw it seems sit to speak of the Vreters, bladder, and parts belonging to the
bladder. Therefore the Vreters are of a spermaticke, white, The substance
magnitude, figure and composure of the vreters.
dense and solid substance, or an indifferent bigness in length and thicknes.
Their figure is round and hollow. They are composed of two coats, one proper
consisting of right and transverse fibers, which comes from the emulgent veins
and arteries; the other common from the Peritonaeum; besides they have veins,
nerves and arteryes from the Neighboring parts.

They be two in number on each side one; They are situate between the Kidneyes
Number and site.
(out of whose hollow part they proceed) and the bladder. But the manner how
the Vreters insert or enter themselves into the bladder, and the Porus
Cholagogus into the Duodenum, exceedes admiration; for the ureters are not
directly but obliquely implanted near the orifice of the bladder and penetrate
into the inner space thereof; for within they do as it were divide the
membrane or membranous coat of the body of the bladder, and inflnuate
themselves into that, as though it were double. But this is opened at the
entrance of the urine, but shut at other times, the cover as it were falling
upon it, so that the humor which is fallen into the capacity of the bladder
cannot be forced or driven back, no not so much as the air blown into it
can come this way out, as we see in swines bladders blown up and filled with
air.

For we see it is the Air contained in these which fills them thus, neither
can it be pressed forth but with extraordinary force.

For as this skin or coat turned in by the force of the humor gives way, so
it being pressed out by the body contained within, thrusts its whole body into
the passage as a stopple; like to this is the insertion of the Porus Cholagogus
into the Guts.

The ureters have connection with the above mentioned parts, with the muscles
Connection.
of the loins; upon which they run from the Kidneyes to the bladder.

Wherefore nothing hinders, but that the stone sliding through the ureters into
the bladder, may stupify the thigh as much as it did when it was in the Kidney.
They are of a cold and dry temper.

Their use is, to serve as passages, or channels for carrying the urine into
the Temper and use.
bladder.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Bladder.
THe bladder is of the same substance that the ureters, that is, nervous, that
The substance
so it may be the more easily dilated.

It is of a large proportion, in some bigger in some less, according to the
difference of age, and habit of body. It is of a round figure and as Figure.
it were Pyramidall.

It is composed of two coats, one proper which is very thick and strong
composed Composition.
of the three sorts of fibers, that is, in the inner side of the direct;
without of the transverse; and in the midst of the oblique.

The other common Coat coming from the Peritonaum has veins and arteryes on
each side one, from the Hypogastrick vessels above the holy-bone, also it has
nerves on each side from the sixth conjugation mixed with the nerves of the
holy-bone.

For these nerves descend from the brain even to the end of the holy-bone.

It is but one and that situate in men in the lower belly upon the light Cut
and below the share bone, but in women between the womb and that bone, to
which it cleaves with its membranous ligaments, as it does to the yard by its
neck, and to the right gut by its common coat and proper vessels. It is of a
cold and dry temper. Temper, use or action.


The use and action thereof is by the fibers continually to draw the urine, and
contain it as long as need requires, and then to expel it by the neck,
partly by compression either of it self, or rather of the muscles of the
Epigastrium and Midriffe, because this motion, seeing it is voluntary cannot be
performed unless by a muscle which the bladder wants; partly also by the
dilatation and relaxation of the sphincter muscle composed of transverse
fibers, like the sphincter of the fundament, after the same manner to shut up
the orifice of the bladder, that the Their sphincter of the bladder.
urine flow not out against our will. But the bladder as it fills is dilated,
but as it is emptied, it is contracted like a purse. You may easily observe
this Muscle in a Sowes bladder, it is stretched from the orifice of the bladder
and beginning of the urinarye passage even to the privities even in women; but
in men it is terminated in the Perinaeum, as soon as it has left the right
Gut.

Besides, this muscle is thus far stretched forth, that the urine by its
compression should be wholly pressed out of the bladder, which by too long stay
would by its acrimony do some harm. This is the common opinion of Anatomists
concerning the Sphincter of the bladder, which never-the-lesse Fallopius
allows not of. For (says he) if this muscle should be situate beneath the
glandulous bodies, the seed in copulation could never be cast forth without
some small quantity of urine. Wherefore he thinks that this muscle is situate
above the Prostats, and that it is nothing else but the beginning of the neck
of the bladder, which becoms more fleshy whilst it is woven with transverse
fibers.

The eleventh figure of the bladder and yard.
AB, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9. The two bodies which make the yard.

CC 2, 3. The place where these two bodies do first arise.

D 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9. The nut of the yard called glans penis.

EE 4, 5. The fungous and read substance of the bodies of the yard.

F 4, 5. The mutual connection of the bodies of the yard, and the nervous
outward substance of the same, compassing round about the former fungous
substance.

G 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9. The passage of the urine, or common pipe running under
the yard all along his length.

H. I. 1. 2. The first pair of Muscles of the yard, which in the first figure
do yet grow to it, but in the second they hang from their original. K. L. 1.
2. The second pair of Muscles of the yard, in the first figure growing, in the
second hanging from their insertion. M 1. 2. The sphincter of the right gut. N
3, 7, 8, 9. The round sphincter Muscle of the bladder. O O, A Membrane which is
over the holes of the share bone. P 2. Arounde Ligament from the meeting of the
share bones unto the head of the thgh. Q. 3. 7. 8. The body of the bladder. R
R, 3, 7. The Prostatae, into which seed when it is perfectly labored, is led.
SS, 3, 8. Portions of the ureters. T T* 3, Portions of the vessels which lead
down the seed. V V, 7, 8, The umbilicall arteries. X 7, 8, The ligament of the
bladder called Vrachus. Y, 7, 8. The navel or umbilicus. Z, 7, 8. The umbilicall
vein. aa 7, The vein and artery of the yard. b 5. The artery distributed
through the body of the yard.



For the neck of the bladder it differs nothing in substance, composure,
number, and The neck of the bladder.
temper from the bladder, but only in quantity, which is neither so large, nor
round in figure, but somewhat long together with the yard representing the
shape of the letter S. It is placed in men at the end of the right Gut and
Perinaeum, rising upwards even to the roots of the yard, and with it bending
it self downwards; in weomen it is short, broad, and straight, ending at the
orifice of the neck of the womb between the nervous bodies of the Nymphae.

In men it has connection with the bladder, the ejaculatory vessels, the right
gut The connection and use thereof.
and yard; but in weomen only with the neck of the womb and privities. The
use of it is in men to cast forth seed and urine, in weomen only urine. But
we must note that the share bones must be divided and pulled asunder, in that
part where they are joined, that so you may the more exactly observe the
situation of these parts. Besides you must note that by the Perinaeum we
understand nothing else, in men and weomen, than that space which is from the
fundament to the privities in which the seame is called Taurus.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the yard.
NOw follows the declaration of the Privy parts of men and weomen, The
substance quantity and figure of the yard.
and first we will treat of men's. The yard is of a ligamentous substance
because it has its original from bones, it is of an indifferent magnitude in
all dimensions, yet in some bigger, in some less; the figure of it is round,
but yet some what flatted above and beneath.

It is composed of a double coat, Nerves, veins, arteryes, two ligaments, the
Composure.
passage of the urine, and four muscles. It has its coats both from the true
skin; as also from the fleshy pannicle, but the veins and Arteryes from these
of the lower part of the lower belly which run on the lower part of the
Holy-bone into the yard, as the seminary vessels run on the upper part.

The ligaments of the yard proceed on both sides from the sides and lower The
ligaments
commissure of the share-bones; wherefore the yard is immediately at his root
furnished with a double ligament, but these two presently run into one spungy
one. The passage of the urine situate in the lower part of the yard comes
from the neck of the bladder between the two ligaments.

For the four muscles, the two side ones composeing or making a great part The
muscles.
of the yard, proceed from the inward extuberancy of the Hip-bone, and
presently they are dilated from their original, and then grow less again.
The two other lower arise from the muscles of the fundament and accompany the
urinary passage the length of the perinaeum until they enter the yard; but
these two muscles cleave so close together, that they may seem one having a
triangular form.

The action of these four muscles in the act of generation is they open and
Their Action.
dilate this common passage of urine and seed, that the seed may be forciblely
or violently cast into the field of nature; and besides they then keep the
yard so stiff, that it cannot bend to either side.

The yard is in number one, and situate upon the lower parts of the share bone
that it might be more stiff in erection. It has connection with the
share-bone and neighboring parts; by the particles of which it is composed. It
is of a cold and dry temper. The action of it is to cast the seed into the
womb, for preservation of mankind.

The head of it begins where the tendons end, this head from the figure thereof
The Nut. The Praeputium, or foreskin.
is called Glans and Balanus, that is the Nut, and the skin which covers that
head is called Praeputium that is, the foreskin. The flesh of this Glandule is
of a middle nature between the Glandulous flesh and true skin. But you must
note that the Ligaments of the yard are spongy contrary to the condition of
others, and filled with gross and black blood. But all these stirred up by
the delight of desired pleasure and provoked with a venereall fire, swell up
and erect the yard.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the spermaticke vessels and testicles in weomen.
NOw we should treat of the Privy parts in weomen but because they depend upon
the neck and proper body of the womb, we will first speak of the womb,
having first declared what difference there is between the In what the
sperematicke vessels in weomen differ from those in men.
spermaticke vessels and testicles of men and weomen. Wherefore we must know
that the spermatick vessels in weomen do nothing differ from those in men in
substance, figure, composure, number, connection, temper, original and use, but
only in magnitude and distribution; for weomen have them more large and short.

It was sit they should be more large, because they should not only convey the
matter fit for generation of young and nourishment of the testicles, but also
sufficient for the nourishment of the womb and child; but shorter because they
end at the testicles Why they are larger but shorter then men's.
and womb within the belly in weomen. Where you must note that the preparing
spermaticke vessels, a little before they come to the Testicles, are divided
into two unequal branches, of which the lesser bended, after the same manner
as we said in men, goes into the head of the testicle, through which it sends
a slender branch into the coats of the testicles for life and nourishment, and
not only into the coats but also into the leading vessels. But the bigger
branch descends on each side by the upper part of the womb between the proper
coat and the common, from the Peritonaeum where it is divided into diverse
branches. By this difference of the spermaticke vessels you may easily
understand why weomen cast forth less seed than men.

For their Testicles, they differ little from men's but in quantity; For they are
lesser and in figure more hollow and flat, by reason of their defective heat
which could In what their testicles differ from men's.
not elevate or lift them up to their just magnitude. Their composure is more
simple, for they want the scrotum or cod, the fleshy coat, and also according
to the opinion of some the Erythroides, but in place thereof they have another
from the Peritonaeum which covers the proper coat, that is the Epididymis, or
Dartos. Silvius writes that women's Testicles wants the Erythroides; yet it is
certain that besides their peculiar coat Dartos, they have another from the
peritonaeum, which is the Erythroides, or as Fallopius calls it the
Elythroides, that is as much as the vaginalis or sheath. But I think that this
error has sprung from the misunderstanding that place in Galen where he Lib.
14. de usu part.
writes, that women's testicles want the Epidedymis. For we must not understand
that to be spoken of the coat, but of the varicous parastats (as I formerly
said). They differ nothing in number, but in fite; for in men they hang without
the belly at the Site.
share bone above the Peritonaeum; weomen have them lying hide in their belly,
nere the bottom at the sides of the womb, but yet so as they touch not the
body of the womb.

But these testicles are tied to the womb both by a coat from the
Peritonaeum, as also by the leading vessels descending to the horns of the
womb, but Connection.
to the rest of the body by the vessels and the nerves arising from the holy
bone and costall nerves. They are of a colder Temper than man's. The
ejaculatorie, or leading Temper. Their ejaculatory vessels.
vessels in women differ thus from men's, they are large at the beginning, and
of a veinie consistance, or substance, so that you can scarce discern them
from the coat Peritonaeum, then presently they become nervous, and wax so
slender, that they may seem broken or torn, though it be not so; but when
they come nearer to the horns of the womb, they are again dilated; in their
other conditions, they agree with men's, but that they are altogether more
slender and short. They have a round figure, but more intricate windings than
men's; I believe, that these windings might Why they have more intricate
windings. Their fite.
supply the defect of the varicous Parastats. They are seated between the
testicles and womb, for they proceed out of the head of the testicle, than
presently armed with a coat from the Peritonaeum, they are implanted into the
womb by its horns.

The twelfth Figure, of the Womb.
A. The bottom of the womb laid open without any membrane.

BB. The neck of the womb turned upward.

CD. a part of the bottom of the womb like the nut of the yard, swelling into
the upper part of the neck of the womb, in the middle whereof the orifice
appears.

EE. a membrane knitting the womb to the Peritonaeum, and holding togethe
vessels thereof.

F. the left testicle.

G. the spermaticall vein and artery.

H. a part of the spermaticall vessels reaching unto the bottom of the womb.

I. one part of the vessels coming to the testicles * a vessel leading the
seed unto the womb.

K. the coat of the testicle with the implication of the vessels. L. the
cavitie of the bladder opened. M. the insertion of the Vreters into the
bladder. N. the Vreters cut from the kidneies. O. the insertion of the neck of
the bladder into the lap or privitie.

The second Figure.

aa. The spermaticall vein and artery. bb. branches distributed to the
Peritonaeum from the spermaticall vessels. c. the bottom of the womb. d. the
neck of the womb. e. certain vessels running through the inside of the
womb, and the neck thereof. ff, vessels reaching to the bottom of the womb
produced from the spermaticall vessel. gg. the leading vessel of seed called
Tuba the Trumper. hh. a branch of the spermaticall vessel compassing the
trumpet. ii. the testicles. kk. the lower ligaments of the womb, which some
call the Cremasteres or hanging muscles of the womb. l. the lap or privitie
into which the Cremasteres do end. m. a portion of the neck of the bladder.

The third Figure.

aa. the spermaticall vessels. bb. a branch from these spermaticall vessels to
the bottom of the womb. cc. the body or bottom of the womb. d. the neck of
the same, e. the neck of the bladder ending into the neck of the womb. ff.
the tefticles. gg. the leading vessels, commonly though not so well called the
ejaculatory vessels. hh. the division of these vessels, one of them determining
into the horns at double kk. ii. the other branch ending in the neck, by
which women with child avoid their seed. kk. the horns of the womb.

The fourth Figure.

AB. The bosom of the bottom of the womb, at whose sides are the horns. CD.
a line like a suture or seame, a little distinguishing that bosom. EE. the
substance of the bottom of the womb, or the thickness of his inner coat. F.
a protuberation or swelling of the womb in the middle of the bosom. G. the
orifice of the bottom of the womb. HH. the coat or second cover of the
bottom of the womb, coming from the Peritonaeum. IIII. a portion of the
membranes which tie the womb. KK. the beginning of the neck of the womb. L.
the neck of the bladder inserted into the neck of the womb. m. the Clitoris
in the top of the privity. n. the inequality of the privitie where the Hymen
is placed. o. the hole or passage of the privitie in the cleft. p. the skinny
caruncle of the privitie.



CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the Womb.
THe Womb is a part proper only to women, given by nature instead of Wherein
the privy parts in weomen differ from those in men.
the Scrotum, as the neck thereof, and the annexed parts in stead of the yard;
so that if any more exactly consider the parts of generation in women and men,
he shall find that they differ not much in number, but only in situation and
use. For that which man has apparent without, that women have hid within, both
by the singular providence of Nature, as also by the defect of heat in women,
which could not drive and thrust forth those parts as in men. The womb is of a
nervous and membranous substance, that it may be more easily dilated and
contracted, as need shall require.

The magnitude thereof is diverse, according to the diversity of age, the use
of The substance and magnitude of the womb.
venery, the flowing of their courses, and the time of conception. The womb is
but small in one of unripe age, having not used venery, nor which is
menstruous; therefore the quantititie cannot be rightly defined.

The figure of the womb is absolutely like that of the bladder, if you
consider it Figure.
without the productions, which Herophilus called horns, by reason of the
similitude The horns of the womb.
they have with the horns of Oxen at their first coming forth. It consists of
simple and compound parts. The simple are the veins, arteries, nerves, and
coats. The veins and arteries are four in number, two from the preparing
spermaticke vessels, Composure. The veins and Arteryes.
the two other ascend thither from the Hypogastricke, after this manner.

First, these vessels before they ascend on each side to the womb, divide
themselves into two branches, from which othersome go to the lower part of the
womb, othersome to the neck thereof, by which the menstruous blood, if it
abound from the conception, may be purged.

Nerves come on both sides to the womb, both from the sixth conjugation,
descending Nerves.
by the length of the back bone, as also from the holy bone, which presently
united and joined together, ascend and are distributed through the womb, like
the veins and arteries.

The utmost or common coat of the womb, proceeds from the Peritonaeum, on The
Coats.
that part it touches the holy bone; but the proper it has from the first
conformation, which is composed of the three sorts of fibers, of the right on
the inside for the attraction of both seeds; the transverse without to expel,
if occasion be; the oblique in the midst for the due retention thereof.

The womb admits no division, unless into the right and left side, by an
obscure line or seame, such as we see in the Scrotum, but scarce so manifest;
neither must we afterthe manner of the ancients, or imagine any other cells in
the womb. For by the No cells in the womb.
law of nature, a woman at one birth can have no more than two. An argument
hereof is, they have no more than two dugges. If any chance to bring forth
more, it is besides nature, and somewhat monstrous, because nature has made no
provision of nourishment for them.

Nature has placed the womb at the bottom of the belly, because that place
The site.
seems most fit to receive seed, to carry and bring forth the young. It is
placed between the bladder and right gut, and is bound to these parts much
more straightly, by the neck, than by the body thereof; but also besides it is
tied with two most strong ligaments on the sides, and upper parts of the
sharebone, on which it seems to hang; but by its common coat from the
Peritonaeum, chiefly thick in that place, it is tied to the hollow bone, and
the bones of the hanch and loins.

By reason of this strait connection, a woman with child feeling the painful
drawings back, and as it were conuvlsions of those ligaments, knows her self
with child. It is of a cold and moist temper, rather by accident, than of it
self. The action The temper and action.
thereof is to contain both the seeds, and to chearish, preserve, and nourish
it, so contained, until the time appointed by nature; and also besides, to
receive, and euacuate the menstruous blood. The compound parts of the womb
are, the proper body and neck thereof. That body is extended in women big
with child, even to the navell, in some higher, in some lower.

In the inner side the Cotyledones come into our consideration, which are
nothing else The Cotyledones.
than the orifices and mouths of the veins, ending in that place. They scarce
appear in women, unless presently after childbearing, or their menstruall
purgation; but they are apparent in sheep, Goats, and Kine, at all times like
wheat corns, unless when they are with young, for then they are of the
bigness of hasell nuts: but then also they swell up in women, and are like a
rude piece of flesh of a finger and a half thick; which begirt all the
natural parts of the infant shut up in the womb; Columbus justly reproved.
out of which respect this shapelesse flesh, according to the opinion of some,
is reckoned amongst the number of coats investing the infant, and called
Chorion, because, as in beasts, the Chorion is interwoven with veins, and
arteries, whence the umbilicall vessels proceed; so in women this fleshie
lump is woven with veins, and arteries, whence such vessels have their
original. Which thing, how true and agreeable to reason it is, let other men
judge.

There is one thing whereof I would admonish thee, that as the growth of the
Cotelidones in beasts, are not called by the name of Chorion, but are only
said to be the dependants thereof, so in women such swollen Cotelidones merit
not the name of Chorion, but rather of the dependances thereof.

This body ends in a certain straitness which is met withal, in following it
toward the privities, in women who have borne no children, or have remained
barren some certain time; for in such as are lately delivered, you can see
nothing but a cavitie and no straitnsse at all. This straitness we call the
proper orifice of the womb, The orifice of the womb. The proper orifice of
the womb is not always exactly shut in women with child. The neck of the
womb.
which is most exactly shut after the conception, especially until the
membrane, or coats incompassing the child be finished, and strong enough to
contain the seed, that it flow not forth, nor be corrupted by entrance of the
air; for it is opened to send forth the seed, and in some the courses and
serous humors, which are heaped up in the womb in the time of their being with
clild.

From this orifice the neck of the womb taking its original, is extended
even to the privities. It is of a musculous substance, composed of soft flesh,
because it might be extended and contracted, wrinkled, and stretched forth, and
unfolded, and wrested, and shaken at the coming forth of the child, and after
be restored to its former soundness and integrity. In process of age it
grows harder, both by use of venery, and also by reason of age, by which the
whole body in all parts thereof becomes dry and hard. But in growing, and
young women, it is more tractable and flexible for the necessity of nature.

The magnitude is sufficiently large in all dimensions, though diverse, by
reason of the infinite variety of bodies. The figure is long, round, and
hollow. The composition Its magnitude. Composition.
is the same with the womb, but it receives not so many vessels as the womb;
for it has none but those which are sent from the Hypogastricke veins, by the
branches ascending to the womb. This neck on the inside is wrinckled with
many crests, like the upper part of a dogs mouth, so in copulation to cause
greater pleasure by that inequality, and also to shorten the act.

It is only one, and that situate between the neck of the bladder and the
right Number and site.
gut, to which it closely sticks, as to the womb by the proper orifice
thereof, and to the privities by its own orifice; but by the vessels to all
the parts from whence they are sent.

It is of a cold and dry temper, and the way to admit the seed into the
womb, Temper.
to exclude the infant out of the womb, as also the menstruall evacuation. But
it is worth observation, that in all this passage there is no such membrane
found, as that they called Hymen, which they feigned to be broken at the first
coition. Yet notwithstanding No Hymen.
Columbus, Fallopius, Wierus, and many other learned men of our time think
otherwise, and say, that in Virgjns a little above the passage of the urine, may
be found and seen such a nervous membrane, placed overtwhart as it were in the
middle way of this neck, and perforated for the passage of the courses. But
you may find this false by experience; it is likely the Ancients fell into
this error through this occasion, because that in some a good quantity of
blood breaks forth of these places at the first copulation.

But it is more probable, that this happens by the violent attrition of
certain vessels lying in the inward superficies of the neck of the womb, not
being able to endure From whence the blood proceeds that breaks forth in some
virgins in the first coition.
without breaking so great extention as that nervous neck undergoes at the
first coition. For a maid which is marriageable, and has her genitall parts
proportionable in quantity and bigness to a man's, shall find no such
effusion of blood, as we shall show more at large in our Book of Generation.

This neck ends at the privities, where its proper orifice is, which privy
parts we must treat of, as being the productions and appendices of this neck.
This Pudendum, or privitie, is of a middle substance, between the flesh and a
nerve; the magnitude is sufficiently large, the figure round, hollow, long. It
is composed of veins, arteries, nerves, descending to the neck of the womb,
and a double coat proceeding from the true skin and fleshie pannicle; both
these coats are there firmly united by the flesh coming between them;
whereupon it is said, that this part consists of a musculous coat. It is one
in number, situate above the Perinaum. It has connection with the fundament,
the neck of the womb and bladder by both their peculiar orifices.

It has a middle temper, between hot, and cold, moist and dry. It has the
same use as a man's Praeputium or fore-skinne, that is, that together with the
Numpha it may hinder the entrance of the air, by which the womb may be in
danger to take cold. The lips of the privities called by the Greeks (...), by
the Latins Ala, contain Alae. (...).
all that region which is invested with hairs; and because we have fallen into
mention of these Nympha, you must know that they are as it were productions of
the musculous skin, which descend on both sides, from the upper part of the
share-bone downwards, even to the orifice of the neck of the bladder, often
times growing to so great a bigness, that they will stand out like a man's
yard. Wherefore in some they must be cut off in their young years, yet with a
great deal of caution, left if they be cut too rashly, so great an effusion of
blood may follow, that it may cause, either death to the woman, or barrenness
of the womb by reason of the refrigeration by the too great effusion of blood.
The latter Anatomists, as Columbus and Fallopius besides these parts, have made
mention of another particle, which stands forth in the upper part of the
privities, and also of the urinary passage, which joins together those wings
we formerly mentioned: Columbus calls it Tentigo, Fallopius Cleitoris, whence
proceeds that infamous word Cleitorizein, (which signifies impudently to
Cleitoris, tentige
handle that part.) But because it is an obscene part, let those which desire
to know, more of it, read the Authors which I cited.

The thirteenth Figure, showing the parts of women different from these in men.
A. B. C. D. The Peritonaeum reflected or turned backward, above and below.

E. F. the gibbous part of the liver (...) the cave or hollow part E.

G. The trunk of the gate vein.

H. the hollow vein.

I. the great artery.

K. the roots of the Coelicall artery which accompanies the gate vein.

L. M. the fatty vein going to the coat of the kidneies.

N. O. the forepart of both the kidneies.

T. V. the emulgent veins and arteries.

aa. the right ureter at the lowest a, cut from a part which near to b,
sticks yet to the bladder, because the bottom of the bladder is drawn to
the left-side.

c. the left ureter inserted into the bladder near to r.

dd. the spermaticke vein which goes to the left testicle marked with i.

ee. the spermaticke vein which goes to the left testicle with i, also. f.
the trunk of the great artery from whence the spermaticall arteries do
proceed. g. h. the spermaticall arteries. ii. the two testicles. ll, a branch
which from the spermaticke vessels reaches unto the bottom of the womb. mm.
the leading vessel of the seed which Falopius calls the tuba or trumpet,
because it is crooked and reflected. n. a branch of the spermaticke vessel,
compassing the leading vessel. oo. a vessel like a worm which passes to the
womb, some call it Cremaster. p. the bottom of the womb called fundus vteri.
q. a part of the right gut. r. s. the bottom of the bladder whereto is
inserted the left ureter, and a vein led from the neck of the womb near
unto r. t. the neck of the bladder. u. the same inserted into the privitie or
lap. x. a part of the neck of the womb above the privity. yy. certain
skinnie Caruncles of the privities, in the midst of which is the slit, and on
both sides appear little hillocks.

The Figures belonging to the Dugges and Breasts.

aa, The veins of the Dugs which come from those, which descending from the
top of the shoulder, are offered to the skin. b. the veins of the dugges
derived from those which through the arme-hole are led into the hand g. the
body of the Dugge or Breast. dd. the kernels and fat between them. ee. the
vessels of the Dugges descending from the lower part of the neck called
iugulum, under the breast bone.



CHAP. XXXV. Of the Coats containing the Infant in the womb, and of the Navell.
THe membranes or coats containing the infant in the womb of the mother, are
of a spermaticke and nervous substance, having their matter from the seed of
the mother. But they are nervous that so they may be the more easily extended,
as it shall be necessary for the child. They are Their substance, magnitude,
figure, and composure.
of good length and breadth, especially near the time of deliverance, they are
round in figure like the womb.

Their composition is of veins, arteries, and their proper substance. The
veins, and arteries, are distributed to them (whether obscurely, or
manifestly, more or fewer) from the womb by the Cotyledones, which have the
same office, as long as the child is contained in the womb, as the nipples or
pappes of the nurses after it is borne. For thus the womb brings the
Cotyledones, or veins, degenerating into them, through the coats like
certain paps to the infant shut up in them.

These coats are three in number according to Galen; one called the Chorion,
Secundine, or afterbirth; the other Allantoides; the third Amnios. I find this
number Their number.
of coats in beasts, but not in women, unless peradventure any will reckon up
in the number of the coats, the Cotyledones swollen up, and grown into a
fleshie mass, which many skillful in Anatomy do write, which opinion
notwithstanding we cannot receive as true. I could never in any place find the
Allantoides in women with child, neither in the infant borne in the sixth,
seventh, eight, or in the full time, being the ninth month, although I have
sought it with all possible diligence, the Midwives being set apart, which
might have violated some of the coats.

But thus I went about this business, I divided the dead body of the mother
crosswise upon the region of the womb, and taking away all impediments, which
might either hinder, or obscure our diligence, with as much dexterity as was
possible, we did not only draw away that receptacle or den of the infant,
from the inward surface of the womb, to which it stuck by the Cotyledones,
but we also took away the first membrane which we called Chorion, from that
which lies next under it, called Amnios, without any rending or tearing; for
thus we powered forth no moisture, whereby it might be said, that any coat,
made for the containing of that humor, was rent, or torn. And then we
diligently looked, having many witnesses and spectators present, if in any
place there did appear any distinction of these two membranes, the
Allantoides, and Amnios, for the separating the contained humors, and for other
uses which they mention.

But when we could perceive no such thing, we took the Amnios filled with
moisture on the upper side, and having opened it, two servants so holding the
apertion, that no moisture might flow out of it into the circumference of the
Chorion or womb; then presently with spunges we drew out by little and little
all the humiditie contained in it, the infant yet contained in it, which was
fit to come forth, that so the coat Amnios being freed of this moisture, we
might see whether there were any other humor contained in any other coat
besides. But having done this with singular diligence and fidelity, we could
see no other humor, nor no other separation of the membranes besides.

So that, from that time I have confidently held this opinion, that the infant
in the womb, is only wrapped in two coats, the Chorion and Amnios. But yet
not satisfied by this experience, that I might yet be more certain concerning
this Allantoides, having He shows by three several reasons that there is no
Allantoides.
passed through the two former coats, I came to the infant, and I put a quill
into its bladder, and blew it up as forceably as I could, so to try, if by
that blowing I might force the air into that coat which we questioned, as
some have written. But neither thus could I drive any air from hence, through
the navell into the controvetted coat, but rather I found it to fly out of
the bladder by the privities. Wherefore I am certainly persuaded that there is
no Allantoides. Moreover I could never find nor see in the navell that passage
called the urachus, which they affirm to be the beginning and original of the
coat Allantoides. But if it be granted that there is no such coat as the
Allantoides, what discommoditie will arise hereof? specially seeing the sweat
and urine of the infant may easily and without any discommoditie be received,
collected and contained in the same coat, by reason of the small difference
which is between them. But if any object that the urine by its sharpness and
touching will hurt the infant; I will answer, there can be no so great
sharpness in the urine of so small an infant, and that, if that there be any,
it is tempered by the admixture of the gentle vapor of sweat.

Besides, if you consider, or have regard to the use of such an humor (which is
to hold up the child, lest by its weight it breaks the ties, by which it is
bound to the womb;) we shall find no humor more fit for this purpose than
this serous, as which by its thickness is much more fit to bear up a weight,
than the thin and to liquide sweat. For so we see the sea or salt water
carries greater weights without danger of drowning, than fresh rivers do.
Wherefore I conclude that there is no need, that the urine should be kept and
contained in one coat, and the sweat in another. The Ancients who have writ
otherwise, have written from observations made in beasts. Wherefore we make but
only two coats the Chorion and Amnios, the one of vhich seeing it contains
the other, they both so encompasse the child, that they vest ^on every side.

Fallopius in some sort seems to be of this opinion; for he only makes two
coats; the Chorion and Amnios, but he thinks the infant makes the water into
a certain pat of the Chorion, as you may perceive by reading of his
Observations. Both these cotes are tied between themselves by the intercourse
of most slender nervous fibes, and small vessels penetrating from the outer
Chorion to the inner Amnios. Wherefore unless you warily handle these coats
you may easily tear the Amnios in seprating it. They are of the same temper
with other membranes. Their use is different Their temper and use.
for the Chorion is made both for the preservation of the vessels, which it
receives from the womb for the generating of the umbilicall veins and
arteries, as also, to keep whole and safe the parts which it invests.

Bt the Amnios is to receive and contain the excrementitious and ferous humors
which the child shut up in the womb is accustomed to evacuate. But this coat;
very thin and soft, but strong and smooth, lest by its touch it might hurt
the infant whereupon it is called the Lamb-kinne coat.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Navell.
THe Navell follows these coats; It is a white body somewhat resembling What
the navell is.
the wreathen cord, or girdle of the Franciscan Friars, but that it has not
the knots standing so far out, but only swelling in certain places,
resembling a knot, only lifted up on one side; it arises and takes its
original from a fleshie mass which we expressed by the name of swelling
C^dones, and goes into the midst of the lower belly of the infant, yea verily
Their Navell is the Center of the body.
into th^idst of the whole body, whose root it is therefore said to be. For
even as a t^ by the root, sucks nourishment from the earth, so the infant in
the womb draw its nourishment by the navell. The greatness of it in breadth
and thickness, eq^ll the bigness of the little finger. But it is a foot and
a half long, so that children (...) brought forth with it, encompassing their
middle, neck, arms, or legs. The fig^e of it is round. It is composed of
two arteries, one vein and two The figure and composure.
coats. It has ^se vessels from that great multitude of capillary veins and
arteries, which are seen ^ispersed over the Chorion. Wherefore the vein
entering in at the navell, penetra^ from thence into the hollow part of the
liver, where divided into two, according ^alens opinion, it makes the gate and
hollow veins. But the arteries, Lib. de format; fatus in uter^.
carried by th^selves the length of the navell, cast themselves into the
Iliacae, which they make, as also all other, that from thence the vital spirit
may be carried by them over all the infant. It has its two coats from the
Chorion.

But seeing they are mutually woven and conjoined without any medium, and are
of a sufficient strength and thickness over all the navell, they may seem to
make the infants external skin and fleshie pannicle. I know very many reckon
two umbilicall veins, as also arteries, and the urachus by, or through which
the urine flows into the coat Allantoides. But because this is not to be
found in women, but only in beasts, I willingly omit it, because I do not
intend to mention any parts, but such There is only one vein in a child's
navill, but no Vrachus.
as belong to humane bodies. Yet if there be any, which can teach me, that
these parts, which I think proper to brute beasts, are to be found in women, I
will willingly confess, and that to his credit, from whom I have reaped such
benefit.

The other things that may be required concerning the navell as of its number,
site, connection, temper, and use, may easily appear by that we have spoken
before. For we hove apparently set down the use, when we said the navell was
made for that purpose, that the infant may be nourished by it, as the tree by
the root, by reason of the continuation of the vessels thereof, with the
preparing spermaticke vessels, made by God for that purpose, to whom be honor
and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
The End of the third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK TREATING OF THE Vital parts contained in the Chest.
The Preface.
HAving finished the first Book of our Anatomy, in explanation of the natural
parts contained in the lower belly, now order requires, that we treat of the
Breast; that so the parts in some sort already explained (I mean the veins and
arteries) may be dispatched after the same order and manner, without
interposition of any other matter.

And besides also that we may the more exactly and chearefully show the rest of
the parts which remain, as the head and limbs, knowing already the original
of those vessels which are dispersed through them. To this purpose, we will
define what the Chest is, and then we will divide it into its parts. Thirdly,
in these we will consider which parts contain, and which are contained, that
so we may more happily finish our intended discourse.

CHAP. I. What the Thorax, or the Chest is; into what parts it may be divided,
and the nature of these parts.
THe Thorax or Chest is the middle belly, terminated or bounded above with the
coller-bones, below with the midriffe, before with the Sternu^ or breast,
behind, with the twelve Vertebra's of the back on both sides, The containing
parts of the Chest.
with the true and bastard ribs, and with the intercostall and
intercartilagineous muscles. Nature has given it this structure and
composition, lest that being a defense for the vital parts against external
injuries, it should hinder respiration; which is no less needful for the
preservation of the native heat, diffused by the vital Why nature has made
the Chest partly bony, partly gri^t^ely.
spirits, and shut up in the heart, as in the fountain thereof, against
internal injuries, than the other forementioned parts against external. For if
the chest should have bin all bony, verily it had been the stronger, but it
would have hindered our respiration or breathing, which is performed by the
dilating, and contracting thereof. Wherefore lest one of these should hinder
the other, nature has framed it, partly bony and gristlely, and partly
fleshie. Some render another reason hereof, which is, that nature has framed
the chest, that it might here also observe the order used by it in the fabric
of things, which is, that it might conjoine the parts much disagreeing in their
composure, as the lower belly, altogether fleshie, and the head all bony, by a
medium partaker both of the bony and fleshie substance; which course we see it
has observed in the connection of the fire and water, by the interposition of
the air; of the earth and air, by the water placed between them.

The Chest is divided into three parts, the upper, lower, and middle: the
collar bones contain the upper, the midriffe the lower, and the Sternon the
middle. The The number of the bones of the Sternon.
Sternon in Galens opinion is composed of seven bones, I believe by reason of
the great stature of the people that lived then. Now in our times you shall often
find it compact of three, four, or five bones, although we will not deny but
that we have often observed it, (especially in young bodies) to consist of
seven or eight bones.

Wherefore those who have fewer bones in number in their Sternon, have them
larger, that they might be sufficient to receive the ribs. This is the common
opinion of the Sternon. Yet Fallopius has described it far otherwise,
wherefore let those who desire to know more hereof, look in his observations.

At the lower part of the Sternon there is a gristle, called commonly Furcula,
and Cartilago scutiformis the brest-blade.
Malum granatum, or the Pomegranate, because it resembles that fruit; others
call it Cartilago scutiformis, that is, the brest-blade.

It is placed there to be as it were a bulwark or defense to the mouth of the
stomach, endued with most exquisite sense; and also that it should do the
like to that part of the midriffe, which the liver bears up in that place,
situate above the orifice of the ventricule by the ligament coming between,
descending from the lower part of the same gristle into the upper part of the
liver.

The common people think that this gristle sometimes falls down. But it so
adheares, and is united to the bones of the Sternon, that the falling thereof
may seem to be without any danger, although often times it may be so moistened
with watery and serous humidities, with which the orifice of the stomach
abounds, that as it were soaked and drunk with these, it may be so relaxed,
that it may seem to be out of its place; in which case it may be pressed and
forced by the hand, into the former place and seat, as also by applying
outwardly, and taking inwardly astringent and drying medicines to exhaust the
superfluous humiditie.

This gristle at its beginning is narrow, but more broad and obtuse at its end,
somewhat resembling the round or blunt point of a sword, whereupon it is also
called Cartilago Ensiformis or the swordlike gristle. In some it has a double,
in others a single point.

In old people it degenerates into a bone. Now because we make mention of this
gristle, we will show both what a gristle is, and how many differences thereof
there be, that henceforward as often as we shall have occasion to speak of a
gristle, you may understand what it is.

A gristle is a similar part of our bodies, next to abone most terrestrial,
cold, dry, What a Gristle is.
hard, weighty and without sense, differing from a bone in drienesse only, the
which is more in a bone. Wherefore a gristle being lost cannot be regenerated,
like as a bone without the interposition of a Callus.

The difference of these are almost the same with bones, that is from their
consistence, The differences thereof.
substance, greatness, number, site, figure, connection, action, and use.
Omitting the other for brevitie sake, I will only handle those differences
which arise from site, use, and connection. Therefore gristles, either adhere to
the bones, or of, and by themselves make some part, as the gristles of the
eyelids called Tarsi, of the Epiglottis and throatle. And others which adhere
to bones, either adhere by the interposition of no medium, as those which come
between the bones of the Sternon, the collar bones, the share and hanch bones
and others; or by a ligament coming between, as those which are at the ends
of the bastard ribs to the Sternon by the means of a ligament, that by those
ligaments being softer than a gristle, the motions of the chest, may be more
quickly and safely performed. The gristles which depend on bones, do not only
yield strength to the bones, but to themselves, and the parts contained in
them, against such things as may break and bruise them. The gristles of the
Sternon, and at the ends of the bastard ribs are of this sort.

By this we may gather that the gristles have a double use, one to polish and
levigate the parts to which that slippery smoothness was necessary for
performance of Their two fold use.
their duty; and for this use serve the gristles which are at the joints, to
make their motions the more nimble. The other use is to defend those parts upon
which they are placed, from external injuries, by breaking violent assaults,
by somewhat yielding to their impression, no otherwise than soft things opposed
against cannon shot. We will prosecute the other differences of gristles in
their place, as occasion shall be offered and required.

CHAP. II. Of the containing, and contained parts of the Chest.
THe containing parts of the chest are both the skins, the fleshie pannicle,
the fat, the breasts, the common coat of the muscles, the muscles of that The
division of the chest into its parts.
place, the forementioned bones, the coat investing the ribs and the
Diaphragma or midriffe. The parts contained are the Mediastinum, the
Pericardium or purse of the heart, the heart, the lungs and their vessels. Of
the containing parts, some are common to all the body, or the most part
thereof, as both the skins, the fleshie pannicle and fat. Of which being we
have spoken in our first Book, there is no need now further to insist upon;
Others are proper to the chest, as its muscles, of which we will speak in
their place, the breasts, the forementioned bones, the membrane investigating
the ribs, and the Diaphragma or midriffe.

We will treat of all these in order, after we have first showed you the way,
how you may separate the skin from the rest of the chest. Putting your knife
down even to the perfect division of the skin, you must draw a strait line
from the upper part of the lower belley, even to the chinne; then draw another
straight line, overtwhart at the collar bones even to the shoulder-blades; and
in the places beneath the collar-bones: (if you desire to shun prolixitie)
you may at once separate both the skins, the fleshie pannicle, the fat, and
common coat of the muscles; because these parts were showed and spoken of in
the dissection of the lower belley.

Yet you must reserve the breasts in dissecting of the bodies of women;
wherefore from the upper parts of the breasts, as artificially as you can,
separate only the skin from the parts lying under it, that so you may show the
Pannicle which there becomes fleshie and musculous, and is so spread over the
neck, and parts of the face, even to the roots of the hairs.

CHAP. III. Of the Breasts or Dugges.
THe Breasts, as we said, when we spoke of the nature of glandules, are of a
glandulous substance, white, rare, or spongious, in maids, and Their substance.
women that do not give suck, they are more solid and not so large.

Wherefore the bigness of the Dugges is different, although of a sufficient
magnitude in all. Their figure is round, somewhat long, and in some sort
Magnitude, Figure.
Pyramidall. Their composure is of the skin, the fleshie pannicle, glandules,
fat, Composure.
nerves, veins, and arteries, descending to them from the Axillaris under the
Sternon betwixt the fourth and fifth, and sometimes the sixth of the true
ribs.

And there they are divided into infinite rivelets by the interposition of the
glandules and fat, by which fit matter may be brought, to be changed into milk
by the faculty of the dugges.

We will speak no more of the nature of glandules, or kernels, as having
treated of them before; only we will add this, that some of the glandules have
nerves, as Which glandules have nerves and which have none.
those of the breasts, which they receive from the parts lying under them, that
is, from the intercostall, by which it comes to pass that they have most
exquisit sense. Others want a nerve, as those which serve only for division of
the vessels, and which have no action, but only use.

They be two in number, on each side one, seated at the sides of the Sternon
upon the fourth fifth and sixth true ribs.

Wherefore they have connection with the mentioned parts with their body, but
Their Connection.
by their vessels with all other parts, but especially with the womb by the
relics of the mamillary veins and arteryes, which descend down at the sides
of the brest-blade; in which place these veins insinuating themselves through
the substance of How the breasts and womb communicate each with other.
the muscles, are a little above the navill conjoined with the Epigastricks,
whose original is in some sort opposite to the Hypogastrickes, which send
forth branches to the womb. By the meeting of these it is more likely that
this commerce should arise, than from other and those almost capillary
branches, which are sometimes seen to descend to the womb from the
Epigastrick.

They are of a cold and moist temper, wherefore they say that the blood by
being Their temper.
converted into milk Recrudescere. Their action and use.
becomes raw, flegmaticke and white by the force of the proper flesh of the
dugs. Their action is to prepare nourishment for the newborn babe, to warm
the heart from whence they have received heat, and to adorn the breast.

By this you may know that some Glandules have action, others use, and some
both. At the top of the dugs there are certain hillockes, or eminencies called
tears or nipples, by sucking of which the child is nourished through certain
small and The Nipples.
crooked passages; which though they appear manifest to the sight, whilst you
press out the milk by pressing the dug, yet when the milk is pressed out
they do not appear, nor so much as admit the point of a needle, by reason of
the crooked ways, made by nature in those passages, for this use, that the
milk being perfectly made should not flow out of its own accord against the
nurses will. For so the seed is retained and kept for a certain time in the
Prostats.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Clavitles, or Collar bones and Ribs.
IF we should handle these parts after the common order, we should now treat of
the Muscles of the Chest which move the arm, and serve for respiration, and
which first offer themselves to our sight.

But for that they cannot be fitly showed, unless we hurt the muscles of the
shoulder blade and neck, therefore I think it better, to defer the
explanation of these muscles until such time as I have showed the rest of the
contained and containing parts, not only of the chest, but also of the head,
that having finished these we may come to a full demonstration of all the rest
of the muscles, beginning with those of the head, which we first meet with,
and so prosequuting the rest even to the muscles of the feet, as they shall
seem to offer themselves more fitly to dissection, that so, as much as lies in
us, we may shun confusion.

Wherefore returned to our proposed task, after the foresaid muscles come the
Collar bones, the sternon and ribs.

But that these parts may be the more easily understood, we must first know
what a bone is, and whence the differences thereof are drawn.

Therefore a bone is a part of our body most terrestrial, cold, dry, hard,
wanting What a Bone is.
all manifest sense, if the teeth be excepted.

I said manifest sense, that you may understand that the parts have a double
sense of touching, the one manifest, such as resides in the flesh, skin,
membranes, nerves, A double sense
Teeth and certain other parts; the other obscure, yet which may suffice to
Lib. 1. de Locis affectis.
discern the helping and hurting tactile qualityes, such sense the bowels and
bones have; for very small fibers of the nerves are disseminated to these parts
by mediation of their coat, or membrane, I say so small, that they can scarce
be discerned by the eyes, unless (as Galen says) by plucking such coats away
from the parts.

But it is no marvel if nature would have these parts in like manner to have
such Why the bones have such small vein..
small veins, contrary to the lungs and most part of the Muscles, only to
yield so much nourishment to the part, as should be needful; for seeing the
substance of the bones is cold, hard, dense and solid, it wastes the less.

Wherefore they need not so much blood for their nourishment, as the hot and
soft parts; and besides the lesser bones have neither veins, nor arteries, but
draw fit nourishment, only by the force of the attractive faculty implanted in
them.

The differences of bones are taken from many things, as from their Apophyses,
Epiphyses, Whence the difference of bones may be taken.
gristles, necks, heads, solidity, cavity, eminencies, marrow, consistence,
bigness, number, figure, site. We will prosecute all these as they shall offer
themselves in the demonstration of the bones; to which doctrine we will give a
beginning at the Clavicles or collar bones.

The Clavicles are two very hard and solid bones, without any great or notable
The Clavicles or collar bones
cavity, situate on each side betwixt the side and upper part of the sternon
and top of the shoulder blade, for the strength and stability of these parts,
whence they take the name of Claviculae Clavicles (from the Greek (...), which
signifies a key or any other bar or fastening of a door.) They carry the shape
of a surgeons Levatory.

But you must note that the Clavicles seems to be fastened to the sternon by
the mediation of a gristlely bone. Moreover the space and cavity contained
within the Collar bones is called by the Latins Ingulum, by the French the
upper furcula, because the jugular veins pass that way; it sticks to the
upper process of the shoulder by a Gristle which Galen calls the small gristle
bone, although it be nothing else but a production Lib. 13. da (...) part. Cap.
11.
of the Os Iuguli.

For the sternon, which we said is framed of diverse bones, as sometimes 3,
sometimes 4, 5, 6, 7, and sometimes 8, you must note they are very spongy and
full of pores, and of a far softer consistence than the collar bones,
wherefore more subject to corruption; besides they are mutually joined by
interposition of muscles. Their use is to be as a shield to defend the vital
parts.

The Ribs are 24. in number, on each side 12, seven of these are called true
or perfect The Ribs.
ribs, because they make a circle, at the one end joined to the sternon, on the
other to the vertebra's; the other are called bastard or short ribs because
they falshort in their way and come not to the sternon; but they are fastened
on the fore-side to the sternon by gristles and ligaments, but on the back part
to the transverse vertebra's of the backbone, and to the sides of the said
vertebra's. But the short ribs are only knit to the vertebra's, wherefore that
part of the vertebra's is called the root of the ribs.

The exterior or forepart of the Bastard or short ribs is gristely, that they
should not be broken, and that they might be the easier lifted up in the
distensions of the Their consistance.
stomach filled with meat. They are of a consistence sufficiently hard, yet
more toward their root, than at the sternon, where they come nearer together,
and are more hardly broken; they are smooth both within and without, but in the
midst they have some sign of being double, or hollow to receive the veins and
arteryes, which nourish their bony substance; they are fashoned like a bow;
their use is the same with the sternon, and besides to carry and strengthen the
muscles serving for respiration.

CHAP. V. The Anatomicall Administration of the Sternon.
THe Coat investing the ribs, which the common Anatomists call Pleura, is the
last of the containing parts of the Chest, which because it lies hid in the
inner part thereof, it cannot be shown unless by pulling asunder of the
Sternon; wherefore we must now show the manner of opening the Sternon, that
hereby we may not violate the original or insertion of any of the muscles.
Wherefore first you must understand that he which will show in their proper
place the original and insertion of the pectorall muscles, of the Mastoides,
of the two muscles of the bone Hyois, of the Muscles subclavii and
intercartilaginei, ought first of all to separate all the pectorall muscles
from the sternon and the gristles from the true ribs; then to cut the
ligaments, next the bones themselves, even from the sixth true rib to the
clavicles.

And then showing the Mediastinum stretched under the sternon all the length
thereof, he must separate the sternon with his knife and bend it up to the
clavicles, and there cut it, reserving together with it the four muscles, that
is, the two Mastoides and the two moving the bone Hyois, because they either
wholly or for the most part arise from the sternon.

Lastly the Clavicles being somewhat thrust upwards, the Gristles must on each
side be turned outward toward the arm; that so the containing parts of the
chest may not only lie open to veiw and be easily showed, but also the muscles
may be contained in their place, until they come to be showed in their order.

And because the Collar bones must be lifted up very high, that the recurrent
nerves may be more easily seen and the distribution of the veins and
arteries, the two small subclavian muscles one on each side must be shown by
the way, who have their original from the inner and fore part of the
Clavicles, and an oblique descent to the sternon toward the gristle of the
first rib.

For the Clavicles cannot be thus separated, but that these muscles must be
violated and spoiled. Also you may divide the sternon in the midst, that you
may show the inward pectorall muscles whole, having separated the muscles which
arise from the upper part. All which things being performed as they ought, we
must come to the Coat investing the ribs and then to the Mediastinum as arising
from it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Pleura, or coat investing the Ribs.
THe Tunica subcostalis, or coat investing the ribs being the last of the
containing parts of the Chest, is a large and a broad membrane answerable What
the membrane investing the Ribs is.
in proportion of use and action to the Peritonaeum of the lower belly. For as
the Peritonaeum generally and particularly covers all the natural parts,
binding and holding them in their places, so this coat invests all the vital
parts in general because it is stretched over all the inside of the Chest, but
in particular, whilst it gives each a coat from it self.

It has its original from the Periostium, (or as others will have it from the
pericranium,) investing the vertebra's of the Chest at the roots of the ribs.
Wherefore it Its original.
sticks very fast to the ribs, scarce to be separated, as also to all the
parts bounding the Chest, and contained in it.

Vesalius reprehends Galen, because he said, that this was double on both
sides; yet Columbus defends Galen, and verily it is seen to be double in the
inner part of the Chest, under the ribs and the muscles of the ribs, that in
that space there may be way for the veins, arteryes and nerves.

Some have made it two fold, and divided it into the internal and external;
as those which have made two sorts of pleurisyes, the true and bastard; placing
the external Whether, as there is a twofold pleurisy, so also a double Pleura
above the Ribs and intercostall muscles; but the internal under the Ribs,
muscles, Diaphragma and sternon.

But we to shun ambiguity, intend only to prosequute those things which are
manifest to the eyes; wherefore we say that the ribs are lined on the inside
with a double coat; one which immediately and firmly sticks to them on every
side called the Periostium, which is common to them and other bones. The
Magnitude and figure.


The other which lies upon that Periostium and on the inside invests all the
ribs, whence it is called the subcostalis tunica. The substance, temper and
composure are the same, as in other membranes. The magnitude in length, as also
the figure is the same with the compass of the inner part of the chest; the
thickness of it is very little. This coat is commonly called the Pleura from
the name of the part which it covers or lines (for the Greeks call the ribs
(...),) and in like manner which happens betwixt the Periostium and this
Pleura, is called either a true or bastard Pleurisye.

CHAP. VII. Of the Mediastinum
NOw we must speak of the parts contained in the Chest, seeing we have The
substance and magnitude.
already handled the containing, beginning with the Mediastinum as being a part
which in dissection first presents it self to our sight. The Mediastinum is of
the same substance, thicknes, composure, number, temper as the Pleura. For the
substance of the Mediastinum is membranous, and though it be stretched all the
length of the Chest, yet it is of a small thicknes, receiving veins, nerves
and arteryes from all the parts to which it is knit, like as the Pleura does;
but especially from the mamillary vessels descending under the sternon.

It is in number one, but it is made of two membranes produced from the
subcostall, for this ascending on each side by the hollownesse of the chest to
the sternon, and then at right angles it is reflected to the bodies of the
vertebra's, whence the Pleura has its original.

In that reflection there is so much distance between each membrane, as may be
sufficient to receive 2 fingers. For otherwise, seeing that they cannot
penetrate through the heart, it was fit each side of the Pleura should turn to
the Pericardium, that so they might arive at the appointed place without
offense. Nether yet is that space void and empty, but woven with many small
nervous fibers; Columbus adds, that, that place is often filled with a certain
humor besides nature, which you may draw our, or evacuate by opening the
sternon.

Yet I would gladly learn of Columbus, by what signs we may know that such an
The figure.
humor is contained there. For the figure, the Mediastinum with the Pleura on
each side represents the figure of a Leather bottle, whose flat side is the
Mediastinum, whose other side the Pelura; the bottom that part of the pleura
which is next the Midriffe, the mouth the upper part of the Pleura at the first
ribs. We showed the site and con nexion of the Mediastinum, when we declared
its original.

The use thereof is to separate the vital parts, as it were into 2 cells, the
right and The use.
le^t, that if peradventure it happen that the one be hurt, the creature may
live by the benefit of the other.

And it has another use which is to prop and hold up the Pericardium, that it
fall not upon the heart with its weight, but tossed with the motions of the
heart and Chest, it may move to this or that side.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Diaphragma or Midriffe.
ALthough the Midriffe may seem to be accounted rather a part containing What
the midreffe is.
than contained, yet for commodities sake we have deferred the demonstration
thereof till now. Therefore it is a muscle round and long, terminating the
lower part of the Chest.

It is of the same substance, composition and temper, as the muscles of the
Epigastrium, Its substance, composition etc.
it is made of two coats the lower whereof is from the Peritonaeum, and the
upper from the Pleura. Which getting to them flesh but not there, but in their
circumference, by the benefit of the blood brought thither by the veins and
arteries distributed through it, turn into a muscle, whose middle is nervous
and membranous, but the extremityes by which it is inserted, one while fleshy
as in that part next to the bastard ribs; another while tendonous, as where it
touches the first and second vertebra's of the loins, for it ends in them by 2
tendons manifest enough. It is one in number, interposed with an oblique site
betwixt the natural and vital parts. It has connection with the lower part of
the sternon and short ribs, and the two first Connection.
vertebra's of the loins, but by its coats and vessels with the parts from
whence it received them.

The extent thereof is equal to the compass of the lower part of the Chest.
The Quantity.
length of it is from the breast blade even to the first and second vertebra of
the loins. The thicknes is diverse, for it is far thicker in its fleshy
extremity, than in its nervous original.

The Action thereof is to help the expulsion of the Excrements by the mutual
assistance of the Epigastrick muscles, but the chief use is for respiration,
of which it is Action.
one of the prime instruments. This partition the Ancients called Phrenes,
because the inflammation thereof caused like symptoms as the inflammation of
the Brain, by Why the Diaphragma was called Phrenes.
reason of the large nerves on each side one which come to it directly and
primarily from the third, fourth and fifth vertebra of the neck. This muscle
differs from other muscles, specially in figure. It is preforated in three
places, to give way or passage to the ascendent Hollow-veine, to the Artery
Aorta, and the Gullet.

CHAP. IX. Of the Lungs.
THe Lungs are of a soft substance and flesh, rare and like a sponge, of a
various color pale red, their quantity is sufficiently large; for most
commonly they Their substance, quantity. The Lobes thereof.
are divided into 4 lobes disioined with a manifest and visible division, on
each side two, whereby they may be the more easily opened and contracted, and
the air may the better enter.

Besides also in large bodies, who have a very great chest, there is found a
fifth lobe, arising from the second lobe of the right side, as a cushion, or
bolster to bear up the hollow vein ascending from the midriffe to the heart.

In little men who have a shorter Chest, because the Heart is so near as to
touch the Diaphragma, this Lobe is not seen, yet it is always found in Dogs.

The Lungs represent the figure or shape of an Oxes foot, or hoof, for like it
they Figure.
are thicker in their basis, but slenderer in their circumference, as you may
see in blowing them up, by the weazon, with your mouth or a pair of bellows.
They are compounded of a coat coming from the Pleura, which on each side
receives sufficient Composition.
number of nerves from the sixth conjugation; and also of the Vena arteriosa
coming from the right ventricle of the heart, and the Arteria venosa from the
left, as shall be showed in the Anatomy of the heart; besides the Aspera
arteria or Weazon coming from the throat, and lastly its own flesh, which is
nothing else than the concretion of choleric blood poured out like foame about
the divisions of the foresaid vessels, as we have said of other parts.

The body of the Lungs is one in number, unless you will divide it into two,
by reason of the variety of its site, because the Lobes of the Lungs stretched
forth into the right and left side do almost involve all the heart, that so
they may defend it against the hardness of the bones which are about it; they
are tied to the heart, chiefly at its basis, but to the roots of the ribs and
their vertebra's by the coat it has from thence; but by the vessels to these
parts from whence they proceed. But often times presently The sticking of the
lungs to the Ribs.
from the first and natural conformation they are bound to the circumference
of the ribs by certain thin membranous productions which descend from thence
to the Lungs, otherways they are tied toe the ribs by the Pleura.

The nourishment of the Lungs is unlike to the nourishment of other parts of
the Their nourishment.
body; for you cannot find a part equally rare, light and full of air, which
may be nourished with blood equally thin and vaporous. In temper they incline
more to heat than to cold, whether you have regard to their composure of
choleric blood, or their use, which is to prepare and alter the air that it
hurt not the heart by its coldness. The Lungs is the instrument of voice and
breathing by the Weazon or windpipe. For the Lobes are the instruments of
voice, and the ligaments, of respiration. But the Larinx or Throtle is the
chief instrument of the voice, for the Weazon first prepares the voice for the
Throtle, in which it being in some measure formed is perfected in the Palate
of the mouth, as in the upper part of a lute, or such like instrument, by the
help of the Gargareon or uvula as a certain quill to play withal.

But as long as one holds his breath, he cannot speak; for then the muscles of
the Larinx, Ribs, the Diaphragma and the Epigastrick muscles are pressed down,
whence proceeds a suppression of the vocal matter, which must be sent forth,
in making or uttering a voice.

Nature would have the Lungs light for many reasons, the first is that seeing
they Why the lungs are light.
are of themselves immovable, they might be more obsequious and ready to
follow the motion of the chest, for when it is straitened, the Lungs are
straitened and subside with it; and when it is dilated, they also are dilated,
and swell so big that they almost fill up all the upper capacity thereof.

Another cause is that by this their rarity they might more easily admit the
entering Air, at such times as they have much, or sudden necessity, as in
running a race.

And lastly, that in Pleurisies and other purnient abscesses of the Chest the
Pus or matter poured forth into the capacity of the Chest may be sucked in by
the rare substance of the Lungs, and by that means the sooner sent forth and
expectorated.

The use of respiration is to cool and temper the rageing heat of the Heart.
For The use of Respiration, or breathing.
it is cooled in drawing in the breath by the cool air, and in sending out
thereof by avoiding the hot fuliginous vapor. Therefore the Chest performs
two contrary motions, for whilst it is dilated it draws in the encompassing
air, and when it is depressed it expels the fuliginous vapor of the Heart;
which any one may easily perceive by the example of a pair of Smithes bellows.

CHAP. X. Of the Pericardium or purse of the Heart.
THe Pericardium is as it were the house of the Heart, which ariseing at the
Whence it has its matter
basis thereof (either the ligaments of the vertebra's situate there or else the
vessels of the heart yiedling it matter) is of a nervous, thick and dense
substance without any fibers. It retains the figure of the Heart, and leaves
an empty space for the heart to perform its proper motions. Wherefore the
bigness of the Pericardium exceeds that of the heart.

It consists of a double coat, one proper of which we have spoken, another
common coming from the pleura; and also of veins, arteries and nerves; the
vessels partly coming from the mamillary, partly from the Diaphragma, chiefly
there where it touches it; the nerves come on each side from the sixth
conjugation.

It is only one, placed about the heart and annexed to it at the Basis thereof
by its Number and connection.
membranes, to the original of the Lungs, and the vertebra's lying under them,
and by the vessels to the parts from whence it received them. It is of a cold
and dry temper as every membrane is.

The use thereof is to cover the heart, and preserve it in its native humidity,
by a Use.
certain natural moisture contained in it, unles you had rather say that the
moisture we see contained in the Pericardium, is generated in it after death by
the condenfation and concretion of the spirits. Although this seems not very
likely; because it grows and is heaped up in so great quantity in liveing
bodies, that it hinders the motion of the heart, and causes such palpitation or
violent beating thereof; that it often suffocates a man.

For this Palpitation happens also to hearty and stout men, whose hearts are
hot, but From whence the matter of the watery humor contained in the
Pericardium.
blood thin and waterish by reason of some infirmity of the stomach or Liver;
and this humor may be generated of vapors which on every side exhale into the
pericardium from the blood boileing in the ventricules of the heart, where kept
in by the density thereof, they turn into yellowish moisture, as we see it
happens in an Alembeck.

Nature would have the pericardium of a dense and hard consistence, that by the
force The Consistence.
thereof the heart might be kept in better state; for if the Pericardium had
been bony, it would have made the heart like iron by the continual attrition;
on the contrary, if it had been soft and fungous, it would have made it spongy
and soft like the Lungs.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Heart.
THe Heart the chief mansion of the Soul, the organe of the vital faculty,
What the heart is, and of what substance.
the beginning of life, the fountain of the vital spirits, and so
consequently the continual nourisher of the vital heat, the first living and
last dying, which because it must have a natural motion of it self, was made
of a dense solid and more compact substance than any other part of the body.

The flesh thereof is woven with three sorts of fibers, for it has the right
in the inner part descending from the basis into the point, that they might
dilate it, and so The three sorts of fibers of the Hear^.
draw the blood from the hollow vein into the receptacles thereof, and the
breath or air from the lungs by the Arteria venosa; it has the transverse
without, which pass through the right at right angles, to contract the Heart,
and so drive the vital spirits into the great Artery Aorta, and the choleric
blood to the Lungs by the vena arteriosa, for their nourishment; It has the
oblique in the midst to contain the Air and blood drawn thither by the
forementioned vessels until they be sufficiently claborate by the heart.

All these fibers do their parts by contracting themselves toward their
original, as the right from the point of the heart toward the basis, whereby
it comes to pass that by this contraction of the fibers the heart dilated
becomes shorter, but broader, no otherwise than it is made more long and narrow
by the contraction of the transverse, but by the drawing of the oblique it is
lessened in that part which looks toward the vertebra's, which chiefly
appears in the point thereof.

It is of an indifferent bigness, but yet in some bigger, in some less
according to The magnitude
the diverse temper of Cold or hot men, as we noted in the liver.

The figure thereof is Pyramidall, that is, it is broader in the basis, and
narrower at Figure.
his round point.

It is composed of the most dense flesh of all the body, by the affusion of
blood at Composition
the divisions and foldings of the vessels, and there concrete; as it happens
also to the other Entrails. For the blood being there a little more dried, than
that which is concrete for the making of the Liver, turns into a fleshy
substance more dense than the common flesh, even as in hollow ulcers, when they
come to a cicatrize.

It has the Coronall veins and arteryes, which it receives either on the
right side The proper vessels.
from the hollow vein, or on the left from the basis at the entranc of the
Artery Aorta. You cannot by your Eye discern that the Heart has any other
Nerves than those The Nerves,
which come to it with the Pleura.

Yet I have plainly enough observed others in certain beasts, which have
great Hearts, as swine; they appeared seated under the fat which covers the
vessels, and basis of the heart, lest the humid substance of these parts should
be dissolved and dissipated by the burning heat of the Heart. Whereby you may
perceive that the heat of the heart is different from the Elementary heat, as
that which suffers fat to grow about this Entraile, where otherwise it does not
concrete unless by cold or a remiss heat, which thing is chiefly worth
admiration.

The Heart is one alone, situate most commonly upon the fourth Vertebra of the
Number and site.
Chest, which is in the midst of the Chest. Yet some think that it inclines
somewhat to the left side because we there feel the motion or beating
thereof; but that happens by reason of its left ventricle, which being it is
filled with many spirits, and the beginning of the arteryes, it beats far more
vehemently, than the right. It required that seat by the decree of Nature,
because that Region is the most safe and armed, and besides it is here on every
side covered as it were with the hands of the Lungs.

It has connection with the fore mentioned Vertebra's, but by the parts
composeing Connection.
it, with those parts from whence it has them; with the Lungs by the Vena
arteriosa, and the Arteria venosa, and lastly with all the parts of the body by
the Arteries which it sends to them all.

It is of a hot and moist temper, as every fleshy part is. The action thereof
is, first Temper and action.
to prepare the blood in its right ventricle, for the fit nourishment of the
Lungs, for from hence it is that Galen says; this right ventricle was made for
the necessity of the lungs. Secondly to generate the vital spirits in its left
ventricle for the use of the whole body. But this spirit is nothing else than a
certain middle substance between What the vital spirit is.
air and blood fit to preserve and carry the native heat, wherefore it is
named the vital, as being the author and preserver of life. In the inner parts
of the heart there present themselves to our consideration the ventricles and
the parts contained in the ventricles and between them; such are the Valvulae
or valves, the vessels and their mouths, their distribution into the lungs,
the wall or partition, and the two productions or Ears of the heart; which
because they are doubtful, whether they may be reckoned amongst the external
or internal parts of the heart, I will here handle in the first place.

Therefore these Auriculae or Ears are of a soft and nervous substance,
compact The Auriculae Cordis, or ears of the heart.
of three sorts of fibers, that so by their softness they might the more
easily follow the motions of the heart, and so break the violence of the
matters entering the heart with great force when it is dilated. For otherwise by
their violent and abundant entrance they might hurt the heart, and as it were
overwhelme and suffocate it; but they have that capacity which we see given by
nature, that so they might as it were keep in store the blood and air, and
then by little and little draw it forth for the use or necessity of the heart.
But if any enquire, if such matters may be drawn into the heart by the only
force of the Diastole ad fugam vacui, for avoiding of emptiness; I will
answer that that drawing in, or attraction is caused by the heat of the heart;
which continually draws these matters to it no otherwise than a fire draws
the adjacent Air, and the flame of a candle the tallow which is about the
weak for nourishments sake. Whilst the heart is dilated it draws the air,
whilst it is drawn together or contracted, it expells it. This motion of the
heart is absolutely natural, as the motion of the Lungs is animal. Some add
a third cause of the attraction of the heart; to wit the similitude of the
whole substance. But in my judgment, this rather takes place in that attraction
which is of blood by the venae coronales for the proper nourishment of the
heart, than in that which is performed for attraction of matters for the
benefit of the whole body.

These ears differ in quantity, for the right is far more capacious than the
left because Their magnitude and numbers.
it was made to receive a greater abundance of matter. They are two in number,
on each side one, situate at the Basis of the heart; The greater at the
entrance of the hollow vein into the heart, the less at the entrance of the
veinous and of the great Artery with which parts they both have connection. We
have formerly declared Their (...).
what use they have; that is, to break the violence of the matters, and besides
to be stays or props to the Arteria venosa and great Arterye, which could not
sustain so rapid and violent a motion as that of the Heart by reason of their
tenderness of substance.

Of the ventricles of the Heart.
THe ventricles are in number two, on each side one, distinguished with a
fleshy The partiti^ between the ventricules of the Heart.
partition strong enough, having many holes in the superficies, yet no where
pearcing through.

The right of these ventricles is the bigger and encompassed with the softer
and rarer Why the right ventricule is more capacious and less compact.
flesh; the left is the lesser but is engirt with a threefold more dense and
compact flesh; for the right ventricle was made for a place to receive the
blood brought by the hollow vein, and for distributing of it, partly by the
vena arteriosa into the Lungs for their nourishment, partly into the left
ventricle, by sweating through the wall or partition, to yield matter for the
generation of the vital spirits.

Therefore because it was needful there should be so great a quantity of this
blood, Why the right ventricle is more capaciout and less compact.
it was likewise fit that there should be a place proportionable to receive
that matter. And because the blood which was to be received in the right
ventricle was more thick, it was not so needful, that the flesh to contain
it should be so compact; but on the contrary the arterious blood and vital
spirit have need of a more dense receptacle, for fear of wasting and lest they
should vanish into air; and also less room that so the heat being united
might become the stronger, and more powerfully set upon the elaboration of the
blood and spirits.

Therefore the right ventricle of the heart is made for the preparation of the
blood The action of the right ventricle.
appointed for the nourishment of the Lungs, and the generation of the vital
spirits, as the lungs are made for the mitification, or quallifying of the
Air. Which works were necessary, if the Physical Axiom be true; That like
is nourished by like, as the rare and spongious lungs with more subtle blood;
the substance of the heart gross and dense, with the veinous blood as it
flows from the Liver, that is gross.

And it has its Cororall veins from the Hollow vein, that it might thence
draw as much as should be sufficient.

But the left ventricle is for the perfecting of the vital spirit, and the
preservation of The action of the left ventricle.
the native heat.

Of the Orifices and Valves of the Heart.
THere be four Orifices of the heart, two in the right, and as many in the
left ventricle; The uses of the four orifices of the Heart.
the greater of the two former gives passage to the vein, or the blood carried
by the hollow vein to the heart; the lesser opens a passage to the vena
arteriosa or the choleric blood carried in it for the nourishment of the lungs.

The larger of the two other makes a way for the distribution of the Artery
Aorta and the vital spirit through all the body; but the lesser gives egresse
and regresse, to the Arteria venosa, or to the air and fuliginous vapors. And
because it was convenient that the matters should be admitted into their
proper ventricles by these orifices, by the Diastole, to wit, into the right
ventricle by the greater orifice, and into the left by the lesser, and because
on the contrary it was fit that the matters should be expelled by the systole
from their ventricles by the forementioned orifices.

Therefore nature to all these orifices has put cleaven valves, that is to
say, six The valves.
in the right ventricle, that there might be three to each orifice; five in
the left, that the greater orifice might have three, and the lesser two, for
the reason we will presently give.

These valves differ many ways; first in action; for some of them carry in
matter to How they differ.
the heart, others hinder that which is gone out that it come not back again;
Secondly they differ in site, for those which bring in have membranes without,
looking in; those Action. Site.
which carry out have them within looking out. Thirdly in figures, for those
which carry in, have a pyramidall figure, but those which hinder the coming
back again Figure.
are made in the shape of the Roman letter C. Fourthly in substance, for the
former Substance,
for the most part are fleshy, or woven with fleshy fibers into certain fleshy
knots ending toward the point of the heart. The latter are wholly membranous.

Fifthly they differ in number, for therebe only five which bring in, three in
the right ventricle at the greater orifice, and two in the left at the lesser
orifice; those which Number.
prohibit the coming back are six in each ventricle, three at each orifice.
Lastly Motion.
they differ in motion; for the fleshy ones are opened in the Diastole for the
bringing in of blood and spirit, and contrary wise are shut in the systole,
that they may contain all or the greater part of that they brought in. The
membranous on the contrary are opened in the systole to give passage forth to
the blood and spirits over all the body, but shut in the Diastole, that that
which is excluded might not flow back into the Heart. But you shall observe
that nature has placed only two valves Why there be only two valves at the
Arteria venosa
at the Orifice of the Arteria Venosa, because it was needful that this
Orifice should be always open, either wholly, or certainly a third part
thereof; that the Air might continually be drawn into the heart by this
orifice in inspiration, and sent forth by exspiration in the contraction of the
heart. Whereby we may gather this, that there is but one third part of that
Air we draw into the heart in breathing, sent forth again in the form of
vapor in exspiration, because nature would have but one third part of the
orifice to ly open for its passage out. Therefore the exspiration or breathing
out, and the systole of the heart and arteryes, is shorter than the
inspiration, so that we may truly say, that the inspiration, or drawing the
breath in, is equally so long as the exspiration is together with the rest,
which is in the midst between the two motions.

CHAP. XII. Of the Distribution of the Vena arteriosa, and the Arteria venosa.
HAving hitherto showed the original of each of the vessels of the Heart, we
must now speak of their distribution. The Vena arteriosa, or the arterious
vein, and the arteria venosa or the veinous artery each proceeding out of his
proper ventricle, that is, the right and left, are divided into two The Artery
always lies under the vein.
large branches; one of which goes to the right and the other to the left hand,
the one lying cross ways over the other, the vein always riding over the
arterye, as you may understand better by the sight of your eyes, than by
reading of books. These branches at their entrance of the lungs are divided
into two other large branches, and each of them go to his peculiar Lobe of the
lungs; and these again run almost into infinite other branches, dispersed in
three places over the Lungs.

These vessels have acquired their names by reason of that transmutation of
consistence, whereby the composure of a vein degenerates into an arterye, and
that of an arterye into a vein, for the commodity of life. For this is a
miracle of prudent nature A twofold reason why the vein was made Arterious, or
like are Artery.
to change the coats of the vessels of the lungs; producing a vein which in
its body should imitate an arterye, and an arterye which should represent a
vein: For if the vena arteriosae should have retained its proper consistence,
the arterious blood which is carried by it from the heart to nourish the lungs,
might by reason of its subtility penetrate through, and flow away by reason of
the rarity of the veinous texture: and so nature should never have attained her
conceived end, that is, to nourish the Lungs, by reason of the continual
motion of their contraction and dilatation.

For nourishment cannot be assimulated to the part, unless it be put and
cleave to it. Wherefor it was fit, that nature should make the body of this
vein solid; that it might be immovable, unshaken and stubborn (in respect of
a vein which by its softness would have been too obsequious and yiedling to
the agitation of the Lungs) that so it might have nourishment, which might be
diffused into all parts thereof, and which might neither be drawn by its
Diastole, nor driven back into the heart by its systole. But the arterye has
the consistence of a vein, that by that veinous Why the Artery was made like a
vein.
softness according to the necessity of nature it might be the more readily
contracted and dilated, to bring the Air in and carry the vapors forth of the
heart. Here we meet with a difficulty, which is, by what way the blood is
carried out of the right into the left ventricle of the heart.

Galen thinks that there be certain holes in the partition made for that
purpose, By what way blood may pass out of the right into the left ventricle.
and verily there are such, but they are not perforated. Wherefore Columbus
has found out a new way, which is, that the blood is carried to the lungs by
the vena arteriosa, and there attenuated; and carried from thence together with
the air by the Arteria venosa to the left ventricle of the heart; this he
writes truly very probablely. Botallus in his treatise De Catarrho has found
out a third way, to wit a vein, which he calls Arteriarum nutrix, that is, The
nurse of the Arteryes, which creepes a little The vein called the nurse of the
Arteries
above the Coronall to the right ear of the Heart, and then goes into the left
ear thereof. But yet I am very much afraid, that this vein observed by
Botallus, is that vessel observed by Fallopius, whereby the Vena arterialis is
joined to the Aorta, and Fallop. initio obser Arteriarum.
by which all the vital blood is carried for the forming and nourishment of
the lungs whilst the infant is yet in the womb. Of which also Galen makes
mention, but it had lain hid from his time to this day, but that Fallopius
raised up the memory of it again. Gal. lib. 15 de ^su part. cap. 6.


CHAP. XIII. The distribution of the ascendent Hollow vein.
THe Hollow vein riseing out of the gibbous part of the Liver, and resembling
(according to Galen) the body of a tree, is divided into two notable Gal. lib.
de form. saetut.
branches, but not of a like bigness. For the greater, by the hind part The
greater descondent branch of the hollow vein.
of the Liver upon the back bone and by the way, receives certain other
branches from the substance of the Liver which entered not into the great trunck
with the rest. You may often see this descendent branch even to the back bone
upon which it lies in this its descent, covered with the substance of the
liver, so that it may seem that branch proceeds not from that common trunck
together with the ascendant, although indeed it always does. But the lesser
branch ascends to the upper The upper branch of the hollow vein is the less.
parts, and is distributed after this manner following. For first ariseing into
the midriffe it bestows two small veins upon it, on each side one, which from
that part are called Phrenicae. But from thence when it arrives at the right
Ear of the Heart, it makes the Coronales, the Coronall or Crown veins, which
compass the basis of the heart in Venae phrenicae. Coronales.
manner of a Crown. Thirdly entering somewhat more deeply into its right Ear,
in its greater part it produces the vena arteriosa. Fourthly lifted up above
the heart, on Vena Arteriosa
the right side it produces the vein Azygos or sine pari (that is, without a
fellow) which descending to the fourth rib, (reckoning from above downwards)
nourishes the intercostall muscles and also the membranes of the 8 lower ribs,
on both sides, sending a branch into each of the muscles at the lower part of
the rib, which may be sufficient for their nourishment. Besides also
oftentimes, especially in little men, this vein Azygos nourishes all the
spaces between all the ribs by the like branches, which Vena Azygos, or sine
part.
it sends in the same manner to the four upper ribs. Moreover also this Azygos
sometimes, though but seldom, is found double, that is, on each side one. Here
you must This Azygos sometimes two
chiefly observe, that this vein after it has nourished the spaces between
the lower ribs, in its remainder descends under the Diaphragma and is joined on
the left side to How the matter of a pleurisy may be evacuated by urine.
the Emulgent vein; by which it is manifest how an Abscesse, may be critically
evacuated by the urine, in a pleurisye. But this same Azygos is more depressed
on the right side, and meets with the Venae lumbares, but especially with one
of them, which goes down to the thigh, whereby Fallopius gathers that it is
very convenient in the beginnings of Pleurisyes to open the vena poplitis, the
vein of the Ham. Fifthly above Interrestalis.
the Azygos (when it is wanting there) it sends forth the branch called
Intercostalis to the other spaces between the upper ribs; although this is
sometimes seen to come from the Axillares, which Sylvius calls the subclaviae.
Sixthly it brings forth the Mammariae so called, because in their greater part
they run to the dugs between the fourth and fifth ribs, for the uses formerly
mentioned; men and women have on each side one Mammaria.
of these coming from the Subclaviae. They are sometimes found to proceed by a
certain common orifice from the hollow vein, before it be divided into the
Subclavian branches, but it is rather in beasts than in men; these veins
descending by the sides of the sternon yield nourishment to the 2 inner muscles
of the chest, to the 7 intercostall muscles of the true ribs, to the sternon it
self and to its ligaments and gristles, as also to the Mediastinum and the
upper part of the right muscles, and the adjacent parts. Seaventhly it produces
the Cervicalis which on both sides through the holes Cervicalis.
of the productions of the Vertebra's of the neck, ascends to the head,
sending many small branches into the spinall marrow through the holes by which
the nerves pass, and also into the membranes, ligaments, gristles, bones, and
neighboring muscles. Musculosa.
Eighthly the Musculosa or musculous, which also ariseing out of the Subclavis
is divided In what place cupping glasses may be fitly applied in a bastard
Pleurisy.
into two other branches; the one whereof goes upon the breast to the paps,
nourishing the foremost muscles; wherefore in a bastard pleurisy Cupping
glasses may be fitly applied in this place.

The other branch descends to the upper muscles of the chest, but specially to
that which is called Latissimus. The tenth is the Axillaris. The eleventh the
Humeralis, of Axillaris. Humeralis. Iugularis interna, et externa. Into what
parts the Iugularis interna goes.
which we will treat in their place. The twelfth and last is the Iugularis
properly so called, which is twofold, the internal and external. The
internal being the lesser does presently on both sides from this very
beginning ascend by the sides of the Aspera Arteria or weazon even to the mouth
and skull, yiedling nourishment to the parts by which it passes, as to the next
membranes and nerves. But when it comes to the basis of the Cranium it is
divided into two branches, the greater whereof going back along the basis of
the Cranium to the hind part thereof, sending abranch to the long muscle
situate upon the oesophagus, it enters the Cranium with the small Carotides
through the hole of the nerves of the sixth conjugation, where they become one
common vessel. The lesser sending a slip to the organe of hearing by the
hole called Cacum (or the blind) also enters the Cranium and is spent in the
thicker meninx nere to the hole of the third and fourth conjugation of nerves.
The external Iugular vein being greater and fairer, most commonly simple, yet
sometimes double, either presently Into what parts the Iugularis externa goes.
at his beginning, or a little after, ascends superficially on both sides of
the neck, between the broad muscle or fleshy pannicle, being there easy to be
discerned, and other muscles situate at the sides of the neck, into which as
also into the skin it sends certain branches for nourishment.

The Figure of the hollow vein whole and freed from the rest of the body.
A, The trunk of the hollow vein. the lower AA, At this place of the Liver,
is seated the left part of the vein, and distributeth branches to the left
side.

B, Shows how the trunk of the hollow vein in the chest (to give way to the
heart) is curved or bowed to the right hand.

Betwix A. and B. that part of the hollow vein which is betwixt the gibbous
side of the Liver and the Midriffe.

C. the left midriffe vein called Phrenica sinistra, from which surcles do
run in a man unto the pursse of the heart, for the midriffe and it do grow
together.

D, The orifice of the hollow vein which grows unto the heart.

E, the crown-veine called coronaria, which like a crown compasses the basis
of the heart, and sprinkleth his surcles on the outside thereof as far as to the
cone or point.

F F, The trunk of the vein, Azygos or non parill, descending along the right
side of the racke-bones unto the loins. GG, the lower intercostall veins, to
the branches of the vein Azygos, which go unto the distances betwixt the ribs,
and afford surcles unto the muscles which lie upon the ribs and the
racke-bones, and the membranes of the chest. H, the division of the hollow vein
into two subclavian trunks near the Iugulum under the brest-bone. ll, the
subclavian branch tending on either side unto the arm; called by some
Axillaris. K, the upper intercostall vein which commonly sends three slips
unto the distances of the upper ribs, unto which the first intercostall vein
sent no branches. LL, the descending mammary vein: this descends under the
brest-bone unto the right muscles of the Abdomen, and affoordeth surcles to the
distances of the griftles of the true ribs, to the Mediastinum, the muscles
that lie upon the breast and the skin of the Abdomen. M, the conjunction of the
mammary with the Epigastricke vein ascending about the navill under the right
muscles. N, the vein of the neck called Ceruicalis, ascending toward the
Scull, which allows surcles to those muscles that lie upon the neck. O, the
vein called Muscula, which is propagated with many surcles into the muscles
that occupy the lower parts of the neck and the upper parts of the chest. P,
Thoraeica superior, the upper chest vein which goes to the muscles lying
upon the chest, to the skin of that place and to the dugges. Q, the double
Scapularis distributed into the hollow part of the shoulderblade and the
neighbor muscles: so also betwixt P and R, sometimes small veins do reach
unto the glandules that are in the arme-holes. R, Thoracica inferior running
downward along the sides of the chest, and especially distributed into the
muscle of the arm called Latissimus. S, the inner Iugular vein which enters
into the Scull after it has bestowed some surcles upon the rough artery. T,
the external Iugular vein. V. the division of this vein under the root of
the ear. X. a branch of the external Iugular which goes into the inside of
the mouth, and is diversely divided into the parts therein contained. Y. the
exterior branch distributed near the Fauces into the muscles of the chops and
the whole skin of the head. Z. a portion of the branch, y, reaching unto the
face. a, ae. the vein of the forehead. a. a portion of it creeping through
the temples ae. * a propagation that goes unto the skin of the Nowle or
Occiput. a a. the vein called Cephalica, or the external vein of the arm
which others call Humeraria. b. Muscula superior, a propagation of the
Cephalica vein which goes unto the backward muscles of the neck. Betwixt b.
and d. on the backeside jssueth a branch from the Cephalica which passes unto
the outside of the blade, and a portion thereof runs betwixt the flesh and
the skin. d. d, a vein from the Cephalica which attaineth unto the top of the
shoulder, and is consumed into the muscle that elevateth or lifts up the arm
and into his skin. e, e. a small vein from the Cephalica dispersed through the
skin and the muscles of the arm. f. the division of the Cephalica into three
parts. g. the first branch runs deep unto the muscles which arise out of the
external Protuberation of the arm. h. the second branch which goes to make
the median vein. i. i. the third branch running obliquely above the wand and
the outside of the arm. k. from this branch certain circles are divided into
the skin, the chief whereof is marked with k. l. the third branch at the wrist
which is joined at l, with the branch of the Basilica marked with x. m. the
Basilica which on the right hand is called Hepatica, on the left hand Lienaris.
n. o. a branch of the Basilica going to the heads of the muscles of the cubit
at n, and to the muscles themselves at o. p, a notable branch of the Basilica
running obliquely, and bestowing surcles upon the muscles that issue from the
external protuberation. This branch descends together with the fourth nerve.
q, division of the Basilica into two branches, and that is noted with q, is
ever accompanied with an arterye. s, a branch of this vein bestowed upon the
skin of the arm. t, a branch of the Basilica which together with the branch of
the Cephalica marked with h, makes the mediana or middle vein marked wirh a.
u, a branch of the Basilica going to the inner head of the arm. xx, a branch
issuing out of the former that creeps along unto the wrist and toward the
little finger conjoining it self with a branch of the Cephalica. y, A vein
running out unto the skin at the outside of the cubit. Upper Z. A propagation
issuing out of a branch of the Basilica marked with t. Lower z. A branch of the
Basilica x, goeing to the inside of the Arm. a. The Median or common vein,
b, The partition of the Median vein above the wrist: This division should have
been made above g. g. The External branch of the partition which goes to the
outside of the head. d, From which issues a small branch to the inside. (...),
The internal branch under (...), which toward the middle and the ring finger
is especially disposed. que, The vein of the thumb dispersed into the
mountenet or hillock, which is conjoined with the branch noted with d z, the
trunk of the hollow vein from which issue branches unto the parts seated
under the liver. (...), The fatty vein called Adiposa sinistra, which goes
unto the fat of the kidneys. th m, The two Emulgents which lead wheyey blood
unto the kidneys. l m, the two spermaticall veins leading the matter of the
seed unto the testicles. V, the beginning of the bodden vessel called vas
varicosum. x, the veins of the loins called Lumbares which are sent in the
knots or knees to the rackebones, to the marrow of the back, to the muscles
that lies upon the loins, and to the Peritonaum. o, the bifurcation of the
hollow vein into the Iliacke branches, which bifurcation is not unlike l. o,
Muscula superior, a transverse branch going to the muscles of the Abdomen, and
to the Peritonaenm. r s, the division of the left Iliacke vein, into an inner
branch at r, and an utter at t. t, Muscula media the utter propagation of the
branch r, distributed through the muscles of the coxa and the skin of the
buttockes. n, An inner propagation of the same branch r which goes unto the
holes of the holy bone. ph, the vein called Sacra, which goes to the upper
holes of the holy bone. ch ps, the vein Hypogastrica distributed to the
bladder, to the muscles of the fundament, and the neck of the womb. o, A vein
arising from the utter branch marked with s which is joined with some branches
of the internal vein, near the holes or perforations of the share bone. i, A
vein which when it has passed the share bone distributeth one branch into the
cup of the coxendix and to the muscles of that place. ch, Another small branch
which runs under the skin at the inside of the thigh. ch, The congresse or
meeting of the foresaid vein, with a branch marked with char. 2. and
distributed into the leg. I, The Epigastricke vein, a propagation of the
utter branch s perforating the Peritonaeum, whereto as also to the muscles of
the Abdomen, and the skin it offers branches, the chief branch of this
vein is joined with the descending mammary above the navell at M. D, Pudenda
an inner propagation of the branch s, running overthwart unto the privities.
TH, Saphaena or the ancle vein or the inner branch of the crurall trunk,
which creeps through the inside of the leg under the skin unto the tops
of the toes. L, the first interior propagation of the Saphaena offered to the
groine. X, The utter propagation thereof divided to the foreside or outside of
the thigh. P, The second propagation of the Saphaena going to the first muscle
of the leg. (...), The third propagation of the Saphaena going to the skin
of the whirle-bone, and unto the hamme. ph, The fourth propagation of the
Saphaena dispersing his muscles forward and backward. PS, Branches from this
unto the foreside of the inner ankle, to the upper part of the foot, and to
all the toes. O, Ischias minor called also muscula interior, the utter branch
of the crurall trunk divided into the muscles of the coxendix, and to the
skin of that place. 1, 2, And this also may be called muscula. 1, the
exterior and lesser which passes into some muscles of the leg. (...), the
interior greater and deeper unto the muscles of the thigh. 3, 4. The vein
called Poplitea, made of two crurall veins divided under the knee. 5, From
this a surcle is reached upward unto the skin of the thigh. 6. But the
greater part runs by the bent of the knee under the skin as far as the
heel. 7, Also to the skin of the outward ankle. 8, The vein called Suralis
or calfe vein, hecause it runs unto the muscles that make the calfe of the
leg. 9, The division of the Surall vein into an exterior trunk 9, and an
interior 14. 10, 11, The division of the exterior trunk under the knee into an
external branch, which along the brace attaineth unto the muscles of the foot
11, and in internal. 12, 13, 12, 13, Which descending along the outside of the
leg to the upper part of the foot is cloven into diverse branches, and in the
back of the foot mixeth it self with Poplitea, or the hamme vein 20. 14, The
interior branch of the Surall vein which runs into the backside of the leg.
15, A branch hereof descending to the inside of the heel and the great toe,
and is divided into diverse surcles. 17, Ischias mayor issuing out of the
internal trunk at 14, and running through the muscles of the calfe. 18, A
propagation hereof derived unto the upper part of the foot, and affoording two
surcles to every toe. 19, the remain- of the inner trunk 14, behind the inner
ankle, approaches to the bottom of the foot and is consumed into all the
toes. 20, the commixtion of the vein Poplitea with the surall or calfe-branch
at 13.



But when it arives to the basis of the lower part of the head, it is divided
into Where the external Iugular vein may be fitly opened in inflammations of
the parts of the mouth.
more branches, one whereof is carried to the muscles of the bone Hydis, the
Larinx, the tongue and the lower part of the tongue (in which place it is
commonly opened in squinancies, and other inflammations of the mouth) and to
the coat of the nose. Another is carried to the Dura matter, passing on both
sides through a hole situate under the bone mastoides, and besides, ascending
to the bone of the back part of the scull, it comes obliquely to the upper
part of the suture lambdoides, where these branches meeting together, pass
into the reduplication of the Dura matter, deviding the forepart of the brain,
that so joined and united, they may make the torcular; the third ascendent is
distributed upon the back part and basis of the lower jaw, to the lips, the
sides of the nose, and the muscles thereof: and in like manner to the greater
corner of the eyes, to the forehead and other parts of the face, and at length
by meeting together of many branches, it makes in the forehead the vein which
is called vena recta or vena frontis, that is, the forehead vein. The fourth,
ascending by the glandules Vena recta
behind the ears, after it has sent forth many branches to them, is divided
into two others, one whereof passing before, and the other behind the ear, are
at length spent in the skin of the head. The fifth and last wandering over all
the lower part of the head, going to the back part thereof, makes the vena
pupis, which extended the length of the head by the sagitall suture, at the
length goes so far, that it meets with the vena frontis, which meeting is
the cause, that a vein opened in the forehead, is good in griefs of the
hinder parts of the head, and so on the contrary. But we must observe that in
the Cranium of some, the vena pupis by one or more manifest passages Vena pupis
sends some portion thereof to the inner part of the head, so that the vena
pupis being opened may make revulsion of the matter which causes the internal
pains of the head.

CHAP. XIIII. The distribution of the nerves, or sinews of the sixth
conjugation.
BEcause the Distribution of the arteries cannot be well showed, unless we
Three pair of nerves of the sixth conjugation.
violate those nerves which are carried over the Chest, therefore before we
show the distribution of the arteries, we will as briefly as we can, prosecute
the distribution of these nerves.

Now the sixth conjugation brings forth three pair of nerves; for passing out
of the skull, as it comes down to the Chest, it by the way sends forth some
branches to certain muscles of the neck, and to the three ascendant muscles
of the Larinx on each side of the Sternon and upon the clavicles. Then the
remainder descending into the Chest, is divided on each side into these three
pair. The first pair makes the Ramus costalis. The second, the Ramus
recurrens. The third pair, the Ramus stomachicus. Ramus Costalis
The Ramus costalis, or costall branch is so called, because descending by the
roots of the ribs, even to the holy bone, and joining themselves to these which
proceed from each of the Vertebra's of the spine, they are carried to all the
natural parts.

The Recurrens, or recurrent is also called, because as it were starting up
from the chest, it runs upwards again, but these two Recurrent nerves do not
run back from the Recurrens
same place; but the right from below the artery, called by some the axillarie,
by others Subclavian, and the left from beneath the great artery, descending to
the natural parts. But each of them on each side ascending along by the
weazon, even to the Larinx, and then they infinuate themselves by the wings of
the Cartilago scutiformis, and Thyroydes into the proper muscles, which open
and shut the Larinx. An anatomical Axiom.


By how much the nerves are nearer the original, to wit, the brain, or
spinall marrow, they are by so much the softer. On the contrary, by how much
they are further absent from their original, they are so much the harder and
stronger, which is the reason, that Nature would have these recurrent nerves to
run back again upwards, that so they might be the stronger to perform the
motions of the muscles Why nature would have the vocal nerves recurrent. Ramus
stomachicus.
of the Larinx. But the Stomachicus or stomacke-branch is so called, because it
descends to the stomach or ventricle. For this branch descending on both sides
by the sides of the gullet, sends many branches from it into the inner
substance of the lungs, into the coat thereof, into the Pericardium and heart;
and then coming into the upper orifice of the stomach, it is spent in many
branches, which folded after diverse manners and ways, chiefly makes that
mouth or stomach, which is the seat of the Animal apetite (as they term it)
and hunger, and the judger of things convenient or hurtful for the stomach.
But from thence they are diversely disseminated over all the body of the
ventricle.

Moreover, the same branch sends forth some small branches to the liver and
bladder of the gall, giving each part by the way, so much sense as should be
sufficiently necessary for it. Here you must note, the stomach branch descends
on each side one, knit to the gullet, and by the way they divide themselves
into two branches, each of which goes to the opposite side, that it may there
join itself to the nerve of that side. To which purpose the right is carried
above the gullet, the left below it, so that these two stomaticke become four,
and again these four presently become two.

CHAP. XV. The division of the Arteries.
THe Artery arising forth of the left ventricle of the heart, is presently (the
two Coronall arteries being first spread over the substance of the heart)
divided into two unequal branches. The greater whereof descends to the lower
parts, being distributed, as we formerly mentioned in the third Book, and The
left branch of the ascendant artery is less then the right. The distribution
of the left subclavian artery into the, 1 Intercostalis.
22. Chapter. The lesser ascending to the upper parts, is again divided into
two other unequal branches, the lesser of which ascending toward the left
side, sends forth no artery from it, until it arive at the first rib of the
Chest, where it produces the subclavian artery, which is distributed after the
manner following.

First, it produces the intercostall, and by it imparts life to the three
intercostall muscles of the four upper ribs, and to the neighboring places.

Secondly, it brings forth the Mammillary branch, which is distributed as the
Mammillary vein is.

Thirdly, the Cervicalis, which ascends along the neck by the transverse
productions 2 Mammaria.
to the Dura matter, being distributed as the vena cervicalis is.

Fourthly, passing out of the Chest, from the back part of the Chest, it sends
3. Cervicalis.
forth the musculosa, whereby it gives life to the hind muscles of the neck,
even to the back part of the head. 4 Musculosa.


Fifthly, having wholly left the Chest, it sends forth the two Humerariae, or
shoulder arteries, the one whereof goes to the muscles of the hollow part of
the shoulder 5 Humoraria duplex.
blade, the other to the joint of the arm and the muscles situate there, and
the gibbous part of the shoulder blade. 6 Theracica duplex. The distribution of
the right subclavian Artery. The Carotides, or sleepy arteries. Their division.
The distribution of the internal branch of the sleepy arteries.


Sixthly and lastly, it produces the Thoracica, which also is two fold, for the
one goes to the fore muscles of the Chest, the other to the Latssimus, as we
said of the vein, the remnant of it makes the Axillaris of that side.

The other greater branch likewise ascending by the right side, even to the
first ribbe of the Chest, makes also the subclavian of that side, which besides
those divisions it makes on this side, like those of the left side, has also
another which makes the right and left Carotides or sleepy arteries, which
ascending undivided with a nerve of the sixth conjugation and the internal
jugular vein, by the sides of the Aspera Arteria or windpipe, when they come
to the Pharinx, they are divided on each side into two branches, the one
internal, the other external. The internal and greater is sent to the
Pharinx, Larinx and tongue; then entering into the head by the long hole, and
the back part of the upper jaw, it sends many branches to the nose, eyes, the
inside of the temporal muscles and to the Crassa meninx, or Dura matter: the
remainder of this branch going by the side holes of the same, that it might
there make the Plexus admirabilis as we see. And then it is spent upon the
basis of the brain abundantly diffused over the tenuis meninx or Pia matter,
and the membrane or Plexus Choroides. The external or lesser branch of the
sleepy arteries goes to the cheeks, To what parts the external branch of the
sleepy artery arrives.
the temples, and behind the ears; lastly, it sends a branch into the long
muscle of the neck, with which the internal Iugular vein insinuates it self
into the Dura matter, entering by the hole of the nerves of the sixth conjugation.

The Figure of the Arteries.
A. The orifice of the great Artery, or the beginning thereof, where it
issues out of the heart.

B. Coronaria, so called, because like a crown it compasses the basis of the
heart.

C. The division of the great artery into two trunkes V i.

D. the left subclavian climbing obliquely upward unto the ribs.

E. the upper intercostall artery, or a branch which bestows four
propagations unto the distances of the lower rib.

F. the neck artery which through the transverse processes of the rackebones
of the neck, attaineth to the scull, bestowing surcles unto the marrow and his
neighbor muscles.

G. the left Mammary artery running under the breast bone, and to the navell.

It distributeth surcles to the Mediastinum, the muscles of the breast, and of
the Abdomen.

H. Muscula, or a branch attaining to the backward muscles of the neck.

I. the Scapular arteries which go unto the hollownesse of the blade, and of
the muscles that lie thereon.

K. Humeraria which climbeth over the top of the shoulder. L. Thoracica
superior, sprinkled unto the forward muscles of the Chest. M. Thoracica
inferior, which passing along the sides of the Chest, attaineth to the broad
muscles of the arm. N. the axillarie artery running out into the arm and
affording branches unto the muscles thereof. O. A branch reaching to the
outside of the cubit lying deep. PP. Branches to the joint of the cubit with
the arm. Q. the upper branch of the artery running along the Radius and
offering surcles to the thumb, the forefinger and the middle finger. k A
surcle creeping unto the outside of the hand and led betwixt the first bone of
the thumb and that of the after-wrist, supporteth the forefinger where we
use to feel the pulse. S. the lower branch of the artery running along the
Vlna and communicating surcles to the little finger, the ring finger, and the
middle finger. A little branch unto the muscles about the little finger. T. the
distribution of the upper and lower branches into the hand and the fingers V.
the trunk of the great artery ascending to the Iugulum, and the division
thereof in that place into X, Y, Z. X, the left Carotis or sleepy artery. Y,
Subclavian dextra is divided into branches, as the right is divided. Z. Carotis
dextra, called also Apoplectica and Lithargica. a, The division of the left
Carotis in the chops. b, the exterior branch of that division going into the
face, the temples, and behind the ears. c, the inner branch going to the
throttle, the choppes and the tongue. d, the division hereof at the basis of
the scull, into two branches which enter the sinus of the Dura matter. e, A
propagation of the branch b, unto the muscles of the face. f, the distribution
of the branch b, under the root of the ear. g. the fore-branch hereof
creeping up the temples. h. the back branch running on the backeside of the
ear under the skin. i, the trunk of the great artery, descending unto the
spondels of the back. kkk, the lower Intercostall arteries which go unto the
distances of the eight lower ribs, from which are offered surcles to the
marrow, and to the muscles that grow to the back and to the Chest. l, the
artery of the midriffe called Phronica or Diaphragmatica. z, Mesenterica
Superior, but you must note that above z, the trunk of the Coeliacall artery
is taken away, left the multitude of letters in so small a Table should breed
obscurity. r, (...), the right and left emulgents running from the Aorta or
great artery unto the kidneies. (...), (...), the spermaticall arteries on
either side going to the testicles. l, the lower Mesentericall artery on the
left below m, running especially into the Collicke gut on that side. mm, the
arteries called Lumbares which run overthwart and like knees, affording
surcles to the muscles that grow to the loins, and to the Peritonaeum. m, the
lower; Muscula superior running into the sides of the Abdomen and the muscles.
v v, the byfurcation of the great artery into two Iliacke trunkes, and at the
sides, but somewhat inward are branches which make those that are called
Sacrae. T, the division of the left Iliacke trunk into an inner branch at x
and an utter at ph. x, the inner Iliacke branch. (...), Muscula inferior, the
utter propagation of the inner branch going unto the muscles which cover the
branch bone and the Coxendix. (...), Hypogastrica, the inner propagation of the
inner branch going to the bladder, the yard and the neck of the womb. (...),
the umbilicall artery. (...), the remainder of the branch x, assuming an
addition from the utter branch near ph, and so falling through the hole of the
share bone into the leg. t, Epigastrica, it ascends upward unto the right
muscle of the Abdomen, and about the navell is joined with the mammary artery.
n, Pudenda, it creeps overthwart the share bone. (...), the Crurall trunk
without the Peritonaeum. ch, Muscula cruralis exterior, going into the fore
muscles of the thigh. (...), Muscula cruralis interior, going unto the muscles
of the inside of the thigh. o, The conjunction of this artery with the
branches. (...), Poplitaea, going to the muscles on the backside of the thigh.
DD, which communicates small branches to the joint of the knee, and the
muscles that make the calfe of the leg. (...), the division of the Crurall
artery under the hamme into three branches. L, Tibiaea exterior, it
accompanies the brace-bone, and is consumed into the muscles. (...) the chief
part of the crural artery. S, the upper and backer Tibiaea. Pph, the lower and
backer Tibiaea running unto the upper side of the foot at ph. ps, A
propagation of the crurall artery going to the inner and upper side of the
foot, and sprinkling a branch unto the ankle. O, A propagation unto the lower
part of the foot which affords surcles to each toe.



But we must note that there be more veins in a man's body, than arteries, and
besides that the veins are far thicker. For there is no need for preserving
the native heat in the parts themselves, either of so many, or so large
instruments of that kind. Therefore you may often find veins without
arteries, but never arteries without veins.

But we understand that an artery is a companion to a vein, not only when it
touches it, or adheres to it by common membranes, as usually it happens; but
also when it is appointed together with the vein for the use of the same part.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Thymus.
THe Thymus is a glandule of a soft, rare, and spongeous substance, of large
bigness, situate in the furthest and highest part of the Chest, amongst the
What the Thymus is.
divisions of the subclavian or Iugular veins and arteries, as yet contained
in the Chest, for this use; that it might serve these vessels for a defense
against the bony hardness of the Chest, and besides, that as it were by this
prop or The use.
stay, the distributions of these vessels might become the stronger; for so we
see that nature has provided for others, especially such as are the more noble
and worthy. This glandule appears very large in beasts and young men, but in
such as have The magnitude.
attained to full growth it is much less, and scarce to be seen.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Aspera Arteria, the rough Artery or Weazon.
THe Aspera Arteria or Weazon seeing it is the instrument of voice and
respiration, is of a gristly, ligamentous, and wholly various substance. For if
it The substance
had been one rough, and continued body with the Larinx or throttle, it could
be neither dilated, nor compressed; opened, nor shut, neither could it order
the voice according to our desire.

It is composed of veins from the internal Iugular, of arteries arising from
the Composure.
Carotides, and of nerves proceeding from the Recurrent branch, of a double
membrane, of which the external comes from the Peritonaeum; the internal,
which is the stronger and woven with right fibers, from the inner coat of the
mouth, the which is common with the inner coat of the oesophagus or gullet.
And also it consists of round gristles, yet not drawn into a perfect circle,
composed in manner of a channel, and mutually joined together in order, by the
ligaments that proceed from their sides and ends.

These same ligaments perfect the remnant of the circle of this Aspera
Arteriae, on Why the back part of the weazon is ligamentous.
that part next the gullet; which is thought to be done to this end; that that
softness of a ligament, might then give place, when we swallow harder and
greater gobbets of meat. Of the two sorts of ligaments which are annexed to
the gristles of the weazon, some tie and fasten together the rings or circles,
which give means both to it, and these circles to be drawn out in length;
othersome bring these gristles into a perfect circle, which also yield them
means of dilatation. These ligaments cover the inner superficies, but the
gristles are placed without, to resist the incursion Why the forepart is
gristlely.
of external injuries. But we must note, that by this communion of the inner
coats of the weazon and gullet, we reap this benefit in the commodiousnesse
of the action, that one of these parts being depressed, the other is lifted up,
like a rope running in a wheel or pully. For thus whilst the gullet is
deprest to swallow any thing, the weazon is lifted up; and on the contrary when
the stomach rises up in vomiting, the weazon is deprest. It is only one, and
that seated between the Larinx (from which it takes its beginning) and the
lunges in which it ends; first dividing it The number and site. The division of
the weazon through the Lobes of the Lungs.
self into two large branches, the right and the left, and besides each of
these entering into the substance of the lungs, is again divided into two
others; to each of the Lobes one; and to conclude, these be subdivided into
infinite others, through the substance of the Lobes.

All these branches are gristlely even to the ends. They are situate between
the ends of the Arteria venosa, and the Vena arteriosa, that the entrance of
the air into the heart by the arteria venosa might be speedier, as also the
passage out of the vapor, by the vena arteriosa. Thus it has connection with
these in the ends, or utmost parts thereof, but by the other parts compassing
it, with the members from whence it takes them. The temperament thereof is cold
and dry. The action is to carry the The temper and action.
air to, and vapors from the lungs; that by dilating, but this by pressing
the gristles together.

The Figure of the Aspera Arteria or Weazon.
A. The orifice of the great artery cut from the heart, aa. the coronall
arteries of the heart.

B. C. D. the division of the great artery into two trunkes, the descending C.
the ascending D.

E. the left axillarie, or subclavian artery.

F. the right axillarie or subclavian artery.

G. the right Carotis or sleepie artery.

H. the left Carotis.

I. the trunk of the rough artery or weazon.

K. L. The division of the rough artery into two branches, of which the right
goes into the right, and the left into the left side of the lungs; which
branches are again subdivided into many other.

M. The head of the Rough Artery called the Larinx or Throttle.

N. N. Certain Glandules or Kernells at the root of it.

OO. The right and left Nerves of the sixth and seventh conjugation. P. A
Revolution of small branches of the right nerve, to the right Axillary Artery.
Q Q. The right Recurrent Nerve. R. A revolution of small branches of the left
nerve unto the descending trunk of the great Artery. S S. The left Recurrent
Nerve.



CHAP. XVIII. Of the Gullet.
THe OEsophagus, or Gullet which is the passage of the meat and drink, The
substance
is of a middle substance between the flesh and sinews, because it consists
of one nervous membrane and another fleshy. The nervous is placed the
innermost, and is continued to the inner Coat of the mouth even to the Lips
(whereby it comes to pass,) that the Lips tremble in diseases which are ready
to be judged by a critical vomiting and to the inner part Attractive force
thereof.
of the Aspera Arteria; it consists of right Fibers for the attraction of the
meat, which we see is sometimes so quick and forcible in hungry people, that
they have scarce time to chaw it, before they find it, to be plucked down, as
it were with a hand. The fleshy Coat placed without is woven with transverse
fibers, to hasten The composure.
the going of the meat into the stomach, and for expulsion in vomiting and
breaking of wind. These two coats are continued with the two coats of the
stomach, and have the like site. Besides, the Gullet has these parts
composing it, as a vein from the Gate and Hollow ascendent vein, a nerve from
the sixth conjugation, an Artery from that which creepes along the bottom of
the stomach with the vena Gastrica, or else from the Arteryes ascending the
hollow part thereof; but also besides all these vessels it may have a third coat
from the membrane investing the Ribs, or Pleura. The magnitude of the Gullet is
large enough, yet some be bigger, some less according to the variety of
bodies. The figure of it is round, that so it might be The magnitude. The
figure. Site.
more large to swallow meat, and less subject to offense. It is placed
between the back bone and the weazon from the roots of the tongue even to the
stomach. But as it discends along the back bone, when it comes to the
fourth Vertebra of the Chest, it turns to the right side, to give way to the
great Artery Aorta and the descendent Artery, then it turns to the left side
to the stomach, or mouth of the ventricle. Nature has fastened it to the
Diaphragma with strong membranous ties, lest that, if it had lain upon the
Artery it should have hindered the passage of the vital spirit to the lower
parts. It is only one and that tied to the forementioned parts, both by its
vessels and membranes. It is of temper rather cold than hot, as all those
parts, which are more nervous than fleshy, are. The Action thereof is to draw
Temper and action.
and carry down the meat, and to cast forth such things by vomit as trouble
the stomach. Here you must note, that whilst we swallow down, the Gullet is
drawn Why we cannot sup and blow at one time.
downwards, and the weazon upwards, which is the cause that we cannot sup and
blow, swallow and breathe together at the same instant; which we must think
to happen by Gods singular providence; to whose name be glory for everlasting,

Amen.
The End of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE ANIMAL parts contained in the Head.
CHAP. I. A General description of the Head.
HAving hitherto declared two general parts of man's body, that is, the
Natural and vital, it is now fit to betake our selves to the last, that is,
the Animal, beginning with the head.

Whrefore we will first define the head, then divide it into its parts; thirdly
describe each of these parts; fourthly demonstrate them after the order they
offer themselves to our sight in dissection.

The head therefore is the seat of the senses, the Palace and habitation of
reason and wisdom, from whence as from a What the head is.
fountain infinite actions and commodities arise. It is seated above the rest
of the body, that the Animal spirit from thence, as from a tower, may govern
and moderate Why seated in the highest place.
the whole body, and perform all actions according to the praescript of
nature. By the head we understand all that which is contained from the Crown
of the head to the first vertebra of the neck.

The best figure of the head is round, lightly flatted on each side,
extuberating something The figure.
to the fore and hind part thereof. For from hence is taken an argument of the
goodness of the senses; on the contrary, those which are exactly round, or
acuminate, and sharp toward the top, are not thought good. The head is divided
into the face, forehead, temples, the forepart, the crown and hind part. The
division thereof.


By the face we understand, whatsoever is contained between the Eyebrows and
the lower part of the chin. By the forehead, all the space from the eyebrows
even to the Coronall future. By the temples, whatsoever is hollowed from the
lesser Corner of the eye, even to the ears. By the forepart of the head,
whatsoever runs in length from the top of the forehead, or the Coronall
suture, even to the suture lambdoides, and on each side to the Ossa petrosa,
the stony bones, or scaly sutures. By the Crown we signify a certain point
exquisitely in the midst of the Sagittall future, which is suffyciently known.
By the Occiput or hindepart of the head, that which is terminated by the suture
lambdoides, and the first vertebra of the neck.

Of all these parts there be some simple, some compound, besides some are
containing, some contained. Of the containing some are common to all the parts
of the head, as the skin, the fleshy pannicle and pericranium; others are
proper to certain The ^ining parts of the head.
parts, as the fleshy panicle to the neck, face, forehead, and skin covering
the Cranium, the common coat of the muscles to the fat and face; The skull and
both the Meninges to the brain.

The parts contained are the substance of the brain, the four ventricules,
and the bodies contained in them, the nerves, the mamillary processes; the
Plexus Choroides or The parts contained.
Rete Admirabile, the Glandula Basilaris, and others of which we will speak
hereafter.

We must now speak of the containing parts beginning with the skin; for the
order of teaching requires that we take our Exordium from the more simple, but
first we will say some thing of the hairs.

The hair is nothing else than an excrement generated and formed of the more
What the hair is.
gross and terrene portion of the superfluities of the third concoction, which
could not be wasted by insensible transpiration. The benefit of it is, that
consuming the gross The use thereof.
and fuliginous or sooty excrements of the brain it becomes a cover and
ornament for the head.

This hair of the head and eyebrows have their original from the first
conformation of the infant in the womb, the rest of the hairs of the body
arise and grow forth as the body grows and becomes more dry, of which sort are
the hairs which cover the Chin, armeholes, groines and other parts of our
bodies.

CHAP. II. Of the musculous skin of the Head, (commonly called the hairy
scalpe) and of the Pericranium.
THe skin which covers the Scull, and is covered with the hair, is far
more fleshy, thick, hard and dry than any other part of the body, especially
What the hairy scalpe is. Its connection.
which wants hair. The skin has almost the like condition of quality as
those parts have, which it does simply cover, but is as it were lost in them,
or grown into one with them, as in the lips and forehead with the fleshy
pannicle, wherefore it is there called musculous; in other places it adheres to
the gristles, as on the sides of the nosethrilles and corners of the Eyes,
whereupon it is there called gristlely.

It has connection with the Pericranium because joined to it, it receives
nerves from the first and second vertebra of the neck, and from the third
conjugation of the brain which are disseminated through all its substance,
whereby it comes to pass, that the wounds, contusions, and impostumes that
happen in or upon this skin, are not to be neglected.

The Our Author with Fallopius and Laurentius confoundes the pericranium and
peri^stium: but Vesalius Bauhinus and Bartheolinus distinguish them making the
pericranium thin and soft, and the periostium most thin and nervous, and of
most exquisite sense. Why the wounds thereof must not be neglected. The
Pericranium and periostium of the same nature. Whence all the membranes
proceed. Why when any membranous part is hurt in any part of the body, the head
is affected by consent. The use of the Pericranium.
Pericranium (but I suppose it should be the Periostium) is a most thin
membrane, which next and immediately covers all the bones of the body, and this
on the head is called by a peculiar name the Pericranium by reason of the
excellency of the Cranium or skull, in other bones it is termed the
Periostium: And as the Pericranium takes its original from the Crassa meninx
propagating it self by certain strings or threads sent forth by the sutures
and holes of the skull, so all other membranes of the body have their original
either from this Pericranium, or the Crassa meninx, sending forth their
productions, as well by the holes or passages of the head, as by these of the
spinall marrow or back bone it self, even to the Holy bone.

Of which this is an argument, for in what part soever of the body a membrane
is hurt, presently the hurt or sense thereof comes to the Crassa meninx. For so
those who have but their little Toe hurt when they sneese, or cough, perceive an
increase of their pain, by the passage thereof to the brain.

The use of this Pericranium is to cover the skull, and to give notice of
things hurtful, by the power of the quick sense which it is endued withal,
and the Periostium does the like in other bones. Besides it sustaines and
fastens by the sutures the Crassa meninx to the skull; least it should fall by
reason of its weight upon the Pia matter, and so hurt it, and hinder the
pulsation of the brain and arteryes that are plenteously spread through both
the Meninges. Wherefore the Pericranium has most strait connection with the
Crassa meninx, because it takes the original from thence.

We must think the same of the other membranes of the body, which thing is
very notable in the solution of the continuity of the membranes.

CHAP. III. Of the Sutures.
THe Sutures do sew or fasten together the bones of the skull; these be Their
use and number.
5 in number. Three are true and legitimate, two false and spurious. The
Coronal, the first of the true sutures, is seated in the forepart of the head,
descending downwards overtwhart the forepart of the head to the midst of the
temples; it is so called, because Corollae, that is, wreaths, crowns or
garlands, are set upon that place:

The second is called the Sagittalis, or right suture, as that which running
through the crown devides the head into two equal parts, as with a straigth
line, running the length of it from the Coronall to the Lambdoides or hind
suture.

But this third suture Lambdoides, is so called because it represents this
Capital greek letter Lambda, L. You must understand this description of the
sutures, not as always but as for the greater part to be thus. For there be
some skulls that want the foremost Some sculls want Sutures.
suture, othersome the hind, and sometimes such as have none of the true
sutures, but only the false and spurious. But also you shall sometimes find the
Sagittal to run to the nose.

And often times there be three or four sutures in the back part of the head,
so that indeed the number of the sutures is not certain. Which also we find
observed by Cornelius Celsus, where he writes, that Hippocrates was deceived by
the sutures by Cells. lib. 8. Cap. 4.
chance, for that he conjectured that the bones of the back part of the head,
were broken, because his Probe thrust to the roughnes of the second suture
Lambdoides, stayed as at a Cleft made in the bone by a stroke.

The other two are called the false, stony and scaly sutures, by reason they
are made by a scaly conjunction of the bones, but not by a toothed saw or
combe-like connection. But if any ask, why the head consists not of one bone,
that so it might be the Why the scull consists of diverse bones.
stronger: I answer it is, that so it might be the safer both from internal
and external injuries. For the scull being as it were the tunnel of the
chymney of this humane fabric, to which all the smoky vapors of the whole
body ascend, if it had been composed of one bone, these vapors should have
had no passage fourth.

Wherefore the grosser vapors pass away by the sutures, but the more subtle
by the pores of the scull; some have their sutures very open; but others on the
contrary very close.

Therefore nature has otherwise compendiously provided for such as want
sutures; In what bodies and by what means the vena pupis sometimes enters into
the parts within the scull.
For it has made one or two holes, some two fingers breadth from the
Lambdoides, through which the Vena pupis enters into the skull, and they are of
that largenes that you may put a points tagge into them, that so the vapors
may have free passage forth, otherwise there would be danger of death; thus
nature has been careful to provide for man against internal injuries; and in
like manner against external, for it has made the head to consist of diverse
bones, that when one bone is broken the other may be safe, the violence of the
stroke being stayed in the division of the bones.

Whereby you may know, that if the skull chance to be broken in the opposite
side In what men one part of the head being stricken, the opposite is broken.
to that which received the blow, that it happens either by reason of the
defect of Sutures, or else because they are unperfect, and too firmly closed;
otherwise it is unpossible such fractures should happen by reason of the
separation of the bones, which breaks the violence of the blow that it can go
no further.

And certainly as it is rare to find a skull without Sutures, so it is rare to
find such kind of fractures. Therefore Chirurgions must diligently observe the
Sutures and site of them, least they be deceived and take them for fractures,
or unawares apply a Trepan to them, whence by breaking the veins, arteryes and
nervous fibers by which Why we must not apply a Trepan to the Sutures.
the internal parts communicate with the external, there may ensue increase
of pain, a violent defluxion of blood upon the Crassa meninx, and the falling
thereof upon the brain, (the fibers being broken by which it stuck to the
Pericranium) and so consequently a deadly interception of the pulsation of the
Brain.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Cranium, or Skull.
THe Cranium, or Skull covering the brain like an Helmet, is composed and What
the Cranium or scull is.
consists of seven bones, of which some are more dense, thick and hard than
other some. The First is the Os occipitis, or Nowle bone seated in the back
part of the head, more hard and thick than the rest, because we want Why the
nowle bone is harder than the rest.
hands and eyes behind, whereby we may keep or save our selves from falling.

This bone is circumscribed, or bounded by the suture Lambdoides, and the My
Author means by the Os Basilarae in this place the wedge bone: but some
Anatomists make it a Synonima of this O^ occipitis. The forehead bone, next to
the nowl: bone is harder than the rest. A Cavity to be observed in the forehead
bone.
Os basilare. The eminencies and as it were heads of this bone are received
into the first vertebra; for upon this the head is turned forwards and
backwards, by the force of fourteen muscles and strong ligaments, which
firmly tie these heads of the Nowle bone in the cavityes of this first
vertebra.

The Second bone of the skull is in the forepart, and is called the Os coronale
or Os frontis the forehead bone, it has the second place in strength and
thickness. It is bounded by the Coronal suture, and the ends of the wedgebone:
in this forehead bone there is often found a great cavity under the upper part
of the eyebrows, filled with a glutinous, gross, viscide and white matter or
substance, which is thought to help to elaborate the air for the sense of
smelling.

Chirurgions must take special notice of this cavity, because when the head
chances to be broken in that place, it may happen, that the fracture exceeds
not the first table; wherefore they being ignorant of this cavity, and moved
with a false persuasion that they see the brain, they may think the bone
wholly broken, and to press the Meninges, whereupon they will dilate the wound,
apply a Trepan and other instruments to lift up the second table of the bone,
without any need at all, and with the manifest danger of the life of the
patient.

The third and fourth bones of the Skull are the Ossa parietalia, or Bregmatis,
having Ossa parietalia and bregmatis.
the third place of density and thicknes; although this density and thicknes be
different in diverse places of them. For on the upper part of the head, or
crown, (where that substance turns not to a bone in children until they have
all their teeth, so that it feels soft in touching, and through it you may
feel the beating of the brain) these bones are very tender, so that often
times, they are no thicker than ones nail, that so the moist and vapourous
excrements of the brain, shut up where the greater portion of the brain
resides, may have a freer passage by the Brains Diastole and Systole. These
two square bones are bounded above with the Sagittall suture, below with the
scaly, on the forepart with the coronall, and on the hind part with the
Lambdoides.

The fifth and sixth bone of the skull are the two Ossa petrosa stony or scaly
bones which are next to the former in strength. They are bounded with the false
or bastard Ossa petrosa, or the scaly bones
Suture, and with part of the Lambdoides, and wedgebone.

The seventh is the Os sphenoides, basilare or Cuneiforme that is, the
wedgebone. It Os Sphenoides, or the wedge-bone.
is called Basilare, because it is as it were the Basis of the head. To this
the rest of the bones of the head are fitly fastened in their places. This bone
is bounded on each side with the bones of the forehead, the stony bones, and
bones of the Nowle and palate. The figure represents a Batte, and its
processes her wings.

There is besides these another bone at the Basis of the forehead bone, into
which Os Ethmoides or cribrosum.
the mamillary processes end, the Greeks call it (...), the Latins Cribrosum
and Spongiosum, the Spongy bone, because it has many holes in it not
perforated in a direct passage, as in a sive, but winding and anfractuous, that
the air should not by the force of attraction presently leap or ascend into
the brain, and affect it with its qualityes, before it be elaborated by its
lingering in the way. There are besides also The three bones of the ^uditory
passage.
six other little bones lying hid in the stony bones, at the hole, or Auditory
passage; on each side three, that is to say, the Ineus or Anvill, the Malleolus
or Hammer, and the Stapes or stirrup, because in their figure they represent
these three things; the use of these we will declare hereafter.

But also in some skuls there are found some divisions of bones, as it were
collected fragments to the bigness almost of ones thumb, furnished and
distinguished by their proper commissures, or sutures, which thing is very fit
to be known to a Chyrurgion in the use of a Trepan.

Verily he may give a conjecture hereof, whilst he separates the Pericranium
from By what means a Surgeon may conjecture, that there are extraordinary
sutures in certain places of the scull. The sculls of such as inhabit the
South^en countries are more hard and dense. We must observe the excuberancies
beside (...) nature which are in some sculls.
the skull, for the pericranium is with greater difficulty plucked away from the
sutures, because the Crassa meninx has straiter connection therewith by his
nervous fibers sent forth in such places. The Skuls in women are softer and
thinner than in men, and in children more than in women, and in young men more
then in men of a middle age. Also the Aethiopians or Blackamoores, as also all
the people inhabiting to the South, have their sculles more hard and composed
with fewer sutures.

Therefore as it is written by Hippocrates, such as have their Skulls the
softer, the Symptoms in fractures are more dangerous and to be feared in them.
But the skull by how much the softer it is, by so much it more easily and
readily yields to the perforating Trepan. Moreover in some skuls, there be
bunches standing out besides nature, made either round, or cornered, which the
Surgeon must observe for two causes; the first is for the better
consideration of a blow or fracture. For in these bunches, or knots, the
solution of the continuity cannot be, if it seem to be stretched in length,
but that the wound must penetrate to the inner parts. For in a round body there
can be no long wound; but it must be deep, by the weapon forced the deeper;
because as a round body touches a plain but only inpuncte in a prick or
point, so what-so-ever falls only lightly or superficially upon it, only
touches a point thereof. But on the contrary a long wound must be upon a plain
surface, which may be but only superficial.

Another cause is, because such bunches change the figure and site of the
Sutures. The site and substance of the Diploe.
And the Surgeon must note that the skuls has two tables, in the midst
whereof the Diploe is; which is a spongy substance into which many veins and
arteryes and a certain fleshynesse are inserted, that the skull should not be
so heavy, and that it might have within it self provision for the life
thereof; and lastly that there might be freer passage out for the fuliginous
vapors of the brain.

The upper table is thicker, denser, stronger and smoother than the lower. For
this as it is the slenderer, so it is the more unequal, that it may give place
to the internal veins and arteryes (which make a manifest impression into the
second table on the inside thereof) from which branches enter into the skull by
the holes which contain the eyes. Which thing fastens the Crassa meninx to the
skull, and is therefore very worthy to be observed.

For in great contusions when no fracture or fissure appears in the skull by
reason There may be a deadly rupture of the vessels of the brain without any
fracture of the Scull. Caution to be had in the use of the Trepan
of the great concussion or shaking of the brain, these vessels are often
broken, whence happens a flux of blood between the skull and membranes, and
lastly death. But it is fit the Surgeon take good heed to the tender and
soft substance of the Diploe, that when he comes to it, having passed the first
table, he may carefully use his Trepan, least by leaning too hard, it run in
too violently, and hurt the membranes lying underneath it, whence convulsion
and death would follow. To which danger I have found a remedy, by the happy
invention of a Trepan, as I will hereafter more at large declare in handeling
the wounds of the head.

CHAP. V. Of the Meninges, that is, the two membranes called Dura Matter and Pia
Matter.
THe Crassa meninx is one of the first and principal membranes of the body;
Why the bone Ethmoides is perforated.
it goes forth by the futures and the holes of the nerves that proceed out of
the skull; and it passes forth by the bone Ethmoides perforated for that
purpose, to carry smells to the Brain, and purge it of excrementitious humors.
This same Crassa meninx invests the inner coat of the Nose; also it passes
forth of the great hole through which the spinall marrow passes, vested with
this Crassa meninx, with all the nerves and membranes. For which cause, if any
membrane in the whole body be hurt, by reason of that continuation which it
has with the Meninges, it straight communicates the hurt to the head by
consent.

The Crassa meninx is thicker and harder than all other membranes in the body;
The consistence of the Crassa meninx
whereupon it has got the name of the Dura matter, besides also it begirts,
produces, and defends the other membranes.

The use of it is to involue all the brain, and to keep it when it is
dilated, that The use.
it be not hurt by the hardness of the Scull. For the course of nature is
such, that it always places some third thing of a middle nature, betwixt two
contraryes. Also the Crassa meninx, yields another commodity, which is, that it
carries the veins and arteryes entering the Scull fora long space. For they
infinuate themselves into that part, where the duplicated or folded Meninges
separate the brain from the Cerebellum, and so from thence they are led by the
sides of the Cerebellum, until they come, as it were, to the top thereof;
where being united they infinuate themselves into that other part of the Crassa
meninx, where in like manner being duplicated and doubled, it parts the brain
at the top into the right and left; These united veins run in a direct passage
even to the forehead, after the manner of the Sagittall suture; They have
called this passage of the mutually infolded veins, the Torcular, What the
Torcular is.
or Press, because the blood which nourishes the brain is pressed and drops
from thence by the infinite mouths of these small veins. Therefore also here
is another use of the Crassa meninx, to distinguish the brain by its
duplication, being it thrusts it self deep into its body, into two parts, the
fore and hind, and presently One part of the brain being hurt the other keeps
the creature alive.
to separate the same into the right and left; that one part being hurt, the
other may remain safe and sound, performing its duty to the creature, as we
see in some that have the Palsy. Columbus observed that this Meninx was
double, and verily I have found it true by my own sight.

The other Meninx or membrane of the brain, called Piamater, is most slender
The consistence of the Piamater.
interchased with diverse veins and arteryes, for its own and the brains
nourishment and life. This does not only involve the Brain, as the Crassa
meninx does, but also more deeply penetrates into the anfractuous passages
thereof, that it may every where join and bind it to it self, not easily to
be drawn from thence, by many small fibers whereby it descends even to the
cavities of the ventricles thereof. Wherefore you must see it absolutely in the
site as we have mentioned, and not pluck it away unless with the substance
of the Brain.

These membranes when they are hurt or afflicted, cause grievous and most
bitter torment and pain; wherefore I dare say, that these membranes are rather
the authors The sense of ^he Meninges.
of sense than the brain it self, because in diseases of the Brain, as in
the Lethargy, the party affected is troubled with little or no sense of pain.

CHAP. VI. Of the Brain.
NOw follows the Brain, the beginning of the nerves and voluntary motion,
What the brain is.
the instrument of the first and principal faculty of the Soul, that is, the
Animal and Rational. Man has this part in greater plenty then any other The
quantity
Creature, for it almost fills the whole Scull. But if it should have filled it
all, the Brain could not be moved, that is, dilated and contracted in the
Scull. It is of a cold and moist Temperature. The laudible temper of the brain
is known by the integrity and perfection of the internal and external
senses, the indifferency of Temper,
sleep and waking, the Maturity or ripeness of judgment, and constancy of
opinions, from which, unless it meet with better and more probable, it is not
easy to be moved.

The first figure of the head, as it appears when the scull is taken away. The
second figure showing the Brain, the scull and Dura matter being taken off.
AA, BB. The Dura meninx or thick membrane.

CCC. The third Sinus of this membrane.

DD. The course of the veins as they run through the membrane, or the second
vein of the brain.

EE. The first vein of the brain.

FFF. Certain small veins which perforate the scull and reach to the
pericranium or Scullskin.

GGG. Fibers of the Dura meninx passing through the Coronall Suture, which
fibers make the Pericranium.

HH. fibers passing through the sagittall Suture.

II. Others passing through the Lambdall Suture.

K. A knub which uses to grow to the Sinus of the Scull.

L. A cavitie in the forehead bone.

M. The Scull.

N. The Pericranium or Scull-skinne.

Fig. 2.

AAA. A part of the Crasse meninx dividing the brain. BB. the third Sinus of
the same Crasse membrane opened. CC. the beginning of the vessels out of the
third Sinus into the Piamater. DDD. the propagation or branches of these
vessels. EEE. the Piamater or thin meninx immediately compassing the brain.
FFF. Certain vessels running through the convolutions or branches of the
brain. GGG. Certain branches of veins running through the sides of the dura
meninx. HHH. The thick membrane reflected downward.



You shall know the brain is more hott, by the quickness of the senses and
motions of the body, by shortness of sleep, the sudden conceiving of
opinions and change of them, by the slippery and failing memory, and lastly by
easily receiving hurt from hot things, as the Sun and Fire. Such as have a
cold brain, are slow to learning, and to conceive other things, but they do
not easily put away their once conceived opinions. They have slow motion to
action, and are sleepy. Those who have a dry brain, are also slow to learn;
for you shall not easily imprint any thing in dry bodies, but they are most
constant reteiners of those things they have once learned; also the motions of
their bodies are quick and nimble. Those who have a moist brain do easily
learn, but have an ill memory, for with like facility as they admit the
species of things and imprint them in their minds, do they suffer them to
slide and slip out of it again. So Clay does easily admit what Character or
impression soever you will, but the parts of this Clay which easily gave way to
this impression, going together again, mixes, obliterates and confounds the
same. Therefore the senses proceeding from a cold brain are dull, the motions
flow, the sleep profound.

The Action of the brain is to elaborate the Animal Spirit and necessary
sense The Action.
serving the whole body, and to subject it self as an instrument to the
principal faculties, as to reason. The brain is twofold, the fore and hind.
The hind by reason Number.
of its smallness is called the Cerebellum, (the little or After-braine). But
the fore by reason of its magnitude has retained the absolute name of the
brain. Again this fore-braine is twofold, the right and left, parted by that
depression, which we formerly mentioned, of the Meninges into the body of the
brain. But this division is not to be here so absolutely taken, as though the
Brain were exactly divided and separated into so many parts, but in the sense,
as we say the Liver and Lungs are divided a pretty way; whereas at their Basis
they have one continued body. The outward surface of the Brain is soft, but
the inward hard, callous and very smooth; when on the contrary, the outward
appears indented and unequal with many windings, and crested as it were with
many wormelike foldings.

CHAP. VII. Of the ventricles and mamillary processes of the Brain.
FOr the easy demonstration of the ventricles of the brain, it is convenient
The substance of the brain is porous and swe^^s forth blood.
you cut away a large portion thereof, and in your cutting observe the blood
sweating our of the pores of it. But besides, it is fit you consider the spongy
substance by which the excrements of the brain are heaped up, to be presently
strained out, and sent away by the hollow passage. In the substance of The
four ventricles thereof.
the brain you must observe 4 ventricles, mutually conjoined by certain
passages, by which the spirits endued with the species of things sensible, may
go from one into another. The first and two greater, one on each side are
placed in the upper brain. The third is under them in the middle part of the
brain. The fourth and last at the The magnitude of the upper ventricles of the
brain.
fore side of the Cerebellum, toward the beginning of the spinall marrow. The
two foremost are extended the length way of the brain in the form of a
semicircle, whose horns look or bend outward. They are spacious and large,
because it was meet the Spirits contained there together with their excrements,
should be there purified and cleansed; but in other ventricles, the pure and
already elaborate spirits are only received. These ventricles are white and
smooth in their inner superficies; but that on each side they have an
extuberancy at the midst of the semicircle, situate at the basis of the Pillar
of the middle ventricle toward the nose under the Septum lucidum or clear
partition, severing or parting in sunder these two ventricles.

This Septum lucidum, or clear or thin partition, is nothing else than a
portion of The Septum Lucidum.
the brain indifferently solid, but very clear, that so through this
partition the animal spirits contained in these two ventricles may mutually
pass and be communicated, and yet no other grosser substance may pierce the
thin density thereof.

Wherefore it is not to be feared, that the water contained in one of the
ventricles Why the Palsy o^ ^^de i^ presently communicated to the other.
may pass to the other through this partitio^, as I have often times observed to
the great admiration of the spectators in the dead bodies of such as dyed of
the Palsy, in which I have found the ventricle of that side which was taken
with the palsy much dilated, according to the quantity of the water contained
therein, the other being either wholly empty and without any; or certainly no
fuller than in any other, dead through any other occasion. For some affirm
that there is a certain kind of waterish moisture always to be found in the
ventricles, which may be made by the condensation of the Animal spirits by the
force of the deadly cold. But these two first ventricles of the brain go into
one common passage, as both the bellows of a furnace, whereby the spirit
instructed with the species of things goes into the under, or middle ventricle
from theformer. In these same first ventricles the Plexus Choroides is to be
considered, and in like manner the passage by which the grosser excrements are
driven or sent into the pituitary Glandule.

The Third Figure represents the Cerebellum with the wormy processes separated
from it.
AB, The right and left part of the After-braine.

C D, The anterior and posterior regions of the middle part of the After brain.

E, The anterior wormy process.

F, The posterior wormy process.

GG, In this place the After-braine did grow to the spinall marrow. H, The
cavity in the spinall marrow makes the forth ventricle. I K. The anterior and
posterior processes of the brain, called vermi-formes or the wormy processes.



This Plexus Choroides is nothing else, but a production of the Pia matter
diversely The Plexus Choroides.
folded with the mutual implication of veins and arterys woven in the form
of a net. These vessels are of magnitude and capacity sufficient, both to yield
life and nourishment to that particle to which they are fastened, as also for
the generation of the Animal spirits, as which take fit matter from the veins
stretched fourth into this same Plexus, the hind artery and vein Torcular;
and also from the air entering The Processus Mammillares.
into the brain by the mamillary processes. But the mamillary processes are
certain common ways for conveyance of the air and smells into the brain,
and carrying of excrements from the brain.

For thus in them who have the Catarrhe and Corizae or pose, neither the air,
nor smells can penetrate into the brain; whence frequent sneesings ensue, the
brain strongly moving it self to the expulsion of that which is troublesome
to it. But of the excrements of the brain, whether bred there, or proceeding
from some other part, some are of a fumide and vaporous nature which breathe
insensibly through the Sutures of the skull; Others are gross and viscide, of
which a great part is expelled by both these productions, or through each of
them. For thus in the Pose you may see some who have one of their nosthrils
stopped, the other running, and some who have both obstructed. The most proper
benefit of the two first ventricles of the brain is to entertain the
Fantasy as in a convenient seat and habitation, seeing the mind The use of
the upper ventricles of the Brain.
there estimates and disposes in order the species of things brought in from
the external senses, that so it may receive a true judgment of them from
reason which resides in the middle ventricle.

The third ventricle is seated between the hindermost extremityes of the
former The seat of the third ventricle of the brain. The parts to be
considered in it.
ventricles; and the last ventricle of the Cerebellum. In this six parts
present themselves to our consideration, that is the Psalloides or Arch, the
Conarium, or pine Glandule, the Buttockes, wormelike productions, the Basin and
passage which is from this middle into the last and hindemost ventricle. The
Psalloides or arch is nothing else, but the cover of the middle ventricle,
resembling a roof borne up with three stays or pillars, the one whereof is
extended to the nose under the Septum lucidum, the two What the fornix or Arch
is, and the use thereof.
other on each side one, look toward the back part of the brain. This is
the reason of this figure which is outwardly convexe and inwardly concave, to
wit, that there might be free space for that motion which the Animal spirit
inwardly produces, and besides that it might more easily sustain the burden of
the brain lying upon it. For an arched figure is the most convenient of all
other to sustain a weight.

The Conarium or Pine glandule, is a small Glandule of the same substance with
What the Conartum or pinc Glandule is.
the brain, round and somewhat long, like a pine Apple, from whence it has
the name; this Glandule is seated over against a small hole which descends to
the lowest ventricle. It has this use, to strengthen the division of the
vessels led thither with the production of the Pia matter for the generation of
the animal spirits, and the life and nourishment of the brain.

The Nates or Buttocks are subjected or placed under this Glandule, that is,
bodies What the Nates or Buttocks are.
of a solid and white substance drawn out in length like a child's buttocks,
especially in beasts, and chiefly in a sheep. These buttocks have such a solid
substance, that so they may keep open and free the passage, or channel that
runs down from the middle to the lower ventricle, by means of which the
Brain participates with the Cerebellum.

The worm is a production of the Cerebellum or After-braine, to wit a portion
of the same being in the top or beginning and as it were in the entrance
thereof, What the worm is.
being like many little circles or wheels mutually knit together by slender
membranes; and it is so called because it resembles those thick white worms
which are found in rotten wood. It does as it were perform the office of a
porter to the formerly mentioned passage, that it may give way and entrance
into the Cerebellum to a necessary quantity of spirits, when need requires;
lest that, if they should rush with a sudden violence into the Cerebellum,
they might confound the imprinted notions of things to be remembered.

The Pelvis or Basin is a passage appointed for the carrying away of the gross
excrements Here the Pelvis or Basin is confounded with the Tunnell.
by the palate, and is so called because it has the similitude and use of a
basin or Tunnell: it descends from the third ventricle into the Glandule which
is seated between the processes of the wedge-bone called the saddle thereof,
as you may perceive by putting in a spatherne. Now there remains the last of
the six parts proposed to our consideration in the third ventricle, that is,
the Channel or passage running from this third ventricle into the fourth, for
the use formerly mentioned.

This Channel descending in its original from the Basin, goes from thence
under the buttocks into the last ventricle, the Meninges being perforated;
which that you The Channel from the third into the fourth ventricle.
may show, it is fit you put the end of a spatherne through it. The benefit of
the third ventricle is; that it may be as a Tribunal or judgment seat to the
Reasoning faculty, when the mind will draw conclusions from things seen.

The fourth ventricle is seated in the place we formerly mentioned; it is less
than The fourth ventricle of the Brain.
the rest, but more solid; less as that which was not to receive the spirit
before it was purified, and cleansed from all impurities; but more solid that it
might contain it the safer. The use thereof is, to be as a Treasury and
storehouse of the opinion, and judgments which reason shall decree, that when
need requires, we may fetch and draw them from thence as laid up in store. I
know Galen, and the Greek Physicians have not so distinguished in places the
three forementioned facultyes; but have written, that they all are all over
confused through the whole substance of the brain, which opinion also
Fernelius in his Pathologia has renewed. Yet I had rather follow this opinion,
as commonly received and celebrated by the Arabian Physicians.

The Mammillary processes are the instruments and passages of smelling, being
of The use of the Mammillary processes.
the same substance with the brain, and like nerves, which run out from the
hind horns of the upper or foremost ventricles of the brain to the Ethmoides
and spongy bones of the nose, that hence they may receive the diverse kinds of
smells, and carry them into the Brain. But although they be like nerves, yet
they are not accounted nerves because they go not out of the scull.

The Fourth and Fifth figures of the Brain.
Figure 5.

R R R, The lower superficies of the callous body reflected.

S T V, The triangular surface of the Fornix or Arch.

X X, The lower part of the partition of the ventricles continuated with the
Arch.

Y Y, The upper part of the partition continued with the callous body.

Figure 6.

A A A, The lower surface of the Arch.

B C, Two corners of the Arch, by which it is continuated with the ventricles.

D E, The right and left ventricles.

F G, Arteries climbing up from the sleepy arteries through the lower side of
the ventricles for the forming of that complication of vessels which is called
Plexus choroides.

H, A vessel issuing out of the fourth Sinus under the Arch, and passing into
the third venticle.

I K L, The division of this vessel, a part whereof goes to the right
venticle at K, and another to the left at L.

M N, The Plexus choroides made of the artery F G, and the vessel H.

O O, Small veins passing thorough the ventricles of the brain, produced from
the vessels K and L.

P, Other veins arising from the same, dispersed without the ventricles into
the Piamater. Q. A passage from the third ventricle unto the Basin or Tunnell.
R S, Canales or Sinus graven or furrowed in the substance of the ventricles, in
which the phlegm is led along to the orifice of the foresaid passage marked
with Q.



The Sixth figure of the Brain.
Figure 10.

A A, Parts of the spinall marrow cut from the brain.

BC, The places where the marrow did grow unto the brain.

D E, The Testicles. FG, The buttocks, H. the pine-glandule.

From I to K, A part of the third ventricle going to the fourth, under the
Testicles.

K L M N, A part of the fourth ventricle which is engraven in the marrow. O,
The top of the fourth venticle. P, The place where the spinall marrow goes out
of the skull. Figure 11. AB. Parts of the opticke nerves. C D, The sleepy
arteries. E, The Basin or Tunnell hanging down. F, A hole or perforation of
the dura meninx, through which the Tunnell reaches unto the glandule. GG,
Parts of the second conjugation of sinnewes. Figure 12. A, The Glandule. B, The
Basin or Tunnell called Peluis or Infundibulum. C D E F, The four holes
thorough which the phlegmatic excrement issues.



CHAP. VIII. Of the 7. conjugations of the Nerves of the Brain, so called,
because they always show the Nerves conjugated and doubled, that, is on each
side one.
THe nerves are the ways and instruments of the animal spirit and facultyes
What a Nerve or Sinew is.
of which those spirits are the vehicles, as long as they are contained in the
brain; they consist of the only and simple marrowey substance of the brain;
or spinall marrow. But passing forth of the brain, they Its substance. Whether
the nerves have a third membrane from the Ligaments of the Vertebra's.
have another membranous substance which involves them joined with them from
the two membranes of the brain; and according to the opinion of some
Anatomists, they have also a third from the ligaments drawn as well from
diverse others, as from these by which they are tied to the Vertebra's; Yet this
opinion seems absurd to me, seeing such a membrane, as that which is
insensible, wholly repugnes the condition of a nerve, which is to give sense to
the parts to which it is inserted.

The magnitude of the nerves is different, according to the diverse necessity of
sense incident to the parts into which they are inserted. Their figure is
round, and long Their magnitude. Their figure.
like to a conduit pipe to carry water in; the membranes of the brain, with
which the nerves are covered, being dilated and stretched over them, after the
same manner that the processes of the Peritonaeum involves the spermatick
vessels, with which they go down to the Testicles, and take life and
nourishment by the capillary veins and arteryes, which descend to them with
the membranes. They are made for this use, that they may impart sense to the
sensitive parts, and motion to these that are fit to Their use.
be moved. All the nerves descend from the brain either mediatly, or
immediately; their Number is seven and thirty pair, or conjugations, whereof
seven have their Their number
original immediately from the brain, the other thirty from the spinall
marrow.

The first conjugation of the nerves of the brain is thicker than all the
rest, and The first conjugation of nerve^.
goes to the eyes, to carry the visive spirit to them. These ariseing from
diverse parts of the brain, in the middle way before they go out of the skull
meet together crosse-wise like the Iron of a Mill (which is fastened in the
upper stone) going into one common passage with their cavityes not visible to
the eye; that so the spirits brought by those two nerves may be communicated,
and they are mutually joined and meet together so, that being driven back from
one eye they may fly back into the other. An argument whereof may be drawn
from such as aim at any thing, who shutting one of their eyes, see more
accurately; because the force of the neighboring spirits united into one eye,
is more strong than when it is dispersed into both. This conjugation when it
comes into the glassie humor, is spent in the structure of the net-like coat
which contains this humor on the back part.

The second conjugation goes into many parts, at its passing forth of the
skull, and The second conjugation.
in the bottom of the circle of the eye it is distributed into the seven
muscles moveing the eyes.

The Seventh figure showing the eight conjugations of the Nerves of the brain.
A A, 2. The brain.

BB 1, 2. The After-braine.

CC 1, 2, the swelling of the brain which some call the mammillary processes.

D 1, the beginning of the spinall marrow out of the Basis of the brain.

E 1, 2, a part of the spinall marrow when it is ready to issue out of the
skull.

F F 1, 2, the mammillary processes which serve for the sense of Smelling.

GG 1, 2, the opticke nerves.

H 1, the coition or union of the opticke nerves.

II 1, 2, the coat of the eye whereinto the optic nerves is extended.

K K 1, 2, the second pair of the sinews, ordained for the motion of the eyes.

LL 1, 2, the third pair of sinews, or according to the most Anatomists the
lesser root of the third pair.

MM 1, 2, the fourth pair of sinews, or the greater root of the third pair.

N 2, a branch of the third conjugation derived to the musculous skin of the
forehead.

O 2, a branch of the same to the upper jaw.

P P 2, another into the coat of the nosethrils.

Q 2, another into the temporal muscles. R 2, a branch of the fourth
conjugation crumpled like the tendrill of a vine. S 2, a branch of the same
reaching unto the upper teeth and the gummes. T 2, another of the same to the
lower jaw. V 2, a Surcle of the branch T, to the lower lip. XX 2, another
surcle from the branch T, to the roots of the lower teeth. YY2, the assumption
of the nerves of the fourth conjugation unto the coat of the tongue. Z 1, 2,
the fourth pair are vulgarly so called which are spent into the coats of the
pallat. a 1, 2. the fifth pair of sinews which belong to the hearing. PH, the
Auditory nerve spread abroad into the cavity of the stony bone. ^, a hard part
of the fifth conjugation above, the * which may be counted for a distinct nerve.
b 1, 2, a small branch derived from this harder part of the first pair. c 1,
2, a lower branch from the same original. d 1, 2, this nerve is commonly
ascribed to the fifth pair, but indeed is a distinct conjugation which we will
call the Eight, because we would not interrupt the order of other men's
accounts. e 1, 2, the sixth pair of sinews. f 2, a branch from them derived to
the neck and the muscles couched thereupon. g 2, another branch to the muscles
of the Larinx or throttle, h 1, 2, the seventh pair of sinews. i 1, the union
of the seventh pair with the sixth. l 2, a propagation of the seventh pair to
those muscles which arise from the Appendix called Styloides. m 2, Surcles from
the seventh conjugation to the muscles of the tongue, the bone Hyois and the
Larinx. o p q 1, three holes; through the hole o the phlegm yssueth out of the
third ventricle of the brain to the Tunnell, and at p q, is the passage of the
Sop^rary arteries to the ventricles of the Brain.



The third is twofold, in the passage out of the skull it is like-wise divided
into The third conjugation.
many branches, of which some are carried to the temporal muscles, into the
Masseteres or Grinding muscles, into the skin of the face, forehead and nose;
Othersome are sent into the upper part of the cheek, and the parts belonging to
it, as into the teeth, gummes and the muscles of the upper lip; and those
which are called the round which incompasse the mouth on the inside; the last
are wasted in the coat of the tongue, to bestow upon it the sense of tasting.

The fourth conjugation is much smaller, and is almost wholly wasted upon the
The fourth conjugation.
coat of the Palate of the mouth, to endue it also with the sense of tasting.

The fifth at its original and having not as yet passed forth of the skull, is
divided The fifth conjugation.
into two, and sends the greater portion thereof to the hole of the ear, or
passage of hearing, that it may support the auditory faculty; and it sends
forth the other lesser portion thereof to the temporal muscles by the passage
next to it; by which the second conjugation passes forth.

The sixth being the greatest next to the first, passing entire forth of the
skull, imparts The sixth conjugation.
some small branches to certain muscles of the neck and throttle, and then
descending into the chest, it makes the recurrent nerves, and dispersed over
all the parts of the two lower bellyes, it passes even to the bladder and
testicles, as we showed in the former book.

The seventh is inserted and spent upon the muscles of the bone Hyois, the
tongue The seventh conjugation.
and some of the throtle, to give them motion; it passes forth of the skull by
the hole of the nowle bone at the extuberancies thereof.

CHAP. IX. Of the Rete Mirabile, or wonderful Net, and of the Wedge-bone.
THe Animal spirit is made of the vital, sent from the heart by the internal
sleepy Arteryes to the brain. For it was requisite that it should be the The
existence of the Animal spirit.
more elaborate, because the action of the Animal is more excellent than that
of the vital; nature has framed a texture of Arteryes in many places What the
Rete Mirabile is,
running cross one another, in the form of a Net diverse times doubled;
(whereupon it had the name of the wonderful Net) that so the spirit by longer
delay in these Labyrinthean or maze-like turnings, might be more perfectly
concocted and elaborate, and attain to a greater fitness to perform the
Animal functions.

This wonderful Net situate at the sides of the Apophyses clinoides or
productions The site, and number.
of the wedgebone, is twofold; that is, divided by the pituitary Glandule which
is situate between the said Apophyses Clinoides, having the wedgebone lying
under them, next to the Crassa Meninx, being perforated on the right and left
side, next to which lie bones as rare as a sponge even to the Palate, by which
the Phlegm is purged by the mouth and nose; and therehence, I think, that
spattle flows, which such as have a moist brain, continually spit out of
their mouth.

The Eight figure of the brain.
A, The Brain.

B, The Cerebellum or after brain.

C, A process of the brain, but not that which is called Mammillaris.

D D, The marrow of the back as it is yet within the skul.

E, The Mammillary process or instrument of smelling.

F, The opticke nerve.

G, The coat of the eye into which the opticke nerve is spread.

H, The nerve that moves the eye or the second pair:

I, The third conjugation; or the harder and lesser branch of the nerves of the
third conjugation brought forward.

K, The fourth conjugation or the greater and thicker nerve of the third pair
bending downward.

L, A branch of the nerve marked with I, which goes to the forehead. M,
Another branch of the nerve I, reaching to the upper jaw, NN, A nerve
proceeding from the branch I, intexed or woven with the coat of the nose. O,
The nerve of the temporal muscle issuing from the branch I. P, A nerve
contorted of the nerves K and b. Q, A nerve proceeding from the branch K, to
the sockets of the upper teeth. R, A nerve creeping from the nerve K, to the
lower jaw. S. A surcle of the branch R, offered to the lower lip. TT, Other
surcles from the branch R, attaining to the lower teeth, VV, A branch of the
nerve K, diffused into the coat of the tongue. X X, The fourth pair of sinews
which go into the coat of the pallat. Y, The fifth pair of sinews which are
the nerves of hearing. a, the membrane of the ear, unto which that fifth nerve
goes. b c, two small branches of the fifth conjugation uniting themselves with
the nerve P. a, the eight conjugation or a nerve of the fifth pair attaining
unto the face. ee, the sixth pair of nerves. f, A branch from the nerve e,
reaching to the muscles of the neck. g, Small branches derived unto the
throttle or larynx. h, the byfurcation of the nerve into two branches. iii, An
inner branch hanging to the rackbones, and strengthening the intercostall
nerves, and is therefore called Intercostalis. kk, Surcles of the utter branch
going to the heads of the muscles, to the breast bone and to the coller-bones.
l m, branches of the right nerve l, making the right Recurrent nerve. m n, the
insertion of the recurrent sinews into the muscles of the larinx. o p, branches
of the left nerve making the left recurrent sinew p. qq, branches from the sixth
conjugation going to the coat of the lungs. r, small nerves of the heart and
of the purse thereof called the Pericardium, as also some approaching to the
coats of the lungs. s, nerves on either side sent to the stomach. t, the right
stomach nerve going to the left orifice of the stomach. u u, the left stomach
nerve going to the right orifice of the stomach. x, a nerve from the branch u,
passing into the hollownes of the liver. y, the nerve belonging to the right
side of the kell. z, the nerve belonging to the colic gut. a, a nerve
creeping to the gut called duodenum and the beginning of the ieiunum or empty
gut. b, a nerve implanted in the right side of the bottom of the stomach. g,
a nerve belonging to the liver and bladder of gall. d, a nerve reaching unto
the right kidney. (...), a branch reaching the Mesenterium and the guts. z, a
branch sprinkled to the right part of the bladder. e, a branch going through
the left part of the kel. tha, surcles derived to the colic gut and the kel.
ch, small branches inserted into the spleen. ll, a nerve approaching to the
left side of the bottom of the stomach. m, a branch belonging to the left side
of the Mesentery and the guts. n, a branch which attaineth to the left kidney.
x, small nerves creeping through the left side of the bladder. o, the seven
pair of finewes. (...), a branch derived from the sixth conjugation to the
muscles which arise from the process called Styloides. (...), a branch of the
seventh conjugation which goes to the muscles of the tongue, of the bone
hyois, and of the throtle or larinx. (...), A conjunction or coition of the 6.
and 7. pair into one nerve.



These Apophyses clinoides are certain productions of the Osbasilare or
wedge-bone, What the Apophyses Clinoides are.
(called the Saddle thereof,) between which, as I said, the pituitary glandule
lies with part of the wonderful net. There is a great controversy amongst
Anatomists concerning this part; for Vesalius denies that it is in man,
Columbus admits it, yet he seems to confound it with the Plexia Choroides.
Truly I have observed it always Whether the Rete mirabio differ from the
Plexus choroides.
after the manner, as Sylvius alleges against Vesalius. It remains, that we
recite the perforations of the skull, because the knowledge of these much
conduces to the understanding of the insertions of the veins, arteryes and
nerves.

CHAP. X. Of the holes of the inner Basis of the Scull.
IN the first place are reckoned the holes of the bone Ethmoides; then those of
the optic nerves; thirdly of the nerves moving the eyes. Fourthly of that
portion, of the nerves, of the fourth conjugation which go to the temporal
muscles. Fifthly are reckoned, these holes scarce visible, situate under the
pituitary glandule, by which the spettle is evacuated. Sixthly that hole which
is in the wedge bone made for the entrance of the internal sleepy Arteries,
composing the wonderful Net, and then passing into the brain by a great slit.
That perforation which we reckon in the seventh place is commonly double, made
for the entrance of one of the branches of the internal Iugular vein. The
eight hole is somewhat long, of an ovall figure, by which, part of the third
conjugation and all the fourth conjugation passes forth. The ninth are the
auditory passages. The tenth are very small holes, and give way to the vein
and artery going to the auditory passage, above the for a men coecum. In the
eleaventh place are reckoned the perforations which yield passage forth to the
sixth pair of nerves, to part of the sleepy Arteries, and of the internal
jugular. In the twelvth those which yield a way out to the seventh conjugation;
The great hole of the Nowle bone through which the spinall marrow passes is
reckoned the thirteenth. The fourtenth is that, which most commonly is behind
that great hole, by which the Cervicall veins and arteries enter in.

CHAP. XI. Of the perforations of the external Basis of the Brain.
THere is a hole on each side at the Eyebrows, by which passes a small nerve
from the third conjugation coming out of the cavity of the Orb of the eye,
and going by the forehead bone to the eyebrows, that it may give motion to
the two muscles of the upper eye-brow and forehead. Yet oftentimes the hole is
but to be seen on one side, often times there is a cleft instead thereof,
otherwhiles it is not perforated nor cleft at all. The second, is the
perforation of the greater corner of the eye, by which a portion of the nerves
of the third conjugation descends to the coat of the nose; in this hole the
Glandula Lachrymalis is seated. The third is seated under the eye, that it may
give way to the other portion of the nerves of the third conjugation going to
the parts of the face, and the teeth of the upper jaw. The fourth is at the
beginning of the palate, amongst the cutting or shearing teeth, through which
a vein, an artery and the coat of the palate passes out. In the fifth order
are reckoned the perforations of the palate, by which the nerves descend from
the fourth conjugation, to give, or cause the taste. In the sixth order are
rancked the holes of the palate serving for respiration, and the phlegm
falling from the brain by the nosethrils. And there is a cleft under the yoke
bone ascending into the Orb of the eye, by which there is a way, as well for
the nerves of the third conjugation to the Temporal muscles, as also for
certain veins and arteryes. But also there is noted another hole at the
mammillary process, which is not perforated in the judgment of the sense.
Besides there is thought to be another at the hind root of the same process,
by which a certain small vein passes from the Iugular to the Torcular. But I
have only noted these three passages by the way, because there is so much
variety in them, that nothing can be certainly said of them.

CHAP. XII. Of the Spinall Marrow, or Pith of the Back.
THe spinall Marrow is like a River running from the fountain of the brain.
What the Spinall marrow is.
This sends nerves for sense and motion to all the neighboring parts under the
head, spreading its branches as from the body of a tree. These branches, as we
shall hereafter show, are on each side thirty. This same spinall marrow is
covered The coats of the spinall marrow.
with the two membranes investing the brain, distinguished by no distance of
place, as in the brain. But also it has another membrane added to these,
being very hard and dense, which keeps it from being broken and violated by the
violent bending of the body forewards and about. The diseases of this marrow
do almost cause the The diseases from the hurting of the spinall marrow.
like Symptoms, as the diseases of the brain; For they hurt the sense and
motion of all the parts lying beneath them, as for example; If any of the
vertebra's of the back bone, be moved out of their place, there follows a
distortion or wresting aside of the Marrow; but then especially if it happen
that one of the vertebra's be strained, so sharp and bitter a compression
urges the marrow by reason of the bony body of the vertebra, that it will
either rend it, or certainly hinder the passage of the spirit by it. But by
these same holes of the vertebra's the veins and arteryes go to the spinall
marrow for to give life and nourishment to it, as the nerves by them pass
forth into a^ the lower parts of the body.

Figure 1. shows the form of the spinall marrow properly so called, with its
membranes, and the nerves proceeding from it.

Figure 2. The spinall marrow naked and bare, together with its nerves, as most
part of Anatomists have described it.

The tenth figure of the spinall marrow.
A, The beginning of the spinall marrow where it falls out of the skull.

B, The thickness thereof in the spondels or rack-bones of the loins.

C, The division thereof into strings, or hairy threads.

D, the seven nerves of the neck.

From D to E or from 7, to 19, show the nerves of the back.

From E to F, the nerves of the loins.

From F to G, the nerves of the os s^crum or holy bone.

H, the end of the marrow.

I K L, do show how the nerves do^ issue from the marrow in strings.

M M, the knots of the sinews made of the conjunction of those strings.

N O, the membranes that invest the marrow:

Figure 2.

A, The beginning of the spinall marrow in the scull.

3, 4, 5, 6, 7, These Characters show (according to Vesalius opinion) how the
conjugations of the nerves of the brain do take their original from the
marrow remaining yet within the Skull.

B, The egresse of the spinall marrow out of the skull.

C, The cords or strings whereinto it is divided.

D 7, The marrow of the neck and seven pair of sinews. E 19, twelve paires
or conjugations of nerves proceeding from the marrow of the Chest. F 24, The
marrow of the loins and 5. pair of sinews. G 30. the marrow of the holy-bone
and 6, pair of sinews. H, the extremity or end of the spinall marrow.



The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK TREATING OF the Muscles and Bones, and the other Extreme parts
of the Body.
The Preface.
PEradventure some may wonder, that I have ended my fifth book of Anatomy,
before I have fully described all the parts of the head, the which seemed as it
were only appointed for that purpose. Therefore I must yield a reason of this
my intention. I have a desire in one Treatise and as it were at one breath, to
prosequute the Anatomy of the Muscles. Wherefore because the parts of the head
not yet described, principally consist of the Muscles, therefore I desired to
comprehend them together with this same description The description of the
bones being unknown is must necessarily follow that the original and
insertion of the muscles must be so also
of the extreme parts of the body; beginning at the upper part of the face, to
wit, the eyes: but having first described the bones of the face, without the
knowledge of which it is impossible to show the original and insertion of the
Muscles. We have formerly noted that by the face is meant whatsoever lies from
the Eyebrows even to the Chin. In which there is such admirable industry of
nature, that of the infinite multitude of men you cannot find two so like, but
that they may be distinguished by some unlikenesse in their faces; also it has
adorned this part with such exquisite beauty, that many have dyed by longing to
enjoy the beauty desired by them. This The endowments of the face.
same face albeit it little exceeds half a foot, yet it indicates and
plainly intimates by the sudden changes thereof, what affections and
passions of hope, fear, sorrow and delight possess our minds; and what state
our bodies are in, sound, sick or The countenance is the bewrayer of the will.
neither. Wherefore seeing the face is of so much moment, let us return to the
Anatomicall description thereof, which that we may easily and plainly
perform we will begin with the bones thereof, whereby, as we formerly said,
the original and insertion of the Muscles may be more certain and manifest to
us.

CHAP. I. Of the bones of the Face.
THe bones of the face are 16, or 17, in number. And first, there be reckoned
Bones in each orb of the Eye.
6 about the Orbs of the eyes, that is 3 to each orb, of which one is the
bigger, another lesser, and the third between both; each of these touch the
forehead bone in their upper part. Besides, the greater is joined with a suture
to the process of the stony bone, and so makes What the Zygoma is and what use
it has.
the Zygoma, that is, the Os Iugale or yoke bone, framed by nature for
preservation of the temporal muscle. The l^sser is seated at the greater
corner of the eye, in which there is a hole perforated to the nose, and in this
is the glandule in which the Aegylops The Aegylops.
does breed. The middle is in the bottom, or inner part of the orb, very
slender and as The two bones of the nose. The two inner bones of the palato.
it were of a membranous thinness: then follow the two bones of the nose which
are joined to the forehead bone by a suture, but on the foreside between them
selves by harmony. But on the back or hind part with two other bones, on each
side one, which descending from the bone of the forehead (to which also they
are joined by a suture) receive all the teeth. These two in Galens opinion are
seldom found separated. But these are the thickest of all the bones of the
face hitherto mentioned, knit by a suture with the greatest bone of the Orb,
on the back part with the wedge-bone, on the inner side with the two little
inner bones of the palate, which on the inside make the extremity thereof,
whereby it comes to pass, that we may call these bones the hinder, or inner
bones of the palate. They reckon one of these bones the eleventh and the other
the twelfth bone of the head; these two little bones on their sides next to the
winged productions of the wedge-bone, receive on each side one of the nerves of
the fourth conjugation, which in the former book, we said were spent upon the
membrane of the palate.

And in Galens opinion there be other two in the lower Iaw, joined at the
middle of The two bones of the jaw.
the chin; although some think it but one bone, because by the judgment of
sense there appears no division or separation therein. But you may see in
children how true this their supposition is, for in men of perfect growth it
appears but one bone; Two productions on each side of the lower Iaw.
these two are reckoned for the thirteenth and fourteenth bones. Now these two
bones making the lower Iaw, have in their back part on each side two
productions, as they lie to the upper Iaw, the one of which represents the
point of a sword, and is called the Corone; the other is obtuse and round,
which is inserted into the cavity seated at the root of the process of the
stony bone, nere to the passage of the ear.

This may be strained to the forepart by violent gaping, by retraction of the
muscles The Luxation of the lower Iaw.
arising from the wing-like processes, and ending at the lower angles of the
broader part of the same Iaw.

This Iaw is hollow as also the upper, especially in the back-part, being
filled with The lower Iaw filled with a marrowy humor.
a white and glutinous humor, conducing to the growth of the teeth. This humor
has its matter from the blood brought thither by the vessels, veins, Arteryes
and nerves from the third conjugation entering in here by a passage large
enough. Whereby it comes to pass, that this part is not only nourished and
lives, but also the teeth receive sense by the benefit of the nerves entering
thither with the vein and artery, by small holes to be seen at the lower
roots of the teeth; and thence it is that a beating How the teeth feel.
pain may be perceived in the toothache, because the defluxion may be by the
arteryes; or rather because the humor flowing to the roots of the teeth may
press the Why the teeth have a beating pain.
artery in that place; beside also you may see some appearance of a nervous
substance in the root of a tooth newly plucked out.

But also you must consider, that this Iaw from its inner capacity produces at
the The nerves of the Lower Iaw must be observed.
fides of the chin two nerves of a sufficient magnitude, over against the lower
dog-teeth and the first of the smaller grinding teeth, as I have noted in the
description of the nerves of the third conjugation. I have thought good to put
thee in mind of these, that when thou shall have occasion to make incision in
these places, thou may warily and discreetly handle the matter, that these
parts receive no harm.

There remains another bone seated above the palate, from which the gristlely
The bone of the nose above the palate, or the partition of the nose,
partition of the nose arises, being omitted of all the Anatomists, for as much
as I know. Now therefore that you may the better remember the number of the
bones of the face, I will here make a repetition of them.

There are six of the orbs of the eyes, at each three. The seventh and eight
we may call the Nasall, or nose bones. The ninth and tenth the Iaw-bones. The
eleventh and twelfth are called the inner bones of the palate. The thirteenth
and fourteenth the bones of the lower Iaw. The partition of the nose may be
reckoned the fifteenth.

Now it remains having spoken of these bones, that we treat of the teeth,
the Eyebrows, the skin, the fleshy pannicle, the Muscles, and lastly the
other parts of the face.

CHAP. II. Of the Teeth.
THe Teeth are of the number of the bones, and those which have the most The
teeth (...) bones.
have thirty two, that is, sixteen above, and so many below; of which in the
forepart of the mouth there are four above and as many beneath, which are
called Incisorij cutting or shearing teeth, to cut in sunder the The shearing
teeth.
meat, and they have but one root. To these are joined two in each Iaw, that
is, on each side of the other one, which are called Canini dentes,
Dogges-teeth, because The Dogteeth
they are sharp and strong like dogs teeth; these also have but one root,
but that is far longer than the other have.

Then follow the Molares or Grinders, on each side five, that is, ten above
and as The Grinding teeth.
many below, that they may grind, chaw and break the meat, that so it may be
the sooner concocted in the stomach; for so they vulgarly think, that meat
well chawed is half concocted; those grinders which are fastened in the upper
jaw, have most commonly three roots, and often times four. But these which are
fastened in the lower, have Why the upper grinding teeth have more roots.
only two roots, and sometimes three, because this lower jaw is harder than the
upper so that it cannot be so easily hollowed, or else because these teeth
being fixed and firmly seated, needed not so many stays as the upper, which
as it were hang out of their seats. The shearing teeth cut the meat because
they are broad and sharp; the The use of the teeth.
Dog-teeth break it because they are sharp pointed and firm; but the grinders
being hard, broad and sharp, chaw and grind it asunder. But if the grinders had
been smooth, they could not fitly have performed their duty, for all things
are chawed and broken asunder more easily by that which is rough and unequal.

Wherefore they sharpen their Milstones when they are smoother than they should
The teeth are fastened in the Jaws by Gomphosis.
be, by picking them with a sharp Iron. The teeth are fastened in the jaws by
Gomphosis, that is, as a stake or nail, so are they fixed into the holes of
their jaws; for they adhere so firmly thereto in some, that when they are
plucked out, part thereof follows together with the tooth; which I have often
observed to have been also with great effusion of blood. This adhesion of the
teeth fastened in their jaws is besides The fastening of the teeth into the
Jaws is to be observed.
strengthened with a ligament, which applies it self to their roots together
with the nerve and vessels. The teeth differ from other bones; because they
have action whilst they chaw the meat; because being lost they may be
regenerated, and for that they grow as long as the party lives, for otherwise
by the continual use of chawing they would be worn and wasted away by one
another. You may perceive this by any that have lost one of their teeth, for
that which is opposite to it becomes longer than the rest, because it is not
worn by its opposite. Besides also they are more hard and solid than the rest
of the bones, and endued with a quick sense by reason of the nerves of Wherein
the teeth differ from the other bones.
the third conjugation which insert themselves into their roots; for if you
rub, or grind a tooth newly plucked out, you may see the remains of the nerve;
they have such quick sense, that with the tongue they might judge of tastes.
But how feel the teeth, seeing For what use the teeth have sense.
they may be filed without pain? Fallopius answers, that the teeth feel not
in their upper or exterior part, but only by a membrane which they have within.
And the teeth have another use, especially the fore-teeth, which is, they serve
for distinct and articulate pronuntiation; for those that want them faulter in
speaking, as also The fore-teeth help for the articulation of the voice.
such as have them too short, or too long, or ill rancked. Besides, children
speak not distinctly before they have their foreteeth. And you must note that
the infant as yet shut up in its mothers womb has solid and bony teeth; which
you may perceive by dissecting it presently after it is borne.

But even as there are two large cavities, in the forehead bone at the
eyebrows, filled with aviscous humor, serving for the smelling; and in like
manner, the air shut up in the mamillary processes is for hearing; so in the
jaws there be two cavities furnished with a viscide humor for the nourishment
of the teeth.

CHAP. III. Of the Broad Muscle.
NOw we should prosecute the containing parts of the face, to wit the skin, the
fleshy pannicle and fat; but because they have been spoken of sufficiently
before, I will only describe the sleshy pannicle, before I come to the
dissection of the eye, that we may the more easily understand, all the motions
performed by it, whether in the face or forehead.

First that you may more easily see it, you must curiously separate the skin in
some part of the face. For unless you take good heed, you will pluck away the
fleshy pannicle together with the skin, as also this broad muscle to which it
immediately adheres, and in some places so closly and firmly, as in the lips,
eyelids and the whole forehead, that it cannot be separated from it. Nature
has given motion, or a moveing force to this broad muscle, that whilst it
extends, or contracts it self, it might serve to shut and open the eye. It
will be convenient to separate the muscle thus freed from the skin, beginning
from the forepart of the clavicles even to the chin, ascending in a right line,
and then turning back as far as you can; for thus you shall show how it mixes
it self with the skin and the muscles of the lips.

When thou shall come to the Eyes, thou shall teach how the eye is shut and
opened by this one muscle, because it is composed of the three sorts of fibers;
although by There are no particular muscles appointed to open and shut the eye,
for that is the work of the broad muscle only. Diverse reasons to that purpose.
the opinion of all who have hitherto written of Anatomy, those actions are
said to be performed by the power of two muscles appointed for that purpose;
one of which is at the greater corner on the upper part, the other resembling a
semicircle at the lesser corner, from whence extending it self to the middle of
the gristle Tarsus, it meets with the former ending there, but they are in part
extended over all the eyelid, whereby it comes to pass that it also in some
sort becomes moveable. But although in public dissections these two muscles
are commonly wont to be solemnly showed, after the manner I have related; yet I
think, that those which show them know no more of them, than I do. I have
grounded my opinion from this, that there appears no other musculous flesh in
these places, to those which separate the fleshy pannicle, or broad muscle,
than that which is of the panicle it self, whether you draw your incision
knife from the forehead downwards, or from the cheek upwards.

Besides when there is occasion to make incision on the eyebrows, we are
forbidden to do it transverse, least this broad muscle falling upon the eye,
make the upper Why you must take heed of making a transverse incision upon the
eyebrows.
Eyelid unmovable: but if such a cut be received accidentally, we are
commanded presently to stitch it up; which is a great argument that the motion
of the upper eyelid is not performed by its proper muscles, but wholly depends
and is performed by the broad muscle. Now if these same proper muscles which we
have described should be in the upper eyelid, it should be meet, (because when
one of the muscles is in action, the other which is its opposite or Antagonist,
rests or keeps holieday,) that when that which is said to open the eye is
employed, the opposite thereof resting, the The action of a muscle.
upper eyelid should be drawn toward its original, as we see it happens in
convulsions: because the operation of a muscle is the collection of the part
which it moves toward its original. Therefore seeing such a motion or
collection appears not any where in the eyelid, I think it therefore manifest
that all the motion of this upper eyelid depends upon this broad muscle, and
that it alone is the author of the motion thereof.

The original of this broad muscle is from the upper part of the Sternon, the
clavicles, The original of the broad muscle. The insertion and reason why we
express so many motions with the face.
the shoulder blades, and all the spines of the vertebra's of the neck: but it
is inserted into all these parts of the head which want hair, and the whole
face, having diverse fibers from so various an original. by benifit of which
it performs such manifold motions in the face (for it so spreads it self over
the face, that it covers it like a vizard) by reason of the variety of the
original and the production of the diverse fibers of this muscle. But I have
not in the description of this muscle prosecuted those nine conditions, which
in the first book of my anatomy I required in every part, because I may seem
to have sufficiently declared them in the description of the muscles of the
Epigastrium. Wherefore hence forward you must expect nothing from me in the
description of muscles besides their original, insertion, action, composition,
and the designation of their vessels.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Eyelids and Eyebrows.
BEcause we have fallne into mention of the Eyelids and Eyebrows, and What
the eyebrows are.
because the order of dissection also requires it, we must tell you what they
are, of what they consist, and how and for what use they were framed by nature.
Therefore the Eyebrows are nothing else, than a rank of hairs set in a
semicircular form upon the upper part of the orb of the Eye, from the greater
to the Their use
lesser corner thereof, to serve for an ornament of the body and a defense of
the eyes against the acrimony of the sweat falling from the forehead.

But the Eyelids on each side two, one above and another below, are nothing
else What the eyelids are.
than as it were certain shuttings appointed and made to close and open the
eyes when need requires, and to contain them in their orbs. Their composure
is of a Their composure and use.
musculous skin, a gristle and hairs set like a pale at the sides of them to
preserve the eyes when they are open, chiefly against the injuries of small
bodies, as motes, dust and such like. These hairs are always of equal and
like bigness, implanted at the edges of the gristly part, that they might
always stand straight and stiff out. They are not thick, for so they should
darken the eye. The gristle in which they are fastened is encompassed with the
pericranium stretched so far before it produce the Coniunctiva. It was placed
there, that when any part thereof should be drawn upwards or downwards by the
force of the broad muscle or of the two proper muscles, it might follow,
entirely and wholly by reason of its hardness. They call this same gristle,
especially What the Tarsus is.
the upper, Tarsus. The upper and lower eyelid differ in nothing, but that the
upper has a more manifest motion, and the lower a more obscure; for otherwise
nature should have in vain encompassed it with a musculous substance.

CHAP. V. Of the Eyes.
THe Eyes are the instruments of the faculty of seeing, brought thither by What
the eyes are.
the visive spirit of the opticke nerves, as in an aqua-ducte. They are of a
soft substance, of a large quantity, being bigger or lesser according to the
bigness of the body. They are seated in the head, that they might overlooke
Their site.
the rest of the body, to perceive and shum such things as might endanger, or
endamage the body; for the action of the eyes is most quick, as that which is
performed The quicknes, and excellency of their action
in a moment, which is granted to none of the other senses. Wherefore this is
the most excellent sense of them all. For by this we behold the fabric and
beauty of the heavens and earth, distinguish the infinite varietyes of colors,
we perceive and know the magnitude, figure, number, proportion, site, motion
and rest of all bodies. The eyes have a pyramidall figure whose basis is
without, but the Cone or point within at the opticke nerves. Nature would have
them contained in a hollow circle, that so Figure.
by the profundity and solidity of the place they might be free from the
incursions of bruising and hurtful things.

They are composed of six muscles, five coats, three humors, and a most bright
spirit, (of which there is a perpetual afflux from the brain) two nerves, a
double Composition.
vein, and one artery, besides much fat, and lastly a Glandule seated at the
greater angle thereof, upon that large hole which on both sides goes to the
nose, and that, Glandula Lachrymalis.
lest that the humors falling from the brain should flow by the nose into the
eyes, as we see it fares with those whose eyes perpetually weep, or water, by
reason of the eating away of this glandule, whence that affect is called, the
Fistula lachrymalis, or Fistula Lachrymalis.
weeping Fistula.

But there is much fat put between the muscles of the eye, partly that the
motion Why fat is placed about the eyes.
of the eyes might be more quick, in that slipperines of the fat, as also that
the temper and complexion of the eyes, and chiefly of their nervous parts,
might be more constant and lasting, which otherwise by their continual and
perpetual motion would be subject to excessive dryness. For nature, for the
same reason has placed Glandules flowing with a certain moisture, near those
parts which have perpetual agitation.

CHAP. VI. Of the Muscles, Coats and humors of the Eye.
THere are six muscles in the eye, of which four perform the four direct
motions of the eye: they arise from the bottom of the orb, and end in the The
number, site and action of the muscles.
midst of the eye encompassing the opticke nerve. When they are all moved with
one endeavor, they draw the eye inwards. But if the upper only use its action,
it draws the eye upwards; if the lower, downwards; if the right, to the right
side; if the left, to the left side.

The two other muscles turn the eye about, the first of which being the longer
and slenderer, arises almost from the same place, from which, that muscle
arises which draws the eye to the right side to the greater corner. But when
it comes to the utmost part of the inner angle, where the Glandula lachrymalis
is seated, it ends in a slender Tendon, there peircing through the middle
membrane which is there, as through a ring; from whence it presently going
back is spent in a right angle toward the upper part of the eye, betwixt the
insertions of those (...) muscles, of the which one draws the eye upwards, the
other directly to the outward corner, as it is observed by Fallopius or rather,
which I remember I have always observed, they turn between the muscles which
move the eye upwards, and to the inner corner.

This fifth muscle when it is drawn in toward its beginning, so draws the
eye with its circular tendon, that it carries it to the greater corner.

The sixth muscle is contrary to that; for it has its original from the lower
part of the orb at a small hole, by which a nerve of the third conjugation
passes forth; and being that it is most slender, whilst it ascends
transversely to the outward corner, it involves the eye so also, that it is
inserted in it by a small Tendon, so that the Tendons of them both are
oftentimes taken but for one. That thou may truly and accurately observe
this anatomicall description of the eye; the eye must not be pluct out of its
orb, but rather the orb it self must be broken and separated.

For thus thou shall certainly and plainly see the forementioned original
of the muscles. For the five coats, the first which is first met with in
dissection, comes from the pericranium, and is extended over all the white of
the eye, even to the (...) or The 5 coats of the eye.
Rainbow. The duty of it is to strengthen, bind and contain the eye in its
orb, wherefore it had the name Coniunctiva, others call it Adnata, or
Epipephycos. Conjunctiva, or Adnata.


The second is called the Cornea, because it resembles a horn in color and
consistence; 2. Cornea, or the Horny coat.
this coat differs and varyes from it self, for in the forepart, as far as the
Iris goes, it is clear and perspicuous, but thick and obscure in the bind
part, by reason of the diverse polishing. On the forepart it is dense that it
may preserve and contain the Christalline and waterish humor, but withal
transparent so to give the object a freer passage to the Chrystalline. It has
its original from the Crassa meninx, proceeding forth from the inner holes of
the orb of the eye, for it compasses the eye on every side.

The third is called the Wea or Grapy coat, because in the exterior part it
represents Wea, or the grapye coat.
the color of a black grape; it arises from the Piamater, and encompasses all
the eye, except the pupilla or apple of the eye, for here being perforated, it
adheres to the horny coat by the veins and arteries which it communicates to
it for life and nourishment. But when it arives at the Iris, then forsaking the
Cornea, it descends deep into the eye, and in some sort is turned about the
Christalline humor, to which also it most firmly adheres, so bounding the
waterish humor, and also prohibiting that the Albugineous humor do not
overwhelme the Christalline. This grapy coat is as it Why the grapy coat
resembles divert colors.
were dyed on the inside with diverse colors, as black, brown, blew, or green
like a rainbow, and that for these ensuing benifits.

The first is, if that it had been tinctured with one color, all objects
would have appeared of the same color, as it comes to pass when we look
through green or red glass. But it must be colored, that so it may collect
the spirits dissipated by the Sun and seeing.

Thirdly it was convenient it should be painted with infinite variety of
colors for the preservation of the sight. For as the extreme colors corrupt
and weaken the sight, so the middle refresh and preserve it, more or less as
they are nearer, or further remote from the extremes. It was fit it should be
soft, that so it might not hurt the Christalline humor upon whose
circumference it ends; and perforated in the part objected to it, least by its
obscurity it should hinder the passage of the objects to the Christalline, but
rather that it might collect by its blacknes as a contrary, the great and as it
were diffused varietye of colors, no otherwise than we see the heat is
strengthened, by the opposition of cold; some call this coat Choroides, because
it is woven with many veins and arteries, like the coat Chorion which involves
the infant in the womb.

Now follows the fourth coat called Ampiblistroides or Retiformis, the
Net-like 4 Amphiblistr^^des or Retiformis, Net: like coat.
coat, because proceeding from the opticke nerve dilated into a coat, it is
woven like a net with veins and arteries which it receives from the grapy
coat, both for the life and nourishment both of its self, as also of the
glassie humor which it encompasses on the back part. The principal commodity
of this coat is, to perceive when the Christalline humor shall be changed by
objects, and to lead the visive spirit instructed or furnished with the
faculty of seeing, by the mediation of the glassie humor, even to the
Christalline being the principal instrument of seeing. It is softer than any
other coat, least the touch of it should offend that humor. Wherein thou will
admire the singular order of nature, which as in other things it passes not
from one extreme to another unless by a Medium, so here it has not fitted the
hard horny coat to the soft An anatomicall Axiom.
humors, but by interposition of diverse media of a middle consistence. For thus
after the harder coats Adnata and Cornea it has placed the Grapy coat, by so
much softer then these two, as the Net-like coat is softer then it, that thus
it might pass from extreme to extreme as it were by these degrees of hardness
and softnes.

The fifth and last coat is called Arachnoides, because it is of the
consistence of a 5 Arachnoides, sive Araneosa, the Cowebcoa^e.
spiders web. And we may well resemble this coat, to that skin of an union
which exceeds the other in clearness, whiteness and thinness. This Araneosa
or Cobweblike coat encompasses the Christalline humor on the fore fide,
peradventure that so it might defend it, as the chief instrument of seeing, if
the other humors should at any time be hurt. It has its original from the
excrementitious humidity of the Crystalline humor, hardened into that coat by
the coldness of the adjacent parts; The 3 humors of the Eye. 1 Aqueus, or matery.
absolutely like the thin skin which encompasses the white of an Egg.

The first humor of the eye is called the Aqueus or waterish, from the
similitude of water; it is seated between the transparent part of the Horny
coat, the portion of the Christalline humor lying toward the apple of the
eye, and that reflection of the Grapy coat which comes from the Iris to the
circumference of the Chrystalline humor, that filling the empty space it may
distend the Cornea, and so hinder the falling thereof upon the Chrystalline
which would spoil the sight; as also that by its moisture it might hinder the
drying of the Chrystalline humor. Peradventure it is made of the whayish humor
sweating out of the vessels of the coats, having their orifices for the most
part in that place, where this waterish humor resides. The second humor and
middle most in situation is called the Chrystalline because it imitats
Crystal in the brightness and color; if so be that we may attribute any 2
Crystallinus, Crystalline.
color to it. For indeed it was fit that none of the three humors should be
tinctured with any color, as those which should be the instruments of sight,
lest they might beguile us in seeing as Red and green spectacles do; for that
is true which we have read written by the Philosopher; That the Subject or
matter appointed A Philosophical Axiom.
for the reception of any form should want all impression thereof. Hence
Nature has created a formelesse matter, the humors of the eyes without
colors, wax without any figure, the mind without any particular knowledge of
any thing, that so they might be able to receive all manner of forms. The
figure of the Crystalline humor is round, yet somewhat flatted on the foreside,
but yet more flatted behind that so the objects might be the better retained
in that, as it were, plane figure, and that they might not fly back as from a
Globe, or round body, in which they could make but short stay; lest it might be
easily moved from its place, by the force of any thing falling or hitting
against it, because that body which is exactly round touches not a plane body
but only in a point or prick. Half this humor swims in the Glassy humor,
that so it may be nourished from it by transposition of matter; or rather
(seeing it is encompassed on every side with the fist coat, that the matter
cannot easily be sent from the one into the other) by the benefit of the
vessels produced even unto it as well by the Net-like coat, as by the Grapye;
but it is filled with a bright spirit on the forepart, which lies next to the
waterish humor, and the space of the Apple of the eye.

Of which thing this is an argument, that as long as a man remains alive, we
see Gal. Cap. 5. lib. 10. de usu part.
the eye every way full, and swollne, but lanke and wrinkled when he is dead;
besides also one of the eyes being shut, the Pupilla of the other is dilated by
the spirit compelled to fly thither. And also for the same cause the horny
coat is wrinkled in very old men, and the Pupilla is straightened by the wrinkles
subsiding into themselves, which is the cause that they see little, or not at
all; for by age and success of time the humor is consumed by little and little,
the implanted spirit vanishes away, and smaller quantity of spirits now from
the brain, as from a fountain which is also exhausted. The Horny coat at his
original, that is, in the parts next the Iris, seems to be very nigh the
Crystalline Humor, because all the coats in that place mutually cohere as
touching one another, but as it runs further out to the Pupilla, so it is
further distant from the Cristalline. Which you may easily perceive by
Anatomicall dissection, and the operation of touching or taking away a
Catarrhact: for whereas a Catarrhact is seated between the horny coat, and
Crystalline humor, the needle thrust In what place Catarrhacte or suffusion
breeds.
in, is carried about upwards, downwards, and on every side through a large
and free space, neither touching the horny coat nor Crystalline humor, by
reason these bodies are severed by a good distance filled with spirit and a
thin humor. The use of it is, that it may be like a looking glass to the
faculty of seeing carried thither with the visive spirit.

The third and last humor is the Vitreus the glassie, or rather Albugineous
humor, called so, because it is like molten glass, or the white of an Egg. It
is seated in the 3 Vitreus, seu (...), that is Glassie, or like the white of an
Egg.
hind part of the Crystalline humor that so it may in some sort break the
violence of the spirit flowing from the brain into the Crystalline humor, no
otherwise than the watery humor is placed on the foreside of the Crystalline to
hinder the violence of the light and colors entering that way. This glassie
humor is nourished by the net-like coat.

We have formerly spoken sufficiently of the nerves of the eye: Wherefore it
remains The veins of the eye.
that we speak of the veins. Some of these are internal, carried thither
with The figure of the eye.
Table 3. figure 1. shows the Membranes and humors of the eye by lines drawn
after the manner of a true eye.

Figure 2. shows the horny coat with a portion of the Opticke Nerve.

Figure 3. shows the same divided by a transuerse section.

Figure 4. shows the Wea or Grapy coat with a portion of the Opticke Nerve.

Figure 5. The Grapy coat of a man's eye.

Figure 6. The Horny, Grapy and the Choroides.

Figure 7. The interior superficies of the Grapy coat.

Figure 8. The Posterior part of the horny coat together with the said Net
coat separated from the Eye.

Figure 9. The coat of the vitreous or glassy humor called Hyaloides.

Figure 10. Three humors joined together.

Figure 11. The forward part of the Christalline.

Figure 12, The Christalline humor covered yet with his coat.

Figure 14. The Christalline of a man's eye.

Figure 15, His Coat.

Fig. 16, The watery humor disposed upon the Christalline round about.

Fig. 17. The hairy processes beamingly sprinkled through the foreside of the
coat of the glassy humor.

Fig. 18, The foreside of the glassy humor.

Fig. 19. The place of the watery humor.

Fig. 20. The glassy humor containeing or comprehending the Chrystalline.

The explication of the first Figure by it self.

a, The Christalline humor.

b, The Glassie humor.

c, The watery humor.

d, The utmost coat called Adnata.

e, The dark part of the horny Tunicle which is not transparant.

f, The Grapy coat called Wea.

g, The Net-like coat called Retiformis.

h, The coat of the glassy humor called Hyaloides.

i, The coat of the Christalline.

k k, The hairy processes called Processus ciliares.

l, The impression of the Grapy coat where it departs from the thick coat.

m, The horny coat, a part of the thick coat.

n n, The fat betwixt the Muscles.

o, The optic Nerve.

p, The Dura meninx.

q, The Pia Matter or thin Meninx.

r r, The Muscles.

The explication of the other 19. figures together.

a 2, 4, 8, The Optic Nerve. b 2, 4, The thin Meninx clothing the Nerve. c 2,
3, The thick Meninx clothing the nerve. d 8. the posterior part of the horny
coat. e 8. The coat called Retina gathered together on an heap. f 23. The
rainebow of the eye. g 2, 3, The lesser circle of the eye or the pupilla. h 2,
3. Vessels dispersed through the Dura Meninx. i 3, 6, The grapy coat, but i,
in the 3. Fig. shows how the vessels do join the hard membrane with the
grapy coat. k 6. The horny or hard membrane turned over. ll 3. 4, Certain
fibers and strings of vessels, whereby the grapy coat is tied to the horny. m
m 4, 5. The impression of the grapy coat where it recedeth or departs from
the horny coat. n n, 4, 5, 6, 7, The pupilla or apple of the eye. o o, 7, The
Ciliar or hairie processes. p 7, The beginning of the Grapic coat made of a
thin membrane dilated, but p, in the 17. figure shows the ciliar processes
sprinkled through the fore part of the glassie humor. r 9, The bosom or
depression of the glassie humor receiveing the Christalline. s 12. 15. The
breadth of the coat of the Christalline, t 12, 13, 14, 16, The posterior part
of the Christalline humor which is sphericall or round. u 11, 14, 20, The
forepart of the same Christalline depressed x 10, 20. The amplitude of the
glassie humor. y 10; 16, 19. The amplitude of the watery humor. z. 19, The place
where the glassie humor is distinguished from the watery by the interposition of
the Hyalaeides or coat of the glassie humor. and a10, 16, The place where the
grap^e coat swimmeth in the watrie humor. and b18. The cavitie or depression of
the glassie humor which remains when the Christalline is exempted or taken
from it.d 19. the cavitie or depression of the watrie humor made by the same
means.

the coats of the vessels of the brain; other some external stretched over
the external What veins may be opened (...) ^ations of the eyes.
parts of the eye, as the Muscles, and coat Adnata, and by these veins
inflammations and reddnesse often happen in the external parts of the eye: for
which the Venapupis must be opened, and cupping glasses and horns must be
applied to the nape of the neck and shoulders; as in the internal
inflammations of the eye the cephalike vein must be opened to avert and
evacuate the morbificke humor.

CHAP. VII. Of the Nose.
THe Nose is called in Greek Ris, because the excrements of the Brain flow
forth by this passage, thou may understand it has a diverse substance by
composition. The quantity, figure and site are sufficiently known to all. But
it is composed of the skin and muscles, bones, gristles, a membrane or coat
nerve^, veins and arteryes. The skin and bones both contained and containing,
have formerly been explained, as also the nerves, veins and arteries. The
gristles of the Nose are six in number; the first is double seperating both
the nose-thrils in the top of the nose extended even to the bone Ethmoides. The
second lies under the former. The Gristles of the nose.
The third and fourth are continued to the two outward bones of the nose. The
fifth and sixth being very slender and descending on both sides of the nose,
make the wings or moveable parts thereof. Therefore the use of these gristles
is, that the nose moveable about the end thereof, should be less obnoxious to
external injuryes, as fractures and bruses, and besides more fit for drawing
the air in and expelling it forth in breathing. For nature for this purpose
has bestowed four muscles upon the nose, on each side two, one within, and
another without.

The External takes its original from the cheek, and descending obliquely
from The muscles thereof.
thence and after some sort annexed to that which opens the upperlip, is
terminated into the wing of the nose, which it dilates.

The internal going on the inner sider from the jaw bone, ends at the
beginning of the gristles that make the wings, that so it may contract them.
The coat which inwardly invests the nose-thrils and their passages, is
produced by the sive-like bones from the Crassa meninn, as the inner coat of
the Palate, throtle, weazon, Gullet and inner ventricle, that it is no
mervaile, if the affects of such parts be quickly communicated with the brain.
This same coat on each side receives a portion of a nerve from the third
conjugation, through the hole which descends to the nose by the great corner of
the eye.

The nose in all the parts thereof is of a cold and dry temper. The Action and
profit The temper, action and use
thereof is to carry the air and often times smells to the mammillary processes,
and from thence to the four ventricles of the brain, for the reasons formerly
showed. But because the mammillary processes being the passages of the air and
smells are double, and for that one of these may be obstructed without the
other, therefore nature has also distinguished the passage of the nose with a
gristly partitio^ put between, that when the one is obstructed, they air by
the other may enter into the brain for the generation and preservation of the
animal spirit. The two holes of the nose first ascend upwards; and then
downwards into the mouth, by a crooked passage, lest the cold air, or dust
should be carried into the lungs. But the nose was parted into two Why the nose
was parted^ two.
passages as we see, not only for the forementioned cause, but also for
helping the respiration and vindicating the smell from external injuryes, and
lastly for the ornament of the face.

CHAP. VIII. Of the muscles of the face.
NOw we must describe the muscles of the face pertaining as well to the There
number.
lips as to the lower jaw. These are 18. in number, on each side nine, that is,
four of the lips, two of the upper, and as many of the lower. But there belong
five to the lower jaw. The first of the upper lip being the longer, and
narrower, ariseing from the yoake-bone descends by the corner of the mouth to
the lowerlip, that so it may bring it to the upper lip, and by that means shut
the mouth. The other being shorter and broader, passing forth of the hollownes
of the cheek, or upper jaw (by which a portion of the nerves of the third
conjugation descends to these two muscles, and other parts of the face) ends in
the upper part of the same upper lip, which it composes together with the
fleshy pannicle and skin, and it opens it by turning up the exterior fibers
toward the nose, and shuts it by drawing the internal inwards toward the
teeth.

The first of the lower lip being the longer and slenderer, entering out of that
region which is between the external perforation of the upper jaw (through
which on the inner part of the same, a nerve passes forth to the same muscles)
and the muscle Masseter, (of which hereafter) then ascending upwards by the
corner of the mouth, it ends in the upper lip, that so it may draw it to the
lower.

The other broader and shorter begins at the lower part of the Chin and the
hollownes thereof, and ends at the lower lip which it makes, opening it within
and without by its internal and external fibers, as we also said of its
opposite. And that I may speak in a word, Nature has framed three sorts of
Muscles for the motion of the mouth, of which some open the mouth, others shut
it, and othersome wrest it and draw it awry; but you must note that when the
muscles of one kind jointly perform their functions (as the a upper which we
described in the first place, on each side one which draw the lower lip to the
upper, and the muscles opposite to them) they make a right or straight motion;
but when either of them moves severally, it moves obliquely, as when we draw
our mouth aside. But these muscles are so fastened and fixed to the skin, that
they cannot be separated; so that it is no great matter whether you call it a
musculous skin, or a skinny muscle (Which also takes place in the palms of the
hands and soles of the feet) but these muscles move the lips, the upper jaw
being not moved at all.

CHAP. IX. Of the Muscles of the lower Iaw.
WE have said these muscles are five in number, that is, four which shut it,
and one which opens it, and these are alike on both sides. The first Their
number
and greater of these four muscles which shut the Iavv is called Crotophita
or Temporal muscle, it arises from the sides of the forehead and Bregms The
Temporal Muscle.
bones, and adhering to the same and the stony bone, it descends under the
yoak-bone, from whence it inserts it self to the process of the lovver Iavv
which the Greeks call Corone, that it may dravv it directly to the upper, so
to shut the mouth.

But you must note, that this muscle is tendinous even to his belly, and that
it fills and makes both the temples. It is more subject to deadly wounds than
the rest by Why the wounds of the temporal Mulcle are deadly.
reason of the multitude of nerves dispersed over the substance thereof, which
because they are nere their original, that is, the brain^, they infer danger
of sudden death by a convulsion which usually follows the affects of this
muscle; but also in like manner it causes a fever, the Phrenzy and Coma.

The Figure of the chief muscles of the Face.
A. The muscle of the forehead and the right fibers thereof.

B. The Temporal muscle.

a. b. g. his semicircular original.

D. The muscle of the upper lip.

G. The yoake-bone unaer which the temporal muscles pass.

I. The Masseter, or Grinding Muscle.

K. The upper gristle of the nose.

M. A muscle forming the cheeks.

N. The muscle of the lower lip.

O. A part of the Fifth muscle of the lower Iaw called Digastricus, that is,
double bellied.

Q. R. The first muscle of the bone Hyoides growing unto the rough Artery.

S. The second muscle of the bone Hyoides under the Chin.

T. The third muscle of the bone Hyoides stretched to the law.

T. K. the seveneth muscle of the head and his insertion at T.

V. V. The two venters of the fourth muscle of the hone Hyoides.

ph. The place where the vessels pass which go to the head, and the nerves
which are sent to the Arm.



Therefore that it should be less subject or obvious to external injuryes,
Nature has, as it were, made it a retiring place in the bone, and fortified it
with a wall of bone raised somewhat higher about it. The other Muscle almost
equal to the former in bigness, being called the Masseter, or grinding muscle,
makes the Cheek, The Masseter, or gri^ding muscle.
it descends from the lowest part of the greatest bone of the orb (which bends
it self as it were back, that it may make part of the yoke bone) and inserts
it self into the lower Iaw, from the corner thereof to the end of the root of
the process Corone, that so it may draw this Iaw forward and backward, and
move it like a hand-mill.

Wherefore nature has composed it of two sorts of fibers, of the which some
from the neeke (the cheek in that place under the eyes standing somewhat out
like an aple arising from the concourse of the greater bones of the orb and
upper jaw) descend obliquely to the corner and hinder part of the lower jaw,
that it may move it forwards. Othersome arise from the lower part of the same
yoak-bone, and descending obliquely intersect the former fibers after the
similitude of the letter X, and insert themselves into the same lower jaw at
the roots of the process Corone, that so they may draw it back. Truly by
reason of these contrary motions it is likely this muscle was called the
Masseter or grinder.

The third, which is the round Muscle, arises from all the Gums of the upper
jaw, The round muscle.
and is inserted into all the gummes of the lower, investing the sides of all
the mouth with the coat, with which it is covered on the inside, being
otherwise covered on the outside with more fat than any other muscle. The
action thereof is, not only to draw the lower Iaw to the upper, but also as
with a Shovell to bring the meat dispersed over all the mouth under the teeth,
no otherwise then the tongue draws it in. The lesser muscle of the lower law.


The fourth being shorter and less than the rest arising from all the
hollownes of the winged process of the Wedge-bone, is inserted within into the
broadest part of the lower Iaw, that so in like manner it may draw the same to
the upper. This is the muscle through whose occasion, we said this lower iaw is
sometimes dislocated.

The fifth and last muscle of the lower jaw from the process styloides of the
stony The fifth and last muscle.
bone, ascends to the forepart of the Chin, nere to the connection of the two
bones of this Iaw, to draw this Iaw downwards from the upper in opening the
mouth. This muscle is slender and Tendinous in the midst, that so it might be
the stronger, but it is fleshy at the ends. All these Muscles were made by the
singular providence of nature Theuse of these mentioned muscles.
and ingrafted into this part for the performance of many uses and actions, as
biting asunder, chawing, grinding and severing the meat into small particles,
which the tongue by a various and harmless motion puts under the teeth. Thus
much I thought good to say of the parts of the face, as well containing as
contained.

The Figure of the Muscles of the lower Iaw.
A. A hole in the forehead bone in the brimme of the seat of the eye, sending
a small nerve of the third pair to the muscles of the forehead and the upper
eye-brow.

B. The Temporal muscle.



CHAP. X. Of the Ears and Parotides or kernels of the Ears.
THe Ears are the Organs of the Sense of hearing. They are composed The nature
and composition of the ears.
of the skin, a little flesh, a gristle, veins, arteries and nerves. They may
be bended or folded in without harm, because being gristlely, they easily
yield and give way; but they would not do so, if they should be bony, but
would rather break. That lap at which they hang pendants What the Fibra and
pinna are.
and lewels, is by the ancients called Fibra; but the upper part pinna. They
have been framed by the providence of nature into twining passages like a
Snailes shell, which as they come nearer to the foramen caecum, or blind hole,
are the more straitened, The figure and the reason thereof.
that so they might the better gather the air into them, and conceive the
differences of sounds and voices, and by little and little lead them to the
membrane.

This membrane which is indifferently hard has grown up from the nerves of
the fifth conjugation, which they call the auditory. But they were made thus
into crooked windings, least the sounds rushing in too violently should hurt
the sense of hearing. Yet for all this we often find it troubled and hurt by the
noise of thunder, Guns and Bells. Other wise also lest that the air too
suddenly entering in should by its qualitys, as cold, cause some harm: and
also that little creeping things and other extraneous bodies as fleas and the
like, should be stayed in these windings and turnings of the ways, the
glutinous thicknes of the choleric excrement or eare-waxe hereunto also
conduceing, which the brain purges and sends forth into this part, that is,
the For what use the eare-waxe serves.
auditory passage framed into these intricate Maeanders.

The Figure of the ears and bones of the auditory passage.
Tab, 10. shows the ears and the diverse internal parts thereof.

Fig. 1. shows the whole external ear, with a part of the Temple bone.

Fig. 2. shows the left bone of the Temple divided in the midst by the
instrument of hearing, whereabout on either side there are certain passages
here particularly described.

Fig. 3, and 4. shows the three little Bones.

Fig. 5. shows a portion of the bone of the temples which is seenneere the
hole of Hearing divided through the midst, whereby the Nerves, Bones and
Membranes may appear as Vesalius of them conceives.

Fig. 6. shows the Vessels, Membranes, Bones and holes of the Organ of
hearing, as Platerus has described them.

Fig. 7, and 8. shows the little bones of the hearing of a man and of a
Calfe, both joined and separated.

Fig. 9. shows the Muscle found out by Aquapendens.

For the particular declaration see D. Crookes Anatomy, page 577.



But that we may understand how the hearing is made, we must know the structure
of the organ or instrument hereof. The membrane which we formerly mentioned For
what use the membrane stretched under the auditory passage serves.
to confist of the auditory nerve, is stretched in the inside over the auditory
passage like as the head of a Drum. For it is stretched and extended with the
Air, or auditory spirit implanted there, and shut up in the cavity of the
mammillary process and foramen caecum, that smitten upon by the touch of the
external air entering in, it may receive the object, that is the sound, which
is nothing else then a certain quality arising What sound is,
from the air beaten or moved by the collision, and conflict of one or more
bodies.

Such a collision is spread over the air, as the water which by the gliding
touch of a stone produces many circles and rings one as it were rising from
another. So in rivelets running in a narrow channel, the water stricken and as
it were, beaten back in its course against broken, craggy and steep rocks,
wheels about into many turnings: this collision of the beaten air flying back
diverse ways from arched and hollow roofed places, as Dens, Cisterns, Wells,
thick Woods and the like, yields and produces The cause of an echo.
a double sound, and this reduplication is called and Echo. Wherefore the
hearing is thus made by the air, as a medium, but this air is twofold, that
is, external and internal.

The exterior is that which encompasses us, but the interior is that which is
shut The 3 bones of the auditory passage.
up in the cavity of the mammillary process and for amen caecum, which truly
is not pure and sole air, but tempered and mixed with the auditory spirit.
Thence proceeds the noise or beating of the Ears, when vapors are there mixed
with the air instead of spirits, whereby their motion or agitation is
perturbed and confused. But neither do these suffice for hearing, for nature
for the more exact distinction of sounds has also made the little bones, of
which one is called the Incus or anvill, another the Malleolus or hammer, the
third the Stapes or stirrup, because the shapethereof resembles a German
stirrup. Also it may be called Deltoides, because it is made in the shape of
the Greek letter D.

They are placed behind the membrane; wherefore the anvill and hammer moved
Theiruse.
by the force of the entrance of the external air, and beating thereof
against that membrane, they more distinctly express the difference of sounds,
as strings stretched within under the head of a Drum; as for example, these
bones being more gently moved represent a low sound to they common sense and
faculty of bearing, but being moved more vehemently and violently, they present
a quick and great sound; to conclude, according to their diverse agitation,
they produce diverse and different sounds. Whence the difference of sounds.


The Glandules should follow the Ears in the order of Anatomy, as well those
which are called the emunctoryes of the brain, that is, the Parotides (Which
are placed as it were at the lower part of the ears) as these which lie under
the lower Iaw, the muscles of the bone Hyoides and the tongue, in which the
Scrophulae and other such cold abscesses breed. It shall here suffice to set
down the use of all such like Glandules.

Therefore the Parotides are framed in that place by nature, to receive the
virulent and malign matter sent forth by the strength of the brain, by the
veins and arteries spread over that place. The rest serve to strengthen the
division of the vessels, to moysten the ligaments and membranes of the Iaw,
lest they should be dried by their continual motion. Their other conditions
and uses are formerly handled in our first book of Anatomy.

CHAP. XI. Of the bone Hyoides, and the muscles thereof.
THe Substance of the Bone Hyoides is the same with that of other bones, The
reason of the name,
The figure thereof imitates the greek letter v from whence it took the name,
(as also the name (...); and from the letter l it is in like sort called (...);
by some it is styled Os Guttur is and os Linguae, that The composition.
is, the Throat bone and Tongue bone. The composition thereof composition
thereof consists of many bones joined into one by the interposition of gristles.

This bone is bigger in beasts and composed of more bones, and that not only by
the intercourse of gristles, but also of ligaments. It is seated with its basis
(being gibbous The free.
on the forepart for constancy, and arched on the inside that it might receive
and contain the root of the tongue) upon the upper part of that gristle of the
throtle which is called scutiformis or Sheild-like, (for this seems to prop it
up by the strength of two processes rising at the basis thereof) and the root
of the tongue. From this basis it sends forth two horns to the sides of the
tongue on each side one, which in men are tied to the Appendix styloides by
ligaments sent from it self. Contrary then it is in beasts, who have it of
many bones united as we said, by the intercourse of ligaments even to the root
of the stiloides. Wherefore this bone has connection The temper and use.
with the forementioned parts, and other hereafter to be mentioned. It has the
same temper as other bones have. The use of it is, to minister ligaments to
certain muscles of the tongue, and insertion as well to the two foremost and
upper muscles of the throtle, as to its own, of which we will now treat.

The muscles of the bone Hyoides, according to the opinion of some are eight,
on each side four; of which there be two, one of which Galen refers to the
common The muscles of the bone Hyoides.
muscles of the larinx or throtle; and the other to those which move the
Shoulder Blade upwards. Howsoever it be, the first of the four before
mentioned arises from the Appendix Styloides, and passing over the Nervous
substance of the muscle opening the lower law, is inserted into the horns of
the bone Hyoides. This muscle is very thin, yet somewhat broad, the which in
that respect may easily be cut, unless you have a care in separating the
muscle which opens the lower Chap. The second ascends obliquely from the upper
part of the shoulder blade nere the production thereof called Coracoides, to
the beginnings of the horns of the said bone Hyoides. This is round and
nervous in the midst that so it might be the stronger, as that is which we
formerly said opens the lower law; and it is referd by Galen amongst those
which move the shoulder blade upwards. The third arises from the upper part of
the sternon, and is inserted at the root and basis of the bone Hyoides; yet
Galen refers it to the common muscles of the Larinx; whose opinion takes place
rather in beasts, than in man, seeing in man this muscle cannot be found either
to proceed, or be inserted into the throtle, as it is in beasts. The fourth and
last descends within from the chin to the root of the bone Hyoides. The first
of these muscles The action of these muscles.
with its companion or partner moves the bone Hyoides upwards; the second
downe-wards; The third backwards; and the fourth forewards. I would declare
whence these muscles have their vessels, had I not abundantly satisfied that
thing, when I treated of the distribution of the nerves, veins and arteries.

CHAP. XII. Of the Tongue.
THE tongue is of a fleshy, rare, loose and soft substance; it enjoyes flesh
What kind of flesh the tongue has.
of a different kind from the rest of the flesh, as chiefly appears when you
cut it from the first original of the muscles thereof; which thing has moved
some, that they have made a fourth kind of flesh proper to the tongue and
different from the rest, viz. the Fibrous, musculous, and that of the bowels.
The quantity thereof is such that it may be contained in the mouth, and The
quantity,
easily moved to each part thereof. The figure of it is triangular, which it
rather expresses The figure.
in the basis, which is at the root of the bone Hyoides, than in its point, or
forepart, where from a triangle it becomes more dilated. It is composed of a
membrane Composure.
(which it has from that which lines all the inside of the mouth) muscles 4.
nerves two on each side, the one whereof is sent from the third conjugation,
into the coat thereof; the other from the seventh is sent into the musculous
substance The nerves.
even to the end thereof for motions sake; so that those sensificke nerves from
the third conjugation only give to judge of tastes, compose the coat, and
touch or enter not the flesh. Besides it is composed of veins and arteries on
each side one, which it receives from the external Iugular and Carotides,
running manifestly to the end thereof on the lower side, that so they might be
easily opened in the diseases of the mouth and throtle; they commonly term
these the Vena nigra or black veins.

The muscles of the tongue are absolutely ten, on each side five. The first
narrow at the beginning, and broader at the end, descends into the upper side
of the tongue The muscles of the tongue.
from the Appendix Styloides, and together with its copartner draws it
upwards. The second has its original within from the lower jaw about the
region of the Grindinge teeth, and is inserted into the lower side of the
tongue, the which with its partner draws it downward. The third proceeds from
the inner part of the Chin and goes to the root of the tongue, that when need
requires it may put it forth of the mouth. The fourth the greatest and broadest
of them all, composed of all sorts of fibers, passes forth from the basis of
the bone Hyoides, and ends at the lower part of the tongue, which with its
companion plucks it back into the mouth. The fifth and last most usually arises
from the upper part of the horns of the bone Hyoides and goes to the roots of
the tongue between the two first, that it may move it to the sides of the
mouth. The temper thereof, as of all other flesh, is hot and moist. The first
The temper, action, and manifold use of the tongue.
action and commodity thereof is, to be the organ of the sense of tasting,
wherefore it was made fungous and spongy, that by reason of the rarity of it, it
might more easily admit the tastes conjoined with the spettle, as a vehicle.
Another to be an instrument to distinguish the voice by articulate speech, for
which it was made movable into each part of the mouth. The third is to be a
help to chaw and swallow the meat. For which cause it is like a scoope or dish
with which we throw back the corn into the mill, which has escaped grinding.
And because, when the tongue is dry, it is less nimble and quick to perform
its motions, as appears by those which can scarce speak by reason of thirst,
or a burning fever: therefore nature has placed very spongy glandules at the
The use of the glandules placed at the roots of the tongue.
roots thereof, on each side one, which like sponges suck and receive, both
from the brain and other places a waterish and spettley humor, with which they
humect and make more glib, not only the tongue, but also the other parts of
the mouth, as the throat and jaws; these glandules are called the Tonsillae,
or Almonds of the throat.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Mouth.
THe mouth is that capacity which bounded with the cheeks and lips contains
What it is. The use.
within its precincts the teeth, tongue, and the beginnings of the throttle and
gullet. Therefore the use of the mouth is to contain the tongue, and serve it
in the fitter performance of its actions; and although many parts hereof have
bin formerly handled, as the lips, teeth, Jaws, tongue, almonds, and passages
of the palate coming from the nose, yet it remains, that we declare, what the
palate, the Gargareon; or Uvula the Pharinx, and fauces or Chops are. The
palate (or as it is commonly called, the Roof What the palate is.
of the mouth) is nothing else but the upper part of the mouth bounded with the
teeth gums and upper Iaw. In which place the coat common to the whole mouth,
is made rough with diverse wrincles, that the meats put up and down between the
tongue and the Palate might be broken and chawed more easily by that inequality
and roughnes. If any The^ nerves thereof.
would find the nerves, which descend into the palate from the fourth
conjugation, let him separate that coat and cast it from the fore to the hind
part of the mouth; for so he shall find them at the sides and hind parts of the
bones of the Palate, which incompasse the palate, and at the beginning of the
inner holes of the mouth, which descend from the nose, and region of the
productions of the wedgbone called the Saddle. These holes or Why the holes of
the palate are open.
passages are open, that we may breath the better when we sleep, and that when
the nose is not well, the excrements which seek their passage by it, may be
easilier drawn away by the mouth. This same coat is woven with nervous fibers,
that, like the tongue, it might judge of tastes; these fibers co^pose a coat
that has a middle consistence betwixt What kind of coat the palate has.
soft and hard. For if it should have been any harder, like a bone or gristle,
it would have been without sense, but if softer hard, acride and sharp meats
would have hurt it.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Gargareon, or Uvula.
BY the Gargareon we understand a fleshy and Spongy body, in shape like a pine
What the Gargareon, or Vvlua is.
apple, hanging directly down at the further end of the palate and basis of the
bone Ethmoides where the two holes of the palate come from the nose, above the
entrance of the throttle. This little body is situate in this place, to break
the violence of the air drawn in by breathing, and that by delay it might in
some sort The site and manifold use, thereof.
te^per and mitigate it by the warmenesse of the mouth. Besides, that it might
be as it were the Plectru^, or quil of the voice, so to diffuse the fuliginous
vapor sent forthin breathing that it may be dispersed over all the mouth, that
resounding from thence it may be articulate, and by the motion of the tongue
distinguished and formed, into a certain voice. Which use is not small, when
we see by experience that such as have this particle cut The discommodities
that ensue the loss of the Uvula.
away, or eaten or corrupted by any accident, have not only their voice
vitiated and depraved, but speak ill favouredly, and as they say, through the
nose; and besides, in process of time they fall into a consumption by reason
of the cold air passing down before it be qualified. This same particle, is
also a means to hinder the dust from flying down through the weazon into the
Lungs. By the Pharinx and fauces is meant the What the Pharinx and fauces are.
inner and back part of the mouth, set or placed before the entrance of the
Throttle and Gullet; being so called, because that place is narrow and strait,
that as it were by these straits, the air drawn in by the mouth might be
forced down by the Throtle, and the meat into the Gullet.

CHAP. XV. Of the Larinx or Throttle.
FIrst we must show what is meant by the Larinx or throttle, then prose qunte
the other conditions of it after our accustomed manner. Therefore by the Larinx
we What is m^ by the Larinx.
understand nothing else in this place, than the head and extremity of the rough
Artery, or weazon, which comes nearer to Gristlely substance, then to any
other. The quantity thereof is sufficiently large, yet diverse according to the
diversity of bodies. It resembles in shape the head of a Germane pipe. The
composure of it consists of 18. The magnitude, figure and composute.
muscles, on each side nine, which as they are like in quantity, so also in
strength and action; of three gristles, veins, arteries and nerves, as we
showed, when we spoke of the distribution of the vessels; as also of a double
coat, the one external, the other internal, as we showed when we spoke of
the weazon. These three Gristles are joined together The description of the 3
gristles of the Larinx.
by certain Ligaments and muscles; the foremost gristle, which also is the
greater is called by the Greeks (...), in Latin commonly Scutiformis, that is
shield like, because it resembles^ shield. The second being the hinder and
middle in magnitude, wants a name, wherefore it is called the innominata or
nameles gristle. The last and least which notwithstanding may be parted into
two, so lies upon the edges of the other, that it resembles the mouth of an
oil pot, or a pitcher, whereupon the Greeks call it Arytonoides. These
gristles thus fitted amongst themselves utter a distinct voice, by the Whence
the infinite variety of voices proceed.
benifit of the Epiglottis, or After tongue, and also of the muscles opening
and shutting, dilating and co^pressing them, whence proceed infinite varieties
of voices. For thus when they are opened and dilated they yield a heavy, or
dull sound; when they are shut or drawn together, a quick, or sharp sound, and
to conclude, they make it infinite ways different according to the infinite
variety of the dilatation, or constriction thereof. Therefore because it was fit
these gristles should be moveable, especially the Arytenoides, and Thyroides,
nature has put to them on each side 9 muscles, of which three are The muscles
of the Larinx. Their number
common and 6 proper. The first of the common lying hid under the third muscle
of them that move the bone Hyoides, arises from the root of the same bone, and
by an oblique descent inserts it self at the basis of the shield-like gristle,
to dilate it upwards and downwards. The second ascends obliquely from the inner
part of the sternon according to the length of the weazon (whence it is called
Bronchius) to the bottom and sides of the same shield-like gristle, that it may
open and dilate it with its wings. This muscle is seen from the first original
thereof, even a great part of the way straightly to cohere with the third muscle
of the bone Hyoides; therefore under each of the muscles, there is a gla^dulous
body spread about the fore and upper part of the weazon, on that place where it
applies it self to the throttle; this body although it resemble a fleshy
substance, yet it is a glandule, which being plucked away by a certain Emperike
taking upon him to A notable history.
cure the kings evil, caused a defect of voice on one side, because be pulled
away the recurrent nerve lying upon that glandule as it goes to the throttle,
as Galen reports, Lib. de locis affectis. The third and last arises from the
part of the Vertebra's of the neck lying transversly upon the sides of the
gullet, and ends at the wings and sides of the shield-like gristle, that it may
tie it more straightly to the second Gristle. But these three are called common
muscles, because they take their original from some other place than y^
throttle that so they may be inserted into some part thereof; for they are
called the proper muscles which arise from the Throttle it self, which we have
said to be 6. on each side. The first of which arising from the fore part of
the second gristle, makes a circle under the basis of the sheld-like gristle;
whilst ascending obliquely to the basis thereof, it is afterward inserted in a
part of it, so to strengthen and dilate it. The second in like manner arising
from the second gristle, from that place where it adheres to the first, it
runs obliquely crossing the first to the inner and forepart of the gristle
Thyroides near to the bafis thereof, that it may join it to the second. The
third from the hind basis of the second gristle ascends directly to the basis
of the third gristle Arytenoides, that with the second muscle it may open and
shut it. The fourth ascends from the sides of the second gristle, near the
original of the second muscle, to the sides of the Arytenoides, that with the
second muscle it may open and shut it. The fifth arises from the inner middle of
the sheild-gristle, and ends in the fore part of the Arytenoides at the
insertion of the fourth muscle, that so it may press down the said gristle.

The sixth and last ascends by the hind basis of the Arytenoides to the fore
basis of the Whence the muscles of the Throttle have their nerves.
same, to press it down. But you must note, that all such muscles, as arise
from below upwards, receive branches from the recurrent, but especially those
who open and shut the gristle Arytenoides. But the site, temper, connection,
and use of the throtle may easily be known by that we have said before:
Although it be a thing very full of difficulty to search out and demonstrate
all the conditions of the organicall parts, by reason of the diversity of
their composition. Wherefore hence forward concerning the substance, temper,
and other circumstances of such parts as we shall omit, you may have recourse
to those things which we have written in the Demonstration of the simple and
simular parts, of which these organicall are composed; as if any should ask of
what temper the Larinx is, you shall answer, of a cold, dry, and hot, and
moist, because it consists both of a gristlely and fleshly substance. He which
reckons up all the parts of the mouth, must not omit that gristlely and
membranous The Epiglottis or After-tongue.
body which arises from the roots of the tongue, which that it might be more
quick for motion, that is, whereby it might be more easily erected and
depressed (for those things which are more soft do continually slide away, but
those which are too hard cannot be bended) it was convenient it should be
neither too hard nor too soft, that it might be erected whilst we breath, but
depressed when we swallow. It is a principal instrument of the voice, for it
cannot be well articulated unless the way were strait. Therefore it straitens
that way, and the passage of the gristles of the throttle, but specially the
Arytenoides; it is always moist by a certain native, and inbred humiditie;
wherefore if it happen to be dried by a fever, or any other like accident the
speech is taken away. It is bound on both sides by the common membrane of the
mouth to the sides of the Arytenoides even to the back part thereof, that so
like a cover it may open and shut the orifice of the throtle, that none of the
meat and drink in swallowing may fall into the weazon, in such abundance as
may hinder the egresse Of potable things somewhat always falls upon the Lungs.
and regresse of the air. For we must not think that this body does so
closely shut the orifice of the throttle, but that some small quantity of
moisture always runs down by the inner sides, as the walls thereof, to
moisten the lungs; other-wise Eclegma's should be of no use in the diseases of
the Chest. And because that this little body is partaker of voluntary motion,
therefore according to the opinion of The muscles of the Epiglottis.
some there are four muscles bestowed upon it, two which may open it and two
that shut it, on each side one. The opening muscles descend from the root of
the bone Hyoides, and in their insertion growing into one they are terminated
in the root of this body, that is, the Epiglottis in the back part thereof.
The shutting muscles (in those creatures where they are found) arise on the
inside between the coat and gristle thereof. Truly I could never observe and
find these four muscles in a man, though I have diligently and earnestly
sought for them, but I have always observed them in beasts. Therefore some
have boldly affirmed that this little body in swallowing lies not upon the
orifice of the Throttle, unless when it is pressed down by the heavines of
such things as are to be swallowed; but that, at all other times by reason of
the continual breathing it stands upright, the Throttle being open: There
remain as yet to The use of the cavities or fissures of the Throttle.
be considered, two small bosoms, or cavities, or rather fissures which nature
has hollowed in the very throttle under the Epiglottis, on each side one, that
if by chance any of the meat or drink should fall, or slip aside in the Larinx,
it might be there stayed and retained. Beside that, the Air too violently
entering, should be in some sort broken by these clifts, or chinkes, no
otherwise than the blood and spirit entering into the heart through the Auricula
or Ears thereof.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Neck and the parts thereof.
FIrst we will define what the neck is, then prosequute the parts thereof as well
proper, as common, especially those of which we have not as yet treated. For it
were superfluous to speak any more of the skin, the fleshy pannicle the
veins, arteries, nerves, gullet, weazon and muscles ascending and descending
to the parts into which they are inserted along the neck; wherefore you must
not expect that we should say any thing of the neck, more than to describe the
Vertebrae or rack bones, being the proper parts thereof, and the ligaments
as well those proper to the neck, as those which it has in common with the
head; and lastly the muscles, as well those it has in common with the head and
chest, as those of its own. Therefore the neck What the neck is.
is nothing elss, then a part of the head, which is contained between the nowle
bone and the first vertebrae of the back. First in the neck the Vertebra's must
be considered, and we must show what they have proper and peculiar, and what
common amongst themselves, that we may the more easily show the original and
insertion of the muscles growing out of them and ending in them. The neck
consists of seven Vertebrae or Rack-bones, in What to be considered in the
vertebrae of the neck.
which you must consider their proper body; and than the holes by which the
spinall marrow passes; thirdly the Apophyses or processes of the Vertebrae;
fourthly the holes through which the nerves are disseminated into other parts
from the spinal marrow, and besides the perforations of the transverse
productions by which the veins, and arteries which we call Cervicales ascend
along the neck, and lastly the connection of these same vertebrae or
Rack-bones. For the first, by the body of the vertebrae, we understand the
forepart thereof upon which the gullet lies. For the hole, that is not always
the largest in those vertebrae which are nighest the head; but it is always
encompassed with the body of the vertebrae, and besides with three sorts of
processes, except in the first Rack-bone, that is right, transverse and
oblique. By right we understand these extuberancies Which be the right
processes of the vertebrae.
in the Racke-bones of the neck which are hollowed directly in the upper part
of them and rise up crested on each side to sustain and receive the basis of
the Rack-bone which is set upon it. By the oblique processes, we understand
the bunchings outby Which the transverse.
which these Rack-bones are mutually knit together by Ginglymos; these are
seated between the righr and transverse processes. By the transverse we
understand the protuberations next the body, which devide the Vertebra or
Rackbone in a straight line. These Which the transverse.
processes are perforated that they may give to the before described veins and
arteries, which entering the Spinall marrow by the holes of the nerves nourish
the Racke-bones and parts belonging to them. Besides you must note that the
perforations of the Rack-bones of the neck by which the nerves proceed from the
spinall marrow to the ourward parts, are under the transverse process, that is
growing or made by the upper and lower vertebra, contrary to all the other
which are in the rest of the Rack-bones. For the connexio^ of the Rack-bones,
you must know that all the Vertebrae of the spine The connexions of the
vertebrae of the neck.
have six connexions, two in their own bodies, and 4 in their oblique
processes. By the two first connexions they are so mutually articulated in
their own bodies that each are joined with other both above and below. But by
the 4 other, by their oblique ascendent and descendent processes, on each side
2, they are so mutually inarticulate that as the fourth Rack-bone of the neck
by its oblique ascendent processes, is received of the descendent processes of
the third Racke-bone; so it receives the oblique ascendent processes of the
first, by its oblique descendents, for always the oblique ascendents are
received, and the descendents receive. Yet we must except the first Rack-bone
of the neck which is contained with 4 connexions by his lower oblique
processes, and by its upper by which it receives the oblique processes both of
the nowle bone, and of the second Rack-bone. The second Vertebra or Rack-bone
must also be excepted which is holden by 5 connexions, that is to say, four by
its oblique processes, and the fifth by its own body, by which it is knit to
the body of the third Vertebra. But we must note, that whereas nature has not
given a Spine to the first Rack-bone, yet it has given it a certain bunch or
extuberancy instead thereof; in like manner, seeing it makes no common passage
with the second Vertebra for the passage forth of the nerve, it is perforated
at the sides of its body, and it is made very thin on the fore side, as if it
were without body, that it might receive the fore process raised in the upper
body of the second The process called the tooth.
Racke-bone, which Hippocrates calls the tooth, to which the principal
Ligament of the head is fastened, which descends within from the hind part of
the head under the Apophyses clinoides or processes of the wedge-bone.

Table 20. Figure I. Shows all the racke-bone of the back knit together.
Figure 2. Shows the fore and upper face of the neck, etc. See D. Crook,
page 398.
From A, to B, the seven vertebres of the neck.

From C, to D, The twelve vertebres of the chest.

From E, to F, The five rack-bones of the Loins.

From G, to H, The Os sacrum or Holy-bone consisting commonly of 6. vertebrae.

From I, to K, The bone Coccyx or the rumpbone according to the late writers.

LL, The bodies of the vertebrae.

M, The transverse processes of the vertebrae.

N, The descendent processes.

OO, The ascendent processes.

PP, The backward processes.

QQ, The holes that are in the sides of the vertebrae through which the nerves
are transmitted.

RR, A gristly Ligament betwixt the vertebrae.

A, 2, 3, 4, The hole whereout the marrow of the back issues.

B, 2, 3, The cavity which admits the root of the second rack-bone.

C, 3, 4, A cavity or Sinus in the same place crusted over with a gristle.

D, 2, A prominence in the outward region of this Sinus.

OF, 2, 3. The Sinus or cavity of the first racke-bone which admits the 2.
heads of the nowle-bone.

GG, 2, 3, 4. the transverse process of the 1. Vertebra.

H, 1, The hole of this transverse process.

I, 3. The Sinus, which together with the cavity of the nowle-bone marked with
I, makes a common passage prepared for the nerves.

K, 3, 4, A rough place where the spine of the first rack is wanting.

LL, 4, Two cavities of the first rack receiving the 2. bunches of the second
rack marked with MN.

MN, 5, 6, The 2. bunches of the second rack which fall into the cavities of
the first:

O, 7, The appendix or tooth of the second rack. P, 5, A knub of this appendix
crusted over with a gristle. Q, 6, The backside of the tooth. R, 6, the Sinus
or cavity of the same, about which a transverse Ligament is rolled containing
the said tooth in the cavity of the first rack. ST 6. Certain cavities at the
sides of the tooth whence the roots issue of the fore-branch of the second
pair of sinews. V, 5, the point of the tooth. X, 3. An asperity or roughness
where is a hole but not thrilled through. Y, 6, A cavity of the second rack
which together with the cavity marked with Z, makes a hole, through which the
nerves do issue. Z, 4, the Sinus of the first rack. a, 5, 6, 7, the double
spine of the second rack. b, 5, 6, 7, the transverse process of the second
rack. c, 7, the hole of the said transverse process. d, 6, 7, the descending
process of the second rack whose cavity is marked with d, in the 6. figure. e,
6, 7, the place where the body of the second rack descends downward. f. gg,
8, the lower side of the body of the third rack at f, the two eminent parts of
the same at gg. hi, 8, the ascending processes. l m, 8, the two descending
processes. n o p q, 8, the transverse processes. r, 8, 9, the spine or backward
process. st, 8, the two tops of the spine. u, 9, the descending process of
the third rack. x, 9, the ascending process. y, the transverse process of the
third rack. a, 8, 9, the hole of this transverse process. b, 9, the upper
hollowed part of the body of the third rack. d, 9, the Sinus or cavity which
makes the lower part of a hole through which the conjugations of the nerves
are led. e, 7, the upper part of the same hole.



And by this articulation the head is bended forewards and backewards, as it is
moved to the sides by the articulation of the first Racke-bone with the second.
That By what articulation the head is bended backwards and forewards
process is bound by two Ligaments, the first of which being the greater and
broader is external, comprehending in the compass thereof all the upper
articulation, ascending from the Racke-bones to the head, or rather descending
from the head to them, as any other Ligament going from one bone to another;
The other is the stronger and also encompasses the articulation mixing its
self with the gristle, which by its interposition binds together all the
Racke-bones, the first excepted, as you may see in pulling asunder the
Racke-bones of a Swine; and the whole Spine or Backe-bone is tied together and
composed throughout with such Ligaments.

The Holy bone is composed of 4. Vertebrae [or rather of five, or six, as in
the figure following] Besides the Rumpe-bone, it receives, and holds fast the
Ossa Ilium, or The Vertebrae of the Holy bone.
Hanch-bones, and is as a Basis to all the Racke-bones placed above it, whereby
it comes to pass that the Racke-bones from the head to the Holy-bone grow
still thicker, because that which supports ought to be bigger than that which
is supported. There is a certain moisture, tough and fatty, put between the
Rack-bones, as also in other joints, to make them glib and slippery that so
they may the better move. Whilst this motion is made, the Racke-bones part one
from another.

The commodities or uses of the Spine are said to be four. The first is, that
it is, as it were the seat and foundation of the composure and construction of
the whole The manifold uses of the backebone.
body, as the Carcass is in a ship. The second, that it is a way or passage
for the marrow. The third is, because it contains and preserves the same. The
fourth is, that it serves for a wall or bulwark to the entrails which lie and
rest upon it on the inside. And because we have fallen into mention of
Ligaments, it will not be amiss to insert in this place, that which ought to
be known of them. First therefore we will declare what a Ligament is, then
explain the diverse acceptions thereof, and lastly prosecute their differences.

Therefore a Ligament is nothing else than a simple part of man's body, next to
a bone and Gristle the most terrestrial, and which most usually arises from
the one or What a Ligament is.
other of them either mediatly or immediately, and in the like manner ends in
the one of them, or in a Muscle, or in some other part; whereby it comes to
pass that a Ligament is without blood, dry, hard, and cold and without sense,
like the parts Why it is without sense.
from whence it arises, although it resemble a Nerve in whiteness and
consistence, but that it is somewhat harder.

A Ligament is taken either generally, or more particularly; in general, for
every part of the body, which ties one part to another, in which sense the skin
may be What parts may be called Ligaments in a general signification.
called a Ligament, because in contains all the inner parts in one union. So
the Peritonaum comprehending all the natural parts, and binding them to the
backe-bone: so the membrane inuesting the Ribbs, (that is the Pleura)
containing all the vital parts; thus the membranes of the brain, the nerves,
veins, arteryes, muscles, membranes, and lastly all such parts of the body,
which bind together and contain other, may be called Ligaments, because they
bind one part to another; as the nerves annexe the whole body to the brain,
the Arteries fasten it to the heart: and the veins to the liver. But to
conclude, the name of a Ligament more particularly taken, signifies that part
of the body, which we have described a little before.

The differences of Ligaments are many, for some are membranous and thin;
others The differences of Ligaments properly so called.
broad, othersome thick and around, some hard, some soft, some great, some
little; some wholly gristlely, others of a middle consistence between a bone
and a gristle, according to the nature of the motion of the parts, which they
bind together in quickness, vehemence and slownesse. We will show the other
differences of Ligaments, as they shall present themselves in dissection.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Muscles of the Neck.
THe Muscles of the neck as well proper as common, are in number Their number
twenty, or else twenty two, that is, ten, or eleven on each side; of which
seven only move the head, or the first vertebra with the head; the other 3 or
4, the neck it self. Of the 7 which move the head, and with the head the first
Vertebra, some extend and erect it, others bend and decline it, others move it
obliquely, but all of them together in a successive motion move it circularly;
and the like judgment may be of the Muscles of the Neck.

The fourth Figure of the Muscles. This Figure shows the cavities of the
middle and lower bellies, the bowels being taken out, but most part of the
bones and muscles remaining.
AB, The first musclebending the neck called Longus.

C C, The second bender of the neck called Scalenus.

D D D D, The outward intercost all muscles.

E E E E, The inner intercostall muscles.

F F F, The second muscle of the chest called serratus mayor.

G, The first muscle of the shoulder blade called s^rratus minor, separated
from his original.

H, The first muscle of the arm called Pectoralis, separated from his
original.

I, The second muscle of the arm called Deltoides.

K, The bone of the arm without flesh.

L, The first muscle of the cubite called Biceps.

M, The second muscle of the cubit called Brachiaus.

N, The clavicle or coller-bone bent backward.

O, The first muscle of the chest called subclavius.

P, The upper process of the shoulder blade. Q, The first muscle of the head
called obliquus inferior. R, The second muscle of the head called Complexus. S,
The fourth muscle of the shoulder blade called Levator. TV, The two bellies of
the fourth muscle of the bone Hyois. X X, a a, The fist muscle of the back
whose original is at a a. Y Y, b b, c c, The sixth muscle of the thigh called
Psoae, whose original is at c c, and tendon at b b. Z Z, The seventh muscle
of the thigh. d, the holy bone. o o o, the holes of the holy bone out of which
the nerves do issue. e, A portion of the fist muscle of the thigh arising from
the share-bone. f, the share-bone bared. k, the ninth muscle of the thigh or
the first circumactor.



The fifth Figure of the muscles in which some muscles of the head, Chest,
arm, and shoulder blade are described.
I, The process of the shoulder blade, called the top of the shoulder.

O, The fourth muscle of the arm or the greater round muscle, to which
Fallopius his right muscle is adjoined, which some call the lesser round muscle.

Q Q The sixth muscle of the arm or the upper blade-rider.

X, The second muscle of the shoulder blade or the Levator or heaver.

Z, the second muscle of the chest or the greater Saw muscle.

Y, the fifth muscle of the chest or muscle called Sacrolumbus.

ab, His place wherein he cleaves fast to the longest muscle of the back.

gg, the Tendons of the muscle obliquely inserted into the ribs.

DD, the first pair of the muscles of the head or the Splinters.

Chapter 8. 9, their length whose beginning at 8 and insertion at 9.

10, 11. the sides of this muscle.

12, that distance where they depart one from the other.

13, the two muscles called Complexi, near their insertion.

PH, the second muscle of the back or the Longest muscle.

O, the fourth muscle of the back or the Semi-spinatus.

d, the shoulder blade bare.

p, A part of the transverse muscle of the Abdomen.



But before I can come to the description of their original and insertion, I
must admonish thee, that the 2 Muscles of the shoulder blade must first be
taken away by dissection; that is, the Trapezius, or Table-muscle, and the
Rhomboides, or square-muscle; whose original and insertion that we may the
better demonstrate, (or rather the action by which we seek that original and
insertion,) they must be pulled up, beginning at their insertion, which is at
the shoulder blade (as shall be showed in the proper place) turning them up
toward their original, that is, to the Spine. Besides the less Rhomboides,
the hinder, and upper (called also the Dentatu^ or toothed-muscle) must be
raised from its original, which is at the three lower Rack-bones of the Neck
and the first of the back, and turned up to its insertion, which is at three
spaces of the lower ribbs nigh to the hind, and upper angle of the
shoulder blade, as shall be showed in fit place hereafter. These muscles thus
raised up, the 4 muscles which erect and extend the head must be taken away,
and then those two which move it obliquely, and lastly one which bends, or
declines, The sixth Figure of the muscles, showing some of the muscles of the
Head, Back, Chest, Shoulder Blade and Arm.
A D, the second pair of the muscles of the head, or the two Complexi, the
first part is at A D.

B C. the second part. E F, the third part rising up under G and inserted at F.

G, the fourth part of this muscle or the right muscle of the head according to
Fallopius, which Vesalius made the 4. part of the 2.

G G, (Betwixt the ribs) the external Intercostall muscles.

L, the original of the 2. muscle of the back.

M, His tendons at the racke-bone of the neck.

The upper O the fourth muscle of the arm or the greater round muscle.

O O, the lower, the 6 muscle of the chest, or the Sacrolumbus hanging from his
original.

Q, the sixth muscle of the arm or the upper Bladerider inverted.

V, the third ligament of the joint of the arm.

X, the fourth muscle of the shoulder blade or the heaver.

Z, the second muscle of the Chest or the greater Saw-muscle.

(...), the 3. muscle of the neck called Transuersalis. p, the 4. muscle of
the neck called Spinatus. S, the first muscle of the back or the Square
muscle. PH, the 2. muscle of thebacke or the Longest, whose original is at L
and his tendons at the Vertebrae at M M. O, the fourth muscle of the back
called Spinatus. d, the back of the shoulder blade flaied.

for thus anatomicall order requires. Yet if you think good, you may, not
hurting the other, first of all cut away that which is called the Mastoides,
which declines or bends the head. For these 4, which lift up and extend the
head, the The Splenius.
first from the figure of the Spleen is called the Splenius, it ascends from
the 5. upper spines of the back and the 4 lower of the neck, and is obliquely
inserted at the back part of the head and the mammillary process, whence you
may raise it toward its original. The second by reason of its composure is
called Complexus; The Complexus.
this passing from the third, fourth and fifth transverse process of the Back
and often from the first of the Neck, ascends directly to the back part of
the head, incompassing the lower and side part of the neck, you may easily
take it up; if you begin at the spine, and so go forwards to the transverse
processes and mammillary processes of the nowle bone. This Complexus may be
divided into two or three muscles, but that with some difficulty, by reason of
its folded texture. The third and fourth, which be two of the eight little
muscles, being four on each side, do ascend somewhat obliquely, the first
truly from the whole side of the second Vertebra. The second from the whole
side of the process of the first Vertebra, which it has in stead of a spine;
they ascend to the back part of the head just against the spine; these The
Recti or (...) right muscles.
two muscles by the consent of all Anatomists are called right, or direct
muscles, only moveing the head: these truly must not be plucked from the
places of their original, nor insertion, but only bound by a string put under
them, that so they may be the more easily showed. On each side follow two
oblique muscles, one whereof The seventh Figure of the muscles; showing some
muscles of the head and Chest, the Trapezius or Table-muscle being taken away:
as also of the blade and arm.
A, The prominent part of the fourth muscle of the chest called Serratus
posticus superior.

D, the first muscle of the head called splenius.

E E, the insertion of the second muscle of the head called Complexus.

I, the collar bone bared.

M, the backpart of the second muscle of the arm called Deltois.

zH, His backward original.

th, His implantation into the arm.

N N, the fourth muscle of the arm called Latissimus.

s m, His original from the spines of the rack-bones and from the holy bone

(...). the connexiou of this muscle with the hanch-bone, which is led in the
inside from m to (...).

(...), the place where it lies upon the lower angle of the Basis of the
shoulder blade.

O, the 4. muscle of the arm called Rotundus mayor. e, some muscles of the
back do here offer themselves. P, the fifth muscle of the arm called
Superscapularis Inferior. Q, the sixth muscle of the arm called Superscapularis
Superior. S, the beginning of the third muscle of the arm called Latissimus.
V, the third muscle of the blade called Rhomboides. (...) X, His original from
the spines of the rackebones. (...), His insertion into the basis of the
shoulder blade. ch, the fourth muscle of the blade called Levator. * A part of
the oblique descendent muscle of the Abdomen.

only moves the head; the other primarily the first Vertebra, but secondarily,
and by accident the head it self. For the first, contrary to the opinion of
some, it arises from the transverse process of the first-rack-bone, and then
is inserted, above the insertion of the first right muscle, the which in like
manner you must lift up, by some thing put underneath it, but not separate it.
The other entering forth of the spine of the second Vertebra, is inserted at the
process of the first, contrary to the original of the precedent, although
some think otherwise. It will be convenient in like manner only, to lift up
this with a string, and not pluck him from his place, that so you may see how
all these make a perfect triangle. The action of this muscle is contrary to the
action of the precedent, as the contrariety of its original and insertion show.

The eight Figure of the muscles; especially of those of the Chest, Head, and
Shoulder Blade, the Trapezius, Latissimus, and Rhomboides, being taken away.
A, The fourth muscle of the chest, or the upper and hinder Saw-muscle.

B, the 5 muscle of the chest, or the lower and hinder Saw-muscle.

a, b, A membranous beginning of the muscle of the Abdomen, descending
obliquely down from the spine of the back.

C, the first muscle extending the Cubit at c, his original is from the neck
of the arm, and from the lower basis of the blade at d.

E, the original of the fourth muscle of the bone hyois from the blade.

G G, the outward intercostall muscles.

I, the Clavicle or coller-bone bared.

N, the upper, the second muscle of the arm called Deltois, char. 4, 5, the
beginning of this muscle.

N, the third muscle of the arm or the broad muscle separated.

O, the fourth muscle of the arm or the lower Super-Scapularis or bladerider.

1, 2, 3. Char. His original at the basis of the shoulder blade at 1 2, and
his insertion into the joint of the arm at 3. Q, the sixth muscle of the arm
or the upper Super-Scapularis. X, the fourth muscle of the blade called Levator
or the heaver. Z, the second muscle of the Chest or the greater Saw-muscle. 7,
7, Char. the ribs. (...), the sixth muscle of the chest, or the muscle called
Sacrolumbus. (...), the first muscle of the head or the splinter. E E, the
second muscle of the head or the insertion of the muscles called complexei. PH,
the second muscle of the back or the longest muscle. O, the fourth muscle of
the back called Semispinatus.



Wherefore when the first oblique moves the head obliquely forwards, the second
pulls it pack by the first Vertebra, this with his associate of the other side,
may Which may be truly called the proper muscle of the neck.
be truly termed the proper muscles of the neck, because they belong to no
other part; whereas it is contrary in other muscles. But we must note, that the
head (according to Galens opinion) has two motions, one directly forwards and
backwards, as appears The two motions of the head.
in beckning it forwards; and casting it backwards; the other circular.

The first in Galens opinion is performed by the first Vertebra moved upon the
second; the second by the head moved upon the first Vertebra; for which he is
reproved by the latter Anatomists, who teach that the head cannot be turned
round or circularly upon the first Vertebra without putting it out of joint.

For the last, which bends the head, it ascends from the upper and side part of
the Sternon, and the next part of the clavicle, obliquely to the Apophysis The
ninth Figure of the muscles, showing the muscles of the Head and Neck.
A B, the third pair of the Muscles of the head called Recti Maiores.

C, the Mammillary process.

D, the transverse process of the first rackebone.

E, the process of the 2 rackebone of the neck.

F G, the fourth pair of muscles of the head called Recti Minores.

H I, the fifth pair of muscles of the head called Obliqui Superiores.

K L, the sixth pair of muscles of the head called Obliqui Inferiores.

X, the fourth pair of muscles of the shoulder blade.

L, the second muscle of the neck called Scalenus, which Falopius makes the
eight muscle of the chest.

P, the fourth muscle of the neck called spinatus.

S, the first muscle of the back called Quadratus.

PH, the second muscle of the back called Longissimus.

a, the sinus or bosom of this muscle, whereby it gives way unto the third
muscle of the back, called Sacer.

b, His Original.

ps, the third muscle of the back called Sacer. g, His Original. d, His end.
O, the fourth muscle of the back called Semispinatus. (...), His upper end
under the fourth muscle of the neck.

Mastoides or mammillary process of the hind part of the head, whence it is
called the Mastoideus. You may divide this by reason of its manifold original
rather into two, than into three muscles. But it had been better that the head
might have The Mastoideus,
been moved every way, equally backwards and to the right and left sides; but
thus it would often have been strained to our great damage and danger of
life; neither could there have been such facility of motion without a
loosensse of the joint. Therefore nature had rather bestow upon the head an
harmless faculty of fewer motions, than one furnished with more variety, but
with a great deal more uncertainty and danger. Wherefore it has made this
juncture not laxe or loose, but stiff and strong.

After the showing of these muscles, we must come to three or four of the
neck, ^f which number two (which some reduce to one) extends, another bends,
and the ^st moves side ways, and all of them with a motion succeeding each
other turn it about, as we said of the muscles of the head. The first of these
which extend, taking ^s original from the six transverse processes of the
six upper racke-bones of the ^acke, or rather from the root of the oblique,
ascends directly to the spine of the second Vertebra of the neck, and the
oblique process thereof; some call it the Trans^versarius; The Transversa^
that is, the transverse-muscle. This, if you desire to take it away, it is
best first to separate it from the spine, then to turn it upwards to the
transverse processes; ^nlesse you had rather draw it a little from its partner
and companion in that place where their originals are distinct, seeing it is
the last and next to the bones.

Marvel not, if you find not this distinction of their original, so plain
and manifest, for it is commonly obscure. For the muscle Spinatus, as it most
commonly comes to pass, arising from the roots of the seven upper spines of
the back, and the The Spinatus,
last of the neck, is inserted into other spines of the neck, so that it
might easily be confounded with the former by Galen. The third bends the neck,
and arising within from the body of the five upper Vertebrae of the back
(though with a very obscure original, specially in lean bodies) it ascends
under the gullet along the neck, even to the nowle-bone, into whose inner
part it is obscurely inserted. Wherefore it is likely that it helps not only
to bend the neck, but also the head. This muscle is made of oblique fibers
proceeding from the body of the vertebrae, all the way it passes to the
transverse processes of the other Vertebra. But it seems with its copartner
which is opposite to it, to make a certain hollow path upon the bodies of the
Vertebrae, to the The L^
gullet, and it is called the long muscle. The fourth and last, which we said
moves the neck to one side, is called Scalenus from the figure thereof; it
ascends from the hinder and upper part of the first rib of the Chest, inserting
its self into all the transverse The Scalenus
processes of the neck by its fibers, which as it were for the same purpose,
it has sufficiently long, that it may fasten it self from the furthest or
lowest process of the neck into the first or highest thereof. The passage of
the nerves through this to the arm makes this muscle seem double or divided
into two. For the veins and arteries pertaining to the neck, they have been
declared in the proper Chapters of the distributions of the vessels; it
remains that you note, all these muscles receive nerves from the Vertebrae
whence they arise.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Muscles of the Chest and Loins.
WE must now speak of the Muscles both of the Chest which serve for
respiration, as also of the Loins. But first we must know that the hind In
what the Vertebrae of the neck and loins agree and disagree.
part of the Chest called the Metaphrenum, or back, consists of twelve
Vertebrae, the loins of five, all which differ not from the Vertebrae of the
neck, but that they are thicker in their bodies than these of the neck;
neither are they lesser in holes, neither they have their transverse processes
perforated, or parted in two, as the racke-bones of the neck have. Besides
each of these rack bones alone by it self, on each side in the lower part
thereof makes a hole, through which a nerve has passage from the spinall
marrow to the adjacent parts, when on the contrary in the Vertrebrae of the
neck, such holes or passages are not made, but by meeting together of two of
them.

Concerning the processes of the Rackbones of the Chest, whether transverse,
right or oblique, they differ nothing from these of the neck (I mean even to
the tenth) but that the transverse seeing they are not perforated, as we said
before, do as it were sustain the ribs, being straightly bound to them with
strong ligaments both proper and common; but after the tenth Vertebrae of the
back, the two other of the back, and all those of the loins are different,
not only from those of the neck, but also from the ten first of the back,
by reason of their oblique processes, because from the eleaventh (which is
received, as well by that which is above it, as by that under it, for the
strength of the whole back, and the easier bending thereof without fear of
fracture or dislocation) the above mentioned processes of the lower rack-bones
which were wont to receive, are received; as on the contrary they receive which
were wont to be received. They differ besides from all the forementioned, by
reason of their spines, because from the eleaventh they begin by little and
little to look upwards, contrary to the former.

But if any ask, how the tenth Vertebrae of the back may be termed the midst
of How the tenth Vertebrae of the back, may be said to be the middle of the
spine.
the spine, being the whole spine consists of twenty four Vertebrae? He may
know that this may be true, as thus; if the six bones of the holy-bone, and
the fourth of the Rumpe (being more gristlely than bony) be numbered amongst the
bones of the Spine; for then from the setting on of the head to the eleaventh
rack bone of the back, are seaventeene in number, and so many from thence
downwards.

But let us return to the muscles of the Chest serving for respiration. First,
you The number of the muscles of the Chest.
must know that these Muscles are fourscore and nine, that is, on each side
forty four, alike in strength, thickness, site, and action; and one besides
in the midst which they call the Diaphragma or Midriffe. Of these forty four,
there are 22. The muscles dilating the Chest.
which dilate the chest in drawing in the breath; that is, the Subclauius, the
Dentatus, or Serratus major in the opinion of some, both the Rhomboides, or
Serrati postici; the oblique ascendent of the lower belly, the eleaven
Intercostales, and the six Intercartilaginei externi. On the contrary, as many
contract the breast in expiration; to wit, the Sacrolumbus, the oblique
descendent, the Right and transverse of the lower belly, the inner Trangular,
the six Intercartilaginei, and the eleaven inner Intercost^les. The muscles
contracting the Chest. The Subclavius is the first of the muscles dilating the
chest. Serratu^ major.
Of these twenty two dilating the Chest, the first, from the site is called
the Subclavius, for it descends obliquely from the inner and forepart of the
Clavicula or Collar bone, into the gristle of the first ribbe, even to the
Sternon, and dilates it. The second is the Serratus major, the greater
Saw-muscle arising according to the opinion of some from the whole basis of the
shoulder blade on the inside, and it is transversely inserted into the nine
upper ribs, producing certain toothed or saw-like processes running further
to the bones of the rib, than to the spaces between them, or Intercostall
muscles, whereupon it has the name of the saw-muscle; yet some have referred
this muscle to them of the shoulder blade. The third descends from the three
lower spines of the neck, and the first of the back, by means of a membranous
and most thin ligament, into the three or four upper ribbs, running further
into their spaces or Intercostall muscles, than into the ribbs themselves,
whereupon it is called Serratus posterior, and superior, that is, the hinder and
upper saw-muscle. The fourth in like manner ascends by means of a membranous
and thin ligament from the Serratus posterior and superior.
three upper spines of the loins, and the two last of the chest, or back,
into three or four of the lower, or last of the bastard ribbs, sent forth
further into them or their bones, than into the Intercostall muscles possessing
the spaces between them, wherefore it is called Serratus posterior and
inferior, the hinder and lower saw-muscle. Moreover these two last muscles have
been called by a common name from their figure the Rhomboides, that is, the
square muscles. The fifth which we said The oblique ascendent of the lower
belly. The eleaven Intercostales externi.
was the ascendent of the Epigrastrium, has already been sufficiently
described in his place. The eleaven Intercostales externi, or external
Intercostall muscles descend obliquely from the back part of the lower side of
the upper ribbe, into the forepart of the upper side of the ribbe lying next
under it, after a quite contrary manner to the six Intercartilaginei, who
having like original and insertion amongst the gristles, as the Intercostall
amongst the ribs, descend obliquely from the forepart 6. Intercartilaginei.
backwads. And thus much of the muscles dilating the Chest in inspiration.

But the first, of the other muscles, being as many in number, which contract
the The Sacro-lumbus, the first of those which contract the chest.
Chest in expiration, arising from the holy-bone, and the oblique processes of
the loins, ascends (firmly and confusedly adhering with the Musculus sacer,
or holy-muscle, which we shall describe hereafter) to the roots of the twelve
ribs, imparting in the ascent a small tendon to each of them, by which it
draws these ribbs toward the transverse processes; and by reason of its
Original it is called Sacrolumbus, that is, the Holy loine-muscle.

The second, third, and fourth, which we said were the oblique descendent,
right, The oblique descendent, the right and transverse of the Epigastrium,
and transverse of the Epigrastium, have been formerly described in their
place.

But by the way you must note that these three muscles of the Epigastrium help
expiration rather by accident, than of themselves, to wit, by driving back the
midriffe toward the lungs by the entrails, which also they force upwards, by
drawing the parts into which they are inserted toward their Original. The
fifth which we called the Triangulus, or Triangular, may be called the
Compressor of the gristles, Triangulus muscul^s.
which proceeding from the inner sides of the Sternon, goes to all the gristles
of the true ribs; this is more apparent under the Sternon in beasts, than in
men, though it be not very obscure in them neither. For the internal
Intercostall muscles, Intercostalc^ incerni.
in my judgment, they arise from the lower sides of the upper ribbe, and
descending obliquely from the fore part backwards, are inserted into the upper
side of the ribbe next under it; so that they may follow the production of the
fibers of the external Intercartilaginei; as the six internal
Intercartilaginei follow the site of the external Intercartilaginei interni.
Intercostall proceeding from behind forwards; wherefore as well the
Intercostall, as the Intercartilaginei, every where intersect each other, after
the similitude of the letter X. I know some have written that the internal
muscles (whether intercostall or Intercartalaginei) ascend from the upper sides
of the lower ribbe forwards, or backwards.

But if this were true, it would follow that these muscles admitted their
nerves in Muscles always receive their nerves in their heads.
their tail and not in their head, seeing the nerve always goes under the
ribbe, and not above it.

The last muscle of the Chest, that is, the Diaphragma or Midriffe, is
sufficiently described The midriffe,
before; wherefore it remains we describe the muscles of the Loins. These
are six in number, on each side three, equal in thickness, strength and
situation; The muscles of the loins. They are three pair^ Triangulu^.
one of these bends, and the other two extend the Loins; it is called by
reason of the figure the Triangulus, or Triangular which bends the Loins, it
ascends from a great part of the hind side of the Hanch-bone into the
transverse processes of the Loins, and the last of the Chest on the inside,
for which cause it is made of fibers short, long, and indifferent, answering to
the nearenesse or distance of the said processes. The first of the extenders is
called the Semispinatus, because even to the middle Semispinatu,
of its body it takes the original from the spines of the holy-bones and
Loins; this with its oblique fibers ascends from all the said spines to the
transverse processes as well of the Loins as Chest. The other is called Sacer,
the Holy-muscle, because it Sacer,
takes its original from the Holy-bone, or the sides thereof; it ascends with
its oblique fibers to the spines of the Loins, and of the eleaven lower
Rack-bones of the Chest.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Muscles of the Shoulder Blade.
NOw we must describe the muscles of the extreme parts, and first of the Arm,
taking our beginning from these of the Shoulder Blade. But first, that we may
the better understand their description, we must observe the nature and
condition of the shoulder blade. Therefore the The description of the
blade-bone, or shoulder blade.
blade bone on that part, which lies next unto the ribbs, is somewhat hollowed;
wherefore on the other side it some what buncles out. It has two ribbs, one
above, another below: by the upper is meant nothing else than a border or right
line, which looking toward the temples is extended from the exterior angle
thereof under the collar-bone, even to the Process Coracoides which this ribbe
produces in the end thereof: By the lower, the underside which lies toward the
lower belly and the short ribbs.

Besides in this shoulder blade we observe the basis, head and spine. By the
basts The basis of the blad^.
we understand the broader part of the shoulder blade, which looks toward the
backe-bone. By the head we understand the narrower part thereof, in which it
receives the head of the Arm in a cavity, indifferently hollow, which it
produces both The head of the shoulder blade.
by it self, as also by certain gristles, which there fastened encompasse
that cavity. This kind of cavity is called Glene.

This receives and contains the bone of the arm, by a certain strong
ligament encompassing and strengthening the joint, which kind of ligament is
common to all other joints; this ligament arises from the bottom of the cavity
of the shoulder blade, and circularly encompasses the whole joint, fastening it
self to the head of the arm; there are also other ligaments besides this,
which encompasse and strengthen this articulation. The spine of the blade, The
processes Acromion and Coracoides.
By the spine is meant a process, which rising by little and little upon the
gibbous part of the blade, from the basis thereof where it was low and deprest,
becomes higher until it ends in the Acromion, or upper part thereof. Nature
has made two productions in this bone (that is to say, the Acromion from the
spine, and the Coracoides from the upper side) for the strengthening of the
articulation of the arm and shoulder blade, that is, left the arm should be
easily strained upward or forwards; The muscles of the shoulder blade.
besides, it is fastened to the clavicle, by the process Acromion.

The muscles which move the shoulder blade are six in number, of which four
are proper, and two common. The first of the four proper seated in the
forepart, ^.
ascends from the bones of five or six of the upper ribbs, to the Coracoides,
which it draws forwards, and is called Serratus minor, that is, the Lesser
saw-muscle; which that you may plainly show, it is fit you pull the pectorall
muscle from the collar-bone, almost to the middle of the Sternon. The other
first opposite against it, is placed on the fore side, and draws its original
from the three lower spines of the neck, and the three upper of the Chest,
from whence it extends it self, and ends into all Rhomboides. Levator.
the gristly basis of the shoulder blade, drawing it backwards; it is called
the Rhomboides. The third from its action, is called the Levator, or the
heaver, or lifter up, seated in the upper part, it descends from the transverse
processes of the four first Vertebrae of the neck into the upper angle and
spine of the blade. The fourth called Trapezius,
Trapezius, or the Table-muscle, is seated in the back part, and is membranous
at the original, but presently becoms fleshy: it arises from almost all the
backe-part of the head, from all the spines of the neck, and the eight upper
Vertebrae of the chest, and then is inserted by his nervous part, almost into
the whole basis of the blade, extending it self above the muscles thereof,
even to the midst of its spine, where being fleshy it is inserted even to the
Acromion, the upper part of the calvicle, and in some sort to the upper ribbe.
This muscle has a threefold action, by reason of its triple original. The
first is to draw the shoulder blade toward its original, that is, to the
nowle, and spine of the neck; the other is to draw it toward the back,
because of the contraction of the middle or transverse fibers which lead it
directly thither; and the other is to draw it downwards by reason of the
original it has from the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eight spine of the
Vertebrae of the Chest.

But we must note that these diverse actions are not performed by this muscle,
by the assistance of one only nerve, but by more, which come into it by the
spinall marrow, by the holes of the Vertebrae, as well of the neck as the
chest, from whence it takes the original. For the two other which are the
common muscles of the blade, and arm, or shoulder, we will describe them with
the muscles of the shoulder or Latissimus.
arm: for one of these which is called the Latissimus, that is, the broadest,
ascends from the holy-bone to the shoulder blade and arm. Pectoralis.


The other named the Pectoralis coms from the Sternon and collar-bone to the
shoulder blade and arm.

CHAP. XX. The Description of the Hand taken in General.
NOW it befits us to to describe in order the muscles of the arm; but first we
must know, what it is that we call the arm. But seeing that cannot fitly be
understood, unless 1. we know what the hand is, seeing that the arm is a part
of the hand; therefore first we must define what a hand is, and then devide it
into its parts. Therefore the hand is taken two manner of ways, that is,
generally and specially.

The hand generally taken, signifies all that which is contained from the
joining of What is meant by the hand in genera^l.
the arm to the shoulder blade, even to the ends of the fingers. But in
particular it signifies only that which is comprehended from the furthest
bones of the cubit, or the beginning of the wrest, to the very fingers ends.

Therefore the hand in general is an instrument of instruments made for to
take up and hold any thing. It is composed of three great parts, that is, of
the Arm, Cubite, and Hand, vulgarly, and properly so called; but the hand
taken thus in particular is again divided in three other parts, the Carpus or
Brachiale, the Wrest, the Metacarpium, or Postbrachiale, the afterwrest, and
the fingers; all these parts (seeing each of them are not only organicall
parts, but also parts of organicall parts) are composed of all, or certainly
of the most of the simular parts; that is, of both the skins, the fleshy
pannicle, the fat veins, arteries, nerves, muscles or flesh, coats both common
and proper, bones, gristles and ligaments, all which we will discribe in their
order.

But first I think good to admonish you of the differences of the hand taken
from The differences of the hand from the site thereof.
the site thereof; and these differences are six in number, the fore, the
hind, the internal, the external, the upper and lower side or part thereof.

By the fore we mean that part which looks directly from the thumb to the
shoulder: by the hind, we understand the part opposite to it, which from the
little finger looks toward the basis of the shoulder blade. By the inside we
signify that part which lies next to the sides of the body, when the hand
retains its natural site; by the outside, the part opposite to it. The upper
and lower side you may know by the very naming thereof.

The hand properly so called is divided into five fingers, that so it may hold
and take up bodies of all figures, as round, triangular, square and the like,
and gather up Why the hand is divided into so many fingers.
the leasts bodies with the fingers ends, as needles, pins, and such like.

Nature has bestowed two hands upon us, that so they may belpe each other,
each moving to each side. But for the taking up and holding of small bodies it
was Why the nails are added to the soft flesh of the fingers.
fit, that the fingers of their own nature soft, should be armed with nails,
that consisting of soft flesh and an hard nail, they might serve for all
actions; for the nail is a stay to the soft flesh, which otherwise would turn
away in meeting with an hard body; the use of the nails is to scratch, shave,
and pull off the skin, to rend, pinch, and pluck asunder small bodies. They
have not bony hardness, that so they might not break, but bend.

Yet other creatures have hard nails, to serve them in stead of weapons. Their
Why the nails grow continunally.
figure is round, because fuch a figure is less obnoxious to external
injuries; and by reason they are subject to wearing, they grow continually.

Nature has placed flesh on the inner and side part of the fingers, so to
press more straightly, the things they once take hold of, so that by holding
them close together, we can hold water that it may not run out. The length of
the fingers is unequal, that when they are opened and stretched forth, they
make as it were a circular figure; for so it comes to pass, that the hand can
hold all bodies, but especially round.

It remains that we prosecute the distribution of the veins, arteries, and
sinews, which run over all the parts of the hand taken in general and
particular, whereby we may more commodiously hereafter handle all the proper
parts thereof.

CHAP. XXI. The Distribution of the Subclavian vein, and first of the
Cephalica, or Humeraria.
TWo large veins descend from the Subclavian, the one from the lower side, the
other from the higher. Yet sometimes, and most usually, both these proceed
from the same common orifice, as in men of a low statnre in the arm. The one
of these is called the Axillaris, the other the Humeraria, or Cephalicke;
therefore this Cephalicke passing forth of the Subclavian runs superficially
along the foreside between the muscle Deltoides, and the Tendon of the
pectorall muscle, and descends in the midst between The Cephalicke vain.
the common coat of the muscles and the fleshy pannicle, even to the bending
of the cubite, where in lean bodies it is plainly to be seen, whereas in fat
bodies it is hardly to be perceived, being as it were buried in abundance of
fat. This vein having in its descent, sent forth some small branches, both to
the skin, as also to certain muscles over which it runs, is divided into
two, a little above the outward protuberation of the arm. One of the branches
into which it is divided descending obliquely to the fore part of the cubite, a
little below the bending of the cubite, it meets, and is united with the like
branch in the same place, as shall be shown hereafter.

That which arises from this concourse, is called the median vein, because it
arises from two branches, and is seated between them. They usually open this
median vein in the diseases of the head and liver, which require Phlebotomy;
but if it shall The median vein.
not be sufficiently manifest, when you judge it must be opened, for a general
evacuation of the whole body; you may cut one of these branches, by whose
concourse it is made, which you shall think the fitter; and because each branch
draws from the next parts, according to the straightness of the fibers,
rather than from the opposite Howby opening the median vein, you may draw more
or less blood from the head or liver.
side; if you would evacuate the head, and liver equally, by opening either of
these branches; it is convenient that opening that branch (for example) which
comes from the Cephalicke, you presently lay your thumb upon it, until you
suppose, you have drawn a just quantity of blood from the liver, by the
Basilica, or liver vein; which done, you may take off your thumb, and suffer
the blood to follow freely, by the open branch of the Cephalicke, until you
have drawn as much blood as you shall judge requisite; otherwise you will draw
it but from one part, to wit, the head. So you shall evacuate it only from the
liver, if you open the branch which comes from the Basilica, and concurs to the
generation of the median.

Moreover, when there is need to open the Basilica, and it shall be no where
conspicuous, the Cephalicke or median being easy to be discerned at the same
time, you may in stead thereof open the median, or if it be not to be found,
the Cephalicke, pressing but the trunk thereof with your thumb, as we said
before, lest the head should be evacuated in stead of the liver. You may do
the same in the Basilica, if when there shall be necessity to open the
Cephalicke, it shall not appear. Most of those which at this day open a vein,
in stead of the median, open that branch of the Basilica which ascends,
together with the Cephalicke to make the median. But you must understand that
the median descends between the two bones of the cubit, even to the end
thereof, and then divided into many branches, it is at length spent on the
back of the hand behind the thumb, the fore and middle fingers, or the
afterwrest. Sometimes it runs back into the following branch, and then at the
wrest it departs from it, to be bestowed upon the forementioned parts. The
other branch of the Cephalicke, which we may call the fore and outward
Cephalicke, descending directly down to the midst of the wand, thence wanders
overthwart into the hind part of the arm, where increased with a branch from
the Basilica, it is distributed over all the back of the hand, which with the
median it nourishes. But the branches of these veins do so run through the
forenamed parts, that by the way, they yield them necessary provision.

CHAP. XXII. The Description of the Axillary vein.
THe Axillary arising at the insertion of the pectorall muscle, or a little The
axillary is divided into
higher, after it has produced the two Thoracicae it is divided under the
tendon of that muscle into two fair branches, that is to say, into the inner
deep Axillary, and the skin or outward axillary. The deep or The deep
axillary, and outward axillary.
inner having still for his companion in his descent, the axillary artery, and
the nerves of the third conjugation, after it has produced the small external
musculous of the arm, it goes into the bending of the elbow, where running
somewhat deep with the artery and nerve into the muscles of the cubite, it is
divided into three other branches, of which one descending with the wand,
slides under the ring, into the inner side of the hand, and has bestowed two
small branches on the thumb, two others on the fore, and one upon the middle
finger, so that all of them ascend by the sides of these fingers, the other
descending with the artery, as the former along the cubite, sends branches to
the rest of the fingers, like as the former. The third goes on the foreside
between the two bones even to the wrest, and the square muscle.

But you must note that the veins of which we now treat, do not only make
these devisions mentioned by us, but infinite others besides, as well in the
parts which they go to, as also in the inner muscles of the hand which they
nourish.

And thus much of the internal and deep axillary vein. For the external or
skin Axillary (which first appears under the skin, especially in lean
bodies, a little above the inward production of the arm) it is divided in that
place into two branches, the one whereof descending to the bending of the arm
meets, and is united with the Cephalike branch, sooner or later, that so it may
produce the median, as we formerly mentioned.

The other branch having sent forth many shoots of a different length and
thickness, as well into the skin, as into the other neighboring parts,
descending along the lower side of the bone of the cubite, properly so
called, is at length spent upon the fore and outward Cephalicke branch, which
we said descended along the wand; and thus united, they run over all the
hand, where in the right hand, between the middle and fore finger, they make
the Salvatella; but in The Selvatella and Splenitica
the left, in the same place, they produce the Splenitica.

But always remember, (if in dissection you find any thing otherwise than we
have delivered it) that the distribution of the vessels is so various
(especially in the hands) that there can no certain rule be delivered thereof.

CHAP. XXIII. The Distribution of the Axillary Artery.
THe Axillary artery from the first original, which is presently after the two
Thoracica, descending between the muscle called Biceps, or the two headed
muscle, and the Brachiaeus, with the deep axillary vein, distributes a large
branch amongst the outward muscles of the arm, which extend the cubite, and is
spent in the external muscles of the same, which arise without, from the
productions of the arm.

And this is called the Ramus Musculus, or Musculous branch, as also the vein
that accompanyes this Arterye. Then this Arterye when it comes to the bending
of the cubite, thrusting it self into the muscles bending the fingers,
communicates certain branches to the parts pertaining to the dearticulation of
the cubit with the shoulder, and other parts there situate, as it did in the
upper parts, by which it descended hither. Verily it may it may be a general
rule; that every vessel sends or bestows certain portions thereof by the way
to all the parts by which it passes. But if you should An Aontomicall Axiom.
ask, why I have not prosecuted these productions; I would answer; I never
intended, to handle other than large and fair branches of vessels, by rash
incision of which, there may happen danger of death or a disease. For it would
be both an infinite and needles business to handle all the small divarications of
the veins, arteryes and nerves. Therefore this Artery sunk into these muscles,
when it comes almost to the midst of the Cubit, presently or a little after it
is divided into two large branches, the one of which along the wand, and the
qther along the Cubite is carried into the hand on the inside under the Ring.
For both these branches are distributed and spent upon the hand after the same
manner as the branches of the internal Axillary vein, that is, having sent by
the way some little shoots into the parts by which they pass, at the length
the branch which descends by the Wand of the remainder thereof, bestows two
sprigs upon the Thumb, on each side one, and two in like manner on the fore
finger, and one on the middle; the other which runs along the Ell, performs
the like office to the little and the middle or ring finger, as you may see by
dissection.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Nerves of the Neck, Back, and Arm.
NOw we should handle the sinews of the Arm, but because these proceed from
the Nerves of the Neck and Back, I think it fit therefore The 7 pair of
nerves of the neck.
to speak something of them in the first place.

Therefore from the Neck there proceed seven pair of Nerves, the first of
which proceeds from the nowle bone, and the first Vertebra The first pair.
of the neck; as also the first pair of the Back from the last Vertebra of
the Neck and the first of the Chest. But all these Nerves are divided into two
or more branches of the first pair (that is to say, on each side) go, the one
to the small right muscle, ascending from the first racke-bone of the neck to
the nowle bone, the other to the long muscle on the foreside of the neck.

The branches of the second pair are distributed, some with a portion which
they The second pair.
receive from the third pair over all the skin of the head; the two others go
as well to the muscles, which are from the second Vertebra to the back part of
the head, and from the same to the first Vertebra, as also to the long muscle
before mentioned.

One of the third pair of Sinews is communicated to the head, as we said
before, but others to the Muscles which extend, or erect the head and the
Neck; there is also The third pair.
one of these distributed into the neighboring ^^de muscle and part of the
long.

The nerves of the fourth pair go, one to the muscles as well of the neck as the
head, and The fourth pair.
to the broad muscle; the other after it has sent some portion thereof into the
long muscle and the side muscles of the neck, it descends with a portion of
the fifth and sixth pair to the Midriffe. One of the branches of the fifth pair
is bestowed on the hind muscles The fifth pair.
of the neck and head, the other upon the long muscle and Midriffe; the third
is communicated to the Levatores, or Heaving muscles of the Arm and shoulder.

One of the Nerves of the sixth pair goes to the hind muscles of the Neck and
The sixth pair
head, another to the Midriffe, the third with a portion of the seventh pair
of the neck, and of the first and second of the Chest go to the Arms and
heaving muscles of the shoulder blade.

One of the branches of the seventh pair runs to the broad muscle and to the
neighboring muscles both of the neck and head; another increased with a
portion The seventh pair.
of the fifth and sixth pair of the neck, and a third joined to the second and
third pair of the Chest descending into the Arm go to the hand.

But you must note that the Muscles which take their original from many
Vertebrae, whether from above downwards, or from below upwards, admit Nerves
not only from the Vertebrae, from whence they take their original, but also
from them which they come near in their descent, or ascent!

There pass twelve conjugations of Nerves from the Rack-bones of the Chest.
The 12. pair^ of Nerves of the Chest. The first pai^^*


The first entering forth from between the last Racke-bone of the neck and the
first of the Chest, is divided (that is, on each side, each Nerve from his
side) into two or more portions, as also all the rest. Therefore the branches
of this first conjugation go some of them to the Arms, as we said before,
others to the muscles as well these of the Chest, as others arising there, or
running that way.

The branches of the second conjugation are distributed to the same parts, that
these The second pair.
of the first were.

But the branches of all the other conjugations even to the twelfth, are
communicated, The other* paires.
some to the intercostall muscles running within under the true ribs even to
the Sternon, and under the bastard ribs even to the right and long muscles; and
the Costall Nerves of the sixth conjugation are augmented by meeting these
intercostall branches by the way as they descend by the roots of the Ribs.
Other particles of the said Nerves are communicated to the muscles as well of
the Chest, as spine, as the same Muscles pass forth, or run along by the
Vertebrae, from whence these nerves have either their original, or passage
forth.

Having thus therefore showed the original of the Sinews of the Arm, it
remains The Nerves which are carried to the Arms.
that we show their number and distribution.

Their number is five or six; proceeding from the fifth, sixth, and seventh
Vertebra of the neck, and the first and second of the Chest. The first of
which not mixed with any other from the fifth Vertebra of the neck, goes to
the Muscle Deltoides and the skin which covers it.

The other 4 or 5 when they have mutually embraced each other, not only from
their first original but even to the shoulder, where they free themselves from
this convolution, are distributed after the following manner.

The first and second descending to the Muscle mentioned a little before, and
thence sometimes even to the hand, is by the way communicated to the Muscle
Biceps, and then under the said Muscle it meets and is joined with the third
Nerve. Thirdly it is communicated with the Longest muscle of the Cubite, in the
bending whereof it is divided into two branches descending along the two
bones of the Cubit, until at last borne up by the fleshy pannicle it is spent
upon the skin and inner side of the hand.

The third lower than this, is first united with the second, under the Muscle
Biceps, then straight way separated from it, it sends a portion thereof to the
Arm which lies under it, and to the skin thereof; lastly at the bending of the
Cubit on the fore side, it is mingled with the fifth pair.

The fourth, the largest of all the rest, coming down below the third branch
under the Biceps with the internal Axillary vein and Artery, is turned
toward the outward and back part of the Arm, there to communicate it self
to the Muscles extending the Cubit, and also to the inner skin of the Arm and
the exterior of the Cubit; the remainder of this branch when in its descent it
has arrived at the joint of the Cubit, below the bending thereof it is divided
into two branches, the one whereof descending along the Cubit is spent on the
outside of the Wrest; the other associating the Wand is on the outside in like
manner in two branches bestowed upon the Thumb, and in as many upon the fore
finger, and by a fifth upon the middle finger though more obscurely.

The fifth branch being also lower than the rest, sliding between the muscles
bending and extending the Cubite, when it comes behind the inner protuberation
of the Cubite (in which place we said before the third branch meets with this)
it is communicated to the internal muscles of the same, and then divided into
three portions one of which on the outside along the middle of the Cubite
goes in two sprigs to the little finger, and so many to the middle finger, and
one to the Ring finger; the other two, the one without and the other within the
Ring, go to the hand, where after each of them has bestowed what was
requisite on the muscles of the hand, they are wasted into other five small
portions, of which these which are from that portion which descends without the
Ring, send two sprigs to the little, two to the fore and one to the middle
finger; but these which come from that which passes under the Ring, by such a
distribution communicates it self to other fingers, as two sprigs to the
thumb, two to the fore and one to the middle finger. The sixth the lowest and
last runs between the skin and fleshy Pannicle, by the inner protuberation of
the Arm, and then is spent upon the skin of the Cubit.

CHAP. XXV. The description of the bone of the Arm, and the Muscles which move
it.
BEcause we cannot perfectly demonstrate the original of the muscles of the
Arm, (especially of the two Arm muscles) not knowing the description of this
bone; first therefore we will describe it, then return to the original of the
muscles arising from thence. The bone of the arm is the greatest The
greatness and figure. The Appendix of the Arm. The processes of the Arm,
of all the bones in the body, except the Thigh Bone; it is round, hollow and
filled with marrow, with a great Appendix or head on the top thereof, having an
indifferent neck, to which it is knit by Symphysis, for appendices are no
otherwise united to their bones. In the lower part thereof it has two
processes, or protuberations, one on the fore side, another on the hind,
between which swellings there is a cavity like to half the compass of a
wheel, about which the Cubit is moved. The extremityes of this cavity ends in
two holes, of which one is the more external, the other more internal: these
cavityes receive the heads of the Cubite, that is, the fore, or internal
receives the fore process when the arm is bended inwards, but the external
or hinder the exterior, as it is extended.

For the head of the arm it has a double connection, the one with its own
neck by Symphysis, that is, a natural union of the bones without any motion;
the other with the lightly engraven cavity of the shoulder blade, which we call
Glene, by that kind of Dearticulation which is called Arthrodia; this
connection is made firm and stable by the muscles descending into the arm from
the shoulder blade, as also by the proper Ligaments descending from the circle
and brow of the cavity of the Acromion and Coracoides to this head of the arm;
this same head of the arm is, as it were more cleft and open on the inner
side, than on the fore side, that so it may give way to one of the Ligaments
coming from the shoulder blade to the muscle Biceps. For as much as belongs to
the lower end of the bone of the arm (which we said has two processes) we may
say that it is fastened to the bones of the Cubit by two sorts of articulation,
that is, by Ginglymos with the Ell or proper bone of the Cubit, and by
Arthrodia with the Radius or Wand, which in a lightly engraven cavity receives
the fore process of the arm, and is turned about it for the motion of the
hand. The hinder process is chiefly added for the safety and preservation of
the veins, arteries and nerves.

These things thus shown, it is worth our labor to know the figure of the
arm it The figure of the Arm.
self, as it lies between the forementioned appendices and processes, that in
the case of a fracture, we may know how conveniently to restore it; therefore
first we must understand, that this bone is somewhat bended and hollowed on the
inside under the cleft of the head thereof, but bunching out on the out and
fore side.

Wherefore seeing it must be moveable forwards and backewards, upwards and The
8 muscles thereof.
downwards, nature for the performance of so many motions has furnished it
with eight muscles, which are six proper and two common with the
shoulder blade. Of which number two move it forwards, two backwards, two
upwards and downwards Which must not be understood so, as that these two
Muscles should move it directly forwards inclining either upwards, nor
downwards; and the other two should move Table 24. shows the Brain together
with the Aster-braine, the spinall marrow and the Nerves of the whole body.
A, That part of the brain that is (...) the nosethrils.

B, That part which is at the side of the ventricles.

C, The back part of the brain.

D, The Cerebellum or After-braine.

E, The Mamillary process in the right side.

F, The original of the opticke nerve.

G, Their conjunctions.

H, The coat into which the opticke nerve is extended.

I, The second pair of the sinews of the brain.

K, The lesser root of the third conjugation.

L, The thick root of the same conjugation according to the common opinion.

M, The fourth conjugatio^ of the sinews

N, The lesser root of the fifth pair.

O, The bigger root of the same pair:

P, The small membrane of the ear which they call the Tympany.

Q, The lower branch of the bigger root of the fifth conjugation.

S, The sixth pair of sinews.

T, The seventh pair.

V, The beginning of the spinall marrow out of the middle of the basis of the
brain.

X, The right sinew of the midriffe cut off.

Y, A branch from the fifth pair creeping to the top of the shoulder.

Z, The first nerve of the arm from whence there goes a branch to the skin.

A, The second nerve of the arm, and a branch there from into the first muscle
of the Cubite.

B, The third nerve of the arm and a branch going to the skin on the outside.

C, A branch from the 3. nerve to the 2. muscle of the Cubite.

D, The congresse or meeting of the second nerve with the third.

E, A small branch from the 3. nerve to the 2. muscle of the Radius.

F, The distribution of the second nerve into two branches.

* The lesser branch of this division lengthened out to the skin as far as the
thumb.

a, The place of the spinall marrow where it issues out of the brain. 1, 2,
3, etc. Thirty paires of nerves arising from the spinall marrow are here noted
by their Char. that is to say, 7. of the neck, 12, of the Chest, 5. of the
loins and 6, of the holy-bone.

b, The thicker branch of the 2, nerve divided into 2, parts.

c, Branches of the 3, nerve sprinkled here and there.

d, Nerves from the third pair to the thumb, the forefinger and the middle
finger.

^e, The 4, nerve of the arm. f, The passage hereof through the inside of the
shoulder.

g, A tripartition of this branch where it touches the Cubit. hh, A branch
distributed from the 4. nerve to the outward skin of the Cubite. i, the upper
branch of the division of the 4. nerve. kk, A branch of i, reaching to the
outside of the hand. ll, the lower branch of the division of the 4. nerve
passing through the backside of the Cubite. m, the 5. nerve of the arm. n,
Branches of this nerve dispersed here and there, oo, A branch of the 5. nerve
reaching to the inside of the hand and the fingers. p. A surcle of the branch
o, derived to the outside of the hand and the fingers. qq, the 6, nerve of the
arm and the course thereof under the skin. rr, the intercostall nerves there
cut off where they are together with the ribs reflected forward. ss, branches
on each side running backward. tt, Nerves attaining unto the Chest. uu, the
commixtion of the nerves rr, with the descending branch of the 6. conjugation
of the brain. xx, Nerves from the loins led unto this place. y, A branch
going to the testicle here cut off. z, A nerve reaching to the 1. muscle of the
thigh. c, the 1. nerve of the leg. ab, A surcle of the former nerve derived to
the skin at a, and inserted into the muscles at b. g, the 2. nerve of the leg.
ddd, A nerve from the former, allowed unto the skin as low as to the foot, and
passing along the inside of the leg. e, a branch of the 2. nerve running unto
the muscles. z, the 3 nerve of the leg. n, a surcle thereof unto the skin. th,
another surcle unto the muscles. (...), the 4. nerve of the leg. xx, the
anterior propagations of the nerves proceeding from the holybone. l, the end of
the spinall marrow. m, a branch from the 4 nerve inserted into the muscles
arising from the Coxendix or hip bone. n, another branch going to the skin of
the thigh on the backside. x, a propagation derived to the 4. muscle of the leg
and to the skin of the knee. oo, nerves attaining to the heads of the muscles
of the foot. (...), the division of the 4: crurall nerve into two trunks. s, a
branch from the trunk p, dispersed into the outward skin of the leg. t, a
surcle of the trunk p, derived to the muscles. n, another surcle to the skin
of the leg on the foreside., a branch of the trunk r, to the skin of the
inside of the leg and of the foot. ch, a surcle of the trunk r, to the
hindmost skin of the leg. (...), a branch of the whole trunk r, led along to
the forward part of the leg and the soot? o, the descent of the trunk r, into
the foot.

it so upwards, as it should incline neither foreward, nor backwards; but thus,
that it cannot be moved neither to this nor that part unless by the help and
proper action of this, or that muscle. Thus therefore if the Pectorall with his
associate perform their duty or action, the arm is always moved forwards, as
it is lifted up by the action of the Deltoides and his companion, and so of the
rest.

But to come to the original and insertion of these muscles; the one of these
two The original and insertion of the pectorall muscle.
which move the arm forwards called by reason of his original, the Pectorall,
arising from more than half of the Collar bone, and almost all the Sternon and
the 6, 7. and 8, Rib, goes up and fastens it self to the Coracoides, by a
membrane or a membranous tendon sufficiently strong (for which cause it is said
to be common to the shoulder and arm) and it goes into the arm between the
muscles Deltoides and Biceps with a strong tendon composed of fibers crossing
each other, of which some descend from the Collar-bone and the upper part of
the Sternon, others ascend from the lower original hereof, that is, from the
6, 7, and 8, Ribs: and although the action of this muscle be diverse, by reason
of the diversity of its fibers arising from diverse places, yet always it
draws the arm forwards, whether it be moved upwards, downwards, or to the
Breast; the other which is his companion descends from the whole lip or brow of
the simous or hollow part of the Blade, which it fills in the forepart of the
arm near the head thereof. For the two Levatores, or the Lifters up of the
arm, the first named Deltoides descends from almost half the Clavicle, the
process Acromion and all the spine of the shoulder blade into the foreside of
the arm the breadth of four fingers The Deltoides
below the joint. It has diverse actions according to the diversity of the
fibers, as also every muscle has; yet howsoever it is contracted, whether by
the fibers from the clavicle alone, or by the spinall alone, or by both at
once, it always lifts and heaves the arm upwards. The other which is his
associate descends from the gibbous part of the Shoulder Blade contained
between the upper rib thereof and the spine between the processes Acromion and
Coracoides, to the neck of the arm; and this we will call the The Epomis, or
Scapularis.
Epomis or Scapularis, that is, the shoulder Muscle. But the first and larger
of the two muscles, which draw the arm backwards, arises from the greatest
part of the utter lip of the gibbous part of the shoulder blade, which is under
the spine thereof, and lying upon the blade it self, it goes into the hind part
of the arm above the neck thereof. The other which is co^tiguous to it and his
partner in working, but lesser, passes from the upper and exterior part of the
lower rib of the shoulder blade, and thence as it were in some sort extending
it self upon the gibbous part thereof near unto that rib, it goes into the
arm. This muscle seems to be the same with the former, being fleshy without
even above the top of the shoulder. One and the lesser of these two which draw
downwards, enters out from the straight line of the lower Rib of the blade, and
goes into the lower part of the arm about the neck thereof. The other called
the Latissimus or broadest, ascends from the spines of the holy-bone, of the
Loins, and often also from the nine lower of the Chest, by the lower corner of
the shoulder blade into which it is inserted by a membranous tendon, as also it
is into the inner part of the arm near unto the neck by another strong
tendon; whereupon this muscle is called a common muscle of the shoulder and
arm. But when this muscle happens to be wounded, the arm cannot easily be
stretched forth, or lifted up.

CHAP. XXVI. The Description of the bones of the Cubit and the muscles moving
them.
AFter these muscles, follow those which bend and extend the cubit, but because
their insertion cannot be fitly demonstrated, unless the bones of the cubit be
first described; therefore first of all we will deliniate the bones themselves.
But verily lest this doubtful word cubit should cause obscurity, first we must
note, that What is meant by the Cubit.
it has a threefold signification; for ofttimes it is used for all that part of
the hand which lies between the arm and wrest, often times for the lower bone of
this part, sometimes for the upper part of this bone which is turned within the
Orb or Cavity of the arm (no otherwise than a cord in the wheel of a Pulley)
and this is called the Olecranon. Here What the Olecranum is. The 2 bones of
the Cubit.
truly we use this word Cubit in the first signification. Wherefore we say the
cubite is composed of two bones, the one of which we call the Radius or Wand,
or the lesser Focile of the Arm; the other we properly call the Cubit or Ell.
These two bones stick together at their ends being firmly bound together by
strong Ligaments; but the middle parts of them are a pretty way distant from
each other, and chiefly toward their lower ends, for the better situation and
passage of the muscles and vessels from the inner side, to the exterior, as
shall be showed in fit place. The wand has two Epiphyses The two Appendices of
the wande.
or Appendices, the one at the upper end, the other at the lower. The upper is
round and hollowed on the surface like a basin, it receives the fore process
of the bone of the arm, bound to the same by strong ligaments, descending as
well from that process of the arm, as the Olecranon into the circumjacent
parts of this appendix of the Wand. This connection is made for this use, that
we may turn our hand upwards and down-wards by the Cubit turned and twined
about this process. But the lower appendix of this wand is hollowed on the
inside that so it might more commodiously receive the bones of the wrest, but
gibbous without, that it might be safer; now this wand is softer The figure and
fite of the wande.
and thicker at the lower end, but lesser and harder above, where on the inside
it has a swelling out, whereby to receive the muscle Biceps, besides on the
outside of the mlddle thereof it is somewhat gibbous and round, so to become
more safe from the injuries of external bodies; but it is hollowed, or bended
on the inside for the better taking or holding any thing in the hand. But that
side which lies next to the Ell is flatted for the fitter original and seat of
the muscles; lastly it is seated upon the bone of the Cubit, or Ell, just
against the thumb. But the Ell, or bone of the cubit properly and particularly
so called, has in like manner two appendices, the one above, the other beneath.
The The 2 Appendices of the bone of the Cubit.
upper which also is the greater, is fitted to the Orb of the arm, in which
it goes to and again for the extensio^ and bending of the arm, no otherwise
than a rope runs in a pulley but that it turns not absolutely and perfectly
round, which is caused by the two processes of unequal bigness, the which are
therefore stayed in the holes or cavities of the bone of the arm, the greater
process which we called Olecranon is let by the exterior hole that so the
extension of the arm can be no further, but the lesser process by the inner
hole makes the bending thereof the less perfect. The Composure of these bones
is by Ginglymos, and it is strengthened not only by common Ligaments coming
from the muscles, which move the bones themselves, but also by proper Ligaments
descending from the processes of the arm and the lips of the holes and
cavities standing about the Appendix of the Cubit. The other lower and lesser
appendix is in some sort hollow on the inside for the fitter receiving the
bones of the wrest, but the outside is round and ends in a point, whence it is
called by the Greeks Styloides. But now this Ell (contrary The figure of the
Cubit bone or Ell.
in this to the wand) is thicker toward the arm, but slenderer toward the
wrest. And besides in the thicker part thereof it is hollowed or bended toward
the inside, and in the same place is gibbous or bunching forth on the out side;
but it is round and straight, unless on that side which lies next the wand,
for the rest, it is hollow and full of marrow like the wand. The site of the
Radius or wand is oblique, but that of the Cubit or Ell is right, that the arm
might be the better and more easily moved; because the motion by which the arm
is exte^ded and be^ded is according to a right line, but that by which the
inside of the hand is turned upwards and downwards, is performed obliquely and
circularly. Wherefore it was expedient that the wand should be oblique, and the
cubit straight for the cubit-bone is appointed for to extend and bend the arm;
but the wand to perform the wheeling and turning about thereof, and this is the
cause that it was fitting there should be a different connection of these bones
with the arm. These things were fitting to be spoken concerning the nature of
these bones, that in the cure of fractures we may work the more safely and
happily, taking indication from that which is agreeabl^ to nature: wherefore now
it remains that we come to the description of the muscles The muscles moving
the Cubite. The Biceps, or (...) headed muscle.
which are seated in the arm, the cubit-bone, or Ell. These are 4, in number,
two extending it, and two bending it. The first of the Benders is called
Biceps, by reason of its two heads; the one whereof descends from the
Coracoides, that other from the lip of the cavity of the shoulder blade by the
fissure or clift of the head of the bone of the arm. These two heads under the
neck of this arm becoming fleshy, are firmly united at the belly and midst
of the arm, and thus united are at length implanted by a strong tendon to the
inner protuberation of the wand. The other is called the Brachiaus, by reason
The Brachiaus.
of the strait coherence thereof with the bone of the arm; this fastened under
the Biceps descends obliquely on the back and upper part of the bone of the
arm into the top of the wand and the inner side of the Ell. But the first of
the extenders is called the longus or Long muscle, this descends from the lower
Rib of the shoulder, and The Longus.
cleaving to the bone of the Arm goes thither (fastened and as it were always
most straightly joined with his fellow muscle, specially nere the Cubite) where
you shall presently hear. The other termed the Brevis or short Muscle, being
the companion of the long, descends on the hind part of the neck of the bone
of the Arm, as it were The Brevis.
growing to and lying under the former long muscle, so that making one common
broad Tendon outwardly ^^eshy, inwardly nervous, they are inserted into the
Olecranum, so by mutual assistance to extend the Cubite.

CHAP. XXVII. The Description of the Bones of the Wrest, Afterwrest and fingers.
WE said before that the Hand taken more particularly and properly, is divided
into the Wrest, afterwrest and fingers, and that the hand in this signification
What the Hand properly so called is.
is bounded by the ends of the bones of the cubit and fingers. All the parts of
the wrest, which it has common with the afterwrest, have bin already also
plentifully explaned, this only remains to be noted, that the skin as well of
the hands as of the feet, is of a middle nature between pure flesh and pure
skin, no otherwise than that which covers the forehead, but that this which
covers the palms of the hands and soles of the feet is unmovable; But it is
most thick, especially on the feet, left it should be easily offended by
continual going. Besides the common parts, the wrest is composed of eight
small bones mutually knit together in a certain order, and by Diarthrosis with
the two bones of the Cubite, but mutually and amongst themselves by
Synarthrosis, by interposition of Gristles and Ligaments as well common, that
is, coming from the muscles, as proper, descending always from the upper to
the lower. But these same bones are some less than othersome, besides they are
hard and without marrow, gibbous on the outside for the security and comeliness
of the hand, but hollow on the inside for to give way to the tendons going into
the fingers. These bones are disposed in two ranks. The first Rank contains
only three, but the second five. The three of the first Rank ar thus arrayed,
or placed, that one of them may receive the Appendix Styloides of the Cubite;
the other the Ell and the Wa^d together, and the third may be received by the
Wand. But three of the five bones of the second order sustain the four bones
of the afterwrest and are knit to the same by Synarthrosis, after which manner
of connection they are joined to the bones of the first rank; the fourth
sustaines the first bone of the Thumb to which also it is coarticulate by
Synarthrosis; the fifth and last is seated on the inside against the Ell,
chiefly above that bone of the first order, which receives the Appendix
Styloides of the Cubite, this is the least and weakest of them all by reason of
its gristlely substance, which makes the Ring with certain Ligaments running
from one of the inner sides of the wrest to the other. What the Annulus o^ Ring
is.


This Ring is placed there as well for the preservation of the sinews, veins
and Arteries passing under it (least when we lean upon our hand, or wrest,
these parts should be hurt by compression) as also for the commodity of the
Action of the muscles bending the finger, which in the performance of their
action and the co^tracting themselves might deform the hand by their passing
forth of the Cavity of the wrest. For what attraction soever is made by
strings, if it be free and not hindered, is according to a straight line.

Now follow the bones of the second part of the hand, or of the afterwrest.
These The bones of the Aftervvrest
are four in number, gibbous without, but arched within, or hollow in the
middle; for hence is the palm of the hand, or certainly the greater part
thereof; their ends next the fingers are somewhat remote from each other, that
in these clifts the Muscles Interosses might find a place and seat. But these
ends have each an Appendix, as you may perceive in the Sceleton of a child.
But you must note that by the first bone of the wrest or Afterwrest, we mean
that which is in the foreside of the hand, that is to say, that in the wrest
which lies under the Thumb, and that in the Afterwrest, which it seated under
the forefinger, as these which keep in order the fingers which exceed the rest
in necessity and dignity.

After these follow the fifteen bones of the fingers, that is, three in each,
which are The bones of the fingers.
hollow and fistulous full of a thin and liquid marrow, and not of gross and
thick as in the arm and thigh. They are outwardly gibbous, but inwardly
hollow and flat for the fitter seat of the Tendons ascending along the
fingers on the inside even to the upper joint. The which that nature might the
better strengthen and preserve, it has produced from the lips of the inner
Cavities of these bones a membranous and strong Ligament, which running
overtwhart from one side to the other does so straightly close the Tendons to
their bones, that they cannot go forth of their places, or incline to either
side. They are connexed on the outside, that they might be more fit to hold any
thing. But for the first bones of the 4 fingers and Thumb, four are joined
together with so many bones of the afterwrest by Synarthrosis, for the bones of
the afterwrest are moved by no manifest motion; the fifth is knit to the second
rank of the bones of the wrest, therefore that bone cannot be attributed to
the afterwrest, as some have written, seeing it has manifest motion and is
knit by Diarthrosis, but the bones of the afterwrest are only fastened by
Synarthrosis. For the second and third rank of bones of the fingers, they are
knit the second to the first, and the third to the second by diarthrosis and
Arthrodia, because besides the manifest motion they have, they receive each
other by a superficary cavity, as those of the first rank, the bones of the
afterwrest, and those of the second rank, them of the first; those of the
third them of the second. And all the bones of the fingers are larger and
thicker at their basis, but smaller toward the ends; and they are bound by
Ligaments especially proper, which (as we said formerly) descend from the first
to the second; so that the last bones seeing they have not to whom to
communicate their nerve, make and produce nails thereof:

Wherefore the nails are generated by the fibers of the Ligaments, and the
excrement When at the mailes are generated. The ossa Sesamoid. or Seed-bones.
of the tendons which are terminated at the bottom of the nails. Now remain
the Ossa Sesamoidea, or seed-bones: these are 19. in number in the inner joints
of each of the hands, and as many in each foot, viz. two in the first joint of
the four fingers and in the second of the thumb, and one in each of the rest.
For the inner fide of the joints, you may for the most part observe one in each
of them; yet in the second joint of the thumb there be two, above the two
tendons, which are somewhat gristlely.

They are made for this use, that they firm and strengthen the joints, so that
the bones of the fingers may not be turned awry, or thrust forth of their
places by strong Their use.
and violent motions, as it sometimes happens in the whirle-bone of the knee.
They are called Sesamoidea from the resemblance they have to the seed of
Sesamum, which is somewhat long and flat.

The Figure of the bones of the Hand. The 1. shows the inside of the right
hand, and the 2. shows the back side of the same.
The Charact. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. show the eight bones of the wrest.

A, 1, 2, The first bone of the Afterwrest lying under the thumb.

I. II. III. IIII. The 4. other bones of the Afterwrest annexed to the fingers.

B, C. The two bones of the thumb.

D, E, F. 1, 2. The 3 bones of the forefinger, which are the same in the other
fingers.

M, 1, 2. A little bone sometimes fastened outwardly at the joint of the eight
bone of the wrest.

N, 1. A process of the eight bone of the wrest, swelling out into the ball of
the hand.

O, 1. A process of the fifth bone of the wrest, from which a Ligament proceeds.

P, 2. An Appendix of the bones of the wrest, by which they are articulated to
the afterwrest.

Q, 2. Another appendix which with its head enters into the Cavity of the
finger.

R, 1, 2. The space between the bones of the afterwrest.

S, 1, 2. Two little seed-bones set on the inside and outside of the first joint:

T, 1. Two seed-bones in the first of the 4 fingers.

V. V. 1. One seed-bone in the second and third joint of the fingers.



CHAP. XXVIII. Of the muscles which seated in the Cubite move the Wand and with
it the Hand.
NOw must we describe the muscles of the formerly described parts, that is,
those which are seated in the Cubit, which are carried to the inside of the The
museles of the Cubite.
hand, and those which are called the Interosses. Now the muscles of the
Cubitare 14, 7 external, and 7 Internal; two of the seven external do
primarily twine or turn up the Wand, and secondarily or by accident turn the
Palm of the hand upwards, whereupon they have called them supinatores, or
turners up of the hand; The Supinatores. The Carpitensores. The
Digitumtensores. The Obliquator externus. The first of the Supinatores. The
second. The upper of the Carpitensores.
two extend the wrest, whereupon they are named Carpitensores or the
Wrest-extenders; two the fingers, whence they are styled Digitumtensores or
finger-stretchers; to conclude, the seventh and last is termed Abductor or
Obliquator externus. The first of the two supinatores is called the Long, or
Longest, because it descends from the outside of the Arm above the processes
thereof, and is inserted by a round and strong tendon into the lower Appendix.
The other descends obliquely from the outward and upper process of the arm,
and is inserted at the third part of the Wand by a membranous and fleshy tendon
before and on the inside thereof. The upper of the two Extenders of the Wrest,
descending above the wand from the external and upper process of the arm is
inserted by two Tendons into the first and second bone of the After-wrest,
which sustain the fore and middle fingers.

The other and lower, descending from the same place as the former, above the
Cubit The lower.
is inserted into the fourth bone of the Afterwrest which bears up the little
finger. These muscles whilst they move alone, that is, each with his
Antagonist, to wit the wrest-benders, they move obliquely upwards or downwards
the whole hand properly so called. The first and greater of the Extenders of
the fingers, or finger-stretchers The greater of the Digitumtensores.
arising from the Olecranum, or bone of the Cubit, descends superficiarilie
between the two bones of the Cubite even to the wrest, in which place it is
divided into 4 tendons, which passing under the Ring seated there, end (each
distinguished by a common ligament above the bone of the Afterwrest) in the
last joints of the four fingers, adhering nevertheless firmly to the bones,
which are above these joints.

The other which is the lesser arising almost in the middle of the Wand, goes
obliquely to the Thumb into which it is inserted by two Tendons; the one
thicker The lesser.
which is inserted into the root thereof, and draws it from the other fingers;
the other slenderer continued even to the upper joint thereof, and by its action
extending the Thumb.

The seventh which is the Abductor or Obliquator, is seated at the hind part
of the The Obliquator, or Abductor externus.
hand, that is, toward the little finger; we have often found this divided in
two, yea verily we have found it trifide, or divided into 3. this year in
three or 4 dead bodies. one portion thereof went to the lower side of the
Ring-finger with two Tendons, the other in like manner to the middle and
fore-fingers, and the third to the Thumb.

And for all that it is thus divided, yet some have taken and accounted it for
one Muscle, because it has one original and action, which is to draw the
fingers backwards; some have added to this the extender of the Thumb by reason
of their common original; and thus of 4. muscles they have made one divided
into 7. tendons, distributed, as is formerly showed. But when the Obliquator of
the Ring-finger is wanting, as it often happens, the extender of the finger
supplies that defect by certain productions oftendinous strings. But some also
have written, that this muscle which we said has 7. tendons, is only a
production of the deep fore muscle, which should be sent through the space
between the bones of the Cubit; yet I had rather make it a muscle of it self,
by reason of its strait adhesion with the bones of the Arm and Wand. And let
thus much suffice for the external muscles of the Cubit, which you may
comprehend in the number of seven, as we have done; or in six, if you take
away one of the 4. or in nine, if you had rather resolve it into 4. with Galen;
or in eight, if you divide this muscle only into three. For in very deed the
Abductor or Obliquator of the Ring-finger is not often found in men.

Now must we come to the inner muscles of the Cubit, the first of which
compasses The muscles of the inner part of the Cubit.
the skin of the palm of the hand, whence it is called the Palmaris. The
second and third joined by the communion of their action turn down or prone
the Wand, and consequently the hand, so that the palm looks toward the feet,
whereupon they are called Pronatores.

The 4. and 5. joined also in affinity of action bend the Wrest, wherefore they
are named Carpiflexores, Wrest benders. The sixth and seventh are appointed to
bend the first, second, and third joints of the fingers, wherefore they are
termed Digitumflexores, Fingerbenders. For their original; the Palmaris the
least and uppermost The Palmaris
of them all, descends fleshy from the hind process of the inner arm, and a
little after ending in a long and slender Tendon, it is spent in the skin of the
Palm of the hand even to the roots of the fingers. For it was necessary that
this skin should straightly cohere with the subjacent parts, not only for the
fitter taking or comprehension of any thing, lest that skin in holding should
be wrinckled and drawn away from the palm and fingers, and so be an
impediment; but besides that the hand might have a more exact sense to
distinguish of hot, cold, moist, dry, smoth, aequall, rough, soft, hard, great,
little, and such other qualityes. Then follow the two Pronatores, of which one
The Pronatores.
called the round, comes obliquely from the inner side of the hind process of
the arm almost to the middle of the Wand, to which it adheres by a me^branous
and fleshly tendon, even to the place appointed for insertion. The other square
three or four fingers broad, yet somewhat slender, seated within under all the
muscles which descend on the inside to the wrest or fingers, upon the ends of
the bones of the Cubit, ascends transverse from below the Ell, unto the top of
the VVande where it ends in a membranous tendon. Both the Carpiflexores, or
VVrest-benders arise from the hind, but The Carpiflexores.
inner process, and descend obliquely (the one more, or less than the other)
the one along the Ell, but the other along the wande; and that which
descends along the Ell, is inserted into the eight bone of the wrest, which
we said made part of the Ring; the other which follows the VVande is inserted
with his greater part into the bone of the wrest, and with the rest into the
first bone of the After-wrest which susteines the forefinger. The
Digitumflexores.


Now remain the Digitumflexores, or Fingerbenders, which because they lie upon
one another, the upper is called the sublimis, but the lower the Profundus. The
Sublimis The Sublimis Digitumflexor.
or upper, arising from the inner part of the hind process of the arm, and
from the upper parts of the Ell and Wand descends between these two bones of
the Cubit even to the wrest and Ring; divided into 4. tendons it is inserted
into the second dearticulation of the four fingers, which it bends by the
force of this his proper insertion; as also the first, as well by the power of
the common ligament, as by certain fibers coming from it, which it sends
thither by the way in its passage. But these 4 tendons nere unto this their
insertion are divided into two, so to give passage and ad strength to the
tendons of the Deep muscles descending into the third and last joint of the
fingers. The profundus Digitumflexor.


But this same Profundus or Deep muscle arising from the upper and inner parts
of the Ell and Wand, descends between these two bones under the Sublimis, also
undivided even to the wrest, where it is divided into 5. Tendons which it
brings forth under the common Ligament, and the divisions of the Tendons of the
Sublimis even to the last joint of the fingers, which they bend, by this their
proper insertion, as also the bones of the first and second joints of the
fingers by the means of the common Ligament and fibrous productions which they
bestow upon them by the way. Besides these forementioned there is seen also a
certain membranous Ligament which engirts the tendons in the compass of the
fingers.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Muscles of the inside of the hand.
THe muscles of the inside of the hand are 7 in number; the first is called
Thenar The number of the muscles of the inside of the hand.
because it makes the greater part of the Palm; the second from the site is
called the Hypothenar; the third the external Abductor of the Thumb. The 4.
other are called by reason of their figure the Lumbrici or wormy muscles, or
the Adductores, or Drawers of the four fingers to the thumb. Now the first
called Thenar, The Thenar.
thicker than the rest, arises from all the bones of the Afterwrest, taking its
beginning from that bone which bears up the Ring finger, whence ascending
along the Vital line even to the end thereof at the first bone of the
After-wrest susteining the fore finger, and it is at length inserted into the
last joint of the Thumb by the longst fibers, but by the middle and shortest
fibers almost into all the inner part of the first bones of two joints, and by
reason of this, the thumb is drawn to the other fingers, and from them again
by his lower original.

Some devide this muscle into three, by reason of his diverse actions, making
the first to arise from the root of the bone of the afterwrest which bears up
the ring finger; but the other from that middle bone of the afterwrest which
sustaines the middle finger; but of the third, from the upper end of that bone
which underprops thefore finger, and that the infertion of them all, is, as we
formerly mentioned. But the former opinion likes me better, both for shunning
confusion, and abbreviating the doctrine of the number of muscles.

The Hypothenar arises from the fourth bone of the afterwrest, and that bone of
The Hypothenar.
the wrest which sustaines it, and then with its longest fibers, it is inserted
into the second joint of the ring-finger, and by the shortest into the first,
through which occasion, as also in respect of its twofold action, some have
divided it into two, that the one of them might lead it from the rest, and the
other might draw it to the thumb.

The third the external Abductor of the thumb, descends from the first bone
of the The external Abductor of the thumb. The Lumbrici.
afterwrest, into the first and second joint of the thumb; wherefore some have
divided it into two. The Lumbrici, or four external Abductores of the four
fingers arise from a membrane, investing and binding together the tendons of
the Digitumflexores, or fingerbenders, and at length on the sides toward the
thumb even by a small tendon, running even to the second joint of the four
fingers.

Now the Interosses of the afterwrest, remain to be spoken of; these are six,
two The Interosses.
in each of the spaces between the fingers, one Internal, the other
External, of which the Internal descending with oblique fibers from the side
of the first bone of the afterwrest, goes also into the sides of the fingers,
that so it may the more closely bind together the bones of the afterwrest,
whose action is manifested when we thrust our fingers into a strait glove, or
when we bend our hand. Some think that it helps also the drawing of the
fingers toward the thumb. The External ascends also by oblique fibers from
the sides of the second bone of the afterwrest, to the first joints of the
fingers, intersecting the internal which we now described after the manner of
the letter X, for to extend the palm of the hand, and help the drawing away
of the fingers from the thumb.

Here concluding the description of the muscles of the whole hand taken in
general, The number of the muscles of the whole taken in general.
you shall note that they are 39. in number, that is, eight appointed to move
the arm; four set to move the cubit in general; seven seated on the outside
of the cubit, and as many on the inside in the same cubite, moving the wand,
and with it the hand; seven on the inside of the hand: and lastly, the six
Interosses. Some increase this number, saying, there are nine on the external
part of the cubite, and eleven on the inside of the hand.

CHAP. XXX. A Description of the Leg taken in general.
AFter the hand follows the description of the leg. Wherefore to take aaway
all doubtfulnesse, we will first define the leg; then devide it into the
parts more and less compound; thirdly we will prosecute all things common to
all these parts; fourthly, those which are peculiar to each, and then, God
willing, we will give an end to our Anatomy.

Now this word Crus, or Leg, is used two manner of ways, that is, either
generally The diverse acception of the Leg.
and specially, and specially again after two sorts, that is, either
absolutely and simply so, or with an adjunct. It is simply taken for all that
which is between the knee and the foot. But with an adjunct for the greater
bone thereof. But the leg taken in general, is the instrument of going,
containing all whatsoever is from the hipps, to the very ends of the toes. It
is divided into three great parts, that is to say, the Thigh, the Leg, or
Shanke, and the Foot. By the thigh we mean that The thigh. The leg or
shanke. The foot.
which lies between the hippe and the knee. By the leg, properly so called,
or shanke, that which is contained between the knee and the foot. By the
foot all from thence to the ends of the toes.

Again, they devide the foot into three parts, that is, the Tarsus or Instep,
the The division of the foot. The Instep.
Pedion or top of the foot, and the Digitipedum, or toes. We understand by the
instep, that which is contained in the first seven bones, which answers in
proportion to the wrest of the hand. By the top of the foot, that which is
comprehended in the The top of the foot. The toes.
five following bones, which is answerable to the afterwrest That which
remains, we call the toes. But because all these parts have other common and
proper parts, we will only follow the distribution of the veins, arteries,
and nerves; seeing we have sufficiently explained the rest, when we described
the containing parts of the body in general.

CHAP. XXXI. A Description of the Crurall vein.
THe Crurall vein begins then, when the hollow vein passing forth of the The
beginning of the Crurall vein. The two branches thereof.
Peritonaum, and stretched to the hanch bone, and the sides of the Pubis in the
groine, is first divided into two large branches; the one of which descends on
the inside along the bones of the whole leg, together with the artery and
nerve; the other runs down outwardly and superficially along the leg,
between the fat lying under the skin, and the muscles even to the foot, and
is spent in the skin thereof. This because it is always apparent and
manifest, is called properly by the Greeks Sapheia, but commonly Saphaena.

This vein by the way presently at its original is divided into two branches,
the By what veins, the matter causing those tumors called Bubones flows down.
one internal, the other external; of which the internal is spent upon the
Bubones, and other glandules of that place and the skin, and by this branch
come the defluxions called Bubones; the other branch is waisted in the fore and
utter skin of the upper part of the thing; then a little lower, that is,
about the breadth of three or four fingers, it is gathered again into one
branch made of many little ones, which is spent in the fore and hind skin of
this thigh. Thirdly, a little below the middle of the thigh it is again
divided into two other branches, of which the one goes into the skin on the
fore side, and the other on the hind side. Fourthly, it is distributed by two
other small spriggs into the skin, on the fore and hind part of the knee;
which oftentimes are not found, especially when the Poplitea or ham vein, is
somewhat larger than ordinary. Fifthly, a little below the knee, it produces
two other branches, lying upon each other in their passage out into the fore
and hind skin of that place. You must note, that branch which runs into
the skin of the hind part, is carried by a certain other sprigge, which it
produces, into a branch of the Poplitea passing forth of the two twin muscles.
Sixthly, in the bigger part of the calfe of the leg, it is divided into two
other branches, which in like manner are distributed into the skin, as well
in the fore side as the back side of the leg.

At length after many other divisions, which for brevitie sake, I omit, when it
arrives Where and in what diseases, the Sapheia must be opened.
at the fore and inner side of the ankle (where it is commonly opened in the
diseases of the parts below the midriffe which require bloodletting) it is
parted into two other branches, the lesser of which descends to the heel; the
other in many sprigs is spent upon the skin of all the upper and lower part
of the foot and toes.

The second branch of this Crurall vein, which we said descends within
together To what places, and by how manifold devisions the internal branch of
the crurall vein goes. Ischiadica Vena.
with the artery and nerve, even into the foot, is divided; first peircing
somewhat deep in, it produces four divarications; one internal descending
below the original of the Sapheia into the muscle called Obturator externus,
and into certain other external muscles. The three other run outwardly, the
first toward the huekle bone, by which the Ischias is made, the two other into
the fore muscles of the thigh, neither are these sprigs far remote from one
another. Secondly, all that branch is divided into two other branches, the one
above, the other below, an artery always accompanying it; the lower of which
is spent upon many of the hinder Musc^la (...)
muscles of the thigh, ending nigh the ham. The upper, besides, that it
bestows many branches upon the fore and inner muscles of the thigh,
descending to the ham, it produces the Poplitea or ham vein, made sometimes of
two branches, the one proceeding from above, and the other from below. This
Poplitea descending by the Poplitea (...).
bending of the ham, is spent one while upon the skin of the calfe of the
leg, another while upon the knee, otherwhiles increased with branches of the
Sapheia, it goes on the outside of the anckle to the skin, on the upper side
of the foot, and sometimes on the lower.

Thirdly, a little below the original of the ham vein, and under the bending
of the knee, it brings forth the Suralis, which is bestowed upon the muscle of
the Sura, Suralis vena^
or calfe of the leg, and upon the skin of the inner side thereof, and of
the foot continued sometimes even to the inner part of the great toe.

Fourthly, under the head of the hinder appendix of the bones of the leg, it
produces between these two bones, another vein, which nourishing the fore
muscle of the leg, is consumed upon the foot.

Fifthly, and lastly, it brings forth the Ischiadica mayor or greater Ischias,
which is divided Ischiadica mayor.
into two branches of an unequal bigness; the larger whereof, from his
original descending along the inner part of the leg bone, insinuates it
self under the muscles of the calfe, between this and the heel, into the
sole of the foot, upon which it is wasted, divided into ten small sprigs, two
for each toe; the other being the lesser descending along the P^rone, or
shin-bone, is consumed between it and the heel, yet sometimes it is produced,
not only even to the muscle the Abductor of the toes, but also by five
surcles, even to the fourth toe, and the sides of the middle toe.

CHAP. XXXII. The Distribution of the Crurall Artery.
THe crurall artery arising from the same place whence the crurall vein
proceeded, and descending with the internal crurall vein is distributed as
follows.

First, into the muscle of the thigh, which spreading it self through the ^
muscula.
muscles thereof meets with the utmost hypogastrica, descending with the vein
through the common hole of the huckle and share bone, and is joined with it.

Secondly, when it arrives at the ham, between the Condyles or processes of
the leg, it sends two branches into the knee.

Thirdly, a little after it produces another branch, which it sends to the
exterior muscles of the leg, and when it arrives at the middle of the leg,
it is divided into two branches, between the twin muscles and Solaeus, the one
internal, the other external; the internal, some surcles communicated by the
way to the parts by which it passes, but specially to the joint of the anckle,
stretches it self over the sole of the foot, between the lower extremity
thereof and heel, whither, when it arrives it is divaricated into five
surcles, of which it bestows two on the great toe, two on the next, and one on
the middle toe. The external descending in like manner to the sole of the
foot, between the fibula and the heel, besides other sprigs, which it may
spread by the way, it produces one without on the joint of the anckle, another
in the muscle, the Abductor of the toes, to the wrest and back of the foot.
But the remainder is divided into five portions, of which two are sent to the
fourth, and two to the little toe, and one to the middle.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Nerves of the Loins, Holy-bone and Thigh.
THere arise five conjugations of nerves from the loins, divided into
external and internal branches; the external are disseminated into the
Rachitae The five conjugations of the nerves of the loins.
or chin muscles, the muscles Semispinatus and Sacer and the skin lying over
them. The internal are sent into the oblique ascendent and transverse muscle
of the lower belly, into the Peritonaeum, into the loine and chest muscles
arising there, but after a different manner; for some are absolutely carried
thither, as the nerves of the first conjugation of the loins, and oftentimes
also of the second, but that sometimes they send a small sprigge to the
testicles, when the Costall have Where the testicles have their nerves.
sent none thither; but some lower are partly distributed there, and partly
sent some other way; for the greater portions first united amongst themselves,
then presently with the portions of these of the holy-bone, go into the thigh,
as we shall show in the distribution of the nerves of the holy-bone.

Now from the holy bone, proceed six conjugations of nerves, reckoning that
The conjugations of the nerves proceeding through the holybone.
for the first which proceeds from the last Vertebra of the loins, and first
of the holy-bone; and that the sixte which proceeds from the lowest part of the
holy-bone, and the first of the rumpe; these conjugations of nerves are divided
into external and internal branches.

The lesser external passing forth by the external and hinder holes of the
holy-bone, are distributed into the parts properly belonging thereto, to wit,
the muscles and skin thereof; for every nerve by the law of nature first and
always yields to An Anatomis call axiom.
the neighboring parts, that which is needful, then presently to others as
much as it can.

Wherefore if thou would know whence each part has his vessels at the next
hand, that is, the veins, arteries and nerves, thou must remember the site of
each part and the course of the vessels, and to consider this, that the veins
and arteries as speedily and conveniently as they can, insinuate themselves
into the parts, sometimes at the head or beginning, somewhiles by the middle,
or extremes thereof, as there is occasion.

But a nerve principally enters a muscle at the head thereof, or at least not
far from thence, but never by the tail, whereby it may easily be understood
by what branch of each vein, artery, and nerve, each part may have
nourishment, lift, and sense. The other internal branches of the foresaid
conjugations go, especially the four uppermost united from their original
with the three lowermost of the loins, into all the leg, as you shall
presently hear. But the two lower are consumed upon the muscles called
Levateres Any, the Sphincter muscle of the same place; besides, upon the
muscles of the yard, and neck of the bladder in men, but in women upon the
neck of the womb and bladder.

For these parts admit another in their bottom from the costall nerve, being
of the sixth conjugation of the brain; these thus considered, let us come to
the nerves of the thigh, which (as we said) from their first original, as it
wereco^pacted and composed of the greater portion of the three inner and lower
branches of the loins, and the four upper of the holy-bone, are divided in
the thigh into four branches, of which the first and higher descending from
above the Peritonaeum, to the little Trochanter, is wasted upon the in ward and
superficiary muscles of the thigh, and the skin which covers them a little
above the thigh.

The second, descending with the crurall vein and artery by the groine, is
divided into two branches like as the vein, the one internal, the other
external, of which the internal descending with the vein and artery is sent
into the inner and deep muscles of the thigh ending above the knee. But the
external descending superficially with the Saphaeia, even into the foot,
gives branches by the way to the skin which covers it.

The third seated under these former, passing by the hole common to the share
and hanch-bone, sends certain branches to the groines, to the muscles called
Obturatores, to the Tricipites, and sometimes to the muscles of the yard, and
it ends at the midst of the thigh.

The fourth, which is the thickest, solidest, and hardest of all the nerves in
the body, descending wholely from the productions of the holy-bone, and
descending out-wardly between the lower part of the same bone, and the Os
Ilium, or Hanch-bone to the thigh, bestows certain sprigges to the hind
muscles thereof proceeding from the proturberation of the Ischium or
huckle-bone, and in like sort it gives othersome to the skin of the buttocks,
and also to the skin covering the forementioned muscles.

A little after, it is parted into two branches descending undevided even to
the bending of the knee, they both are communicated by diverse surcles of the
muscles of the leg; yet so as the lesser produces another branch from the
rest of the portion thereof descending on the fore part of the leg, along
the shin-bone unto the top of the foot, where it is divided into ten surcles
scarce apparent to the sight, two running to each of the toes. The other
greater descending in like manner in the remainder of its portion by the
hinde-part of the leg into the sole of the foot, casts its self with the
veins and arteries between theheele and leg bone; where first divided into
two branches, each of which presently parted into five, send two sprigs to the
sides of the toes. And these are the most notable and necessary distributions
of the vessels and nerves; we purposely omit others which are infinite, and of
which the knowledge is impertinent.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the proper parts of the Thigh.
HAving explaned the common parts of the leg in general; now we must come
to the proper, beginning at the Thigh. The proper parts of the Thigh, are
muscles, bones, and ligaments But because the demonstration of the muscles is
somewhat difficult, if we be ignorant of the description of the bones from
whence they arise, and into which they are inserted; therefore we judge it
worth our labor, first to show the bones, and the dearticulation of these of
the Thigh; beginning with these bones which are knit with the upper part of the
holy-bone. And they are two in number, on each side one, commonly called the
Ossa Ilium; each of these is composed of three bones, of which one Of how many
bones the Ossa Ilium consist. What the Os Ilium strictly taken is.
is the upper, another the lower and anteriour, and the third the middle, and
after a manner the posteriour. The upper by a particular name is called the Os
Ilium, the hanch-bone, and it is the largest and biggest, having a gristlely
appendix in the compass thereof, even to the connection it has with the other
neighboring bones, whose upper part we term the right line thereof; but the
basis, which is adjoined to it by Simphysis, we call the lip or brow thereof,
because it stands both somewhat out and in, after the manner of the brow. But
that which lies between the basis and What theline, lip, brow, and rib, of
the Os Ilium are.
straight line we name the ribbe; this same upper bone has two hollow
superficies, the one internal, the other external. The connection thereof by
Symphysis, is twofold, the one with the upper part of the holy-bone; the other
with that bone we called the middle, and after some sort the posteriour; which
taking its beginning from the narrower part of the Os Ilium, makes that cavity
in which the head of the The Os Ischium, or huckle-bone.
thigh is received; this cavity the Greeks call Cotyle, the Latins
Acetabulum, and it is ended by the side of the hole common to it, and the
share-bone; this middle, and in some sort posteriour bone is called properly
and particularly the Os Ischij, or huckle-bone, and contains nothing else but
the forementioned cavitie, but that on the hind and lower part thereof, it
brings forth a process, which adjoynes it self to the share bone at the lower
part of the common hole, in which place it appears very rough and unequal,
and it is called the tuberositie of the huckle-bone, at whose extremity also it
brings forth a little head somewhat resembling the process of the lowerjaw
called Corone. The third bone named Os pubis or the share-bone, The Os pubis,
or share-bone.
flretches it self even to the highest part of the pecten, where meeting with
the like bone of the other side, it is united to it by Symphysis, after which
manner also, all these three bones are united; it is reported, that this bone
opens in women in their travel, yet hitherto I can find no certainety thereof.

The Figure of the Thigh Bone.
A 1, 2. The head of the thigh going into the cup of the hip-bone.

B, 2, A sinus in the head of the thigh, into which is inserted a round
Ligament.

C 1, 2, The conjunction of the appendix of the thigh with the bone it self.

D 1, 2, 3, the neck of the thigh.

E, F, the two lower heads of the thigh.

G, 1, 2, The conjunction of the lower appendix.

H, 1, 12, A sinus betwixt the two heads of the thigh.

K 2, A part of the lower head of the thigh, from whence the first muscle of
the foot does proceed.

L 2, Another part from whence the second and first muscles arise.

M 2, Another part to which the Tendon of the fifth muscle of the thigh is
infixed.

N 1, 2, A sinus of the out-ward side of the head for the fourth muscle of the
leg.

O 2, A sinus of the inside through which the tendons do pass. P 2, A
protuberation at which the said tendons are reflected. Q 2. the upper process
of the thigh, and betwixt Q and D is the sinus. R 1, 2, the union of the
process with the thigh. S S 2, a rough line from the impression of the
external processes. T 1, the anterior impression of the internal processes.
e, betwixt T and V another impression higher than the former. V 1, 2, the
fourth impression in the top of the process. X 3. Four X, show the four
appendices of the thigh. Y 3, Three Y, show the three heads of the thigh. Z Z
3, Two processes of the thigh. a 1, the interior process of the thigh. b 1,
the conjunction of the process with the thigh. c c 2, a line descending
obliquely from the inner process. d d 2, a line running through the length of
the thigh. e 2, the largeness of the thigh in this part. f 1, a roughness
from which the eight muscle issues. g, h 5, a knub of the Whirle-bone going
into the sinus marked with I, which is betwixt the heads of the thigh. i 5, a
sinus sitted for the inner head of the thigh. k 5, a sinus agreeing with the
external head of the thigh. l 5, the lower asperity or roughness. m 4, the
foreside of the pattell or whirle-bone rough and unequal.



You may perceive a manifest separation of these three bones in the Sceleton of
a child; for in those who are of more years, the gristles which run between
these connexions turn into bones.

Now follows the thigh bone, the biggest of all the bones of the body; it is
round, The descript of the thigh bone.
and so bended, that it is gibbous on the exterior and fore part thereof, that
so it might be the safer from external injuries; but on the hind and inner
part, it is hollow or simous, like to the back of an Ass, whereby the muscles
might have a more commodious original and insertion.

That simous part a little below the midst thereof, is divided into two lines,
the one whereof goes to the internal tuberositie, the other to the external
of the lower appendix of the same thigh. These are chiefly to be observed,
because the oblique fibers of the vaste muscles thence take their original.

Besides, this bone has two appendices in the ends thereof, as easily appears
in The two appendices of the thigh bone.
a child's thigh; the upper appendix, makes the round head of the thigh it
self, which (as every other appendix) seated upon a long neck, is received in
the cavitie of the hanch-bone by Enarthrosis; it is stayed and fastened there
by two sorts of ligaments, of which the one is common, proceeding from the
muscles, which descend from above, about the neck thereof; the other is
proper, which is twofold, that is, one membranous and broad, proceeding from
the whole cavity of the orb, or cup, descending about all the head of the
thigh, above the neck thereof; the other thick and round, descending from the
second cavity of the Cotyle it self, which is extended, even to the common
hole at the top of the head thereof.

Besides, under this head, that bone has two processes, the one great and
thick, The two processes of the thigh bone make the two Trochanters.
the other little and short.

The greater seated in the hind part, is called the great Trochanter; the
lesser situate in the inner part, is named the little Trochanter.

But you must note, that the great Trochanter, on the higher and hind part
thereof, which looks toward the head of this bone, makes a certain small
sinus or bosom, into which the twin muscles and others, whereof we shall
hereafter speak, are implanted; we must also consider the multitude of holes
encompassing this neck, between the head and the two Trochanters, which yield
a passage to the Whence the marrow becomes partaker of sense.
vessels, that is, the veins, arteries, and nerves, into the marrow of the
bone it self, whence the marrow it self becomes partaker of sense, especially
on that part which is covered with a coat, and the bone lives and is nourished.

The other Appendix of the thigh, that is, the lower, is the greatest and
thickest, rising, as it were with two heads, which are divided by two cavities,
the one superficiarie and on the fore side, whereby it receives the whirle-bone
of the knee; the other deep, and on the back part, by which it receives the
gristlely and as it were bony ligaments, proceeding from the eminency which is
seen between the two cavities of the upprer, appendix of the bone of the
leg, which Hippocrates, lib. de fracturis, calls in his tongue Diaphysis.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the muscles moving the thigh.
THe muscles of the thigh are just fourteen in number, that is, two Their
number.
bend it, whereupon they are called the Flexores, or benders; three extend it,
whereupon they are called Tensores, extenders; three move it inwards, driving
the knee outward, and drawing the heel inwards, as when we cross our
legs; yet some make these three one, and call it the Triceps, or threeheaded
muscle. Six spread it abroad, and dilate it, as happens in the act of venery.

Four of these are called Gemini or Twins, by reason of the similitude of
their thickness, original inserrion and action; the two other are called
Obturatores, because they stop the hole which is common to the share and
backe-bones.

Now one of the two Flexores, being round, descends on the inside with fibers
of an The two flexores.
unequal length from all the transverse processes of the loins, above the
hind commissure of the hanch and share-bones, and is inserted into the little
Trochanter; the other broader and larger from the original passes forth of the
whole lip, and inner brow of the hanch-bone, and filling the inner cavity
thereof, is inserted above the fore part of the head of the thigh, into the
little Trochanter by a thick tendon, which it with the follow muscle lately
described, produces, even from the fleshy part thereof, wherefore you need to
take no great pains in drawing, or plucking them away.

The three Tensores or extenders, make the buttocks, of which the first being
the thicker, larger, and external, arising from the rumpe, the holy-bone, and
more The three Tensores.
than half of the exterior and hinder lip of the hanch-bone, is inserted by
oblique fibers, some four fingers breadth from the great Trochanter at the
right line, which we said, resembled an Asses back.

The second, which is the middle in bigness and site, descends from the rest
of the lip, and from the for^ and outward ribbe of the hanch-bone, and above
the midst of the bone, is inserted into the upper part of the great Trochanter
by a triangular insertion above the upper and exterior part thereof.

The third being lesser, shorter and thinner, lying hid under these former,
proceeds from the middle of the external surface of the hanch-bone, and then
is ins^ted into the greater part of the right line of the great Trochanter.

These three muscles have a great and large original, but a narrow insertion,
as it were by oblique fibers.

Then follow those three muscles which move the thighs inwards, straiten and
cross then, so that the knee stands forwards or outward, but the heel is
drawn inwards, Three Intromoventes.
as you may understand by their insertion, although some think otherwise; But
these three muscles by their original, partly fleshy, and partly membranous,
arise from the upper and fore part of the circumference of the share-bone, and
thence are inserted into the hind line of the huckle-bone, some higher than
othersome; for the lesser and shorter stays at the roots of the little
Trochanter, the middle descends a little deeper, the 3. with the longest of his
fibers, descends even to the midst of the line.

This if it be so, that is, these muscles proceeding from the fore and upper
part, to be inserted into the hinder line of the huckle-bone, whilst they
alone perform their action, and draw the thighs together, they will turn them
outward, just so as when we put them acrosse, but they will not draw one heel
to another, and put t^ heel outward, for such like motion is performed by the
inner Vaste muscle of the thigh, moving the leg. Now follow the six which
move the buttocks. The movers of the buttocks.


The first, and higher of the Quadrigemini, or the four twin muscles, passes
forth of the commissure of the holy-bone, with the bone of the rumpe, or rather
from the lowest extreme of the holy-bone, and thence it is inserted into the
cavity of the great Trochanter by a tendon of a sufficient largeness.

The second proceeding from the hollow part or fissure, which is between the
extremity of the huckle-bone, and the tuberositie, or swelling out of the same,
is inserted in like manner into the cavity of the great Trochanter.

The third, ascends from the inner part of the swelling out of the huckle-bone,
a little above, between the two Trochanters, into the cavity of the greater of
them.

The fourth, and last, the lowest and broadest of them all proceeds from all
the exterior protuberancie of the huckle-bone, and thence is inserted into the
great Trochanter, and these four muscles lie hid under the thick and more
eminent part of the buttocks; wherefore that you may the better show them, they
must be turned up toward their original.

The two Obturatores remain to be spoken of, that is, the internal and
external, The two Obturatores.
both which arise from the circuit and circumference of the hole which they
stop, which as we said is common to the share and huckle-bone, but the
internal ascends to the exterior root of the great Trochanter by the middle
fissure between the upper part of the protuberancy of the hucklebone, and the
spine which stands up in the hinder basis of the hanch-bone.

But the external proceeds from the exterior cavity, and the middle space
between the tuberosity of the huckle-bone and cavity thereof, and is inserted
in the lower part into the cavity of the great Trochanter, together with the
Quadrigemini.

If you would plainly see the exterior Obturator, you must either cut off the
beginning of the three-headed muscle, or handsomely pluck it away, and then
extend it, and turn it up; The internal is easily discerned when the bladder
is taken away.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the bones of the Leg, or Shanke.
THose which would describe the muscles of the leg, ought first to describe
What the Paiella, or whirle bone of the knee is.
the bones thereof, beginning at the Rotula, or whirle-bone of the knee.

This bone is gristlely on the outside, and round in compass, but on the inner
and middle part after some sort gibbous, but somewhat flatted at the sides,
that so it may be fitlier applied to the joint of the knee, and fitted within
the anteriour cavity of the two appendices of the thigh, and the upper and
foremost of the leg.

The use thereof is to strengthen the joint of the knee, and to hold the leg
The use thereof.
at his due extent, so that it may not be bended so far forwards, as it is
backe-wards.

The bones of the leg are two, the one thicker, called by the particular and
proper What, and how many bones the leg has.
name, the Os Tibiae or legge-bone; the other which is lesser, is termed
Perone, or Fibula, but commonly the lesser focile, (and in English it may be
termed the shin-bone.) The thicker being hollow and marrowie, is seated in the
inner part of the leg, The legge-bone.
having two processes, the one bigger, the other less.

The bigger seated on the upper part of the bone, and conjoined to it by
Symphysis, makes two superficial and side cavities disioyned by an indifferent
rising; wherefore this bone is connext to the bone of the thigh by Ginglymos.
For in the cavities thereof it receives the lower and hinder protuberances of
the Appendix of the thigh bone, but the middle eminency thereof, is received
by it between the two protuberances thereof.

This joint is strengthened, not only by the force of the tendons, or muscles
ending there, but also of three strong ligaments, of which one proceeds from
all the external, another from all the internal part of that connxeion; the
third which we, out of Hippocrates, called Diaphysis, from the distance or
space between them. What Diaphysis is.
The other process of the legge-bone, which we called the less, seated in the
lower part thereof, makes as it were a double cavitie, whereby it receives the
Astragalus or Pasterne bone; but on the inside it makes the anckle, as the
Perone makes it without: between these ancles the Astragalus is received on
the sides, and turned as the nut in a Crosse-bow, as often as there is need to
bend or extend the foot. Besides, this same leg-bone, being triangular has
three eminencies made in the shape of an Asses back; the sharper descends
along the fore part, called by the Greeks Anticnemion; the second resides on
the inner part, and the third on the outer; all these must be diligently
observed, and chiefly, that on the fore part; because it is as a guide and
rule to a Surgeon in the well setting of a broken leg. The Perone, or
shinne-bone, is The Perone fibula, or shinne-bone.
seated, as it were, on the outside, and as behind the legge-bone; it has
also two appendixes hollow on the inside, but gibbous on the out. This bone by
the upper of these is fastened and inserted under the inner, and in some sort
the hinder appendix of the legge-bone, so that it is in no sort articulated
with the thigh, but serves only in stead of a leaning stock. But by the
lower, this same bone is not only received in the lowest part of the leg, or
anckle, or pasterne bone, but also receives part thereof, which is joined on
the same side with the heel, especially then when we bend our foot outward.

This bone is fastened to the forementioned bones by Synarthosis, but bound by
strong ligaments proceeding from the same bones, and mutually sent from one to
another, or if you had rather, from the upper into the lower, as we said in the
arm. But this same fibula or shin-bone is also triangular, having three lines,
of which one stands outward, another on the foreside, and the third behind.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Muscles of the Legs.
ALL the motions of the leg are performed by eleven muscles, of which Their
number.
there be six on the foreside, and five on the hind. But of these, some move
the leg only, as those which take their original from the bone of the
thigh; others truly move the leg, but with the thigh, as those which arise
above the thigh, that is, from the hanch, huckle, and share-bones.

The first of these on the foreside, called the Long, but commonly the Sutorius
(or The Longus.
Tailor-muscle by reason of its action) it arises from the lower and fore
extremity of the spine or appendix of the hanch-bone, and descending obliquely
above the other muscles, is inserted by a large and membranous tendon, into the
fore and inner part of the leg under the knee; the action thereof is to
cross the legs, but being first bended by the muscles presently to be
treated of, it helps also the three headed muscle in the performance of the
forementioned action.

The second of these fore muscles is termed the membranosus, or membranous, The
Membranosus.
because it is wholly such, unless at the original where it descends fleshy
from the root and basis of the above mentioned spine of the hanch-bone, and
that obliquely with its membranous and broad tendon (mixed with the common coat
of the muscles) into the outward part of the leg, which it moves outward, as
also the thigh with the four twin muscles; for as we have in another place
observed, of two oblique motions, concurring in one, is made a right motion;
and besides, almost all the motions of the body, are thus performed; the
muscles which perform such motions are placed and opposed in an oblique site,
as may be perceived by the motions and site of the muscles of the hand taken in
general.

The third, called the Rectus, or right (because it descends above the Crurcus,
along The Rectus.
the right fore-line of the thigh, between the two Vaste muscles) comes forth
between the extremity of the appendix of the hanch-bone and cavity thereof,
with a very strong ligament, and then is inserted into the fore part of the
leg, passing over the midst of the whirle-bone of the knee; it extends the
leg, with the three following, but by accident it may help the bending of
the thigh.

The fourth and fifth are called Vasti, Vaste or huge muscles, by reason of
their largeness; the one of these is internal, the other external: they both
arise The two Vasti.
with right fibers, from their original, but with oblique at their insertion,
by reason whereof they both seem to have a compound action from a right and
oblique motion; the right helping for the extension of the leg, but the
oblique to draw one knee to another, or to desioyne both the knees; the
internal comes by its right fibers from the root of the little Trochanter, but
by its oblique from the innerdescendent line of the thigh. The external passes
forth by its right fibers from the root of the great Trochanter, but by the
oblique from the external descendent line of the same bone. But all these
fibers are in certain places so mixed with the Crureus that they cannot be
separated unless you violate the one of them; they go into the leg (each on
his side) above the whirle-bone of the knee along the sides of the right
muscle, with which it makes an unseparable tendon, as you shall presently
hear. The sixth and last of these fore muscles called the Crurcus, or
Thigh-muscle, The Crurcus.
(by reason of the strait and firm adhesion, which it has with the
thigh bone, which is by some called Crus) from the space between the two
Trochanters descends under the right muscle, and two vaste muscles into the
fore part of the thigh, even to the whirle-bone of the knee. But we must note
that these four last muscles make a common thick and broad tendon with which
they cover the Patella, or whirle-bone, and all the fore dearticulation of the
knee, that they cannot be separated without tearing; wherefore we must think
that this tendon, serves the knee for a ligament; now all these muscles
performing their action together, extend the leg. The five hind muscles
follow to be spoken of, of which three arise from the tuberositie of the
huckle-bone, going into the inner part; the fourth from the middle The three
Internal.
of the Pubis, called Biceps, that is, the two headed muscle into the outside
of the leg. Of the internal, one passing from the forementioned tuberositie,
descends ligamentous even into the midst of the thigh, and then becoming
fleshy, is inserted by its tendon, after the manner we formerly mentioned.

The other being slender, passing forth also from the same place, with its
tendon, is inserted with the tendon of the long muscle, and ends in the inner
part of the leg, which with its companion, it draws inwardly, and brings to
the other, which same thing it performs in the thigh, by the help of the
three headed muscle.

The third, being the inner, or hinder, descends from the middle part of the
share-bone, with a broad and slender ligament, and is inserted with a round
tendon, into the inner part of the leg after the manner of the forementioned.

The fourth called Biceps takes one of the two heads, of which it consists,
from the last mentioned tuberositie; the other from the outer line of the
thigh, but is inserted The Biceps, or two-headed muscle.
into the external part of the leg, as we formerly said.

The fifth and last called the Popliteus descends obliquely fleshly from the
external condyle or knot of the thigh, into the inner and hinder part of the
leg, at the The Popliteus or ham muscle.
joining thereof to the shinne-bone; the action thereof is, to draw the leg,
after a manner inwards.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Bones of the Foot.
THe Order of Anatomy requires, that we now prosecute the muscles moving the
foot; but because we should in vain deliver their insertion, the disposition
and condition of the bones of the foot, not being first known, wherefore it
first behooves us, to set forth their description. Therefore the bones of the
foot are six and twenty in number, distinguished into three ranks, that is,
the bones of the Tarsus or Instep, are seven; these of the Pedium, the
afterwrest, Their number The bones of the Instep.
or back of the foot, five, and those of the toes fourteen. Of the seven
bones of the instep, there are 4. named, and 3. unnamed. The first of the named
immediately following the bones of the leg, is called Astragalus, the
pasterne, or anklebone. This has three connexions, one, as we said before, in
the upper and broader The Astragalus, its three connexions, and their use.
part with the bones of the leg, of which it is received; the other in the
lower and hind part, by which it receives the upper and inner process of the
bone of the heel; the third on the foreside by which it is received in the
cavitie of the Os naviculare or Scaphoides, that is, the boate-like-bone. By
the first connection the foot is extended and bended; by the second it is moved
with the heel to the sides: the two first connexions are by Diarthrosis, the
last by Synarthrosis. But it is strengthened by strong and broad ligments,
descending, and ascending from one bone into another; also they are
strengthened by membranes, muscles and tendons, descending to the foot, above
and under these joints. But this bone has 3. processes, as 3. feet fastened
to the bone of the heel; of which the first and least is under the outer
anckle; the Its three processes.
bigger (which Galen says, makes a round head, fastened on a long neck)
looks toward the fore part of the foot, over against the great toe, and the
next toe to it; the middlemost is at the heel, behind the legge-bone.

I pass over in silence many other things, as the smoothness and asperity or
roughness of the bone, which I had rather you should learn by ocular
inspection, than by book. The second bone lying under this is called the
Calcaneum, or heele-bone, being The description of the Calcaneum or C^.
the biggest of all the bones of the foot, upon which all the body relies when
we go. It has two upper processes, the one great, the other little. The great
is received in the hind and outer process of the Astragalus; the lesser is
received on the inside in the 3. process of the same bone, which we said had a
round head fastened to a long neck. Besides, it is round on the hind part, and
much disioyned from the legge-bone, but on the fore and longer part, it is knit
by Synarthrosis to the Die-bone, whose lower and inner part, it seems to
receive; the superficies thereof is wholly unequal, and rising up with many
swellings. On the inner side it makes as it were a channel, so to give way, as
well to the vessels as tendons going to the sole of the foot and toes. Lastly,
we must consider the holes by which the vessels pass into that bone to give it
nourishment; by reason of which vessels the fracture of this heele-bone, is
very Why a fracture of the heel is so dangerous. Hippocrates, Sect. 3. lib. de
fracturis.
dangerous, because of the pressing and contusion of the vessels; as
Hippocrates shows. For the ligaments of this heel, or heele-bone they are
such, as these of the Astragalus, to wit, tendons, membranes and ligaments
properly so called, coming from one bone to another. The third bone of the
foot is named Scaphoides or boate-like, from the resemblance it has to a
boat, for on that part which looks toward The Os Scaphoidos, or
boate-likebone.
the posterne bone, it is hollow; but on that part which is next the three
Innominata, or namelesse bones (which it sustaines, and of which it is
received, as it in the cavity thereof receives the head of the Astragalus) it
is gibbous like the bottom of a boat. The connexions thereof are by
Synarthrosis, and they are strengthened by the forementioned ligaments; this
same bone is arched on the upper part, but somewhat hollowed or flatted below:
the inner part ends in a point, like the prow of a ship, but the outer obtuse
like the stern of a ship. The fourth bone of these which have names, is
called the Cuboides, from the resemblance of a Die; although that similitude be
very obscure. On the fore part it sustaines the toes; which by a certain
proportion The Os Cuboides or Die-bone.
to the fingers of the hand, may be called the Ring and little toes, but it is
sustained on the hind part, with the back part of the heel; on the inner
side it is joined with the boat-like-bone, and that namelesse bone which
sustaines the middle toe; on the outside, it produces a rising like the back
of an Ass, which on the lower part is extended transversly all the length
thereof; at the two sides of this eminency or rising, there are two small
cavities, in the form of a channel. The first and the greater of the Ossa
innominata, or namelesse bones, sustaines the great toe; the lesser and second,
The Ossa innominata, or namelesse bones.
the next toe thereto; the third and middle in bigness, the middle toe. These
three bones are arched on their upper part, but somewhat hollowed below. They
are knit to the three forementioned bones by Synarthrosis, of which they are
received, but on the hind part with the boate-like bone which they receive.
Now we must come to the bones of the second rank, that is, of the Pedium, or
back of the foot; these are five in number, bearing up the five bone of the
toes. They are somewhat The bones of the foot or Pedium.
gibbous on their upper part, but hollow below; each of them has two processes
at the end thereof, by the lower and first of which they receive the three
namelesse and Die-bone, but by the upper made into a round head, they are
received of the first bones of the toes. Their connexions, whether with the
toes, or bones of the instep, are by Synarthrosis. The ligaments as well proper
as common are such, as we said of the former. The bones of the third order now
remain to be spoken of, which we said, make the toes, and they are
fourteen, two of the great toe, but three of each The bones of the toes.
of the other toes. The first is somewhat longish, but the rest are very short,
except that of the great toe, all of them on the upper side are round and
convexe, but on the lower somewhat hollow, and plain longwise, that the
tendons which bend them, may pass more straightly and safely without inclining
to either side, even to their furthest joints; although such passages are much
helped by the membranous and common ligament, which rising from the sides of
these bones, involves these tendons, as we mentioned in the fingers. To
conclude, each of these bones the last excepted, have a double connection by
Diarthrofis, they are all unequal in their bigness, that is, thick at their
beginning (where they receive the heads of the precedent bones, upon which they
move, as a door upon the hinges) and so they grow smaller toward the ends,
but by their ends, they are received of the following bones: at their ends they
rise into two eminencies on their sides; distinguished by a cavity between
them, through which occasion they are far thicker at their ends, than in
their middle.

The Figure of the bones of the Foot properly so called.

Figure 1. and 2, show the bones of the right foot fastened together their
upper face and their nether face.

Fig. 3, 4, 5; and 6, show the upper, lower, inner and outer sides of the Talus
or pasterne.

Fig. 7, 8, 9, shows the same sides of the Heel.

Fig. 10, and 11. shows the forward and backward side of the boat bone.

Fig. 12, and 13, show the fore and back part of the wrest made of four bones.

ABCD 3, 5, 6. The protuberation of the Talus joined to the appendix of the
leg-bone, and of this protuberation four sides.

EE, 3, A sinus insculped in the protuberation of the Talus.

FF 3, two bunching parts of the Talus.

G 3, the inner side of the protuberation of the Talus crusted over with a
gristle, joined to the inner ankle.

H6, The outward sinus of the protuberation of the Talus covered over with a
gristle, and receiving the inner ankle.

I5. A rough sinus of the Talus, receiving a gristly ligament from the inner
ankle.

K6, a sinus of the Talus receiving a griftly ligament from the outward ankle.

LM 5, 6, two sinus in the hinder part of the Talus.

N 3, 4, 5, 6, the neck of the Talus or pastern bone.

O 3, 4, 5, 6. the head of the Talus going under the sinus of the boat bone.

P 7, 8, 9. the head of the bone of the heel crusted over with a gristle, and
going under the sinus of the Talus or the pasterne bone.

Q, 4. a large sinus of the Talus receiving the head of the heel.

R 7, 8, 9. a sinus of the heel whereto the lower part of the head of the
Talus is joined.

S 4, the lower part of the head of the Talus going into the sinus of the heel.

TT 4, a sharp sinus of the heel receiving a gristly ligament from the
pasterne bone.

XYZ 2, the place of the heel.

YZ 2, Y 8, Z 9. a process of the heel made for the production of muscles. a
b 7 8, 9, from a to b the distance of the upper part of the heel. c 8, 9. the
hinder part of the heel. d 2, 8, the inner side of the heel. e 8, the place
where the tendons that run to the bottom of the foot are reflected. f 7 8,
the utter side of the heel. g 1, 7, 9, here the tendons of the 7 and 8 muscles
of the foot are stretched out. h 7. the forepart of the heel which is joined
to the pasterne bone. i 7, that part of the heel which is joined to the
Cube-bone. k 11, the sinus of the Boat-bone receiving the head of the Talus.
Imn 10, three surfaces of the Boat-bone lightly prominent, which are
articulated to the bones of the wrest, op 11, the upper part of the Boat-bone
regarding the top of the foot. q r 10, and q 11, his lower part. q 10, 11, A
sinus through which the sixth muscle of the foot is led. s t u 13. the plain
surfaces of the three inner bones of the wrest whereby they are articulated to
the Boat-bone. x 13, a shallow sinus of the Cube-bone whereby it is articulated
to the heel, ab 12, the place of the Cube bone to which that bone of the
Afterwrest is joined which supporteth the last Toe save one. g 12. 13, the
place of the Cube bone where the third bone of the wrest is articulated. d 12,
13. that part of the Cube bone which respects the outside of the foot. e 12,
13. the surface of the Cube-bone in the upper part of the foot. z 2, 13, that
part of the Cube bone which regards the earth. ^ 2, a sinus of the Cubebone
at which the tendon of the seventh muscle of the foot is reflected. B 13, a
process of the third bone of the wrest whereinto the fifth muscle of the foot
is inserted. ^ 12. the place of the inner bone of the wrest to which that bone
of the Afterwrest which sustaineth the great Toe is coupled. ch 12, the place
of the second bone of the wrest whereto the bone of the Afterwrest that
supporteth the fore Toe is articulated. l 12 the place of the third bone of the
wrest whereto that bone of the Afterwrest which supporteth the middle toe is
articulated. m 1, 2, a small bone whereby that bone of the Afterwrest which
sustaineth the little toe is joined unto the Cubebone. yy 1, 2 the distances
betwixt the bones of the Afterwrest. xx, 1, 2, the heads of the bones of the
Afterwrest which enter into the bosoms of the toes. p 2, a process of the
bone of the afterwrest wherein the tendon of the seventh muscle of the foot is
implanted. ^ 2, a process of the Bone of the Afterwrest, which sustaineth the
little toe, which process receives the tendon of the eight muscle of the
foot. z, t, n, 1, 2, the three bones of the foretoe. PS, o, 2, two seed bones
placed under that bone of the afterwrest which sustaineth the great toe, ^ 2
under X. a seed bone set to the sesecond joint of the great Toe. G, 1, 2, the
Talus or pasterne. D, 1, 2, the Heel. th, 1, 2, the Boat-bone. L, X, 1, 2, the
bones of the toes. ph,, 1, 2, two bones of the great toe I, II, III, IV, V, 1.
the five bones of the afterwrest.



The Ligaments by which their connexions are fastened, are such as the former.
The Ossa sesamoidea or Seed-bones of the feet are like in number and site to
these of the hands. But this is to be noted, that those Seed-bones which are in
the first articulation are somewhat bigger than the rest, and they are round
and longish on the out side, but smooth and hollow on the inside, seated
between two cavities, encompassed The Seed-bones of the foot.
by three risings, of which two are on the sides, and the third in the midst of
the extremity of the first bone of the Pedium, which chiefly bears up the
great toe. To conclude, before we come to speak of the muscles, we must
observe that the foot was made for two commodities. The first is to stay and
bear the whole body when we stand, for which cause nature set not the great
toe contrary to the other, as it placed the Thumb on the hand. The other is
for apprehension, or taking hold of, wherefore nature framed and made the foot
and these moveable and joynted in the toes, as in the fingers of the hand.
Besides also for that we must go upon The twofold use of the feet.
our feet, Nature has made them in some places hollow on the lower side, and
in other some plain in a triangular figure, that so our feet may carry us over
every soil, plain mountanous, equal and unequal, through all parts of the
world.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Muscles moving the foot.
THe muscles of the Leg moving the foot are absolutely nine, three in the
fore part and six in the hind. Two of the three fore muscles bend the Their
number.
foot, when they jointly perform their action, but when severally, each
draws it to his side; the third chiefly extends the Toes, for other whiles it
seems by its slenderer and longer Tendon (which exceeds not that bone of the
Pedium which susteines the little Toe) to help also to bend the foot.

The first is called Peronaeus, because it descends along the bone Perone;
the other the Tibiaeus anticus, for that it descends along the Os Tibiae, or
bone of the Leg. The Musculus Peronaus.
third from its action is called the Digitumtensor, or Toe-stretcher. For their
original the Peronaeus which seems to have two heads, descends from the upper
appendix of the Perone or shin-bone by its first head, but by the other from
the middle of the same bone from the fore side into the hind, as the
superficies shows which passes between the fore and outward line of the said
bone; but after it arives at the lower and hinder appendix of the same bone,
behind the outer Anckle it produces two tendons, which by the guidance of the
Ligaments as well proper, as common, go the thicker under the sole of the
foot, ending in the Die-bone and that bone of the Pedium which susteines the
great Toe; the lesser goes on the outside to the Die-bone, and the last and
least bone of the Pedium which bears up the little Toe, sometimes a slender
portion thereof is produced even to the side of the little Toe, extending it and
drawing it from the rest. The Tibiaeus anticus or Fore leg muscle proceeding
Tibiaeus anticus.
from the upper and outer appendix of the Leg-bone descends above the surface
of the same bone, which is between the fore and outer line to which it
adheres, as also to that surface even to the midst, from which place it
produces one tendon, which descending on the fore and lowest part, ends on the
outside into two of the nameles bones, that is, into the first which is the
thicker, and into the middle-most, but besides by a slender portion thereof it
is extended into the first and greater bone of the Pedium, so to extend the
great Toe, drawing it inwards to the other foot. And this muscle with the
precedent bends the foot, if they both perform their parts at once; but if
severally, each draws the foot toward his side. The third which is the
Digitumtensor, or Toe-stretcher, is two fold; the one takes its original from
the top of the Leg, and running along the shin-bone and passing under the
ring, carries it self into the foot, in which it ends by five tendons going
to all the joints of the Toes, and by a sixth at that bone of the Pedium which
The Toestretcher is twofold.
susteines the little Toe, whereby (as we formerly said) it helps the bending
of the foot. The other descends into the midst of the shin-bone, and somewhat
fastened thereto by one tendon passing under the Ring it goes to the great Toe.
But you must note that all these Tendons have nervous, ligamentous and fleshy
fibers so separated from each other, that they can equally alone perform their
function, as if they were more distinct muscles. And we must think the same
of the rest which have distinct Tendons presently from their fleshy part. The 6
hind muscles.


The six hind muscles follow, of which the two first are called the Gemelli
or Twins by reason of the similitude of their thickness, original, insertion
and action. The third is called the Plantaris, because it is spent upon the
sole of the foot, as the Palmaris upon the palm of the hand. The fourth is
termed the Soleus or sole muscle by reason of the resemblance it has to the
fish of that name. The fifth the Tibiaeus posticus or hindlegge Muscle which
descends along the back part of the leg-bone. The sixth and last the
Digitumflexor or Toe-bender, equivalent to the Deep muscle of the hand, some
make but one muscle of this and the Tibiaeus posticus, The 2 Gemeli or Twins
muscles.
which produces three tendous; others had rather make three, as thus, that one
should be the Tibiaeus, the other the bender of four Toes, the third the
bender of the great Toe.

Now for the two Gemelli or Twins, the one is internal, the other external;
the internal passes forth from the root of the inner Condyle of the Thigh;
but the external from the external Condyle; and from this their original
presently becoming fleshy, especially on the out side, they meet together a
little after in their fleshy parts, and with the soleus they make the thick and
great Tendon at the midst of the leg, which from thence is inserted into the
back part of the heel; in this very Tendon breed painful kibes. The action
thereof is, to help our going by putting In what place the kibes breed
forth the foot, whilst it draws the Heel toward its original.

The Plantaris the least and slenderest of them all, passes forth fleshy from
the out-ward head of the legge-bone, and from thence the space of some four
fingers breadth The Plantaris
it ends in a strong and slender Tendon, which it sends between the Twin and
sole muscles to the sole of the foot, there to produce a membrane which covers
the sole of the foot, and a muscle equivalent to the upper bender of the Hand.

The Soleus, or sole muscle the thickest of them all, and seated under the Twin
The Soleus.
muscles, descends from the commissure of the leg and shin-bones, and about
the midst of the leg, after it has mixed his tendon with that of the Twin
muscles, it runs into the foresaid place that it may extend the foot for the
foresaid use,

The Tibiaeus posticus descends from the hinder appendix of the leg and
shinbones, The Tibiaeus Posticus.
and adhering, to them almost as fare as they go, by a strong Tendon, being as
it were bony at the end thereof, it is inserted into the Boat-like bone and the
two first nameles bones so to help the oblique extension of the foot.

The last being the Digitumflexor or Toe-bender is twofold, for one arises from
the legge-bone, in that place where the Poplitaeus ends, and inserted into that
same bone it The Digitumflexor twofold.
goes even to the backside of the inner ankle and from thence into the joints
of four of the toes. The (...) draws his original from almost the middle of
the shin-bone, and somewhat inserted into it, it goes by the heel and pasterne
bone to the great toe, mixed with the precedent; their action is to bend the
first joint of the Toes, rather by the force of the common Ligament, than by
the small portion of the Tendon which ends there. But it is their action to
bend the last dearticulation of the Toes by their proper insertion.

CHAP. XL. Of the Muscles moving the Toes of the feet.
NOw follow the muscles moving the Toes; these are eight in number, one on the
upper, and seven on the lower side. The first proceeds Their number.
from the Pasterne, heel and Die bones below the external Anckle, or the
Ligament of these bones with the Legge-bone, and obliquely stretched to the top
of the foot is parted into five small tendons to the sides of the five toes,
so to draw them outward toward its original, whereupon The Abductor of the
Toes, or Pediosus.
it is called the Abductor of the Toes, and also Pediosus, because it is
stretched over the Pedium, or back of the foot.

The first of the seven of the lower side called the flexor superior or upper
bender, The Flexor superior.
arises from the heel and stretched along the foot under the strong
membrane, (which from the heel is straightly fastened to the extremity of the
bones of the Pedium to streng then the parts contained under it) is inserted by
four Tendons, at the second joints of the four Toes which it bendes. Here you
must note that near the insertion thereof, this muscle divides it self, like
that muscle of the hand which is called sublimis, that so it may give way to
the Deep, which (as we said) descends along the fingers, to which a certain
common membranous Ligament adjoynes it self, which involues and fastens it to
the bone all along the lower part of the fingers, even to the last
dearticulation.

The second equivalent to that muscle of the hand which is called Thenar,
seated The muscle equivalent to the Thenar.
on the inner side of the foot, arises from the inner and hollow part of the
heel and pasterne bones and ends in the side, and inner part of the great Toe,
which it draws from the rest, inwards. This may be divided into two or three
muscles, as the Thenar of the hand, to draw the great Toe to the rest, as much
as need requires, just as we said of the Hand. The third answerable to that of
the hand which is named the Hypothenar, passes from the outer part of the heel
and ascending by the sides of the foot it is in like manner inserted into the
side of the little Toe, so to draw it from the rest; to which same action a
certain flesh contained under the sole of the feet may serve, which is
stretched even to these Toes, that also it may serve to hollow the foot. The
four Lumbrici or wormy muscles follow next, which from the membrane of the The
4 Lumbrics.
Deep Toe-bender are inserted into the inner and side part of the four Toes,
so to draw them inwards, by a motion contrary to that which is performed by the
Pediosus. The Interosses or bone-bound muscles of the Pedium or back of the
foot, remain to be spoken The descrip^^on of the upper and lo^ Interosses.
of: These are eight in number, ^oure above, and as many below, different in
their original, insertion and action; for the upper because they draw the
foot outward with the pediosus, arise from the fore and inner part of that
bone of the pedium, which bears up the little Toe (and so also the rest each in
its order) and are inserted into the outward and forepart of the following
bone. The lower on the contrary pass from the fore and outer part of that bone
of the pedium, which bears up the Great Toe (and so each of the rest in its
order,) but are inserted into the inner and upper part of the following bone,
so with the wormy muscles to draw it inwards, or to hollow the foot as the
outward, or to flat the foot, as we said of the Interosses of the hand.

CHAP. XLI. A^ Epitome or brief recital of the bones in a man's body.
THe whole head which has the least consists of 60. bones; but that which has
most of 63. that is, 14 of the Cranium or scull, 14 or 17. of the face, and 32
The bones (...) the S^.
teeth; Of the bones of the scull there be 8 containing and six contained; the
This first shows the forepart of the Sceleton of a man, etc.
The Declaration of these three figures put into one.

A 3. The Coronall Suture called in Greek (...).

B 23. The suture like the letter (...) called (...).

C 2, The sagittall Suture called (...).

D 2, 3. The scale-like Conjunction called (...).

a 2, 3, Os verticis, or syncipitis, the bone of the Synciput, called Os (...).

b, 1, 3. The forehead-bone, that is, (...).

g, 2, 3. The bone of the Nowle or (...).

d, 2, 3. The bones of the temples or (...).

e, 3. An appendix in the temple-bone like a Bodkin, (...).

z 1, 2, 3. A process in the temple-bone like the teate of a dugge, called
therefore Mamillaris and (...)

E, 2, 3. the wedge-bone, (...).

(...), 3, the stony part of the Scull.

(...), 3, a process of the wedge-bone much like the wing of a Bat, and
therefore called (...).

The 2 and 3 Figures shows the backside of the Sceleton. and the laterall
part of the Sceleton.
F, 1, 2, 3. the yoke-bone (...). G 1, 3. the lower jaw. I, K, L, M, N, 1, 2,
3. the back or the spine, (...). From I to K, the Neck, (...). From K to L,
the Rackebones of the Chest. From L to M, the rackebones of the Loins. From M
to N, the Holy-bone, (...). N, the Rumpe bone, (...). O, 1, 3. the brest-bone,
(...). P, 1, 3. the Sword-like gristle of the breast, (...) Char. 1, 2, 3, as
far as to 12. in all three Tables, show the twelve ribs of the Chest (...). Q
1, the clavicles or collar bones, (...). R, 1, 2, 3 the shoulder blade, (...).
l, 1, 2, 3, the upper process of the shoulder blade, or the top of the
shoulder, called (...) m, 1, 3, The lower process of the shoulder blade:
called (...). S, 1, 2, the bone of the arm, called Humerus and (...). T, V, 1,
2, 3, the Cubit (...). X, 1, 2, 3: the wand or the upper bone of the Cubit,
called (...). Y, 1, 2, 3, the ell or lower bone of the Cubit, called (...). y
3, the process of the Cubit, (...). x, 13, the process like a bodkin or
probe, called (...). ZZ: 1, 2, 3, the wrest (...). GG, 1, 3, the after-wrest
(...). DDD. 1, the fingers (...). th, 1, 2, 3, the bones joined to the sides of
the Holy bone, on each side, distinguished as it were into three parts. 0, 1,
2, 3, the first part called the Hanch-bone, Os Ilium, (...). a, 1, 2, 3, the
second part the bone of the Coxendix (...). (...), 1, 2, 3, the third part the
share-bone, Os pubis (...). s, 1, 2, 3, a gristle going between the
conjunction of the share-bones. L, 1, 2, 3, the thigh, (...). t, 1, 2, 3, the
greater outward process of the thigh called Rotator (...). n, 1, 2, 3, his
lesser and inner process. (...), 1, 2, 3, the whirle bone of the knee, Patella
Rotutula, (...). P, S, 1, 2, 3, the leg, (...), ph, 1, 2, 3, the inner and
greater bone of the leg (...). ps, 1, 2, 3, the utter and smaller bone of the
leg, called the Brace-bone, Fibula, (...). ph, 1, 2, 3, the process of the Leg
or the inner anckle called Malleolus internus., 1, 2, the process of the brace
of the out-ward ankle, both of them are called in greek, (...). ph, 1, 2, 3,
the bone called the cockal, Talus, balista, Os (...). a, 2, the Heel Calx,
(...). b, 1, 3, the bone called Os Naviculare, (...). cc, 1, 2, 3, the wrest of
the foot called Tarsus, consisting of four bones, (...). d, e, f, 1, 2, 3,
three inner bones of the wrest of the foot, called by some (...) g, 1, 2, 3,
the utter bone of the wrest of the foot like a Dye, (...). hh, 1, 2, 3, the
after wrest of the foot called Pedium, by some (...). ii, 1, 2, 3, the toes of
the foot. k, 1, 2, 3, the seed bones of the foot, called oscicula sesamina,
(...).

This figure shows the Sceleton of the bones and gristles of a woman, that it
may appear all her bones are in proportion lesser than the bones of a man. But
in this figure only those parts are marked with letters wherein a woman
differs from a man in her bones and gristles.
A, The sagittall suture descending into the nose, and dividing the fore head
bone, which is sometimes found in women, very rarely in men, but always in
Infants.

BB, the Chest somewhat depressed before, because of the Paps.

CC, the collar bones not so much crooked as in men, nor intorted so much
upward.

D, the brest-bone perforated sometimes with a hole much like the form of a
heart, through which veins do run outward, from the mammary veins unto the
paps.

E, the gristles of the ribs, which in women are somewhat bony, because of the
weight of the Dugs.

F, a part of the back reflected, or bent backward above the loins.

GG, the compass of the hanch-bones running more outward, for the womb to
rest upon, when a woman is with child.

HH, the lower processes of the share-bones, bearing outward that the cavity
marked with K, might be the larger.

I, the anterior commissure or conjunction of the share-bones filled up with a
thick gristle, that in the birth they might better yield somewhat for Natures
necessity.

K, A great and large cavity circumscribed by the bones of the coxendix and the
Holy-bone. L, The Rumpe or Coccyx, curved backward to give way in the time of
the birth. M, the thigh bones by reason of the largeness of the foresaid
cavity, have a greater distance betwixt them above, whence also it is that
women's thighs are thicker than men's.

containing are, the Os frontis, or Forehead bone, the Nowle-bone, the two
bones of the Synciput, the two stony bones, the Wedgebone, and the Sive-like or
spongy-bone. But the contained are six shut up in the cavity of the Ears, the
Anvile, Hammer and stirrup.

For the bones of the face, there are six within or about the Orb of the Eye,
that The bones of the face 15.
is, on each side three; two bones of the Nose, two lesser Iaw bones, and two
bigger, which are always in beasts seen distinguished by a manifest
difference, but it is so rare in men, that I have not found it as yet;
therefore these only are distinguished by manifest difference, two which
contain all the upper teeth, the two inner of the palate, the two of the lower
Iaw in children; And last of all the Os Cristae, whence the middle gristle or
partition of the nose arise.

The two and thirty teeth are equally distributed in the upper and lower Jaws;
and of these there be eight shearers, four fanges, or Dog-teeth, and twenty
Grinders. The teeth 32.


And there is another bone at the root of the tongue called Os Hyoides,
always The bone Hyoides
composed of three bones, sometimes of four.

Now follow the bones of the Spine, or Backbone, which are just four and
thirty, The bones of the spine 34.
that is, seven of the neck, twelve of the Chest, five of the loins, fix of
the holy-bone; and four of the rumpe. Besides there are two bones of the
throat, or Collar bones. 2 Coller-bones. The Ribs 24. The bones of the Sternon
3.


The Ribs are twenty four, that is, fourteen true and ten bastard ribs. The
bones of the Sternon or Breast Bone most frequently three, other whiles seven,
as sometimes in young bodies.

Hence coming to the Arms there are reckoned 62, beginning with the
shoulder blade; as there are two shoulder-blades; two Arm bones; four bones
of the Cubite; The bones of the whole arm 62.
that is, two Ell-bones and two Wands; sixteen of the Wrest, eight of the
Afterwrest, and thirty of the fingers: into this number also come the
Sesamoidea, or seedbones, of which some are internal, and these always twelve
at the least, although sometimes there may be more found, a great part of which
rather merit the name of Gristles, than bones; there are others external if
we believe Sylvius.

Now remain the bones of the Leg, which (if we reckon the Ossa Ilium on each
side three, as in young bodies, it is fit they should) they are sixty six,
besides the seed-bones, The bones of the whole leg, 66.
that is to say, two Haunch-bones, two share bones, two Huckle-bones, two
thigh-bones, two Whirlbones of the knees, four of the leg, that is two
leg-bones, and two shin-bones. Fourteen of the Instep, as two heel, two
pasterne, two boat-like, two Die, and six namelesse bones. Ten of the Pedium or
back of the foot, that is, five in each foot; and twenty eight of the Toes:
and as many seed-bones in the feet, as the hands enjoy. But I have thought good
to add these figures for the better understanding of what has been spoken
hereof.

CHAP. XLII. An Epitome of the names and kinds of composure of the bones.
BEcause it is as nececessary for a Surgeon to know the manner of setting
and repairing broken bones, as to put them in their places when they are
dislocated, or out of joint; but seeing neither of them can be understood when
the natural connection of the bones is not known, I have thought it a work
worth my What the Sceletos is.
labor, briefly to set down, by what and how many means the bones are
mutually knit and fastened together. The universal composure and structure of
all the bones in a man's body is called, by the Greeks; Sceletos. But all these
bones are composed The bones are composed two manner of ways.
after two sorts, that is, by Arthron, an Articulation or joint, and by
Symphysis a natural uniting or joining together. There are many other kinds of
both these sorts. For there are two kinds of Articulation, that is Diarthrosis
or Dearticulation, and Synarthrosis, 2 Sorts of Articulation. What Diarthosis
and Synarthrosis are. 3. Sorts of Diarthrosis. What Enarthrosis is,
or Coarticulation; which differ as thus, Dearticulation is a composition of
the bones with a manifest and visible motion; Coarticulation has a motion of
the bones, yet not so manifest, but more obscure. But these two do again admit
a subdivision into other kinds. For Diarthrosis conteines under it Enarthrosis,
Arthrodia and Ginglymos. Now Enarthrosis or Inarticulation is a kind of
Dearticulation, in which a deep Cavity receives a thick and long head, such a
composition has the Thigh Bone with the Huckle-bone.

Arthrodia is when a lightly engraven civity admits a small and short head,
such What Arthrodia.
a connection is that of the Arme-bone with the shoulder blade; of the first
Vertebra with the second. The Greeks have distinguished by proper names these
two kinds of Cavities and heads; For they call the thick and long head
Cephale, that is, a What Cephale is. What Corone is. What Cotyle is What Glene
is What Ginglymos.
Head absolutely; but the lesser they term Corons, or Coronon which the
Latins call Capitulum, a Litle-head. But they call a deep Cavity Cotyle, and
a superficiary one Glene. The third sort called Ginglymos, is when the bones
mutually receive and are received one of another; as when there is a cavity in
one bone, which receives the head of the opposite bone, and also the same bone
has a head which may be received in the Cavity of the opposite bone; such a
composure is in the Cubite and knee, that is in the connection of the Thigh Bone.

And thus much of Dearticulation and the three kinds thereof. Synarthrosis 3
Kinds of Synarthrosis.
or Coarticulation, another kind of juncture, has also three kinds thereof
(Gal. lib. de Ossibus) to wit, Sutura, Gomphosis and Harmonia.

Suture is a composition of the bones after the manner of sowing things
together, What a Suture is. What Gomphosis is. What Harmonia is.
example whereof appears in the bones of the Scull. Gomphosis is when one bone
is fastened in another as a pin is fastened in a hole, after which manner the
teeth are fastened in their sockets in both the Jaws. Harmony is when the
bones are composed by the interposition of a simple line, after which manner
many bones of the nose and face are joined together.

Hitherto we have spoken of the first construction of the bones by articulation
and the kinds thereof; now it follows we treat of Symphysis. What Symphyasis
is.


Symphysis, or Growing together as we formerly said, is nothing else, than
natural union of the bones; such union is made two manner of ways, that is,
either by interposition of no other thing; after which sort in success of time
the bones of the lower Iaw grow together, which formerly in children were
manifestly distinguished; or by the mediation of some Medium; but that happens
three manner of ways, by interposition of three several Media, as first of a
Synchondrosis.
Gristle, which kind of union the Greeks call Synchondrosis, after which
manner the Share-bones grow together and also some Appendices in young bodies;
secondly of a Ligament, and it is named by the Grecians Syneurosis, the name of
a Nerve being taken in the largest sense, for sometimes it is used for a
tendon, other-whiles for a Ligament, otherwhiles for a Norve properly so called
and which is Syneurosis.
the author of sense and motion. But this Symphysis or union has place by
Syneurosis, or interposition of a Nerve in certain bones of the Sternon and
Haunch. The things signified by word Nerve. Synsarcosis.


Thirdly, the bones grow into one by interposition of flesh, called in Greek
Synsarcosis; thus the flesh of the Gums fastens the teeth and makes them
immovable. But if some be less pleased with this division, by reason of the
obscurities, in which it seems to be involved, this following expression comes
into my mind, which I was first admonished of by German Cortin Doctor of
Physic, which if you well observe it, is both blameless and more easy for
your understanding.

The bones, which as pillars sustain the fabric of the whole body, are
either,

United mutually by Symphysis or union; by which they are so conjoined that
there is no dissimular, nor heterogeneous body, at least which may be
discerned, interposed between them. Such union appears in the two bones of the
lower Iaw at the Chin, in the bones of the Sternon, the Hanch with the
Huckle-bones, and the Share-bones between themselves; of this union there are
no more kinds, for by this it comes to pass, that the bones, which were more
and distinct meet together by interposition of one Medium, to wit, a Gristle,
which now indeed is no Gristle, but is turned into a Bone. or Conjoined by that
which they call Arthrodia, or Articulation, as when they so concur and are
bound together, that some Heterogeneous substance may be noted betwixt them,
but the bones thus composed are knit two manner of ways, that is, either more
loosly as by Diarthrosis, that is a kind of Articulation not very strait, as
by which it might have opportunity to preforme diverse motions: of this
composure or Articulation of bones there are three kinds, as Enarthrosis, when
the head of a bone is wholly received in the cavity of another, and hid therein,
as the Thigh Bone is joined with the Huckle-bone. Arthrodia, when in a lightly
engraven and not much depressed cavity, the head of another bone is not wholly
hid, but only received in part thereof; so that unless nature had otherwise
provided a sufficient receptacle for the head of this bone (as by the ligame^ts
of the neighboring Muscles) it would otherwise have bin in perpetual danger
of dislocation. Thus the Arme-bone is fastened to the shoulder blade.
Gynglymos, when the bones mutually receive each other, such like composition
has the Cubit and Arme-bone.
or more straightly, as by synarthrosis, when the bones are more straightly knit so
that they can perform no motions in the body. Of this Articulation there are
also 3, kinds, that is Gomphysis, as when one bone so receives another as a Pin
is fastened in the hole made by a peircer, thus the teeth are fastened in the
Jaws. Sutura, like a Saw, or teeth of a comb, as the bones of the scul are
mutually knit together, or as scales, or tiles are laid, after which manner the
stony bones are fastened to these of the Synciput. Harmonis, which is by
interposition of a simple line, which parts bones abutting one upon another, as
the bones of the Nose.


An Epitome or brief recital of all the Muscles of man's body.

As I have formerly reckoned up the bones, so here I have decreed to recite the
muscles of man's body. Wherefore in the face we first meet with the broad or
skin muscle, arising from the flshy pannicle, and covering the whole neck and
almost all the face. Then follow 4, perteining to the upper eyelids. In the
Orbs of the eyes lie 14, that is 7, in each Orb, of which 4 are called right,
two oblique and one pyramidall. Then succeed 4 of the nose, two external on
each side one, and two internal, these draw it together and the other open it.
After these come the ten muscles of the lower Iaw, of which two are called the
Crotaphitae or Temporal; two Masseteres or Grinders; two round (which seem to
me rather to perteine to the lips, than to this Iaw;) two little ones hid in the
mouth, arising from the winged process of the wedge-bone; two openers of the
mouth being nervous or tendinous in their midst. Then follow the 8 muscles of
the lips, that is, 4 of the upper and as many of the lower, shutting and
opening the mouth. The tongue with his ten muscles is hid as it were in the den
of the mouth. Wherefore the; muscles of the whole face are 51. In the fore part
of the neck are found the muscles of the bone Hyoides and throtle; now 8
muscles hold the bone Hyoides as equally balanced; of which there are 2 upper
arising from the Chin; 2 on the sides from the process Styloides perforated in
their midst, through which the 2 openers of the mouth in that part nervous do
pass; 2 arise from the Sterno^, and lastly 2 from the upper rib of the
shoulder blade to the Coracoides, which also in their midst are nervous, in
which place the two Mastoidei lie upon them.

The Throtle composed of three gristles has eighteen or twenty muscles, of
The ^8. of the La^x.
which six or eight are common, and twelve proper; Of the common there are two
above, two below, and two at the sides of the first gristle, to which we may
add these two which serve for the opening of the Epiglottis, which are always
found in great four footed beasts for to press down the Epiglottis.

The proper are twelve which almost all of them come from the second gristle,
so to be inserted into the first and third, of which some are before, others
behind the Thyroides. Besides these, there are the Mastoidei which bend the
head. The head is moved by 14. Muscles.


But in the back part of the Neck there are twelve muscles also appointed for
to move the head, so that in all there are fourteen muscles serving for the
motion of the head, the two fore Mastoidei, and the twelve hind Muscles, that
is to say, the two Splenij, two Complexi, four Right, and so many oblique
which are very short, so that they pass not beyond the first and second
Vertebra. The 8. Muscles of the neck.


The Neck has eight Muscles, of which two are called the long, lying before
upon the bodies of the Vertebrae; the two Scaleni which are at the sides; the
two Spinati which run along the Spine; the two transverse which go to the
transverse processes of the Chest. The Muscles of the chest 18.


The Chest has 81 Muscles, of which some are on the fore part, some on the
hind, others on the sides; they are all combined or coupled together except
the Midriffe. Now of these there are the two Subclavij; the two great
Saw-muscles which proceed from the basis of the shoulder blade; the four little
Rbomboides or square muscles, that is, two above and two below; the two
Sacrolumbi; the two binders of the Gristles within the Chest.

Besides there are twenty and two external and as many internal Intercostall
muscles, twenty four Intercartilaginei, that is, twelve external and as many
internal; so that the Intercostall, and Intercartilaginei are 68, which with
the twelve before mentioned make the number of 80 Muscles. Add to these the
Midriffe being without an associate, and you shall have the number formerly
mentioned, to wit, 81. But also if you will add to these the Muscles of the
lower belly, I will not much gainsay it, because by accident they help
inspiration and exspiration. The 8. muscles of the lower belly.


Wherefore of the eight muscles of the Epigastrium, there are four Oblique, of
which two are descendent and so many ascendent; two right, to which you may
add the two Assisting or Pyramidall muscles which come from the share-bone, if
it please you to separate them from the head of the right muscles: The 6. or 8.
of the loins.


There are six or eight Muscles of the Loins, of which two bend the loins
which are the triangular; the two Semispinati; two Sacri; two are in the midst
of the back, which for that cause we may call the Rachitae or Chine-muscles.
Now, that hereafter we may severally and distinctly set down the muscles of
the extreme parts, will we come to the privities. The two Cremasters of the
Testicles.


Where for the use of the Testicles there are two Muscles called the
Cremasteres, or Hanging Muscles. At the root of the yard, or Perinaeum, there
are four others, partly for the commodious passing of the urine and seed, and
partly for erecting the yard. The Sphincter Muscle is seated at the Neck of
the Bladder.

At the end of the right Gut are three Muscles, two Levatores Any, or Lifters
The three of the fundament.
up of the fundament, and one Sphincter or shutting Muscle. Now let us
prosequute the Muscles of the Extremities, or Limbs. But it will be sufficient
to mention only the Muscles of one side, because seeing these parts of the
body are double, those things which are said of the one may be applied to the
other.

Wherefore the muscles of the Arm, beginning with these of the shoulder blade,
The muscles of the Arm (...) general 32.
at the least, are 42. for there are 4 of the shoulder blade: of the Arm
properly or particularly so called, seven or eight; and there are three, four,
or five proper muscles of the Cubite, that is, appointed for the performance of
the motions thereof; in the inner part of the Cubite are seven, and as many in
the outer; but those of the hand are reckoned thirteen at the least.

The fourth of the shoulder blade are the Trapezius resembling a Monks Cowle,
which moves it upwards and downwards, and draws it backwards; the second is
the Levator, or Lifter-up; the third the great Rhomboides lying under the
Trapezius. The fourth, the lesser saw muscle which is inserted into the
Coracoides. The arm is moved forwards, backwards, upwards, downwards and
circularly.

The Pector all muscle arising from the Clavicle, Breast Bone and neighboring
ribs, draws it forwards; the Humilis or low-muscle coming from the lower rib
of the shoulder blade draws it backwards; the Deltoides upwards; and the
Latissim^ downwards, and somewhat backe-wards. But the three seated about the
shoulder blade move it about, or circularly.

The Epomis or Scapularis upwards; the Supcascapularis, which may seem two,
backwards and downwards; the Subscapularis which is in the Cavitie of the
shoulder blade, forewards, so that by a certain vicissitude and succession of
action they move it circularly. Two muscles bend the Cubite, the one named
Biceps or Two-headed, and the other Brachiaeus or the Arme-muscle; but one,
two, or three muscles extend it; for if you have respect to the original, this
muscle has two or three heads, but one only insertion.

In the inside of the Cubite are seven muscles, one Palmaris, two
wrest-benders; two pronatores, one square, another in some sort round; two
finger-benders, and one Abductor or Drawer aside. These fourteen internal and
external muscles of the Cubite, do not indeed move the Cubite, but only
seated there move the wande and with it the hand. These are the thirteen
Muscles of the hand; the Theu which may not only be divided into two, but into
six, not only by the diverse actons it performs, but also by the branches
divided by a manifest space between them; the second is called the Hypothenar,
which lies under the little finger, as the Thenar does under the Thumb; the
third is the Abductor of the Thumb; then follow the four Lumbrici and six
Interosses, although eight may be observed.

The whole Leg has at the least 50. Muscles, for we reckon there are
fourteen muscles in the thigh; there are eleven made for the use of the Leg;
there are nine The muscles of the leg in general 50.
seated in the Leg, three before and six behind which serve for the use of
the foot and toes; in the foot are seated sixteen. Therefore of the
fourteen muscles serving the thigh two bend it, one called the Lumbaris, the
other arising from the cavity of the Hanch-bone; but the three which make the
Buttocks and the Triceps or Three-headed muscle, (which if you please, you may
divide into three) extend it. Besides these the 4. twin muscles, and two
Obturators, of which the one is internal, the other external, turn the Thigh
about. The Leg has eleven, that is, the Long, the Membranous, the four
Postici or Hind muscles (three of which come from the Huckle-bone, but the
other from the commissure of the Share-bone) the Right, the two Vaste, the
Crureus or Legge-muscle, and the Poplitaeus, or Ham-muscle. These seated in the
leg for the use of the foot and toes are three fore and six hind muscles:
two of the fore bend the foot, one of which is called the Tibiaeus anticus,
the other Peronaeus, which you may divide into two. The third the bender of the
toes, although it also partly bend the foot, to which also the bender of the
Thumb may be revoked. One of the hind is the Toe-bender, others extend the
foot, and are in this order; Two twins, one Plantaris, one Soleus, one
Tibiaeus posticus and the great bender of the Toes, to which may be revoked the
bender of the Thumb. Of the sixteen seated in the foot, one is above, seated
on the back of the foot, which we call the Abductor of the Toes; another in
the sole of the foot, to wit, the little bender of the Toes, which goes to the
second joynte of the Toes along the inside of the foot; the other lends his
help to the great Toe, which you may call the Abductor of the Thumb; another
is seated on the outside for the use of the little Toe. To these are added the
four Lumbrici, besides the eight Interosses; or if you had rather, ten. And
thus much may suffice for the enumeration of the muscles.

The Figure of the Muscles when the skin with its veins, the fat, and all the
fleshy membrane are taken away, that part of the fleshy membrane excepted;
which takes upon it the nature of a muscle, as being conjoined with the muscles.
a, the muscle of the forehead.

b, the temporal muscle.

c, the muscle shutting the eyelid.

d, the muscle opening the wings of the nose.

e, the fore part of the yoake-bone.

f, the muscle of the upper lip tending to the nose.

g, the beginning of the masseter or grinding muscle.

h, the broad muscle consisting of a fleshy membrane.

i, k, the beginning thereof which rises immediately from the coller-bone and the
top of the shoulder.

l, that part thereof which bends forwards to l.

m, the muscle which lifts up the arm.

n, the pectorall muscle.

o, the membranous part of this muscle which is joined to the nervous part of
the first muscle of the Abdomen or belly. q, q, the fleshy portion thereof,
from the 6. and 7. ribs, and the insertion thereof. r the muscle drawing down
the arm. s, the oblique descending muscle of the lower belly. t, t, t, the
insertion of the greater saw muscle. u u. the linea alba or white line, at
which the two oblique descendent muscles meet, covering the whole belly. x, the
yard, the skin being taken away. y, the vessels of seed. a, the testicles
wrapped in the fleshy membrane. (...), the fore muscle bending the cubite. g,
g, the hind muscle bending the cubite. d, the muscle extending the cubite.
(...), the two-headed muscle extending the wrest. (...), the muscle producing
the broad tendon on the back of the hand. z, his tendon. (...), the muscle
turning up the Wand. th, the upper muscle flatting the Wand, (...), the. second
of the arme-benders, whose beginning is ch, and tendon l, o, a portion of the
muscle, whereof one part yields tendons to the wrest, the other to the thumb.
(...), the fleshlesse articulation of the thumb. r, a muscle inserted into the
wrest, lying near to the following muscle. s, a muscle divided into two
tendons, the one whereof is inserted into the first joint of the thumb, the
other into the following. t, the first muscle of the thigh, whose head is at n,
and tendon at PH, and insertion at chapter PS, the end of the second muscle of the
thigh. o the end of the third muscle of the thigh. 1, the sixth muscle of the
leg; his beginning at 2. almost wholly membranous at 3. 4, the ninth muscle of
the leg. 5, the eight of the leg. 6, a portion of the sixth and seventh of
the thigh. 7, the Glandules of the groines. 8, the eight of the thigh. 9, the
second of the leg. 11, the innermost of the anckle. 12, the sixth muscle of
the foot, his original 13. end 14. 15, the seventh of the foot. 16, the
tendon of the muscle lifting up the great toe. 17, the muscles extending the
four other toes. 18, the abductor of the great toe. 19, a transverse ligament.
20, a tendon of the ninth muscle of the foot. 21, the first muscle. 22, the
fourth muscle of the foot. 23, the tendon of the third muscle. 24. a muscle
bending the third bone of the four lesser toes.



THE SEVENTH BOOK Of Tumors against Nature in General.
CHAP. I. What a Tumor against Nature, vulgarly called an Impostume, is, and
what be the differences thereof.
AN Impostume, commonly so called, is an affect against nature, What an
Impostume vulgarly so called is. The material causes of Impostumes, or
unnatural tumors.
composed and made of three kinds of diseases, Distemperature, ill
Conformation, and Solution of Continuitie, concurring to the hindering or
hurting of the Action. An humor, or any other matter, answering in proportion
to a humor, abolishing, weakening, or depraving of the office or function of
that part or body in which it resides, causes it.

The differences of Impostumes are commonly drawn from five things; quantity,
matter, accidents, the nature of the part, which they affect or possess; and
lastly, their efficient causes. I have thought good for the better
understanding of them, to describe them in this following Scheme.

A Table of the differences of Tumors.
The differences of Impostumes are drawn principally from five things, that
is, from their quantity, by reason whereof Impostumos are called -- Great,
which are comprehended under the general name of Phlegmons, which happen in
the fleshy parts, by Galen, Lib de tumor contra naauram, and lib. 2, ad
Glauconem. Indifferent, or of the middle sort, as Fellons. Small, as those
which Avicen calls Bothores, i. Pushes and Pustules, all kind of Scabs and
Leprosies, and lastly, all small breakings out.
from their accidents, as Color, from whence Impostumes are named white, red,
pale, yellow, blew, or black, and so of any other color. Pain, hardness,
softness, and such like, from whence they are said to be painful, not
painful, hard, soft, and so of the rest.
from the matter, of which they are caused and made, which is either Natural
or Hot, and that either, Sanguine, from whence a true Phlegmon. Choleric, from
whence a true Erysipelas.
Cold and that either Phlegmatic, from whence a true Oedema. Mela^colick from
whence a perfect Scyrrhus.

Not natural, which has, exceeded the limits of its natural goodness, from
whence illegitimate tumors, therefore of a sanguine humor, of a choleric
humor, Carbunckles, Gangrenes, eating ulcers, Sphaceles are caused. Of the
grosser, the eating Herpes, of the subtiler the Herpes miliaris is made. Watery
and flatulent Impostumes, the Kings-evill, knots and all phlegmatic swellings,
and excrescenses. The exquisite or perfect Scyrrhus, hardnesses and all sorts
of cancerous Tumors.
of a phlegmatic humor, of a mela^cholick humor,

From the condition and nature of the parts which they possess, from whence
the Ophthalmia, is a Phlegmon of the eyes. Parotis a tumor near the ears.
Paronychia or a whitlow at the roots of the nails; and so of the rest. From
the efficient causes, or rather the manner of doing. For some impostumes are
said to be made by defluxions, others by congestion, those are commonly hot,
and the other commonly cold, as it shall more manifestly appear by the
following chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the general causes of Tumors.
THere are two general causes of Impostumes, Fluxion, and Congestion.
Defluxions are occasioned, either by the part sending, or receiving, the part
After what manner tumors against nature are chiefly made.
sending discharges it self of the humors, because the expulsive fa^ltie
resident in that part is provoked to expel them, moved thereto, either by the
troublesomenesse of their quantity or quality. The part receiving draws, and
receives occasion of heat, pain, weakness (whether natural, or accidental)
opennesse of the passages, and lower situation.

The causes of heat, in what part soever it be, are commonly three, as all
immoderate Three causes of heat.
motion (under which frictions are also contained,) external heat, either from
fire, or sun, and the use of acride meats and medicines.

The causes of pain are four, the first, is a sudden and violent invasion of
some Four causes of pain.
untemperate thing, by means of the four first qualities; the second is
solution of continuitie, by a wound, luxation, fracture, contusion or
distention; the third, is the exquisit sense of the part, for you feel no
pain in cutting a bone, or exposing it to cold or heat; the fourth is, the
attention, as it were of the animal faculty, for the mind diverted from the
actual cause of pain, is less troubled, or sensible of it.

A part is weak, either by its nature, or by some accident; by its nature as
the Glandules and the Emunctories of the principal parts; by accident, as if
some distemper, Two causes of weakness.
bitter pain, or great defluxion have seized upon it, and wearied it, for so
the strength is weakened, and the passages dilated. And the lowness of site
yeeks opportunity for the falling down of humors.

The causes of congestion are two principally, as the weakness of the
concoctive Two causes of congestion.
faculty, which resides in the part, (by which the assimulation into the
substance of the part of the nourishment flowing to it is frustrated) and the
weakness of the expulsive faculty; for whilst the part cannot expel
superfluities, their quantity continually increases.

And thus oftentimes cold impostumes have their original from a gross and
tough humor, and so are more difficult to cure.

Lastly, all the causes of Impostumes may be reduced to three, that is, the
primitive, or external; the antecedent, or internal; and the conjuncte, or
containing, as we will hereafter treat more at large.

CHAP. III. The signs of Impostumes or Tumors in general.
BEfore we undertake the cure of Tumors, it is expedient to know their kinds
and differences, which knowledge must be drawn from their proper The
principal signs of tumors are drawn from the essence of the part.
signs, the same way, as in other diseases. But because the proper and
principal signs of tumors are drawn from the essence of the part they
possess, we must first know the parts, and then consider what their essence
and composition are.

We are taught both, by skill in Anatomy, and the observation of the deprived
function, especially when the affected part is one of those which lie hid in
the body; for we know whether or no, the external parts are affected with a
tumor against nature, by comparing that with his natural which is contrary.
For comparing the sound part with the diseased, we shall easily judge whether
it be swollen, or no.

But because it is not sufficient for a Surgeon only to know these general
signs (which are known even to the vulgar) he must attentively observe such
as are more proper and nere. And these are drawn from the difference of the
matter and humors of which the tumors consist.

For this Galen teaches, that all differences of tumors arise from the nature
and condition of the matter which flows down and generates the tumor; also
they are Lib. 2. ad Glaue. and 13. method.
known by such accidents as happen to them, as color, heat, hardness,
softness, pain, tension, resistance.

Wherefore pain, heat, redness, and tension indicate a sanguine humor;
coldness, The proper signs of a sanguine tumor, of a plegmaticke, of a
melancholic, of a choleric.
softness, and no great pain, phlegm; tension, hardness, the livide color
of the part, and a pricking pain by fits, melancholy; and yellowish and pale
color, biting pain without hardness of the part, choler.

And besides, Impostumes have their periods and exacerbations following the
nature and motion of the humors of which they are generated. Wherefore by the
The knowledge of tumors by their motion and exacerbation.
motion and fits it will be no difficult matter to know the kind of the humor;
for as in the Spring, so in the morning the blood is in motion; as in the
Summer, so in the midst of the day, choler; as in Autumn, so in the evening,
melancholy; as in Winter, so on the night the exacerbations of phlegm are most
predominante. For Hippocrates and Galen teach, that the year has circuits of
diseases, so that the same Lib. 2. Epidem.
proportion of the excess and motion of humors which is in the four seasons
of the year, is also in the four quarters of each day.

Impostumes which are curable have four times, their beginning, increase,
state, and declination, and we must alter our medicines, according to the
variety of these times. We know the beginning by the first swelling, of the
part; The increase when the swelling, pain, and other accidents do manifestly
increase, and enlarge themselves; The beginning of an impostume. The increase.
The State.
the state, when the foresaid symptoms increase no more, but each of them,
because at their height, remain in their state immovable, unless the very
matter of the tumor degenerate, and change it self into another kind of
humor; The declination, when the swelling, pain, fever, restlesnesse are
lessened. And from hence the Surgeon may presage what the end of the tumor
may be; for tumors are commonly terminated four manner of ways, if so be that
the motion of the humors causing them be not intercepted, or they without some
manifest cause, do flow back into the body.

Therefore first they are terminated by insensible transpiration, or
resolution; secondly, by suppuration when the matter is digested and ripened;
thirdly, by induration when it degenerates into a Scyrrhus, the thinner part of
the humor being dissolved; the fourth, which is the worst of all, by a
corruption and Gangrene of the part, which is, when overcome with the violence,
or the abundance or quality of the humor, or both, it comes to that distemper,
that it looses its proper action.

It is best to terminate a tumor by resolution; and the worst by corruption;
suppuration and induration are between both, although that is far better than
this. The signs by which the Chirurgions may presage that an Impostume may be
terminated The signs of a tumor to be terminated by resolution.
by resolving, are the remission, or flacking of the swelling, pain,
pulsation, tension, heat, and all other accidents, and the unaccustomed
liveliness and itching of the part; and hot Impostumes are commonly thus
terminated, because the hot humor is easily resolved, by reason of its subtilty.

Signs of suppuration are the intension or increase of pain, heat, swelling,
pulsation, The signs of suppuration.
and the fever; for according to Hippocrates, pain and the fever are greater
when the matter is suppurating, then when it is suppurated.

The Surgeon must be very attentive to know and observe when suppuration is
made; for the purulent matter often times lies hid (as Hippocrates says) by
reason of the thickness of the part lying above, or over it.

The signs of an Impostume degenerating into a Scyrrhus hardness, are the
diminution The signs and causes of a tumor terminated in a Scyrrhus.
of the tumor, and hardness remaining in the part. The causes of the hardness
not going away with the swelling, are the weakness of nature, the grosnesse
and toughness of the humor, and unskilfulnesse of the Surgeon, who by too
long using resolving things has occasioned, that the more subtle part of the
humor being dissolved, the rest of the grosser nature like earthy dreggs
remains concrete in the part. For so potters vessels dried in the Sun grow
hard. But the unskilful Surgeon may occasion a Scyrrhous hardness by
another means, as by condensating the skin, and incrassating the humors by
too much use of repercussives. But you may perceive an Impostume to degenerate
into a Gangrene thus, if the accidents of heat, redness, The signs of a
Gangrene at hand.
pulsation and tension shall be more intense, than they are wont to be in
suppuration; if the pain presently cease without any manifest cause, if the
part wax livide or black; and lastly, if it stink.

But we shall treat of this more at large when we come to treat of the
Gangrene and Sphacelus. A sudden diminution of the tumor, and that without
manifest cause, Of disappearance of a tumor, and the signs thereof.
is a sign of the matter fallen back, and turned into the body again, which
may be occasioned by the immoderate use of refrigerating thing. And sometimes
much flatulencie mixed with the matter, although there be no fault in those
things which were applied.

Fevers and many other malign Symptoms, as swoundings and convulsion, by
translation of the matter to the noble parts, follow this flowing back of the
humor into the body.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Prognostics in Impostumes.
TVmors arising from a melancholy, phlegmatic, gross, tough, or viscors
humor, ask a longer time for their cure, than those which are of blood or Cold
tumors require a longer cure.
choler. And they are more difficultly cured which are of humors not natural,
than those which are of humors yet contained in the bounds of nature.

For those humors which are rebellious, offend rather in quality, than in
quantity, and undergo the diverse forms of things dissenting from nature,
which are joined Tumors made of matter not natural, are more difficultly cured.
by no similitude or affinity with things natural, as suet, poultis, honey,
the dregs of oil, and wine; yea, and of solid bodies, as stone, sand, coal,
strawes, and sometimes of living things, as Worms, Serpents, and the like
monsters.

The tumors which possess the inner parts, and noble entrails, are more
dangerous and deadly, as also those which are in the joints, or near to them.
And these tumors which seize upon great vessels, as veins, arteries, and
nerves, for fear of great effusion of blood, wasting of the spirits and
convulsion. So impostumes of a monstrous bigness are often deadly, by reason
of the great resolution of the spirits caused by their opening. Those which
degenerate into a Scyrrhus are of long continuance and Hippo. Aph. 8. sect. 6.
hard to cure, as also those which are in hydropicke, leprous, scabby and
corrupt bodies, for they often turn into malign and ill conditioned vulcers.

CHAP. V. Of the general cure of Tumors against Nature.
THere be three things to be observed in cure of impostumes. The first is the
essence thereof; the second the quality of the humor causing the impostume;
What must be considered in undertaking the cure of tumors.
the third the temper of the part affected. The first indication drawn from
the essence, that is, from the greatness, or smallness of the tumor, varies
the manner of curing, for the medicines must be increased or diminished
according to the greatness of the tumor. The second, taken from the nature of
the humor also changes our counsel, for a Phlegmon must be otherwise cured
than an Erysypelas and an Oedema than a Scyrrhus, and a simple tumor, otherwise
than a compound. And also you must cure after another manner a tumor coming of
an humor not natural, than that which is of a natural humor, and otherwise
that which is made by congestion, than that which is made by defluxion. The
third Indication is taken from the part in which the tumor resides; by the
nature of the part we understand its What we must understand by the nature of
the part.
temperature, conformation, site, faculty, and function.

The temperature indicates that some medicines are convenient for the fleshy
parts; as those which are more moist; others for the nervous, as more dry; for
you must apply some things to the eye, and others to the throat; one sort of
things to these parts which by reason of their raritie are easily subject to
defluxion, another to those parts which by their density are not obnoxious to
it.

But we must have good regard to the site of the part, as if it have any
connection with the great vessels, and if it be fit to power forth the matter
and humor when it is suppurated.

Galen by the name of faculty understands the use and sense of the part, This
has a What we must understand by the faculty of the part.
manifold indication in curing, for some parts are principal, as the Brain,
Heart, and Liver; for their virtue is communicated to the whole body, by the
nerves, arteries, and veins.

Others truly are not principal, but yet so necessary that none can live
without them, as the Stomach. Some are endued with a most quick sense, as the
eye, the membranes, nerves, and tendons; wherefore they cannor endure acrid and
biting medicines. Having called to mind these indications, the indication will
be perfected What we must consider in performing the cure.
by these three following intentions, as if we consider the humor flowing
down, or which is ready to flow; the conjunct matter, that is, the humor
impact in the part; the correction of accidents; yet so that we always have
care of that which is most urgent and of the cause. Therefore first
repercussives must be applied for the antecedent matter, strong or weak,
having regard to the tumor as it is then, only excepting six conditions of
Tumors; the first is, if the matter of the Tumor be venenate: the second, if it
be a critical abscesse: the third, if the defluxion be near the noble What
things dissuade us from using repercussives.
parts: the fourth, if the matter be gross, tough, and viscide: the fifth,
when the matter lies far in, that is, flows by the veins which lies more
deep: the sixth, when it lies in the Gandules. But if the whole body be
plethoricke, a convenient diet, purging, and Phlebotomie must be appointed,
frictions and bathes must be used. Ill humors are amended by diet and purging.
If the weakness of the part receiving draw on a defluxion, it must be
strengthened.

If the part be inferior in its site, let the patient be so seated, or laid,
that the part receiving, as much as may be, may be the higher. If pain be the
cause of defluxion, we must assuage it by things mitigating it. If the
thinness, or lightness of the humor cause defluxion, it must be inspissate by
meats and medicines. But for the matter contained in the part, because it is
against nature, it requires to be evacuate by resolving things, as Cataplasmes,
ointments, somentations, cupping glasses; or by evacuation, as by scarifying,
or by suppurating things, as by ripening and opening the Impostume. Lasty, for
the conjunct accidents, as the Fever, pain and such like, they must be
mitigated by asswaging, mollifying and malaxing medicines, as I shall show more
at large hereafter.

CHAP. VI. Of the four principal and general Tumors, and of other Impostumes
which may be reduced to them.
THe principal and chief Tumors which the abundance of humors generate are
four, A Phlegmon, Erysipelas, O^dema and Scyrrhus: innumerable others may be
reduced to these, distinguished by diverse names according What tumors may be
reduced to a Phlegmon.
to the various condition of the efficient cause and parts receiving. Wherefore
a Phygethlum, Phyma, Fellon, Carbuncle, inflammation of the eyes, Squincy,
Bubo, and lastly all sorts of hot and moist tumors may be reduced to a
Phlegmon. The Herpes Which to an Erysipelas.
^iliaris, the eating Herpes, Ringwormes and Tetters and all impostumes brought
forth by choler, are contained under an Erysipelas. Atheromata, Ste^tomata,
Meld^^rides, Which to an Oedema.
the Testudo, or Talpa, Ganglion, Knots, Kings-evill, Wens, watery Ruptures the
Ascites and Leucophlegmatia may be reduced to an Oedema, as also all flarule^^
tumors, which the abundance of corrupt Phlegm produces.

In the kindred of the Scyrrhus are reckoned a Cancer, Leprosy, Warts, Corn^
Which to a Scyrrhus.
a Thymus, a Varix, Morphew, black and white, and other Impostumes arising from
a melancholy humor.

Now we will treat of these Tumors in particular beginning with a Phlegmon.

CHAP. VII. Of a Phlegmon.
APhlegmon is a general name for all Impostumes, which the abundance of
inflamed blood produces. That is called a true Phlegmon, which is made of What
a true Phlegmon is.
laudable blood, offending only in quantity. But a bastard Phlegmon, or a
Phlegmonous Impostume has some other, and proper name; as a Carbuncle, Fellon,
A Phlegmon one thing, and a Phlegmonous tumor another.
Gangrene, Sphacel, and the like malign Pustules. So when there is a conflu^e
of diverse humor into one tumor, diverse kinds of phlegmonous Impostumes called
by diverse names, according to the more abundant humor, arise; as if a small
portion of phlegm shall be mixed with a greater quantity of blood, it shall be
called as Oedematous Phlegmon; but if on the contrary, the quantity of phlegm
be the greater, it shall be named a phlegmonous Oedema, and so of the rest;
always naming the tumor, from that which is most predominant in it.

Therefore we must observe that all differences of such tumors arise from that,
either because the blood causing it offends only in quantity; which if it do,
it causes that tumor which is properly called a Phlegmon; if in quality, it
makes a Phlegmonous tumor, because the matter thereof is much departed from the
goodness of blood.

But blood is said to offend in quantity, either by admixture of some other
matter, as Phlegm, Choler, or melancholy, from whence proceeds Oedematous,
Erysipel^s and Scyrrhous Phlegmons; or by corruption of its proper substance
from whence Carbuncles, and all kinds of Gangrens; or by concretion, and when
nature is disappointed of its attempted and hoped for suppuration, either by
default of the air, or patient, or by the error of the Physician; and hence
often times happen Atheroma's, Steatoma's, and Melicerides. Although these things
be set down by the ancients, of the simple and simular matter of the true
Phlegmon; yet you must know, that in truth there is no impostume, whose matter
exquisitely shows the nature of one, and that simple humor without all
admixture of any other matter; for all humors are mixed together with the
blood, yet from the plenty of blood prodominating, they are called Sanguine, as
if they were of blood alone.

Wherefore if any Tumors resemble the nature of one simple humor, truly they
are not of any natural humor, but from some humor which is corrupt, vitiated
and offending in quality; for so blood by adustion degenerates into choler and
melancholy.

Therefore a true Phlegmon is defined by Galen; A tumor against nature, of
laudable Gal. lib. de tumoribus, and 2. ad Glanc.
blood flowing into any part in too great a quantity.

This tumor though most commonly it be in the flesh, yet sometimes it happens
in the bones, as Hippocrates and Galen witness.

A Phlegmon is made and generated thus, when blood flows into any part, in too
Hippoc. lib. de v^ln: cap. Gal. lib. de tumor. praeier naturam.
great a quantity; first the greater veins and arteries of the affected part
are filled, then the middle, and lastly, the smallest and capillary; so from
those thus distended, the blood sweats out of the pores and small passages like
dew; and with this the void spaces which are between the simular parts are
first filled, and then with the same blood all the adjacent parts are filled,
but especially the flesh, as that which is most fit to receive defluxions, by
reason of the spongious rarity of its substance; but then the nerves, tendons,
membranes, and ligaments, are likewise stuffed full; whereupon a Tumor must
necessarily follow, by reason of the repletion which exceeds the bounds of
nature; and from hence also are tension and resistance; and pain also happens
at the same time, both by reason of the tension and preternaturall heat.

And there is a manifest pulsation in the part, specially whilst it
suppurates, because The cause of a beating pain in a Phlegmon
the veins, arteries, and nerves, are much pained, being they are not only
heated within by the influxe of the fervide humor, but pressed without by the
adjacent parts. Therefore seeing the pain comes to all the foresaid parts
because they are too immoderately heated and pressed, the arteries which are in
the perpetual motion of their Systole and diastole, whilst they are dilated,
strike upon the other inflamed parts, whereupon proceeds that beating pain.

Hereunto add, the Arteries then filled with more copious and hot blood, have
greater need to seek refrigeration by drawing in the encompassing Air;
wherefore they must, as of necessity, have a conflict with the neighboring
parts which are swollen and pained. Therefore from hence is that pulsation in a
Phlegmon which Comm. ad Aph. 21. sect. 7.
is defined by Galen, an agitation of the arteries, painful, and sensible to
the Patient himself; for otherwise as long as we are in health, we do not
perceive the pulsation of the arteries.

Wherefore these two causes of pulsation, or a pulsi^icke pain in a phlegmon
are worthy to be observed, that is, the heat and abundance of blood,
contained in the vessels and arteries (which more frequently than their wont
incite the arteries to motion, that is, to their Systole and Diastole) and the
compression and streightning of the said arteries, by reason of the repletion
and distention of the adjacent parts, by whose occasion the parts afflicted and
beaten by the trembling and frequent pulsation of arteries are in pain.

Hence they commonly say, that in the part aflected with a Phlegmon, they feel
as it were the sense or stroke of a Mallet or Hammer smiting upon it. But also
besides Another kind of Pulsation in a phlegmon.
this pulsation of the arteries, there is, as it were another pulsation with
itching from the humors whilst they putrefie and suppurate, by the permixtion,
motion, and agitation of vapors thereupon arising.

The cause of heat in a Phlegmon is blood, which whilst it flows more
plentifully into the part, is as it were trodden or thrust down, and causes
obstruction, from whence necessarily follows alprohibition of transpiration,
and a putrefaction of the blood, by reason of the preternaturall heat. But the
Phlegmon looks red by reason of the blood contained in it, because the humor
predominant in the part shines through the skin.

CHAP. VIII. Of the causes and signs of a Phlegmon.
THe causes of a Plegmon are of three kinds; for some are primitive, some
antecedent, The primitive causes of a Plegmon.
and some conjunct. Primitive are falls, con^usions, strains, immoderate
labor, frictions, application of acrid ointments, burnings, long staying or
laboring in the hot Sun, a diet unconsiderate, and which breeds much The
Antecedent and conjunct. The signs of a Phlegmon.
blood. The antecedent causes are, the great abundance of blood, too
plentifully flowing in the veins. The conjunct, the collection or gathering
together of blood impact in any part.

The signs of a Plegmon are swelling, tension, resistance, feverish heat,
pain, pulsation, (especially while it suppurates) redness, and others, by
which the abundance of blood is signified.

And a little Phlegmon is often terminated by resolution; but a great one by
suppuration; and sometimes it ends in a Scyrrhus, or a Tumor like a Scyrrhus;
but otherwhiles in a Gangren, that is, when the faculty, and native strength
of the part affected, is overwhelmed by the greatness of the deflxion, as it
is reported by Galen. The Surgeon ought to consider all these things, that
he may apply and vary Gal. l. de Tum.
such medicines as are convenient for the nature of the Patient, and for the
time and condition of the part affected.

CHAP. IX. Of the cure of a true Phlegmon.
THe Surgeon in the cure of a true Phlegmon must propose to himself What
kind of diet must be prescribed in a Plegmon.
four intentions. The first of Diet; This, because the Plegmon is a hot affect
and causes a fever, must be ordained of refrigerative and humecting things,
with the convenient use of the six thingsnot natural, that is, air, meat,
and drink, motion and rest, sleep and waking, repletion, and inanition, and
lastly, the passions of the mind. Therefore let him make choice of that air
which is pure and clear, not too moist, for fear of defluxion, but somewhat
cool; let him command meats which are moderately cool and moist, shunning
such as generate blood too plentifully; such will be brothes not to fat,
seasoned with a little Borage, Lettuce, Sorrel, and Succory, let him be
forbidden the use of all spices, and also of Garlic, and Onions, and all
things which heat the blood, as are all fatty and sweet things, as those which
easily take fire. Let the Patient drink small wine, and much alaied with
water: or if the fever be vehement, the water of the decoction of Licoris,
Barley, and sweet almonds, or water and sugar; always having regard to the
strength, age, and custom of the Patient.

For if he be of that age, or have so led his life, that he cannot want the use
of wine, let him use it, but altogether moderately. Rest must be commanded; for
all bodies wax hot by motion, but let him chiefly have a care that he do
not exercise the part possessed by the plegmon for fear of a new defluxion.
Let his sleep be moderate, neither, if he have a full body, let him sleep by
day, specially presently a^er meat. Let him have his belly soluble, if not by
nature, then by art, as by the frequent use of glisters and suppositories. Let
him avoid all vehement perturbations of mind, as hate, anger, brawling; let
him wholly abstain from venery.

This manner of diet thus prescribed, we must come to the second scope, that
is, the diversion of the defluxion, which is performed by taking away its
cause, that is, How to divert the defluxion of humors.
the fullness and illness of the humors. Both which we may amend by purging
and blood letting, if the strength and age of the patient permit.

But if the part receiving be weak, it must be strengthened with those things
which by their astriction amend the opennesse of the passages, the violence of
the The pain must be assuaged.
humor being drawn away by cupping glasses, frictions, ligatures. But if pain
trouble the part, which is often the occasion of defluxion, it must be
mitigated by medicines asswaging pain.

The third scope is to overcome the conjunct cause. That we may attain to
this, we must enter into the consideration of the tumor, according to its
times, that is, the beginning, increase, state, and declination. For from hence
the indications of variety of medicines must be drawn. For in the beginning we
use repercussives to drive away the matter of the Phlegmon flowing down, as
the white of an Egg, Oxicrate, When we must use repercussives.
the juices or waters of Houseleeke, Plantaine, Roses; Cataplasmes of Henbane,
Pomgranate, Pills, Balausties, Bole armenicke, Terra sigillata, oil of Roses,
Quinces, Mirtilles, Poppies.

Of these simples, variety of compound medicines arises. This may be the form,
of a Cataplasme., far. hordei ij. succi sempervivi, plantag. an. iij. pal.
malicorij, balaustiorum and rosar. an. ij ^l. mirtill. and rosar. an. j, fiat
Cataplasma. Another,, Plantag. solani, hyoscyam. an. m. ij. ca^da equin. tapsi
barb. cintinodia an. m. j. coquantur perfect in oxicrato, pistentur,
traijciantur, addendo p^lveris mirtill. nue. cupressi. and ros. rub. an. iij.
farin. fab. jj, olei rosar. and cyd^n. a^. (...)* mix them and make a
cataplasma to the form of a liquid pultis. And you may use this liniment, by
dipping linen clothes in it, and applying to the part;, ol. nymph. and rosar.
an. iij, aq. ros. solani and plantag. an. ij, aceti iij, albumin. ov^r um n.
iij, fiat linimentum. Also ung. rosatum and ^ng. Album, camphor. Rasis are good
to apply to it, as in like manner, Emp. Diacalcitheos dissolved in vinegar, and
oil of Roses, and also Populeon may be used. In the increase you must have
care of the humor flowing down, and of that which already impacted in the
part, did formerly fall down. Therefore repercussives must be tempered and
mixed with discussing medicines, but so that they may carry the chief sway,
as, fol. malvae, absinth. plantag. an. m. iij, coquantur What local medicines
we must use in the increase.
in oxicrat^, contundantur, trajectis add farinae fabarum and hordei an. j,
pull. rosar. rub. and Absinth. an. i, ol. rosar. and chamaem, an. j, fiat
cataplasma od formam pultis satis liquidae. Another., farinae hord. iij.
farinae sem. lini and f^nugroeci, an. j. coquantur in aqua communi, addendo sub
finem pull. mirtillorum, rosarum and chamaemeli an. ss, axungiae anseris and
olei rosarum an. j, misce, fiat cataplasma.

But in the state the repercussives, and discussives ought to be alike with
some anodine, What in the state.
or mitigating medicines, if it be painful, as, rad. Altheae iiij, malvae,
parietar. an. m. ij, coquantur sub cineribus, addendo farin. fabarum and
lentium an ij, pulveris chamaem, and metiloti an. ss. olei chamaem. and rosar.
an. j. axungiae gal. ij. fiat cataplasma. Another, micae panis triticei aqua
calida macerati lbss, pulveris rosar. rub. and absi^th. ana. vj. olei aneth.
and mellis com. an. ij. misce omnia simul and fiat cataplasma ad formam pultis
satis liquidae; which is of chief use when there is pain.

But when the violence of pain and other symptoms are assuaged, it is likely
that What in the declination.
the plegmon is come to determination. Wherefore then we must use more
powerful and strong discussives, and only then beginning with the more
gentle, lest the subtiler part of the humor being dissolved, the grosser,
remaining in the part, should grow hard, as, mal. bismal. an. m. iij. coquantur
addendo furinae hordei ij, mellis com. j, ol. chamae. and melilot. an. ss, fiat
cataplasma, Or, radicum Brion. and Cucumer. agrest. an. ij, florum chamam. and
meliot. ana. m. iij. coquantur in hydromelite addendo farin^, sem. lini and
faenugraec. an. ij. ol. aneth. axungiae Anser. and anat. an. j. fiat
Cataplasma. And this plaster following may here find place.

, Diachyl. mag. ij, Empl. de melilot. j, olei aneth. and chamaemel. an. ss:
dissolve them all together and make a medicine for your use. Or, Empl. de
mucag. and oxycro: an. ij. Empl. Diachyl. Ireat. j. olei liliorum and
chamaemel. quantum satis est, and make thereof a soft emplaister.

The fourth scope of curing a Phlegmon consists in correction of the accidents
The correction of the accidents.
which accompany it; of which pain is the principal.

Wherefore the Surgeon must be diligent to assuage it, for besides, that it
weakens the strength, and debilitates and depraves the function, it also causes
defluxions by drawing the blood and spirits to the part affected.

According to the variety of pain there must be variety of medicines, as,
micae The discommodities of pain. Medicines aswaging pain.
panis albi in lacte tepido macerati lbss, vitell. ovorum iij. ol. rosar. ij,
croci ss, fiat cataplasma. Or, florum chamaem. and melil. an. p. iij. farinae
sem. lini. and fenugraec. an. j. fiat cataplasma pultis, satis liquidae. Or,
mucagin. rad. althea and faenugraeci an. iij, ol. rosar. and aneth. an. j.
farin. sem. lini. quantum satis, ut jude formetur cataplasma satis molle.

But if the pain remain, and yield not to these remedies, we must fly to
stronger, making use of narcoticks, or flupifactives, but with care lest we
benum, or dead the part; as, fol. hyoscyani and papauer. sub. cineribus
coctorum an. iij, adipis suillae, and ol. ros. an. j, croci. ij, fiat
cataplasma: or,, fol. cicutae and solani furiosi. an. iiij, coquantur
Narcoticke medicine^.
sub cineribus, pistentur, and traijciantur addendo. unguent. popul. and ol.
rosar. an j, farin. faenugrac. quantum satis erit, ut inde formetur cataplasma
ad form^m pultis liquidae.

CHAP. X. The cure of an ulcerated Phlegmon.
But it often happens, that the humor is so impactin the part, The signs of a
Phlegmon turning to an Abscesse.
that it cannot be repressed, and so gross, that it cannot be discussed; which
we may know by the greatness of the heat and swelling, by the bitterness of
the pricking pain, the fever, and pulsation, and heaviness.

Wherefore laying aside all hope of discussing, we must come to suppuratives.
For which purpose Galen sorments the swollen part with water, or oil being
Lib. (...) ad Glau^. Cap. 7.
warm, or with both of them; and then applies this following cataplasme.

, farinae tric. vel micae panis, iiij. ol. com. iij, aquae com. quantum
sufficit, fiat cataplasma; or, rad. lilior. alb. and altheae, an. iij, fol.
malvae, parietar. and senecionis Suppurative medicines.
ana. m. j. coquantur in hydromelite, pissentur, trajectis add farin. sem.
lini ij, ^xungiae suillae, ol. liliorum an. iss, fiat cataplasma: Or, malvae,
bismalv. violar. an. m. j. caricarum ping. n. x. passul. ij, coquantur in aq.
com. tusis, and traiectis, add n^ ellis com. ij, ung. basilicon. and butyri
recent. ana. j, fiat cataplasma. You may profitably use for the same purpose
Empl. Diachylon magnum, or Basilicon. Or, Empl. Dyachil. mag. iij. ung.
basilicon. j, ol. liliorum ss. Of these mixed together make a a medicine for
the foresaid use.

When the heat, pain, fever, and other accidents shall remit, when the tumor
has a sharp head, when by the pressing of your finger you find the The
signs of p^ or matter.
humor to flow as it were to and fro, then you may know that it is ripe.

Wherefore without any further delay the tumor must be opened, lest the matter
too long shut up, corrode the adjacent parts, and the ulcer become sinuous and
fistulous.

For this usually happens, especially then, when the matter is venenate or
malign, or when the swelling is near a joint, or at the fundament, or such
like hot and moist places.

For by the decree of Hippocrates we should anticipate the maturation of such
tumors Hip. lib. de Fistul^.
by opening.

They may be opened with an incision knise or causticke, and that, either
actual or potentiall. For if the patient shall be hartlesse and less
confident, so that he either cannot, or will not endure any instrument, you
must make way for the matter by a potentiall cautery. You may also do the
business by another slight, as thus.

Thrust the point of a sharp knife or lancet, through a brass counter that it
may stand fast in the midst thereof; then cover it diligently with some
Emplaister or Cataplasme, that neither the Patient nor standers by perceive the
deceit: then laying on the plaster as that you would make a passage for the
matter by that means, but when you have fitted the point to the part, where it
is fit to open the tumor, so guide the Counter with your fingers, that you may
presently make an impression into the Tumor, sufficient for excluding the
matter. I have here expressed three deliniations of such Instruments, that you
may use these, either bigger, lesser or indifferent, as occasion shall serve.

Counters with the points of Knives or Lances put through them.
A. shows the Counter or piece of Silver.

B. shows the point of the Lancet.



Other Instruments for opening Abscesses.
Rings in which little knives lyebid, fit for to open Abscesses.

The Deliniation of a Trunk or hollow Iustrument going with a spring.

A. Shows the thicker pipe.

B. Shows another which enters and is fastened in the other by a scrue.

C. The point of the Instrument, looking out.

D. The spring which forces the Instrument.



But there are seven things which must be diligently considered in opening all
sorts of Impostumes. The first is, that you put your knife to that part of the
Abscesse which is the softer, and yields to the impression of your fingers, and
where it rises into a head, or point. The second is, that you make choice of
that place for dissection which is the lowest, that so the contained impurity
may the more readily flow out, and not stay in the passage. The third is, that
it be made according to the wrincles of the skin, and the right fibers of the
Muscles lying next under the skin. The fourth is, that you turn your knife
from the larger vessels and Nerves worth speaking of. The fifth is, that the
matter contained in them be not evacuated too abundantly at once in great
Abscesses, lest thereby the strength be dejected, the spirits being much wasted
together with the unprofitable humor. The sixth is, that the affected part be
handled as gently as you can. The seventh is, that after the opening when the
matter is evacuated, the Abscesse be cleansed, filled with flesh, and lastly
consolidated and cicatrized. But seeing that commonly after such sections some
part of the Tumor What the cure must be after the opening of the Abscesse
remains, all the contained humor being not wholly suppurated, the Chiurgion
may perceive that this is an implicit affect, that is a, Tumor and Ulcer. But
the Cure thereof must be so, that you take away the Tumor before the ulcer; for
the ulcer cannot be healed before the part be restored to its nature. Therefore
the suppuratives formerly prescribed must be used, and the ulcer must be
dressed for two or three days with this following Medicine. Detersive
Medicines.


, Vitellum vnius ovi, terebinth. Venetae, and ol. Rosar. an. ss, fiat
medicamentum. Then you must seek to cleanse it by this following Medicine.

Mellis to sar. j, Syrupi rosar. and tereb. Venet. an. jss, far. hordei ij,
fiat medicamentum Vng^entum de Appi^.
ad usum. For this very purpose there is a singular Detersive made of Appium or
Smallage of which this is the description.

Succi appij, plantag. beton. an. j, Mellis commun. v, terebint. Venet. iiij,
farin. Hordei and Orobi, an. ij, pulveris Aloes, rad. Ireos florent. myrrhae,
an j. coquatur mel cum succis, quibus consumptis addantur sarinae and pulveres,
and misceantur omnia ad formam unguenti. But if you would cleanse it more
powerfully, you may use Vnguentum Apostolorum; or Vnguentum Aureum and
Aeyptiacum mixed according to the scope you conceive in your minds, when the
ulcer shall seem sufficiently cleansed, it shall be filled with flesh and
cicatri^ed after the manner we shall declare in the proper treatise of the cure
of Ulcers.

CHAP. XI. Of seavers, and the cures of these ^eavers which accompany Plegmons.
AMongst the Symptoms which most usually accompany Phlegmons, and afflict all
the body of the patient, Fevers are the chief; that is hot, and dry
distempers The ^eaver of a Phlegmon. What a Fever is.
kindled in the heart, and thence by the Artery is sent over all the body; yet
those which usually follow this kind of Tumors are Ephemerae, that is, Diary,
unputrid Synochi or putrid Synochi; Of whose nature and order of cure I will
here briefly relate what I have learnt from my Masters, that is, Doctors of
Physic, as I have been conversant with them in the practice of my Art.

The Ephemera, or Diary [that is of one day] is, a hot and dry distemperature
What an Ephemera, or Diarye is.
kindled in the vital spirits. It has that name, because by its own nature
it tarryes not above the space of one day or twenty four hours, by reason it
is kindled in a subtie easily dissipable matter.

The efficient causes of this Fever are weariness, hunger, drunkenness,
anger, fury, sorrow, watching, great and peircing cold, Adustion, Bathes, and
manner of living The causes thereof.
inclining more to heat than ordinary, applying, using or drinking of acride
medicines as Poisons, or of hot meats, and drinks; to conclude, all the
efficient causes common to all Fevers, putrefaction only excepted which
properly appertains to putride fevers.

For a Bubo also, which is a Phlegmon of the Glandules, causes a Diary, as
Hippocrates shows. All fevers proceeding from the Tumors of the Glandules are
evil, the Aphorism. 55. lib. 4.
Diary excepted. Which Aphorism must be understood warily and with that
distinction which Galen gives in his commentary, where he says; It is only to
be understood of Tumors risen in the Glandules without occasion, that is,
without any evident and manifest cause; for otherwise Fevers that thence take
their original, though not Diary, yet are not all evil, as we learn by
Buboes in Children, and the venereous Buboes, which happen without
inflammation, or corruption of the liver, for such commonly have no malign
Fever accompanying them, which thing is worthy a Chirurgions observation.

The common signs of a Diary are, a moderate and vaporous heat feeling gentle
to the hand, a pulse swift and frequent, sometimes great and strong, as when
the The signs of a Diarie.
Diary is caused by anger; sometimes little, if the Fever proceed from sorrow,
hunger, cold, crudity; for other respects equal and ordinary.

The most certain signs are, if the Fever come upon one not by little and
little but suddenly and that from some external and evident cause, no loathing
of meat, no causeless weariness, no deep sleep, yawning, great pain,
restlesnesse, shaking nor cold going before, and lastly no other troublesome
symptom preceding. We here make no mention of the urine, because most
frequently they resemble the vrines of sound bodies; for in so short a time as
Diaryes endure, there cannot so great a perturbation Why in a Diarye the vrines
like to these in health.
be raised in the blood that there may be signs thereof found in the urine. A
Diary is ended in one fit, which by the proper nature of this Fever lasts but
one day, although sometimes, otherwise it is extended to three, or four days
space; and then it easily degenerates into a Putride, especially any error of
the Patient, Phi^ition, or those which attend him concurring therewith, or if
the external things be not rightly fitted.

This Fever is terminated either by insensible transpiration, or by the
moisture of the skin, or by a sweat natural, gentle, and not ill smelling; to
this Diary we The unputride Synochus.
may refer the unputride Synochus, generated of blood not putrid, but only
heated beyond measure. For usually there arises a great heat over all the
body, by means of the blood immoderatly heated; whence the veins become more
tumide, the face appears fiery, the Eyes red and burning, the breath hot, and
to conclude, the whole habit of the body more full, by reason of that
Ebullition of the blood, and the diffusion of the vapors thence arising over
all the body: Whence it is, that this kind of Synochus may be called, a
vapourous Fever. To this Children are incident as also all sanguine bodies,
which have no ill humors. The cure of this and the Ephemera or Diary is the
same; because it may scarce seem different from the Ephemera in any other
thing, than that it may be prolonged for three or four days. Wherefore
whatsoever we shall say for the cure of the Ephemera, may be all applied to the
Synochus, bloodletting excepted, which in an unputrid Synochus is very
necessary.

Now the Cure of a Diary Fever consists in the decent use of things not
natural, The cure of a Diary fever.
contrary to the cause of the disease; wherefore bathes of warm and natural
water are very profitable; so that the Patient be not Plethoricke, nor stufft
with excrements, nor obnoxious to catarrhes and defluxions, because a catarrhe
is easily caused and augmented by the humors diffused and dissolved by the
heat of a bath; therefore in this case we must eschew frictions, and
anointing with warm oil, which things notwithstanding are thought very
useful in these kind of Fevers, especially when they have their original
from extreme labor, by astriction of the skin or a Bubo. Let this be a
general rule, that to every cause, whence this Fever proceeded, you oppose
the contrary for a remedy; as to labor, rest; to watching; sleep; to anger and
sorrow, the grateful society of friends, and all things replenished with
pleasant good will; and to a Bubo, the proper cure thereof.

Wine moderately tempered with water according to the custom of the sick
patient, The use of wine in a Diarye.
is good and profitable in all causes of this Fever, except he be pained in
his head, or that the Fever drew its original from anger, or a Bubo; for in
this last case especially, the patient must abstain wholly from wine, until
the inflammation come to the state, and begins to decline. This kind of Fever
often troubles infants; and then you must prescribe such medicines to their
Nurses, as if they were sick, that so by this means their milk may become
medicinable. Also it will be good to put the Infant himself into a bath of
natural and warm water, and presently after the bath to anoint the ridge of
the back and breast with oil of Violets. But if a Phlegmon possess any inward
part, or otherwise by its nature be great, or seated near any principal
Bowell, so that it may continually send from it either a putrid matter or
exhalation to the heart, and not only affect it by a quality or preternaturall
heat by the continuity of the parts, thence will arise the Putride Synochus,
How a putride Synochus is caused.
if the blood by contagion putrefying in the greater vessels, consists of on
equal mixture of the four humors. This Fever is chiefly thus known, it has
no exacerbations, or remissions, but much less intermissions; it is extended
beyond the space of twenty four hours, neither does it then end in vomit,
sweat, moisture, or by little and little by insensible transpiration, after the
manner of intermitting Fevers, or Agues; but remains constant, until it
leaves the Patient for altogether; it commonly happens not unless to these of
a good temper and complexion, which abound with much blood, and that tempered
by an equal mixture of the four humors. It commonly endures not long, because
the blood by power of some peculiar putrefaction degenerating into choler or
Melancholy, will presently bring forth another kind of fever, to wit a
Tertian or continued Quartaine.

The cure of this Fever (as I have heard of most learned Physicians) chiefly
consists in Phlebotomy necessary in a putride S^^^chu^.
Bloodletting. For by letting of blood the fulness is diminished, and
therefore the obstruction is taken away, and lastly the putrefaction. And seeing
that in this kind of Fever there is not only a fault of the matter, by the
putrefaction of the blood, but also of the Temper by excess of heat;
certainly Phlebotomy helps not only, as we said, the putrefaction, but also
the hot distemper. For the blood in which all the heat of the creature is
contained, whilst it is taken way, the acrid and fuliginous excrements exhale
and vanish away with it, which kept in, increased the Feverish heat. Moreover,
the veins, to shun emptiness, which nature abhors, are filled with much cold
air instead of the hot blood which was drawn away, which follows a cooling
of the habit of the whole body; yea and many by means of Phlebotomy have
their bellyes loosed, and sweat, both which are much to be desired in this
kind of Fever.

This moved the ancient Physicians, to write, that we must draw blood in this
disease, even to the fainting of the Patient. What benefit we may reap by
drawing blood even to fainting.


Yet because thus, not a few have poured out their lives together with their
blood, it will be better and safer to divide the evacuations, and draw so much
blood at several times, as the greatness of the disease shall require, and
the strength of the Patient may bear.

When you have drawn blood, forthwith inject an emollient and refrigerative
Why we must give a clyster presently after bloods letting.
clyster; lest that the veins emptied by Phlebotomy may draw into them the
impurity of the Guts; but these clysters which cool too much, rather bindethe
belly, than loose it. The following day the Morbi^icke matter must be partly
evacuated by a gentle purge, as a bole of Cassia, or Catholicon; then must you
appoint Syrupes which have not only a refrigerative quality, but also to
resist putrefaction, What Syrupes profitable in this case.
such as the Syrup of Lemmons, Berberries, of the Iujce of Citrons, of
Pomgranats, Sorrel and Vinegar; let his diet be absolutely cooling and
humecting and also slender; for the native heat much debilitated by drawing of
a great quantity Why a slender Diet must be used after letting much blood.
of blood cannot equal a full diet. Therefore it shall suffice to feed the
Patient with chicken and veale brothes made with cooling herbs, as Sorrel,
Lettuce and Purslaine. Let his drink be Ba^ly water, Syrup of Violets mixed
with some pretty quantity of boiled water, Iulepum Alexandrinum, especially if
he be troubled with scouring, o^ laske. But the Physician must chiefly have
regard to the fourth day, for if then there appear any signs of concoction in
the excrements, the Crisis must be expected on the seventh day and that either
by a looseness of the belly, or an abundance of urine, by vomits, sweats, or
bleeding. Therefore we must then do nothing, but commit the whole business to
nature. When drinking of water is to be permitted in a putride Synochus.


But for drinking cold water, which is so much commended by Galen in this kind
of Fever, it is not to be suffered beforethere appear signs of concoction;
moreover in the declining of the disease the use of wine will not be
unprofitable to help forwards sweats.

CHAP. XII. Of an Erysipelas, or Inflammation.
HAving declared the cure of a Phlegmon, caused by laudable blood, we must now
treat of these tumors which acknowledge Choler the material cause of their
generation, by reason of that affinity which interceeds between Choler and
Blood. Therefore the tumors caussed by natural Choler, are called Erysipelata,
or Inflammations; these contain a great heat in them, The definition of an
Erysipelas.
which chiefly possesses the skin, as also oftentimes some portion of the flesh
lying under it. For they are made by most thin and subtle blood (which upon any
occasion of inflammation easily becomes choleric) or by blood and choler,
hotter than is requisite, and sometimes of choler mixed with an acride serous
humor.

That which is made by sincere and pure choler, is called by Galen, a true and
perfect Erysipelas. But there arise three differences of Erysipelaes by the
admixture of Gal. Cap. 2. lib. 14 Meth. med. and 2. ad Glau.
choler with the three other kinds of humors. For if it being predominant be
mixed with blood, it shall be termed Erysipelas Phlegmonodes; if with phlegm,
Erysipelas oedematodes; if with Melancholy, Erysipelas S^irrhodes. So that the
former and substantive word shows the humor bearing dominion, but the latter
or adjective that which is inferior in mixture. But if they concur in equal
quantity, there will be thereupon made Erysipelas Phlegmone; Erysipelas oedema;
Erysipelas scirrhus.

Galen acknowledges two kinds of Erysipelaes, one simple and without an ulcer,
Two kinds of Erysipelas.
the other ulcerated. For Choler drawn and severed from the warmness of the
blood, running by its subtlety and acrimony unto the skin, ulcerates it; but
restrained by the gentle heat of the blood, as a bridle, it is hindered from
peircing to the top of the skin, and makes a tumor without an ulcer. But of
unnatural choler are caused many other kinds of choleric tumors, as the
Herpes exedens, and Miliaris, and lastly all sorts of tumors which come
between the Herpes and Cancer. You may know Erysipelaes chiefly by three
signs, as by their color, which is a yellowish red; by their quick sliding
back into the body at the least compression of the skin (the cause of which is
the subtlety of the humor and the outward site of it under the skin, whereupon
by some an Erysipelas is called a Disease of the skin) Lastly by the number of
the Symptoms, as heat, pulsation, pain. The heat of an Erysipelas is far
greater than that of a Phlegmon, but the pulsation is much less; for as the
heat of the blood is not so great, as that of choler, so it far exceeds
choler in quantity and thickness, which may cause compression and obstruction
of the adjacent muscle. Gal. lib. 2. ad Glaue.


For Choler easily dissipable by reason of its subtlety quickly vanishes,
neither does it suffer it self to be long contained in the empty spaces
between the muscles; neither does an Erysipelas agree with a Phlegmon in the
propriety of the pain. For that of an Erysipelas is pricking and biting
without tension, or heaviness, yet the primitive, antecedent and conjunct
causes are alike of both the tumors. Although Hip. Apho. 79 Sect. 7. Aph. 25
Sect. 6. Aph. 43. Sect. 3.
an Erysipelas may be incident to all parts, yet principally it assailes the
face, by reason of the rarity of the skin of that place, and the lightness of
the choleric humor flying upwards. It is ill when an Erysipelas comes upon a
wound, or ulcer, and although it may come to suppuration, yet it is not good;
for it shows that there is obstruction by the admixture of a gross humor,
whence there is some danger of erosion in the parts next under the skin.

It is good when an Erysipelas comes from within outward; but ill when from
without it retires inward. But if an Erysipelas possess the womb it is
deadly, and in like manner if it spread too far over the face, by reason of the
sympathy of the membranes of the brain.

CHAP. XIII. Of the cure of an Erysipelas.
FOr the cure of an Erysipelas we must procure two things, to wit, evacuation
and Refrigeration. But because there is more need of cooling, than in a
Phlegmon, the chief scope must be for refrigeration. Which being Gal: (...)*
Method.
done, the contained matter must be taken away and evacuated with moderatly
resolving medicines. We must do four things to attain unto these
forementioned ends. First of all we must appoint a convenient manner of Diet,
in 4 Things to be performed in curing an Erysipelas.
the use of the six things not natural; that is, we must incrassate,
refrigerate and moisten as much as the nature of the disease and patient will
suffer, much more than in a Phlegmon; then we will evacuate the Antecedent
matter, by opening a vein, and by medicines purging choler. And that by
cutting the Cephalicke vein, if there be a portion of the blood mixed with
Choler, if the Erysipelas possess the face, In what Erysipelas it is
convenient to let blood, in what not.
and if it be spread much over it.

But if it shall invade another part, although it shall proceed of pure choler,
Phlebotomy will not be so necessary, because the blood which is as a bridle to
the choler being taken away, there may be danger, lest it become more fierce;
yet if the body be plethoricke, it will be expedient to let blood, because
this, as Galen teaches, is often times the cause of an Erysipelas. It will be
expedient to give a clyster of refrigerating and hum^^ting things before you
open a vein; but it belongs to a learned and prudent Physician to prescribe
medicines, purging choler.

The third care must be taken for Topic, or local medicines, which in the
beginning What topicke medicines are fit to be used it the beginning of an
Erysipelas
and increase must be cold and moist, without any either drynes or astriction,
because the more acride matter by use of astringent things being driven in,
would ulcerate and fret the adjacent particle.

Galen and Avicen much commend this kind of remedy; Take fair water vj, of
the sharpest Vinegar j, make an Oxycrate, in which you may wet linen clothes
and apply to the affected part and the circumjacent places, and renew them
often. Or, Succi solani, plan^ag. and sempervivi, an. ij, aceti ss, Mucaginis
sem. Psylij ij, succi hyoscyami j, Misce. But if the Erysipelas be upon the
face, you must use the medicine following.

. Unguent. Ros. iiij, succi plantagin. and sempervivi, an. j. trochisc. de
Camphor^ ss. aceti parum; let them be mixed together and make a liniment. But
if the heat and pain be intolerable, we must come to narcoticke medicines.
As, succi hyoscyami, solani, cicutae, an. j. album. ovorum n. ij. aceti ss,
opij and Camphor. an. gr^. 4 croc^ ss, Mucaginis sem. psill. and faenigr.
extractae in aq. ros. and plantag. an j, ol. de papau. ij fiat linimentum,
addendo ung, refrigerantis Gal. camphor q. satis sit. Yet we must not use such
like medicines too long, lest they cause an extinction of the native heat and
mortification of the part.

Wherefore such Narcoticke medicines must be used with regard of place, time
and such other circumstances. Therefore we may three manner of ways understand
What caution must be had in the use of narcoticke medicines.
when to desist from using Narcoticke or stupefactive medicines. The first is
when the Patient in the affected part feels not so much heat, pricking and
pain, as before; The second is when the part feels more gentle to the touch
than before; The third when the fiery and pallide color begins by little and
little to wax livid and black; for then must we abstain from Narcoticke, and
use resolving and strengthening things, whereby the part may be revived and
strengthened by recalling Resolving and strengthening medicines.
the Native heat; As. ^arina hordei and Orobi, an. ij farina sem. lini jss.
coquantur in Hydromelite vel oxycrato, addendo pulv. rosarum and chamaemael.
an. ss. a^ethi and chamaem. an. j, fiat cataplasm^. Or you may use this
following fomentation. Rad. Altheae ij, fol. malvae, bismal. pariet. absinthij,
salviae, an. m. j. flor. chamaem. meliloti, rosar. rub. an. m. ij. coquantur in
aequis partibus vini and aqu^, and fiat fotus cum spongia. After the
fomentation you may apply an Emplaister of Diachylon Ireatum, or Diapalma
dissolved in oil of chamomille and Melilote, and such other like. The fourth
Intention which is of the correction of accidents, we will perform by these
means which we mentioned in curing a Phlegmon, by varying the medicaments,
according to the judgment of him which undertakes the cure.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Herpes; that is Teaters, or Ringwormes, or such like.
HErpes is a tumor caused by pure choler separated from the rest of the humors,
that is carried by its natural lightness and tenuitye even to the What a
Herpes is, what be the kinds there of. Gal. 2. ad Glauronem. What the Herpes
miltaris is. What the exedens.
outer or scarf skin, and is diffused over the surface thereof. Galen makes
three sorts of this tumor. For if perfect choler of an indifferent substance,
that is, not very thick, cause this tumor, then the simple Herpes is
generated, obteining the name of the Genus; but if the humor be not so thin,
but compounded with some small mixture of Phlegm, it will raise little blisters
over the skin like to the seeds of Miller, whence it was that the Ancients
called this Tumor the Herpes Miltaris. But if it have any admixture of
Melancholy, if will be an Herpes exedens, terrible by reason of the erosion or
eating into the skin and muscles lying under it.

There are absolutely three intentions of curing; The first is to appointe a
Diet just Three intentions in curing Herpes.
like that we mentioned in the cure of an Erysipelas; The second is to evacuate
the antecedent cause, by medicines purging the peccant humor, for which purpose
oft-times clysters will suffice, especially if the patient be somewhat easy by
nature, and if the urine flow according to your desire; for by this a great
part of the humor may be carried into the bladder; The third shall be to take
away the conjunct cause by local medicines ordained for the swelling and
ulcer. Therefore the Surgeon shall A rule for healing ulcers conjoined with
tumors.
have regard to two things, that is, the resolving of the tumor, and the drying
up of the ulcer, for every ulcer requires drying, which can never be attained
unto, unless the swelling be taken away. Therefore because the chiefest care
must be to take away the Tumor, which unless it be performed there can be no
hope to heal the ulcer, he shall lay this kind of medicine to dissolve and
dry, as. Cerusae and tuthiae praepar. an. j. ol. ros. and adipis capon. an. ij.
corticis pini usti, and loci, ss cerae quantum satis, fiat unguentum. Or.
Farin. hordei and lent. an. ij, conquantur in decocto corticis mali granati,
balaust. plantag. addendo pulveris rosar. ru^. absinth. an. ss. olei Myrtillor.
and mellis com. an. vj, fiat ungentum, ut artis est. But for an Herpes Miliaris
these must chiefly be used,. pulv. gallarum, malicorij, balaust, boli armeni
an. j. aquae ros. iij, aceti acerrimi j. axungiae anser. and olei Myrtillor.
an. jss, terebinth. j fiat unguentum ad usum. I have often The force of
Vnguentum enulatum cum Mrcur^^. Medicines fit for restraining eating and
spreading ulcers.
sound most certain help in unguentum enulatum cum Mercurio, for it kills the
pustules, and partly wastes the humor contained in them. Yet if the ulcer, not
yet neither yields, but every day diffuse^ it self further and further you
shall touch the edges and lips thereof with some acride medicine, as Aqua
fortis, oil of Vitriole, of such like, for by this kind of remedy, I have often
times healed fretting ulcers, which seemed altogether incureable.

CHAP. XV. Of Fevers, which happen upon Erysipelous Tumors.
AS Fevers sometimes happen upon Inflammations, and Erysipelaes, which A
vulgar description of an intermitting Tertian fever.
savor of the humor whereof they proceed, that is, Choler. Therefore seeing it
is peculiar to Choler, to move every third day, it is no marvel if great
Inflammations bring with them Tertian Fevers, or Agues, which have their fit
every third day; for it is called anIntermitting Tertian which comes every
other day.

The Primitive causes in general are strong exercises, especially in the hot
Sun, The causes of Tertian fevers.
the use of heating, and drying either meats or medicines, great abstinence
joined with great labor, care, sorrow; the antecedent causes are the plenty of
choler in the body, an hot and dry distemperature either of the whole body, or
of the liver only: the conjunct cause is the putrefaction of the Choleric
humor lying in some plenty without the greater vessels, in the habit of the
body.

The signs, a shaking or shivering like as when we have made water in a cold
winter The signs of an intermitting Tertian.
morning, a great pricking, stretching, or stiffnesse, as if there were pins
thrust into us over all our bodies, by reason of the acrimony of the choleric
humor driven uncertainly and violently over all the body, and the sensible
membranous and Nervousparticles at the beginning of the fit; then presently the
heat becomes acride, the Fever kindled, like a fire in dry straw; the pulse
is great, quick and equal; the tongue dry; the urine yellowish, red and thin.
The Symptoms are watchings, thirst, talking idly, anger, disquietnesse The
Symptoms.
and tossing the body at the least noise or whispering. These Fevers are
terminated by great sweats. They are incident to choleric young men, such as
are lean, and in Summers; after the fit often times follow choleric vomiting
and yellowish stools. After the fit there follows an absolute intermission
reteining no relics of the Fever, Why Tertians have an absolute cessation of
the fever at the end of each fit.
until the approach of the following fit, because all the choleric matter by
the force of that fit and nature is easily cast out of the body, by reason of
its natural levity and facillity; whereas in Quotidians there is no such thing,
as which after the fit always leave in the body a sense and seeling of a
certain inequality by reason of the stubbornness of the Phlegmatic humor, and
dullness to motion. The fit commonly uses to endure 4, 5, or 6 hours, although
at sometime it may be extended to 8 or 10. This Fever is ended at 7 fits, and
usually is not dangerous, unless there be some error committed by the
Physician, Patient, or such as attend him. Tertians in summer are shorter, in
winter longer.

Wherefore the beginning of the fit is accompanied with stiffenesse, or
stretching, the state with sweat, whereupon if the nose, lips of mouth break
forth into pimples or scabbes, it is a sign of the end of the Fever, and of
the power of nature which is able to drive the conjunct cause of the disease
from the center to the habit of the body; yet these pimples appear not in the
declining of all Tertians, but only then, when the Choleric humor causing
the Fever shall reside in the stomach, or is driven thither from some other
part of the first region of the Liver. For hence the subtler portion thereof
carried by the continuation of the inner coat to the mouth and nose, by its
acrimony easily causes pimples in these places. The cure is performed by Diet,
and Pharmacy.

Therefore let the Diet be so ordered for the six things not natural, that it
may The Diet of such as have a Tertian.
incline to refrigeration and humection, as much as the digestive faculty will
permit, as Lettuce, Sorrel, Gourds, Cowcumbers, Mallows, Barley Creames, Wine
much a laid with water, thin, small, and that sparingly and not before signs
of concoction When such as have a certain may use wine.
shall appear in the urine; for at the beginning he may not use wine, nor in
the declining, but with these conditions, which we have prescribed.

But for the time of feeding the patient, on that day the fit is expected, The
time of feeding the patient.
he must eat nothing for three hours before the fit, lest the aguish heat
lighting on such mea^s as yet crude, may corrupt and putrefie them; whence the
matter of the Fever may be increased (because it is as proper to that heat to
corrupt all things, as to the native to preserve and vindicate from
putrefaction), the fit lengthened, and nature called away from the concoction
and excretion of the Morbisicke humor; yet we may temper the severity of this
law by having regard to the strength of the patient; for it will be convenient
to feed a weak patient not only before the fit, but also in the fit it self,
but that only sparingly, lest the strength should be too much impaired.

Now for Pharmacy; It must be considered, whether the strength of the Patient
be sufficient, if the humors abound; for then you may prescribe Diaprunum
simplex, When to purge the patient.
Cassia newly extracted, the decoction of Violets, of Citrine Myrobalanes;
Syrupes of Violets, Roses, of Pomegranats and Vin^ger. But if the powers of the
Patient languish, he must not only not be purged, but also must not draw
blood too plenteously, because Choleric men soon faint, by reason of the
facile and casie dissipation of the subtle humors and spirits; besides, such as
are subject to tertian Fevers do not commonly abound with blood, unless it
be with Choleticke blood, which must rather be renewed, or amended by cooling
and humecting things, than evacuated. Yea verily, when it is both commodious
and necessary to evacuate the body, it may be attempted with far more safety by
such things as work by insensible transpiration, which provoke sweats, vomit
or urine by reason of the subtlety of the Choleric humor, than by any other.
Also the frequent use of emollient glysters made with a docoction of Prunes,
jujubes, Violets, branne and Barley, will profit much; If the patient fall into
a Delirium or talk idly by reason of the heat and drynes of the head, with
a particular excess of the Choleric humor, the head must be cooled by
applying to the Temples and forehead and putting into the nose oil of Violets,
Roses, or woman's milk. Let the feet and legs be bathed in fair and warm
water, and the soles of the feet be anointed with oil of Violes and such like.

In the declining, a Bath made of the branches of Vines, the leaves of
Willowes, Lettuce and other refrigerating things boiled in fair water, may be
profitablely used three hours after meat eaten sparingly.

But I would have you so to understand the Declination or declining not of one
When the time is fit to use a Bath.
particular fit, but of the disease in general, that the humors already
concocted, allured to the skin by the warmness of the bath, may more easily
and readily breathe forth: he which otherwise ordaines a bath at the beginning
of the disease, will cause a constipation in the skin and habit of the body, by
drawing thither the humors peradventure tough and gross, no evacuation going
before.

Also it will be good after general purgations to cause sweat by drinking
What kinds of evacuations (...) most fit in a Tertian.
White wine thin and well tempered with water; but urine by decoction of
Smallage and Dill; Certainly sweat is very laudable in every putride Fever,
because it evacuates the conjunct matter of the disease, but chiefly in a
Tertian, by reason that choler by its inbred levity easily takes that way, and
by its subtilty is easily resolved into sweat. But that the sweat may be
laudable, it is fit it be upon a critical day, and be foreshewed by signs of
concoction agreeable to the time and manner of the disease, Sweats when as they
flow more Sudorifick^.
slowly are forwarded by things taken inwardly and applied outwardly; by things
taken inwardly, as with white wine, with a decoction of Figgs, Raisons stoned,
grass roots and the like opening things; but by things outwardly applied, as
spunges dipped in a decoction of hot herbs (as Rosmary, Time, Lavander,
Marjerome and the like) applied to the Groines, Armeholes, and ridge of the
back.

You may for the same purpose, fill two Swines bladders with the same
decoction, or else stone bottles, and put them to the feet, sides, and
between the thighs. Then let this be the bound of sweating, when the patient
begins to wax cold, that is, when the sweat feels no more hot, but cold.

But by the consent of all, blood must not be letten after the third fit, but
presently When blood must be lot.
at the beginning of the Fever, according to the opinion and prescription of
Galen; for seeing this Fever for the most part is terminated at seven fits, if
you stay until the third fit be past, the Fever will now be comne to its
state; but Hippocrates Aphor. 29. Sect. 2.
forbide us to move any thing in the state, least nature then busied in
concocting the disease, be called from its begun enterprise.

CHAP. XVI. Of an Oedema or cold Phlegmatic Tumor.
HItherto we have treated of hot Tumors, now we must speak of cold; Cold
Tumors are only two, on Oedema, and a Scirrhus; And Gal. lib. de tumo. praeter
naturs.
for all that Hippocrates and the Ancients used the word Oedema for all sorts
of Tumors in general; yet by Galen and these Physicians which succeeded him,
it has been drawn from that large and general signification, to a more
strait and special, only to design a certain species, or kind of Tumor.

Wherefore an Oedema is a soft, laxe and painlesse Tumor, caused by collection
What an Oedema is.
of a fleg maticke humor.

The Ancients made eight differences of Tumors proceeding of Phlegm. The first
they termed a true and lawful Oedema proceeding from natural Phlegm; from
The differentces of Oedemas
unnatural Phlegm by admixtion of another humor they would have three sorts
of Tumors to arise, as that by mixture of blood, should be made an Oedema
Phlegmonodes, and so of the rest.

Besides, when they perceived unnatural Phlegm either puffed up by
flatulency, or to slow with a waterish moisture, they called some Oedemaes
flatulent, others waterish; but also when they saw this same Phlegm often to
turn into a certain Plaister-like substance, they thought that hence
proceeded another kind of Oedema, which they expressed one while by the name
of Atheroma, another while by Steaetoma, and sometime by Melicerides, as lastly
they called that kind of Oedema which is caused by putride and corrupt phlegm,
Scrophulae. For we must observe that Phlegm By how many ways Phlegm becomes
not natural.
sometimes is natural, and offends only in quantity, whence the true Oedema
proceeds; other whiles it is not natural; and it becomes not natural, either
by admixtion of a strange substance, as blood, Choler or Melancholy, whence
arise the three kinds of Oedema's noted formerly by the way; or by the
putrednesse and corruption of its proper substance, whence the Struma and
Scrophulae proceed; or by concretion, whence kernells and all kinds of Wens,
Ganglia and knots; or by resolution, whence all flatulent and waterish Tumors,
as the Hydrocele, Pneumatocele and all kinds of Dropsies.

The causes of all Oedema's are the defluxion of a Phlegmatic or flatulent
The Causes.
humor into any part, or the congestion of the same made by little and little in
any part, by reason of the imbecility thereof in concocting the nourishment,
and expelling the excrement.

The signs are a color whitish and like unto the skin, a soft Tumor, rare
and laxe by reason of the plentiful moisture with which it abounds, and
without The signs.
pain, by reason this humor inferres no sense of heat nor manifest cold; when
you press it with your finger the print thereof remains, because of the
grossness of the humor and slownesse to motion. Oedema's breed rather in
winter The prognostics.
than in the summer, because winter is fitter to heap up Phlegm; they chiefly
possess the Nervous and Glandulous parts, because they are bloodlesse, and so
cold and more fit by reason of their looseness to receive a defluxion; for the
same cause bodies full of ill humors, ancient, and not exercised, are chiefly
troubled with this kind of Tumor.

An Oedema is terminated sometimes by resolution, but oftener by concretion, How
Oedemas are terminated.
seldomer by supputation, by reason of the small quantity of heat in that
humor.

A Symptomaticall Oedema, as that which follows upon a Dropsy or Consumption,
admits no cure unless the disease be first taken away.

The general cure is placed in two things, that is, in evacuation of the
conjunct matter, prohibiting the generation of the antecedent. We attain to
both The intentions of curing Oedema's.
chiefly by four means.

The first truly by ordaining a fit manner of living and prescribing
moderation in the use of the six things not natural. Wherefore we must make
choice of The diet.
such air as is hot, dry and subtle; we must prescribe wine of a middle
nature for his drink; let the bread be well baked; let meats be appointed
which may generate good blood, and these rather roasted than boiled. Let all
fruits be forbidden, as also brothes and milke-meates; let him eat such fish
as are taken in stony rivers; the Patient shall observe mediocrity in feeding,
but principally sobriety in drinking, for fear of crudities; After meat let
him use digestive powders, or common drige powder; if his belly be not
naturally loose let it be made so by art.

Let the Patient use exercise before meat, so by little and little to spend this
humor, and restore the native heat. Let him sleep little, because much fleepe
Exercise.
breeds cold humors; let him avoyde grief and sadness. And if he be of a
weak body, let him abstain from venery, lest by another weakening by the use
of venery added to his present infirmity, he fall into an uncureable coldness,
from whence a greater measure of crudity will arise. Otherwise, if the body
What to be observed in the use of venery.
be strong and lusty, by such exercises and the moderate use of venery it will
be the more dried and heated.

For so that sentence of Hippocrates is to be understood; That venery is a cure
6. Epid. sect. 5^ sen. 23.
for Phlegmatic diseases, as Galen in his commentaryes tells us. The
Physician may perform the second intention by turning his counsel to that
part, from whence the spring of this Phlegmatic humor flows. For if the
infirmity arise from the stomach, or from any other part, the part from whence
it comes must be strengthened; if from the whole habit of the body, let
attenuating, penetrating and opening medicines be prescribed. We perform the
third intention by evacuating the humor impact in the part with local
medicines varyed according to the four times of the Tumor.

For Galen in the beginning and increase prescribes a fomentation of Oxycratum
Lib. 2. ad Glaus. cap. 3. A rovvler.
used with a sponge. But if so be that the Oedema be upon the Arm or Leg, a
repelling rowler is very good, that is, such an one as is brought from below
upwards. So these medicines following are very fit for the same purpose,.
Lixivij ex cineribus sarmentorum, and caulium, an. iiij. Tartari and Aluminis
an. (...), aceti ij. mix all together and make a decoction, wherein wet
spunges and foment the place. Also you may use the following Cataplasme,,
farinae hordei iiij. coquantur in Lixivio communi, addendo pulveris nuci^
cupressi, corticum granatorum, balausti. an. j. Myrrhae, Aloes, alum. an^ ss,
olei Myrtill. ij, fiat Cataplasma. In the state and declination you must use
drying and resolving medicines, as. Nucum cupressi, granat. sumach, balausti,
an. j. Salviae, origan. calament. Hyssopi, melissae an. in. j. absint^ij,
plantag. caudae. equ. tapsi. barb. centinod. an. m. ss. alumi. tartar. and
salis com. an. j. coquanter cum lixivio; foment it with a spung, then presently
apply this following Cataplasme., Rad. Brioniae ij. absinth. plantage.
centinchamaem, meliloti, puleg. an. m. ss. coquantur in hydromelite, pistentur,
traijciantur, addendo pulveris ros. rub. chamaem. melil. an. j. fiat Cataplasma.

Lastly, you may here with good success use resolving emplaisters and
ointments, first heating or chasing the part by friction or fomentations as well
moist as What caution to be had in application of Emplaisters.
dry; otherwise emplaisters will scarsly do their duty, by reason of the great
coldness of the part, being not sufficient of it self to assimulate the
nourishment, or to expel the superfluous and unprofitable humor. Let a
fomentation be made with white wine, in which Sage, Rosmary, Time, Lavander,
Chamomile and Melilote flowers, red Roses, Orris roots, Staechos and such like
have been boiled, with a little Vinegar added thereunto. Quench hot brickes in
the same docoction, and apply them wrapped in linen clothes to the affected
part, for so a vapor will breathe forth which has an attenuating, pearcing,
resolving and strengthening faculty. But you may in stead of the bricks fitly
apply Hoggs or Ox bladders, filled half full with the foresaid decoction, and
that hot. The frictions must be made with hot linen clothes, for so the native
heat together with the blood and spirits is recalled to the part, and
fuliginous humors contained under the skin are resolved, whereby the strength
of the part is in some sort recovered.

CHAP. XVII. Of the cure of flatulent and waterish Tumors.
I Formerly declared that not only flatulent and waterish Tumors were
comprehended under this word Oedema, but also such as are bred of congealed
Phlegm, as Atheromata, Steatomata and Melicerides. Flatulent In what places
flatulencies may be gathered.
or windy Tumors are caused by vapor and wind kept in or contained sometimes
under the skin, somewhiles under the membranes, as the Periostium and
pericranium, whereupon ensues cruel torment by reason of the distention of
these parts which are endued with most exquisite sense. Sometimes the
Entrails, as the stomach and Guts are swollen and stretched out with wind,
as in a Tympany.

They in this differ from a true and legitimate Oedema, that when you lay your
In what flatulent tumors differ from a true Oedema.
finger upon them and take it off again, there remains no sign of the
pressure thereof, because they are distent by vapor and not by humor, for the
vapor being pressed returns speedily again, as you may perceive by balls or
bladders filled with wind.

The cause of such Tumors is the weakness of the native heat, not being able
The causes of flatulent Tumors.
easily to resolve and waste the Phlegm by which the windy Tumors are raised,
for so the morning Sun (which in some sort resembles our native heat) cannot
resolve the mists dipersed in the air; which at noone it easily resolves into
pure air. Almost after the same manner our weaker heat stirs up vapors from
that phlegm it could not dissolve, which vapors are the matter of inflations,
or swellings. But often times although the native heat be sufficiently
powerful, yet because the humor lies deep, or is kept in by the thickness
of some membrane, tendon or Ligament, the stirred up vapor cannot exhale,
whereby it comes to pass, that increased by little and little it causes a Tumor.

The signs of such a Tumor are a certain renitency or resistance perceived
The signs of such Tumors.
by pressing it with your finger, and sometimes a noise as if you smit upon a
drum, especially if much wind be contained therein, such as is often gathered
together in the hollownesse of the belly, and in the spaces between the larger
muscles. The Tumor is neither red nor hot, but rather cold and white as in an
Oedema. It often possesses the joints, and especially the knees, and it is
very difficult to be resolved. If such flatulency be gathered together in the
Guts, it causes the wind Collicke, in which sometimes the distention is so
great that death ensues by reason of the renting or tearing the coats of the
Guts.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the cure of a flatulent and waterish Tumor.
WE shall chiefly and principally cure flatulent and waterish tumors by three
means. First by the same diet which we prescribed in an Oedema; then Diet.
Things strengthening the parts.
by strengthening the parts appointed for concoction, as the stomach and
Liver, chiefly by the temperate use of Aromaticke things as Diacuminum,
Diacalamenthae, Aromaticum caryophyllatum, Aromaticum Rosatum, and the like, to
be prescribed according to good liking of the Physician which oversees the
cure; lastly by taking away of the conjunct matter by hot, drying and
attenuating medicines which they call Carminative, that so the part being
rarefied the humor and flatulency therein contained may be discussed and
dissipated. But remedies of this nature must Medicines evacuating the conjunct
matter.
be varied according to the variety of the parts; for some things are fit to be
applied to the stomach, others to the Guts, others to the joints, and others
to the fleshy parts; for the Collicke you must inject carminative glisters, let
resolving Sacculi or Baggs be applied, and cupping Glasses fastened to the
Navel; if an outward part be affected, we use fomentations, liniments, chiefly
if pain torment; as also Cataplasmes and Emplaisters, as Florum chamaem.
melil. rorismarini, rosar. rub. an. p. j: absinth. hyssopi, an. m. ij. let them
be boiled in Lie, adding a little vinegar for a fomentation to be used with
spunges.

Galen foments the part with Rose-vinegar and a little salt put thereto, and
would have a sponge dipped therein to lie somewhat long upon the part.. Olei
chamaem. aneth. rut. Galens ^omentation.
and liliorum, an. ss, cerae albae vj; aq. vitae j, let them all be mixed
together and make a liniment, with which anoint the part after the
fomentation.. Farinae fabar. orobi, an. iij, coquantur in decocto pulegij,
origani, calamenth. salviae, addita pulverum chamaem. and melilot. an. m. ss.
fur^ur. sarinae fab. and orobi, an. ij, coquantur cum lixivio communi, addendo
terebinth. iij, oleor. aneth. and rut. an. ij; make an emplaister for the
foresaid use.

The emplaister of Vigo with Mercury, and without is very good for the same
purpose. But you must note, that such medicines must be applied to the part
actually hot, and the same heat must be contained and renewed by putting about
it linen clothes, bricks, bottles and such like hot things.

The Humor and flatulency which were kept shut up in the part being resolved,
the part must be strengthened, lest now and then it receive or generate the
like Corrobotating medicines
matter: That may be done by the following fomentation and cataplasme.. Nucum
cupressi, corticum granat. sumach. berberis, balaust. an. j, caudae equin.
arnogloss. tupsi barb. absinth. salviae, rorism. lavendul. an. m. ss. flor.
chamaem. melil. rosar. anthos, an. p. j. alum. salis com. an. j, bulliant omni^
in aequis partibus aquae fabrorum and vini austeri, make bags for a
fomentation, or use the decoction for the same purpose with a sponge., Farinae
fab. hordei and lupin. an. ij. terebinth. com. iiij, pulver. r^dicis ireos,
mastic. an. ss, mellis com. ijss, of the foresaid decoction as much as shall
suffice, so to make a cataplasme to the form of a poultice liquid enough, let
it be applied hot to the affected part having used the fomentation before.

The signs of a waterish tumor are the same as of a flatulent; but over and
besides it shines, and at the pressing with your fingers, there is hard a noise
or murmr as of The signs of a water^^h Tumor.
a bladder half filled with water.

Therefore the waterish tumor if it shall not yield to the forementioned
resolving Why a wateterish tumor must be opened with an instrument:
medicines, the way must be opened with an incision knife, after the same
manner, as we mentioned in a Phlegmon. For often times this kind of remedy must
be necessarily used, not only by reason of the contumacie of the humor which
gives no place to the resolving medicines, but also because it is shut up in
its proper cyst or bag, the thickness of which frustrates the force of the
resolving medicines, neither suffers it to penetrate into the humor. As I some
years ago found by experience A History.
in a maid of 7. years old; which troubled with a Hydrocele or waterish
rupture, to whom when I had rashly applied to dissolve it resolving medicines
of all sorts, at length I was forct to open it with my knife; not only to
evacuate the contained matter, but also that I might pluck out the bag,
which unless it were cut up by the root, would be a mean to cause a relapse.
John Altine doctor of Physic called me to this business. James Guilemeau the
Kings Surgeon oversaw the cure.

CHAP. XIX. Of an Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris.
ALthough these Tumors may be thought comprehended under one genus with other
Oedematous tumors, yet they differ as thus; that is, their matter is shut up in
its bladder or bag, as it were in a peculiar cell. But their In what an
Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris differ.
difference amongst themselves is thus; the matter of the Steatoma as the name
signifies, is like unto Tallow [for (...) in Greek signifies Tallow, or
seame] yet it often times is found stuffed with other diverse hard bodies, stony,
bony or callous like unto the claws of an hen. For Philoxenus reports that he
sometimes saw flies in a Steatoma at the opening thereof, and such other like
things wholly dissenting from the common matter of Tumors. The matter contained
in an Atheroma is like to pappe, with which they feed little Children. A
Meliceris contains matter resembling honey in color and consistence; these
Tumors appear and rise without any Inflammation going before them. Thus you
shall know these Tumors; a Steatoma is harder than the other two, neither
yields it to the pressure of your finger, but when it once yields, it does not
speedily and easily return to its former figure, because the matter is more
gross; It is of the same color as the skin, without pain, and of a longish
figure. The Meliceris yeeds to the touch, as being a loose and soft body, and
as it is easily disposed and diffused, so it quickly returns to its former
place and Tumor. It differs from the Atheroma in figure and substance. For it
is more globous and of a subtiler and more shining matter, besides also it
takes up a large space, and is more obsequious to the touch, and for the rest,
without pain. As for the manual Of Chirurg^ry to be used to these Tumors.
operation of the Surgeon in their cure, it seems to be of no great
consequence of what sort the matter is, whether resembling tallow, honey, or
pappe, for there is one simple manner of operation, which is, that you pluck
away the contained humor, as also the receptacle in which it is contained. Yet
you must note such Tumors, sometimes as it were hanging in the surface of the
skin, are easily to be moved this way and that way; but other some again
deeper fastened firmly cohere with the adjacent bodies, and these require an
exquisite hand and also industry for fear of a great flux of blood and
convulsion by cutting a vein. There are many other kinds of Tumors, as the
Testudo or Mole, the Nata, the Glandula, Nodus, Botium, Lupia, which as in
matter (for they are all of a thick, clammy and viscous Phlegmatic humor) so
also in kind they agree with an Atheroma, Steatoma and Meliceris. But also in
these for the most part, when they are opened, you may see bodies of all sorts
far different from the common matter of Tumors, as stones, chalk, sand,
What the cause may be, that we sometimes sinde infectae in these Tumors.
coals, snailes, strawes, or awnes of Corn, hey, horn, hairs, flesh both
hard and spongious, gristles, bones, whole creatures as well living as dead.

The generation of which things (by the corruption and alteration of humors)
shall not make us much to admire it, if we consider, that as nature of all the
seeds and elements of the whole great world, has made man the Microcosme or
little world, that he might be, as it were, the lively Image of that greater
world; so in him, it being never idle in us, would have all the kinds of all
motions and actions to show themselves, as long as matter for generation is not
wanting. But because there is little, or rather no mention of these tumors
amongst the anicents, we will briefly show the opinions of the later Writers
concerning them.

Now they say, the Testudo is a rumor contrary to nature, soft, diffused, or
vaulted, What the Testudo, or Talparia is.
or arched like a Tortois, sometimes it arises in the head in form of a Mole,
and then it is called a Mole.

The Nata is a great and fleshly tumor, not in shape unlike a Melon, or rather
the What the Nata is.
flesh of a man's buttockes, whence it may seem to have had the name, unless
we had rather say it had it, because it more usually breeds upon the buttocks,
than upon any other part of the body.

The Glandula takes its denomination from an Acorne, called Glans in Latin,
the What a Gandula.
which it somewhat resembles in the compass and form of the tumor; or else
because it most commonly breeds in the Glandules, or Emunctories of man's body.

The Nodus or knot, is a round tumor, hard and immovable, named from a rope
What Nodus.
tied on a knot.

Guido Cauliacensis affirms knots commonly to grow in nervous bodies; but at
this time they more usually arise on the bones of such as have the French
disease.

CHAP. XX. Of the cure of Lupiae, that is, Wens, or Ganglions.
A Wen or Ganglion is a tumor sometimes hard, sometimes soft, yet always What
a Glanglion is.
round, using to breed in dry, hard, and nervous parts. And seeing that some of
the tumors mentioned before in the former Chapter, stick immovable to the
part to which they grow, because they are contained in no cyste, or bag;
othersome are moved up and down by the touch of your fingers, because they are
contained in a bag or bladder, it commonly comes to pass that Wens have their
bladder wherein to contain them, and therefore we think fit, the rather more
freely, and particularly to treat of their cure, because they are more
difficultly cured, especially where they are inveterate and of long standing.

The primitive causes of these are dull blows, fallings from high places,
strains, The causes.
and other such like occasions. But the antecedent and conjunct causes are the
same with those of an Atheroma, Meliceris and Steatoma.

The description formerly set down, will furnish you with the signs by which
Signs.
you may know when they are present; certainly from very small beginnings they
grow by little and little to a great bigness, in the space of six or seven
years, some of them yield much to the touch, and almost all of them are
without pain.

You may hinder such as are beginning and first growing, from increase by
somewhat a strong and frequent rubbing with your fingers. For so their bag
or bladder, together with the skin wax thin, and the contained humor grows
hot, is attenuated Their cure at the beginning.
and resolved. But if so you nothing prevail, you must lie upon them with your
whole hand, or a flatted piece of wood as heavy as you can, until such time as
the cyste or bag be broken by your impression; Then apply and strongly bind
unto it a plate of lead, rubbed over with Quicksilver; for I have many times
found by Plates of lead rubbed with Quicksilver,
experience, that it has a wonderful force to resolve and waste the subject
humor. But if the Wen be in such a place in which you can make no strong
impression, as in the face, chest, belly, and throat, let there be applied an
Emplaister which has a resolving force, such as this following has;, gummi
ammon. bdelij. galban. an. iij, A resolving plaster.
liquefiant in aceto, and traijciantur per setaceum, addendo olei liliorum and
lauri, an. j, aqu. vitae parum, pulveri, ireos, salis ammon. surphur. vivi,
vitrioli romani, an ss; let them be all incorporated together, and make an
Emplaister according to Art. But if the tumor cannot be thus resolved, it must
be opened with a knife or cautery. And after Things to wast or consume the bag.
the Eschar is removed, and the bag waisted by Aegyptiacum, Mercury, and the
like, the ulcer must be cleansed, replenished with flesh, and cicatrized.

Sometimes Wens grow to so great a mass, that they cannot be cured by the
described remedies, wherefore they must be taken away by the root, by your
hand and instrument, if so be that there be no danger by reason of their
greatness, and so that they adhere not too closely to the adjacent parts, and
if they be not too nigh to the greater veins and arteries; for it will be
better in such a cause to let them alone. This shall be your way to cut the^
off, or take them away. A small incision must be made The manner to take away
Wen^.
even to the bladder, or bag, by which thrust in a probe of a fingers thicknes,
hollowed in the midst, round at the end, and as long as need shall require;
then draw it many times about between the skin and the bag, even to
theroote of the Wen, that so the skin may be divided long ways, then it will
be requisite to make another incision overthwarte, so that they may intersect
each other like a cross; then presently draw the skin from the bladder, from
the corners of the Wen; toward the root, and that with your finger covered
with a fine linen cloth, or else with a Razor if need require.

But you must observe that in a Wen there are always certain vessels, which
are small in the beginning, but much increased in process of time, according
to the increase of the Wen, whereof they are as it were the roots; wherefore
if any Haemorrhagie or flux of blood happen, let it be stopped by binding the
vessels at their heads and roots, or make a strait ligature at the roots of the
Wen, with a piece of whipcord, or with a manytimes doubled thread, and let the
ends hang forth until it fall away of its own accord. Neither will it be
sufficient to have cut away all this tumor, but also it will be fit to cut away
portion of the skin, wherewith the tumor was covered, and only to leave so
much as shall suffice to cover the part, then with a needle and thread draw
together the lips of the incision, but in the interim let tents be put into the
bottom of the ulcer until it be perfectly cleansed, and the rest of the cure
be workemanlike performed, even to the cicatrizing thereof.

The Surgeon Collo and I using this method, in the presence of Master Dr.
Violanius A History.
the Kings Physician, took away a Wen from Martial Colard, the Major of
Burbon; it hanged at his neck, as big as a man's head, and it weighed eight
pounds; which made it so troublesome and burdensome to him, that he was forced
to carry it bound up in a towell, as in a scrip.

Verily if these kind of tumors have a slender root and broad top, they must
be What Wens to be cured by ligature. Which dangerous to cure.
straightly tied and so cut off. But it is very difficult and full of dangerous
chance to take away such Wens as are seated in the neck, neareunto the Iugular
veins, these under the armeholes, in the groines, and such as are under the
ham; by reason of the deadly force of such symptoms, as may thence arise. We
can only conjecture, not certainly say what kind of matter may be contained
in them. We can only know of what sort it is, when by incision it is presented
to our sight. Yet in such as are very hard and do much resist the touch, there
are often found matters, which in consistence may be resembled to little
stones, or pebles.

I being on a time called to open the body of a great Lady, found in one of her
A History.
breasts a body which might equal the bigness of an Hens egg, hard, and
compact like a rough peble; it was held, whilst she lived, both by the
Physicians and Chirurgions The matter of a Wen is sometimes taken for a Cancer.
Another History.
to be a Cancer, because this hardness was very painful to her, when it was
but gently pressed down.

But also some few years agon, I being called to the cure of a very honest
woman, which was troubled with the same disease, strongly withstood the
Physicians and Chirurgions affirming it to be a Cancer, for the tumor had taken
no deep root, the habit of the part was not changed from the native color,
the veins about it were not fwollen, neither was there any other convincing
sign of a Cancer. For this same woman had her courses at their due and usual
time, and was well liking, and How you may know a Wen from a Cancer.
had a good color in her face and body, was free from all sort of pain,
unless when you pressed down the part affected. Besides thenceforward the
tumor grew not at all; no other evil accident befell her, yea verily shelives
merrily, and well both in body and mind.

CHAP. XXI. Of a Ganglion more particularly so called.
THere are also certain small tumors of the kind of Lupiae or Wens, which
What a Ganglion properly so called is.
grow on diverse parts of the body, but chiefly on the wrests of the hands,
and anckles of the feet, being called by a more particular name Gangli^; they
appear on the top of the skin, neither do they ever lie deep. The cause of
The causes.
them is either the imbecilitie of a Nerve or Tendon got by wresting,
extension, a blow, labor, or other such like cause. Through which occasion the
alimentary juice which flowed to these parts, seeing it can neither be
concocted, nor assimulated into the proper substance, is converted into an
humor of the like nature cold, and gross; which in continuance of time heaping
it self up by little and little about the fibers, and the very substance of
the tendon, concretes into a tumor.

It is not fit to use any iron instrument to these Ganglia which possess the
tendons What Ganglia may not be cured with iron Instruments.
and joints, but only apply Ammoniacum and Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar and
Aqua vitae: as gummi ammon. and sagapeni in aqua vitae dissolutorum, ana. j.
coquantur super cineres calidos adformam emplastri, sub finem add sulphuris
vivi subtiliter pulverisati. ss, fiat empl. ad usum. Also the Emplaster of Vigo
with double Mercury would be good for the same purpose.

The tumor softened by these remedies, must be wrought, rubbed, or pressed, so
long, until the bladder or bag be broken under your fingers, which I have
diverse times done; then it will be expedient presently to apply and bind hard
thereunto^ plate of lead rubbed with Quicksilver, which may waste and consume
the remainder of the tumor.

Sometimes there are Ganglia seen hanging by a small root, as it were a
string; wherefore they must be tied with a string at the root, and every day
twitched harder and harder, till such time as they fall off. The rest of the
cure may be easily performed by the common rules of Art.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Strumae or Scrophulae, that is, the Kings-Evill.
TThe Scrophulae are oedematous tumors arising in the glandulous parts, as What
the Scrophulae or Kings-Evill is.
the breasts, armeholes, groines, but chiefly in the glandules of the neck.
They appear either one or many, according to the quantity of that matter from
whence they proceed, commonly contained in their proper cyste, or bag, as
Atheromacs, Steatomaees, and Melicerides are.

They are made of a gross, cold, viscide, and phlegmatic matter with some
admixture Their material cause. How they differ from other glanduleus tumors.
of malancholy. They differ from other glandulous tumors; first in number, for
most usually there appear many of them united together, springing from
somewhat a deeper root than glandulous tumors do; some of them are moveable,
othersome woven with the neighboring nerves, remaining unremoveable.

Gangliae appear fewer in number, and are without pain; but Scrophulae
oftentimes are painful, especially when they wax hot by putrefaction; so
that sometimes they degenerate into cancerous ulcers, not to be touched by
instruments, nor acride medicines.

Phlegmatic, Melancholic, and gluttonous persons, and such as are accustomed
to feed on cold and moist nourishments, as fish and cold water, and lead a
sedentarie and idle life, are subject to the Scrophulae. They are cured by a
most slender Their cure by diet.
diet, for so the native heat by want of nourishment turned upon the material
cause of such like tumors, wastes it.

And they are cured by purging of the superfluous humors, and also by
application of emollient resolving, and suppuratine topicke medicines, after
this following manner., Mucaginis ulth. faenugr. and ficuum ping. an. ij, olei
liliorum, and chamaem. an. j, Emollient and resolving medicines.
pinguedinis anseris and axungiae porct ss, Terebinth. Ven. iss, ammoniaci, and
galbani in aeceto dissolutorum an. j, cerae novae quantum satis, fiat cerotum
secundum artem ad modum d^achyli magni.

The ointment for the French disease, and the Emplaister of Vigo with Mercury,
are excellent for this purpose, especially if we continue so long, until the
Patient come to Salivation, for so Nature will disburden it self of the humor,
generating the Scrophulae, which I have sometimes tried with happy success,,
Emplastri diachyl. alb. and mag. cerotioesopi descriptionis Philagrij, ana. ij.
Terebinth. clarae j, oleililiorum param, fiat emplastrum satis molle. But if
the Scrophulae cannot by this means be resolved, but as it often times happens,
tend to suppuration, you must use suppuratives, as, rad. alth. and liliorum,
an. iij. coquantur in aqua communi, pistentur, trajectis Seppuratives.
add capitum alliorum sub cineribus coctorum iij, olei liliorum, and ping.
anseris and anat. an. iss, farinae seminis lini quantum satis, formetur
cataplasma.

Here we must admonish the Surgeon, that he open not the Scrophulae before A
note to be observed in opening Scropulous tumors.
that all the contained humor be fully and perfectly turned into pus or matter;
other-wise the residue of the humor will remain crude, and will scarce in a
long time be brought to maturation; which precept must be principally observed
in the Scrophulae, and also sometimes in other abscesses, which come to
suppuration. For we must not as soon as any portion of the contained humors
appears converted into pus, procure and hasten the apertion. For that portion
of the suppurated humor, causes the rest sooner to turn into pus, which you
may observe in inanimate bodies. For fruits which begin to perish and rot,
unless we presently cut away the putrefying part, the residue quickly becomes
rotten; there is also another reason; The native heat is the Natural heats
the cause of suppuration.
efficient cause of suppuration; it therefore (the sore being opened)
diminished and weakened by reason of the dissipation of the spirits, evacuated
together with the humor, will cause the remaining portion of the humor, not to
suppurate, or that very hardly, and with much difficulty. Yet if the tumified
part be subject, by its own nature, to corruption and putrefaction, as the
fundament; if the contained matter be malign, or critical, it will be far
better to hasten the apertion.

There is also another way of curing the Scrophulae, which is performed by the
The Chirurgicall manner of cuting Scrophulae.
hand. For such as are in the neck, and have no deep roots, by making
incision through the skin, are pulled and cut away from these parts with which
they were entangled. But in the performance of this work, we take special
care, that we do not violate or hurt with our instrument, the jugular veins,
the sleepy arteries, or recurrent nerves. If at any time there be danger of any
great effluxe of blood, after they are plucked from the skn, they must be tied
at their roots, by thrusting through a needle and thread, and then binding the
thread strait on both sides, that so bound they fall off by themselves by little
and little without any danger. The remainder of the cure may be performed
according to the common rules of Art.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Fever which happens upon an oedematous Tumor.
HAving showed all the differences of oedematous tumors, it remains that How
an intermitting Quotidian haopens upon oedematous tumors.
we briefly treat of the Symptomatical fever, which is sometimes seen to
happen upon them. This therefore retaining the motion of the humor by which it
is made, is commonly of their kind, which they name Intermitting Quotidians.
Now the fit of a Quotidian comes every day, and in that repetition The cause of
a Quotidian ^ea.
continues the space of eighteen hours; the residue of the day it has
manifest intermission.

The primitive causes of this fever are, the coldness and humitity of the
air encompassing us, the long use of cold meats and drinks, and of all such
things as are easily corrupted, as Summer fruits, crude fishes, and lastly,
the omission of our accustomed exercise.

The antecedent causes are a great repletion of tumors, and these especially
phlegmatic. The conjunct cause, is phlegm putrefying in the habit of the
body, and first region thereof without the greater veins.

The signs of this fever are drawn from three things; as first natural; for
this The Signs:
Fever or Ague chiefly seazes upon these which which are of a cold and moist
temper, as Old-men, Women, Children, Eunuchs, because they have abundance of
phlegm; and it invades Old-men by its own nature, because their native heat
being weak, they cannot convert their meats, then taken in a small quantity,
into laudable blood, and the substance of the parts. But it takes children by
accident, not of its self, and the own nature, for children are hot and
moist; but by reason of their How children come to be subject to Quotidian
fevers.
voracitie, or greediness, and their violent, inordinate, and continual
motion after their plentiful feeding, they heap up a great quantity of crude
humors fit matter for this fever; whereby it comes to pass, that fat children
are chiefly troubled with this kind of fever, because they have the passages
of their bodies strait and stopped; or because they are subject to Worms,
they are troubled with pain, by corruption of their meat; whence arises a
hot distemper by putrefaction, and the elevation of putride vapors, by which
the heart being molested, is easily taken by this kind of fever.

From things not natural, the signs of this fever are thus drawn. It
chiefly takes one in Winter, and the Spring, in a cold and moist Region, in a
sedentary and idle life, by the use of meats, not only cold and moist, but
also hot and dry, if they be devoured in such plenty, that they over whelme the
native heat.

For thus wine, although it be by faculty and nature, hot and dry, yet taken
How phlegmatic humors happen to be generated by hot and dry meats.
too immoderately, it accumulates phlegmatic humors, and causes cold
diseases. Therefore drunkenness, gluttony, crudity, bathes, and exercises
presently after meat, being they draw the meats as yet crude into the body and
veins, and to conclude, all things causing much phlegm in us, may beget a
Quotidian fever. But by things contrary to nature, because this fever usually
follows cold diseases, the Center, Circumference, and Habit of the body being
refrigerated.

The symptoms of this fever are, the pain of the mouth of the stomach,
because The Symptoms of quptidians.
that phlegm is commonly heaped up in this place, whence follows a vomiting,
or casting up of phlegm; the face looks pale, and the mouth is moist without
any thirst, often times in the fit it self; because the stomach flowing with
phlegm, the watery and thinner portion thereof continually flows up into the
mouth and tongue, by the continuitie of the inner coat of the ventricle common
to the gullet and mouth.

It takes one with coldness of the extreme parts, a small and deep pulse,
which The manner of the pulse and heat in a Quotidian.
notwithstanding in the vigor of the fit, becomes more strong, great, full,
and quick. Just after the same manner, as the heat of this fever at the
first touch appears mild, gentle, moist, and vaporous; but at the length it is
felt more acride, no other-wise than fire kindled in green wood, which is
small, weak, and smokie at the first; but at the length when the moisture
being overcome, does no more hinder its action, it burns and flames freely.

The Patients are freed from their fits with small sweats, which at the first
fits break forth very sparingly, but more plentifully when the Crisis is at
hand; the urine Critical sweats.
at the first is pale and thick, and sometimes thin, that is, when there is
obstruction. But when the matter is concoct, as in the state, it is red: if at
the beginning of The urine.
the fit they cast up any quantity of phlegm by vomit, and that fit be
terminated in a plentiful sweat, it shows the fever will not long last; for
it argues the strength of nature, the yielding and tenuitie of the matter
flying up, and the excretion of the conjunct cause of the fever. Why
Quodidiansare often times long. In to what diseases a quartaine usually changes.


A Quotidian fever is commonly long, because the phlegmatic humor being
cold, and moist by nature, is heavy and unapt for motion; neither is it
without fear of a greater disease, because often times it changes into a
burning, or quartaine fever, especially if it be bred of salt Phlegm; for
saltness has affinity with bitterness, wherefore by adustion it easily
degenerates into it, so that, it need not seem very strange, if salt Phlegm
by adustion turn into choler, or Melancholy. Those who recover of a quotidian
Fever, have their digestive faculty very weak; wherefore they must not be
nourished with store of meats, nor with such as are hard to digest. In a
quotidian the whole body is filled with crude humors, whereby it comes to pass
that this Fever often times lasts sixty days. But have a care, you be not
deceived, How to distinguish a quotidian from a double tertian.
and take a double tertian for a quotidian, because it takes the patient every
day as a quotidian does. Verily it will be very easy to distinguish these
Fevers by the kind of the humor, and the propriety of the Symptoms and
accidents; beside, quotidians commonly take one in the evening, or the midst of
the night, as then when our bodies are refrigerated by the coldness of the
air caused by the absence of the Sun. Wherefore then the cold humors are
moved in us, which were bridled a little before by the presence and heat of the
Sun. But on the contrary, double tertians take one about noone. The
shortness and gentleness of the fit, the plentitifull sweat breaking forth,
the matter being concocted, causes us to think the quotidian short and
salutary.

The Cure is performed by two means; to wit Diet and Pharmacy. Let the Diet
Diet.
be slender and attenuating, let the patient breathe in a clear air
moderately hot and dry; let his meats be bread well baked, cock or chicken
brothes in which have bin boiled the roots of Parsley, Sorrel and the like.

Neither at some times will the use of hot meats, as those which are spiced and
salted, When the use of spiced and salted meats are fit.
be unprofitable, especially to such as have their stomach and liver much
cooled. Let him eat Chickins, Mutton, Partridge and small Birds, river fishes
and such as live in stony waters fried or broiled, rear Eggs and such like.
These fruits are also good for him, Raisons, stewed Prunes, Almonds and Dates.
Let his drink be small white wine mixed with boiled water. Moderate exercises
will be good, as also frictions of the whole body: sleep taken at a fitting
time, and proportioned to waking, so that the time of sleep fall not upon the
time of the fit; for then it hurts very When sleep it hurtful.
much; for calling the heat to the inner parts, it doubles the raging of the
feverish heat inwardly in the bowels.

For the passions of the mind, the patient must be merry, and comforted with a
hope shortly to recover his health. It seems not amiss to some, at the
coming of the fit to put the feet and Legs into hot water, in which Chamomill,
Dill, Melilote, Marjerome, Sage, and Rosemary have been boiled.

The Medicines shall be such Syrupes as are called digestive and aperitive, as
Syrup Medicines.
of Wormwood, Mints, of the five opening roots, Oxymel with a decoction of
Chamomill, Calamint, Melilot, Dill and the like, or with common decoctions. The
Purgatives shall be Diaphaenicon, Electuarium Diacarthami, Hiera picra,
Agaricke; Turbith; of which you shall make potions with the water of Mints,
Balm, Hyssope, Sage, Fennel, Endive or the like, Pilluae aureae are also
good. These purgatives shall sometimes be given in form of a bole with Sugar,
as the Physician being present shall think most fit and agreeable to the
nature of the Patient.

About the state of the disease, you must have a care of the stomach and
principally Care must be had of the stomach.
of the mouth thereof, as being the chief seat of Phlegm; wherefore it will
be good to anoint it every other day with oil of Chamomill mixed with a little
white wine, Vomits.
as also to unlade it by taking a vomit of the juice of Raddish, and much
Oxymel, or with the decoction of the seeds and roots of Asarum and Chamomill;
and Syrup of vinegar will be very good, especially at the beginning of the
fit, when nature and the humors begin to move; for an inveterate quotidian,
though you can cure it by no The use of Treacle in an inveterate quotidian.
other remedy, nothing is thought to conduce so much as one dram of old Treacle
taken with Sugar in form of a Bole, or to drink it dissolved in Aqua vitae.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of a Scirrhus, or an hard Tumor proceeding of Melancholy.
HAving showed the nature of Tumors caused by blood, choler and Phlegm, it
remains we speak of these, which are bred of a Melancholic humor; Of these
there are said to be four differences. The first is What a true and legitimate
Scirrhus, is.
of a true and legitimate Scirrhus, that is, of an hard Tumor endued with little
sense, and so commonly without pain, generated of a natural Melancholic
humor. The second is, of an illegitimate Scirrhus, that is, of an hard Tumor
What an illegitimate Scirrhus is.
insensible, and without pain, of a Melancholic humor concrete by too much
resolving and refrigerating. The third is of a cancrous Scirrhus bred by the
corruption and adustion of the Melancholic humor. The fourth of a Phlegmonous,
Erysipelous or Oedematous Scirrhus, caused by Melancholy mixed with some other
humor. The cause of all these kinds of Tumors is a gross, tough and tenacious
humor concrete, in any part. But the generation of such an humor in the body
happens either of an ill and irregular diet, or of the unnatural affects of
the liver or spleen, as obstruction; or by suppression of the Haemorr^oides or
Courses.

The signs are hardness, renitency, a blackish color, and a dilatation of
the veins The signs.
of the affected part with blackishnesse, by reason of the abundance of the
gross humor. The illegitimate or bastard Scirrhus which is wholly without pain
and sense, Prognostics.
and also the cancerous, admit no cure, and the true legitimate scarce yield to
any. Those which are brought to suppuration, easily turn into cancers and
fistulaes; these tumors though in the beginning they appear little, yet in
process of time they grow to a great bigness.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Cure of a Scirrhus.
THe Cure of a Sirrhus chiefly consists of three heads. First, the Physician
shall prescribe a convenient diet, that is, sober and moderate in feeding,
tending to humidity, and indifferent heat; for his manner of life, let it be
Diet.
quiet and free from all perturbation of anger, grief and sadness, as also
abhorring the use of venery. The second is placed in the evacuation of the
antecedent matter, as by Phlebotomy, if need require, and by purging, by
procuring the haemorrhoids in men and the courses in women; let purgations be
prescribed of Discatholicon, Hyera, diasenna, polipody, Epythymum according to
the mind of the learned Physician. The third consists in the convenient use of
Topicke medicines, that is, emollient at the beginning, and then presently
resolving, or rather such as are mixed both of resolving and emollient
faculties, as Galen teaches; for by the use of only emollient Lib. 2. Ad
Gla^conem.
things there is danger of putrefaction and a Cancer, and only of resolving
there is fear of concretion the subtiler part being resolved, and the grosser
subsiding.

The emollient shall be thus:. Rad. alth. lib. s. rad. liliorum iij. conquantur
in aqua com. pistentur, traijciantur per setaceum, addendo olei chamaem. and
lilior. an. ij. oesipi humidae ss. emplastri diachyl. alb. cum oleo liliorum
dissoluti iij, cerae albae quantum Emollients.
fit satis, fiat cerotum. Or. gummi ammoniaci, galb. bdellij, styracis liquidae
in aceto dissolutorum, an. j. diachyl. mag. jss, olei liliorum, and axungiae
anseris, an. j. ceroti oesip. descriptione Philagr. ij. liques^ant omnia simul,
cerae quantum sit satis, ut jude fiat cerotum satis molle. When you have
sufficiently used emollient things, fume the Tumor with strong Vinegar and
Aqua vitae poured upon a piece of a Millstone, flint or brick heated very hot;
for so the mollified humor will be rarefied, attenuated, and resolved; then
some while after renew your emollients, and then again apply your resolvers to
waste that which remains, which could not be performed together and at once;
for thus Galen healed a Scirrhus in Cercilius Lib. 2. ad Glau.
his son. Goats dung is very good to discuss Scirrhous tumors; but the
Emplaster The efficacy of the Empl. of Vigo with Mercury.
of Vigo with a double quantity of Mercury is effectual above the rest, as
that which mollifies, resolves and wastes all tumors of this kind.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a Cancer already generated.
A Cancer is an hard Tumor, rough and unequal, round, immovable, of an What a
Cancer is.
ash, or livide color, horrid by reason of the veins on every side, swollen
with black blood, and spread abroad to the similitude of the stretched out legs
and claws of a Crabb. It is a tumor hard to be known at the first, as that
which scarce equals the bigness of a Chicke, or Cicer, after a little time it
will come to the greatness of a Hasell Nut, unless peradventure provoked by
somewhat too acride medicines it suddenly increase; being grown bigger,
according to the measure of the increase it torments the patient with pricking
pain, with acride heat, the gross blood residing in the veins growing hot,
and inferring a sense like the pricking of Needles, from which notwithstanding
the Patient has often times some rest. But because this kind of Tumor by the
veins extended and The nature of the pain.
spread about it like claws and feet, being of a livide and ash color,
associated with a roughness of the skin and tenacity of the humor, represents,
as it were, the toothed The reason of the name.
claws of the Crab, therefore I thought it not amiss here to insert the
Figure of the Crabb, that so the reason both of the name and thing might be
more perspicuous.

The figure of the Crabb, called Cancer in Latin.


CHAP. XXVII. Of the causes, kinds, and prognostics of a Cancer.
HEre we acknowledge two causes of a Cancer, the antecedent, and conjunct. The
causes of a Cancer.
The antecedent cause depends upon the default of irregular diet, generating
and heaping up gross and feculent blood; by the morbificke affection of the
Liver disposed to the generation of that blood; by the infirmity or weakness
of the spleen in attracting and purging the blood; by the suppression of the
Courses or Haemorrhoids, or any such accustomed evacuation. The conjunct cause
is that gross and melancholicke humor sticking and shut up in the affected
part, as in a strait. That malancholicke blood which is more mild, and less
malign, only The causes of a not ulcerated Cancer.
increased by a degree of more fervide heat, breeds a not ulcerated Cancer, but
the more malign and acride causes, an ulcerated. For so the humor which
generated Carbuncles, when it has acquired great heat, acrimony, and
malignitie, corrodes, and ulcerates the part upon which it alights. A Cancer is
made more fierce and raging by meats inflaming the blood, by perturbations of
the mind; anger, heat, and medicines too acride, oiely, and emplaisticke,
unfitly applied, both for time and place.

Amongst the sorts or kinds of Cancers, there be two chiefly eminent, that
is, the The sorts and differences of Cancers.
ulcerated or manifest Cancer, and the not ulcerated, or occult. But of Cancers
some possess the internal parts, as the Guts, Womb, Fundement; others the
external, as the Breasts; also there is a recent, or late bred Cancer, and
also an inveterate one. There is one small, another great; one raging and
malign, another more mild. Every Cancer is held almost incurable, or very
difficult to be cured, for it is a disease altogether malign, to wit, a
particular Leprosy. Therefore says Aetius, a Cancer is not easily stayed
until it has eaten even to the innermost of the part which it possesses.
Aetius lib. 16.
It invades women more frequently than men, and those parts which are laxe,
rare, fungous, and glandulous, and therefore opportune to receive a defluxion
of a The parts most subject to Cancers.
gross humor, such are the Breasts and all the emunctories of the noble parts.
When it possesses the Breasts, it often causes inflammation to the armeholes,
and sends the swelling ever to the glandules thereof; whereupon the Patients
do complain that a pricking pain even peirces to their hearts. But this same
pain also runs to the clavicles, and even to the inner side of the
shoulderblades and shoulders. When it is increased, and covers the noble parts,
it admits no cure but by the hand; but in deca^ed bodies, whose strength fail,
especially if the Cancers be inveterate, we must not attempt the cure, neither
with instrument, nor with fire, neither by too acride medicines, as potentiall
Cauteries; but we must only seek to keep them from growing more violent, and
from spreading further, by gentle medicines, and a palliative cure. What
Cancers one must not undertake truly to cure.
For thus many troubled with a Cancer, have attained even to old age. Therefore
Hippocrates admonishes us, that it is better not to cure occult, or hidden
Cancers; for the Patients cured (says he) do quickly die, but such as are not
cured live longer.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Cure of a Cancer beginning, and not yet ulcerated.
A Cancer beginning is often hindered from increasing, before it fasten its roots,
but when it has once increased, it admits no cure but by iron, as that which
contemnes, by reason of the malignity and contumacy, the force of all Lib. 2.
ad Glau.
medicines. Galen affirms, he cured a Cancer not ulcerated.

Now that cure is performed by medicines, purging melancholy, by Phlebotomy,
when the strength and age of the Patient may well endure it, by shunning all
things, which may breed ill and faeculent blood. The distemper of the Liver
must first be corrected, the Spleen strengthened, as also the part affected;
in men the Haemorrhoides, in women their Courses must be procured.

Threfore thick and muddy wines, vinegar, brown bread, cold herbs, old
cheese, old and salted flesh, Beef, Venison, goat, hare, garlic, Diet.
onions and mustard, and lastly all acride, acide and other salt (...)* which
may by any means incrassate the blood, and inflame the hum^ be eschewed. A
cooling and humecting diet must be prescribed; fasting eschewed, as also
watchings, immodera^e labors, sorrow, cares, and mournings; let him use
ptisans, and in his brothes ^boile Mallows, Spinach, Lettuce, Sorrel,
Purslaine, Succory, Hops, Violets, Borradge, and the four cold seeds. But let
him feed on Mutton, Veale, Kid, Capon, Pullet, young Hares, Partridges, Fishes
of stony rivers, rear Eggs; and use white wine, but moderately for his drink.

The part affected with the Cancer must be gently handled, and not overburdened
How to handl^ the cancorous part.
by over hard, or heavy things, or by too solid, or fat emplaisters; on the
contrary gentle and mitigating medicines must be used; applying also at
certain times such things as resist venom or poison, as Treacle and
Mithridate. Asses milk is exceeding Antidotes. Asses milk.
fit to assuage the acrimony of the cancorous humor. Therefore it must not only
be taken inwardly, but also applied outwardly to the cancrous ulcer, making
thereof a fomentation.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the cure of an ulcerated Cancer.
AN Vlcerated Cancer has many signs common with that which is not The Signs.
ulcerated, as the roundnesse of the tumor, the inequality, roughness, and
pain; to the judgment of the eye, the tumor seems soft, but it is hard to
the touch; the Ulcer is filthy, with lips thick, swollen, hard, knotty, turned
out, and standing up, having a horrid aspect, and casting forth ichorous,
filthy, and carionlike filth, sometimes black, sometimes mixed with rotten
filth, and otherwhiles with much blood. This kind of ulcer is malign,
rebellious, and untractable, as that which contemnes mild remedies, and
becomes more fierce, by acride and strong; the pain, fever, and all the
symptoms being increased, from whence the powers are dejected, the wasting and
consumption of the body follows, and lastly death. Yet if it be small, and in
a part which may suffer amputation, the body How and where a Cancer may be cut
away. What to be observed in cutting away a Cancer.
being first purged, and blood drawn, the strength of the Patient not
dissuading, it will be convenient to use the hand, and to take hold of, and cut
away whatsoever is corrupt, even to the quick, that no fear of contagion may
remain, or be left behind. The amputation finished, the blood must not be
presently stopped, but permitted to flow out in some measure, yea verily
pressed forth all about it, that so the veins swollne with black and
melancholicke blood may be disburdened. When you have The benefit of applying a
cautery after amputation of the Cancer.
taken a sufficient quantity of blood, the place must be scared with an actual
cautery. For that will strengthen the part affected, draw forth the venenate
quality, and also stay the defluxion. Then must you apply mitiga^ medicines,
and procure the falling away of the Eschar. To conclude, that which rem^ must
be performed according to the cure of other ulcers. Now we know and ^stand that
all the Cancer is cut away, Signs that a Cancer is well taken away:
and all the malignity thereof extinct, when ^lcer casts forth laudable matter,
when that good flesh begins to grow^ little ^ittle, like to the grains of a
Pomeganate, the pricking pain, and ^e symptoms being assuaged. Yet the cure
of an ulcerated Cancer, which shall possess the lips may be more happily and
mildly performed, no causticke medicine being applied after section, so also
that scarce any deformity will be left, when it is cicatrized. Which new and
never formerly tried, or written of way, as far as I know, I found and
performed in a man of fifty years old. Doctor John Altine, a most learned
Physician being called to Counsel, James Guillemea^, and Master Eustachius,
the Kings Chirurgions, and John Le Ieune the Duke of Guise his most worthy
Surgeon being present.

The way is this; The Cancer must be thrust through the lips on both sides,
above A new and observeable way of taking away a Cancer from the lip.
and below with a needle and thread, that so you may rule and govern the
Cancer with your left hand, by the benefit of the thread (least any portion
thereof should escape the instrument in cutting) and then with your Sizers in
the right hand, you ^ut it off all at once, yet it must be so done, that some
substance of the inner ^the lip, which is next to the teeth, may remain, (if
so be that the Cancer be not grown quite through) which may serve as it were
for a foundation to generate flesh to fill up the hollownesse again. Then when
it has bled sufficiently, the sides and brinkes of the wound must be scarified
on the right and lift sides, within, and without, with somewhat a deep
scarification, that so (when we would draw together the sides and lips of the
wound, by that manner of stitching, which is used in an hare-lippe) we may have
the flesh more pliant and tractable to the needle and thread. The residue of
the cure must be performed just after the same manner as we use in hare-lips;
of which we shall treat hereafter.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Topicke medicines to be applied to an unlcerated, and not
ulcerated Cancer.
WE at the beginning use repercussive medicines, such as are the juyces of
Nightshade, Plantaine, Henbane, Lettuce, Sorrel, Houseleeke, Water Lentill or
Duckes-meate, Knotgrasse, Pomegranates, and the like. Also Repelling medicines,
Oleum rosarum omphacinum, the powders of Sumach, Berberies, Litharge, Ceruse,
Burnt-lead, Tutia, Quicksilver, and the like. Of which you may compose
Fomentations, Liniments, Ointments, Cataplasmes, Emplaisters. Emplastrum
Diacalcitheos dissolved with juice of Nightshade, and oil of Roses is very fit
for not ulcerated Cancers. Pompholix, or Tutia, washed in juice of Nightshade,
or Plantaine, is very good for ulcerated Cancers. Besides this following
medicine is very commendable.

, Lytharg. and cerus. an. j, terantur in mortario plumb. cum oleo rosar. donec
reducantured consistentiam linimenti vel unguenti; and there may be use of a
resolving and repercassive ointment, as, plumbi usti loti, pomphol. thuris, an.
ijss, absinth. pontic. ss, olei rosarum iij, cerae vj, succi solani, quantum
sufficit ad unguenti crassitudinem. They very much commend Theodorickes
Emplaister to assuage the pain of ulcerated Cancers.

, Olei ros. cerae alb. an ijss, succigranat. and solani, an. ij, cerusae lotae
j, plumbi usti, loti, Theodoricks Emplaister.
and tuthiae praepar. an. ss, thuris, mastich. an. ij, fiat empl. molle. This
following ointment I have often used with good success.

, Therciac. veter. j, succi cancrorum ss, succi lactucae and olei rosar. an.
iss, vitel. ovorum sub cinerib. coct. ij, camphor. ss. pistentur omnia in
mortario plumb. and fiat unguentun^.

, spum. argent. axungiae porei recentis, cerae alb. an lib. ss, olei boni viij,
vitel. ovorum assat. iiij, fiat unguent. servetur usui. And when you will use
it, mix it with a little ointment of Roses. I have also mitigated great pain
by applying Leaches to an unulcerated Cancer, in that part where the torment
was most vehement, by disburdening Leaches.
the part of some portion of the malign humor; which same thing I have done
The application of whelps. chickins, and (...)
by application of young Whelp^, or Kitlings, or Pidgions, or Chickins cut long
ways, and presently applied to the ulcer, and now and then changed, as soon
as their heat seems dissolved; and ^hers applied for the natural heat in an
anodyne or mitigating medicine. John Ba^ ^heodosius in his Epistles, writes,
that a cataplasme Epist. 21. The estate of Erysimum.
of the herb Erysimum, or C^cke, being beaten, is very good to be applied to a
Cancer not ulcerated; but if the Cancer ^cerated, he boiles this same herb in
Hydromel, and so by injections and lotions ^ses the ulcer, and mitigates the
pain. If The signs of the Cancer in the womb.
the Cancer affect the womb, the patient feels the pricking of the pain in
the groines above the pecten, and in the Kidneyes, and is often troubled with a
difficulty of making water; but when it is ulcerated it poures forth filth or
matter exceeding stinking and carion-like, and that in great plenty; the filthy
vapor of which carried up to the heart and brain, causes often swounding. Now
to mitigate the pains of such like places, the following medicines are of good
use.

. Mucag. semin. lini, foenugr. extract. in aqua rosar. and plantaginis quod
satis est; Of this being warm make a fomehtation.

. Rad. Atheae, lbss. coquatur in hydromelite, pistetur, and traijciatur,
addendo olei rosar. parum, fiat Cataplasma. Also you shall make diverse
pessaries according to the different kinds of pain; also make injections of
the juice of Plantaine, Knotgrasse, Lettuce, Purslaine, mixed together, and
agitated or labored in a leaden mortar wi^ oil of Roses; for this kind of
medicine is commended by Galen, in every kind of ulcerated Cancer. Also this
following water is very profitable, and often approved Lib. 9. Simpl.
by me.. Stercoris bubuli lb. iiij. herbae Roberti, plantag, sempervivi,
hyoscyami, portulac. lactuc. endiv. an. m. j. cancros slu^iatiles, number. xij.
let them be all beaten together and distilled in a leaden Alembicke, keep the
liquor for use and with it make often injection into the part; or if the site
of the part will permit, let the cancerous ulcers be washed therewith, and
pledgets of lint steeped therein be applied and renewed ever and anon; for so
the acrimony and force of the inflammation is retunded, and the pain assuaged.
Galen beats into powder river Crabs burnt; the Lib. ^. decom^med. secundum genesis
powder mixed with ointment of Roses is most profitably applied upon lint to
cancerous ulcers.

It will be very convenient to put into the neck of the womb the following
instrument made of Gold, or Silver, whereby the cancerous filth may have free
and safe passage forth, and the filthy and putredinous vapors may more easily
breathe forth. Therefore let it be hollow quite through; some five or six
fingers long, and about the bigness of ones Thumb, at the upper end, perforated
with many holes whereby the filth may have passage forth. Let the outer or
lower end be some two fingers thick in the circumference, make it with a neat
spring, that may hold that end open more, or less according to the Physicians
mind; let there be two strings, or laces put unto it, by which being tied
before and behind to the rowler, with which the woman shall gift her loins,
the Device may be kept from falling, as you may see in the following figure.

A Vent made like a Pessary for the womb affected with a Cancerous ulcer.
A. Shows the upper end perforated with five or six holes.

B. The Lower end.

C. That part of the end which is opened by the spring, which is marked with
the letter D.

E E. The strings, or laces.



Neither is that remedy for not ulcerated cancers to be contemned, which
consists of a plate of lead besmeared with quicksilver; for Galen himself
testifies that lead is a Lib. 9. (...).
good medicine for malign and inveterate ulcers. But Guido Cauliacensis is a
witness Plates of Lead
of ancient credit and learning, that such plates of lead rubbed over with
quicksilver, to such malign ulcers as contemn the force of other medicines,
are as it were Antidotes, to waste and overcome their malignity and evil
nature. This kind of remedy, when it was prescribed by that most excellent
Physician Hollerius, who commanded A History.
me to apply it to the Lady of Montigni maid of Honor to the Queen mother,
troubled with a Cancer in her left breast, which equalled the bigness of a
Wallnut, did not truly thoroughly heal it, yet notwithstanding kept it from
further growth.

Wherefore at the length growing weary of it, when she had committed her self
to a certain Physician boldly promising her quick help, she tried with loss
of her life, how dangerous, and disadvantagious that cure of a Cancer was,
which is undertaken according to the manner of healing other ulcers; for this
Physician, when he had cast away this our medicine, and had begun the cure with
mollifying, heating and attractive thing, the pain, inflammation and all the
other Symptoms increasing, the Tumor grew to that bigness; that being the humor
drawn thither could not be contained in the part it self, it stretched the
breast forth so much, that it broke it in the middle, just as a Pomegranate
cleaves when it comes to its full maturity; whereupon an immoderate flux of
blood following, for staying whereof he was forcte to strew causticke pouders
thereon; but by this means the inflammation and pain becoming more raging,
and swoundings coming upon her, she poor Soul in steed of her promised
health, yielded up her ghost in the Physicians bosom.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Fever which happens in Scirrhous Tumors.
SVch a Fever is a Quartaine, or certainly coming near unto the nature of a
Quartaine, by reason of the nature of the Melancholic Why a quartaine happens
upon scirrhous tumors.
humor of which it is bred. For this shut up in a certain seat in which it
makes the tumor, by communication of putride vapors heats the heart above
measure, and enflames the humors contained therein, whence arises a Fever. Now
therefore a quartaine is a Fever coming every fourth day, and having two
days intermission.

The primitive causes thereof are, these things which increase Melancholicke
humors in the body, such as the long eating of pulse, ofcourse and burnt bread,
of salt flesh and fish, of gross meats as Beese, Goat, Venison, old Hares,
old Cheese, Cabbage, thick and muddy wines and other such things of the same
kind.

The antecedent causes are a heaped up plenty of Melancholicke humors abounding
over all the body. But the conjunct causes are Melancholic humors putrefying
without the greater vessels, in the small veins and habit of the body.

We may gather the signs of a Quartaine fever from things which they call
natural, not natural, and against nature; from things natural, for a cold
and dry The signs.
temper, oldeage, cold and fat men, having their veins small, and lying hid,
their spleen swollen and weak, are usually troubled with quartaine Fevers.

Of things not natural; this Fever, or Ague is frequent in Autumn, not only
because, for that it is cold and dry, it is fit to heap up Melancholic
humors; but Why they are frequent in Autumn.
chiefly by reason that the humors by the heat of the preceding Summer are
easily converted into adust Melancholy, whence far worser and more dangerous
quartaines arise, than of the simple Melancholic humor; to conclude, through
any cold or dry season in a region cold and dry, men that have the like Temper
easily fall into quartaines; if to these a painful kind of life full of
danger and sorrow does accrue.

Of things contrary to nature; because the fitts take one with painful
shaking, inferring as it were the sense of breaking or shaking the bones;
further it takes one every fourth day with an it ching over the whole body,
and often times with a thin skurfe and pustles especially on the legs; the
pulse at the beginning is little, slow, and deep, and the urine also is then
white and waterish, inclining to somewhat a dark color.

In the declination when the matter is concocted the urine becomes black, not
occasioned by any malign Symptom or preternaturall excess of heat, (for so
it should be deadly) but by excretion of the conjunct matter. The fit of the
Quartaine continues 24 hours, but the intermission is 48 hours. It often
takes its original from an obstruction, pain, and Scirrhus of the Spleen,
and the suppression of the courses and Haemorroides.

Quartaines taken in the Summer are for the most part short, but in the Autumn
Prognostick^.
long, especially such as continue till Winter. Those which come by succession
of any disease of the Liver, Spleen, or any other precedent disease, are worse
than such as are bred of themselves, and commonly end in a Dropsy. But those
which happen without the fault of any bowels, and to such a patlent, as will
be governed by the From what diseasses a quartain (...).
Physician in his Diet, infer no greater harm, but free him from more grievous
and long diseases, as Melancholy, the Falling sickness, Convulsions, Madness,
because the Melancholy humor, the author of such diseases, is expelled every
fourth day by the force of the fit of the Quartaine.

A Quartane Fever, if there be no error committed, commonly exceeds not a
year, for otherwise some Quartanes have been found to last to the twelfth
year according to the opinion of Auicen: the Quartane beginning in Autumn is
often times ended in the following spring; the Quartane which is caused by adust
blood or choler or Salt phlegm is more easily and sooner cured, than that which
proceeds from an adust Melancholy humor; because the Melancholy humor,
terrestrial of its own nature, and harder to be discussed than any other
humor, is again made by adustion (the subtiller parts being dissolved and the
grosser subsiding) more stubborn, gross, malign and acride. The cure is
wholly absolved by two means, that is, by Diet and medicines. The Diet ought to
be prescribed, contrary to the Diet.
cause of the Fever in the use of the six things not natural, as much as
lies in our power. Wherefore the Patient shall eschew Swines flesh, flatulent,
viscide and glutinous meats, fenny fowls, salt meats and Venison, and all
things of hard digestion. The use of white wine indifferent hot and thin is
convenient to attenuate and incide the gross humor, and to move urine and
sweat; yea verily at the beginning of the fit a draught of such wine will cause
vomiting, which is athing of so great moment, How much vomitting prevails to
cure ^ quartaine
that by this one remedy many have been cured. Yet if we may take occasion and
opportunity to provoke vomit, there is no time thought fitter for that purpose
than presently after meat; for then it is the sooner provoked, the sibers of
the Stomach being humected and relaxed, and the stomach is sooner turned to
vomiting, whereupon follows a more plentiful, happy and casie evacuation of
the Flegmatique and Choleric humor, and less trouble some to nature: and of
all the crudities with which the mouth of the ventricle abounds in a Quartaine,
by reason of the more copious afflux of the Melancholic humor, which by his
qualities cold and dry, disturbes all the actions and natural faculties.
Moreover exercises and frictions are good before meat; such passions of the
mind as are contrary to the cause from which this Fever takes his original,
are fit to be cherished by the patient; as Laughter, Ieasting, Music, and all
such like things full of pleasure and mirth. At the beginning the patient must
be gently handled and dealt withal, and we must abstain from all very strong
medicines until such time, as the disease has been of some continuance. For
this humor, contumacious at the beginning when as yet nature has attempted
nothing, is again made more stubborn, terrestrial and dry, by the almost
fiery heat of acride medicines. If the body abound with blood, some part
thereof must be taken away by opening the Median or Basilick vein of the left
arm, with this caution, that if it appear more gross and black, we suffer
it to flow more plentifully; if more thin, and tinctured with a laudable red
Color, that we presently stay it. The matter of this Fever must be ripened,
concocted and diminished with the Syrrupes of Epithymum, of Scolopendrium, of
Maiden hair, Agrimony, with the waters of Hopps, Buglosse, Borage and the
like. I sincerely protest, next unto God, I have Medicine.
cured very many quartaines by giving a potion of a little Treakle dissolved in
about some two ounces of Aqua vita; also sometimes by two or three grains of
musk dissolved in Muskadine, given at the beginning of a particular fit
toward the general declination of the disease, after general purgations the
humor and body being prepared, and the powers strong; And certainly an
inveterate Quartaine can scarce ever be discussed unless the body be much
heated with meats and medicines. Therefore it is not altogether to be
disproved which many say, that they have driven away a quartaine by taking a
draught of wine every day as soon as they came forth of their bed, in which
some leaves of Sage had bin infused all the night. Also it is good a little
before the fit to anoint all the spine of the back with oils heating all the
nervous parts, such as are the oil of Rue, Wallnuts, of the Peppers, mixing
therewith a little Aqua vitae. but for this purpose the oil of Castoreum which
has been boiled in an apple of Coloqui^tida, the Kernells taken out, upon
hot coals to the consumption of the half part, mixing therewith some little
quantity of the powders of Pepper, Pelitory of Spain and Euphorbium, is
excellent. Certainly such like Inunctions are good not only to mitigate the
vehemence of the terrible shaking, but also to provoke sweats; for because by
their humid heat they discuss this humor being dull and rebellious to the
expulsive faculty, for the Melancholy is as it were the dross and mudde of
the blood. Therefore if on the contrary the Quartaine fever shall be caused by
adust choler, we must hope for and expect a cure by refrigerating What
quartaines must be cured with refrigerating things.
and humective medicines, such as are Sorrel, Lettuce, Purflane, brothes of
the decoction of Cowcumbers, Gourds, Mellons and Pompions. For in this case if
any use hot medicines, he shall make this humor most obstinate by the resolving
of the subtiller parts. Thus Trallianus boasts that he has cured these kinds
of Quartane Fever by the only use of refrigerating Epithemaes being often
repeated a little before the beginning of the fit. And this is the sum of the
Cure of true and legitimate intermitting Fevers. That is, of those which are
caused by one simple humor, whereby the What bastard agues are and how they
must be cured.
Cure of those which they call bastard intermitting Fevers, may be easily
gathered and understood; as which are bred by a humor impure and not of one
kind, but mixed or composed by admixture of some other matter; for example,
according to the mixture of diverse humors Flegmatique and choleric, the
medicines must also be mixed, as if it were a confused kind of Fever of a
Quotidian and tertian; it must be cured by a medicine composed of things
evacuating phlegm and choler.

CHAP. XXXII. Of an Aneurisma, that is, the dilatation, or springing of an
Artery, vein, or Sinnew.
AN Aneurisma is a soft tumor yielding to the touch, made by the blood and
spirit powered forth under the flesh and Muscles, by the dilatation What it is.
or relaxation of an Artery. Yet the author of the definitions seems to call
any dilatation of any venous vessel by the name of an Aneurisma. Galen calls
an Aneurisma an opening made of the Anastomasis of an Artery: Also an Aneurisma
is made, when an Artery that is wounded closes too slowly, the substance which
is above it being in the mean time agglutinated, filled with flesh and
cicatrized, which does not seldom happen in opening of Arteries unskilfully
performed and negligently cured; therefore Aneurismaes are absolutely made by
the Anastomasis, springing, breaking, Erosion, and wounding of the Arteries.
These In what parts they chiefly happen.
happen in all parts of the body, but more frequently in the throat, especially
in women after a painful travail. For when as they more strongly strive to
hold their breath, for the more powerful expulsion of the birth, it happens
that the Artery is di ated and broken, whence follows an effusion of blood and
spirits under the skin. The signs are, a swelling one while great, another
small, with a pulsation and a color not varying from the native constitution
of the skin. It is a soft tumor, and so yielding to the impression of the
fingers that if it peradventure be small, it wholly vanishes, the Arterious
blood and spirits flying back into the body of the Artery, but presently
as soon as you take your fingers away, they return again with like celerity.
Some Aneurismaes do not only when they are pressed, but also of themselves
make a sensible hissing, if you lay your ear near to them, by reason of the
motion of the vital spirit rushing with great violence through the straitnes
of the passage.

Wherefore in Aneurismaes in which there is a great rupture of the Artery, such
a Prognosticke.
noise is not heard, because the spirit is carried through a larger passage.
Great Ane^rismaes under the Arm pits, in the Groines and in other parts
wherein there are large vessels, admit no cure, because so great an eruption
of blood and spirit often follows upon such an incision, that death prevents
both art and Cure. Which I A History.
observed a few years ago in a certain priest of Saint Andrews of the
Arches, M. John Maillet dwelling with the chief President Christopher de Thou.
Who having an Aneurisma at the setting on of the shoulder about the bigness of a
Wall-nut, I charged him, he should not let it be opened, for if it did, it
would bring him into manifest Aneurismaes must not rashly be opened.
danger of his life, and that it would be more safe for him, to break the
violence thereof with double clothes steeped in the juice of Nightshade and
Houselike, with new and whayey cheese mixed therewith: Or with Vnguentum de Bolo
or Emplastrum contra rupturam and such other refrigerating and astringent
medicines, if he would lay upon it a thin plate of Lead, and would use shorter
breeches that his doublet might serve to hold it too, to which he might fasten
his breeches instead of a swathe, and in the mean time he should eschew all
things which attenuate and inflame the blood, but especially he should keep
himself from all great straining of his voice. Although he had used this Diet
for a year, yet he could not so handle the matter but that the tumor
increased, which he observing goes to a Barber, who supposing the tumor to be
of the kind of vulgar inpostumes, applies to it in the Evening a Causticke
causing an Eschar so to open it. In the Morning such an abundance of blood
flowed forth from the tumor being opened, that he therewith astonished,
implores all possible aid, and bidds that I should be called to stay this his
great bleeding, and he repented that he had not followed my directions.
Wherefore I am called, but when I was scarce over the three should, he gave up
his ghost with his blood. Wherefore I diligently admonish the young Surgeon
that he do not rashly open How they must be cured.
Aneurismas unless they be small in anignoble part, and not endued with large
vessels, but rather let him perform the cure after this manner. Cut the
skin which lies over it until the Artery appear, and then separate it with
your knife from the particles about it, then thrust a blunt and crooked needle
with a thread in it under it, bind it, then cut it off and so expect the
falling off, of the thread of it self whiles nature covers the orifices of the
cut Artery with new flesh, then the residue of the cure may be performed after
the manner of simple wounds. The Aneurismaes which happen in These of the
inward parts incureable.
the internal parts are uncurable. Such as frequently happen to those who have
often had the unction and sweat for the cure of the French disease, because the
blood, being so attenuated and heated therewith that it cannot be contained in
the receptacles of the Artery, it distends it to that largeness as to hold a
man's fist; Which I have observed in the dead body of a certain Tailor, who by
an Aneurisma of the Ar^erious A History.
vein suddenly whilst he was playing at Tennis fell down dead, the vessel
being broken: his body being opened I found a great quantity of blood powered
forth into the Capacity of the Chest, but the body of the Artery was dilated to
that largeness I formerly mentioned, and the inner Coat thereof was bony. For
which cause within a while after I showed it to the great admiration of the
beholders in the Physicians Schole whilst I publicly dissected a body there;
the whilst he lived said he felt a beating and a great heat over all his body
by the force of the pulsation of all the Arteryes, by occasion whereof he
often swounded. Doctor Syluius the Kings professor of Physic at that time
forbad him the use of Wine, and wished him to use boiled water for his drink,
and Crudds and new Cheeses for his meat, and to apply them in form of
Cataplasmes upon the grieved and swollen part. At night he used a ptisan of
Barley meal and Poppy-seedes, and was purged now and then with a Clyster of
refrigerating and emollient things, or with Cassia alone, by which medicines
he said he found himself much better. The cause of such a bony constitution
of the Arteries by Aneurismaes is, for that the hot and fervid blood first
dilates the Coats of an Artery, then breaks them; which when it happens, it
then borrowes from the neighboring bodies a fit matter to restore the loosed
continuity thereof.

This matter whilst by little and little it is dried and hardened, it degenerats
into a Gristely or else a bony substance, just by the force of the same
material and efficient causes, by which stones are generated in the reins and
bladder. For the more terrestrial portion of the blood is dried and condensed
by the power of the unnatural heat contained in the part affected with an
Aneurismae; whereby it comes to pass that the substance added to the dilated
and broken Artery is turned into a body of a bony consistence. In which the
singular providence of nature, the handmaide of God is showed, as that which,
as it were by making and opposing a new wall or bancke, would hinder and break
the violence of the raging blood swelling with the abundance of the vital
spirits; unless any had rather to refer the cause of that hardness to the
continual application of refrigerating and astringent medicines. Which have
power to condensate and harden, as may not obscurely be gathered by the
writings of Galen. But beware you be not deceived by the forementioned signs;
For Lib. 4. Cap. ^lt. de praes, expuls^.
sometimes in large Aneurismaes you can perceive no pulsation, neither can you
force the blood into the Artery by the pressure of your fingers, either because
the quantity of such blood is greater than which can be contained in the
ancient receptacles of the A Caution in the knowing of Aneurismaes
Artery, or because it is condensate and concrete into Clods, whereupon wanting
the benefit of ventilation from the heart, it presently putrifies; Thence ensue
great pain, a Gangren, and mortification of the part, and lastly the death of
the Creature.

The End of the Seventh Book.
OF PARTICULAR TVMORS AGAINST NATVRE. THE EIGHT BOOK.
The Preface.
BEcause the Cure of diseases must be varied according to the variety of the
temper, not only of the body in general, but also of each part thereof; the
strength, figure, form, site, and sense thereof being taken into
consideration: I think it worth my pains, having already spoken of Tumors in
General, if I shall treat of them in particular which affect each part of the
body, beginning with those which assail the head. Therefore the Tumor either
affects the whole head, or else only some particle thereof, as the Eyes,
Ears, Nose, Gumms and the like. Let the Hydrocephalos, and Physocephalos be
examples of those tumors which possess the whole head.

CHAP. I. Of an Hydrocephalos or watery tumor which commonly affects the heads
of Infants.
THe Greeks call this disease Hydrocephalos, as it were a Dropsy of the What
it is.
Head, by a waterish humor; being a disease almost peculiar to Infants newly
borne. It has for an external cause the violent compression The causes.
of the head by the hand of the Midwife or otherwise at the birth, or by a
fall, contusion and the like. For hence comes a breaking of a vein or Artery,
and an effusion of the blood under the skin. Which by corruption becoming
whayish, lastly, degenerateth into a certain waterish humor. It has also an
inward cause, which is the abundance of serous and acride blood, which by its
tenuity and heat sweats through the Pores of the vessels, sometimes between
the Musculous skin of the head and the Pericranium, sometimes between the
Pericranium Differences by reason of place
and the skull, and sometimes between the skull and the membrane called Dura
matter, and otherwhiles in the ventricles of the brain.

The signs of it, contained in the space between the Musculous skin and the
Signs.
Pericranium, are a manifest tumor without pain, soft, and much yeeelding to
the pressure of the fingers. The Signs, when it remains between the
Pericranium and the skull, are for the most part like the forenamed, unless it
be that the Tumor is a little harder, and not so yielding to the finger, by
reason of the parts between it and the finger; And also there is somewhat more
sense of pain. But when it is in the space between the skull and Dura matter,
or in the ventricles of the Brain or the whole substance thereof, there is
dullness of the senses as of the sight and hearing; the tumor does not yield
to the touch, unless you use strong impression, for then it sincketh somewhat
down, especially in infants newly borne; who have their sculls almost as soft
as wax, and the junctures of their Sutures laxe, both by nature, as also by
accident, by reason of the humor contained therein moistening and relaxing all
the adjacent parts; the humor contained here lifts up the Scull somewhat more
high, especially at the meetings of the Sutures, which you may thus know,
because the Tumor being pressed, the humor flies back into the secret passages
of the brain.

To conclude, the pain is more vehement, the whole head more swollen, the
forehead stands somewhat further out, the eye is fixed and immovable, and also
weeps by reason of the serous humor sweating out of the brain.

Vesalius writes that he saw a girl of two years old, whose head was thicker
than A History.
any man's head by this kind of Tumor, and the Scull not bonie, but membranous,
as it uses to be in abortive birthes, and that there was nine pound of water
ran out of it.

A^ucrasis tells that he saw a child whose head grew every day bigger by reason
of the watery moisture contained therein, till at length the tumor became so
great, that his neck could not bear it neither standing nor sitting, so that
he died in a short time. I have observed and had in cure four children
troubled with this disease, one of which being dissected after it died, had a
brain no bigger than a Tennis Ball. But of a Tumor and humor contained within
under the Cranium, or Scull, I have seen none recover; but they are easily
healed of an external Tumor.

Therefore whether the humor lie under the Pericranium, or under the musculous
skin of the head, it must first be assailed with resolving medicines, but if it
cannot be thus overcome, you must make an incision, taking heed of the
Temporal Muscle, and thence press out all the humor, whether it resemble the
washing of flesh newly killed, or blackish blood, or congealed or knotted
blood, as when the tumor bath been caused by contusion; then the wound must be
filled with dry lint, and covered with double boulsters, and lastly bound with
a fitting ligature.

CHAP. II. Of a Polypus, being an eating disease in the Nose.
THe Polypus is a Tumor of the Nose against nature, commonly arising from the
Os Ethm^ides of spungye bone. It is so called, because it resembles the The
reason of the name.
fect of a Sea Polypus in figure, and the flesh thereof in consistence. This
Tumor stops the Nose, intercepting and hindering the liberty of speaking and
blowing the Nose. Celsus says the Polypus is a caruncle or Excrescence one
while white, another while reddish, which adheres to the bone of the Nose, and
sometimes Lib. 6. Cap. 8.
fills the Nosthrils hanging toward the lips, sometimes it descends back
through that hole, by which the spirit descends from the Nose to the throtle;
it grows so that it may he seen behind the Uvula, and often strangles a man
by stopping his breath. There are five kinds thereof, the first is, a soft
membrane, long and thin like the relaxed and depressed Uvula, hanging from the
middle gristle of the nose, being filled with a The differences thereof.
Phlegmatic and viscide humor. This in exspiration hangs out of the Nose, but
is drawn in and hid by inspiration; it makes one snaffle in their speech and
snort in their sleep. The second, has hard flesh, bred of Melancholy blood
without adustion, which obstructing the nosthrils intercepts the respiration
made by that part. The third, is flesh hanging from the Gristle, round, and
soft, being the offspring of Phlegmatic blood. The fourth is an hard Tumor,
like flesh, which when it is touched yields a sound like a stone; it is
generated of Melancholic blood dried, being somewhat of the nature of a
Scirrhus confirmed and without pain.

The fifth is as it were composed of many cancrous ulcers spread over the
transverse surface of the gristle.

Of all these sorts of Polypi, some are not ulcerated, others ulcerated, which
send forth a stinking and strong smelling filth. Such of them as are painful,
hard, Which of them admit no manual operation.
resisting, and which have a livide, or leaden color, must not be touched with
the hand, because they savor of the Nature of a Cancer, as into which they often
degenerate; yet by reason of the pain which oppresses more violently, you may
use the Anodyne medicines formerly described in a Cancer, such as this
following.

. Olei de vitell. ovorum ij, Lytharg. auri, and Tuthiae praep. an. j. succi
plant. An Anodyne.
and solani an. ssj. Lapid. haematit. and camphorae, an ss. Let them be wrought
a long time in a leaden mortar, and so make a medicine to be put into the
nosethrills. Those which are soft, loose and without pain, are sometimes
curable, being plucked away with an instrument made for that purpose, or else
wasted by actual cauteries put in through a pipe, so that they touch not the
sound part; or by potentiall cauteries, as Agyptiacum composed of equal parts
of all the simples with vitrioll which has a faculty to waste such like
flesh. Aquafortis and oil of vitrioll have the same faculty, for these take
away a Polypus by the roots; for if any part thereof remain Why it must be
taken clear away.
it will breed again. But Cauteries and acride medicines must be put into the
nostrills with this Caution, that in the mean time cold repelling and
astringent medicines be applied to the nose and parts about it to assuage the
pain, and hinder the inflammation. Such as are Vnguentum de bolo, and
vnguentum nutritum, whites of Eggs beat with Rose leaves, and many other
things of the like nature.

CHAP. III. Of the Parotides that is, Certain swellings about the Ears.
THe Parotis is a Tumor against nature, affecting the Glandules and those What
it is.
parts seated behind and about the Ears, which are called the Emunctories of
the brain; for these because they are loose and spungy, are fit to receive the
excrements thereof. Of these some are critical, the matter of the disease
somewhat disgested being sent thither by the force of nature. The differences.
Their signs and Symptoms.
Others Symptomaticall, the excrements of the brain increased in quantity or
quality rushing thither of their own accord. Such abscesses often have great
inflammation joined with them, because the biting humor which flows thither is
more vitiated in quality than in quantity. Besides also they often cause great
pain, by reason of the distention of the parts endued with most exquisit
sense, as also by reason of a Nerve of the fifth Conjugation spread over these
parts; as also of the neighboring membranes of the brain, by which means the
patient is troubled with the Headache and all his face becomes swollen. Yet many
times this kind of Tumor uses to be raised by a tough, viscous, and gross
humor.

This disease does more grievously afflict young men than old; it commonly
Prognosticke.
brings a Fever and watching. It is difficult to be cured, especially when it
is caused by a gross, tough, and viscide humor, sent thither by the Crisis.

The cure must be performed by diet, which must be contrary to the quality of
the humor in the temper and consistence of the meats. If the infla^mation and
redness be great, The cure.
which indicate abundance of blood, Phlebotomie will be profitable, yea very
necessary. But here we must not use the like judgment in application of local
medicines Lib. 3. de compmed. see. Locol. Hip. aph. 21 lib. 1.
as we do in others tumors, as Galen admonishes us; that is, we must not
use repercussives at the beginning, especially if the abscesse be critical;
for so, we should infringe or foreflow the endeavors of nature forcibly freeing
it self from the morbifique matter. But we must much less repel or drive it
back if the matter which has flowed thither be venenate, for so the reflow
thereof to the noble parts would prove mortal. Wherefore the Surgeon shall
rather assist nature in attracting and drawing forth that humor. Yet if the
defluxion shall be so violent, if the pain so fierce that thence there may be
fear of watchings and a Fever, which may deject the powers, Galen thinks it
will be expedient with many resolving medicines to mix some repelling.
Wherefore at the beginning let such a Cataplasme be applied.

. Far. hord. and sem. lin. ana. ij. coquantur cum mulsa aut decocto cham.
addendo but. recen. and olei cham. ana j fiat Cataplasma. And the following
ointment will also be good.

. But. recen. ij, oles cham. and lilior. an j. unguen. de Althea ss. cerae
parum: make an Gentle resolving medicines
ointment to be applied with moist and greasy wool to mitigate the pain,
also somewhat more strong discussing and resolving medicines will be profitable,
as:

. Rad. altheae and bryon. an. ij. fol. rutae, puleg. orig. an. m. j. flo.
chamaem. melil. an. p. j. Stronger resolvers.
coquantur in hydromelite, pistentur, traijciantur, addendo farin. faenugraec.
orobi, an. j. pal. Ireos, cham. melilot. an. ij. olet aneth. rutac. an. j. fiat
cataplasma. But if you determine to resolve it any more, you may use Emplastrum
Oxycroceum and Melilot-Plaister. If the humor does there concrete and grow
hard, you must betake you to the medicines which were prescribed in the Chapter
of the Scirrhus; but if it tend to suppuration, you shall apply the following
medicine.

. Rad. liliorum and ceparum sub cineribus coct. an. iij. Vitell. over. number. ij.
axung. suilla and unguent. basilicon, an. j. far. sem. lini iss. fiat
Cataplasma. But if the matter do A Ripening medicine.
so require, let the tumor be opened as we have formerly prescribed.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Epulis, or overgrowing of the flesh of the Gums.
THe Epulis is a fleshy excrescence of the Gums between the teeth, which is by
little and little often times increased to the bigness of an Egg, so that it both
What it is.
hinders the speech and eating; it casts forth salivous and stinking filth,
and not seldom degenerates into a Cancer, which you may understand by the
propriety of the color, pain and other accidents; for then you must by no
means touch it with your hand. But that which does not torment the Patient
with pain, may The Symputomes.
be plucked away; and let this be the manner thereof.

Let it be tied with a double thread, which must be straiter twitched until
such time as it fall off; when it shall fall away, the place must be burnt with
a cautery put through a trunk or pipe, or with Aqua fortis, or oil of
Vitrioll, but with great care The Chirutgicall cure.
that the sound parts adjoining there to be not hurt, for if so be that it be
not burnt, it usually returns.

I have often by this means taken away such large tumors of this kind, that
they hung out of the mouth in no small bigness, to the great dissiguring of the
face, which when as no Surgeon durst touch, because the flesh looked livide,
I ventured upon because they were free from pain; and by taking them away and
cauterizing the place, I perfectly healed them; not truly suddenly and at once;
for although I b^ the place after dissection; yet nevertheless they sprung up
again, because a certain portion of the bone and sockets in which the Teeth
stand fastened, were become rotten I have often observed such like flesh by
continuance of time to have turned into a gristlely and bony substance.
Wherefore the cure must be begun as speedily as may be; Why the eure must not be
deferred.
for being but little, and having fastened no deep roots, it is more easily
taken away, being then only filled with a viscide humor, which in success of
time is hardened, and makes the taking away thereof more difficult.

CHAP. V. Of the Ranula.
THere is ofttimes a tumor under the tongue, which takes away the liberty The
Reason why it is so called.
of pronuntiation, or speech; wherefore the Greeks call it Batrachium, the
Latins Ranula, because such as have this disease of the tongue, seem to
express their minds by croaking rather than by speaking. It is caused by the
falling down of a cold, moiste, gross, tough The Cause.
viscide and Phlegmatic matter, from the brain upon the tongue, which matter
in color and consistence resembles the white of an egg, yet sometimes it
looks of a Citrine or yellowish color.

That you may safely perform the cure, you must open the Tumor rather with The
Cute.
a cautery or hot Iron, than with a Knife, for otherwise it will return
again. The manner of opening of it must be thus. You shall get a bended hollow
and perforated iron plate with a hole in the midst, and making the patient to
hold open his mouth, you shall so fit it, that the hole may be upon the part
which must be opened. Then there you must open it with an hot Iron, for so you
shall hurt no part of the mouth which is whole; but when you are ready to burn
it, by thrusting your thumb under the Patients Chin, you may somewhat elevate
the Tumor, whereby you may open it with more certainty; when it is opened you
must thrust out the matter contained therein, and then wash the patients mouth
with some barley water, honey, and Sugar of Roses; for so the ulcer will be
safely and quickly healed.

The deliniation of the Iron plate and crooked actual Cautery.


CHAP. VI. Of the swelling of the Glandules, or Almonds of the Through ate.
NAture at the jaws near the roots of the Tongue, has placed two Why the
Glandules are called Almonds.
Glandules opposite to one another; in figure and magnitude like to Almonds,
whence also they have their name, Their office is to receive the spittle
falling down from the brain, both least that the too Their use.
violent falling down of the humor should hinder the tongue in speaking, as
also that the tongue might always have moisture, as it were laid up in store,
lest by continual speaking it should grow dry and fail. For thus this spittle
being consumed by feverish heats, the patients are scarce able to speak,
unless they first moisten their tongue by much washing of their mouth.

These Glandules because they are seated in an hot and moist place, are very
subject The Cause of their tumor.
to inflammations; for there flows into these ofttimes together with the
blood, a great quantity of crude, phlegmatic and viscous humors, whence
arises a tumor; which is not seldom occasioned by drinking much and that
vaporous wine, by too much Gluttony, and staying abroad in the open air.

Swallowing is painful and trouble some to the Patient, and commonly he has
a Symptoms.
Fever. Ofttimes the neighboring Muscles of the Throtle and neck are so
swollen together with these Glandules, that (as it usually happens in the
Squinzye) the passage of the breath and air is stopped, and the Patient
strangled.

We resist this imminent danger by purging and blood-letting, by applying
Cupping-Glasses Cure.
to the Neck and shoulders, by frictions and ligatures of the extreme parts,
and by washing and gargling the mouth and throat with astringent gargarismes.
But if they come to suppuration, you must with your incision Knife make way for
the evacuation of the Pus, or Matter; but if on the contrary, these things
performed according to art, defluxion be increased, and there is present danger
of death by stopping and intercepting the breath, for the shunning so great and
imminent danger, the top or upper part of the Aspera arteria or Weazon must be
opened, in that place Extreme diseases must have extreme remedies.
where it uses to stand most out; and it may be done so much the safer, because
the jugular veins, and arteryes are furthest distant from this place, and for
that this place has commonly little flesh upon it. And that the incision may be
the fitlyer made, the patient must be wished to bend his head back, that so
the Artery may be the more easily come to by the instrument; then you shall make
an incision overtwhart with a crooked knife between two rings (not hurting nor
touching the Gristlely substance) that is to How you must open the Wearon.
say, the membrane which ties together the Gristlely rings being only cut; you
shall then judge that you have made the incision large enough, when you shall
perceive the breath to break out by the wound; the wound must be kept open so
long, until the danger of suffocation be past; and then it must be sowed up
not touching the Gristle. But if the lips of the wound shall be hard and
callous, they must be lightly scarified, that so they may become bloody for
their easier agglutination and union, as we shall show more at large in the
cure of Hare lips. I have had many in cure, who have recovered, that have had
their Weazon together with the Gristlely rings thereof cut with a great wound,
as we shall note when we shall come to treat of the cure of the wounds of
that part.

CHAP. VII. Of the inflammation and relaxation of the Uvula, or Columella.
THe Uvula is a little body, spongy and somewhat sharpened to the form of a
pine apple, hanging even down from the upper and inner part of the What the
Uvula is, and what the use thereof. The Cause of the swelling thereof.
palate, so to break the force of the Air drawn in, in breathing and carried
to the Lungs, and to be as a quill to form and tune the voice. It often grows
above measure by receiving moisture falling down from the brain, becoming
sharp by little and little from a broader and more swollen Basis. Which thing
causes many Symptoms; for by the continual irritation of the distilling humor
the Symptoms
Cough is caused, which also hinders the sleep, and intercepts the liberty of
speech; but also by hindering respiration the patients cannot sleep unless
with open mouth: they are exercised with a vain endeavoring to swallow (having
as it were a morsel sticking in their jaws) and are in danger of being
strangled.

This disease must be resisted and affailed by purging, bleeding, Cupping,
taking of The Cure.
chysters, using astringent Gargles, and a convenient diet; but if it cannot
thus be overcome, the cure must be tried by a causticke of Aqua fortis, which I
have diverse times done with good success. But if it cannot be so done, it will
be better to put to your hand, than through idleness to suffer the patient to
remain in imminent and deadly The Cure by Surgery.
danger of strangling; yet in this there must very great caution be used; for
the Surgeon shall not judge the Uvula fit to be touched with an instrument
or caustic, which is swollen with much enflamed, or black blood after the
manner of a Cancer; but he shall boldly put to his hand if it be longish, grow
small by little and little into a sharp, loose and soft point; if it be neither
exceeding red, neither swollen with too much blood but whitish and without
pain. Therefore that you may more easily and safely cut away, that which
redounds and is superfluous, desire the patient to sit in a light place, and
hold his mouth open; then take hold of the top of the Uvula with your sizers,
and cut away as much thereof as shall be thought unprofitable. Other-wise you
shall bind it with the instrument here under described; the invention of this
instrument is to be ascribed to Honoratus Tastellanus that diligent and learned
man, the Kings Physician in ordinary, and the chief Physician of the Queen
mother; Which also may be used in binding of Polypi and warts in the neck of
the Womb.

The Deliniation of constrictory rings fit to twitch, or bind the Columella,
with a twisted thread.
A. Shows the ring whose upper part is somewhat hollow.

B. A double waxed thread, which is couched in the hollownesse of the ring, and
has a running, or loose knot upon it.

C. An iron rod, into the eye whereof the forementioned double thread is put,
and it is to twitch the Columella when as much thereof is taken hold of, as is
unprofitable, and so to take it away without any flux of blood. When you would
straiten the thread, draw it again through this iron rod, and so strain it as
much as you shall think good, letting the end of the thread, hang out of the
mouth. But every day it must be twitched harder than other, until it fall away
by means thereof, and so the part and patient be restored to health. I have
deliniated three of these instruments, that you may use which you will, as
occasion shall be offered.



A Figure of the Speculum oris, by which the mouth is held and kept open,
whilst the Surgeon is busied in the cutting away or binding the Uvula.


But if an eating ulcer shall associate this relaxation of the Uvula, together
with a flux of blood, then it must be burnt and seared with an hot iron, so
thrust into a Trunk, or Pipe with an hole in it, that no sound part of the
mouth may be offended therewith.

A hollow Trunk with a hole in the side, with the hot iron inserted, or put
therein.


CHAP. VIII. Of the Angina, or Squinzy.
THe Squinancy, or Squinzy, is a swelling of the jaws, which hinders the
entering of the ambient air into the weazon, and the vapors and spirit What it
is.
from passage forth, and the meat also from being swallowed. There are three
differences thereof. The first torments the patient with great pain, no
swelling being outwardly apparent, by reason the morbificke humor lies The
differences. The first kind.
hid behind the almonds or Glandules at the Vertebrae of the neck, so that it
cannot be perceived, unless you hold down the tongue with a spatula or the
Speculum oris, for so you may see the redness and tumor there lying hid. The
patient cannot The Symptoms.
draw his breath, nor swallow down meat, nor drink; his tongue, (likes
Gray-hounds after a course,) hangs out of his mouth, and he holds his mouth
open that so he may the more easily draw his breath; to conclude, his voice is
as it were drowned in his jaws and nose; he cannot lie upon his back, but
lying is forced to fit, so to breathe more freely: and because the passage is
stopped, the drink flies out at his nose; the eyes are fiery and swollen, and
standing out of their orb. Those which are thus affected are often suddenly
suffocated, a foame rising about their mouths.

The second difference is said to be that, in which the tumor appears
inwardly, The second kind.
but little or scarce any thing at all outwardly, the tongue, Glandules, and
jaws appearing some what swollen.

The third being least dangerous of them all, causes a great swelling
outwardly, but The third.
little inwardly.

The Causes are either internal, or external. The external are a stroke,
splinter The Causes:
or the like things sticking in the Throat, or the excess of extreme cold, or
heat. The internal causes are a more plentiful defluxion of the humors either
from the whole body or the brain, which participate of the nature either of
blood, choler or phlegm, but seldom of Melancholy. The signs by which the
kind and commixture may be known, have been declared in the general
treatise of tumors. The Squincy is more dangerous, by how much the humor is
less apparent within and without. That is less dangerous which shows it
self outwardly, because such an one shuts not up the ways of the meat, nor
breath. Some dye of a Squincy in twelve hours others in two, four or seven
days. Those (says Hippocrates) Hip. sect. 3. prog. z. Aphor. ^0. sect. 5.
which escape the Squincy, the disease passes to the lungs, and they dye within
seven days; but if they escape these days, they are suppurated; but also often
times this kind of disease is terminated by disappearing, that is, by an
obscure reflux of the humor into some noble part, as into the Lungs (whence the
Empyema proceeds) and into other principal parts, whose violating brings
inevitable death; sometimes by resolution, otherwise by suppuration.

The way of Resolution is the more to be desired; it happens when the matter is
small, and that subtle, especially if the Physician shall draw blood by opening
a vein, and the patient use fitting Gargarismes. A Critical Squincy diverse
times proves deadly by reason of the great falling down of the humor upon the
throtle, by which the passage of the breath is suddenly shut up. Brothes must
be used made with Capons, and Veale, seasoned with Lettuce, Purslaine, Sorrel,
and the cold seeds.

If the Patient shall be some what weak, let him have potched Eggs, and Barley
Dict.
Creames, the Barley being first boiled with Raisons in water and Sugar, and
other meats of this kind. Let him be forbidden wine, in stead where of he may
use Hydromelita, and Hydrosachara (that is, drinks made of water and Honey, or
water and Sugar) as also the Syrupes of dried Roses, of Violets, Sorrel and
Limons, and others of this kind. Let him avoid too much sleep. But in the
mean time the Physician must be careful of all, because this disease is of
their kind, which brook no delays. Wherefore let the Basilica be presently
opened, on that side the tumor is Cure.
the greater; then within a short time after the same day, for evacuation of
the conjunct matter, let the vein under the tongue be opened; let
cupping-Glasses be applied, sometimes with scarification, sometimes without, to
the neck and shoulders, and let frictions and painful Ligatures be used to
the extreme parts. But let the humor impact in the part be drawn away by
glisters and sharp suppositories. Whilst the matter is in defluxion, let the
mouth without delay be washed with astringent gargarismes to hinder the
defluxion of the humor, least by its sudden falling down it kill the
Patient, as it often happens, all the Physicians care and diligence Repelling
Gargarismes.
not withstanding. Therefore let the mouth be frequently washed with Oxycrate,
or such a gargarisme: Pomorum silvest. nu. iiij. sumach, Rosar. rub. an. m. ss.
berber. ij. let them be all boiled with sufficient quantity of water to the
consumption of the half, adding thereunto of the wine of sour Pomegranats
iiij. of diamoron ij, let it be a little more boiled and make a gargle according
to art. And there may be other Gargarismes made of the waters of Plantaine,
Nightshade, Verjuice, Iulep of Roses and the like. But if the matter of the
defluxion shall be Phlegmatic, Alume, Pomgranate pill, Cypress nuts, and a
little Vinegar may be safely added. But on the contrary, repercussives must not
be outwardly applied, but rather Lenitives, where by the external parts may be
relaxed and rarefied, and so the way be open either for the diffusing or
resolving the portion of the humor. You shall know the humor to begin to be
resolved, if the Fever leave the patient, if he swallow, speak and breathe
more freely, if he sleep quietly, and the pain begin to be much aswaged.
Therefore then natures endeavor must be helped by applying resolving medicines,
or else by using suppuratives inwardly and outwardly, if the matter seem to
turn into Pus. Therefore let gargarismes be made of the roots Ripening
Gargarismes.
of March-Mallowes, Figgs, Iujubes, damask Prunes, Dates, perfectly boiled in
water. The like benefit may be had by Gargarismes of Cowes milk with Sugar, by
oil of sweet Almonds, or Violets warm, for such things help forward
suppuration and aswage pain; let suppurating cataplasmes be applied outwardly
to the neck and throat, and the parts be wrapped with wool moistened with
oil of Lillyes. When the Physician shall perceive that the humor is perfectly
turned into pus, let the patients mouth be opened with the Speculum oris, and
the abscesse opened with a crooked and long incision knife; then let the mouth
be now and then washed with clensing gargles; as. Aquae hordej lib. ss. mellis
ros. and sir. rosar. sic. an j. fiag gargarisma. Detergent Gargarisma.
Also the use of aenomel, that is wine, and Honey will be fit for this purpose.
The ulcer being cleansed by these means, let it be cicatrized with a little
roch-Alume added to the former gargarismes.

The Figure of an incision knife opened out of the hafte, which serves for a
sheath thereto.


CHAP. IX. Of the Bronchocele, or Rupture of the throat.
THat which the French call Goetra, that the Greeks call Bronchocele, the
Latins The reason of the name.
Gutturis Hernia, that is, the Rupture of the throat. For it is a round tumor
of the throat, the matter whereof coming from within outward, is contained
between the skin and weazon; it proceeds in weomen from the same cause as an
Aneurisma.

But this general name of Bronchocele undergoes many differences, for
sometimes The differences.
it retains the nature of Melicerides, other whiles of Steatom'as, Atheroma's
or Aneurisma's, in some there is found a fleshy substance having some small
pain; some of these are small, others so great, that they seem almost to
cover all the throatt; some have a Cyste, or bag, others have no such thing;
all how many so ever they be, and what end they shall have, may be known by
their proper signs; these which shall be cureable, may be opened with an
actual or potentiall cautery, or with The Care.
an incision knife. Hence if it be possible, let the matter be presently
evacuated, but if it cannot be done at once, let it be performeed at diverse
times, and discussed by fit remedies, and lastly let the ulcer be consolidated
and cicatrized.

CHAP. X. Of the Pleurisy.
THe Pleurisy is an inflammation of the membrane, investing the ribs, What
it is.
caused by subtle and choleric blood, springing upwards with great violence
from the hollow vein into the Axygos, and thence into the intercostall veins,
and is at length powered forth into the empty spaces of the intercostall
muscles, and the mentioned membrane. Being contained there, if it tend to
suppuration, it commonly infers a pricking pain, a Fever and difficulty of
breathing. This suppurated blood is purged and evacuated one while Of a
Pleurisy coming to suppuration.
by the mouth; the Lungs sucking it, and so casting it into the Weazon, and so
into the mouth, otherwhiles by urine, and sometimes by stool.

But if nature being too weak, cannot expectorate the purulent blood poured
forth into the capacity of the Chest the disease is turned into an Empyema,
wherefore the Surgeon must then be called, who beginning to reckon from
below upwards, may Of the change there of into an Empyema.
make a vent between the third and fourth true and legitimate ribs; and that
must be done either with an actual or potentiall cautery, or with a sharp
knife drawn upwards Of the apertion of the side in an Empyema
toward the back, but not downwards, lest the vessels should be violated
which are disseminated under the rib. This apertion may be safely and easily
performed by this actual caurtry; it is perforated with four holes, through
one whereof there is a pin put higher or lower according to the depth and
manner of your incision: then the point thereof is thrust through a plate
afiron perforated also in the midst, into the part designed by the Physician,
lest the wavering hand might peradventure touch, and so hurt the other parts
not to be meddled withal. This same plate must be somewhat hollowed, that so it
might be more easily fitted to the gibbous side, and bound by the corners on
the contrary side with four strings. Wherefore I have thought good here to
express the figures thereof.

The Figure of an actual cantery with its plate fit to be used in a pleurisy.


But if the patient shall have a large body, Chest and ribs, you may divide and
perforate the ribs themselves with a Trepan; howsoever the apertion be made,
the pus or matter must be evacuated by little and little at several times; and
the capacity of the Chest cleansed from the purulent matter by a detergent
injection of vj ounces of Barley water, and ij honey of Roses, and other the like
things mentioned at large in our cure of wounds.

CHAP. XI. Of the Dropsy.
THe Dropsy is a Tumor against nature by the abundance of a waterish What the
Dropsy is.
humor, of flatulencies, or Phlegm, gathered one while in all the habit of
the body, otherwhiles in some part, and that especially in the capacity of the
belly between the Peritonaeum and entrails. From this distinction of places
and matters there arise diverse kinds of Dropses. First that Dropsy which fills
that space of the belly, is either moist or dry. The The differences thereof.
moist is called the Ascites, by reason of the similitude it has with a
leather bottle, or Borachio, because the waterish humor is contained in that
capacity, as it were in such a vessel.

The dry is called the Tympanites, or Timpany, by reason the belly swollen with
wind, sounds like a (Tympanum) that is, a Drum. But when the whole habit of
the body is distended with a Phlegmatic humor, it is called Anasarca or
Leucophlegmatia. The Symptoms.
In this last kind of Dropsy the lower parts first swell, as which by reason
of their site are more subject to receive defluxions, and more remote from the
fountain of the native heat; wherefore if you press them down, the print of
your finger will remain sometime after; the patients face will become pale and
puffed up, whereby it may be distinguished from the two other kinds of Dropsy.
For in them first the belly, then by a certain consequence the thighs and
feet do swell. There are besides also particular Dropsies contained in the
strait bounds of certain places, such are the Hydrocephalos in the head; the
Bronchochele in the throat; the Pleurocele in the Chest; the Hydrocele in the
Scrotum, or Cod; and so of the The Causes.
rest. Yet they all arise from the same cause; that is, the weakness or defect
of the altering or concocting faculties, especially of the liver, which has
been caused by a Scyrrbus, or any kind of great distemper, chiefly cold,
whether it happen primarily, or secondarily by reason of some hot distemper
dissipating the native and inbred heat, such a Dropsy is uncureable; or else
it comes by consent of some other higher or lower part; for if in the Lungs,
Midriffe, or Reins there be any distemper, or disease bred, it is easily
communicated to the gibbous part of the Liver by the branches of the hollow
vein, which run thither. But if the mischief proceed from the Spleen,
Stomach, Mesentery, Guts, especially the Iejunum and Ileum, it creeps into the
hollow side of the Liver by the meseraicke veins, and How diverse diseases
turn into Dropsies.
other branches of the Vena porta or Gate-veine. For thus such as are troubled
with the Asthma, ptisicke, Spleen, Iaundise, and also the Frenzy, fall into
a Dropsy.

Lastly, all such as have the menstruall or haemorrhoidall blood suppressed or
too immoderatly flowing contrary to their custom, either overwhelmes,
diminishes or extinguisheth the native heat; no otherwise than fire, which is
suffocated by too great a quantity of wood; or dies and is extinguished for
want thereof. We must look for the same from the excrements of the belly or
bladder, cast forth either too sparingly or too immoderatly: Or by too large
quantity of meats too cold, and rashly devoured without any order; To conclude
by every default of external causes, through which occasion, error may happen,
in diet or exercise.

The Ascites is distinguished from the two other kinds of Dropsies, both by the
The signs of an Ascites.
magnitude of the efficient cause, as also by the violence of the Symptoms, as
the dejected appetite, thirst, and swelling of the Abdomen. And also when the
body is moved or turned upon either side, you may hear a sound as of the
jogging of water in a vessel half full. Lastly the humor is diversely driven
upwards or downwards, according to the turning of the body and compression of
the Abdomen; It also causes The Symptoms.
various Symptoms by pressure of the parts to which it flows. For it causes
difficulty of breathing and the cough by pressing the Midriffe; by sweating
through into the capacity of the Chest it causes like Symptoms as the
Empyema. Besides also the Patients often seem, as it were, by the ebbing and
flowing of the waterish humor, one while to be carried to the skies, and
another whiles to be drowned in the water; which I have learnt not by reading
of any author, but by the report of the patients themselves. But if these
waterish humors be fallen down to the lower parts, they suppress the
excrements of the Gutts and bladder by pressing and straitning the passages.
When the patient lies on his back the tumor seems less, because it is spread
on both sides; On the contrary when he stands or sits, it seems greater, for
that all the humor is forced or driven into the lower belly, whence he feels
a heavines in the Pecten or share. The upper parts of the body fall away by
defect of the blood fit for nourishment in quality and consistence, but the
lower parts swell by the flowing down of the Serous and watrish humor to them.
The pulse is little, quick, and hard with tention.

This disease is of the kind of Chronicall or long diseases; wherefore it is
scarce, Prognostickes.
or never cured, especially in those who have it from their mothers womb, who
have the Action of their Stomach depraved, and those who are cachecticke, old,
and lastly all such as have the natural faculty languishing and faulty.

On the contrary young and strong men, especially if they have no Fever, and
finally all who can endure labor and those exercises which are fit for curing
this disease, easily recover, principally if they use a Physician before the
water which is gathered together do putrify and infect the bowels by its
contagion.

CHAP. XII. Of the cure of the Dropsy.
THe beginning of the cure must be with gentle and mild medicines; neither
must we come to a Paracentesis, unless we have formerly used and tried these.
Therefore it shall be the part of the Physician to prescribe a drying diet, and
such medicines as carry away water, both by stool and Hip. lib. 4. de acut.
and lib. de intern.
urine. Hippocrates ordaines this powder for Hydropicke persons., Canthar.
ablatis capitib. and alis ss. Comburentur in furno, and fiat pulvis; of which
administer two grains in white wine, for nature helped by this, and the like
remedies has not seldom been seen to have cured the dropsy. But that we
may hasten the cure, it will be availeable to stir up the native heat of the
part by application of those medicines which have a discussing force: as
bags, baths, ointments, and emplaisters. Bags.
Let bags be made of dry and harsh Bran, Oats, Salt, Sulphur, being made
hot, or for want of them, of Sander, or Ashes often heated.

The more effectual baths are salt, nitrous, and sulphurous waters, whether by
Bathes.
Nature or Art, that is, prepared by the dissolution of Salt niter, and
Sulphur; to which, if Rue, Marjarom, the leaves of Fennel, and tops of Dill,
of Staechas, and the like be added, the business will go better forwards. Let
the ointments be made Liniments
of the oils of Rue, Dill, Baies, and Squills, in which some Euphorbium,
Pellitory of Spain, or Pepper have been boiled. Let plasters be made of
Franckinsence, Emplaisters.
Myrrh, Turpintine, Costus, Baiberies, English galengall, honey, the dung of
Oxen, Pigeons, Goats, Horses, and the like, which also may be applied by
themselves. If the disease continue, we must come to Synapismes and Phoenigmes,
that is, to rubrifying Vesicatories.
and vesicatory medicines. When the blisters are raised, they must be anointed
again, that so the water may by little and little flow so long until all the
humor be exhausted, and the patient restored to health.

Galen writes, the Husbandmen in Asia, when they carried wheat out of the
country Gal. lib. defacul. nature. (...).
into the city in Carrs, when they will steal away and not be taken, hid
some stone juggs filled with water in the midst of the wheat; for that will
draw the moisture through the juggs into it self, and increase both the
quantity and weight. When certain pragmaticall Physicians had read this, they
thought that wheat had force to draw out the water, so that if any sick of the
Dropsy should be buried in a heap of wheat, it would draw out all the water.

But if the Physician shall profit nothing by these means, he must come to the
exquisitely chief remedy, that is, to Paracentesis. Of which because the
opinions of Diverse opinions of Paracentesis, or opening of the belly. Reasons
against it.
the ancient Physicians have been diverse, we will produce and explain them.

Those therefore which disallow Paracentesis, conclude it dangerous for three
reasons. The first is, because by pouring out the contained water, together
with it, you dissipate and resolve the spirits, and consequently the natural,
vital, and animal faculties; another opinion is, because the Liver wanting
the water by which formerly it was borne up; thence forward hanging down by
its weight, depresseth and draws downwards the Midriffe and the whole Chest,
whence a dry cough, and a difficulty of breathing proceed. The third is,
because the substance of the Peritonaeum, as that which is nervous, cannot be
pricked or cut without danger, neither can that which is pricked or cut be
easily agglutinated and united, by reason of the spermatique and bloudlesse
nature thereof. Erasistratus moved by these reasons condemned Erasistratus his
Reasons against it.
Paracentesis as deadly: also he persuaded that it was unprofitable for these
following reasons, viz. because the water powered forth, does not take away with
it the cause of the Dropsy, and the distemper and hardness of the Liver, and
of the other bowels, whereby it comes to pass that by breeding new waters they
may easily again fall into the Dropsy. And then the fever, thirst, the hot
and dry distemper of the bowels, all which were mitigated by the touch of the
included water, are aggravated by the absence thereof, being powered forth:
which thing seems to have moved Avicen and Gordonius that he said none; the
other said very few lived after the Paracentesis: but the refutation of all
such reasons is very easy.

For, for the first Galen inferres, that harmefull dissipation of spirits, and
resolving Reasons for it.
the faculties happens, when the Paracentesis is not diligently, and
artificially performed. As in which the water is presently powered forth; truly
if that reason have any validity, Phlebotomy must seem to be removed far
from the number of wholesome remedies, as whereby the blood is powered forth,
which has far more pure and subtle spirits, than those which are said to be
diffused and mixed with the Dropsie-waters.

But that danger which the second reason threatens shall easily be avoided; the
patient being desired to lie upon his back in his bed, for so the Liver will
not hang down. But for the third reason, the fear of pricking the
Peritonaeum, is childish: for those evils which follow upon wounds of the
nervous parts, happen by reason of the exquisite sense of the part, which in
the Peritonaeum ill affected and altered by the contained water, is either none
or very small. But reason and experience teach, many nervous parts, also the
very membranes themselves being far removed from a fleshie substance, being
wounded, admit cure; certainly much more the Peritonaeum, as that which
adheres so straightly to the muscles of the Abdomen, that the dissector cannot
separate it from the flesh, but with much labor. But the reason which seems
to argue the unprofitablenesse of the Paracentesis is refelled by Lib. 3. Cap.
21.
the authority of Celsus. I, says he, am nor ignorant that Erasistratus did
not like Paracentesis; for he throught the Dropsy to be a disease of the
Liver, and so that it must be cured, and that the water was in vain let forth,
which the Liver being vitiated, might grow again. But first this is not the
fault of this bowell alone, and then although the water had his original from
the Liver, yet unless the water which staieth there contrary to nature being
evacuated, it hurts both the Liver, and the rest of the inner parts, whilst
it either increases their hardness, or at the least keeps it hard, and yet
notwithstanding it is fit the body be cured. And although the once letting
forth of the humor profit nothing, yet it make way for medicines, which while
it was there contained, it hindered. But this serous, salt, and corrupt humor,
is so far from being able to mitigate a Fever and thirst, that on the
contrary, it increases them. And also it augmenteth the cold distemper,
whilst by its abundance it overwhelmes and extinguisheth the native heat. But
the authority of Caelius Aurelianus that most noble Physician, though a
Methodicke, may satisfy Avicen and Gordonius. They, says he, which dare
avouch that all such as have the water let out by opening their belly have
died, do lie; for we have seen many recover by this kind Lib. de morb. Chapter
cap. de Hydrope.
of remedy: but if any died, it happened either by the default of the slow or
negligent administration of the Paracentesis. I will add this one thing which
may take away all error of controversies: we unwisely doubt of the remedy when
the patient is brought to that necessity, that we can only help him by that
means. Now must we show how the belly ought to be opened. If the Dropsy
happen by fault of the Liver, The places of the apertion must be diverse,
according to the parts chiefly affected.
the section must be made on the left side; but if of the Spleen, in the right:
for if the patient should lie upon the side which is opened, the pain of the
wound would continually trouble him, and the water running into that part where
the section is, would continually drop, whence would follow a dissolution of
the faculties. The Section must be made three fingers breadth below the Navell,
to wit, at the side of the right muscle, but not upon that which they call the
Linea Alba; neither upon the nervous parts of the rest of the muscles of the
Epigastrium; that so we may prevent pain and difficulty of healing. Therefore
we must have a care that the patient lie upon his right side, if the incision
be made in the left, or on the left, if on the right. Then the The manner of
making apertion.
Surgeon both with his own hand, as also with the hand of his servant
assisting him, must take up the skin of the belly, with the fleshie pannicle
lying under it, and separate them from the rest; then let him divide them so
separated with a Section even to the flesh lying under them, which being done,
let him force as much as he can the divided skin upwards toward the
stomach, that when the wound, which must presently be made in the flesh lying
there under, shall be consolidated, the skin by its falling therein, may
serve for that purpose: then therefore let him divide the musculous flesh and
Peritonaum with a small wound, not hurting the Kall or Guts.

Then put into the wound a trunk, or golden, or silver crooked pipe, of the
thickness of a Gooses-quill, and of the length of some half a finger. Let
that part of it which goes into the capacity of the belly have something a
broad head, and that perforated with two small holes, by which a string being
fastened, it may be bound so about the body, that it cannot be moved, unless
at the Chirurgions pleasure. Let a sponge be put into the pipe, which may
receive the dropping humor: and let it be taken out when you would evacuate the
water: but let it not be powered out all together, but by little and little, for
fear of dissipation of the spirits, and resolution of the faculties, which I
once saw happen to one sick of the Dropsy. He being impatient A History.
of the disease and cure thereof, thrust a Bodkin into his belly, and did much
rejoice at the pouring forth of the water, as if he had bin freed from the
humor and the disease, but died within a few hours, because the force of the
water, running forth, could by no means be stayed, for the incision was not
artificially made. But it will not be sufficient to have made way for the humor
by the means aforementioned, but also the external orifice of the pipe must
be stopped and strengthened by double clothes, and a strong ligature, least
any of the water flow forth against our wills. But A Caution for taking out the
Pipe.
we must note that the pipe is not to be drawn out of the wound, before as
much water shall be issued forth as we desire, and the tumor requires; for
once drawn forth, it cannot easily be put in again, and without force and
pain be fitted to the lips of the wound, because the skin and fleshy pannicle
cover it by their falling into the wound of the flesh or muscle. But whilst
the water is in evacuation, we must have a diligent care of feeding the
Patient, as also of his strength, for if that fail, and he seem to be
debilitated, the effusion of the water must be stayed for some days; which at
the length performed according to our desire, the wound must be so consolidated
that the Surgeon beware it degenerate not into a Fistula.

The Figure of a Pipe inform of a Quill, to evacuate the water in Dropsies.


Others perform this business after another Another manner of evacusting the
water after the ap^rtion.
manner; for making an incision, they thrust through the lips of the wound
with a needle and thread: but they take up much of the fleshie substance with
the needle, least that which is taken up should be rent and torn by the
forcible drawing of the lips together. Then the thread it self is wrapped up
and down over both ends of the needle, so thrust through, as is usually done
in a hare-lippe, that so the lips of the wound may so closely cohere, that
not a drop of water may get out against the Chirurgions will. Sometimes such as
are cured and healed of the Dropsy, fall into the Iaundise, whom I usually
cure after this manner., sterc. anser. ij, dissolve it in iij, vini alb.
coletur. A medicine for the Iaundies.
make a Potion, and let it be given two hours before meat.

CHAP. XIII. Of the tumor and relaxation of the Navell.
THe Exomphalos or, swelling of the Navell, is caused by the Peritonaeum,
either The diverse causes thereof.
relaxed or broken: for by this occasion oft-times the Guts, and oft-times the
Kall, fall into the seat of the Navell, and sometimes superfluous flesh is
there generated; otherwise this tumor is as an Aneurisma by too great a
quantity of blood powered forth in that place: otherwise by a flatulent matter,
Signs hereof occasioned by the Kall.
and sometimes by a waterish humor. If the humor be occasioned by the Kall, the
part it self will retain his proper color, that is, the color of the
skin; the tumor will be soft and almost without pain, and which will reside
without noise, either by the pressure of your fingers, or of it self when the
Patient lies on his back; but the tumor caused by the guts, is more unequal,
and when it is forced in by the pressure of your fingers, there is such a noise
heard, as in the Enterocele; but if the tumor proceed By the guts:
of superfluous flesh, it will be harder and more stubborn, not easily
retiring By flesh.
into the body, although the Patient lie upon his back, and you press it with
your fingers.

The tumor is softer which proceeds of wind, but which will not retire into
the body, and sounds under your nail like a taber. If the swelling be caused
by a waterish By wind.
humor, it has all things common with the flatuous tumor, except that it is
not By a waterish humor. By bruised blood. Which may be cured by Surgery,
which not.
so visible, and without noise. If it be from effusion of blood, it is of a
livid color, but if the effused blood shall be arteriall, then there are the
signs of an Aneurisme. Wherefore when the tumor is caused by the Guts, Kall,
Wind, or a waterish humor, it is cured by Surgery: but not if it proceed
from a fleshie excrescence or suffusion of blood. The tumor of the Navell
proceeding from the Kall, and Guts, the Patient must lie upon his back to be
cured, and then the Kall, and Guts, must with your fingers be forced into their
due place: then the skin with which the tumor The cure by Surgery.
is circumscribed must be taken up with your fingers, and thrust through with a
needle, drawing after it a double twined and strong thread; then it must be
scatified about the sides, that so it may be the easier agglutinated. Then must
it be thrust through with a needle, three or four times, according to the
manner and condition of the distention and tumor. And so twitch it strongly
with a thread, that the skin which is so bound may at length fall off
together with the ligatures. But also you may cut off the skin so distended
even to the ligature, and then cicatrize it, as shall be fit. A flatulent tumor
of the Navell shall be cured with the same remedies, as we shall hereafter
mention in the cure of a windy rupture, but the watery may be powered forth by
making a small incision. And the wound shall be kept open, so long, until all
the water be drained forth.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Tumors of the Groines and Codds, called Herniae, that is,
Ruptures.
THe ancient Physicians have made many kinds of Ruptures, yet indeed There
are only 3. sorts of Ruptures.
there are only three to be called by that name, that is, the Intestinalis, or
that of the guts, the Zirbalis, or that of the kall, and that which is mixed of
them both. The other kinds of Ruptures have come into this order, rather by
similitude, than any truth of the thing: for in them the Gut, or Kall do not
forsake their places.

The Greeks have given to all these several names, both from the seat of the
tumor, as also from their matter. For thus they have called an unperfect
rupture which descends not beyond the Groines, nor falls down into the Codds,
Bubo^ocele: but Bubo^ocele.
the complete which penetrates into the Codde, if it be by falling down of
the Gut, Enterocele: if from the Kall, Epiplocele; if from them both together,
they name it Enteroepiplocele: Enterocele and Epiplocele.
but if the tumor proceed from a waterish humor, they term it Hydrocele; if
from wind, Physocele, if from both, Hydrophydocele; if a fleshie excrescence
Hydrocele. Physocele.
shall grow about the testicle, or in the substance thereof, it is named
Sarcocele. If the veins interwoven, and divaricated diverse ways shall be
swollen in the Codde and Sarcocele.
Testicles, the tumor obtaines the name of a Cirsocele. But if the humors shall
be Cirsocele.
shut up, or sent thither, the name is imposed upon the tumor, from the
predominant humor, as we have noted in the beginning of our Tractate of tumors.
The causes are The Causes.
many, as all too violent motions, a stroke, a fall from a high place,
vomiting, a cough, leaping, riding upon a trotting horse, the sounding of
trumpets, or sackbuts, the carrying, or lifting up of a heavy burden, racking,
also the too immoderate use of viscide and flatulent meats; for all such
things may either relaxe or break the Iertonaeum, as that which is a thin
and extended membrane. The signs of a Bubo^ocele are a round tumor in the
Groine, which pressed, is easily forced in. The signs of Thesignes.
an Enterocele, are a hard tumor in the Codde, which forced, returns back
and departs with a certain murmour and pain; but the tumor proceeding of
the Kall, is laxe and feels soft like Wool, and which is more difficultly
forced in, than that which proceeds from the Guts, but yet without murmuring
and pain: for the substance of the Guts, seeing it is one, and continued to it
self, they do not only mutually succeed each other, but by a certain
consequence do, as in a dance draw each other; so to avoid distention, which
in their / membranous body cannot be without pain, by reason of their change
of place from that which is natural, into that against nature: none of all
which can be fall the Kall, seeing it is a stupide body; and almost without
sense, heavy, dull, and immovable. The signs that the Peritonaeum is broken,
are the sudden increase of the tumor, and a sharp and cutting pain; for when
the Peritonaeum is only relaxed, the tumor grows by little and little, and
so consequently with small pain; yet such pain returns so often, as the
tumor is renewed by the falling down of the Gut, or Kall, which happens not
the Peritonaeum being broken: for the way being once open, and passable to the
falling body, the tumor is renewed without any distention, and so without any
pain to speak of. The rest of the signs shall be handled in their places.
Sometimes it happens that the Guts, and Kall, do so firmly adhere to the
process of the Peritonaeum, that they cannot be driven back into their proper
seat. This stubborn adhesion happens by the intervention of the viscide
matter, or by means of some excotiation caused by the rude hand of a
Surgeon, in too violently forcing of the Gut, or Kall, into their place. But
also, too long stay of the gut in the codde, and the neglect of wearing a
Trusse, may give occasion to such adhesion. A perfect and inveterate rupture by
the breaking of the process of the Peritonaeum in men of full growth, never,
or very seldomes admits of cure. But What rupture is uncurable.
you must note, that by great ruptures of the Peritonaeum, the Guts may fall
into the codde, to the bigness of a man's head, without much pain and danger
of life, because the excrements, as they may easily enter, by reason of the
largeness of the place and rupture, so also they may easily return.

CHAP. XV. Of the cure of Ruptures.
BEcause children are very subject to Ruptures, but those truly not fleshy To
what ruptures children are subject.
or varicous, but watery, windy, and especially of the Guts, by reason of
continual and painful crying and coughing: Therefore in the first place we
will treat of their cure. Wherefore the Surgeon, called to restore the Gut
which is fallen down, shall place the child, either or table, or in a bed, so
that his head shall be low, but his buttocks, and thighs higher; the^ shall he
force with his hands by little and little, and gently, the Gut into its proper
place; and shall foment the Groine with the astringent fomentation, described
in the falling down of the womb. Then let him apply this remedy., Praescript
decoctionis quantum An astringent cataplasme.
sufficit, farinae hordei and fabarum, an. j, pulver. Aloes, Mastiches,
Myrtyll. and Sarcoco. an. ss, Boli Armeni ij. Let them be incorporated and made
a cataplasme according to Art. For the same purpose he may apply Emplastrum
contra Rupturam: but the chief of the cure consists in folded clothes, and
Trusses, and ligatures artificially made, that the restored gut may be
contained in its place, for which purpose he shall keep the child seated in
his cradle for 30. or 40. days, as we mentioned before; and keep him from
crying, shouting, and coughing. Aetius bids steep paper 3. days in water, and
Ser. 1. Cap. 24.
apply it made into a ball to the groine, the gut being first put up; for that
remedy by 3. days adhesion will keep it from falling down. But it will be, as I
suppose more effectual, if the paper be steeped not in common, but in the
astringent water, described in the falling down of the womb. Truly I have
healed many by the help of such remedies, and have delivered them from the
hands of Gelders, which are greedy o^ The craft and coveto usuesse of Gelders.
childrens testicles, by reason of the great gain they receive from thence.
They by a crafty cozenage, persuade the Parents, that the falling down of the
Gut into the Codde, is uncurable: which thing notwithstanding, experience
convinces to be false, if so be the cure be performed according to the
forementioned manner, when the Peritonaum is only relaxed, and not broken: for
the process thereof by which the Gut does fall as in a steep way, in
progress of time and age is straightened and knit together, whilst also in the
mean time the guts grow thicker. Another way to cure Ruptures.


A certain Surgeon who deserves credit, has told me that he has cured
many children as thus: He beats a loadstone into fine powder, and gives it in
pappe, and then he annointes with honey the Groine, by which the gut came out,
and then strewed it over with fine filings of iron. He administered this kind
of remedy for ten or twelve days: The part, for other things, being bound up
with a ligature and trusse as was fitting. The efficacy of this remedy seems
to consist in this; that the loadestone by a natural desire of drawing the
iron which is strewed upon the The reason of this cure.
Groine, joins to it the fleshy and fatty particles interposed between them,
by a certain violent impetuosity, which on every side pressing and bending the
looseness of the Peritonaeum, yea verily adjoining themselves to it, in
process of time by a firm adhesion intercept the passage and falling down of
the Gut or Kall; which may seem no more abhorring from reason, than that we
behold the loadstone it self through the thickness of a table, to draw iron
after it any way. The same Surgeon affirmed, that he frequently and happily
used the following medicine. He burnt into ashes in an Oven red Snailes, shut
up in an earthen pot, and gave the powder Another medicine.
of them to little children in pappe, but to those which were bigger, in broth.

But we must despair of nothing in this disease, for the cure may happily
proceed in men of full growth, as of forty year old, who have filled the
three demensions of the body, as this following relation testifies.

There was a certain Priest in the Parish of Saint Andrews, called John
M^ret, A notable History.
whose office it was to sing an Epistle with a loud voice as often as the
solemnity of the day, and the thing required. Wherefore seeing he was troubled
with the Enterocele, he came to me, requiring help, saying, he was troubled
with a grievous pain, especially then, when he stretched his voice in the
Epistle.

The Figure of a man broken on the side, wearing a Trusse, whose bolster must
have three Tuberosities, two on the upper, and one on the lower part; and there
must be a hollownesse between them in the midst, that they may not too
straightly press the sharchone, and so cause pain. The manner of such a Trusse,
I found out not long ago, and it seemed better and safer than the rest for to
hinder the falling aowne of the Gut and Kall.
A. Shows the shoulder band which is tied before and behind to the girdle of
the Trusse.

B. The Trusse.

C. The Cavitie left in the midst of the Tuberosities.



When I had seen the bigness of the Enterocele, I persuaded him to get
another to serve in his place; so having gotten leave of M. Curio Clearke, and
Deacon of Divinity, he committed himself unto me: I handled him according unto
Art, and commanded him he should never go without a Trusse; and he followed my
directions. When I met him some five or six years after, I asked him how he
did, he answered very well, for he was wholly freed from the disease with which
he was formerly troubled; which I could not persuade my self of, before that I
had found that he had told me the truth, by the diligent observation of his
genitals. But some six months after, he dying of a Pleurisy. I came to
Curio's house where he died, and desired leave to open his body, that I might
observe whether nature had done any thing at all in the passage through which
the gut fell down. I call God to witness, that I found a certain fatty
substance about the process of the Peritonaeum about the bigness of a little
egg, and it did stick so hard to that place, that I could scarce pull it away
without the rending of the neighboring parts. And this was the speedy cause of
his cure. But it is most worthy of observation, and We must never despair in
disseases if so be nature be associated by Art.
admiration, that Nature but a little helped by Art, heals diseases which are
thought incurable. The chief of the cure consists in this, that we firmerly
stay the gut in its place, after the same manner as these two Figures show.

Another Figure of a man having a Rupture on both sides, showing by what
means, what kind of Trusse, and what shoulder-band he must be bound on each
groine.
A. Shows the shoulder-band divided in the midst for the putting through of
the head.

B. The Trusse, with two bolsters, between which is a hole for putting through
the yard. The form of both bolsters ought to be the same with the former.



In the mean time we must not omit diet. We must forbid the use of all
things, which may either relaxe, dilate, or break the process of the
Peritonaeum, of which I have already treated sufficiently. Sometimes, but
especially in old men, the guts cannot be restored into their place by reason
of the quantity of the excrements hardened in them: In this case they must not
be too violently forced, but the Patient must be kept in his bed, and lying
with his head low, and his knees higher up; let the following Cataplasmes be
applied.

. rad. alth. and lil. ana. ij. seminis lini. and foenug. an. ss, sol. malva,
viol. and parietan. A Cataplasma to soften the excrements.
m. ss. Let them be boiled in fair water, afterward beaten, and drawn
through a searse, adding thereto of new Butter without falt, and oil of
Lillies, as much as shall suffice. Make a Cataplasme in the form of a liquid
pultis. Let it be applied hot to the Codde, and bottom of the belly; by the
help of this remedy when it had been applied all night, the guts have not
seldom been seen of themselves, without the hand of a Surgeon, to have
returned into their proper place. The windiness being resolved, which hindered
the going back of the excrements into another gut, whereby they might be
evacuated and expelled. But if the excrements will not go back thus, the
flatulencies, yet resisting and undiscussed, an emollient and carminative
Clyster is to be admitted with a little Chymicall oil of Turpentine, Dill,
Juniper or Fennill. Clysters of Muscadine, oil of Wallnuts and Chymicall oil.
Aqua vitae, and a small quantity of any the aforesaid oils, are good for the
same purpose.

It often happens that the guts cannot yet be restored, because the process of
the Peritonaeum is not wide enough. For when the excrements are fallen down
with the gut into the codde; they grow hard by little and little, and increase
by the access of flatulencies caused by resolution, which cause such a tumor
as cannot be put up through that hole, by which a little before it fell down:
whereby it happens that by putrefaction of the matter there contained, come
inflammations, and a new access of pain; and lastly, a vomitting and
evacuation of the excrements by the mouth being hindered from the other passage
of the fundament. They vulgarly call this affect Miscrere mei. That you may
help this symptom, you must rather assay extreme remedies, than suffer the
Patient to die by so filthy and loathsome a death. And we must cure it by
Surgery after this manner following. We will bind the Patient lying on his
back, upon a Table or Bench; then presently make an incision in the upper pard
of the codde, not touching the substance of the guts; then we must have a
silver Cane or Pipe, of the thickness of a Goose quill, round, and gibbous in
one part thereof, but somewhat hollowed in the other, as is showed by this
following Figure.

The Figure of the Pipe or Cane.


We must put it into the place of the incision, and put it under the production
of the Peritonaeum being cut together with the codde, all the length of the
production; that so with a sharp knife we may divide the process of the
Peritonaeum, according to that cavity separated from the guts there contained,
by the benefit of the Cane in a right line not hurting the guts. When you have
made an indifferent incision, the guts must gently be put up into the belly
with your fingers, and then so much of the cut Peritonaeum must be sowed up, as
shall seem sufficient, that by that passage made more straight, nothing may
fall into the Codde, after it is cicatrized.

But if there be such abundance of excrements hardened, either by the stay or
heat of inflammation, that that incision is not sufficient to force the
excrements into their place, the incision must be made longer, your Cane being
thrust up toward the belly: so that it may be sufficient for the free regresse
of the guts into the belly. Then sow it up as is fit, and the way will be shut
up against the falling down of the guts or kall; the process of the
Peritonaeum being made more straight, by reason of the future; for the rest,
the wound shall be cured according to Art. But before you undertake this work,
consider diligenly whether the strength of the Patient be sufficient, neither
attempt any thing before you have foretold, and declared the danger to the
Patients friends.

CHAP. XVI. Of the golden Ligature, or the Punctus Aureus; as they call it.
IF the Rupture will not be cured by all these means, by reason of the The
Chirurgicall cure by the golden Tie.
great solution of the continuity of the relaxt, or broken Peritonaeum, and the
Patient by the consent of his friends there present, is ready to undergo the
danger in hope of recovery; the cure shall be attempted by that which they call
the Punctus Aureus, or Golden tie.

For which purpose a Surgeon which has a skillful and sure hand, is to be
employed. He shall make an incision about the share bone, into which he shall
thrust a Probe like to the Cane, a little before described; and thrust it long
ways under the process of the Peritonaeum, and by lifting it up, separate it
from the the adjoining fibrous, and nervous bodies, to which it adheres; then
presently draw aside the spermatique vessels, with the Cremaster, or hanging
muscle of the testicle; which being done, he shall draw aside the process it
self, alone by it self: And he shall take as much thereof, as is too lax,
with small and gentle mullets, perforated in the midst, and shall with a
needle, having five or six threeds, thrust it through as near as he can to
the spermaticke vessels, and cremaster muscles. But the needle also must be
drawn again into the midst of the remnant of the process, taking up with
it the lips of the wound; then the thread must be tied on a strait knot, and
so much thereof must be left after the section, as may be sufficient to hang
out of the wound. This thread will of it self be dissolved by little and
little by putrefaction: neither must it be drawn out before that nature shall
regenerate and restore flesh into the place of the ligature, otherwise all our
labor shall be spent in vain.

And lastly, let the wound be cleansed, filled with fiesh, and cicatrized, whose
callous hardness may withstand the falling of the gut, or kall.

There are some Chirurgians who would perform this golden Ligature after
anoothe manner. They cut the skin above the share-bone where the falling
down Another manner thereof.
commonly is, even to the process of the Peritonaeum, and they wrap once or
twice about it, being uncovered, a small golden wyre, and only straiten the
passage as much as may suffice, to amend the looseness of this process,
leaving the spermatique vessels at liberty. Then they twist the ends of the
wyre twice or thrice with small mullets, and cut off the remnant thereof; that
which remains after the cutting, they turn in, least with the sharpness it
should prick the flesh growing upon it. Then leaving the golden wyre there,
they cure the wound like to other simple wounds, and they keep the Patient
some fifteen or twenty day in his bed, with his knees some thing higher, and
his head some thing lower.

Many are healed by this means; others have fallen again into the disease by
reason of the ill twisting of the wire.

There is also another manner of this golden tie, which I judge more quick and
The third manner thereof.
safe, even for that there is no external body left in that part after the
cure. Wherefore they wrappe a leaden wyre in stead of the golden, which comes
but once about the process of the Peritonaum, then they twine it as much as
need requires, that is, not too loosely, least it should leave way for the
falling down of the body, neither too straightly, least a Gangrene should come
by hindering the passage of the spirits and nourishment. The ends thereof are
suffered to hang out; when in process of time, this contraction of the
Peritonaeum seems callous, then the wyre is untwisted and gently drawn out.
And the rest of the cure performed according to Art. But let not the Surgeon
thrust himself upon his work rashly, without the advice of A thing to be
noted.
the Physician, for it diverse times comes to pass, that the testicles are not
as yet fallen down into the Codde by the too great sluggishnesse of nature, in
some of a pretty growth, but remains long in the groines, causing a tumor with
pain, which thing may make a good Surgeon believe that it is an Enterocele.
Therefore whilst he labors by repelling medicines and trusses to force back
this tumor, he increases the pain, and hinders the falling down of the
testicles into the codde. I observed this not long ago in a Boy, which an
unskilful Surgeon had long, and A History.
grievously troubled, as if he had had a rupture: for when I had observed that
there was but one stone in the Codde, and knew the Boy was never gelt, I bid
them cast away the plasters, and trusses, and wished his Parents that they
should suffer him to run and leap, that so the idleing stone might be drawn
into the Codde, which thing by little and little, and without pain, had the
event, as I foretold. That the reason of this affect may be understood, we must
know a man differs from a woman, only in efficacy of heat; but it is the
nature of strong heat to drive forth, as of cold to (...) Hence it is that the
stones in men hang forth in the codde, but in women they (...) in the lower
belly. Therefore it happens that in some males more cold by nature, the
testicles are shut up some certain time, until at length they are fore'st
down into the codde by youthful heat. But that we may return to our former
treatise of the codde, although that way of curing ruptures wants not pain and
danger, yet it is safer than that which is performed by gelding, which by the
cruelty thereof exposes the Patient to manifest danger of death. For the
Gelders whilst they fear least when the cure is finshed, the relaxation may
remain, pull with violence the process of the Peritonaeum from the parts to
which it adheres, and together with it a nerve of the sixth conjugation which
runs to the stones; they offer the same violence to the spermaticke vessels;
by which things ensue great pain, convulsion, effluxe of blood, inflammation,
putrefaction, and lastly death, as I have observed in many whom I have
disfected, having died a few days after their gelding. Although some escape
these dangers, yet they are deprived of the faculty of generation for all their
life after, for performance whereof nature has bestowed the testicles, as
parts principally necessary for the conservation of mankind. Through which
occasion Galen has not Lib de art medic^.
feared to prefer them before the heart; because the heart is the beginning
of life, but the resticles of a better life; for it is far more noble to live
well, than simply and absolutely to live; therefore Eunuchs degenerate into a
womanish nature, for they Lib. de sem.
A. Shows a crooked needle, having an eye not far from the point, through
which you may put the golden wyre.

B. B: The golden wyre put through the eye of the needle.

C. The mullets or Pincers, to cut away the wast or superfluous ends of the
wyre.

D. The spring of the mullets.

E The mullets to twist the ends of the wyre together.

remain without beards, their voice is weak, their courage fails them, and
they turn cowards; and seeing they are unfit for all humane actions, their
life cannot but be miserable. Wherefore I will never subscribe to the cutting
out of the stones, unless a Sarcocele or Gangrene in vade them. But that the
way of performing the Punctus anreus may be better known, I have thought good
here to set the instruments, by which this operation is performed, before your
view.

Another more easy and safe way to restore the Gut and Kall.
THeodoricke and Guido have invented another way of performing this operation.
Lib. 3, Cap. 33.
They put back into their places the Gut and Kall being fallen down, the
Patient being so placed, that his thighs are high and his head is somewhat low;
then they draw aside the lower portion of the production of the Peritonaeum;
and also the spermaticke vessels, and cremaster muscle to the Ischium; then by
applying a causticke fitted to the age and disease, they burn the other part
of the process, directly perpendicular to the share-bone, where the Gut did
fall down. Then they pull off the eschar thus made with a knife even to the
quick, then they apply another causticke in the same place, which may go even
to the bone, then procure the falling of this Eschar made on the foresaid
process. And afterward they heal the ulcer which remains, which presently
contracting somewhat a thick Callus, so keeps up the Guts and Kall, that it
binds them from falling down into the Cod. This way of restoring the Gut and
Kall, though it be safer and more facile; yet the Surgeon must not attempt
it, if the Guts or Kall stick so fast, agglutinated to the process of the
Peritonaeum, that they cannot be severed, nor put back into their places (for
from the guts so burnt and violated, greater mischief would ensue) if by the
broken and too much dilated process, the bodies thereby restrained, make an
exceeding great tumor by their falling down; if the testicle yet lying in the
groine as in a Bubonocele, a kind of Enterocele, being not yet descended into
the Scrotum or Codde; if the Patients be not come to such age as they can keep
themselves from stirring, or hold their excrements whiles the operation is
performed.

CHAP. XVII. Of the cure of other kinds of Ruptures.
EPiplocele is the falling down of the Kall into the Groine, or Codde, it has
the same causes as an Enterocele. The signs have been explained. It is not so
dangerous, nor infers a consequence of so many evil symptoms, as the
Enterocele does, yet the cure is the same with the other.

Hydrocele is a waterish tumor in the Codde, which is gathered by little and
little what a Hydrocele is.
between the membranes encompassing the testicles, especially the Dartos and
Erythroides; it may be called a particular dropsy, for it proceeds from the
same causes, but chiefly from the defect of native heat. The signs are a
tumor increasing slowly The signs.
without much pain, heavy, and almost of a glassie clearenesse, which you may
perceive by holding a candle on the other side, by pressing the Codde above,
the water flows down, and by pressing it below, it rises upwards, unless
peradventure in too great a quantity it fills up the whole capacity of the
Codde, yet it can never be forced or put up into the belly as the Kall or Guts
may, for often times it is contained in a Cyste, or bag; it is distinguished
from a Saycocele, by the smoothness and equality thereof. The cure must first
be tried with resolving, drying, and discussing medicines, The cure.
repeated often before, and in the Chapter of the Dropsy; this which follows
I have often tried and with good success.

, Vng. comitissa, and desiccat. rub. an. ij. malaxentur simul; and make a
medicine for A medicine (...) draw forth the contained matter.
your ease. The water by this kind of remedy is digested and resolved, or
rather dried up, especially if it be not in too great quantity. But if the
swelling, by reason of the great quantity of water will not yield to those
remedies, there is need of Surgery; the Cod and membranes wherein the water
is contained, must be thrust through with a Seton, that is, with a large three
square pointed needle, thread with a skeane of silk; you must thrust your
needle presently through the holes of the mullets made for that purpose, not
touching the substance of the Testicles. The skean of thread must be left there,
or removed twice or thrice a day, that the humor may drop down, and be
evacuated by little and little. But if the pain be more vehement by reason of
the Seton, and inflammation come upon it, it must be taken away, and neglecting
the proper cure of the disease, we must resist the symptoms.

Some Practitioners use not a Seton, but with a Razor, or incision knife, they
open the lower part of the Cod, making an incision some half fingers breadth
long, penetrating even to the contained water; always leaving untouched the
substance of the Testicles and vessels, and they keep the wound open, until
all the water seems evacuated; truly by this only way the cure of a watery
rupture whose matter is contained in a Cyste, is safe, and to be expected; as
we have said in our Treatise of Tumors in general.

The Pneumatocele, is a flatulent tumor in the Codde, generated by the
imbecility of heat residing in the part. What a Pneumatocele is.


It is known by the roundnesse, lenity, renitencie and shining. It is cured by
prescribing a convenient diet, by the application of medicines which resolve
and discuss The Cure.
flatulencies, as the seeds of Annis, Fennel, Faenugreeke, Agnus Castus, Rue,
Origanum, other things set down by Avicen in his Treatise of Ruptures. I have
often used with good success for this purpose, Emplastrum Vigonis cum
mercurio; and Emplastrum Diacalcitheos, dissolved in some good wine, as
Muscadine, with oil of Bays.

A Sarcocele is a tumor against nature, which is generated about the stones by
a schyrrhus flesh. Gross and viscide humors breed such kind of flesh, which
the part What a Sarcocele is.
could not overcome and assimulate to it self; whence this over-abundance of
flesh proceeds, like as Warts do. Varices, or swollen veins often associate
this tumor; and it increases with pain. It is known by the hardness,
asperitie, inequality, and roughness. It cannot be cured but by amputation or
cutting it away; but you must The signs. Prognostics.
diligently observe, that the flesh be not grown too high, and have already
seized upon the Groine, for so nothing can be attempted without the danger of
life.

But if any may think, that he in such a case may somewhat ease the patient by
the cutting away of some portion of this same soft flesh, he is deceived. For a
Fungt will grow, if the least portion thereof be but left, being an evil fure
worse than the former; but if the tumor be either small or indifferent, the
Surgeon taking the whole tumor, that is, the testicle, tumefied through the
whole substance, with the The signs.
process encompassing it, and adhering thereto on every side, and make an
incision in the Codde, even to the tumor; then separate all the tumid body,
that is, the testicle from the Codde: then let him thrust a needle with a
strong thread in it, through the midst of the process above the region of
the swollen testicle; and then presently let him thrust it the second time
through the same part of the process; then shall both the ends of the thread
be tied on a knot, the other middle portion of the Peritonaeum being
comprehended in the same knot. This being done, he must cut away the whole
process with the testicle comprehended therein. But the ends of the thread,
with which the upper part of the process was bound, must be suffered to hang
some length out of the wound, or incision of the Codde. Then a repercussive
medicine shall be applied to the wound, and the neighboring parts with a
convenient ligature. And the cure must be performed as we have formely
mentioned.

The Cirsocele is a tumor of veins dilated, and woven with a various and
mutual implication about the testicle and codde, and swelling with a gross
and melancholy What a Cirsocele is.
blood. The causes are the same as those of the Varices. But the signs are
manifest.

To heal this tumor, you must make an incision in the codde, the breadth of two
The Cure.
fingers to the Varix. Then you must put under the varicous vein, a needle
having a double thread in it, as high as you can, that you may bind the roots
thereof: then let the needle be again put after the same manner about the
lower part of the same vein, leaving the space of two fingers between the
Ligatures. But before you bind the thread of this lowest Ligature, the Varix
must be opened in the midst; almost after the same manner as you open a
vein in the arm to let blood; That so this gross blood causing a tumor in
the Cod, may be evacuated as is usually done in the Cure of the varices. The
wound that remains shall be cured by the rules of Art after the manner of
other wounds: Leaving the threads in it, which will presently fall away of
themselves. To conclude then, it being grown callous especially in the upper
part thereof; where the vein was bound, it must be Cicatrized, for so
afterward the blood cannot be strained, or run that way.

Hernia Humoralis is a tumor generated by the confused mixture of many humors
Hernia Humoralis.
in the Cod or between the tunicles which involue the testicles, often also in
the proper substance of the testicles. It has like causes, signs and cure as
other tumors. While the cure is in hand, rest, trusses, and fit rowlers to
sustain and bear up the testicles are to be used.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the falling down of the Fundament.
WHen the muscle called the Sphincter which ingirts the Fundament is relaxed,
then it comes to pass that it cannot sustain the right gut. This disease is
very frequent to Children by reason of the too much The causes.
humidity of the belly; which falling down upon that muscle mollifieth and
relaxeth it or presses it down by an unaccustomed weight, so that the muscles
called Levatores Any or the lifters up of the Fundament, are not sufficient to
bear up any longer. A great bloody flux gives occasion to this effect. A
strong endeavor to expel hard excrements, the Haemorrhoides, which suppressed
do over-loade the right gut, but flowing relaxe it: Cold as in those which go
without breeches in winter, or sit a long time upon a cold stone, a stroke or
fall upon the Holy-bone: a palfie of nerves which go from the Holy-bone to the
Muscles the lifters up of the fundament: the weight of the stone being in the
bladder.

That this disease may be healed, we must forbid the Patient too much
drincking, The cure.
too often eating of broth, and from feeding on cold fruits. For local
medicines the part must be fomented with an astringent decoction made of the
rinds of Pomegranetts, galls, myrtles, knotgrasse, sheapheards purse, Cypress
nutts, Alume, and common salt boiled in smiths water or red wine. After the
fomentation, the gut be anointed with oil of Roses or myrtles, and then let
it be gently put by little and little into its place, charging the child if
he can understand your meaning, to hold his breath. When the gut shall be
restored, the part must be diligently wiped least the gut fall down again by
reason of the slipperinesse of the unction. Then let the powder prescribed for
the falling down of the womb be put into the fundament as far as you can:
Then you must straightly bind the loins with a swathe, to the midst whereof
behind let another be fastened which may be tied at the Pubes coming along the
Perinaeum, so to hold up to the fundament; the better to contain it in its
place, a sponge dipped in the astringent decoction. The Patient if he be of
sufficient age to have care of himself, shall be wished when he goes to
stool that he sit upon two pieces of wood being set some inch a sunder, least
by his strayning he thrust forth the gut together with the excrement; but if
he can do it standing, he shall never by strayning thrust forth the gut.

But if the gut cannot by the prescribed means be restored to its place,
Hippocrates bids that the Patient hanging by the heels be shaken, for so the
gut by that shaking will return to his place: but the same Hippocrates wishes
to anoint Hippocrates his cure.
the fundament, because that remedy having a drying faculty, has also power
to resolve the flatulent humors without any acrimony, by reason of which the
gut was the less able to be contained in his place.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Paronychia.
THe Paronychia or Panaris is a tumor in the ends of the fingers, with great
inflammation, coming of a malign and venomous humor, What the Paronychia is.
which from the bones by the Periostium is communicated to the tendons and
nerves of that part which it affects, whereof cruel symptoms do follow, as
pulsifique pain, a fever, restlessenesse, so that the affected through
impatiencie of the pain are variously agitated like those tormented with
Carbuncles: for which cause Guide and Johannes de Vigo judge this disease to be
mortal; wherefore you must provide a skillful Physician for the cure of this
disease, which may appoint convenient diet, purging and Blood letting. In the
mean time the Surgeon, shall make way for the virulent and venenate matter, by
making incision in the inner part of the finger, even to the bone along the
first joint thereof; for Vigo says there is not a presenter remedy, if so be
that it be quickly done Lib. 2. cap. 4. tract. 8.
and before the maturation of the matter; for it vindicates the finger from the
corruption of the bone and nerves, and asswages pain, which I have often and
happily tried immediately at the beginning, before the perfect impression of the
viruleacie.

But the wound being made you must suffer it to bleed well, then presently let
him dip his finger in strong and warm vinegar, in which some treakle being
dissolved may draw forth the virulencie. But to appease the Pain, the same
remedies must be applied to the affected part as are used in Carbuncles, as the
leaves of Sorrel, Henbane, Hemlocke, Mandrake roasted under the Embers and
beaten in a Mortar with new Vnguentum Populeon, or oil of Roses or new butter
without salt: for such like medicines also help forward suppuration, whilst
by their coldness, they repress the extraneous heat affecting the part; and
so strengthen the native heat being the author of suppuration: which reason
moved the ancient Physicians to use such medicines in a Carbuncle: but if by
reason of the fearfulness of the patient, or unskilfulnesse of the Surgion,
no incision being made, a Gangren and Sphacel shall possess the part, it
remains that you cut off with your cutting mulletts as much of the part as
shall be corrupt, and perform the rest of the cure according to Art. Yet it
does not seldom happen that there may be no need to cut off such a finger,
because it being corrupted together with the bone does by little and little
dissolve into a purulent or rather sanious and much stinking filth. But in
this affect there is often caused an Eschar by the adustion of putredinous
heat, and superfluous flesh endued with most exquisit sense grows underneath
it, which must in like manner be cut off with the Mulletts that the part may
receive comfort, the pain being aswaged by the copious effusion of blood.

CHAP. XX. Of the swelling of the knees.
AFter long and dangerous diseases there oftentimes arise Tumors in the knees,
and also in plethoricke bodies and such as have evil juice after Gal. comm. ad
sent. 1. ser. 4. lib. 6 E^^. Gal. Com ad sect, 67. sect. 2. prog.
labors and exercise. This kind of disease is frequent because the humor
easily falls into the part which has been heated by Labor. But if such
tumors follow long diseases, they are dangerous and difficult to cure, and
therefore not to be neglected; for bitter pain accompanies them, because the
humor falling thither distends the Membranes, which being many involve the
part; besides that this humor participateth of a certain virulent and malign
quality whether it be cold or hot, when it has settled into those parts, being
such as we find in the pains of the joints, and in the bitings of venomous
creatures.

For the cure, if the tumor be caused by blood, let a slender and
refrigerating The cure.
diet be appointed, and phlebotomy for the revulsion of the antecedent cause;
diverse local medicines shall be used according to the variety of the four
times. But for to assuage the pain, Anodyne or mitigating medicines shall be
appointed: of all which we have sufficiently treated in the Chapter of the
cure of a Phlegmon.

And because these parts are of exact sense, if there be necessity to open the
tumor, yet must we not do it rashly or unconsiderately, for fear of pain and
evil accidents.

This kind of tumor is often times raised by wind contained there; in which
case the Surgeon must be very provident, that he be not deceived with the
show of flowing of the humor; which he seems to perceive by the pressure of
his fingers, as if there were matter and humor contained therein, and so be
brought to open the tumor. For the wind breaking forth in stead of the humor,
causes evil symptoms by reason of the section rashly made in a part so
sensible.

But if watrish humors shall tumifie the part, the body shall first be purged
with medicines purging phlegm: And then inciding, attenuating, rarifying,
discussing and very drying local medicines shall be used.

Of which we have abundantly spoken in the Chapter of the Oedema. Yet this
humor, diverse times lies deep between the whirle bone and the joint, which
causes it that it cannot be discussed and resolved by reason of the weakness
of the part and defect of heat, so that the adventitious humor often moves and
excludes the bones from their seat. As I have observed it to have happened to
many.

In which cause Irrigations of red wine falling something high, whereby the
force of the medicine may enter and more easily penetrate, are much commended.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Dracunculus.
ICannot choose, but explain in this place those things which may be It is not
as yet sufficiently known what Dracunculs are.
spoken of that kind of tumor against nature, which by the ancients is called
Dracunculus. The matter and reason of these has been variously handled by
diverse Authors, so that hitherto we have nothing written of them to which
we may by right and with good reason adhere as a firm foundation of their
essence.

For first for Galens opinion, Lib. 6. de Loc. affect cap. 3. The generation,
says he, of those hayres which are evacuated by the Urine is worthy no less
admiration than the Dracunculi, which as they say, in a certain place of
Arabia breed in the legs of men being of a nervous nature and like worms in
color and thickenesse.

Therefore seeing I have heard many who have said they have seen them, but I
my self never saw them, I cannot conjecture any thing exactly neither of their
origiginall nor essence.

Paulus Aegineta writes that the Dracunculi are bred in India and the higher
parts of Egypt, like worms in the musculous parts of man's body, that is, the
arms, Lib. 4. cap. ult.
thighs and legs, and also creep by the intercostall muscles in children
with a manifest motion.

But whether they by creatures indeed, or only have the shape of creatures,
they must be cured with a hot fomentation, by which the Dracunculus raised to
a just tumor, may put forth it self, and be plucked away piece meal with the
fingers: The cure out of Egineta.
also suppurating Cataplasmes may be applied, composed of water, honey, wheat
and barley meal.

Avicen being various, having no certainty whereon to rest, inclines one while
to this, and another while to that opinion: for now he speaks of the
Dracunculi as Cap 21. lib. 4. sent. 3 tract. 3.
of creatures, then presently of a matter and humor shut up in a certain
place; for the rest he rightly delivers the cure and essence of this disease,
as we shall afterward show.

Actius says, the Dracunculi are like worms, and that they are found
sometimes Lib. 14. cap. ult.
great, sometimes small, and that their generation is not unlike to that of
flat worms, which are bred in the guts, for they move under the skin
without any trouble, but in process of time, the place becomes suppurate about
the end of the Dracunculus. The skin opens, and the head thereof is thrust
forth.

But if the Dracunculus be pulled, it causes great grief; especially if it
be broken by too violent pulling. For that which is left causes most vehement
pain. Where fore that the creature may not run back, the arm must be
bound with a strong thread, and this must be done every day, that the
Dracunculus going forward The cure out of Aetius
by little and little, may be intercepted by this binding, but not broken off.

The place must be bathed with Aqua Mulsa and oil in which wormwood or
southernewood has been boiled, or some other of those medicines which are
prescribed for the worms of the belly.

But if the Dracunculus going forward of its own accord, may be easily drawn
forth, we must do nothing else: but if it be turned to suppuration we must
not leave off the Cataplasmes, the Aqua Mulsa and anointing with oil: It was
usual with him after the taking away of the Cataplasmes, to apply Emplaslrum E
Ba^^is Lauri: but when it is come to suppuration the skin must be opened
long ways, and the Dracunculus so laid open must be taken away, but the skin
must be filled with lint, and the rest of the suppurative cure used, so that
the creature being suppurated and drawn forth, the wound may be incarnated
and cicatrised.

Rhasis writes, that when the part is lifted up into a blister, and the vein
hastneth its egresse, it is good for the patient to drink the first day half
a dram Tract. at (...). cap. 31. The cure our of Rhasis.
of Aloies, the next day a whole dram, the third day two drammes; and in like
manner the place affected must be fomented with Aloes, for so that which lies
hid will break forth: that which shall come forth must be rolled in a pipe of
lead, which may equal the weight of a dram so that it may hang down, for
the vein drawn by the weight will come more forth; and when that which shall
come forth is grown much and long, it must be cut off, but not by the root,
but so that a portion thereof may remain and hand forth, to which the leaden
pipe may be fastened, for otherwise it would withdraw it self into its skin
and its lurking hole, and so cause a putrid and malign ulcer.

Therefore we must gently meet with this disease, and the vein must be
drawn by little and little out of the body until it be all come forth that no
worse thing happen: but if by chance it shall happen that as much of the vein
as shall be come forth shall be cut off by the roots, then the ulcer must be
opened long ways with an incision knife, and that so that whatsoever remains
thereof may be wholly taken away. Then for some days the part must be
anointed with butter until whatsoever of such a substance adheres, being
consumed with putrefaction shall flow away. Then the ulcer must be cured with
sarcoticke things.

Therefore Rhasis thus in the same text expresses the same thing by diverse
names, and armed with Iron and Lead, he comes to the cure thereof, as if he
meant to His opinion of them.
encounter with some fierce beast.

Soranus the Physician, who lived in the times of Galen, was of a quite
contrary opinion, Soranus his opinion.
as Paulus Aegineta in the place being before cited, relates of him; as who
denies the Dracunculus to be a living creature, but only a condensation of a
certain small nerve, which seems both to the Physicians and Patients to have
some motion under the skin.

Wherefore Soranus seems to have come nearer the truth than the rest, but yet
not so, as thoroughly to understand, and know the essence of this disease, as we
shall demonstrate hereafter.

Manardus writes, that the Dracunculi are generated of evil and unlaudable
blood, Epist. 2. lib. 7.
gross, hot, and melanckolicke, or of adust phlegm very much dried.

Gorraeus a most learned Physician of our time, Lib. de Definitionib. medic.
denies any of our Physicians to be able to say anything of the Dracunculi,
because it is a disease so unfrequent in these our regions, that it is scarce
ever met withal in practice.

The Author of the Introduction, and Medicinal definitions, defines the
Dracunculus to be a disease very like the Varices; then causing great pain,
when increasing by little, and little, it begins to be moved: Therefore to be
cured after the same manner, and by the same method of Section and incision, as
the varices are. Which thing chiefly seems to have moved Guido to refer
this kind of disease to the Varices in his Tractate of Impostumes, because it
has the same cause, and is healed with the same remedy as the varices.

But seeing that diverse names have been imposed upon this disease by several
writers, yet they all have expressed it by the name of a vein: for it is
called by Avicen and Guido, Vena Meden, because it is a disease frequent in the
City Medina: by Albucrasis, vena civilis. Haliabbas has called it vena
famosa; others have called it Vena Cruris or the leg vein. Truly the
contrariety of so many opinions repugnant not only amongst themselves, but
also with themselves, easily argues how little certainty they had of the
essence of this disease, who have written of it unto us: To which also this may
be added, that none of the latter Physicians have written any things thereof.
For although Iacobus Dalechamphius a man most conversant in every part of
Physic, has written much of this matter in his book of the French Surgery
which he set forth some years ago: Yet he has left us no amplier testimony
of his industry, than that he was very diligent in collecting the writings of
the Ancients concerning this thing, interposing no judgment of his own, the
better to assure us of a thing so controverted.

But my modesty cannot so contain me, but that I shall choose rather to
undergo the censure of being thought too daring, than (as much as in me
lies,) to suffer this question of the Dracunculi to remain longer ambiguous
and undecided. Therefore for the present, I will thus order it, that refuting
the opinions of the Ancients I may strengthen by certain reasons, my opinion
of the essence and cure of this disease.

For first, that Dracunculi are no living things, nor like unto worms, nor of
like generation Aetius opinion confuted. Tract. 3. serme. 1. cap. 40.
as the flat worms of the belly, which was the opinion of Aetius, is easy to
disprove both by his writings, as also by reason it self. For he writes that
the broad worm which he calls Tania, is as it were a certain Metamorphosis
or transmutation of the inner tunicle of the small guts, into a quick living
and moveable body.

But no man ever said, neither will he confess that the Dracunculi have the
material causes of their beginning from the tunicle of the vein, in which
they are closed, or from the fibers of a nervous body, to which often they are
adjoined; but much less from the skin under which they lie, may they draw
their material causes of their original.

Moreover, neither can there be any generation of worms, nor of any other
living creatures whatsoever, who have their original from putrefaction,
unless by the Corruption of some matter, of whose better and more benign
part, nature by the force of the vital heat, produces some animate body, as
Aristotle teaches. Wherefore to produce this effect, it is fit the matter
should have such a 4. Meteorolog.
disposition to putrefaction as is required for the generation of such a
creature as they would make the Dracunculus to be: It is fit the helping causes
should concur as assistants to the principalls in the action. And it is meet
the place should be opportune or fit.

But there may be many causes found which may give life to the Dracunculi, for
by the common consent of all those who have written of them, their generation
proceeds from an humor melancholicke, terrestrial and gross, which by its
qualities both by the first coldness and dryness, as also by the second, that
is Aciditie, is not only thought most unfit of all others for putrefaction,
but also is judged Natural Melancholicke humor is most unapt to putrify.
to resist putrefaction, as that which is caused by heat and superfluous heat
humidity. Besides, if the material cause of this disease should be from an
humor putrefying and turning by putrefaction into some living creature, it was
fit there should be stench also, as being an unseparable accident of
putrefaction, for thus the excrements Stink an unseparable companion to
putrefaction.
in the guts of which the worms are generated, do smell or stink.

Therefore that which exhales from their bodies which are troubled with the
Dracunculi, should be stinking, as it happens to those sick of the Pthiriasis
or Lewsie-evill. But none of those who have delivered the accidents or
symptoms of the Dracunculi are found to have made mention hereof. But for the
efficient cause whereby so great heat may be raised in the places next under
the skin, by the efficacy whereof such a creature may be formed of a matter
melancholicke and most unapt to putrify, as they make the Dracunculus to be
who feign our bodies to be fruitful monsters; especially seeing the surface of
the body is continually ventilated by the small Arteries spread under the
skin, as also by the benefit of insensible transpiration, and breathed with
the coolenes of the Air incompassing us. But now the material and efficient
causes being defective, or certainly very weak, for the generation of so
laborious an effect; what coadjutory cause, can yield assistance? Can the
humidity of meats? for those bodies which are fed with warm and moist meats,
What things usually breed worms.
as milk, Cheese, Summer fruits, usually breed worms, as we are taught by
experience in Children.

But on the Contrary, Avicen in the place before cited writes, that meats of a
hot and dry temper chiefly breed this kind of disease, and that it is not so
frequent to moist bodies and such as are accustomed to the Bath, moist meats
and wine moderatly taken. But whether may the condition of the Air of those
regions in which it is as it were, an Endemiall disease, confer any thing to
the generation of such creatures? Certainly for this purpose a cloudy warm
and thick air, such as uses to be at the beginning of the Spring when all
places resound with frogs, toades and the like creatures bred of putrefaction.

But on the Contrary Iacobus Dalechampius by the opinion of all the Physicians
that Cap. 83. Chir. Gallic.
have written of the Dracunculi, writes that this disease breeds in the dry
and Sun burnt regions of India and Arabia; but if at the least that part of our
body which is next under the skin should have any opportunity to engender and
nourish such creatures, they may be judged to have written that the Dracuuculus
is a living creature with some probability, But if there be no opportunity for
generation in that place, nor capacity for the nourishment of such like
creatures as in the guts, if that region of the body be breathed upon with no
warmenesse and smothering heat, if it be defiled with none of the gross
excrements, as the gutts usually are, but only by the subtiller exhalation,
which have an easy and insensible transpiration by the pores of the skin,
which may seem to be a just cause of so monstrous and prodigious an effect:
but we shall little profit with these engines of reason unless we cast down
at once all the Bulwarks, with which this old opinion of the Dracunculi may
stand and be defended.

For first they say, why have the ancients expressed this kind of disease by
the name of a living thing, that is, of a Dracunculus or little Serpent? I
answer, because in Physic names are often imposed upon diseases rather by
similitude than from the truth of the thing; for the confirmation whereof, the
examples of three diseases may suffice, that of the Cancer, Polypus, and
Elephas. For these have those names not because any Crabb, Polypus, or living
Elephant may breed in the Body by such like diseases, but because this by its
propagation into the adjacent parts represents the feet and claws of a
Crabbe: the other represents the flesh of the Sea-Polypus in its substance; and
the third because such as have the Leprosy have their skin wrinckled, rough,
and horrid with scales and knots, as the skin of a living Elephant. So truly
this disease of which we now enquire seems by good right to have deserved the
name Dracunculus, because in its whole conformation, color, quality and
production Why they are called Dacunculi.
into length and thickness it expresses the image of a Serpent. But whence,
will they say (if it be without life) is that manifest motion in the matter? We
reply that the humor the cause of this disease is subtle and hot, and so
runs with violence into the part whence it may seem to move. But when the
Dracunculi are separated, why do they put their heads as it were out of their
holes? we answer, in this the ancients have been very much deceived, because
after the suppuration the ulcer being opened, some nervous body being laid
bare, thrust forth and subjected it self to the sight, which by the convulsive
and shaking motion might express the crooked creeping of a Serpent. But they
will say, pain happens not unless to things endued with sense and life, but
this Dacunculus when he is drawn too violently especially if he be broken,
thereby will cause extreme pain: we do answer, that the conclusion does not
follow and is of no consequence, for these pains happen not unless when the
unprovident Surgeon draws or pulls instead of the Dracunculus some nervous or
membranous body swollen and repleate with an adust humor, whence there cannot
but be great pain that part being pulld which is the author ofsence. But it is
childish to say that the Dracunculus feels, for that it causes sharp pains
to the living body in which it is. Therefore that at last we may determine
something of the nature, essence and generation of these Dracunculi, I dare
boldly affirm it is nothing else but a tumor and abscesse bred from the heat
of the blood in a venenate kind. Such blood driven by the expulsive faculty
through the veins to the External parts, especially the limits, that is the
Arms and Legs, causes a tumor round and long often stretched from the joint
of the shoulder even to the wrist, or from the groine even to one of the
Anckles with tension, heat, renitency, pricking pain, and a fever. But this
tumor is some whiles stretched forth straight, otherwhiles into oblique and
crooked tumors, which has been the cause that many taken with this kind of
disease, and having their limbs so infolded as with the twinings of a Serpent
would say they had a Serpent. I have thus much to say of the Dracunculi,
especially of those of our own country.

For the cure, it is not unlike to the cure of a Phlegmon arising from a
defluxion, The Cure.
for here also in like manner the remedies must be varied according to the
four times of the disease, and the same rule of diet, phlebotomy and purging
must be observed which is before prescribed in the cure of a Plegmon.

The mention of the Dracunculi calls to my memory another kind of Abscesse,
So the Malu^pilate in Aristotle cap. 11. lib. 7. hist. animal.
altogether as rare. This our French men name Cridones, I think a Crinib us.
i. from hayres: it chiefly troubles children and pricks their backs like
thorns. They toss up and down being not able to take any rest. This disease
arises from small hairs which are scarce of a pins length, but those thick
and strong. It is cured with a fomentation of water more than warm, after
which you must presently apply an ointment made of honey and wheaten flower;
for so these hairs lying under the skin are allured and drawn forth; and
being thus drawn, they must be plucked out with small mullets. I imagine this
kind of disease was not known to the ancient Physicians.

The End of the Eighth Book.
OF VVOUNDS IN GENERAL. THE NINTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. What a Wound is, what the kinds and differences thereof are, and
from whence they may be drawn, or derived.
A Wound is a solution of Continuity, caused by a stroke, fall, or What a
Wound properly is.
bite, newly done, bloody, and with putrefaction, and filth. They also call it
a new simple ulcer; for the solution of continuity happens to all parts of the
body; but according to the diversity of the parts, it has diverse names amongst
the Greeks. For in the flesh it is called Helcos, in the bone Catagma, in the
nerve Spasma, in the Diverse appellations of wounds according to the varieties
of the parts.
ligament Thlsma, in the vessels Apospasma, in the Muscles Regma: and that
solution of continuity, which happens in the vessels, their mouths being open,
is termed Anastomasis, that which happens by erosion, Anaurosis; that which is
generated by sweating out and transcolation, Diapedesis. That these may be the
more easily understood, I have thought good to describe them in the following
table.

A Table of the differences of Wounds.
The differences of wounds are drawn or taken, From the nature of the parts in
which they are made or happen. But these parts are Either similar and these,
Either soft as the Glandules, Flesh, Fat, Marrow.
Or hard as A Bone, A Gristle.
Or of a middle consistence, as the Membranes, Ligaments, Fibers, Vessels,
Nerves, Veins, Arteries.

Principal as the Brain, Heart, Liver, to which some ad the womb and
Testicles.
Or Organicall and these either. Or serving the principal, as The Weason,
Lungs, gullet, Stomach, Gutts, Bladder.
Or neither The Ears, Nose, Feet, Hands, and other of the same kind.

From their proper essence, from whence they are called, Simple wounds When
there is no complication of any other disease or symptom besides.
Or compound, When there is a complication of some one or more diseases, which
unless they be taken away, we must not hope for to cure the wound.

From their quantity according to which they are called, Great, Long, Broad,
Deep.
Indifferent, Little, Short, Narrow, Super ficiarie.

From their figure, according to which they are named, Straight, Oblique,
Cornered.


CHAP. II. Of the causes of Wounds.
ALL things which may outwardly assail the body with force and violence, may
be counted the causes of wounds; which are called green, and properly Diverse
denominations from their causes.
bloody. These things are either animate, or inanimate. The animate, as the
bitings, and prickings of beasts. The Inanimate, as the stroke of an arrow,
sword, clubb, gunne, stone, a dagger, and all such like things.

From the variety of such like causes, they have diverse names: for those which
are made by sharp and pricking things are called punctures: those caused by
cutting things, are called wounds or gashes: and those which are made by heavy
and obtuse things are named Contusions, or wounds with Contusions.

CHAP. III. Of the signs of Wounds.
WOunds are first known by sight, and by the signs drawn from thence. The
Surgeon ought first and chiefly, to consider, what wounds are cureable, A
caution for making reports of Wounds.
and what not; what wounds will scarce admit of cure, and what may be easily
cured; for it is not the part of a prudent Surgeon, to promise cure in a
deadly or dangerous and difficult wound; Least he may seem to have killed him,
whom not the unsufficiencie of the Art, but the greatness of the wound has
slain.

But when the wound is dangerous, but yet without despair of recovery, it
belongs to him to admonish the Patients friends which are by, of the present
danger, and doubtful state of the wound; that if Art shall be overcome by the
greatness thereof, he shall not be thought ignorant of the Art, neither to
have deceived them.

But as this is the part and duty of a good and prudent Surgeon, so it is
the trick of a cheating and juggling knave, to enlarge small wounds, that so he
may seem A Iugling cheating Surgeon.
to have done a great cure, when it is nothing so.

But it is agreeable to reason, that the Surgeon professing the disease
easy to be cured, will think himself in credit bound by such promises and
his duty, and therefore seek all means for the quick recovery of the
patient; le^t that which was of its own nature small, may by his negligence
become great. Therefore it is expedient, he should know what wounds are to be
accounted great.

This (as Galen says) is three ways to be known; The first is by the
magnitude Lib. 4. Meth. cap. 6. 1.
and principallity of the part affected; for thus the wounds of the Brain,
Heart, and of the greater vessels, though small of themselves, yet are thought
great. Then from the greatness of the solution of continuity; for which cause
wounds may be judged Wounds are called great out of three respects.
great, in which much of the substance of the part is lost in every dimension,
though the part be one of these which are accounted servile. Then from the
malignitie; through which occasion the wounds of the joints are accounted
great, because for the most part, they are ill conditioned.

CHAP. IIII. Of Prognostickes to be made in VVounds.
THose Wounds are thought dangerous, wherein any large Nerve, Vein, What
wounds are dangerous.
or Artery are hurt. From the first there is fear of convulsion, but from the
other large effusion of the veinous, or arterious blood, whence the powers are
debilitated; also these are judged evil, which are upon the arm pitts,
groines, leskes, joints and between the fingers; and likewise those which hurt
the head or tail of a Muscle. They are least dangerous of all other which
wound only the fleshy substance. But they are deadly which are inflicted upon
the Bladder, Brain, Heart, Liver, Lungs, Stomach and small guts. But if any
Bone, Gristle, What least dangerous. What deadly. Hip. aphor. 19. Lib. 6.
Nerve or portion of the cheek or prepuce, shall be cut away, they cannot be
restored. Contused wounds are more difficult to cure, than those which are
only from a simple solution of continuity; for before you must think to heal
them up, you must suppurate and cleanse them; which cannot be done in a short
time. Wounds which are round and circular are so much the worse; for there can
be no unity unless by an angle, that is, a meeting together of two lines,
which can have no place in Why round Wounds are difficult to heals.
round wounds, because a circular figure consists of one oblique line. Besides,
wounds are by so much thought the greater, by how much their extremes and lips
are the further dis-joyned, which happens to round Wounds. Contrary to these
are cornered wounds or such as are made along the fibers, as such as may be
easily healed.

Wounds may be more easily healed in young men, than in old, because in them
nature is more vigorous, and there is a greater plenty of fruitful, or good
blood, by which the loss of the flesh may be the better and more readily
restored, which is slowlier done in an old body, by reason their blood is
smaller in quantity and more dry, and the strength of nature more languide.

Wounds received in the Spring, are not altogether so difficult to heal as
those Hip. lib. de ulcer. Hip. aph. 66. lib. 5.
taken in Winter or Summer. For all excess of heat and cold is hurtful to
them; it is ill for a convulsion to happen upon a Wound, for it is a sign that
some Nervous body is hurt; the brain suffering together therewith, as that
which is the original of the Nerves. A Tumor coming upon great Wounds is
good; for it shows the force of nature is able to expel that which is
harmefull, and to ease the wounded part. The organicall parts wholly cut off
cannot again be united: because a vital part once severed and plucked from
the trunk of the body cannot any more receive influence from the heart as from
a root without which there can be no life. The loosed continuity of the
Nerves, Veins, Arteries, and also the bones, is sometimes restored, not
truly, and as they say, according to the first intention, but by the second,
that is, by reposition of the like, but not of the same substance. The first
intention takes place in the fleshie parts by converting the Alimentary blood
into the proper substance of the wounded part. But the second, in the
spermatique parts in which the lost substance may be repaired by interposition
of some heterogeneous body, which nature, diligent for its own preservation,
substitutes in place of What a Callus is and whence it proceeds.
that which is lost: for thus the body, which restores and agglutinats, is no
bone but a Callus, whose original matter is from an humor somewhat grosser
than that, from whence the bones have their original and beginning.

This humor, when it shall come to the place of the fracture, agglutinateth the
ends of the bones together, which otherwise could never be so knit by reason
of their hardness. The bones of children are more easily and speedily united
by reason of the pliantnesse of their soft and tender substance. Lastly we
must here admonish Small and contemptible. Wounds often prove mortal
the Surgeon, that small Wounds and such as no Artisan will judge deadly,
do diverse times kill by reason of a certain occult and ill disposition of the
wounded, and incompassing bodies; for which cause we read it observed by
Hippocrates, that it is not sufficient for the Physician to perform his duty,
but also external things Aphor. 1, sect. 1
must be rightly prepared, and fitted.

CHAP. V. Of the Cure of Wounds in general.
THe Surgeon ought for the right cure of wounds to propose unto himself The
General Indication of Wounds.
the common and general indication: that is, the uniting of the divided parts,
which indication in such a case is thought upon and known even by the vulgar:
for that which is dis-joyned desires to be united, because union is contrary
to division. But by what means such union may be procured, is only known to
the skillful Artisan. Therefore we attain unto this chief and principal
Indication by the benefit of nature as it were the chief Agent, and the work
of the Surgeon as the servant of nature. And unless nature shall be strong
the Surgeon shall never attain to his conceived, and wished for end:
therefore that he may attain hereto, he must perform five things; the first
is, that if there be Five things necessary for uniting wounds.
any strange bodies, as pieces of Wood, Iron, Bones, bruised flesh, congealed
blood, or the like, whether they have come from without, or from within the
body, and shall be by accident fastened or stuck in the wound, he must take
them away, for otherwise there is no union to be expected.

Another is, that he join together the lips of the Wound; for they cannot
other-wise be agglutinated and united. The third is, that he keep close
together the joined lips. The fourth, that he preserve the temper of the
wounded part, for the distemper remaining, it is impossible to restore it to
its unity. The fifth is, that he correct the accidents, if any shall happen,
because these urging, the Physician is often forced to change the order of the
cure.

All strange and external bodies must be taken away, as speedily as is
possible, because they hinder the action of nature intending unity, especially
if they press or prick any Nervous body, or Tendon, whence pain or an
Abscesse may breed in any principal part, or other serving the principal.

Yet if by the quick and too hasty taking forth of such like bodies there be
fear of cruel pain or great effusion of blood, it will be far better to
commit the whole work to nature than to exasperate the Wound by too violent
hastening.

For nature by little and little will exclude, as contrary to it, or else
together with the Pus, what strange body soever shall be contained in the
wounded part. But if there shall be danger in delay, it will be fit the
Surgeon fall to work quickly, safely, and as mildely as the thing will
suffer: for effusion of blood, swooning, convulsion and other horrid symptoms,
follow upon the too rough and boystrous handling of Wounds, whereby the patient
shall be brought into greater danger than by the wound it self.

Therefore he may pull out the strange bodies, either with his fingers, or with
instruments, fit for that purpose: but they are sometimes more easily and
sometimes more hardly pulled forth, according as the body infixed is either
hard or easy to be found or pulled out. Which thing happens according to the
variety of the figure of such like bodies; according to the condition of the
part it self, soft, hard, or deep, in which these bodies are fastened more
straightly or more loosely; and then for fear of inferring any worse harm, as
the breaking of some Vessel; but how we may perform this first intention,
and also the expression of the instruments necessary for this purpose, shall be
shown in the particular treaties of wounds made by Gunshot, Arrows and the
like.

But the Surgeon shall attain to the second and third scope of curing wounds
by Ligatures and Sutures for to conjoyne and hold together the lips of wounds.
two and the same means, that is, by ligatures and sutures: which
notwithstanding before he use, he must well observe whether there be any
great flux of blood present, for he shall stop it if it be too violent; but
provoake it, if too slow, (unless by chance it shall be powered out into any
capacity or belly) that so the part freed from the superfluous quantity of
blood may be less subject to inflammation. Therefore the lips of the wounds
shall be put together, and shall be kept so joined by suture and ligatures:
Not truly of all, but only of those which both by their nature, and magnitude,
as also by the condition of the parts in which they are, are worthy and capable
of both the remedies. For a simple and small solution of continuity, stands
only in need of the Ligature which we call incarnative, especially, if it be
in the Arms or Legs; but that which divides the Muscles transversly, stands
in need of both Suture and Ligature; that so the Lips which are somewhat
far distant from each other, and as it were drawn toward their beginnings,
and ends, may be conjoined.

If any portion of a fleshy substance by reason of some great cut shall hang
down, it must necessarily be adjoined and kept in the place by suture. The
more notable and large Wounds of all the parts, stand in need of Suture, which
do not easily admit a Ligature, by reason of the figure and site of the part
in which they are, as the Ears, Nose, Hairy-scalpe, Eie-liddes, Lips, Belly
and Throat.

There are three sorts of Ligatures, by the joint consent of all the Ancients.
They Three sorts of Ligatures:
commonly call the first, a Glutinative or Incarnative; the second Expulsive,
the third Retentive. The Glutinative or Incarnative is fit for simple, green,
and yet What an incarnative Ligature is.
bloody wounds. This consists of two ends, and must so be drawn, that
beginning on the contrary part of the wound, we may so go upwards, partly
crossing it, and going downwards again, we may closely join together the
lips of the Wound. But let the Ligature be neither too strait, least it may
cause inflammation or pain; nor too loose, least it be of no use, and may not
well contain it.

The Expulsive Ligature is fit for sanious and fistulous ulcers, to press out
the filth What an expulsive.
contained in them. This is performed with one Rowler, having one simple head;
the beginning of binding must be taken from the bottom of the Sinus, or
bosom thereof; and there it must be bound more straightly, and so by little
and little going higher, you must remit something of that rigor, even to the
mouth of the Ulcer. That so (as we have said) the sanious matter may be pressed
forth.

The Retentive Ligature is fit for such parts as cannot suffer straight
binding, such What the retentive.
are the Throat, Belly, as also all parts oppressed with pain; For the part
vexed with pain, abhors binding. The use thereof, is to hold to local
Medicines. It is performed with a Rowler, which consists some whiles of one,
some whiles of more heads. All these Rowlers ought to be of linen, and such as
is neither too new, nor What the rowlers must be made of.
too old; neither too course, nor too fine. Their breadth must be
proportionable to the parts to which they shall be applied; the indication of
their largeness being taken from their magnitude, figure and site. As we
shall show more at large in our Tractates of Fractures and Dislocations. Why
and how the temper of the wounded part must he preserved.


The Surgeon shall perform the first scope of curing Wounds, which is of
preserving the temper of the Wounded part, by appointing a good order of Diet
by the Prescript of a Physician, by using universal and local Medicines. A
slender, cold, and moist Diet must be observed, until that time be passed,
wherein the patient may be safe and free from accidents which are usually
feared. Therefore let him be fed sparingly, especially if he be plethorick; he
shall abstain from salt and spiced flesh, and also from wine; If he shall be
of a Choleric or Sanguine nature: In steed of wine he shall use the decoction
of Barley or Liquerice, or Water and Sugar. He shall keep himself quiet; for
rest is (in Celsus opinion) the very best Medicine. He shall avoyde Venery,
Contentions, Brawles, Anger, and other perturbations of the mind. When he
shall seem to be past danger, it will be time to fall by little and little
to his accustomed manner of diet and life. Universal remedies are Phlebotomies
and purging, which have force to divert and hinder defluxion, whereby the temper
of the part might be in danger of change.

For Phlebotomy it is not always necessary, as in small wounds and bodies,
which In what wounds blood letting is not necessary.
are neither troubled with ill humors, nor plethoricke: But it is only
required in great wounds, where there is fear of defluxion, pain, Delirium,
Raving and unquietness; and lastly in a body that is Plethoricke, and when the
joints, tendons, or nerves are wounded. Gentle purgations must be appointed,
because the humors are moved and enraged by stronger; whence there is danger
of defluxion and inflammation: wherefore nothing is to be attempted in this
case, without the advice of a Physician.

The Topic and particular Medicines are Agglutinative, which ought to be
endued What medicines are to be judged agglutinative.
with a drying and astrictive quality, whereby they may hold together the lips
of the wound, and drive away defluxion, having always regard to the nature of
the part and the greatness of the disease. The Simple Medicines are Glibanum,
Al^es, Sarcocolla, Bole-Armenick, Terra sigillata, Sanguis Draconis, Common and
Venice Turpentine, Gum Elemni, Plantane, Horse-tayle, the greater Comfery,
Farina Volatilis, and many other things of this kind, which we shall speak of
hereafter in our Antidotary.

The fifth scope of healing wounds, is the Correction of those Symptoms or
Accidents which are accustomed to follow wounds, which thing verily makes the
Surgeon have much to do; For he is often forced to omit the proper cure of
the disease, so to resist the accidents and symptoms, as bleeding, pain,
inflammation, a fever, convulsion, palsy, talking idly, or distraction, and
the like. Of which we shall treat briefly and particularly, after we have
first spoken of Sutures as much as we shall think fitting for this place.

CHAP. VI. Of Sutures.
WHen Wounds are made along the thighs, Legs, and arms, they may easily
want Sutures, because the solution of continuity is easily restored What wounds
stand in no need of a suture
by Ligatures, but when they are made overthwart, they require a Suture,
because the flesh and all such like parts, being cut are drawn toward the
sound parts; whereby it comes to pass that they part the further each from
other; wherefore that they may be joined and so kept, they must be sowed, and
if the wound be deep, you must take up much flesh with your needle; for if you
only take hold of the upper part, the wound is only superficially healed: but
the matter shut up, and gathered together in the bottom of the wound, will
cause abscesses and hollow Ulcers: Wherefore now we must treat of making of
Sutures.

The first, called Interpunctus, leaves the distance of a fingers breadth, and
therefore The first manner of suture.
is fit for the green wounds of the fleshy parts, which cannot be cured with a
Ligature, and in which no heterogeneous or strange body remains; It is
performed after this manner. You must have a smooth needle with a thread in it,
having a three The form of your needle.
square point, that so it may the better enter the skin, with the head of it
some what hollowed, that the thread may lie therein; for so the needle will the
better go through. You must also have alittle pipe with a hole or window in
the end, which you must hold and thrust against the lip of the wound, that it
be not moved to the The form of the pipe. with a window in it.
one side or other, whilst you thrust thorough the needle: And that we may
see thorough that window when the needle is thrust thorough, and also draw it
together with the thread, and withal hold the lip of the wound in more firmly,
that it follow not at the drawing forth of the needle and thread. Having thus
pierced the lips of the wound, tie a knot, near to which cut off the thread;
least that if any of it be left below the knot, it may so stick to the
Emplasters that it cannot be plucked and separated from them without pain,
when they are taken off. But you must note, the first stitch must be thrust
through the midst of the wound, and then the second must be in that space which
is between the midst and one of the ends; but when you have made your
stitches, the lips of the wound must not be too closely joined, but a little
space must be left open between them, that the matter may have free passage
forth, and the inflammation and pain may be avoided: otherwise if they shall
be closely joined together without any distance between, a tumor after arising
when the matter shall come to suppuration, the lips will be so much distended
that they may easily be broken by the stiffness of the thread. But you must
neither take hold of too much nor too little flesh with your needle, for too
little will not hold, and too much causes pain and inflammation. And besides
leaves an ill favored scarre. Yet in deep wounds, such as are those which are
made in the thicker Muscles, the needle must be thrust home, that so it may
comprehend more of the fleshy substance; least the thread drawn away by the
weight of the flesh not taken hold of, may be broken. But often times wounds are
seen made in such places as it will be needful, the Surgeon should have a
crooked needle and pipe, otherwise the Suture will not succeed according to
his desire. Wherefore I have thought good to set forth both their figures, that
you may use either as occasion shall serve.

The Figure of Pipes with fenestels in them, and Needles fit for Sutures.


The second Suture is made just after the same manner as the Skinners sow
their The 2. manner of Suture.
^els or forrs. And the guts must be sowed with this kind of Suture, (if they
shall be at any time wounded) that the excrements come not forth by the wound.

The third Suture is made by one or more needles having thread in them, thrust
The third manner of Suture.
through the wound, the thread being wrapped to and again at the head and the
point of the needle, as boys use to fasten their needle, for fear of losing
it, in their caps, or clothes. This kind of Suture is fit in the curing and
healing of Hare-lips, as we shall show you hereafter expressed by a Figure.

The fourth kind of Suture is termed Gastroraphia, invented for the restoring
and The 4. kind of Suture termed Gastroraphia.
uniting the great Muscles of the Epigastrium, or lower belly, cut with a great
wound together with the Peritonaeum lying under them. The manner whereof we
will show in due place.

The fifth kind is called the Dry Suture, which we use only in the wounds of
the The 5. kind called the Dry Suture.
face, which also we will describe in its proper place.

CHAP. VII. Of the Flux of blood, which usually happens in wounds.
Often times great bleeding follows upon wounds, by reason of some vessel The
signs of blood flowing from an artery
cut, broken, or torn, which there is need to heal and help diligently,
because the blood is the treasure of nature, without which life cannot consist.
The Blood which flows from an Artery, is thus known. It is more subtle, it
runs forth as it were leaping, by reason of the vital spirit contained
together with it in the Arteries. On the contrary that which flows from a
Vein is more gross, black, and slow. Now there are many ways of stenching
blood.

The first and most usual is that, by which the lips of the wound are closed,
and The first way of staying bleeding.
unless it be somewhat deep, are contained by Medicines which have an
astringent, cooling, drying, and glutinous faculty; As terrae sigill. Boli
Armeni, ana.. ss. thuris, Mastichis, Myr hae, Aloes, ana.. ij. Farinae volat.
molend.. j. Fiat pulvis qui albumine ovi excipiatur. r Or. Thuris and Aloes,
ana. parts aequales. Let them be mixed with the white of an Egg, and the
down of a hare, and let the pledgets be dipped in these Medicines, as well
those which are put unto the wound as those which are applied about it. Then
let the wound be bound up with a double clop and fit Ligature, and the part be
so seated as may seem the least troublesome and most free from pain.

But if the blood cannot be stayed by this means, when you have taken off all
that covers it, you shall press the wound and the orifice of the Vessel
with your The 2. manner of stanching is.
thumb, so long until the blood shall be concrete about it, into so thick a
clott as may stop the passage.

But if it cannot be thus stayed, then the Suture (if any be) must be opened,
and the The 3. way by binding of the vessels.
mouth of the Vessel toward the original or root, must be taken hold of,
and bound with your needle and thread, with as great a portion of the flesh as
the condition of the part will permit. For thus I have staid great bleedings,
even in the amputation of members, as I shall show in fit place. To perform
this work, we are often forced to divide the skin which covers the wounded
Vessel. For if the Iugular vein, or Artery be cut, it will contract and
withdraw it self upwards and down-wards. Then the skin it self must be
laid open under which it lies, and thrusting a needle and thread under it, it
must be bound as I have offen done. But before An admonition
you loose the knot, it is fit the flesh be grown up, that it may stop the
mouth of the Vessel, least it should then bleed.

But if the condition of the part shall be such as may forbid this
comprehension, and binding of the Vessel, we must come to Escharoticks, such
as are the powder of The 4. way die Escharoticks.
burnt Vitriol, the powder of Mercury, with a small quantity of burnt Allume;
and Cawsticks which cause an Escar. The falling away of which must be left to
Nature, and not procured by art, least it should fall away before that the
orifice of the Vessel shall be stopped with the flesh, or clotted blood.

But some times it happens that the Surgeon is forced wholly to cut off the
vessel The 5. way by cutting off the vessels.
it self, that thus the ends of the cut vessel withdrawing themselves, and
shrincking upwards and downwards, being hidden by the quantity of the adjacent
and incompassing parts, the flux of blood, which was before not to be staid,
may be stopped with less labor. Yet this is an extreme remedy and not to
be used, unless you have in vain attempted the former.

CHAP. VIII. Of the pain which happens upon wounds.
THe pains which follows upon wounds ought to be quickly aswaged, because
Pains weakens the body, and causes defluxious.
nothing so quickly dejects the powers; and it always causes a defluxion, of
how good soever a habit and temper the body be of; for Nature ready to yield
assistance to the wounded part, always sends more humors to it, than are
needful for the nourishment thereof, whereby it comes to pass that the
defluxion is easily increased, either by the quantity, or quality, or by both.

Therefore to take away this pain the author of defluxion, let such Medicines
be applied to the part as have a repelling and mitigating faculty; as. Olei
Myrtini. Diverse Anodines or medicines to assuage pain.
and Rosarum, ana.. ij. Cerae alb.. j. Farinae hordei,. ss. Boli armeni, and
terra sigillat. ana.. vj. Melt the Wax in the Oils, then incorporate all the
rest, and according to Art, make a Medicine to be applied about the part, or.
Emplast. Diacalcith.. iv. Ole. Rosar. and aceti, ana.. ss. liquefiant simul,
and let a Medicine be made for the fore mentioned use. Irrigations of oil of
Roses and Mirtiles, with the white of an Egg, or a whole Egg added thereto,
may serve for lenitives, if there be no great inflammation; Rowlers and double
clothes moistened in Oxycrate, will be also convenient for the same purpose.
But the force of such Medicines must be often renewed, for when they are dried,
they augment the pain. But if the pain yield not to these, we must come to
narcoticke Medicines, such as are the Oil of Poppy, of Mandrake, a Caraplasme
of Henbane and Sorrel, adding thereto Mallows and Marshmallows, of which we
spoke formerly in treating of a Phlegmon.

Lastly, we must give heed to the cause of the pain, to the kind and nature of
the humor that flows down, and to the way which Nature affects: for according
to the variety of these things, the Medicines must be varied, as if heat cause
pain, it will be aswaged by application of cooling things; and the like reason
observed in the contrary; if Nature intend suppuration, you must help forwards
its endeavors with suppurating Medicines.

CHAP. IX. Of Convulsion by reason of a wound.
A Convulsion is an unvoluntary contraction of the Muscles (as of parts What a
Convulsion is.
moveable at our pleasure, toward their original, that is, the Brain and
Spinall Marrow, for by this the Convulsed member or the wholle body (if the
Convulsion be universal) cannot be moved at our pleasure. Yet motion is not
lost in a Convulsion as it is in a Palsy, but it is only depraved: and
because sometimes the Convulsion possesses the whole body, otherwhiles some
part thereof, you must note that there are three kinds of Convulsions in
General.

The first is called by the Greeks, Tetanos, when as the whole body grows
stiff Three kinds of an universal Convulsion.
like a stake that it cannot be moved any way.

The second is called Opisthotanos, which is when as the whole body is drawn
backwards.

The third is termed Emprosthotonos, which is when the whole body is bended or
crooked forwards. A particular Convulsion is, when as the Muscle of the Eye,
Tongue, and the like parts which is furnished with a Nerve, is taken with a
Convulsion. Repletion or Inanition, Sympathy or consent of pain cause a
Convulsion. Abundance Three causes of a convulsion Causes of Repletion.
of humors cause Repletion, dulling the body by immoderate eating and
drinking, and omission of exercise, or any accustomed evacuation, as
suppression of the Hemorrhoids and Courses: for hence are such like
excrementions humors drawn into the Nerves, with which they being replete and
filled, are dilated more than is fit, whence necessarily becoming more short,
they suffer Convulsion. Examples whereof appear in Leather and Lute or
Viol-strings, which swollen with moisture in a wet season are broken by
repletion.

Immoderate vomitings, fluxes, bleedings, cause Inanition or Emptiness,
wherefore a Convulsion caused by a wound, is deadly: as also by burning
fevers. For by Causes of Inanition.
these and the like causes, the inbred and primigeneous humidity of the Nerves
is wasted, so that they are contracted like leather which is shrunk up, by
being held too near the fire, or as fidle strings which dried with Summers
heat, are broken with violence, such a Convulsion is incurable: For it is
better a Fever follow a Convulsion, than a Convulsion a Fever; as we are
taught by Hippocrates, so that Aph. 26. sec. 2.
such a Fever be proportional to the strength of the convulsifique cause,
and the Convulsion proceed from Repletion; for the abundant and gross humor
causing the Convulsion is digested and wasted by the feverish heat.

The causes of a Convulsion by reason of pain, are either the puncture of a
Nerve, Causes of convulsion by consent of pain.
whether it be by a thing animal, as by the biting of a venomous beast; or by
a thing inanimate, as by the prick of a needle, thorn, or penknife: or great
and piercing cold, which is hurtful to the wounds, principally of the nervous
parts; whereby it comes to pass, that by causing great and bitter pain in the
nerves they are contracted toward their original, that is, the Brain, as if
they would crave succor from their parents in their distressed estate. Besides
also, an ill vapor carried to the brain from some putrefaction so vellicateth
it, that contracting it self, it also contracteth together with it all the
Nerves and Muscles, as we see it happens in those which have the falling
sickness. By which it appears that not only the brain itself suffers
together with the Nerves, but also the Nerves with the Brain. The signs
Signs of a convulsion.
of a Convulsion are difficult, painful and depraved motions, either of some
part or of the whole body, turning aside of the Eyes and whole Face, a
Contraction of the Lips, a drawing in of the Cheeks as if one laughed, and
an Universal sweat.

CHAP. X. The cure of a Convulsion.
THe cure of a Convulsion, is to be varied according to the variety of the
Convulsive cause, for that which proceeds from Repletion must be other-wise
cured, than that which is caused by Inanition, and that which proceeds The
cause of a Convulsion by Repletion.
of pain, otherwise than either of them. For that which is caused by Repletion
is cured by discussing and evacuating Medicines: as by diet conveniently
appointed, by purging, bleeding, digestive local Medicines, exercise,
frictions, sulphurious Baths and other things appointed by the prescription of
some learned Physician which shall oversee the cure, which may consume the
superfluous and excrementitious humors that possess the substance of the
Nerves, and habit of the body. The local remedies are Oils, Unguents and
Liniments, with which the Neck, Backbone and all the contracted parts shall be
anointed. The Oils are, the Oil of Foxes, Bays, Camomill, Worms,
Turpentine, of Costus, of Castorcum: The Ointments are Vnguentum Arragon,
Agrippae, de Althaea, Martiatum. This may be the form of a Liniment;. Olei
Chamaem. and Laurin. ana.. ij. Olei Vulp.. j. Vnguenti de Althaea and Marti.
an.. ss. Axungiae vulpis,. j. Aquae vitae,. j. ss. Cerae quantum sufficit. Make
a Liniment for your use, or. Olei Lumbric. de Spica and de Castoreo, ana.. iij.
Axng. hum. j. Sulphuris vivi,. ss. Cerae quantu^ sufficit. Make a Liniment, or.
Vnguenti Martiati, and Agrip. an.. iij. Olei de Terebinth.. j. ss. Olei
Salvia,. ss. Aquae vitae. j. Cerae. j. ss. fiat linimentum. But this disease is
cured by slender diet, and sweating with the Decoctions of Guiacum, because by
these remedies the gross, tough, and viscide excrements, which are in fault,
are digested.

A Convulsion proceeding of Inanition is to be cured by the use of those
things, which do wholesomly and moderately nourish. And therefore you must
prescribe a diet consisting of meats full of good nourishment, as broaths and
cullices of Capons, The cure of a Convulsion caused by inanition.
Pigeons, Veale, and Mutton, boiling therein Violet and Mallow leaves.
Conserves must be ordained, which may strengthen the debilitated powers, and
humect the habit of the body, such as are, the Conserves of Buglosse, Violets,
Borage and water Lillies. The following broth will be profitable,. Lactucae,
Buglos. and portul. ana. M. j. quatuor seminum frigid. major. an. ss. seminis
Barberis,. j. Let them al be boiled with a Chicken, and let him take the broth
every morning. If thirst oppress him, the following Iulep will be good.. Aquae
rosar.. iv. Aquae viol. lb. ss. Saccari albissimi. vj. fiat Iuiep, utatur in
siti. If the patient be bound in his body, emollient and humecting Clysters
shall be appointed, made of the decoction of a sheeps head and feet, Mallows,
Marsh Mallows, Pellitory of the wall, Violet leaves, and other things of the
like faculty; or that the remedy may be more ready and quickly made: let the
Clysters be of Oil and Milk. Topic remedies shall be Liniments and Bathes.
Let this be the example of a Liniment.. Olei Viol. and Amygdal. dulc. ana. ij.
Olei Lilior. and An Emolient Liniment for any Convulsion.
Lumbric. ana.. j. Axungiae porci recentis,. iij. Cerae novae quantum sufficit,
fiat Linimentum, with which let the whole spine and part affected be anointed:
This shall be the form of an emollient and humecting Bath.. Fol. Malvae, Bis
Malvae, Pariet. ana. An Emolient and humecting Bath.
M. vj. Seminis Lini and foenug. ana. lb. ss. Coquantur in Aqua communi,
addendo Olei Lillior. lb. viij. Make a Bath: Into which let the patient enter
when it is warm. When he shall come forth of the Bath, let him be dried with
warm Clothes, or rest in his bed avoiding sweat. But if the patient be able to
undergo the charge, it will be good to ordain a Bath of Milk, or Oil alone,
or of them equally mixed together.

CHAP. XI. Of the cure of a Convulsion, by sympathy and pain.
A Convulsion which is caused both by consent of pain and Communication of the
affect, is cured by remedies which are contrary to the dolorifique The cure of
a Convulsion by a puncture, or bite.
cause. For thus if it proceed from a puncture or venomous bite, the wound
must be dilated and enlarged by cutting the skin, that so the venenate matter
may flow forth more freely, for which purpose, also Medicines which are of a
thin and liquid consistence, but of a drying and digestive faculty shall be
powered in, to call forth and dissolve the virulency, as Treacle and Mithridate,
dissolved in Aqua vitae, with a little of some Mercuriall powder for this is a
noble A worthy Alex^pharmac^ or Antidote.
Antidote. Also cupping glasses and scarrifications will be good. Lastly the
condition of all dolorifique causes, shall be oppugned by the opposition of
contrary remedies, as if pain by reason of a pricked Nerve or Tendon, shall
cause a Convulsion, it must presently be resisted by proper remedies, as Oil
of Turpentine, of Euphorbium, mixed with Aqua vitae, and also with other
remedies appropriated to punctures of the Nerves. If the pain proceed from
excess of cold, because cold is hurtful to the Brain, the Spinall marrow,
and Nerves; the patient shall be placed in a hot air, such as that of a
Hot-house or Stoave, all the Spine of his back and Convulsed parts, must be
anointed with the hot Liniments above mentioned: For that is much better, than
suddenly to expose him from the conceaved convulcifique, cause to a most hot
fire or warm Bath. In the mean time the Surgeon must take diligent heed,
You must hinder the locking of the teeth.
that as soon as the signs of the Convulsion to come, or already present, or
at hand, do show themselves, that he put a stick between the patients teeth,
least they be fast locked by the pertinacious contraction of the Jaws: for
many in such a case have bit off their tongues, for which purpose he shall be
provided of an instrument called Speculum Oris, which may be dilated and
contracted according to your mind by the means of a screw, as the figures
underneath demonstrate, the one presenting it open and somewhat twined up, and
the other as it is shut.

The Figure of a Speculum Oris, to open the teeth when they are locked or held
fast together.


CHAP. XII. Of the Palsy.
THe Palsy is the resolving or mollification of the Nerves, with privation of
sense and motion, not truly of the whole body, but of the one part thereof, as
of the right or left side. And such is properly named the Palsy: What a Palsy
is.
for otherwise and less properly the resolution of some one member is also
called the Palsy: For when the whole body is resolved, it is an Apoplexy.
Therefore The differences thereof.
the Palsy sometimes takes half the body, otherwhiles the uper parts which
are between the navell and the head, otherwhiles the lower which are from the
navell to the feet; sometimes the tongue, gullet, bladder, yard, eyes, and
lastly any of the panicles of the body.

It differs from a Convulsion in its whole nature. For in a Convulsion, there
is a contention and contraction of the part, but in this a resolving and
relaxation thereof: besides, it commonly happens that the sense is either
abolished or very dull, which usually remains perfect in a Convulsion. There
are some which have a pricking, How it differs from a Convulsion.
and as it were great pain in the part.

The causes are internal or external, the internal are humors obstructing
one of the ventricles of the brain, or one side of the spinall marrow, so that
the Animal faculty, the worker of sense and motion, cannot by the Nerves come
to the part to The causes.
perform its action. The external causes are a fall, blow, and the like
injuries, by which often times the joints are dislocated, the spinall marrow
wrested aside, and constrictions and compressions of the Vertebrae arise, which
are causes that the Animal spirit cannot come to the Organes in its whole
substance. But it is easy by skill in Anatomy perfectly to understand by the
resolved part the seat of the morbifique cause, for when there is a Palsy
properly so called, that is when the right, or left side is wholly feized upon,
then you may know that the obstruction is in the brain, or spinall marrow; but
if the parts of the head being untoucht, either of the sides being wholly
resolved, the fault remains in the Original of the spinall marrow; if the
arms be taken with this disease, we may certainly think that the matter of
the disease lies hid in the 5. 6. and 7. Vertebra of the neck. But if the lower
members languish, we must judge the Paralitick cause to be contained in the
Vertebra of the loins and holy bone. Which thing the Surgeon must
diligently observe that he may always have recourse to the original of the
disease. The Palsy which proceeds from a Nerve cut, or exceedingly bruised,
is incurable, because the way to the part by that means is shut against the
Animal spirit. Old men scarce or never recover of the palsy, because their
native heat is languid, and they are oppressed with abundance of
excrementitious humors, neither does an inveterat palsy which has long
possessed the part, neither that which succeeds an Apoplexy, yeeldus any better
hope of cure. It is good for a It is good for a fever to happen upon a Palsy.
fever to come upon a Palsy, for it makes the dissipation of the resoloving
and relaxing humor, to be hoped for. When the member affected with the palsy,
is much wasted, and the opposite on the contrary, much increased in quantity,
heat and color, it is ill: For this is a sign of the extreme weakness of
the afflicted part, which suffers it self to be defrauded of its nourishment,
all the provision flowing to the sound or opposite side.

CHAP. XIII. Of the cure of the Palsy.
IN the cure of the Palsy we must not attempt any thing, unless we have first
used general remedies, diet and purging; all which care lies upon the learned
and prudent Physician. The Decoction of Guaiacum is very fit for this The
decoction of Guaiacumis good for a Palsy.
purpose, for it procures sweat and attenuates, digests and dries up all the
humidity which relaxeth the nerves: but when sweat does not flow it shall not
be unprofitable to put about the resolved members, bricks heated red hot in the
fire and quenchedin a decoction of Wine, Vinegar, and resolving herbs, or also
stone bottles, or Ox and Swines bladders, half filled with the same
decoction; for such heat which is actual Things actually hotegood for to be
applied to paraliticke me^bera.
resuscitateth and strengthens the heat of the part, which in this disease is
commonly very languid: Then the Patient shall go into a Bathing-tub, which is
veiled or covered over just as we have described in our Treatise of Bathes,
that so he may receave the vapor of the following Decoction.. Fol. Salviae,
Lavend. Lauri. major. Absinth. Thym. Angelicae, Rutae. ana. M. ss. Florum
Chamaem. Melil Anethi, Anthos. ana. P. ij. Baccar. Laur. and Juniper.
Conquassatar. ana.. j. Caryophyl.. ij. Aquae fontanae and Vini albi, ana. lb.
iv. Let them be all put in the Vessel mentioned in the Treatise lately
described for use. The patient shall keep himself in that Bathing-tub, as
long as his strength will give him leave, then let him be put into his bed well
covered, where he shall sweat again, be dried and rest. Then let him be
presently anointed with the following ointment, which Leonellus Faventinus much
commends,. Olei Laurini and de Terebinth. ana. iij. Olei Leon. Faventi. his
ointment.
Nardini and petrolei, ana. j Vini malvatici, iv. Aqua vitae,. ij. Pyrethri,
Piperis, Synap. Granor. lunip. Gummi hederae, anacard. Ladani puri, an. j. ss.
Terantur and misceantur omnia cum Olets and Vino: bulliant in vasi duplici
usque ad Vini consumptionem, facta forti expressione, add Galbani, Bdillit,
Euphorbil. Myrrhae, Castorei, adipis ursi, Anatis, Ciconiae, an. ij. Make an
ointment in form of a liniment, adding a little wax if need shall require. Or
you shall use the following remedy approved by many Physicians, Myrrhae and
aloes, An approved ointment for the Palsy.
Spicaenardi, Sanguinis draconis, thuris, opopanacis, Bdellii. Carpobalsami,
amemi, sarcocollae, eroci, mastio. gumml arabici, styrac. liquidae, ladani,
castorei, ana. ij. Moschi,. j. aquae vitae,. j. Terebinthinae venetae, ad
pondus omnium, pulverabuntur pulverisanda and gummi eliquabuntur cum aqua vitae
and aceti tantillo. And let them all be put in fit vessels, that they may be
distilled in Balneo Mariae, and let the spine of the back, and paralytick
limbs be anointed with the liquor which comes from thence. I have often tried
the force of this following Medicine.. rad. Angel. Ireos, floren. gentian.
cyperi, ana.. j. Calami aromat. A distilled water good to wash them outwardly,
and to drink inwardly,
Cinam, Caryophil. nucis Mosch. macis, ana.. ij. Salviae, major. Iuae
arthriticae, Lavend. rorism. satureiae, puleg. calament. mentastri, ana. M. ss.
florum chamaem. melil. hyperic. anthos, staechad. ana. P. j. Concisa omnia
contundantur, and in Aqua vit. and Vini malvat. an. lb. ij. infundantur. And
let them be distilled in Balneo Mariae, like the former, let the affected parts
be moistened with the distilled liquor, of which also you may give the patient
a spoone full to drink in the morning with some Sugar. For thus the stomach
will be heated, and much phlegm contained therein as the fuel of this
disease, will be consumed.

You must also appoint exercises of the affected parts and frequent and hard
frictions, with hot linen clothes, that the native heat may be recalled and
the excrements Exercises and frictions.
contained in the parts digested: You may also use the Chymicall oils of
Rosemary, Time, Lavander, Cloves, Nutmegs, and lastly of all spices, the manner
of extracting, Chymicall oils.
whereof we shall hereafter declare in a peculiar Treatise.

CHAP. XIV. Of Sowning.
SOwning is a sudden and pertinacious defect of all the powers, but
especially the Vital; In this the Patients lie without motion and sense, so
that the Ancients thought that it differed from death only in continuance of
time. What Sowning is.
The cause of sowning, which happens to those that are wounded, is bleeding,
which causes a dissipation of the spirits: or fear which causes a Three
causes of sowning.
sudden and joint retirement of the spirits to the heart. Whence follows an
intermission of the proper duty as also of the rest of the faculties, whilst
they being thus troubled, are at a stand. Also Sowning happens by a putrid and
venenate vapor, carried to the heart by the Arteries, and to the Brain by the
Nerves; by which you may gather that all sowning happens by three causes. The
first is, by dissipation of the spirits and native heat, as in great bleeding.
And then by the oppression of these spirits by obstruction, or compression as
in a fear, or tumult; For thus the spirits fly back hastily from the surface
and habit of the body, unto the heart and center. Lastly, by corruption, as in
bodies filled with ill humors, and in poisonous wounds. The signs of Sowning
are Palenes, a dewy and sudden sweat arising, the failing of the pulse, a
sudden falling of the body upon the ground without sense and motion, a
coldness possessing the whole body, so that the Patient may seem rather dead,
than alive. For many of these who fall into a sown dye unless they have
present help.

Therefore you shall help them, if when they are ready to fall, you sprinckle
much The cure of sowning caused by dissipation of spirits.
cold water in their face, if that the sowning happen by dissipation of the
spirits, or if they shall be set with their faces upwards, upon a bed or on the
ground, as gently as may be; and if you give them bread dipped in wine to hold
and chew in their mouths. But if it be caused by a putrid vapor and poisonous
air, you shall give them a little The cure of sowning caused by a venenate
air. The cure of Sowning caused by oppression and obstruction.
Mithridat or Treacle in Aqua vitae with a spoone, as I usually do to those
which have the plague, or any part affected with a Gangreene, or sphacell. But
if the patients cannot be raised out of their sownes, by reason of the
pertinatious oppression and compression of the spirits about the heart, you
must give them all such things as have power to diffuse, callforth and
resuscitat the spirits, such as are, strong wines to drink, sweet perfumes to
smell: You must call them by their own name, loud in their ear, and you must
pluck them somewhat hard by the hairs of the Temples, and neck. Also rub the
temples, nostrils, wrests and palms of the Hands with Aquavitae, wherein
Cloves, Nutmegs, and Ginger have been steeped.

CHAP. XV. Of Delirium (i.) Raving, Talking idly or Doting.
DOting, or talking idly, here is used for a symptom which commonly happens
in fevers caused by a wound, and inflammation; and it is a perturbation What a
Symptomaticall Delirium is. The causes thereof.
of the fantasy, and function of the mind, not long enduring. Wherefore such
a doting happens upon wounds, by reason of vehement pain, and a fever, when
as the nervous parts as the joints, stomach, and middriffe shall be violated.

For the Ancients did therefore call the Middriffe Phrenae, because when this
is hurt Why the brain suffers with the midriffe.
as if the mind it self were hurt, a certain frenzy ensues, that is, a
perturbation of the Animal faculty, which is employed in ratiocination; by
reason of the community which the Diaphragma has with the Brain, by the
nerves, sent from the sixth Conjugation, which are carried to the stomach.
Therefore doting happens by too much bleeding, which causes a dissipation of
the spirits, whereby it happens that the motions and thoughts of the mind err,
as we see it happens to those who have bled much in the Amputation of a member.
And it happens by the puncture of a venomous beast, or from seed retained or
corrupted in the womb, or from a Gangreen or Sphacel, from a venenate and
putrid air carried up to the brain, or from a sudden tumult and fear.
Lastly, what things soever with any distemper especially hot, do hurt and
debilitate the mind. These may cause doting by the afflux of humors, specially
choleric, by dissipation, oppression or corruption of the spirits. Therefore
if it shall The Cure
proceed from the inflammation of the brain, and Meninges or Membranes
thereof; after purging and blood letting by the prescription of a Physician, the
hair being shaved or cut off, the head shall be fomented with rose vinegar,
and then an Emplaster of Diacalcitheos dissolved in oil and vinegar of Roses,
shall be laid thereupon. Sleep shall be procured with Barley creames, wherein
the seeds of white Poppy have been boiled, with broaths made of the Decoction
of the cold seeds of Lettuce, Purslaine, Sorrel and such like. Cold things
shall be applied to his nostrils, as the seeds of Poppy gently beaten with
Rose Water and a little vinegar. Let him have merry and pleasant Companions
that may divert his mind from all cogitation of sorrowful things, and may ease
and free him of cares, and with their sweet entreaties may bring him to
himself again. But if it happen by default of the spirits, you must seek
remedy from these things which have been set down in the Chapter of Sowning.

The End of the Ninth Book.
OF THE GREEN AND BLOODY VVOVNDS OF EACH PART. THE TENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the kinds or differences of a broken Scull.
NOw that we have briefly treated of wounds in general, that is, of their
differences, signs, causes, prognostics and cure, and also showed the reason
of the accidents and symptoms which usually follow and accompany them; it
remains that we treat of them as trey are incident to each part, because the
cure of wounds must be diversely performed according to the diversity of the
parts. Now we will begin with the The differences of a broken head.
wounds of the head. Therefore the head has the hayry scalpe lightly bruised
without any wound, otherwhiles it is wounded without a Contusion, and sometimes
it is both contused and wounded: but a fracture made in the Scull, is sometimes
superficiary, sometimes it descends even to the Diploe, sometimes it penetrats
through the 2. Tables, and the Meninges into the very substance of the Brain;
besides, the brain is often times moved and shaken with breaking of the
internal veins, and diverse symptoms happen when there appears no wound at
all in the head: of all, and every of which we will speak in order, and add
their cure, especially according to the opinion of the divine Hippocrates. He
in his Book of the wounds of the head, seems to have The kinds of a broken
Scul out of Hippocrates.
made 4. or 5. kinds of fractures of the Scull. The first is called a fissure
or fracture, the 2. a contusion or collision, the 3. is termed Effractura, the
4. is named Seeds, or a seat; the 5. (if you please to add it) you may call a
Counterfissure, or as the interpreter of Paulus calls it, a Resonitus. As when
the bone is cleft on the contrary side, to that which received the stroke.
There are many differences of these 5. kinds of a broken Scull. For some
fractures are great, some small, and others indifferent; some run out to a
Differences from their quantity.
greater length or breadth; others are more contracted; some reside only in the
superficies; others descend to the Diploe, or else pierce thorough both the
Tables of the Scull; some run in a right line, others in an oblique and
circular; some are complicated Differences from their figure. From their
complication.
amongst themselves, as a fissure is necessarily and always accompanied with a
Collision or Contusion; and others are associated with diverse accidents, as
pain, heat, swelling, bleeding and the like. Sometimes the Scull is so broken,
that the membrane lying under it, is pressed with shivers of the bone, as with
pricking needles. Somewhiles none of the bones falls off. All which differences
are diligently to be observed, because they force us to vary the cure, and
therefore for the help of memory, I have thought good to describe them in the
following Table.

A Table of the fractures of the Scull.
A fracture, or solution of continuity in the Scull is caused either, by
Contusion, that is, a collision of a thing bruising, hard, heavy and obtuse,
which shall fall or be smitten against the head, or against which the head shall
be knocked, so that the broken bones are divided, or Keep their natural
figure and site, touching each other, whence proceeds that fracture of the
Scull which is called a fissure, which is Either manifest, and apparent, that
is To your sight, To your feeling, Or instrument.
Or obscure and not manifest, when as not the part which received the blow is
wounded, but the contrary thereto; and that happens either. In the same bone,
and that 2 manner of ways as On the side, as side example, then the right side
of the bone of the forehead is stricken, the left is cleft. Or from above to
below, as when not the first Table which received the blow is cleft, but that
which is under it.
In diverse bones to wit in such men as want sutures, or have them very close,
or disposed otherwise then is fit, and this opposition is, either From the
right side to the left, and so on the contrary, as when the right Bregma is
struck, and the left cleft. From before to behind and the emtrary, as when the
forehead is smitten, the nowle is cleft.

Or between both, that is, the obscure and manifest, as that which is termed a
Capillary fissure, and is manifested by smearing it over with oil, and writing
ink.
Or loose that site, and that either Wholly so that the particles of the broken
bone removed from their seat, and falling down, press the membrane, whence
proceeds that kind of effracture which reteines a kind of attrition, when as
the bone struck upon is broken as it were into many fragments, shivers and
scailes, either apparent, or hid in the sound bone, so that it is pressed
down. Or in some sort; as when the broken bone is in some part separated, but
in others adheres to the whole bone, whence another kind of effracture arises;
you may call it Arched, when as the bone so swells up, that it leaves an empty
space below.

Or by incision of a sharp, or cutting thing, but that incision is made,
either by Succision, when the bone is so cut, that in some part it yet adheres
to the sound bone. Rescission, when the fragment falls down wholly broken off.
Or Seat, when the mark of the weapon remains imprinted in the wound, that
the wound is of no more length, nor breadth than the weapon fell upon.


Another Table of the differences of a fractured Scull.
The differences of fractures common to these of all other parts are drawn,
either from Their nature, according to which fractures are called, Simple, as
when they are found solitary and by themselves. Compound and that either
Mutually with themselves, as a contusion, or collision with incision, a fissure
with an effracture. Or with other symptoms, as swelling, pain, heat,
bleeding, convulsion and the like.

Their Quantity whence they are called, great, indifferent and small, according
to the triple dimension of length, breadth and profunditie. Their figure, from
whence they are called. Right, Oblique, Transverse, Round, Triangular.
Their site, whence they are termed on the fore or back, or the right or left,
or the upper or lower part; or superficiary and profound. The part, whence it
is called a Fracture of the Forehead, Nowle, Bregma, and Stony bones; and hence
it is judged, what may be deadly, or hopeful of recovery, easy or difficult
to cure.

CHAP. II. Of the causes and signs of a broken Scull.
THe causes of a broken Scull are external, as a fall, a blow or stroke with
any kind of weapon, sharp, obtuse, heavy, hard, the bitings of The external
causes.
Beasts, and many other things of the like kind. But the signs by which we
come to know that the Scull is broken, are of two kinds; for some of them are
found out by the reasoning and discourse of the mind, other by the sense, as
those which lay open the wound to the eye and hand.

The Rational signs show by these things which have happened upon the thing
it Rational causes.
self, whether it be, and of what sort it is. For you may know the Scull is
broken, if the patient shall fall down with the stroke, or if he shall fall
headlong from a high place upon some hard thing. If for some time after the
stroke, he shall lie without speaking, sight, and hearing, if he shall have
felt and feel much pain, so that he is often forced to put his hand to the
wound. But also the weapon is to be considered, that is, whether it be heavy,
obtuse, pricking or sharp. Also we must consider with what and how great
strength the stroke was given, and with how great anger and from what distance
the weapon fell. Also he must consider whether the patient received the blow
with his head unarmed and naked; whether he fell into a sown presently after
the blow; whether when he came to himself, he was in his right senses; whether
his eyes were blinded, whether he was troubled with a giddines or dizines, and
whether he bled at the nose, mouth, ears, or eyes, and lastly whether he
vomited. For Hippocrates writes, that Aphor. 50. sec. 6.
those who have their brain cut, must necessarily have a fever and vomiting
of choler to ensue thereupon, which Galen confirming in his Commentary says,
that the same happens also when the wound comes to the Membranes of the brain.

Also a dull sound as from a broken vessel coming from the skull, (the hairy
sealpe and Pericranium being taken off) and it being lightly smitten upon with
an Iron probe, is said to be a sign of a fracture thereof, as it is recorded
by Paulns Lib. 8, cap. 4.
Aegineta. Truly all these signs make a great conjecture or rather
assuredness that the skull is wounded, and the brain hurt, as which cannot
happen unless the bone be broken, as Celsus has written. Yet many have had
their sculles broken, who had no such sign immediately after the blow; but this
is very seldom. But I do not think fit amongst so many signs, here to omit
that which is set down by Guido. If any (faith he) will know in what place the
scull is broke, let the patient hold fast between his foreteenth, one end of a
lute string or thread, and the Surgeon hold the other in his hand; then let
him lightly touch or play upon the string with his fingers; for in the very
instant of the sound or stroke, the patient will be certainly admonished, or
perfectly perceive the part of the scull that is broken, and as overcome and
forest by this sense of pain, will by lifting up his hand make demonstration
thereof. As yet I have not beeneable to find the truth hereof by experience,
although I have made trial of it in many. Wherefore I cannot say any thing
certainly of this sign, as neither of that which is mentioned by Hippocrates
in Coais Pras. Hippocrates and Guidoes conjecturall fignes of a broken scull.
In such as you doubt, whether the bones of the scull be broken, or not, you
must judge by giving them the stalk of Asphodill, to chaw on both sides of
their jaws, but so that you bid them withal observe, whether they perceive
any bone to crackle, or make a noise in their heads, for these which are
broken seem to make a noise.

But passing over these things, now let us come to these signs, which may be
obvious to our senses.

CHAP. III. Of the signs of a broken skull, which are manifest to our sense.
THese signs are here said to be manifest to sense, which when the bone is
bared, manifest the wound to our eyes, fingers and probe. But if the Sensible
signs of a broken scull before the dividing of the skin.
hairs stand upon one end in the wound, you may know the bone is broke,
because the hair which yields to the violence of the blow, cannot be so cut,
the bone which resists the stroke being not violated, as it is observed by
Hippocrates; wherefore we may by the sight of this one thing, before any
inspection of the wound it self, suspect by a probable conjecture, that Lib.
de vuluere cap.
the Scull is broken, and persuade the beholders or standers by so much.

Moreover we may, before we have cut the skin acrosse, or baid lare the bone,
give a guess by our feeling, whether the scull be broken, or no, if we by
pressing down our fingers near the wound shall perceive the bone either to
stand up, or be pressed down otherwise than it should naturally be.

The skin being cut crossewise and the bone laid bare, if the fracture be not
obvious to the eye, you must try with your probe, which must neither be too
thin What a probe must be used in searching for a fracture.
nor to sharp, least by falling into some natural cranyes, it may cause us to
suspect without any cause that the bone is broken; neither let it betoo thick,
lest the little clifts may deceive you. If when your probe comes to the bone,
it meets with nothing but that which is smooth and slippery, it is a sign
that it is whole.

But on the contrary, if you find it any thing rough, specially where there is
no suture, it shows the bone is broken. But let the Surgeon consider, that
the fractures are not seldom upon the futures; and that the futures have not
always one and their natural site; as also it often comes to pass that the
broken clefte, or cut bone can neither be perceived by your sight, nor
instrument; wherefore if you think there is any such thing, by the rational
signs above mentioned, annointe the place with writing Incke, and oil, and so
you shall find the crack or clift, by the means we shall show you hereafter.

When you are certain of the fracture, then you must diligently consider the
greatness of the disease, and apply medicines speedily. Verily when a fracture
chances to light upon any future, the disease is hard to be known, unless the
fracture be very Lib. 5. Epid. in Autonomus of Omsium Hipcrates was deceized by
the futures.
great, because the futures by their clifts and roughness resemble fractures;
wherefore Hippocrates faith that he was deceived by them. Now having briefly
delivered the differences and signs of a broken scull, it is time to come to
the several kinds thereof, with a Fissure.

CHAP. IIII. Of a Fissure, being the first kind of a broken scull.
IF the Surgeon by the forementioned signs shall know that the scull is
Upon what occasion the hairy sealpe must be cut.
broken, or cracked, and if the Wound made in the musculous skin shall not be
thought sufficient for ordering the fissure, then must he shave off the hair,
and cut with a razour, or incision knife, the musculous skin with the
Pericranium lying under it, in a triangular or quadrangular figure to a
proportionable bigness, always shunning, as much as in him lies, the futures
and temples; neither must the fear any harm to ensue hereof; for it is far
better to bare Celsus.
the bone by cutting the skin, then to suffer the kind and nature of the
fracture to remain unknown, by a too religious preservation of the skin;
for the skin is cured without any great ado, though plucked off to no purpose.

For it is much more expedient (in Hippocrates opinion) to cure diseases safely
and Hippocrater.
securely though not speedily; than to do it in a shorter time with fear of
relapse and greater inconveniences. Let this dissection be made with a
razour, or sharp knife, and if there be any Wound made in the skin by the
weapon, let one of your incisions be made agreeable thereto.

A Razour, or Incision knife.


Now therefore the Musculous skin together with the Pericranium must be
divided and cut with a sharp razour pressed and guided with a strong and
steady hand; The manner how to pull the hairiesealp from the broken scull.
then must it be so plucked from the bone, or scull lying under it, that none
thereof remain upon the bone; for if it should be rent or torn with the
Trepane, it would cause vehement fevers with inflammation. You must begin to
pull it back at the corners of the lines crossing each other with right
angles, with this Chissell whose figure you see here expressed.

A Chissell or Instrument to pull back or separate the Pericranium from the
Scull.


Then you must fill all the wound with boulsters of fine soft linte, that so
the lips may be kept further a sunder. But you shall apply upon it medicines
fit to stanch blood. But if it come so to pass that the blood flows forth so
violently, that it can be stayed by no means, the vessel it self must be
bound, after this manner

First thrust thorough the musculous skin on the outside with a needle and
The manner to bind a vessel in case of too much bleeding.
thread, then thrust the needle back again; then tie the thread on a knot on
the outside, but first put some lint rolled up to the bigness of a Goose
quill between the thread and the hairy scalpe on both sides thereof, least the
strait twitching of the thread which may serve to stay the bleeding, may cut and
tear the skin, or cause pain: then must you raise his head somewhat higher.

I have lately tried, and performed this upon a certain Coachman, who thrown
A History.
from the Coach upon his head on a pavement of freestone, exceedingly bruised
the hind part of the Bregma, for which cause it was fit to open the Musculous
skin, with a cross incision, both that the congealed blood might be pressed
out, as also that the fracture (if there were any) might be observed. But an
Artery being cut in performance hereof, when as the Surgeon who was there
present could not stay the blood leaping out with violence; and the Coachman
already had lost so great a quantity thereof, that his strength was so much
decayed, that he could not stir himself in his bed, or scarce speak: I
being called, showed them by experience, that whereas a stringent medicines
were used before to no purpose, it was better to stay the bleeding by binding
the vessel, than to let the patient die for a childish fear of pricking him.

But that we may return to our former matter, the Surgeon shall the next
day consider with what kind of fracture the bone is hurt; and if no signs of
hurt appear to the eyes, nor be perceived with your fingers and probe, yet
some of the rational signs may cause one to have a conjecture that there is a
fracture: Then you A way to find a fracture in the scull, when it presents not
it self to the view at the first.
must anoint as we told you before, the bared bone with writing Ink, and a
little oil of Roses; that the cleft or crack may be dyed or colored
therewith, if that therebe any there. Then the next dressing you must dry the
bone with a linen cloth, and scrape off the Ink, and oil, with scraping
Instruments made for the purpose: if any part thereof, shall be suncke into the
bone; for if there be any crack, it will be black; Wherefore you must continue
scraping until no sign of the fissure remain, or else until you come even
to the Dura Matter. But that he may be more certain whether the fissure pierce
thorough both the Tables of the scull, he must bid the Patient, that stopping
his nose and mouth, he strive to breathe with a great endeavor. For then bloody
matter or sanies will sweat thorough the fissure: For the breath driven forth A
sign that both the Tables are broken.
of the chest, and prohibited passage forth, swells and lifts up the substance
of the brain, and the Meninges, wherereupon that frothy humidity and Sanies
sweats forth. Therefore then the bone must be cut even to the Dura Matter, with
Radule and other scraping Instruments, fit for that purpose, yet so as you hurt
not the membrane; but if the fissure shall be somewhat long, it will not be
convenient to follow it all the extent thereof: for nature will repair and
restore the remnant of the fissure by generating a Callus, besides also the
Surgeon according to Celsus opinion must take away as little of the bone as
he can, because there is nothing so fit to cover the brain, as the scull.
Therefore it shall suffice to make a passage, whereby the blood and Sanies may
pass and be drawn forth, least that matter being suppressed may corrupt the
bone, and cause an inflammation in the brain. But the broken bone must be
taken forth within three days if it be possible, especially in Summer for
fear of inflammation. Yet I have oftentimes taken forth with a Trepan and with
Scrapers the bones You may use the Trepan after the tenth day.
of the scul, after the seaventeenth day, both in Winter and Summer; and that
with happy success. Which I have the rather noted, least any should, at any
time, suffer the wounded to be left destitute of remedy: for it is better to
try a doubtful remedy than none: Yet the Bystanders shall be admonished and
told of the danger, for many more die who have not the broken bones of the
scull taken out, than those that have.

But the Instruments, with which the wounded or cleft bones may be cut out are
called Scalpri or Radulae, of which I have caused diverse sorts to be here
decyphered, that every one might take his choice, according to his mind, and
as shall be best for his purpose. But all of them may be scrued into one
handle, the figure whereof I have here exhibited.

Radulae or Scalpri (i) Shavers or Scrapers.


Radulae of another form, for the better cutting of the greater bones.


To conclude, when the scull shall be wounded or broken with a simpleifissure,
the It it sufficient in a simple fissure to dilate it with your Scalpri only
and not to Trepan it.
Surgeon must think he has done sufficient to the patient; and in his Art,
if he shall divide the bone and dilate the fissure or cleft with the described
Instruments, though he have used no Trepan, although the fissure pierce
thorough both the Tables. But if it does not exceed the first Table, you must
stay your scrapers as soon as you come to the second, according to the opinion
of Paulus: but if the bone shall be broken, and shivered into many pieces, they
shall be taken forth with fit Instruments, using also a Trepan if need shall
require, after the same manner as we shall show you hereafter.

CHAP. V. Of a Contusion, which is the second sort of fracture.
AN Ecchymosis, that is, an effusion of blood, presently concreating under the
What an Ecchymosis is.
musculous skin, without any wound, is often caused by a violent Contusion.
This Contusion if it shall be great, so that the skin be divided from the
scull, it is expedient, that you make an incision, whereby the blood may be
evacuated and emptied. For in this case you must wholly desist from suppurative
medicines, How (...) contusion of the scull must be cured.
(which otherwise would be of good use in a fleshy part) by reason that all
movst things are hurtful to the bones, as shall be shown hereafter.

Such like Contusions more frequently happen in children, being easily
perceived by the softness, and inundation of the contused part: forth of which
often times when I have opened them with my incision knife, serous, clotted and
blackish blood has issued. The residue of the cure is perfected by moderate
compression of the part, and drying medicines. Moreover the scull of a child,
may be pressed down, by a Different cures of a depressed scull.
great contusion, even as we see it happens in thin vessels of brass, lead,
or pewter, for often times by the pressure of your finger, they are so dented in,
that the print thereof remains; yet sometimes they fly back of themselves,
and again acquire their former plainness and equabilitie, which also happens,
in the bones of children, women, and such as are soft, humide and phlegmatic.
But if the bones do not spring back of themselves, you must apply a cupping
glass with a great flame; withal command the patient, to force his breath up
as powerfully as he can, keeping his mouth and nose close shut; for thus there
will be hope, to restore the depressed bone to its place, by the spirits forced
upwards to the brain and scull, by the powerful attraction of the cupping
glass. But if so be that the bone cannot by this means be restored, then you
must make an incision in the skin, and fasten such a Trepan, as you see here
deliniated, into the deprest, or settled part of the bone, and so pull it
directly upwards, just as we see Coopers raise the staves of their caske, when
they are sunk too much in.

But if the bone shall be too strong, thick, and dense, so that this
Instrument will not serve to pluck it forth; then you must perforate the
scull, in the very center of the depression; and with this threefold
Instrument, or Levatory put into the hole, lift up and restore the bone to its
natural site; for this same Instrument is of strength sufficient for that
purpose. It is made with three feet, that so it may be applied to any part of
the head which is round; but diverse heads may be fitted to the end thereof
according as the business shall require, as the figure here placed does show.

A three footed Levatorie.


A deliniation of other Levatories.
A A. Shows the point or tongue of the Levatory, which must be somewhat dull,
that so it may be the more gently and easily put between the Dura Matter and
the scull, and this part thereof may be lifted up so much by the head or handle
taken in your hand, as the necessity of the present operation shall require.

B. Intimates the body of the Levatory, which must be four square, lest the
point or tongue put thereon should not stand fast, but the end of this Body
must rest upon the sound bone, as on a sure foundation.

The use thereof is, thus; put the point or tongue under the broken or
depressed bone, then lift the handle up with your hand, that so the depressed
bone may be elevated.

C. Shows the first Arm of the other Levatory, whose crooked end must be
gently put under the depressed bone.

D. Shows the other Arm, which must rest on the sound bone, that by the firm
standing thereof, it may life up the depressed bone.



But if at any time it comes to pass, that the bone is not totally broken or
deprest, but only on one side; it will be fit, so to lift it up, as also to
make a vent for the issuing out of the filth, to devide the scull with little
sawes like these, which ye see here expressed, for thus so much of the bone, as
shall be thought needful, may be cut off without compression, neither will
there be any danger of hurting the brain or membrane with the broken bone.

The Figures of Sawes fit to divide the scull.


But if by such signs as are present, and shall appear, we perceive or judge
that the contusion goes but to the second Table, or scarce so far; the baring
or taking away of the bone, must go no further than the contusion reaches; for
that will be sufficient to eschew and divert Inflammation and diverse other
symptoms. And this shall be done with a scaling or Desquamatory Trepan (as
they term it) with which, you may easily take up as much of the bone, as you
shall think expedient: And I have here given you the figure thereof.

A Desquamatorie or Scaling Trepan.


CHAP. VI. Of an Effracture, depression of the bone, being the third kind of
Fracture.
BEfore I come to speak of an Effracture, I think it not amiss to crave
pardon of the courteous and understanding Reader, for this reason especially,
that as in the former Chapter, when I had determined and appointed to speak of
a Contusion. I inserted many things of a Depression; so also in this chapter of
an Effracture, I intend to intermixe something of a Contusion; we do not this
through any ignorance of the thing it self; for we What a contusion is.
know that it is called a contusion, when the bone is deprest and crushed, but
falls not down. But an Effracture is when the bone falls down and is broken
by a most violent blow. But it can scarce come so to pass, but that the things
themselves must be What an Effracture is.
confounded and mixed, both as they are done; and also when they are spoken of:
so that you shall scarce see a Contusion without an Effracture, or this without
that. Therefore the bones are often broken off and driven down with great and
forcible blows, with clubbes whether round or square, or by falling from a
high place directly The causes of Effractures.
down, more or less according to the force of the blow, kind of weapon, and
condition of the part receiving the same: Wherefore you must be provided with
diversity of remedies and Instruments to encounter therewith. Wherefore admit
the bone is pressed down, and shivered into many pieces, now for that these
splinters need not be taken out with a Trepan: you may do the business with
Levatories The cure.
made and neatly fashioned for that purpose; such as these, which are here
expressed.

A Levatorie.


But we must have special care, least that in pulling and taking out of these
scales and splinters, we hurt the membranes. These scales are sometimes very
rough and prickly, so that they cannot touch the Meninges without offense; but
somewhiles the business is so intricate, that they cannot be taken out unless
by enlarging the fracture. Wherefore in this case, if there be a space so
large, as that the ends of these mullets may enter you may easily sheare off so
much of the bone, as shall be necessary ^equisite for the taking away of these
scales, without any assistance of the Trepan, which I have done very often and
with good success; for the operation performed by these mullets is far more
speedy and safe, than that with the Trepan; and in the performance of every
operation, the chief commendation is given to safenesse and celeritie.

Cutting Mullets, commonly called, Rostra Psittaci, or Parrots-beakes.


Moreover I have thought good here to give you the figures of chissells,
scrapers, and Pincers, together with a leaden mallet, because such Instruments
are not only very necessary to take forth the scales of bones which are
broken, but also to plain, and smooth those which remain whole.

The Figures of Scrapers, Pincers, a Leaden Mallet, etc.


But here you must note, that a Trepan nor Levatorie must never be applied to
a bone quite broken, lest the membranes lying under it be hurt by the
compression thereof. Therefore you must apply them to a sound bone, but as
near as you can to the fracture, so that you take away as little of the scull
as is possible, least the brain despoiled of its bonie cover, take some harm
thereby. Neither Effractures, nor yet fissures if they be of some length, must
be followed to their ends, but think your self well, if you have made a
passage for the issuing forth of the Sanies or filth, and have drawn forth
that bone, which pricked the membranes. For nature is accustomed by generating
a Callus to souder, or unite the bones of the scull, as it also does these of
the other parts; as we have read it written by Hippocrates and Galen; for
which purpose it has by singular providence Hip. lib. do ^ul^. cap. Gal. sib.
6. meth. cap. (...).
replenished both the Tables of the scull, with a certain alimentarie and
bloody matter, that with this, as with marrow it might repair the loss and
defect of the bone.

The truth hereof was lately manifested in the servant of Master Grol^, who had
an A History.
Effracture on the coronall bone, by a greevous blow, given him with the foot
of a Mule; which when I understood, I divided the musculous skin with a three
cornered section in that place, with an intent to apply a Trepan there;
wherefore the day following, the bone being bored, and when I thought to draw
it forth, yea verily endeavored to pluck it forth, being already divided with
the Trepan; I perceived a fearful production of an Effracture; by the
moveablenesse of the bone shaking under my hand; for it reached from the midst
of the forehead, to the lesser corner of the eye. Wherefore omitting both my
determination and endeavor to pull it forth, I thought I should do
sufficiently for the patient^ if I should only raise up the bone which was
deprest; for so it did not trouble the Crass^meninx by pressing it, and the
matter, and filth, were let forth by a passage made with a saw. So that in
conclusion, he recovered perfectly, but that he lost one of his eyes which was
adjoining to the fracture.

CHAP. VII. Of a Seat, being the fourth kind of a broken Scull.
HIppocrates calls a seat that kind of Fracture of the scull, when the weapon
What a seat is.
so falls upon the scull, that the fracture reteining the print thereof is
neither stretched forth any further, nor contracted to any less space.

And seeing there be many forms hereof, they all whether they shall be
superficiary, or shall pierce even to the Diploe, or else pass through both
the (...), The cure.
whether it be with any loss of the bonie substance, whether it run long
ways, or else be but short, or otherwise are dilated to some breadth, or else
be but narrow; whether they shall be done with a cut, or with a prick with a
dagger, stelletto, la^ce or other kind of weapon, whether they shall have this
or that accident joined with them, I say all of them, how many and various
soever they be, ought and must be cured by some of the formerly described
Instuments and means. Yet this must be noted, which as yet we have not
remembered, that if it happen by a violent stroke, and great wound, that a
portion of the bone is wholly so cut off, that it is clean severed from the
rest of the scull, and hang only by the Pericranium and musculous skin; yet
you must not pluck it from the Pericranium, and cast it away as unprofitable,
but restore it to its proper seat and plaoe, so by the force of nature, to be
glewed by a Callus, as Celsus has observed. Lib. 8. cap. 4.


I have tried the truth of this experiment, in captain Hydron not very long
ago. He had the middle part of the Os Coronale, of the breadth, and length of
three fingers, A History.
so cut with a sharp sword, that it stuck not to the rest of the bone; but
scarce adh^aring to the Pericranium and musculous skin; but lay turned down
over his face, so that the Dura Matter was plainly seen; wherefore I prepared
to pluck it from the skin, and cast it away, but that I remembered
Hippocrates precept, where he bids, that the Brain should not be robbed of
its cover and left bare. Wherefore first of all I wiped away the blood which
was fallen upon the Dura Matter, whose motion you might plainly see, then I
restored the portion of the bone, to its place, and fastened it on the upper
side with a suture consisting of three slitches; and that the residue of the
matter might have passge forth, I filled the places between each stitch with
linte; by this means, he by the mercy of God, recovered, though at the same
time he received many other large wounds in his body; which is a certain
experiment, that we must cast away no part of the scull, nor of the
Pericranium, no not of the musculous skin, unless necessity urge; therefore
much less to leave the brain naked and despoiled of its coverings.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Resonitus, or Counter-fissure, being the fifth kind of
Fracture.
SOmetimes the fracture is made in the part opposite to that which received the
blow; as if the right side be struck, the left is cloven; this kind What a
Resonitus, is.
of fracture is very dangerous, because we cannot find it out by any certain
sign, as it is written by Hippocrates Lib. de vulu. Capitis. Wherefore if at
any time the patient dye of such a fracture, the Surgeon must be pardoned.

And although Paulus Aegineta laugh at this kind of fracture and thinks that
it Lib. 6. cap. 90.
cannot happen to a man's head, as that which is hard and full, as it happens in
empty glass bottles, yet I have sometimes seen and observed it.

Neither is their reason of any validity, who think nature therefore to have
framed the head of many bones knit together by sutures, left the fracture of
the one In whom this fracture may take place in diverse bones of the scull.
side, should be stretched to the other. For peradventure this may take place,
in such as have express sutures, seated and framed according to nature. But it
takes no place in such as either want them, or have them not seated according
to nature, or have them very close and so defaced that it may seem one bone
grown together of many; This shall be made manifest by recital of the
following History.

A servant of Massus the Poste-master had a greevous blow with a stone, upon
the A History.
right Bregma, which made but a small wound, yet a great contusion and Tumor:
Wherefore that it might more plainly appear, whether the bone had received
any harm, and also that the congealed blood might be pressed forth, the wound
was dilated, the skin being opened by Theodore Hereus the Surgeon, who as
he was a skillfull workman and an honest man, omitted nothing which Art might
do for his cure. When he had divided the skin, the bone was found whole,
although it was much to be feared, that it was broken, because he fell
presently to the ground with the blow, vomited and showed other signs of a
fractured scull; so it happened that he dyed on the one and twentieth day of
his sickness. But I being called to learn, and search how he came by his death,
deviding the scul with a saw, found in the part opposite to the blow, a great
quantity of Sanies or bloody matter, and an Abscesse in the Crassae meninx, and
also in the substance of the very brain, but no sutures, but the two scaly
ones. Therefore that is certain which is now confirmed by the authority of
Hippocrates; as also by reason and experience, that a blow may be received on
the one side, and the bone may be fractured on the opposite, especially in such
as have either no sutures, or else so firmly united and closed, that they are
scarce apparent.

Neither is it absured, that the part, opposite to that which received the
stroke, of The Resonitus may be in the same bone of the scull.
the same bone and not of diverse bones may be cloven, and in those men who
have their sculls well made, and naturally distinguished and composed with
sutures; and this both was and is, the true meaning of Hippocrates. That this
may be the better understood, we must note that the opposite part of the same
bone may be understood two manner of ways. First, when the fracture is in the
same surface of the smitten bone, as if that part of one of the bones of the
Bregma which is next to the Lambdall future be smitten, and the other part next
to the Coronall suture be cloven. Secondly, when as not the same superficies
and table which receives the blow, but that which lies under it is cleft, which
kind of fracture I observed, in a certain Gentleman A History.
a Horsman of Captain Stempans troop; He in defending the breach of the wall
of the Castle of Hisdin was struck with a Musket bullet upon the Bregma, but
had his helmet on his head; the bullet dented in the Helmet but did not break
it, no nor the musculous skin, nor scull, for as much a could be discerned,
yet notwithstanding he died apoplecticke upon the sixth day after.

But I being very desirous to know, what might be the true cause of his death,
dividing his scull, observed that the second table was broken, and cast off
scales and splinters, wherewith as with nedles the substance of the brain was
continually pricked, the first and upper table being whole, for all this: I
afterward showed the like example to Capellanus and Castellanus the King and
Queens chief Physicians in the expedition of Roane. Why Hippocrates set
down no way to cure a Resonitus.


But Hippocrates prescribes no method of curing this fifth kind of fracture, by
reason he thinks it cannot be found out by any circumstance, whence it happens
that it is for the most part deadly. Yet must we endeavor to have some
knowledge and conjecture of such a fracture; if it shall at any time happen.
Wherefore having first diligently shaved away the hair, we must apply an
Emplaister of Pitch, Tar, Wax, Turpentine, The manner to know when the scull
is fractured by a Resonitus.
the powder of Iris, or flower deluce roots, and mastich; now if any place of
the head shall appear more moist, soft and swollne, it is somewhat likely that
the bone is cleft in that place, so that the patient, though thinking of no
such thing, is now and then forest to put his hand to that part of the scull.
Confirmed with these and other signs formerly mentioned, let him call a
counsel of learned Physicians; and foretell the danger to the Patients friends
which are there present, that there may no occasion of calumny remain, then
let him boldly perforate the scull; for that is far better, than forsake the
patient ready to yield to the greatness of the hidden disease, and so
consequently to dye within a short while after. There are four sorts, or
conditions of fractures, by which the Surgeon may be so deceived, that when
the scull is broken indeed, yet he may think there is no fracture. The first
is when the bone is so depressed, that it presently rises up into its true
place, and native equability. The second is when the fissure is only
capillary, The third is when the bone is shaken on the inside, the utter
surface nevertheless remaining whole, forasmuch as can be dediscerned. The
fourth is, when the bone is stricken on the one side and cleft on the other.

CHAP. IX. Of the moving, or Concussion, of the Brain.
BEsides the mentioned kinds of fractures by which the brain also suffers;
there is another kind of affect besides nature, which also assailes it by the
Gal. lib. 2. de comp. medic. cap. 6. and Com. ad Aph. 58, sect. 7.
violent incursion of a cause, in like manner, external; they call it the
Commotion or shaking of the brain, whence Symptoms like those of a broken
scull ensue. Falling from aloft upon a solid and hard body, dull and heavy
blows, as with stones, clubbes, staves, the report of a piece of Ordinance, or
crack of Thunder, and also a blow with ones hand.

Thus as Hippocrates tells, that beautiful damsel the daughter of Nerius,
when she was twenty years old, was smitten by a woman, a friend of hers,
playing with her, Lib. 5. Epidem.
with her flat hand upon the fore part of the head, and then she was taken with
a g^ddines, and lay without breathing, and when she came home, she fell
presently into a great Fever, her head aked, and her face grew red. The
seventh day after there came forth some two or three Ounces of stinking and
bloody matter about her right ear, and she seemed some what better and to be
at somewhat more ease. The fever increased again, and she fell into a heavy
sleepiness, and lost her speech, and the right side of her face, was drawn
up, and she breathed with difficulty, she had also a convulsion and trembling;
both her tongue failed her, and her eyes grew dull, on the ninth day she dyed.
But you must note, that though the head be armed with a helmet, yet by the
violence of a blow, the Veins, and Arteries may be The vessels of the brain
broken by the commotion thereof.
broken, not only these which pass through the sutures, but also those which
are dispersed between the two tables in the Diploe, both that they might bind
the Crassa Meninx to the scull, that so the brain might move more freely, as
also that they might carry the alimentary juice to the brain wanting marrow,
that is, blood to nourish it, as we have formerly showed in our Anatomy.

But from hence proceeds the effluxe of blood running between the scull, and
signs.
membraines, or else between the membraines and brain; the blood congealing
there, causes vehement pain, and the eyes become blind, vomitting is caused,
the Celsus.
mouth of the stomach suffering together with the brain, by reason of the
Nerves of the sixth conjugation, which run from the brain thither, and from
thence are The cause of vomiting when the head is wounded.
spread over all the capacity of the ventricle; whence becoming a partaker of
the offense it contracts it self, and is presently as it were overturned;
whence first, these things that are contained therein are expelled, and then
such as may flow, or come thither from the neighboring and communne parts, as
the Liver and Gall; from all which choler, by reason of its natural levity and
velocity, is first expelled and that in greatest plenty; and this is the true
reason of that vomiting, which is caused and usually follows upon fractures of
the scull and concussions of the Brain.

Within a short while after inflammation seizes upon the membranes and brain
it self, which is caused by corrupt and putrid blood proceeding from the
vessels broken by by the violence of the blow, and so spread over the substance
of the brain. Such inflammation communicated to the heart, and whole body by
the continuation of the parts, causes a fever. But a fever, by altering the
brain causes Doting; to which if stupidity succeed; the Patient is in very ill
case, according to that of Hippocrates; Stupidity, and doting, are ill in a
wound, or blow upon the head. But if Aphor. 14, sect. 7
to these evils, a sphacell, and corruption of the brain ensue, together with
a (...) difficulty of breathing, by reason of the disturbance of the Animal
fac^, which from the brain imparts the power of moving to the muscles of the
Chest, the instruments of respiration, then death must necessarily follow.

A great part of these accidents appeared in King Henry of happy memory, a
little A History*
before he dyed. He having set in order the affairs of France, and entered into
amity with the neighboring Princes, desirous to honor the marriages of his
daughter, and sister, with the famous and noble exercise of Tilting, and he
himself running in the Tilt-yard, with a blunt lance received so great a
stroke upon his breast, that with the violence of the blow, the visour of his
helmet flew up, and the trunchion of the broken Lance, hit him above the left
eye-brow, and the musculous skin of the forehead was torn even to the
lesser corner of the left eye, many splinters of the same trunchion being
struck into the substance of the fore mentioned eye, the bones being not
touched or broken; but the brain was so moved and shaken, that he dyed What
was the necessary cause of the death of King Henry the second of France.
the eleaventh day after the hurt. His scull being opened after his death,
there was a great deal of blood found between the Dura, and Pia Matter, poured
forth in the part opposite to the blow, at the middle of the suture of the
hind part of the head; and there appeared signs by the native color turned
yellow, that the substance of the brain was corrupted, as much as one might
cover with ones thumb. Which things caused the death, of the most Christian
King, and not only the wounding of the eye, as many have falsely thought. For
we have seen many others, who have not dyed of far more greevous wounds in
the eye. A History.


The history of the Lord Saint John's is of late memory: he in the Tilt-yarde,
made for that time before the Duke of Guises house, was wounded with a splinter
of a broken Lance, of a fingers length and thickness, through the visour of
his Helmet, it entering into the Orb under the eye, and peircing some three
fingers breadth deep into the head; by my help and Gods favor he recovered,
Valeranus and Duretus the Kings Physicians and James the Kings Surgeon
assisting me.

What shall I say of that great and very memorable wound of Prancis of Loraine
the A History*
Duke of Guise? He in the sight of the City of Bologne had his head so thrust
thorough with a Lance, that the point entering under his right eye by his nose,
came out at his neck between his ear and the vertebrae, the head or Iron
being broken and left in by the violence of the stroke, which stuck there so
firmly, that it could not be drawn or plucked forth, without a pair of Smiths
pincers. But although the strength and violence of the blow was so great, that
it could not be without a fracture of the bones, a tearing and breaking of the
Nerves, Veins, Arteries and other parts; yet the generous Prince by the favor
of God recovered.

By which you may learn, that many die of small wounds; and other recover of
Why some die of small wounds and others recover of great.
great, yea very large and desperate ones. The cause of which events is chiefly
and primarily to be attributed to God, the author and preserver of mankind;
but secondarily to the variety and condition of temperaments. And thus much of
the commotion or conclussion of the brain; whereby it happens that although
all the bone remains perfectly whole, yet some veins broken within by the
stroke, may cast forth some blood upon the membranes of the brain, which
being there concreate may cause great pain, by reason whereof it blindes the
eyes; if so be that the place can be found against which the pain is, and when
the skin is opened, the bone look pale, it must presently be cut out, as
Celsus has written. Now it remains, that we tell you how to make your
prognostickes, in all the forementioned fractures of the scull.

CHAP. X. Of Prognostickes to be made, in fractures of the scull.
WE must not neglect any wounds in the head, no not these which cut or bruise
but only the hairy scalpe; but certainly much less, these Hippoc. de vul.
cap.
which are accompanied by a fracture in the scull; for often times all horride
symptoms follow upon them, and consequently death it self, especially in
bodies full of ill humors, or of an ill habit, such as are these which are
affected with the Lues venerea, leprosy, dropsy, Pthisicke and consumption;
for in these, simple wounds are hardly or never cured; for union in the cure of
wounds, but this is not performed, unless by strength of nature, and
sufficient store of laudible blood: but those which are sick of hecticke
fevers and consumptions, want store of blood and those bodies which are
repleate with ill humors, and of an ill habit have no affluxe or plenty of
laudible blood: but all of them want the strength of nature; the reason is
almost the same in those also which are lately recovered of some disease.

Those wounds which are bruised are more difficult to cure, than those which are
cut, When the scul is broken, than the continuity of the flesh lying over it
must necessarily be hurt and broken, unless it be in a Reso^itus. The bones of
children are more soft, thin Whether the wounds of children, or old people are
better to heal.
and replenished with a sanguine humidity, than those of old men, and therefore
more subject to putrefaction; Wherefore the wounds which happen to the bones of
children, though of themselves, and their own nature they may be more easily
healed, (because they are more soft, whereby it comes to pass, that they may
be more easily agglutinated, neither is there fit matter wanting for their
agglutination by reason of the plenty of blood laudible both in consistence and
quality) than in old men, whose bones are dryer and harder, and so resist
union, which comes by mixture, and their blood is serous, and consequently a
more unfit bond of unity and agglu^ination; yet often times through occasion of
the symptoms which follow upon them, that is putrefaction and corruption,
which sooner arise in a hot and moist body, and are more speedily increased in
a soft and tender, they usually are more suspected and difficult to heal.

The Patient lives longer of a deadly fracture in the scull, in Winter than in
Summer, for that the native heat is more vigorous in that time than in this;
besides, also the humors putrify sooner in Summer, because unnatural heat is
then easily enflamed and more predominant, as many have observed out of
Hippocrates.

The Wounds of the brain and of the Meninges or membranes thereof are most
Aph. 15. sect. 1.
commonly deadly, because the action of the muscles of the chest, and others
serving for respiration, is diverse times disturbed and intercepted, whence
death insues. If a swelling happening upon a wound of the head presently vanish
away, it is an ill sign, unless there be some good reason therefore, as
blood-letting, purging, or the use of resolving local medicines, as may be
gathered by Hippocrates in his Aphorisms. If a fever ensue presently after
the beginning of a wound of the head, that is, upon the Aphor. 65, sect. 5
fourth or seventh day, which usually happens, you must judge it to be
occasioned by the generating of Pus or Matter, as it is recited by Hippocrates.
Neither is such a fever so much to be feared, as that which happens after the
seventh day, in which Aph. 47, sect. 2.
time it ought to be determinated; but if it happen upon the tenth or
foureteenth day with cold or shaking, it is dangerous, because it makes us
conjecture that there is putrefaction in the brain, the Meninges, or scull,
through which occasion it may arise, chiefly if other signs shall also
concur, which may show any putrefaction, as if the wound shall be pallide and
of a faint yellowish color, as flesh looks after it is washed.

For, as it is in Hippocrates Aphoris. 2. sect. 7. It is an ill sign if the
flesh look livide, Wounds which are dry, rough, livide and black are evil.
when the bone is affected; for that color portends the extinction of the
heat, through which occasion, the lively, or indifferently red color of the
part, faints and dies, and the flesh there abouts is dissolved into a viscide
Pus or filth. Commonly another worse affect follows hereon, wherein the wound
becoming withered and dry, looks like salted flesh, sends forth no matter, is
livide and black, whence you may conjecture, that the bone is corrupted,
especially if it become rough, whereas it was formerly smooth and plain; for
it is made rough when Caries or corruption invades it; but as the Caries
increases, it becomes livide and black, sanious matter withal sweating out of
the Diploe, as I have observed in many: all which are signs that the native
heat is decayed, and therefore death at hand; but if such a fever be
occasioned from an Erysipelos which is either present or at hand, it is usually
less terrible. But you shall know by these signs, that the fever is caused
by an Erysipelas The signs of a fever caused by an Erysipelas.
and confluxe of choleric matter; if it keep the form of a Tertian, if the
fit take them with coldness and end in a sweat; if it be not terminated before
the cholerike matter is either converted into Pus or else resolved; if the lips
of the wound be somewhat swollne, as also all the face; if the eyes be red and
fiery; if the neck and chappes be so stiff, that he can scarce bend the one,
or open the other; if there be great excess of biting and pricking pain, and
heat, and that far greater than in a Phlegmon. For such an Erysipelous
disposition generated of thin and hot blood, chiefly assailes the face, and
that for two causes.

The first is, by reason of the natural levity of the choleric humor; the
other because Why an Erysipelas chiefly assailes the face. The cure of an
Erysipelas on the face.
of the rarity of the skin of these parts.

The cure of such an affect must be performed by two means, that is,
evacuation, and cooling with humectation. If choler alone cause this tumor, we
must easily be induced to let blood, but we must purge him with medicines
evacuating choler. If it be an Erisipelas phlegmonodes, you must draw blood
from the Cephalicke vein of that side, which is most affected, always using
advise of a physician. Having used these general means, you must apply
refrigerating and humecting things, such as are the juice of Nightshade,
Housleeke, Purslaine, Lettuce, Navell wort, Water Lentill, or Ducks-meate,
Gourdes; a liniment made of two handfulls of Sorrel boiled in fair water, then
beaten and drawn through a searse, with ointment of Roses, or some unguent.
Populeon added thereto, will be very commodious. Such and the like remedies
must be often and so long renewed until the unnatural heat be extinguished.
But we must be careful to abstain from all unctuous and oily thing, because
Why oily things must not be used in an Erysipelas of the face.
they may easily be enflamed, and so increase the disease. Next we must come to
resolving medicines; but it is good when anything comes from within, to
without; but on the contrary it is ill, when it returns from without inwards,
as experience and the Authority of Hippocrates testify: If when the bone shall
become purulent, pustles Aph. 25. sect. 6
shall break out on the tongue, by the dropping down of the acride filth or
matter by the holes of the palate upon the tongue, which lies under. Now when
this symptom appears, few escape. Also it is deadly when one becomes dumb
and stupid, that is, Apolecticke by a stroke or wound on the head; for it is a
sign that not only the bone, but also the brain it self is hurt. But often
times the hurt of the Brain proceeds Deadly signs in wounds of the head.
so far, that from corruption it turns to a Sphacell, in which case, they
all have not only pustles on their tongues, but some of them dye stupide and
mute, othersome with a convulsion of the opposite part; neither as yet have I
observed any which have dyed with either of these symptoms, by reason of a
wound in the head, who have not had the substance of their brain tainted with
a Sphacell, as it has appeared when their sculls have been opened after their
death.

CHAP. XI. Why, when the brain is hurt by a wound of the head, there may
follow a Convulsion of the opposite part.
MAny have to this day enquired, but as yet as far as I know it has not A
convulsion is caused by dryness.
bin sufficiently explained, why a convulsion in wounds of the head seazes on
the part opposite to the blow. Therefore I have thought good to end that
controversy in this place. My reason is this, that kind of Symptom happens
in the sound part by reason of emptiness and dryness; but there is a twofold
cause, and that wholly in the wounded part, of this emptiness and dryness of
the sound or opposite part; to wit, pain; and the concourse A twofold cause of
convulsisieke dryness.
of the spirits and humors thither by the occasion of the wound, and by reason
of the pains drawing and natures violently sending help to the afflicted part.

The sound part exhausted by this means both of the spirits and humors, easily
falls into a Convulsion.

For thus Galen writes; God the creator of nature, has so knit together, the
triple spirituous substance of our bodies, with that tie, and league of
concord, by the productions Lib. 4. de usu partium.
of the passages; to wit of Nerves, Veins, and Arteries, that if one of these
forsake any part, the rest presently neglect it, whereby it languisheth, and by
little, and little dies, through defect of nourishment. But if any object that
nature has made the body double, for this purpose, that when one part is hurt,
the other remaining safe and sound, might suffice for life and necessity: but I
say, this axiom has no truth in the vessels and passages of the body. For it
has not every where doubled the vessels, for there is but one only vein,
appointed for the nourishment of the brain, and the membranes thereof, which
is that they call the Torcular, by which when the left part is wounded, it may
exhaust the nourishment of the right and sound part, and though that occasion
cause it to have a convulsion, by too much dryness; Verily it is true, that
when in the opposite parts, the muscles of one kind are equal in magnitude,
strength, and number, the resolution of one part, makes the convulsion of the
other by accident; but it is not so in the brain.

For the two parts of the brain, the right and left, each by its self
performs that which belongs thereto, without the consent, conspiratiou, or
commerce of the opposite part; for otherwise it should follow, that the Palsy
properly so called, that is of half the body, which happens by resolution,
caused either by mollification or obstruction residing in either part of the
brain, should infer together with it a Convulsion of the opposite part.
Which notwithstanding daily experience convinces as false. Wherefore we must
certainly think, that in wounds of the head wherein the brain is hurt, that
inanition and want of nourishment are the causes, that the sound and opposite
part suffers a convulsion.

Francis Dalechampius in his French Chirurgiry renders another reason of this
question; That, (says he) the truth of this proposition may stand firm and
ratified, we Opinion of Champhius.
must suppose, that the convulsion of the opposite part mentioned by
Hippocrates, does then only happen, when by reason of the greatness of the
inflammation in the hurt part of the brain, which has already inferred
corruption; and a Gangraene to the brain and membranes thereof, and within a
short time is ready to cause a sphacell in the scull, so that the disease must
be terminated by death; for in this defined state of the disease, and these
conditions, the sense and motion must necessarily perish in the affected part,
as we see it happens in other Gangraenes, through the extinction of the native
heat. Besides, the passages of the animal spirit must necessarily be so
obstructed by the greatness of such an inflammation or phlegmon, that it
cannot flow from thence to the parts of the same side lying there under, and to
the neighboring parts of the brain; and if it should flow thither, it will be
unprofitable to carry the strength and faculty of sense and motion, as that
which is infected and changed by admixture of putred and Gangraenous vapors.
Whereby it comes to pass, that the wounded part destitute of sense, is not
stirred up to expel that which would be troublesome to it, if it had sense;
wherefore neither are the Nerves thence arising seized upon, or contracted by a
Convulsion.

It further more comes to pass, that because these same nerves are deprived of
the presence and comfort of the animal spirit, and in like manner the parts of
the same side, drawing from thence their sense and motion are possessed with a
palsy; for a palsy is caused either by cutting or obstruction of a Nerve, or
the madefaction, or mollification thereof by a thin and watery humor, or so
affected by some vehement distemper, that it cannot receive the Animal spirit.

But for the opposite part and the convulsion thereof, it is known and granted
by all, that a convulsion is caused either by repletion which shortens the
Nerves by distending them into breadth, or by inanition, when as the native and
primitive heat of the Nerves being wasted, their proper substance becoming
dry is wrinckled up and contracted; or else it proceeds from the vellication,
and acrimonie of some vapor, or sanious and biting humor, or from vehemency
of pain. So we have known the falling sickness caused by a venenate
exhalation carried from the foot to the brain. Also we know that a
convulsion, is caused in the puncture of the Nerves, when as any acride and
sanious humor is shut up therein, the orifice thereof being closed; but in
wounds of the Nerves when any Nerve is half cut, there happens a convulsion by
the bitterness of the pain.

But verily in the opposite part, there are manifestly two of these causes of a
convulsion; that is to say, a putride and carionlike vapor, exhaling from the
hurt, and Gangraenate part of the brain; and also a virulent acride and biting
Sauies, or filth, sweating into the opposite sound part, from the affected and
Gangraenous; the malignitie of which Sanies, Hippocrates desirous to decipher,
in reckoning up the deadly signs of a wounded head, has expressed it by the
word Ichor; and in his book of fractures he has called this humor Dacryodes
et non Pyon. [that is, weeping and not digested.] Therefore it is no mervaile
if the opposite and sound part endewed with exquisite and perfect sense, and
offended by the flowing thereto of both the vaporours and sanious matter, using
its own force, contend and labor as much as it can, for the expulsion of that
which is trouble somethereto. This laboring or concussion is followed (as we
see in the falling sickness) by a convulsion, as that which is undertaken in
vain, death being now at hand; and nature overruled by the disease. Thus
(says Dalechampius) must we in my judgment determine of that proposition of
Hippocrates and Avicen.

But he adds further, in wounds of the head, which are not deadly,
practitioners observe that sometimes the hurt part is taken with the palsy,
and the sound with a convulsion; otherwhiles on the contrary, the wounded part
is seized by a Convulsion and the sound by a Palsy; otherwhiles both of them
by a convulsion or Palsy; and somewhiles the one of them by a convulsion or
Palsy, the other being free from both affects; the causes of all which belong
not to this place to explain. Thus much Dalechampius.

CHAP. XII. A Conclusion of the deadly signs in the Wounds of the head.
NOw that we may return to our former discourse; you may certainly foretell
The signs of a deadly wound from the depraved faculties of the mind.
the patient will dye; when his reason and judgment being perverted, he shall
talk idly, when his memory fails him; when he cannot govern his tongue, when
his sight grows dark and dim, his ears deaf, when he would cast himself
headlong from his bed, or else lies therein without any motion; when he has a
continnuall fever with a delirium, when the tongue breaks out in pustles,
when it is chopped, and become black, by reason of too much dryness; when the
wound From habit of the body.
grows dry, and casts forth little or no matter, when as the color of the
wound which was formerly fresh, is now become like salted flesh yellow and
pale; when the Urine, and other excrements are suppressed; when the Palsy,
convulsion, apoplexy; and lastly often sowning, with a small and unequal
pulse, invade him. All such signs sometimes From the time that such signs
appears.
appear presently after the wound, otherwhiles some few days after; therefore
when as the brain is hurt and wounded by the violence of the incision, or
fissure, of the contusion, compression, puncture, concussion or any other
fracture, the forementioned signs appear presently in the first days; but
when they do not appear till many days after the blow, you may know that
they rise and appear, by reason of an inflammation and phlegmon in the brain,
occasioned by the putrefaction of the blood poured forth upon it.

But we must observe this by the way, which also belongs to the prognostickes,
that Celsus lib. 8. c^. 4.
flesh is easily regenerated, and restored in all parts of the head, except in
that part of the forehead, which is a little above that which lies between the
eyebrows, so that it will be ulcerated ever after, and must be covered with a
plaster. I believe that, in that place there is an internal cavity in the
bone, full of air which goes to the sive-like bones of the nose, by which the
growth of flesh may be hindered; or else that the bone is very dense or compact
in that place, so that there can scarce sufficient juice sweat forth, which may
suffice for the regeneration of flesh; add hereunto a great confluxe of
excrements flowing to this ulcer, which should otherwise be evacuated by the
eyes and nose, which hinder by that means the dryness of the ulcer, and
consequently the healing thereof.

Hence certainly it comes to pass, that if you desire the patient thus
affected to breathe, shutting his mouth and nose, the air or breath will come
forth of the ulcer with such force, as it will easily blow forth a lighted
candle of an indifferent bigness held thereto. Which thing I protest, I
observed in a certain man, whom I was forced to trepan in that place, by
reason the bone of the forehead was broken and depressed.

CHAP. XIII. Of salutarie signs in wounds of the head.
But on the contrary these are salutary signs, when the patient has no
fever, is in his right mind, is well at the application or taking of any
thing, sleeps well, has his belly soluble, the wound looks with a fresh and
lively color, casts forth digested and laudible matter, the Crassa Meniux has
its motion free and no way hindered.

Yet we must note, which also is observed by the Ancients and confirmed by
experience; When the patients are out of danger.
that we must think none past danger, and free from all chance, until the
hundredth day be past. Wherefore the Physician ought so long to have a care of
his patient, that is, to consider how he behaves and governes himself in
meat, drink, sleep, venerie and other things.

But let the Patient diligently avoid and shun cold, for many when they have
The patient must beware of cold.
been cured of wounds of the head, by careless taking cold have been brought
into danger of their lives. Also you must know that the Callus whereby the
bones of the scull are knit together, requires almost the space of forty or
fifty days to its perfect coagmentation and concretion. Though in very deed
one cannot set down a certain number of days, by reason of the variety of
bodies, or tempers. For it is sooner finished in young men, and more slowly in
old; And thus much may serve for prognostickes. Now will we treat as breefely
and perspicuously as we can of the cure both in general and particular;
wherefore beginning with the general we will first prescribe a convenient diet
by the moderate use of the six things not natural.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the general cure of a broken scull, and of the Symptoms
usually happening thereupon.
THe first cure must be, to keep the patient in a temperate air; and if so
be, that it be not such of it self and its own proper How the air ought to
be.
nature, it must be corrected by Art. As in winter he must have a clear fire
made in his chamber, lest the smoke cause sneesing and other accidents; and
the windows and doors must be kept shut to hinder the approach of the cold
air and wind. All the time the wound is kept open to be dressed, some body
standing by shall hold a chafendish full of coals or a heated Iron bar over
the wound, at such a distance, that a moderate heat may pass thence to the
wound; and the frigidity of the encompassing air may be corrected by the
breathing of the diffused heat. For cold according to the opinion of
Hippocrates, Aphor. 18. sect. (...).
is an enemy to the Brain, Bones, Nerves, and spinall marrow; it is also
hurtful to ulcers, by suppressing their excrements, which suppressed do not
only hinder suppuration, but also by corrosion makes them sinuous. Therefore
Galen rightly admonishes us, to keep cold from the brain, not only in the
time Lib. 2, de us^ part. ca. 2.
of Trepaning, but also afterward. For there can no greater, nor more certain
harm befall the fractured scull, than by admitting the air, by such as are
unskilful. For if the air should be hotter than the brain, then it could not
thence be refrigerated; The Air though in summer is colder than the brain.
but if the brain should be laid open to the air, in the midst of Summer,
when it is at the hottest, yet would it be refrigerated, and unless it were
releeved with hot things, take harm: this is the opinion of Galen, whereby you
may understand that many who have their sculls broken, dye more through default
of skill in the curing, than by the greatness of the fracture.

But (when the wound is bound up with the pledgets, clothes, and rowlers as is
fit) if the air chance to be more hot, than the patient can well endure, let
it be amended by sprinkling, and strawing the chamber with cold water,
oxycrate, the branches of Willowes and Vine. Neither is it sufficient to shun
the too cold air, unless also you take heed of the over light, chiefly
until such time as the most feared and malign symptoms are past.

For a too great light dissipates the spirits, increases pain, strengthens the
fever and The discommodities of too much light.
symptoms. Hippocrates wholly forbids wine, therefore the patient in steed
thereof must drink, Barley water, fair water boiled and tempered with Iulep of
Roses, What his drink must be.
syrup of Violets, vinegar and the like: water wherein bread crummes have
been steeped, water and sugar, with a little juice of Lemons, or pomecitron
added thereto, and such like as the abilitye and taste of the patient shall
require. Let him continue such drinks, until he be free from malign
symptoms, which usually happen within fourteen days.

His meat shall be pappe, ptisan, shunning Almond milkes; (for Almonds are said
Almonds increase the pain of the head.
to fill the head with vapors and cause pain) stued damask Prunes, Raisons
and Currance, seasoned with sugar, and a little cinnamon (which has a wonderful
power to comfort the stomach, and revive and exhilarate the spirits) Chickens,
Pigeons, Veale, Kid, Leverets, birds of the fields, Pheasons, blacke-birds,
Turtles, Partridges, Thrushes, Larkes and such like meats of good digestion,
boiled with lettuce, purslaine, sorrel, borage, buglosse, succory, endive and
the like, are thought very convenient in this case. If he desire at any time to
feed on these meats roasted, he may, only dipping them in verjuice, in the
acide juices of Oranges, Citrons, Lemons, or Pomegranets, sometimes in one, and
sometimes in another, according to his taste and ability. If any have a desire
to eat fish, he must make choice of Troutes, Gudgions, What fish he may eat.
Pikes and the like, which live in running and clear waters, and not in muddy;
he shall eschew all cold sallets and pulse, because they fly up and trouble
the head: it will be convenient after meat to use common drige powder; or
Aniseed, Fennell-seed or Coriander comfits, also conserve of Roses, or
Marmilate of Quinces to shut up the orifice of the Ventricle, lest the head
should be offended with vapoures arising from thence.

Children must eat often, but sparingly; for children cannot fast so long as
those Aphor 13. and 14 sect. 1.
which are elder, because their natural heat is more strong, wherefore they
stand in need of more nourishment; so also in winter all sorts of people
require more plentiful nourishment, for that then their stomachs are more hot
than in Summer.

When the foureteenth day is past, if neither a fever, nor any thing else
forbid, he Aphor. 15, sect. 2
may drink wine moderately, and by little and little, increase his diet, but
that respectively to each ones nature, strength and custom. He shall shun,
as much as in him lies, sleep on the day time, unless it happen that a
Phlegmon seize upon the brain or Meninges. For in this case it will be
expedient to sleep on the day time, Why sleep upon the daytime is good for
the brain being enflamed. Lib. 2. Epidem.
especially from morning till noone, for in this season of the day, as also in
the spring blood is predominant in the body, according to the opinion of
Hippocrates. For it is so vulgarly known, that it need not be spoken, that the
blood when we are awake is carried into the habit and surface of the body;
but on the contrary by sleep it is called into the noble parts, the Heart and
Liver. Wherefore if that the blood by the force of the Sun casting his beams
upon the earth, at his rising is carried into the habit of the body, should
again be more and more diffused by the strength and motion of watching, the
inflammation in the brain and Meninges would be much increased. Wherefore it
will be better, especially then to stay by sleep the violence of the blood
running into the habit of the body, when it shall seem to rage and more
violently to affect that way. Watching must in like manner The discommodities
ensuing immoderate Watching.
be moderate; for too much depraves the temper of the brain and of the habit
of the whole body; it causes crudities, pains and heaviness of the head, and
makes the wounds dry and malign.

But if the patient cannot sleep by reason of the vehemency of the
inflammation of the brain and Meninges, Galen wishes, to wash, besmeare and
anoint the head, nose, Gal. Meth. 13.
temples and ears with refrigerating and humecting things, for these stupifie,
and make drowsy the Brain and membranes thereof, being more hot than they
ought to be. Wherefore for this purpose let the temples be anointed with
Vnguentum populeon, or Vnguentum Rosatum with a little rose vinegar, or
oxycrate; Let a sponge Medicin^s procuring sleep.
moistened in the decoction of white or black poppie seed, of the rinds of the
roots of Mandrages, of the seeds of Henbane, lettuce, purslaine, plantaine,
nightshade and the like. He may also have a broth or barley cream, into which
you may put an emulsion made of the seeds of white poppye, or let him have a
potion made with j. or iss. of the syrup of poppie, with ij. of lettuce water;
Let the patient use these things 4 hours after meat, to procure sleep. For
sleep does much help concoction, it repaires the effluxe of the triple
substance caused by watching, aswageth The commodities of sleep.
pain, refreshes the weary, mitigates anger and sorrow, restores the depraved
reason, so that for these respects it is absolutely necessary that the patient
take his natural rest.

If the patient shall be plethoricke, let the plenitude be lessened by
blood-letting, purging and a slender diet, according to the discretion of the
Physician who shall oversee the cure.

But we must take heed of strong purgations, in these kinds of wounds,
especially at the beginning, lest the fever, inflammation, pain, and other
such like symptoms be increased by stirring up the humors.

Phlebotomie according to Galens opinion, must not only be made respectively
to Lib. 4. Meth.
the plenty of blood, but also agreeable to the greatness of the present
disease, or that which is to come, to divert, and draw back that humor which
flows down, by a way contrary to that which is impact in the part; and which
must be there evacuated, or drawn to the next. Wherefore for example, if the
right side of the head be wounded, the Cephalicke vein of the right arm shall
be opened, unless a great Plethora or plenitude cause us to open the Basilica,
or Median, yet if neither of them can be fitly opened, the Basilica may be
opened, although the body is not plethoricke.

The like course must be observed in wounds of the left side of the head; for
that is far better by reason of the straightness of the fibers, than to draw
blood on the opposite side; in performance whereof you must have diligent care
of the strength of the patient, still feeling his pulse, unless a Physician be
present, to whose judgment you must then commit all that business. For the
pulse is, in Galens opinion, the certainest shewer of the strength. Wherefore
we must consider the changes and inequalities thereof, for as soon as we find
it to become lesser and more slow, when Lib. de cur. per sangu^ Miss.
the forehead begins to sweat a little, when he feels a pain at his
heart, when he is taken with a desire to vomit, or go to stool, or with
yawning, and when he shall change his color and his lips look pale, then you
must stop the blood as speedily as you can; otherwise there will be danger lest
he pour forth his life together with his blood. Then he must be refreshed
with bread steeped in wine, and put into his mouth, and by rubbing his temples
and nosethrilles with strong vinegar, and by lying upon his back.

But the part shall be eased and freed from some portion of the impact and
conjunct humor by gently scarifying the lips of the wound, or applying of
Leaches. But it shall be diverted, by opening these veins which are nighest
to the wounded part, as the Vena Puppis, or that in the midst of the
forehead, or of the temples, or these which are under the tongue; besides also
cupping-glasses shall be applied to the shoulders sometimes, with scarification,
sometimes without; neither The use of Fractures.
must strong, and long frictions with course clothes, of all the whole body,
the head excepted, be omitted during the whole time of the cure, for these will
be available, though but for this, that is; to draw back and dissipate by
insensible transpiration the vapors which otherwise would ascend into the
head, which matters certainly in a body that lies still and wants both the use
and benefit of accustomed exercise, are much increased.

But it shall be made manifest by this following and notable example, how
powerful A History.
blood-letting is, to lessen and mitigate the inflammation of the Brain, or
the membranes thereof in wounds of the head. I was lately called into the
suburbs of Saint German, there to visit a young man twenty eight years old,
who lodged there in the house of John Martial, at the sign of Saint Michaell.
This young man, was one of the household servants of Master Doucador, the
steward of the Lady Admiral of Brion. He fell down headlong upon the left
Bregma, upon a marble pavement, whence he received a contused wound, without
any fracture of the scull, and being he was of a sanguine temperature, by
occasion of this wound, a fever took him on the seventh day with a
continual delirium and inflammation of phlegmonous tumor of the wounded
Pericranium. This same tumor possessing his whole head and neck by
continuation and sympathy of the parts, was grown to such a bigness, that his
visage was so much altered, that his friends knew him not; neither could he
speak, hear, or swallow any thing but what was very liquide. Which I
observing, although I knew, that the day past, which was the eight day of his
disease, he had four saucers of blood taken from him by German Agace
Barber-surgion of the same suburbs; yet considering the integrity and
constancy of the strength of the patient, I thought good to bleed him again;
wherefore I drew from him fourteen saucers at that one time; when I came to
him the day after, and saw that neither the fever, nor any of the fore
mentioned symptoms were any whit remitted, or aswaged, I forthwith took from
him four saucers more, which in all made two and twenty; the day following
when I had observed, that the symptoms were no whit lessened, I durst not
presume by my own only advice, to let him the fourth time blood as I desired.
Wherefore I brought unto him, that most famous Physician Doctor Violene, who as
soon as he felt his pulse, knowing by the vehemency thereof, the strength of
the Patient, and moreover considering the greatness of the inflammation and
tumor which offered its self to his sight, he bid me presently take out my
Lancet and open a vein. But I lingered on set purpose, and told him, that he
had already twenty two saucers of blood taken from him: Then said he, Grant it
be so, and though more have been drawn, yet must we not therefore desist from
our enterprise, especially seeing the two chief Indications of blood-letting
yet remain, The two chief Indications in blood letting.
that is, the greatness of the disease, and the constant strength of the
Patient. I being glad of this, took three saucers more of blood, he standing
by, and was ready to take more but that he wished me to differ it until the
after noone; wherefore returning after dinner I filled two saucers more, so
that in all, this young man to his great benefit, lost twenty seven saucers of
blood at five times, within the space of four days. Now the ensuing night was
very pleasing to him, the fever left him about noone, the tumor grew much
less, the heat of the inflammation was aswaged in all parts, except in his
eyelids, and the lappes of his ears, which being ulcerated cast forth a great
quantity of Pus or matter. I have recited this history purposely, to take away
the childish fear which many have to draw blood in the constant strength of
the patient, and that it might appear how speedy and certain a remedy it is
in inflammations of the head and brain.

Now to return from whence we digressed, you must note that nothing is so
hurtful The discommoditis of venery in vvounds of the head.
in factures and wounds of the head, as venery; not only at that time the
disease is present, but also long after the cure thereof. For great plenty of
spirits are contained in a small quantity of seed, and the greatest part
thereof flows from the brain; hence therefore all the faculties, but chiefly
the Animal, are resolved, whence I have diverse times observed death to ensue
in small wounds of the head, yea when they have been agglutinated and united.

All passions of the mind must in like sort be avoided, because they by
contraction and dissipation of the spirits cause great trouble in the body and
mind. Let a place be chosen for the Patient as far from noise as can be, as
from the ringing of bells, beatings and knockings of Smithes, Coopers, and
Carpenters, and from highways How hurtful noise is to the fractures of the
scull.
through which they use to drive Coaches; for noise increases pain, causes a
fever, and brings many other symptoms.

I remember when I was at Hisdin at the time that it was beseiged by the forces
of Charles the fifth, that when the wall beaten with the Cannon, the noise of
the Ordinance A History.
caused grievous torment to all those which were sick, but especially those
that were wounded on their heads, so that they would say, that they thought at
the discharging of every Cannon that they were cruelly stricken with staves on
that part which was wounded; and verily their wounds were so angered herewith,
that they bledde much, and by their pain and fevers increased, were forced
with much sighing to breathe their last.

Thus much may serve to be spoken of the cure in general, now we will out of
the monuments of the ancients, treat of the particular.

CHAP. XV. Of the particular cure of Wounds of the head, and of the musculous
skin.
LEt us begin with a simple wound, for whose cure the Surgeon must Of a
simple wound of the flesh and the skin.
propose one only scope, to wit, Union; for unless the wound pierce to the
scull, it is cured like other wounds of the fleshy parts of our bodies. But if
it be compound, as many ways as it is complicate, so many indications show
themselves. In these the chiefest care must be had of the more urgent order
and cause.

Therefore if the wound shall be simple and superficiary, then the hair must
first be shaven away, then aplaister applied made of the white of an egg,
bole Armenicke and Aloes. The following day you must apply Emplastrum de Ianua,
or else de gratia Dei, until the wound be perfectly healed. But if it be
deeper and penetrate even to the Pericranium, the Surgeon shall not do
amiss, if at the second dressing he apply a digestive medicine (as they call
it) which may be made of Venice Turpentine, the A degestive medicine.
yolks of eggs, oil of Roses and a little saffron, and that shall be used so
long, until the wound come to maturation; for then you must add honey of
Roses and Barley flower to the digestive. Hence must we pass to these
medicines, into whose composition no oily, or unctious bodies enters, such as
this; Terebinth. venetae ij. syrupi rosar. j. pull. aloes, Myrrhae, and mastich.
an ss. Let them all be incorporated and made into A sarcoticke Medicine.
an unguent, which shall be perfectly regenerated; then it must be cicatrised
with this following powder. Aluminis combusti, corticis granatorum combust. an.
j. Misceantur simul and fiat puluis: but if the wound be so large that it
require a suture, it An Epuloticke.
shall have so many stitches with a needle, as need shall seem to require.

Whilst I was at Hisdin, a certain soldier, by falling of the earth whilst
he undermined, A History.
had the Hairy scalpe so pressed down even to the Pericranium, and so wholly
separated from the beginning of the hind part of his head, even to his
forehead, that it hung over his face. I went about the cure in this manner; I
first washed all the wound with wine, a little warmed, that so I might wash away
the congealed blood mixed with the earth; then I dried it with a soft linen
cloth, and laid upon it Venice Turpentine mixed with a little Aqua Vitae
wherein I had dissolved some Sanguis Draeconis, Mastich and Aloes; then I
restored the hanging skin to its former place, and there stayed it with some
stitches being neither too strait, (...) nor too close together, for fear of
pain and inflammation, (which two chiefly happen whilst the wound What
things we must observe in sovveing.
comes to suppuration) but only as much as should serve to stay it on every
side, and to keep forth the air, which by its entrance does much harm to
wounds: the lower sides of the wound, I filled with somewhat long and broad
tents, that the matter might have passage forth. Then I applied this following
cataplasme to all the head., farinae board. and fabarum an vj. olei rosati iij,
aceti quantum sufficit, fiat cataplasma ad formam pultis; this has a faculty
to dry, cool, repel mitigate pain and inflammation, and stay bleeding. When
we must not let blood in wounds.


I did not let him bood, because he had bled much, especially at certain
arteries which were broken near his temples; he being dressed after this
manner grew well in a short time.

But if the wound be made by the biting of a wild beast, it must be handled
A History.
after another manner, as shall appear by this following history. As many
people on a time stood looking upon the Kings Lions, who were kept in the
Tilt-yard at Paris for the delight of King Henry the second, and at his
charges: it happened that one of the feircest of them broke the things wherein
he was tied, and leaping amongst the company, he with his paws threw to the
ground a Girl of some twelve years old, and taking her head in his mouth,
with his teeth wounded the musculous skin in many places, yet hurt not the
scull. She scarce at length delivered by the Master of the Lions from the jaws
of Death and the Lion, was committed to the cure of Rowland Claret Surgeon;
who was there present by chance at the sametime; some few days after, I was
was called to visit her; she was in a fever, her head, shoulders, breast and
all the places where the Lion had set his teeth, or nails, were swollen, all
the edges of the wounds were livide, and did flow with a watrish, acride,
virulent, cadaverous, dark green and stinking matter, so that I could scarce
endure the smell thereof; she was also oppressed with pricking, biting and very
great pain; which I observing, that old saying came into my mind which is:
That all wounds made by the bitings of beasts, or of men also, do The bitings
of man and beasts are venenate.
somewhat participate of poison. Wherefore there must principally great care
be had of the venenate impression left in the wounds by the nails and teeth,
and therefore such things must be applied, as have power to overcome poison.
Wherefore I scarrifyed the lips of the wounds in diverse places, and applied
Leaches to suck out the venenate blood, and ease the inflammation of the
parts, then I made a Lotion of Aegyptiacum, Treacle and Mithridate after the
following manner.

. Mithrid. j theriac. ij. agyptiac. ss dissolvantur omnia cum aqua vitae, and
Cardui Theriacall (...) pick Medicines.
ben. Let the wounds be fomented and washed with it warm; besides also Treacle
and Mith^idate were put in all the medicines which were either applied or put
into the wound; and also of the same with the conserves of Roses and Buglosse
dissolved in the water of Sorrel and Carduus benedictus, potions were made to
strengthen the heart and vindicate it from malign vapors.

For which purpose also this following Epithema was applied to the region of
her A Cordial Epithema.
heart.. aquae rosar. and nenuphar, an. iiij. aceti scillitici j. corallorum,
santalorum alborum and rubrorum, rosar rub. pulveris spodij. an. j.
Mithridatij, theriacae, an. ij. flo. cordial. pulverisatorum p. ijcroci, j.
dissolve them altogether, make an Epitheme and apply it to the heart with a
scarlet cloth or sponge, and let it be often renewed. Verily she dressed after
this manner, and the former remedies but once used, pain, inflammation and all
the malign symptoms were much lessened; to conclude she recovered, but
lingered and was lean some two years after, yet at lengh she was perfectly
restored to her health and former nature. By which you may understand, that
simple wounds must be handled after another manner, than these which have any
touch of poison.

But now that we may prosecute the other affects of the hairy scalpe; say that
it is The cure of the Hairy scalpe when it is contused.
contused with a blow without a wound, that which must be first and always
done, (that so the affect may better appear, and the remedies which are
applied may take more effect) the hair must be shaven away, and at the first
dressing a repelling medicine applied, such as is this following Oxyrhodinum..
ol. ros. iij. album. ovorum nu. ij. pulveris nucum cypressi, balanst. alumin.
rochae, rosar. rub. an. j. Let them be all incorporated, A repelling medicine.
and make a medicine for the formeruse, or in steed thereof, you may apply the
cataplasme prescribed before consisting of Farina hordei, sabaru^, aceto and
oleo rosaceo. But such medicines must be often renewed. When the pain and
defluxion are appeased, we must use discussing medicines for the dissipation
of that humor which remains impacted in the part; Emplastri de mucilagin. ij.
oxicrocei, and emp. de meliloto, an. j. olei chamaem. and anethi, an. ss.
malaxentur simul and fiat emplastrum ad A discussing Fomentation.
usum dictum. Such a fomentation will also be good. vini rub. lib. iiij.
lixiuij. com. lib. ij. nuces cupressi contus. nu. x. pull. myrtillorum j. rosar
rub. absinth. fol. salviae, majoranae, staechados, florum chamaem. melil. an.
M. ss. aluminis rochae, radicis cyperi, calami aromatici an. ss. bulliant omnia
simul, and make a decoction to foment the grieved part. After somewhat a long
fomenting it, whereby it may the better discuss, dry and exhaust the concrete
humor; the head must be dried and more discussing things applied such as the
Cerate described by Vigo called de minio, which has an emollient and digestive
faculty in this form. Olei chamam. lilior. an. x. olei mastich. ij.
pinguedinis Ceratum de Minio.
vervecis lib. j. litharg. auri, viij. minij ij. vini boni cyathum unum,
bulliant omnia simul baculo agitando, primum quidem lento igne, mox vero
luculentiore, donectot^ massa colorem nigrum vel subnigrum contrahat; add in
fine cocturae Terebinth. lib. s. pulveris mastich. ij. gum. elemi. j. cerae
quantum sufficit, bulliant rursus una ebullitione and fiat empl. molle. But if
the humor be not thus discussed, but only grow soft, then the tumor must be
quickly opened, for when the flesh is inflamed and putrifyed through occasion
of the contained humor, the bone under it putrifies also by the contagion of
the inflammation and the actimony of the matter falling upon the bone. When you
have opened it, wash away the filth of the ulcer with this following detersive
medicine. syrupi ros. and absinth. an. j. terebinth. iss. pull. ireos, aloes,
mastich^, Detersive or clensing medicines.
myrrhae, farinae, hordei an. ss. In steed here of if there be great
putrefaction Aegyp^^a. either by it self, or mixed with an equal quantity of
Vnguenium apostolorum may be put into the ulcer. When the ulcer is cleansed it
will be time to use scarcotike and cicatrizing medicines.

CHAP. XVI. Of the particular cure of a fractured or broken scull.
IF the scull be be broken, so that it be needful to trepan it, or to elevate
and lift it up, or scrape it away, the musculous skin being cut as we
formerly noted, the Pericranium shall be plucked from the scull, as we Why the
Pericranium. has such exquisite sense.
said before; which because it can hardly be done without great pain, by
reason of its exquisite sense and connection with the membranes of the brain,
we must labor to mittigate the pain for fear of inflammation and other
accidents. Therefore the first dressing ended and the corners of the wound
drawn each from other; at the second dressing put to the wound, a digestive (as
they term it) made of the yolke of an egg, and oil of Roses, but you must
apply no humide thing to the bone, because we desire to keep it sound and
whole. For Galens opinion is, that bared bones must not be touched with
unctuous things, but rather on the contrary Gal. 6. Meth.
all dry things must be applied to them, which may consume the superfluous The
bones are offended with the application of humide things.
humidity. Therefore we must lay some linte and the cephalicke powders which we
shall hereafter describe, upon the bone we intend to preserve, and must have
diligent care that it be not offended either by the the air, or touch of
humide medicines. You must in Trepaning have a special care of the Crassa
Meniux. For I have often observed a great quantity of blood to have flowed from
some broken vessel, which adhered to the second Table: neither must we
presently and forthwith stay such bleeding, but suffer it to flow according to
the plenitude and strength of the patient; for thus the fever, and together
therewith the rest of the symptoms are diminished.

For in the opinion of Hippocrates, in every green wound it is good to cause
often bleeding, except in the bellies; for thus the vehemency of pain,
inflammation and Lib. dei ulcer*
other accidents will be less troublesome; also it is not amiss too for old
ulcers to bleed much, for so they are freede from the burden of the impact
humors. When you think it has bled sufficiently, it may be stanched with this
following medicine described by Galen.

pulveris Aloes ij, thuris, mastiches an. iss. albuminua overum nu. ij. (...).
6. Math.
agitentur simul cum pilis leporinis minutim incisis, fiat medicamentum. When
the bleeding is stayed, you shall for the aswaging of pain, drop upon the
Meniux some Pidgions blood, yet warm by opening a Vein under the wing, then
it shall be strewed over with this following powder, Aloes, thuris, myrrhae,
sanguinis drac^nis an. j. Misce, fiat pulvis subtilis. Also you may make an
irrigation with Rose Vinegar, or some repelling medicine; such as is a
cataplasme ex farinis, and olc^ rosacco. Which may be applied until the
fourth day to aswage and mittigate pain.

Vigoes Cerate will be of good use in this case, as that which in my opinion is
most Vigoes Cerate good for a broken scull.
fit for fractures of the scull, because it draws powerfully, resolves and
dries moderately, and by reason of the smell refreshes the animal spirits, and
strengthens the brain and membranes thereof, as you may easily perceive by
things which enter into the composition thereof.

Oleiros. Omph. resinaepini, gummi Elemi. an ij. Mastiches iss. pinguedinis
vervecis castrati ijss. foliorum beton. caprifol. anthos an. M. j. ammoniaci
ss. granorum tinctorum x. liquata pinguedine terenda terantur, and ammoniacum
simul cum aceto fcillitico, eliquetur; deinde bulliant omnia simul in lib. ij.
vini boni, lento igne usque ad consumptionem vini, deinde exprimantur; cum
expressione addantur terebinth, Ven. iiij. cerae albae quantum susficit, fiat
cerotum molle ad usum praedictum. Also let the neck, and all the spine of the
back be anointed with a liniment, which has force of mollifing the Nerves,
lest they should suffer convulsion; such is this.

Rutae, marrubij, rorismar. ebulor, saluia, herb. paralys. an. M. s. rad.
Ireos, cyperi, A liniment good against convulsions.
baccarum lauri. an. j. florum chamae. melil. hyperici, an. M. j. pistentur and
macerentur omnia in vino albo per noctem, deinae coquantur in vase duplici cum
olei lumbricorum, liliorum, de terebinthina, axungiae, anseris and hum. an. ij
usque ad consumptionem vini, postea colentur and in colatura add terebinth.
venet. iij. aquae vitae ss. cerae quantum sufficit fiat linimentum secundum
artem.

But when the pain is aswaged, we must abstain from all such unctuous things,
lest they make the wound become sordide and malign, and putrify the adjacent
parts, and; consequently the Crassa Meninx and scull; for the integrity of all
parts may be preserved by their like, and such are dry things in a fracture of
the scull. Wherefore all humide and oyely things must be shunned in the cure
thereof, unless peradventure there shall be some need to mitigate pain and
bring the humor to suppuration.

For according to Galen, we are often forest for a time to omit the proper cure
of Gal. 4. Meth.
the disease, so to resist the symptoms; furthermore Hippocrates would have us
not How far humide things are good for a fractured scull.
to foment the scull, no not with wine, but if we do, to let it be but with
very little. Vidius interprets that little to be, when there is fear of
inflammation; for wine if it be red, tart and astringent, has a repressing
refrigerating and drying faculty: for otherwise all wine although it heates
and dries by its faculty, yet it actually humects and cooles, both which are
very hurtful in wounds of the head, or a fractured scull, especially when the
bone is bare; for from too much cooling of the brain there is fear of a
convulsion, or some other evil symptom.

Wherefore let this be ratified, that is, We must not use humide and unctuous
medicines in wounds of the head, except for curing of an inflammation, or the
mitigation of pain caused thereby. Therefore let the bared scull be strewed
with catagmaticke and cephalicke powders, (being so called by the ancients, for
that they are convenient and good in fractures of the scull and the rest of the
bones) for by Why Cephalicke or Catagmaticke pouders are good.
their dryness they consume the superfluous humiditie, and by that means
help nature in the separating of the broken bones, and the regenerating of
flesh. Such pouders usually consist of such things as these ensuing.

Thus, radix Iridos florent. farina Hordei, and Ervi, pulvis Aloes Hepatica,
sanguis Draconis, mastiche, Myrrha, rad. Aristolochiae, Gentianae: and
generally all such simples as have a drying and an abstergent faculty without
biting; but you must not use these things before the pain, inflammation and
apostumation be past; that is then, when the membranes must be cleansed, the
bones scaled, and the flesh generated. When to used.
For the scull by how much it is the dryer, by so much it requires and more
easily endures more powerful and dryer medicines, than the Dura Matter or
Pericranium, as that which in quickness of sense comes far short of these
two. Wherefore when you would apply the forementioned cephalicke pouders to the
Meninges, they must How to be mixed when trey are to be applied to the
Meninges.
be associated and mixed with honey, syrup of roses or of wormwood and such
other like, that so their too violently drying faculty may be alayed and
tempered.

CHAP. XVII. Why we use Trepaning, in the Fractures of the scull.
THere are four causes of this remedy. The first is, to raise up the deprest
bones, and take forth their fragments, which press upon the Meninges, or also
upon the substance of the brain. The second is, that the Sanies or matter may
be evacuated, cleansed, wasted, and dried up, which by the breaking of any
vessel is poured forth upon the Membraines, whereby they are, and not they
only, but the Brain also is in great danger of corruption. The third is, for
the fitter application of medicines, convenient for the wound and fracture. The
fourth is, that so we may have something whereby we may supply the defect of a
Repelling Ligature, and such an one as may hinder defluxions; for such a
Ligature cannot take place here as it may Why a repelling Ligature cannot be
used in fractures of the Scull.
in the other parts of the body, by reason of the Sphaericall or Round figure
of the head, which does not easily admit binding; and then the density and
hardness of the interposed scull is a means that the vessels lying under it
(by which usually the defluxion comes) cannot easily be bound with a rowler
sufficiently to repel the running blood. And the external vessels, (to whom
the force of the Ligature may come) cannot be bound without great pain, and
danger of Inflammation.

For by such a compression the pulsation of the Arteries would be intercepted,
and the effluxe of the suliginous excrements which uses to pass through the
sutures of the scull, would be suppressed, by reason of the constriction of these
sutures.

Besides also, the blood would thus be forced from the wounded part without,
to within into the Membranes and Brain; whence pain, Inflammation, a Fever,
Abscesse, Convulsion, Palsy, Apoplexy, and lastly death it self would ensue.

And these are the chief causes, that Trepaning is necessary in fractures of
the scull, and not so in the fractures of other bones.

But before you apply or put to your Trepan, the Patient must be fitly placed
How the patient must be placed when you Trepan him.
or seated, and a double cloth must be many times wrapped about his head, and
then his head must be so laid, or pressed upon a Cushion or pillow, that when
you come to your operation, it may not sink down any further, but remain
firm and steady.

Then you must stop the patients cares with Cotton-wooll, that so he may not
hear the noise made by the Trepan, or any other Instrument.

But before you put to your Trepan the bone must be pierced with an Instrument,
having a three square point, that so it may be the more speedily and
certainly perforated What to be done before the application of the Trepan.
The point thereof must be no bigger then the pin of the Trepan, that so the
Trepan which is forthwith to be applied may stand the more firmer, and not
play to and again in too wide a hole.

The shape of this Instrument is not much different from a Gimblet, but that
the point is three-square, and not twined like a screw; as you may perceive, by
this following figure.

A Gimblet or peircer to perforate the scull, before the setting too of the
Trepan.
A. Shows the handle.

B. The points which may be screwed and fitted into the handle.



CHAP. XVIII. A description of Trepans.
TRepans are round sawes, which cut the bone circularly more or less according
to their greatness; they must have a pin standing in the middle a little
further out than their teeth, so to stay and hold fast the Trepan that it
stir neither to this side nor that, until it be entered and you have cut
through the first table at the least: then you must take forth the pin, lest
going quite through the bone, it may prick or hurt the Crassa Meninx.

Wherefore when you have taken forth the pin, you may safely turn it about
until you have cut through both the tables; Your Trepans must also have a
cappe, or some what to engirt or encompasse them, lest no way hindered they cut
more of the bone than we would, and in conclusion run into the Meninx.

They must also be anointed with oil, that so they may cut the more readily
and gently; for thus Carpenters use to grease their sawes. But you must, during
the time of the operation, often dippe them in cold water, lest the bone by
attrition become The harm the bone receives by being heated with the Trepan.
too hot: for all hard solid bodies by quick and often turning about, become
hot; but the bone made more hot and dry, is altered and changes its nature, so
that after it is cut, more of it scailes and falls away.

Now you must know that the bone, which is touched with the Trepan, or the
Air, always casts off scailes, for the speedier helping forwards whereof, you
must strew upon it pouders made of Rocket, Briony, wild Coucumber and
Aristolochia roots. When the bone is sufficiently scaled let this following
powder be put upon it, which What things hasten these ailing of the bone.
has a faculty to cover the bone with flesh, and to harden it with dryness
convenient to its kind.

Pulver, Ireos Illyrica, Aloes, Manna thuris, Myrrha, aristolochia an. j. Flesh
being by this means generated, let it be cicatrized by strewing upon it the
rindes of Pomegranats and Alome burnt. The bone must not be forcibly scailed.


Neither shall the Surgeon forcibly take away these scales, but commit that
whole work to nature, which uses not to cast them off before that it has
generated flesh under them. For otherwise if he do any thing rashly, he
brings new corruption to the bone; as we shall more at large declare, when we
come to treat of the Caries or Rottenness of bones.

He which uses the Trepan, must consider this, that the head is of a round
figure, and also the Trepan cuts circularly, and therefore it is unpossible to
cut the bone so equally A caution in Trepaning.
on every side, as if it were performed upon a plane body. Furthermore the
thickness of the scull is not alike in all places; wherefore you must look,
and mark whether the Trepan go not more deep on one side than on the other,
which you may do by measuring it now and then with a pin or needle; and if
ye find that it is cut deeper on one side, than on the other, you must press
down the Trepan more powerfully upon the opposite part.

But seeing there are many sorts of Trepans invented and expressed by many men,
A safe and convenient Trepan.
yet if you weigh and rightly consider them all, you shall find none more
safe, than that I invented, and have here delineated. For it cannot pierce one
jot further into the scull, than he pleases that uses it, and therefore it
cannot hurt either the Meninges or the Brain. An Iron head or cover stays it
as a bar, that it can penetrate no further than you shall think it requisite.

This head or Cover is to be drawn up and down, and set higher and lower, as
he which uses it shall think good, and so it will stay the Trepan that it
shall not go a hairs breadth beyond your intended depth. So that hence
forwards there shall be no Surgeon, howsoever ignorant in the performance of
his Art, which by the benefit of such a Trepan may not perform this operation
without any danger or fear of danger of touching the Dura Matter; the hurting
whereof, puts the life in jeopardie.

The figure of our Trepan opened and taken in pieces.
A. Shows the whole handle or Brace of the Trepan.

B. The Cover or Cap of the Trepan.

C The ferule.

D. D. The screw pins which hold and stay the ferule and Trepan.

E. The Trepan without his pin.

F. The Trepan furnished with its pin.



The figure of the same Trepan fitted and put together.
A. Shows the Brace and Trepan fitted in every point.

B. The place into which the Trepan is put and fitted.

C. C. C. The upper end of the Trepan which is to be fitted and put into the
Brain.

D. The Trepan with its cover or cap upon it.

E. The ferule.

F. A screw pin by the twining whereof the Trepan is fastened in the Brace.

G. Another screw pin which fastnes the ferule closer to the Trepan.

H. The Three square point.



In stead of the other Trepan set forth by the Author, I have thought fit to
give you the figure of that Trepan that is here most in use, and the fittest
therefore, as it is set forth by Mr. Doctor Crook.



All these particulars of the Trepan taken in sunder, you may see united and
fitted together in the other figure. But when you cannot bring out the bone
which you have cut off with your Trepan; then you may take it forth with the
Terebellum or Gimblet here expressed, that is, screwing the point thereof into
the hole made by the three square pin; the handle of this Instrument may also
serve in steed of a Levatorie.

A Terebellum or Gimblet consisting of three branches.


When with the Gimblet you have drawn or taken forth that part of the scull
which was cut away by the Trepan; if there shall be any sharp splinters in
the second table, which may hurt and prick the Meninx, when it is heaved up by
the motion of the brain, they must be shaved away and planed with this Lentill
fashioned scraper, being so called, because it has the head thereof fashioned
and smooth like a Lentill, lest being sharp it should hurt and prick the
membrane in the smoothing thereof.

A Lentill-like cutting Scraper.


But if by reason of the thickness, the scull cannot be cut with this
Lentill-like The use of a Leaden Mallet.
scraper, you may use the cutting scrapers and a mallet. The mallet must be of
lead, that so it may shake the brain as little as may be. But you must
diligently with your mullets take forth the sharp splinters, and pieces of the
bone. But if the fractured part of the scull be such, that it will not admit
that section which is requisite for the bared bone, as when the fracture is
upon the temporal muscle, or at the sutures; Why a Trepan must not be applied
to the sutures.
then in the steed of one Trepan, two or three must be applied, if the
necessity of the present case so require, and that within a very small
compass; but they must not be applied to the fractured part, but nigh
thereto, as we shall show more at large in the following chapter.

But the Trepans shall be applied so near to each other, that the ring of the
second may be joined with the ring of the first and third. But if a fracture
shall happen to Why two Trepans are to be used to a fractured suture.
light upon a suture, then you must not apply a Trepan to it, but use two
thereto on each side; he that shall do otherwise, shall tear in sunder the
nervous and membranous fibers, and also the veins and arteries by which the
Dura Matter is fastened to the scull, and yields matter to the Pericranium. He
which shall apply one Trepan, that is, but upon one side of the suture, he
shall not be able to get forth all the Sanies which is fallen down on both
sides by reason of the partition of the Crassa Meninx which lies between, and
rises up by the sutures of the scull.

To conclude, when for what cause soever we cannot make use of a Trepan, we may
employ this instrument, if so be as much of the bone be bared as is needful.
It is made in form of a pair of Compasses, and by means of a screw may be
opened more or less as you please. You as need shall require may change the
points, and put other in their places, for they may be fitted to one side of
the compass with a screw.

Apaire of cutting Compasses to cut forth the scull.
A. Shows the one leg of the cutting compasses, which as you carry it about
cuts the scull.

B. The screw which fastens the point to the leg of the compasses.

C. C. Two different points which may be screwed to the leg of the
Compasses, as need shall require.

D. A great screw which fastens upon an Iron string, along which the one of
the legs of the Compass running, may be widened and straightened as you please.



Moreover it is fit that the one leg of such cutting compasses should stand
firm and steady, whilst the other is drawn circularly to cut. Wherefore it
is fit you have an Iron plate made full of little holes, wherein you may
firmly stay that leg of the compass, least it waver against your will; it
is requisite that this plate be crooked, (because the head is round) that so it
may be fitted to any part thereof.

A crooked Iron Plate fit to sustain and hold steady one leg of the Compass
upon the head.


Another pair of Commpasses of the like nature and use, which may be widened
and straightned by a screw.


CHAP. XIX. Of the places of the scull whereto you may not apply a Trepan.
FIrst of all, you shall not apply a Trepan, to a bone that is so broken that it
is A bone almost severed from the scull must not be Trepaned.
wholly, or in the greater part thereof divided from the scull by the violence
of the stroke, least by your weight and pressing of the Trepan, you force it
down upon Membrane.

Secondly, you must not apply one to the fractured Sutures, for the reasons
mentioned in the former chapter.

Thirdly, nor to that part of the forehead which is a little above the
eyebrows, A notable cavitie in the forehead bone.
for these reasons we gave you before in the twelfth chapter. For there is in
that place under the first table of the scull it self, a large cavitie
replenished with a certain white and tough humor, as also with a certain
spirituous and ayrie substance, placed there by nature, to prepare the air
which ascends to the brain by the Nose-thrills: unless the Surgeon observe
and be mindful hereof, he may be deceived, supposing this cavity to be an
Effracture of the bone and a depression thereof.

Fourthly, neither in the lowest parts of the scull, lest the marrowy substance
of the Brain, by reason of its weight, should slide through the hole made by
the Trepan.

Fifthly, neither to the Bregma bones of Children, as those which as yet have
not acquired just soliditie, to endure the impression of a Trepan.

Sixthly, nor to the temples by reason of the Temporal muscle, the cutting
whereof in the opinion of Hippocrates causes convulsson of the opposite part.
For being cut Lib. de ^ul. c^.
athwart it looses its proper action, that is, to move and lift up the lower
Iaw; but then the opposite Temporal muscle being whole and perfect, using its
strength, (his Antagoniste suffering it, and not resisting or laboring any
thing at all to the contrary) it draws the same Iaw to it, whereupon the mouth
and all the parts of the face are drawn awry, and suffer a Convulsion toward
the sound part, the other being resolved according to Hippocrates his rule.

For as often as the muscles of one kind are equal in number, magnitude and A
rule out of Hippocrates.
strength on each side, the resolution of the one part, causes the Convulsion
of the other. What discommodities arise from cutting the temporal muscle.


Neither does this danger alone arise from the cutting of the Temporal muscle,
but also another, which is, that this muscle when we eat and speak, is in
perpetual motion, whereby it comes to pass, that being once cut, it is scarce
ever united again, besides also the commissure or joining together of the
stony bones lie under it.

But by the second caution we are forbid to Trepan upon the sutures; moreover
also many Veins, Arteries and Nerves are spread over the substance thereof, so
that by cutting of them, there is danger of many and malign symptoms, as
pain, inflammation, a fever, a convulsion not only of the part it self, but
also of the whole body, whence lastly death ensues.

Wherefore let no Surgeon be so fool hardy, as to attempt the cutting of
this muscle, so to Trepan the bone which lies under it; rather let him apply
his Trepan above it, or on the side thereof, or as near to the affected part
as he can, as I did in a Gentleman caled Monsieur de la Bretesche.

He in the triumphant entrance of King Henry the second, into the City of
Paris; was so hurt with a stone, that the Os Petrosum or scaly bone, was broken
with the A history.
violence of the blow, and the temporal muscle was vehemently contused, yet
without any wound. I being called the next day (viewing the manner of the hurt,
and the condition of the wounded part) thought good to bring some Physicians,
and Chirurgions with me to consult hereof, of whom when some thought it
expedient presently to divide the Temporal muscle, that baring the bone we
might apply a Trepan, and so take forth the broken bones: I on the contrary
begun earnestly to withstand that opinion, citing that saying of Hippocrates,
ex libr^ de vulneribus Capitis, wherein Chirurgions are forbidden to cut such
muscles, for fear of the forementioned symptoms; also I cited experience, how
that I had often observed all those which had this muscle cut, dyed with a
convulsion; but that it should be far better, that near above the fracture
the bone should be Trepaned, not touching the Temporal muscle at all if he
could. When all of them at the last had inclined to my opinion, I presently
divided the musculous skin which was over the upper part of the fracture with
a three cornered section: the day following which was the third of his disease
I Trepaned him, and after I had done, some few days after, I took out some
four splinters of the broken bone; and I put in a plain leaden pipe, by which
(I wishing the patient ever when I dressed him to hold down his head, to stop
his mouth and his nose, and then strive as much as in him lay to put forth his
breath) much sanious matter came forth, which was gathered between the scull
and Crassa Meniux. Other filth which stuck more fast, I washed out with a
detergent decoction, injected with such a syring as is here expressed; And I did
so much, God blessing my endeavors, that at length he recovered.

A Plane leaden pipe for to carry forth the Sanies gathered under the scull.


A little syring fit to make injections withal.


The like chance and fortune befell Monsieur de Pi^nne at the seige of Mets.
For he as he fought at the breach of the wall, had the bone of his Temples
broken with a stone struck out of the adjacent wall, by a piece of Ordinance
shot from the A history.
Emperors camp; he presently fell down with the blow, and cast blood out of
his mouth, nose and ears, with much vomiting, and remained dumb and as it
were senseless almost fourteen days, so that he knew none of the
bystanders. He had often palpitations, and convulsiue twitchings, and his face
was swollne. His forehead bone was Trepaned at the side of the Temporal muscle
by the hand of Peter Aubert the Kings Surgeon: and although on the 25. day,
soft flesh, endued with exquisite sense grew out of the hole made with the
Trepan, whose growth could not be hindered by Cathaereticke pouders, yet at the
length he recovered.

The Ancients called this kind of growing flesh a Fungus [i. a Mushrome] for
that it is soft, and grows with a small root and broad top like a mushrome:
but it increases and decreases, according to the plenty of the flowing matter,
and industry of the Surgeon hindering by art the growth thereof.

This flesh stinkes exceedingly, they commonly call it ^icus sancti ^icarij [i.
the Fig of S. Fiacrye.] This disease commonly has its original after this
manner. Even as in the bodies of Trees from the excrements of nourishment, a
certain half putrid The generation of a Fungus.
gross and viscous humor sweats through the bark, and gathered together by
little and little grows into a Mushrom, so blood melancholy both in temper
and consistence, springs from the broken vessels of the scull and Crassa
Meninx, which also is sent sometimes by nature for the necessary repairing of
the flesh in these parts, whereupon a certain fungus breeds, which in Galens
opinion, savors or partakes of the nature and condition of the parts to which
it grows; though in general it be of the nature of malign warts, or
excrescences. But for to take away such Fungi, you must apply medicines which
have a specific faculty to waste superfluous flesh; such are these which
strongly dry, and gently waste and eat, such as this which follows.

Sabinae ij. ocrae j. pulverisentur simul, aspergatur caro excrescens. or else.
Hermodsctylorum combustorum ss. make a powder for the same use. But if so be
that this fungous flesh come to such growth, (as it often happens,) as to
equal the bigness of an egg, it must be tied and strait twitched, close to
the root with a silken thread; and when it shall fall away by reason of this
binding, the place must be strewed with the forementioned powders, for so it
will be more certainly cured, than with more acride cathaeretickes.

CHAP. XX. Of the corruption and Caries, or rottenness of the bones of the
Head.
THere sometimes follows a corruption and Sphacell of the fractured Why when
the scull is broken the bones sometimes become foul or rotten.
bones of the scull upon wounds of the head; which happens either because they
are touched by the air, which they are not sensible of; or for that the Sanies
putrefying and detained under them, has infected them with like putrefaction;
or by the cure unskillfully handled, they by the rash application of
suppurating and oily medicines becoming more moist, and so undergoing an
unnatural change of their proper complexion and native temper, as we shall
show more at large when we shall treat of the reason of the Caries in the Lues
venerea. We shall know this unnatural change and corruption, partly The signs
of foulness of the bone.
by sight, that is, when from white they become to be yellowish, livide and
black; partly also by putting down a probe; when as it meets with nothing
smooth and slippery, but feels rough in many places, and besides also when it
enters and easily penetrates with a small thrusting down into their substance,
as if it were fungous. Yet this last sign may often deceive you, for I have
diverse times observed rotten bones, Corrupt bones are sometimes hard.
which being bare had long suffered the injury of the air, to become so hard
that a Trepan would scarce pierce them; for it is putride humidity which makes
the bones soft and fungous; but the air by drying them exhausts this humiditie
and lastly dryes it, whence follows such contumacious hardness. This sign
will be far more certain, if the flesh which is grown upon the bone be
more soft than is fit, loose and have little or no sense or feeling. You may
correct and amend this corruption of the bone with cauteries as well actual, as
potentiall, or with the powders of Aloes, Gentian, Aristolochia, centaury,
cortex pini, as,

radic. Ireos, Flor. aristolochiae an. j. centaur. ij. corticis pi^i ss. Misce
and fiat pulvis subtilissimus ossi inspergendus. But if it be much corupted, it
must be scraped forth with your Scalpra. And you must expect the falling or
scailing of the corrupt bone from the sound, and not forciblely procure it; for
otherwise the sound bone, which lies under it, being as yet covered with no
flesh growing over it, would be corrupted by the appulse, or touch of the air.
Yet you shall by little and little gently move and shake rotten bones with your
probe, that so they may more easily scaile and with less trouble to nature.
But note by the way, that the scailing of the bone which has environed the
Trepan, is commonly performed in the space of forty or fifty days. So long
also will that caused by the unusual appulse or touch of the air, or
application of a Cautery, or the aspersion of Cephalicke pouders; besides also
in the same number of days broken bones may be united and joined together by a
Callus, which is to them as a scarre, yet sometimes sooner, somewhiles latter
according to the variety of the ages, tempers and habits of diverse men.

But if the Caries or Rottennes can neither by these fore mentioned remedies be
overcome and amended, neither the loosed continuity agglutinated nor united, you
must give the patient a vulnerary potion, for hence I have found happy success
The benefit of a vulnerary potion.
in many. But sometimes not only a certain portion of the bone, is taken with
a Caries, but also the whole is often seized upon with sphacell, and all falls
out. For in Hippocrates opinion, Lib. de vulneribus capitis, the bone of the
scull being broken falls from the sound more or less, according to the
violence of the blow; which also is confirmed by experience.

For which purpose I think good in this place to recite a History, whereof I
was A History.
an eye witness, whilst I served as Surgeon in Piemont under the Marshal de
Montejan (who was the Kings Leiftenant there.) It happened that a Lackey of
Monsieur de Goulaines came to me to be cured; he had the Bregma bone of the
left side broken with a sword, neither yet did the fracture come to the second
Table; a few days after his recovery the bone being agglutinated and united,
it came to pass that a company of Gascoine soldiers his countreimen came to
^urin, with whom one morning he eat plentifully Tripe fried with Onions and
spices, and drunk a great quantity of strong wine. Whereupon he presently
fell into a continual Fever, and lost his speech and understanding; his head
swelled, his eyes looked red and fiery and as though they would have started
out of his head. Which things being considered, I let him blood, having first
(by the Physicians advice) given him a Glister, and applied to his head such
things as were fit, and also I labored with Frictions and Ligatures of the
extreme parts to draw the humors downwards; yet for all this the part of the
head which was formerly affected begun to impostumate; which being opened,
there came forth a great quantity of matter, and at the length the musculous
skin and Pericranium sincking down, both the Tables of the scull became
putrified and rotten, as you might know by their blackness and stench. Now to
take away this coruption, I applied at certain times actual cauteries, both
to amend the corruption and separate that which was altered: but mark, after
some months space, a great number of worms came forth by the holes of the rot,
ten bones from underneath the putrified scull; which moved me to hasten the
separation and falling away of the putrid bones. Which being done, upon the
very Crassa Meniux, which is more strange, in that place which nature had
covered with flesh, I observed three cavities of the largeness of ones thumb
filled with worms A great falling away of a corrupt bone.
about the bigness of a points tagge, with black heads, diversely wrapped
amongst themselves. The bone which nature separated was of the bigness of the
palm of ones hand, so that it was strange that so large a portion of the scull
should be cast off by nature, and yet the patient not dye thereof; for he
recovered yet beyond all men's expectation, but after the agglutination of the
wound the scarre remained very Aph. 45. Sect. 6
hollow according to the decree of Hippocrates. For flesh does not easily grow
upon a Callus, because it is a thing strange and supposititious by nature;
besides, as a scarre is a thing more dense than the skin, so is a Callus than
the bone, so that through the more compact substance thereof, the blood can
neither freely, nor plentifully sweat through for matter to regenerate flesh.
Hence it is, that wheresoever any portion of the scull is wanting, you may
there by putting too of your hand perceive and feel the beating of the Brain,
wherefore the scull must needs be much weaker in that place. Now to help
this infirmity, I wished this Lackey to wear a Cap made of thick leather, so
more easily to withstand external injuries, The cevetous craft of impo^tore.
and verily thereby he grew much better.

Now I think good in this place to lay open the deceit and craft of some
Impostors falsely stiling themselves Chirurgions, who when they are called to
cure wounds of the head, wherein any part of the scull is lost, persuade the
patient and his friends, that they must put a plate of gold in the place of the
scull which is wanting. Wherefore they hammer it, in the presence of the
patient, and turn it diverse ways and apply it to the part, the better to fit
it; but presently after they ^liely convey it into their purses, and so leave
the patient thus cosened. Others brag that they are able to put the dried
rind of a gourd into the place of the lost bone, and fasten it on to defend
the part; and thus they grossly abuse those which are ignorant in the Art. For
this is so far from being done that nature will not suffer nor endure so much
as an hair, or any other small body to be shut up in a wound when it is
cicatrized; neither is the reason alike of a leaden bullet which shot into the
body lies there for many years without any harm to the patient; for although
lead have a certain familiarity with man's body, yet is it at length (unless
the density of the opposed flesh, ligament, tendon, or some other such like
substance hinder) thrust forth by nature impatient of all strange bodies. And
thus much of the rottenness and corruption of fractured bones; now must we
speak of the discommodities which befall the Meninges by wounds whereby the
scull is broken.

CHAP. XXI. Of the discommodities which happen to the Crassa Meninx by
fractures of the scull.
MAny discommodities chiefly happen to the Crassa Meninx by a fracture of the
scull and rash Trepaning thereof; for it sometimes chances to be cut and
torn. Agglutination is a remedy for this disease, which Hippocrates wishes to
be procured with the juice of Nepeta [that is, of that calamint, which smells
like Penny-royall.] mixed with barley flower. In steed whereof this following
powder having the like faculty may take place. Remedies for the lace^ and
Meniux.


Colophon. iij. Myrrhae, aloes, mastiches, sanguinis Dracon. an. j. croci,
sarcocoll^ an ss. misce and fiat pulvis subtilis. But to purge the blood and
matter which is gathered and lies between the Crassa Meninx and scull, you
shall put in a Tent made of a ragge twined up some four or five double, and
steeped in syrup of Roses or wormwood and a little aqua vita; for thus you
shall press down both the Crassa Meninx, lest lifted up by the accustomed and
native pulsation of the brain, it should be hurt by the edges of the scull yet
rough by reason of the sharp splinters of the bone lately Trepaned, and give
freer passage forth for the matter there contained. But as often as you shall
dress the patient, you shall renew the forementioned Tent, until all the
matter be purged forth. And so often also you shall press down with the
following instrument the Dura Matter, and bid the patient to strive to put forth
his breath, stopping his mouth and nose, that so the matter may more easily be
evacuated. This Instument wherewith you shall hold down the Dura Matter, must
have the end round, polisht and smooth as it is here expressed.

A fit Instrument to press and hold down the Dura Matter, so to make way for
the passage forth of the Sanies or Matter.


And let there be laid upon the Dura Matter strewed over with the formerly
mentioned powder, a sponge moystened and wrung forth of a drying decoction made
of aromaticke and cephalicke things, such as this which follows.

, Fol. salviae, majoran. betonica, rosar. rub. absinth. Myrtil. florum chamam.
melil. stoechad. utriusque an. M. iij. ss. rad. cyperi, calam. aromat. ireos,
caryophyllatn; angelic^, an. ss. bulliant omnia secundum artem cum aqua
fabrorum and vino rubro, fiat decoctio ad usum dictum. And in stead hereof you
may use claret with a little aqua vita, that so the contained matter may be
evacuated and dried up. A sponge is fitter for this purpose to draw than a
linen ragge or any other thing, both because it is good A sponge fit to (...)
with all.
of its self to draw forth the humidity, as also for that by its softness it
yields to the pulsation of the Brain. Then apply to the wound and all the
adjoining parts, an emplaster of Diacalcitheos dissolved with vinegar, or wine,
or oil of Roses, that so the plaster may be the more cold and foft. For in
Hippocrates opinion, Lib. de (...). cap.
nothing which is any thing heavy or hard must be applied to wounds of the
head, neither must it be bound with too strait, or hard a ligature, for fear
of pain and inflammation.

For Galen tells (as he had it from Mantias) that a certain man lost his eyes
by inflammation and impostumation arising, for that an Apothecarie had used too
Lib. de fasc^js.
strait a ligature to his head and face; for this strait ligature so pressed
the sutures, that the fuliginous vapoures, which used to pass through them and
the pores of The discommodities of too strait binding of the head.
the scull, were stopped from passing that way; besides, the beating of the
Arteries was intercepted and hindered; by which means the pain and
inflammation so increased, that his eyes were rent and broke in sunder and fell
forth of their orb.

Wherefore Hippocrates rightly commends an indifferent ligature, also he fitly
wishes us to let the emplaisters be soft which are applied to the head, as
also What clothes we must use.
the clothes wherewith it is bound up, to be of soft and thin linen, or of
Cotton, or wool. When the patient is in dressing, if there come much matter
out of the wound, you shall wish him if he can, to lie upon the wound, and now
and then by fits to strive to breathe, stopping his mouth and nose, that so the
brain How the patient must lie in his bed.
lifted and swollne upwards, the matter may be the more readily cast forth;
otherwise suffer him to lie so in his bed, as he shall best like of, and shall
be least troublesome to him.

You may with good success put upon the Crassa Meninx oil of Turpentine with
a small quantity of aqua vitae and a little Aloes and Saffron finely powdered,
to cleanse or draw forth the Sanies, or matter. Or else,

. Mellis rosar. ij. sarinae hord. pulver. aloes, Mastich. and Ireos Florent.
an. ss. aqu^ vitae parum; let them be incorporated together and make a
detersive medicine for the foresaid use.

Sometimes also the Crassa Meninx is inflamed after Trepaning, and swollen by a
Phlegmon, that impatient of its place, it rises out of the hole made by the
Trepan, Paulus lib. 6. cap. 90.
and lifts its self much higher than the scull, whence greevous symptoms
follow. Wherefore to prevent death, of which then we ought to be afraid, we
must enlarge the former hole with our cutting mullets, that the matter
contained under the scull, by reason of whose quantity the membraine swells,
may the more freely breathe and pass forth; and then we must go about by the
prescript of the Physician to let him bleed again, to purge and diet him. The
inflammation shall be resisted by the application of contrary remedies, as
this following fomentation.

Sem. lini, althae, soen. psillij, ros. rub. an. j. solani, plantag. an. M. j.
bulliant in aqua tepida communi, ex qua fiat fotus. Anodyne and repelling
medicines shall be Remedies for the inflammation of the Crass. Meninx.
dropped into his ears; when it is exceedingly swollen, that the tumor may
subside, you shall cast upon it the meal or flower of lentills, or vine leaves
beaten with Goose grease. With all which remedies if the tumor do not vanish,
and withal you conjecture that there is Pus or matter contained therein, then
you must open the Dura Matter with your incision knife, holding the point
upwards and outward, for so How we must open the Crassa Meninx when it is
impostumate
the matter will be poured forth and the substance of the brain not hurt nor
touched. Many other Chirurgions, and I my self have done this in many patients
with various success.

For it is better in desperate causes to try a doubtful remedy than none at
all; also it often times happens whither by the violence of the contusion and
blow, or concretion or clotting of the blood which is shed, or the appulse of
the cold air, or the rash application of medicines agreeing neither in temper
nor complexion with the The causes and remedies of the blackenesse of the Dura
Matter.
Crassa Meninx, or also by the putrefaction of the proper substance, that the
Dura Matter it self becomes black. Of which symptom the Surgeon must have
a great and special care.

Therefore that thou may take away the blackness, caused by the vehemency
of the contusion, you shall put upon it oil of eggs with a little Aqua Vitae,
Remedies for contusion.
and a small quantity of Saffron and Orris roots in fine powder; you shall also
make a ^omentation of discussing and aromaticke things boiled in water and
wine; and Vigoes Cerat formerly described shall be applied. But if the harm
come from congealed blood, you shall withstand it with this following remedy.

Aquae Vitae ij. granor. tinctorum in tenuempulverem tritorum iiss. croci, 1.
For cong^^led blood.
Mellis rosat. jss. sarcocol. iij. Leviter and simul bulliant omnia, and de
colatura infundatur, quousque nigrities fuerit obliterata. If this affect come
by the touch of the air, it shall be helped with this following remedy.

Tereb. ven. iij. Mellis ros. ij. Vitellum ovi unum, sarin. hordei iij. creci.
j. For the hurt received by the air.
sarcocol. ij. aq. vitae ij. Incorporentur simul, and bulliant paululum. This
remedy shall be used until the blackness be taken away, and the membrane
recover its pristine color.

But if this affect proceeds from the rash use of medicines, it must be
helped by application of things contrary. For thus the offense caused by the
too long use of What medicines make the Crassa Meniux black.
moist and oily medicines, maybe amended by using catagmaticke and cephalic
powders; but the heat and biting of acride medicines, shall be mitigated by the
contrary use of gentle things; for both humide and acride things somewhat long
used make the part look black; that truly by generating and heaping up
filth, but this by the burning and hardening heat. But when such blackness
proceeds from putrefaction, John de Vigo commends the following remedy.

aquae vitae ij mellis rosat. ss. But if the affect be grown so contumacious
that Medicines against that putrefaction of the Meniux.
it will not yield to this gentle remedy, then this following will be
convenient.

R Aq. vitae iij. mellis ros. j pulver. Mercur. ij. vnica ebullitione bulliant
simul ad usum dictum. Or aquae vit. iss. syrup. absinth and mellis to (at. an.
ij. unguenti aegyptiaci ijss. sarcocol. myrrha, aloes, an. j. vini albi boni
and odoriferi, j. bulliant leviter omnia simul, colentur ad usum dictum. But if
the force of the putrefaction be so stubborn, that it will not yield to these
remedies, it will be helped with Agyptiacum (made with plantaine water in steed
of Vinegar) used alone by its self, or with the powder of Mercury alone by it
self, or mixed with the powder of Alome. Neither must we be afraid to use such
remedies especially in this extreme disease of the Dura Matter; for in Galens
opinion the Crassa Meninx after the scull is Trepaned delights in medicines
that are acride, that is, strong and very drying, especially if it Why the
Crassa Meninx easily endures acrid medicines.
have no Phlegmon; and this for two reasons; the first is, for that hard and
dry bodies, such as membranous bodies are, be not easily affected unless by
strong medicines; the other is, which must be the chief and prime care of the
Physician, to preserve and restore the native temper of the part by things of
like temper to it. But if the auditory passage not only reaching to the hard
membranes of the Brain, but also touching the Nerve which descends into it
from the brain, suffer most vehement medicines, though it be placed so near;
certainly the Crassa Meninx will endure them far more easily and without
harm.

But if by these means the putrefaction be not restrained, and the tumor be
increased so much, that the Dura Matter rising far above the scull, remains
unmovable, black and dry, and the patients eyes look fiery, stand forth of
his head and roll up and down with unquietness and a frenzy, and these so
many ill accidents Signs of death at hand.
be not sugitive, but constant; then know that death is at hand, both by reason
of the corruption of the gangraene of a noble part, as also by extinction of
the native heat.

CHAP. XXII. Of the cure of the Brain being shaken, or moved.
We have formerly declared the causes, signs and symptoms of the concussion,
or shaking of the Brain, without any wound of the musculous What the
concussion of the brain is.
skin, or fracture of the bone; wherefore for the present I will treat of
the cure.

Therefore in this case, for that there is fear that some vessel is broken
under the scull, it is fit presently to open the cephalicke vein. And let
blood be plentifully taken according to the strength of the patient, as also
respectively to the disease both which is present, and like to ensue, taking
the advice of a Physician.

Then when you have shaven away the hair, you shall apply to the whole head
and often renew the forementioned cataplasme, Ex farinis, ale^ rosace^,
oxymelite, and other like cold and moist repelling medicines. But you must
eschew dry, and too astringent medicines must be shunned, such as are
Vnguentum de bolo and the like; for they obstruct too vehemently, and hinder
the passage sorth of the vapors both by the sutures and the hidden pores of
the scull. Wherefore they do not only not hinder the inflammation, but fetch
it when it is absent, or increase it, when present. The belly shall be loosed
with a glister, and the acride vapors drawn from the head; for which purpose
also it will be good, to make frictions from above downwards, to make
straight ligatures on the extreme parts, to fasten large cupping-glasses with
much flame to the shoulders and the original of the spinall marrow, that so
the revulsion of the blood running violently upwards to the brain, and ready
to cause a phlegmon, may be the greater. The following day it will be
convenient to open the Vena Puppis, which is seated upon the Lambdall suture,
by reason of the community it has with the veins of the brain, and shutting
The opening of the Vena Puppis.
the mouth and nose to strive powerfully to breathe. For thus the membranes
swell up, and the blood gathered between them and the scull is thrust forth;
but not that which is shut up in the brain and membranes, of which if there be
any great quantity, the case is almost desperate, unless nature assisted with
stronger force, cast it forth turned into Pus. But also after a few days the
vena frontis or forehead vein may be opened, as also the Temporal Arteri^s
and Veins under the tongue, that the conjunct matter may be drawn forth by
so many open passages.

In the mean spare the Patient must keep a spare diet, and abstain from
wine, especially until the fourteenth day, for that until that time the
fearful symptoms commonly reign. But repelling medicines must be used
until the fourteenth day be past, then we must come to discussing medicines,
beginning with the more mild, such as is this following decoction.

. rad. Alth. vj. ireos, cyperi, calami arom. an. ij. fol. salviae, Majoran,
betonic. flor. chamaem. me^il. ros. rub. s^oechad. an. M. ss. salis com. iij
bulliant omnia simul secundum A discussing ^omentatior.
artem cum vino rub. and aqua fabrorum, fiat decictio. Let the head be washed
therewith twice a day with a sponge. But yet when you do this, see that the
head A caution in somenting the head.
be not to much heated by such a fomentation, or any such like thing, for
fear of pain and inflammation.

Then you shall apply the cerate of Vigo which has power to discuss
indifferently, to dry, and draw forth the humors which are under the scull, and
by its aromaticke force and power to confirm and strengthen the brain; it is
thus described.

. Furfuris been triturati iij. farin. lentium ij. ros. myrtillor. foliorum and
granorum A description of V. goes Cerate.
ejus, an. j. cal^m. aromat. iss. chamaemel. melil. an. M. ss. nuces cupres^^
number. vj. olei rosacei, and chamaem. an. iij. ceraealbae iiss, thuris,
mastichis, an. iij. myrrhae ij. Inpulverem quae redigi debent redactis, and
liquefactis oleis cum cera, omnis misceantur simul, and fiat mixtura, quae erit
inter formam emplastri and ceroti.

Vigo says, that one of the Duke of Vrbins Gentlemen found the virtue hereof A
History.
to his great good. He fell from his horse with his head downwards upon hard
Marble, he lay as if he had been dead, the blood gusht out of his nose, mouth
and ears, and all his face was swollen and of a livide color; he remained
dumb twenty days, taking no meat but dissolved gellies, and Chicken, and
Capon broths with sugar; yet he recovered, but lost his memory, and saultered
in his speech all his life after. To which purpose is that Aphorism of
Hippocrates; Those Aph. 58 sect. 7.
which have their Brain shaken by what cause soever, must of necessity become
dumb; yea also, as Galen observes in his commentary, loose both their sense
and motion. That Cerat is not of small efficacy, but of mavelous and
admirable force, which could hinder the generating of an abscesse, which was
incident to the brain by reason of the fall.

Yet there be many men so far from yielding to reason, that they stiffly
deny, that any impostumation can be in the brain, and augmenting this error
with another, That there may be an abscesse in the brain.
they deny that any who have a portion of the brain cut off can recover, or
rise again; but the authority of ancient writers and experience do abundantly
refell the vanity of the reasons whereon they rely. Now for the first in the
opinion of Hippocrates; If those which have great pain in their heads have
either pus, water or blood flowing Aph, 10. sect. 6.
from their Nose, mouth or ears, it helps their disease. Gal. lib. deine
aqual. ^temp. Rhas. cap. 4. continent. Av^cen. cap. de exit. se^. 3. lib, 4.
cap. 20. A History.


But Galen, Rhasis and Avicen affirm that Sanies generated in the brain
disburdens its self by the nose, mouth or ears; and I my self have observed
many who had the like happen to them.

I was told by Prethais Coulen Surgeon to Monsieur de Langey, that he saw a
certain young man in the town of Man's, who often used to ring a great bell;
he once hanging in sport upon the rope, was snatch up therewith and fell with
his head full upon the pavement: he lay mute, was depriyed of his senses and
understanding, and was besides hard bound in his belly. Wherefore presently a
fever and delirium with other horrid symptoms assailed him, for he was not
Trepaned because there appeared no sign of fracture in the scull: on the
seventh day he fell into a great sweat with often sneesing, by the violence
whereof a great quantity of matter and Pus flowed forth of his ears, mouth and
nose, then he was eased of all his symptoms, and recovered his health.

Now for the second, Galen affirms that he saw a Boy in Smirna of Ionia that
recovered of a great wound of the brain, but yet such an one as did not
penetrate to Lib. 8. de. us^ part. and com. ad aph. 18. sect. 6.
any of the ventricles.

But Guido of Caulias says, he saw one which lived and recovered after a great
portion of the brain fell out by reason of a wound received on the hind part
of his head.

In the year of our Lord 1538. while I was Surgeon to the Marshall of
Montejan at Turin, I had one of his Pages in cure, who playing at quoites
received a wound with a stone upon the right Bregnia with a fracture, and so
great an effracture of the bone, that the quantity of half a hasell Nut of the
brain came forth thereat. Which I observing, presently pronounced the wound to
be deadly; a Physician which was present contradicted my opinion, affirming
that substance was no portion of the brain, but a certain fatty body. But I
with reason and experience in presence of a great company of Gentlemen,
convinced the pertinacie of the Man; with reason; for that fat cannot be
generated under the scull, for although the parts Why fat cannot be generated
under the scull.
there contained be cold, yet because they are heated by the abundance of the
most hot and subtle animal spirits, and the heat of vapors rising thither
from all the body, they do not suffer fat to concreate about them. But with
experience, for that in the dissecting of dead bodies, there was never any fat
observed there; besides also fat will swim on the top of water; but this
substance as marrowie, cast into the water presently sunk to the bottom.
Signs of a fa^^y substance.


Lastly, fat put to the fire becomes liquide and melts; but this substance
being laid upon a hot Iron, became dry, shrunk up and contracted it self like
a piece of leather; but dissolved not at all. Wherefore all those which were
present cried out, that my judgment was right of that substance that came
forth of the scull. Yet though it was cut away, Page recovered perfectly, but
that he continued deaf all his life after.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the wounds of the face.
HAving treated of the wonnds of the head by their causes, signs and cure, it
follows that we now speak of the wounds of the face, if but for this, Why we
treat in particular of wounds of the face.
that when they are carelessely handled, they leave deformed scarres in the
most specious and beautiful part of the body. The causes are the same which
are incident to the scull, that is, external. But this may be added to the
kinds and differences of the wounds, that the life may be out of danger though
any one whole part of the face, (as the ear, eye, nose, lip) may be cut
away by a wound, but not so in the head or scull. Wherefore beginning at the
wounds of the eye brows, we will prosecute in order the wounds of the other
parts of the face.

This is chiefly to be observed in wounds of the eyebrows, that they are
often A thing to be observed in wounds of the eyebrows.
times cut so overtwhart, that the muscles, and fleshy pannicle which moove and
lift them up, are wholly rent and torn. In which case the eye liddes cannot be
opened, and the eyes remain covered, and as it were shut up in the cases of
their lids; so that even after the agglutination of the wound, if the patient
would look upon any thing, he is forced to hold up the eyelids with his hand;
with which insirmity I have seen many troubled, yet often times not so much by
the violence of the wound, as by the unskilfulnesse of the Surgeon who cured
them; that is, by the negligent application of boulsters, an unfit ligature and
more unfit suture. In this case the skillful Surgeon which is called to the
patient shall cut off as much of the skin and fleshy pannicle as shall serve
the eyelids, that so they may by their own strength hold and keep open,
without the help of the hand: then he shall sow the wound as is fit, with such
a stitch as the Furriers, and Glovers use; and then he shall pour thereon some
of the balsome of my description, and shall lay such a medicine to the
neighboring parts.

R Olei rosar. ss. album. o^^r. nu. ij. boli armeni, sanguinis Dracon. Mastich.
an j. agitentur simul, fiat medicamentum. Then let the part be bound with a
fitting ligature. Afterward you shall use Emplast. degratia Dei, Empl. de
Betonica, Diacalcitheos, or some other like, until the wound be cicatrized.
But such like and all other wounds of the face may be easily healed, unless
they either be associated with some malign symptoms, or the patient body be
repleate with ill humors.

There sometimes happens a quite contrary accident in wounds of the eyebrows,
Lagophthal^i^ is a quite contrary to the falling down of the eyelids.
that is, when the eyelids stand so up that the patient is forced to sleep
with his eyes open, wherefore those which are so aflected are called by the
Greeks Lagophthal^i. The cause of this affect is often internal, as a
carbuncle or other kind of abscesse, as a blow or stroke. It shall be cured
by a crooked or semicircular incision made above the eye-liddes, but so that
the extremes of the semicircle bend downwards, that they may be pressed down
and joined as much as is needful to amend the stiffness of the eye-lidde. But
you must not violate the gristle with your Instrument, for so they could no
more be lifted up; the residue of the cure must be performed as is fit.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the wounds of the eyes.
WOunds of the eyes are made by the violence of things prickings cutting,
bruising, or otherwise loosing the continuity. But the cure must always be
varied according to the variety of the causes and differences. The first head
of the cure is, that if any strange and heterogeneous body shall be fallen into
the eyes, let it be taken forth as soon as you can, lifting and turning up the
eyelid with the end of a spatula. But if you cannot discern this moate or
little body, then put three or four seeds of Clary, or Oculus Christi into
the pained eye. For these seeds are thought to have a faculty to cleanse the
eyes and take out the moats, which are not fastened deep in, nor do too
stubbornely adhere to the membranes. For in this case, you shall use this
following instrument, for heerewith we open the eyelids the further, putting
it between them and the eye, and also keep the eye steady by gently pressing
it, that so with our mullets we may pull out the extraneous body; this is the
figure of such an Instrument.

The deliniation of a Speculum oculi, fit to dilate and hold asunder the
eyelids, and keep the eye steady; it is so made, that it may be dilated and
contracted according to the greatness of the eyes.


All strange bodies taken out, let this medicine be put into the eye. Take the
strains A repercussive to be put into the eye.
of a dozen eggs, let them be beaten in a lead Mortar with a little Rose
water, and so put into the eye; but let this repercussive be laid upon the eye
and the neighbouing parts.. albumin. ovor. nu. iiij. pulver. aluminis rochae
combusti ij. sanguinis Draconis j. aquae rosar. and plantag. an. ij. agitentur
simul, make a repercussive, which you Diverse repercusaives to be applied to the
eye.
may frequently use. Or else apply cheese curds well wrung, mixed with
Rosewater, the white of an Egg, and as much acacia as shall suffice. This
which follows does more powerfully stay the flowing humor.. gum* arab and
tragac. an. ij psilij. cydon. semin. portul. plant. s^mach. an. ij fiat mucag.
cum aqua plantag. solan. and rosar. concinnetur collyrium, of which you may
drop some both within and about the eye.

But note, that all such remedies must be applied warm, both that they may the
Things actually cold are hurtful to the eyes.
better penetrate by their moderate heat, as also for that all actual cold
things are hurtful to the eyes and sight, because they dull the sight by
incrustating the visive spirits. For I have known many who have become dull of
sight by the frequent using of medicines actually cold to the eyes.

I have on the contrary seen not a few, who have recovered with the fit use of
such like medicines, who have had any part of their eye (so it were not the
pupilla or Apple of the eye) so pricked with a needle or bodkin, that much of
the watrish humor ran forth thereat.

The milk of a woman which suckles a girl (for that is reputed the cooler)
mitigates Anodyne medicines for the eyes.
pain and clenses, if it be milked out of the Dug into the eye; to which
purpose also the blood of Turtles, Pigeons or Chickens much conduces, being
dropped into the eye by opening a vein under their wings. Also this following
cataplasme asswageth pain and inflammation, and hinders defluxion, being
applied to the eye and the adjacent parts. Carnis pomorum sub cinere calido
decoctorum v. vitellos ^vorum number. iij, cassiae fistulae recenter extractae ss,
macaginis psilij, altheae and cydon. an. j. farin. hordeiparum, incorporentur
omnia simul, fiat cataplasma.

Also sheep lungs boiled in milk and applied warm, and changed as they grow
cold, are good to aswage pain. But if the too violent heat and pain shall
not yield to such medicines, but require more vehement, then Foliorum
Hyoscyami, m. j. Narcotickes.
sub cineribus coquatur, atque in mortario cum mucagine seminis psilij, and
cydonier, extract in aquis solani and plantag. pistetur: then let this medicine
be wrapped in a linen cloth and applied to the eyes and temples. The
mucilages of Psilium, or Flea-wort, and Quince seeds extracted in a decoction
of Poppy heads and mixed with a little Opium and Rose water, are used for the
same purpose. But when there is need of detergent and sarcoticke medicines,
then R syrup. rosar. siccar. j. aq faenic. and ruta an. ij, aloes l^e, olibani
an. ss. mix them for the foresaid use. The galls of Scates, Hares, and
Detergent medicices.
Partridges dissolved in eyebright and fennel water, are fit for clensing
such wounds; as also this following Collyrium.

R Aquae hordei j. mellis despumati iij. aloes ter lotae in aqua plantaginis
and sacchari cand. an j. fiat collyrium. Also this ensuing medicine is very
sarcoticke.

R mucagin. gummi olibani, arabici, tragacanth. and sarcocol. in aq. hordei
extract. an. A sarcoti ^^e ^d^ane for the eyes.
iij. aloes ter lota in aq. rosarum j. cerus. ustae and lotae, tutia prapar.
an. ss fiat collyrium.

But here you must note, that the coat Adnata often swells so much by reason
of a wound or some other injury, and stands so forth by the falling down of
humotes, access and mixture of flatulencies, that it hides the whole Pupilla,
and hangs forth of the eyelids, like as if it were an unnatural fleshy
excrescence, and it looses the native color, and looks very red; so that the
eye can neither be shut nor opened.

Wherewith a young Surgeon being deceived, determined to cut away this
protuberancie of the Adnata, as though it had been some superfluous flesh, and
then to waste it with cathaereticke powders, had I not forbidden him, telling
him of the certain danger of blindness which would thereupon befall the
patient. Wherefore I prescribed a fomentation of chamomile, melilote, Rose
leaves, wormwood, rue, fennel, and aniseedes boiled in milk with the roots
of Orris and marigolds. Then I presently added this following fomentation,
being more powerful and drying.

R Nucis cupressi, gallar. balaust. an. j. plantag. absinth. hippuris, flo.
chamaem. ros. rub. A drying fomentation.
an. M. ss. bulliant simul cum aqua fabrorum, and fiat decoctum pro fotu cum
spongia.

Besides also you may apply a cataplasme made of barley and bean flower, the
powders of Masticke, Mirrhe, and Aloes, and some of the last described
decoction. The tumor beginning to decline; I dropped the flowing liquor into the
eye, which has a very astringent, drying and strengthening faculty.

Roast a new laid egg in Embers until it be hard, then pill off the shell,
take forth the yolke, and in place thereof put a scruple of Roman Vitrioll in
fine powder, then put it in a linen cloth and wring it hard forth into some
clean thing, and drop thereof for some days into the eye, with a little
smithes water wherein Sumach and Rose leaves have been boiled. I have found by
experience the certain force of this remedy; but if notwithstanding there be a
true fleshy excrescence upon the coat Adnata, it may be taken away by this
following powder.

R Ossis sepiae, and testae ovorum calcinatae an. j, fiat pulvis. Calcined
Vitriole, burnt A medicine to consume a fleshvex croscence without biaing.
Alome and the like may be commodiously used to this purpose. Yet you must
warily make use of all such things, and always lay repercussives about the
eye, that no harm ensue thereof.

For diverse times acride humors fall down into the eye with such violence,
that they break the Horny coat, whereupon the humors of the eye are poured
out. Remember also, that in diseases of the eyes, the Patient lie with his head
somewhat high, and that he keep shut not only the pained, but also the sound
eye, because rest is always necessary for the grieved part. But one eye cannot
be moved without some motion of the other by reason of the connection they have
by their opticke and moving nerves, both the Meninges, the Pericranium; Veins,
and Arteries; which is the cause that when the one suffers, the other in some
sort partakes therewith.

But if we cannot prevail by all these formerly prescribed medicines fit to
stay A Seton a good remedy against inveterate defluxions into the eyes.
the defluxion, then it remains, that we apply a Seton to the neck; for it
is a singular remedy against inveterate defluxions into the eyes. For we know
by daily experience, that many who have had their sight dulled by a long and
great defluxion, so that they were almost blind, have by little and little
recovered their former splendor and sharpness of sight, when matter once
begun to be evacuated by the Seton.

The truth hereof appeared in Paul the Italian Goldsmith, who dwelt near the A
History.
Austine Friars. For he having used many medicines of diverse Physicians, and
Chirurgions in vain, when he was almost blind, he applying a Seton, by mine
advice, began by little and little to see better according to the quantity of
the matter which was evacuated, until at length he perfectly recovered his
sight. But at last growing weary of the Seton which he had worn for a year
(although matter came daily forth thereof) yet he would have it taken forth,
and healed up; but this way of evacuation being shut up, and the humor again
beginning to flow into his eyes, so that he was in danger to become blind, he
called me and made me again to apply the Seton in his neck. Whereby
recovering his former soundness and perfection of sight, he yet wears the
Seton.

I also once freed by this kind of remedy, by the appointment of the most
learned A Seton good against the falling sicken^sse.
Physician Hollerius, a certain young man of twenty years old, from the
falling sickness, who before had many fits thereof; the Ichorous humors the
feeders of this disease being by this means, as it is most probable, drawn
away and evacuated.

Wherefore seeing a Seton is of this use, I have thought good in this place to
set The manner of making a Seton.
down in writing and by figure, the manner of making thereof, for the behoof
of young practitioners. Wish the patient to sit on a low stool, and to bend
down his head, that so the skin and fleshy pannicle may be relaxed; then
must you with your fingers pluck up and sever the skin from the muscles, and
take hold of as much hereof as you can with your pincers, not touching the
muscles of the neck for fear of a convulsion and other symptoms; you shall
then twitch the skin which is held in the pincers, most hard, when you shall
thrust the hot Iron through the holes made in the midst of them; that also the
nerves being so twitched, the dolorificke sense may the less come to the part.
The wound must be made or burnt in long ways and not twharting, that so the
matters may be the better evacuated by the straight fibers. But the cautery or
hot Iron must have a three or else a foure-square point and that sharp, that
so it may the more easily and speedily enter. Then keeping the pincers
immovable, let him draw through the passage made by the cautery a needle thread
with a three or four doubled thread of Cotton [or rather a skeane of silke]
moistened in the white of an egg and oil of Roses; then after you have applied
pledgets dipped in the same medicine, bind up the part with a convenient
ligature. The day following the neck must be anointed with oil of Roses, and
the pledgets dipped in the former medicine applied for some days after. But it
will be convenient to moisten the Seton with a digestive made of the yolke of
an Egg and oil of Roses, until the ulcer cast forth much matter; then you
shall anoint the Cotton thread with this following remedy.. terebinthinae ven.
iiij. syrupirosat. and absinthij. an. ss. pulveris Ireos, diacrydij, agarici
trochiscati, and Rhei, an. ss. incorporentur omnia simul and siat medicamentum.
Which you shall use so long, as you intend to keep open the ulcer. For it has
a faculty to draw the humors from the face, and cleanse without biting.

A figure of the Pincers, actual Cautery and Needle used in making a Seten.


I have found not long since by experience, that the apertion made with a long
thick Triangular needle of a good length like to a large Pack-needle, is less
painful, than that which is performed with the actual cautery, which I
formerly mentioned. Wherefore I would advise the young Surgeon, that he no
more use the foresaid actual cauterie. I have here given you the figure of the
Needle.

The Figure of a Triangular Needle.


CHAP. XXV. Of Wounds of the Cheek.
SEeing a wound of the cheek seems to require a suture, it must have a The
use of a dry suture.
dry suture (as they term it) least that the scarre should become deformed.
For that deformity is very greevous to many, as to women who are highly pleased
with their beauties. Therefore you shall spread two pieces of new cloth of an
indifferent finenesse, and proportionable bigness with this ensuing medicine.

. pulveris mastichini, sanguinis Draconis, thuris, farinae volatilis,
tragacantha contusae, gypsi, picis, sarcocollae an. ij. picis nigra iss.
albumina ovorum quae sufficiant, fiat How to make a dry suture.
medicamentum. Apply the pieces of cloth spread with this on each side of the
wound one, some fingers breadth asunder, and let it alone till it be hard dried
to the skin. Then you shall so draw them together with your needle and thread,
that the flesh by their sticking may also follow, and be mutually adjoined, as
you may see it here expressed. The wound shall be agglutinated by this means,
together with the use of fit medicines, pledgets, ligatures. But all the
ligatures and stays which shall be used for that purpose must be fastened to
the patients night-lappe.

But when the wound is great and deep, and the lips thereof are much distant
the on from the other, there can be no use of such a dry suture. Wherefore you
must use a A Suture fit for hare-lips.
three or four square needle (that so it may the more readily and easily enter
into the flesh) being thread with a waxed thread; and with this you must thrust
through The manner thereof.
the lips of the wound, and leave the needle sticking in the wound, and then
wrappe the thread to and again over the ends thereof eight or ten times, just
after that manner which women use to fasten a needle with thread in it, upon
their sleeves, or Tailors to their hatts or capps, that they may not lose them.



The needle thus fastened, shall be there until the perfect agglutination of
the What hare-lips are
wound; this kind of suture is used in the wounds of the lips, as also in
hare-lips, for so we commonly call lips which are cleft from the first
conformation in the womb by the error of the forming faculty. But such a
suture will help nothing to agglutination, if there lie or remain any skin
between the lips of the wound; Wherefore you shall cut away whatsoever thereof
shall be there, other-wise you must expect no union. Other kind of sutures are
of no great use in wounds of these parts, for out of the necessity of eating
and speaking, they are in perpetual motion; wherefore a third would cut the
flesh; for which reason you shall take up much flesh with such Needles
mentioned in this last described kind of Suture, as this following figure
shows.

The figure of the suture fit for cloven or Hare lips, as also the dilineation
of the Needle about whose ends the third is wrapped over and under, to and
again.


To this purpose I will recite a history, to the end, that if any such thing
happen ^.
to come to your hands, you may do the like. A certain Gascoine in the
battle at Saint Laurence had his upper jaw cut overthwart even to his mouth,
to the great disfiguring of his face. The wound had many worms in it, and
stanke exceedingly, because he could get no Surgeon until three days after
he was hurt. Wherefore I washed it with a decoction of wormwood, Aloes and a
little Aegyptiacum, A decoction good to wash away putridematter.
both to kill the worms, and to fetch away all the putride matter; I discussed
the tumor with a dissolving fomentation and cataplasime, I joined together the
lips of the wound with the last described suture. But I applied this
following medicine to the whole part.

Terebinth. venet a vj. gumml elemi. ij. pulver is boli armeni, san. drac.
Mastiches, myrrhae, aloes an. ss. incorporentur simul, fiat medicamentum. The
wound was agglutinated within a few days, but that there remained a certain
little whole at the joining A small hole remaining after the cure of great
wound.
of the lower jaw with the upper, wherein you could scarce put the head of a
pin; out whereof nevertheless much serous and thin moisture flowed,
especially when he either eat or spoke; which I have also observed in many
others. But for staying of this watrish humidity I dropped Aqua fortis into the
bottom of the ulcer, and diverse times put therein a little of the powder of
burnt vitriole. Thus by Gods grace he recovered and became whole.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the wounds of the Nose.
THe Nose many ways suffers solution of continuity; as by a wound, fracture
and contusion, and it is sometimes battered and broken on the How many ways
the nose may be ^urt.
upper part; which when it happens, you shall restore the deprest bones to
their native seat and figure, with the end of a spatula or fit stick wrapped
about with towe, cotton or a linen ragge. Then with pledgets dipped in an
astringent medicine composed ex albumine ovi, mastich, bole armeno, sanguine
drac. and Alumine ufto, and applied to the side of the nose, he shall The cure
of a broken nose.
labor to strengthen the restored bones, and then bind them with a convenient
ligature, which may not press them too much, lest the nose should become flat,
as it happens to many through the unskilfulnesse of Chirurgions. Then must you
put little pipes into the nose-thrills, and these not exactly round, but
somewhat flat and deprest, The use of pipes in broken nose:
tied to the night-cappe on each side with a thread, least they should fall out.
By the help of these pipes the bones of the nose will be kept in their place,
and there will be pastage forth for the matter, and for inspiration and
exspiration. But if all the nose, or some portion thereof shall be wholly cut
off, we must not hope to restore it.

But if the Nose be so cut, that as yet it adheres to much of the adjacent
flesh, from whence it may receive life and nourishment, then sow it up. For the
lower part of the nose it may be shaken, deprest and wrested aside, seeing it
is gristly; but it cannot be broken as the other which is of a bony nature.

The Figure of pipes to be put into the Nose-thrills.


CHAP. XXVII. Of the Wounds of the tongue.
THe tongue may be so wounded, that either it may be wholely cut off and
deprived of some portion of the substance, or onelyslit long ways How many
ways the continuity of the tongue may be loosed.
or atwhart. The loss of the substance cannot be rapaired, because every part
separated and plucked from the living body, from whence it had life, spirit and
blood, presently dies. For as the Philosophers say, A privatione ad habitum non
est regressus. But when it is cut or slit longwayes or sidewayes, it is easily
restored by suture, if so be that the cloven part yet adhere to the living
body from whence it may draw both matter and form of life. Therefore The cure
of a cloven tongue.
a careful servant shall straightly hold with a soft and clean linen cloth the
body of the tongue, least it should slip away by reason of its slipperinesse,
whilst the Surgeon stitch it above and below; when he thinks he has
sufficiently sowed it, let him cut off the thread as near to the knot as he
can, least being left too long it might be tangled with the teeth as he
eats, and so cause a hurtful laceration or rending of the sowed parts. In the
mean time let the patient eat barley creames, almond milkes, Gelleyes,
cullisses and broathes, and the yolks of eggs; and let him often hold in his
mouth Sugar of Roses and syrup of Quinces; for such things besides their
nourishing faculty, perform the part of an aggluttinating and detergent
medicine.

I have learned these things I have here set down, neither from my Masters
whom I have heard with attention, nor by reading of books, but they have been
such as I have tried with happy success in many; as in the son of Monsieur
de Marigny president of the Inquisition, in John Piet a Carpenter dwelling in
the suburbs of Saint German.

But most apparently in a child of three years old, the son of the great
Lawyer A History.
Monsier Covet, who fell with his chin upon a stone, and so cut off a large
piece of the end of his tongue, which chanced to be between his teeth, it hung
but at a very small fiber of flesh, so that I had very little or no hope to
agglutinate and unite it, which thing almost made me to pluck it quit away;
yet I changed that determination by considering the loss of the most noble
action of speaking, which would thereupon ensue, and weighing the providence of
nature often working wonders and such things as exceed the expectation of the
physician in curing diseases.

I also thought thus with my self, the flesh of the tongue is soft, loose,
(...) and spungie, neither is it altogether obvious to the external injuries
of the air, wherefore Nature often does strange things in the cures of diseases.
after that I had once or twice thrust through the needle and thread upwards and
downwards, and for the rest ordered the child to be used and after the manner
I lately mentioned, he grew well within a short time, and yet remains so,
speaking well and distinctly.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Wounds of the Ears.
THe ears are sometimes wholly cut off, sometimes but in part, otherwhiles
they are only slit, so that the rent portion as yet adhearing to the rest, is
How many ways the unity of ears may be violated. How to sow a wounded Ears.
joined with it in communion of life. In this last cafe it is fit to use a
suture; but yet so that you touch not the gristle with your needle; for thence
there would be in danger of a gangraene which happens to many by foolish
curing; therefore you shall take up and comprehend with your needle only the
skin, and that little flesh which encompasses the gristle.

You shall perform the rest of the cure with pledgets and ligatures
artificially fitted, and shall resist inflammation and other symptoms with fit
medicines. But you must take special care that no superfluous flesh grow in
the auditory passage, which may hinder the hearing; wherefore you shall keep
that passage free by stopping it with a piece of sponge. But you shall procure
agglutination and consolidation of the gristly part (and therefore next to a
bone most dry) with dry medicines. But those who have their ears quite cut
off, can do nothing but hide the deformity of their misse-hap with a cap,
stuffed with Cotton on that side.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Wounds of the neck and throat.
THe Wounds of the neck and throat are somewhiles simple, as those which
only use the continuity of the muscles; other whiles compound, The differences
of wounds of the neck and throat.
such as those which have conjoined with them a fracture of the bones, as of
the Vertebrae, or hurt of the internal and external jugular Veins, or sleepy
Arteries; sometimes the Trachea Arteria, or Weazon, and the oesophagus or
gullet are wounded; sometimes wholly cut off, whence present death casues.
Wherefore let not the Surgeon meddle with such wounds, unless he first
foretell the danger of death, or the loss of some motion to those that are
present. For it often happens that some notable nerve or tendon is violated by
a wound in the neck, whence a palsy ensues, and that absolutely incureable,
if the wound shall penetrate to the spinall marrow, also hurt therewith. Wounds
of the gullet and Weazon are The palsy follows upon wounds of the neck.
difficultly cured because they are in perpetual motion; and chiesely of the
latter by reason it is grisly and without blood. The wounds of the gullet are
known, by spitting of blood, by the breaking forth of meat and drink by the
wound; but if the Signs that the gullet is wounded.
gullet be quite cut asunder, the patient cannot swallow at all. For the cut
parts are both contracted in themselves, the one upwards, and the other
downwards. But we know the weazon is hurt, by casting up blood at the mouth
with a continual cough, and by the coming forth of the breath or wind by the
Wound. The Wounds of the jugular Veins and sleepy Arteryes, if they be great,
are usually deadly, The wounds of the iugular veins and fleepy Arteries are
deadly by accident.
because they cannot be straitely bound up; for you cannot bind the throat
hard without danger of choking or strangling the patient. But for defect of a
strait ligature in this case the flux of blood prooves deadly. If the
recurrent Nerve of either side be cut, it makes the voice hoarse; if cut on
both sides, it takes away the use of speech, by hurting these instruments which
impart motion to the muscles of the Larinx. By hurting the recurrent Nerve the
voice is hurt.
For the cure if the wound be small, and not associated with the hurt of any
notable vessel, nor of the Weazon and gullet, it is speedily and easily cured;
and if there shall be need you shall use a suture, then you shall put therein
a sufficient quantity of Venice Turpentine mixed with bole-Armenicke; or else
some of my Balsame of which this is the receipt.. Terebinth. venetae lb ss.
gum. elemi iiij. olei hypericon is iij. The description of the Authors Balsame.
boli armeni, and sang. draconis an. j. aqua vita ij. liquefiant simul omnia
lento igne, and fiat Balsamum ut artis est, addendo pusveris ireos Florent.
aloes, Mastiches, myrrhae, an. j. I have done wonders with this Balsame in the
agglutination of simple wounds, wherein no strange body has been. Now when
you have put it in, lay upon it a plaster of Diacalcitheas dissolved in oil
of Roses and vinegar, as that which has power to repress the flowing down
The faculty of Diacalcitheas
of humors, and hinder inflammation, or in steed thereof you may apply Emp. de
Gratia, Dei, or Emp. de Ianua.

But if the jugular veins and sleepy Arteries be cut, let the bleeding be
stayed, as we have showed in a chapter, treating thereof. When the Weazon or
Gullet are wounded, the Surgeon shall sow them up as neatly as he can; and
the patient The cure of the wounded Weazon and gullet.
shall not endeavor to swallow any hard thing, but be content to be fed with
gellyes and brothes. When a gargarisme is needful, this following is very good.

R. hordei M. j. florum rosar. p. j. passul. mund. jujubarum an. ss,
glycyrhizae j. bulliant A gargarisme
omnia simul, addendomellis ros. and Iulep. ros. an. ij. fiat gargarisma, ut
artis est.

With which being warm the Patient shall moysten his mouth, and throat, for
it will mittigate the harshnesse of the part, aswage pain, cleanse and
agglutinate, and The manifold use thereof.
make him breathe more freely. But that the Surgeon may not despair of, or
leave any thing unattempted in such like wounds, I have thought good to
demonstrate by some examples, how wonderful the works of nature are, if they
be assisted by Art.

A certain servant of Monsieur de Champaigne, a gentleman of Anjou, was
wounded A History.
in the throat with a sword, whereby one of the jugular veins was cut together
with his Weazon. He bled much and could not speak, and these symptoms
remained, until such time as the wound was sowed up, and covered with
medicines, But if the medicines at any time were more liquid, he as it were
sucked them by the wound and spaces between the stitches, and presently put
forth at his mouth that which he had sucked or drawn in. Wherefore more
exactly confidering with my self, the greatness of the Wound, the
spermaticke, and therefore dry and bloodlesse nature unapt to agglutination, of
the affected part, but cheefely of the Weazon and jugular vein; as also for
that the rough Artery is obnoxions to these motions which the gullet performs
in swallowing, by reason of the inner coat, which is continued to the coat of
the gullet, by which means these parts mutually serve each other with a
reciprocal motion, even as the ropes which run to the wheel of a pulley;
further more weighing that the Artery was necessary for the breathing, and
tempering the heat of the heart, as the jugular veins served for the
nourishment of the upper parts; and lastly weighing with my self the great
quantity of blood he had lost, which is as it were the treasure of nature, I
told those which were present, that death was near and certainly at hand. And
yet beyond expectation, rather by divine favor than our Art, he recevered his
health.

Equally admirable is this history following. Two Englishmen walked out of the
City of Paris for their recreation to the wood of Vincenne; but one of them A
strange History.
lying in wait to rob the other of his money and a massy chain of gold which
he wore, set upon him at unawares, cut his throat and robbed him, and so left
him amongst the Vines which were in the way, supposing he had killed him having
with his dagger cut the Weason and gullet.

This murderer came back to the city; the other half dead, crawled with much
ado to a certain Peasants house, and being dressed with such medicines as
were present and at hand, he was brought to the City, and by his acquaintance
committed to my cure to be cured.

I at the first, as diligently as I could, sowed up the Weason which was cut
quite a-sunder, and put the lips of the wound as close together as I could; I
could not get hold of the gullet because it was fallen down into the stomach,
then I bound up the wound with medicines, pledgets and fit ligatures. After he
was thus dressed he begun to speak, and tell the name of the villain the author
of this fact, so that he was taken and fastened to the wheel, and having his
limbs broken lost his wretched life, for the life of the innocent wounded man
who dyed the fourth day after he was hurt.

The like hurt befell a certain Germane; who lay at the house of one Perots
in Another History.
the street of Nuts; hebeing frantic in the night cut his throat with a
sword: I being called in the morning by his friends who went to see him, dressed
him just after the same manner as I dressed the Englishman. Wherefore he
presently recovering his speech, which before could not utter one syllable,
freed from suspicion of the caime and prison the servant who lying in the same
chamber with him, was upon suspicion committed to prison, and confessing the
thing as it was done, living four days after the wound, being nourished with
broathes put into his fundament like clysters, and with the grateful vapor of
comfortable things, as bread newly drawn out of the Oven and soked in strong
wine.

Having thus by the Art of Surgery made the dumb speak for the space of
four days.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Wounds of the Chest.
SOme wounds of the Chest are on the fore side, some behind, somepenetiatc
more deep, others enter not into the capacity thereof, other The differences
of wounds of the Chest.
some pierce even to the parts contained therein, as the Mediastinum, Lungs,
heart, midriffe, hollow vein, and ascendent artery; Other some pasle quite
through the body; whereby it happens that some are deadly, some not.

You shall thus know that the wound penetrates into the capacity of the Chest,
if The signs.
that when the patients mouth and nose be shut, the breath, or wind breaks
through the wound with noise, so that it may dissipate, or blow out a lighted
candle being held necre it. If the patient can scarce either draw, or put forth
his breath, which also is a sign that there is some blood fallen down upon
the Diaphragma.

By these signs you may know that the heart is wounded: If agreat quantity of
Signs that the heart is wounded.
blood gush out, if a trembling possess all the members of the body; if the
pulse be little and faint, if the color become pale, if a cold sweat and
frequent sowning assail him, and the extreme parts become cold, then death's
at hand.

Yet when I was at Turin I saw a certain Gentleman who fighting a Duel with A
History.
another, received a wound under his left breast which pierced into the
substance of his heart, yet for all that he struck some blows afterward, and
followed his flying Enemy, some two hundred paces until he fell down dead
upon the ground; having opened his body, I found a wound in the substance of
the heart, so large as would contain ones finger; there was only much blood
poured forth upon the midriffe.

These are the signs that the Lungs are wounded, for the blood comes soamie
Signs that the Lungs are wounded.
or frothy out of the wounds the patient is troubled with a cough, he is also
troubled with a great difficulty of breathing and a pain in his side, which
he formerly had not; he lies most at ease when he lies upon the wound, and
sometimes it comes so to pass, that lying so he speaks more freely and
easily, but turned on the contrary side, he presently cannot speak.

When the Diphragma or midriffe is wounded, the party affected is troubled with
a weight or heaviness in that place, he is taken with a Delirium, or raving
by reason Signs that the midriffe is wounded.
of the sympathy of the Nerves of the sixth conjugation which are spread over
the midriffe; difficulty of breathing, a cough and sharp pain trouble the
patient, the Guts are drawn upwards; so that it sometimes happens by the
vehemence of breathing, that the stomach and gutts are drawn through the
wound in to the capacity of the, Chest; which thing I observed in two.

The on of these was a Maison, who was thrust though the midst of the midriffe,
where it is Nervous, and dyed the third day following. I opening his lower
belly, and no A History.
finding his stomach, thought it a monstrous thing; but at length searching
diligently, I found it was drawn into the Chest, though the wound which was
scarce an inch broad. But the stomach was full of wind, but little humidity
in it.

The other was called captain Francis d' Alon a Native of Xantoigne, who
before Another History.
Roshell was shot with a musket bullet, entering by the breast bone near to the
sword-like. Gristle, and passing through the fleshy part of the midriffe, went
out at the space between the fifth and sixth bastard ribs. The wound was
healed up on the out side, yet for all that there remained a weakness of the
stomach, whereupon a pain of the guts like to the colicke took him
especially in the Evening, and on the night; for which cause he durst not sup
but very sparingly. But on the eighth month after, the pain raging more
violently in his belly than it was accustomed, he dyed; though for the
mitigating of the vehemence thereof Simon Malmedy and Anthony du Val both
learned Physicians, omitted no kind of remedy. The body of the diseased was
opened by the skillful Surgeon, James Guillemeau, who found a great portion
of the collicke gut swelled with much wind gotten into the Chest, through the
wound of the Diaphragma, for all it was so small that you could scarce put your
little finger in thereat, But now let us return from whence we digressed.
Signs that there is blood poured into the capacity of the Chest.


We understand that there is blood poured forth into the capacity of the Chest
by the difficulty of breathing, the vehemence of the increasing fever, the
stinking of the breath, the casting up of blood at the mouth, and other
symptoms which usually happen to these who have putrified and clotted blood
poured out of the vessels into the belly, infecting with the filthy vapor of
the corrupt substance, the partato which it shall come.

But also, unless the patient cannot lie upon his back, he is troubled with a
desire to vomit, and covets now and then to rise, whence he often falls into
a swoond, the vital faculty which fusteines the body being broken and
debilitated both by reason of the wound, and concreate or clotted blood; for so
putting on the quality of poison, it greatly dissipates and dissolves the
strength of the heart. Signs that the spine is wounded.


It is a sign the spinall marrow is hurt, when a convulsion or Palsy, that
is, a sudden loss of sense and motion in the parts thereunder, an
unvoluntary excretion of the Urine and other excrements, or a total
suppression of them, seazes upon the Patient.

When the hollow vein and great Artery are wounded, the patient will dye in a
short time, by reason of the sudden and abundant effusion of the blood and
spirits, which intercepts the motion of the lungs and heart, whence the party
dies sufforaced.

CHAP. XXX. Of the cure of the Wounds of the Chest.
WE have read in John de Vigo, that it is disputed amongst Chirurgions Vigo
tract. de vul. thereat, cap. 10.
concerning the consolidation of wounds of the Chest. For some think that such
wounds must be closed up, and cicatrized with all possible speed, least the
cold air come to the heart, and the vital spirits fly away and be
dissipated. Others on the contrary think that such wounds ought to be long
kept open; and also if they be not sufficiently large of themselves, that then
they must be enlarged by Surgery, that so the blood powered forth into the
capacity of the Chest may have passage forth, which otherwise by delay would
putrefie, whence wound ensue an increase of the fever, a fistulous ulcer, and
other pernicious accidents.

The first opinion is grounded upon reason and truth, if so be that there is
little or no blood poured forth into the capacity of the Chest; But the latter
takes place where there is much more blood contained in the empty spaces of the
Chest. Which least I may seem rashly to determine, I think it not amiss to
ratify each opinion with a history thereto agrecable.

Whilst I was at Turin, Surgeon to the Marshall of Montejan, the King of
France A History.
his General, I had in cure a soldier of Paris, whose name was L'evesque, he
served under captain Renouart. He had three wounds, but one more greevous than
the rest, went under the right breast, some what deep into the capacity of the
Chest, whence much blood was poured forth upon the midriffe, which caused such
difficulty of breathing, that it even took away the liberty of his speech;
besides, though this occasion he had a vehement fever, coughed up blood, and a
sharp pain on the wounded side. The Surgeon which first dressed him, had so
bound up the wound with a strait and thick suture, that nothing could flow
out thereat. But I being called the day after, and weighing the present
symptoms which threatened speedy death, judged that the sowing of the wound
must straight be loosed; which being done, there instantly appeared a clot of
blood at the orifice thereof; which made me to cause the patient to lie half
out of his bed, with his head downwards, and to stay his hands on a settle
which was lower than the bed, and keeping himself in this posture, to shut his
mouth and nose that so his lungs should swell; the midriffe be stretched forth,
and the intercostall muscles and those of the Abdomen should be compressed,
that the blood powered into the Chest might be evacuated by the wound; but also
that this excrescion might succeed more happily, I thrust my finger somewhat
deep into the wound, that so I might open the Orifice thereof being stopped up
with the congealed blood; and certainly I drew out some seven or eight ounces
of putrified and stinking blood by this means. When he was laid in his bed, I
caused frequent injections to be made into the wound of a decoction of Barley
with honey of Roses and red Sugar, which being injected I wished him to turn
first on the one, and then on the other side and then, again to lie out of his
bed as before: for thus he evacuated small, but very many clots of blood,
together with the liquor lately injected; which being done, the symptoms were
mittigated, and left him by little and little. The next day I made another more
detergent injection, adding thereto worme-wood, Why bitter things must not be
cast in to the Chest.
centaury, and Aloes; but such a bitterness did rise up to his mouth together
with a desire to cast, that he could not longer endure it. Then it came into my
mind that formerly I had observed the like effect of the like remedy in the
Hospital of Paris, in one who had a fistulous ulcer in his Chest. Therefore
when I had considered with my self that such bitter things may easily pass
into the Lungs, and so may from thence rise into the Weazon and mouth, I
determined that thence forwards I would never use such bitter things to my
patients, for the use of them is much more troublesome than any way good and
advantageous. But at the length this patient by this and the like means
recovered his health beyond my expectation. Read the History of Maryllus in
Galen, lib. 7. de Anatom. admismistra.


But on the contrary, I was called on a time to a certain German gentleman
who was run with a sword into the capacity of his Chest; the neighboring
Surgeon had put a great tent into the wound at the first dressing, which I
made to be taken forth, for that I certainly understood there was no blood
powered forth into the capacity of the Chest because the patient had no fever,
no weight upon the diaphragma, nor spitted forth any blood. Wherefore I cured
him in few days by only dropping in some of my balsame and laying a plaster
of Diacalcitheos upon the wound. What harm ensues the too long use of tents.


The like cure I have happily performed in many others. To conclude, this I
ear boldly affirm, that wounds of the Chest by the too long use of tents
degenerate into Fistula's.

Wherefore if you at any time shall undertake the cure of wounds which
penetrate into the capacity of the Chest, you shall not presently shut them up
at the first dressing, but keep them open for two or three days; but when you
shall find that the patient is troubled with no or very little pain, and that
the midriffe is pressed down with no weight, and that he breathes freely, then
let the tent be taken forth, and the wound healed up as speedily as you can by
covering it only with lint dipped No liniments must be used in wounds of the
Chest.
in some balsame which has a glutinative faculty, and laid some what broader
than the wound; never apply liniments to wounds of this kind, lest the patient
by breathing draw them into the capacity of the Chest. Wherefore also you must
have a care that the tent put into those kinds of wounds may be fastened to
the Pledgets, and also have somewhat a large head, lest they should be drawn
as we said into the capacity of the Chest, for if they fall in, they will cause
putrefaction and death.

Let Emplast. Diacalcitheos or some such like be applied to the wound. But if,
on the contrary, you know by proper, and certain signs, that there is much
blood fallen into the spaces of the Chest, then let the orifice of the wound
be kept open with larger tents, until all the Sanies or bloody matter,
wherein the blood has degenerated, shall be exhausted. But if it happen at
any time, as assuredly it sometimes does, that notwithstanding the Art and care
of the Physician, the wound degenerates into a Fistula, then the former evil
is become much worse. For Fistula's of the Wounds of the Chest easily
degenerate into a Fistula.
Chest, are scarce cured at any time, and that for diverse causes. The first is,
for that the muscles of the Chest are in perpetual motion; Another is, because
they on the contrary inside are covered only with the membrane investing the
ribs, which is without blood. The third is, for that the wound has no stay,
by means whereof it may be compressed, sowed, and bound, whereby the lips
being joined together, the wound may at length be replenished with flesh, and
cicatrized.

But the reason why wounds of the Chest do every day heap up and pour forth
Why there flows such planty of matter out of wounds of the Chest.
so great a quantity of matter, seems to be their vicinity to the heart, which
being the fountain of blood, there is a perpetual effluxe there eof from
thence to the part affected. For this is natures care in preserving the
affected parts, that continually and abundantly without measure or mean it
sends all its supplies, that is, blood and spirits, to the aid. Ad hereto,
that the affected parts by pain, heat and continual motion of the Lungs and
midriffe, draw and allure much blood to themselves. Such like blood defiled by
the malignity and filth of the wound, is speedily corrupted; whence it is that
from the perpetual affluxe of blood, there is a continual effluxe of matter
or filth, which at the last brings a man to a consumption; because the
ulcerated partlike a ravenous wolf consumes more blood by the pain, heat and
motion than can be ministered thereto by the heart. Yet if there be any hope to
cure and heal the Fistula, it shall be performed, (after the use of diet,
phlebotomie, and according to the prescript of the Physician) by a vulnerary
potion, which you shall find described when we treat of the Caries or
rottenness of the bones. Wherefore The cure ofa Fistula in the Chest.
you shall make frequent injections therewith into the Fistula, adding and
mixing with it syruput de rosts ficcis and mel rosarum. Neither doc I, if the
putrefaction be great, fear to mix therewith Aegyptiacum. But you must have
a care to remember When Aegyptiacum must be put into the in^ections.
and observe the quantity of the injected liquor, that you may know whether it
all come forth again after it has performed its detergent office. For if any
thereof remain behind in the corners and crooked passages, it hurts the part,
as corrupted with the contagion thereof.

The for me of a Syring fit to make injection, when a great quantity of liquor
is to be injected into any part.


After the injected liquor is come forth, a pipe of gold, silver or lead, shall
be put into the fistulous ulcer; and it must have many holes in it, that so
the filth may pass forth at them; it must be fast tied with strings, that it
may not fall into the capacity of the Chest.

A great sponge steeped in aqua vita and wrung forth again, shall be laid hot
to the end or orifice thereof, both to hinder the entrance of theayre into the
Fistulous ulcer, as also to draw forth the filth thereof by its gentle heat,
the which thing the Patient shall much further if often times both day and
night he hold his breath, stopping his mouth and nose, and lying upon the
diseased side, that so the Sanies may be the more forcibly evacuated; neither
must we leave putting in the pipe, before that this fistulous ulcer shall be
almost dry, that is, whole, as when it yields little, or no matter at all; then
it must be cicatrized. But if the orifice of this fistulous ulcer being in the
upper part hinder the healing thereof, then by a chirurgicall Section a passage
shall be made in the bottom, as we said before in an Empyema.

The delineation of the pipes with their strings and spunges.
The reader must note that the pipes which are fit for this use, need not have
so many holes as these here expressed; but only two or three in their ends: for
the flesh growing and getting into the rest, make them that they cannot be
plucked forth without much pain.



A wound made in the Lungs admits cure, unless it be very large; if it be
without inflammation; if it be on the skirts of the Lungs, and not on What
wounds of the Lungs cureable.
their upper parts; if the patient contain himself from coughing much, and
contentious speaking, and great breathing: for the wound is enlarged by
coughing, and thence also arises inflammation; the Pus and Sanies whereof,
whilst the lungs again endeavor to expel by coughing, by which means they
are only able to expel that which is hurtful and troublesome to them, the
ulcer is dilated, the inflammation The harm that ensues upon coughing in
wounds of the Lungs.
augmented, the Patient wastes away, and the disease becomes incureable.

There have been many Eclegma's described by Physicians for to cleanse the
ulcer; which when the patient uses, he shall lie on his back, to keep them
long in his mouth, so to relaxe the muscles of the Larinx; for thus the
medicine will fall by How Eclegma's must be swallowed.
little and little along the coats of the Weazon, for if it should fall
down in great quantity, it would be in danger to cause coughing. Cowes, Asses,
or Goats milk with a little honey, least they should corrupt in the stomach,
are very fit remedies for this purpose; but woman's milk exceedes the rest.

But Sugar of Roses is to be preferred before all other medicines, in the
opinion of Avicen, for that it has a detergent, and also an astrictive and
strengthening faculty, The utility of Sugar of roses in ulcerated or wounded
Lungs.
than which nothing is more to be desired in curing of ulcers. When you shall
think it time to agglutinate the cleansed ulcer, you must command the patient
to use emplasticke, austere, and asttringent medicines, such as are Terra
sigillata, bolus armenus, hypocystis, plantaine, knot-grasse, Sumach, acacia
and the like, which the patient shall use in hisbrothes and Eclegma's, mixing
therewith honey of roses, which serving for a vehicle to the rest, may carry
away the impacted filth which hinders agglutination. But seeing an hecticke
fever easily follows upon these kinds of wounds, and also upon the affects of
the Chest and lungs, it will not be amiss to set down somewhat concerning the
cure thereof, that so the Surgeon may know to administer some help to his
patient, whilst a Physician is sent for, to overcome this disease with more
powerful and certain remedies.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the differences, causes, signs and cure of an Hecticke fever.
A Hecticke fever is so called; either for that it is stubborn and hard to
eure and loose, as things which have contracted a habit; for Hexis in The
reason of the name.
Greek signifies a habit; or else for that it seazes upon the solid parts of
our bodies called by the Greeks Hexeis; both which the Latin word Habitus
does signify.

There are three kinds, or rather degreees of this fever. The first is when
the hecticke The differences theroof.
heat consumes the humidity of the solid parts. The second is, when it feeds
upon the fleshy substance. The third and uncureable is, when it destroys the
solid parts themselves. For thus the flame of a lamp first wastes the oil,
then the proper moisture of the week. Which being done there is no hope of
lighting it again what store of oil soever you pour upon it. This fever
very seldom breeds of its self, but commonly follows after some other.

Wherefore the causes of a hecticke fever are, sharp and burning fevers not
well The causes,
cured, especially if their heat were not repressed with cooling epithemes
applied to the heart and Hypochondria. If cold water was not fitly drunk. If
may also succeed a Diary fever which has bin caused and begun by some long,
great and vehement or anger, or some too violent labor, which any of a slender
and dry body has performed in the hot sun. It is also often time caused by an
ulcer or inflammation of the Lungs, an empyema of the Chest, by any great and
long continuing Phlegmon of the liver, stomach, mesentery, womb, kidneyes,
Bladder, of the guts Iejunam and Colon, and also of the other Guts, of if the
Phlegmon succeed some long Diarrhoea; Lienteria or bloody flix; whence a
consumption of the whole body, and at last a hecticke fever, the heat
becoming more acride, the moisture of the body being consumed.

This kind of fever as it is most easily to be known, so is it most
difficulty to The Signs.
cure; the pulse in this fever is hard, by reason of the dryness of the
Artery which is a solid part; and it is weak by reason of the debility of the
vital faculty, the substance of the heart being assaulted. But it is little
and frequent because of the distemper and heat of the heart, which for that it
cannot by reason of its weakness cause a great pulse to cool its self, it
labors by the oftennesse to supply that defect

But for the pulse, it is a proper sign of this fever, that one or two hours
after meat the pulse feels stronger than usual; and then also there is a
more acride heat Why in hectickes the heat is more acride after meat.
over all the patients body. The heat of this flame lasts until the
nourishment be distributed over all the patients body; in which time the
dryness of the heart in some sort tempered and recreated by the appulse of
moist nourishment, the heat increases no otherwise than lime which a little
before seemed cold to the touch, but sprinkled and moystned with water grows
so hot, as it smoakes and boiled up. At other times there is a perpetual
equallity of heat and pulse in smallness, faintness; obscurity, frequency,
and hardness, without any excerbation, so that the patient cannot think
himself to have a fever, yea he cannot complain of any thing, he feels no
no pain, which is another proper sign of an hecticke fever.

The cause that the heat does not show its self is, it does not possess the
surface of the body, that is, the spirits and humors, but lies as buried in
the earthy grossness of the solid parts. Yet if you hold your hand somewhat,
you shall at length perceive The signs of a hecticke joined with a putride
fever.
the heat more acride and biting, the way being opened thereto by the skin
rarifyed by the gentle touch of the warm and temperate hand. Wherefore if at
any time in these kind of fevers the Patient feel any pain, and perceive
himself troubled with an inequality and excess of heat, it is a sign that
the hecticke fever is not simple, but conjoined with a putride fever, which
causes such inequality, as the heat does more or less seace upon matter
subjecte to putrefaction; for a hecticke fever of its self is void of all
equality unless it proceed from some external cause, as from meat;
Certainly if an Hippocratique face may be found in any disease, it may in
this, by reason of the colliquation, or wasting away the triple substance. In
the cure of this disease, you must diligently observe with what affects it is
entangled, The cure.
and whence it was caused. Wherefore first you must know whether this fever be
a disease; or else a symptom. For if it be symptom aticall it cannot be cured,
as long as the disease the cause thereof, remains uncured; as if an ulcer of
the guts occasioned by a bloody flixe shall have caused it, or else a fistulous
ulcer in the Chest A symptomaticall hecticke.
caused by some wound received on that part; it will never admit of cure,
unless first the fistulous or dysenterick ulcer shall be cured; because the
disease feeds the symptoms, as the cause the effect. But if it be a simple
and essential hecticke fever, for that it has its essence consisting in an
hot and dry distemper, which is not fixed An essential hecticke.
in the humors, but in the solid parts, all the counsel of the Physician must
be to renew the body, but not to purge it; for only the humors require
purging, and not the defaults of the solid parts. Therefore the solid parts
must be refrigerated and humected; which we may do by medicines taken
inwardly and applied out-wardly.

The things which may with good success be taken inwardly into the body for
Things to be taken inwardly.
this purpose, are medicinal nourishments. For hence we shall find more
certain and manifest good, than from altering medicines, that is, wholly
refrigerating and humecting without any manner of nourishment.

For by reason of that portion fit for nutriment which is therewith mixed, they
are drawn and carried more powerfully to the parts, and also converted into
their substance: The benefit of medicinal nourishments.
whereby it comes to pass that they do not humect and cool them lightly and
superficially, like the medicines which have only power to alter and change
the body, but they carry their qualities more thoroughly even into the innermost
substance.

Of these things some are herbs, as violets, purssaine, buglosse, endive,
ducks-meat, or water lentill, mallows, especially when the belly shall be
bound. Some are fruits, as gourds, cowcumbers, apples, prunes, raisons, sweet
almonds, and fresh or new pineapple kernells. In the number of seeds are the
four greater and lesser cold seeds, and these new, for their native humidity,
the seeds of poppyes, berberries, quinces. The flowers of buglosse, violets,
water lillies, are also convenient; of all these things let broth be made with
a chicken, to be taken in the morning for eight or nine days, after the first
concoction.

For meats; in the beginning of the disease, when the faculties are not too
much The choice of meats.
debilitated, he shall use such as nourish much and long, though of hard
digestion; such as the extreme parts of beasts, as the feet of Calves, Hoggs
feet not salted, the flesh of a Tortois, which has lived so long in a garden,
as may suffice to digest the excrementitious humidity; the flesh of white
Snailes, and such as have been gathered in a vineyard, of frogs, river Crabs,
Eeles taken in clear waters and; welcooked, hard eggs eaten with the juice of
Sorrel without spices; Whitings and stockfish. For all such things because they
have a tough and glutiuons juice, are easily put and gluti, nated to the parts
of our body, neither are they so easily dissipated by the feverish heat. But
when the patient languisheth of a long hectic, he must feed upon meats of
easiy digestion, and these boiled rather than roasted; for boiled meats humect
more, and roasted more easily turn into choler. Wherefore he may use to eat
Veale, Kid, Capon, Pullet, boiled with refrigerating and humecting herbs; he
may also use Barley creames, Almond milkes, as also bread crummed and moystened
with rose water and boiled in a decoction of the four cold seeds with sugar
of roses; for such a Panada cooles the liver, and the habit of the whole body,
and nourishes withal.

The Testicles, wings, and livers of young cocks, as also figs and raisons.
But if the patient at length begin to loathe and grow weary of boiled meats,
then let him use roast, but so that he cut away the burnt and dried part
thereof, and feed only on the inner part thereof, and that moystned in rose
water, the juice of Citrons, Oranges or Pomegranats. Let him abstainefrom salt
and dry fishes, and choose such fishes as live in stony waters, for the exercise
they are forced to undergo in shunning the rocks beaten upon by the waves.
Asses milk newly milked and seasoned with a little salt, sugar, honey, or
fennel, that it may not corrupt, nor grow sour in thestomacke; How Asses
milk must be used in a hecticke.
or woman's milk sucked from the dug by the patient, to the quantity of half a
pint is much commended; verily woman's milk is the more wholesome, as that which
is more sweet and familiar to our substance, if so be that the nurse be of a
good remper and habit of body. For so it is very good against the gnawings of
the stomach, and Woman's milk more wholesome than Asses.
ulcers of the Lungs, from whence a Consumption often proceeds. Let your milch
Ass be fed with barley, oats, oakeleaves; but if the patient chance to be
troubled with the flux of the belly, you shall make the milk somewhat
astringent, by gently boiling it, and quenching there in pebble stones heated
red hot. But for that all natures cannot away with Asses milk, such shall
abstain from it, as it makes to have acrid belchings, difficulty of breathing,
a heat and rumbling in the Hypochondria, and pain of the head. Let the
patient temper his wine with a little of the waters of Lettuce, purslaine and
water lillies, but with much buglosse water, both for that it moystens very
much; as also for that it has a specificke power to recreate the heart, whose
solid substance in this kind of disease is greivously afflicted. And thus
much of things to be taken inwardly.

These things which are to be outwardly applied, are inunctious, bathes,
epithemes, Things to be outwardly applied.
clysters. Inunctions are diverse, according to the various indication of the
parts whereto they are applied. For Galen annoints all the spine with cooling
and moderate astringent things, as which may suffice to strengthen the parts,
and hinder their wasting, and not let the transpiration; for if it should be
let, the heat would become more acride, by suppressing the vapors. Oil of
roses, water lillies, Quinces, the mucilages of Gum tragacanth and arabicke
extracted in water of night shade, with some small quantity of camphire, and a
little wax if need require; but on the contrary, the parts of the breast must
be anointed with refrigerating and relaxing things; by refrigerating I mean
things which moderately cool, for cold is hurtful to the breast. But
astringent things would hinder the motion of the muscles of the chest, and
cause a difficulty of breathing. Such inunctions may be made of oil of
Violets, willowes, of the seeds of lettuce, poppyes, water-lillyes, mixing with
them the oil of sweet almonds to temper the astriction which they may have by
their coldness. But you must have great care that the Apothecarie for A
caution in the choice of Oils.
covetousness in steed of these oiles newly made give you not old, rancide and
salted oiles, for so in steed of refrigerating, you shall heat the part; for
wine, honey and oil acquire more heat by age; in defect of convenient oils,
we may use butter well washed in violet and nightshade water. The use of such
inunctions, is to cool, humect and comfort the parts whereto they are used;
they must be used evening and morning, chiefly after a bath.

Now for Bathes, we prescribe them either only to moysten, and then plain
warm The differences of bathes.
water wherein the flowers of Violets and water lillyes, willow leaves and
barley have been boiled, will be sufficient; or else not only to moysten, but
also to acquire them a fairer and fuller habit, and then you may add to your
bath the decoction of a sheep head and Gather, with some butter. But the
patient shall not enter into the bath fasting, but after the first concoction
of the stomach, that so the nourishment Why the patients must not enter the
Bath fasting.
may be drawn by the warmenesse of the bath into the whole habit of the body,
for otherwise he which is sick of a consumption and shall enter the bath with
his stomach empty, shall suffer a greater dissipation of the triple substance,
by the heat of the bath, than his strength is well able to endure. Wherefore
it is fit thus to prepare the body, before you put it into the bath. The day
before in the morning let him take How to prepare the body for the Bath.
an emollient clyster, to evacuate the excrements backed in the guts by the
hecticke dryness; then let him eat to his dinner some solid meats about nine
of the clock; and let him about four of the clock eat somewhat sparingly,
meats of easy digestion to his supper. A little after midnight let him sup of
some chicken broth or barley cream, or else two rear eggs tempered with some
rose water and sugar of roses in steed of salt. Some 4. or 5. hours after, let
him enter into the bath, these things which I have set down, being observed.
When he comes out of the ^ath, let him be dried and gently rubbed, with soft
linen clothes, and anointed as I formerly prescribed, then let him sleep it
he can for two or three hours in his bed: when he wakes let him take some
Prisan, or some such like thing, and then repeat his bath after the foresaid
manner. He shall use this bath thrice in ten days; But if the patient be
subject to crudities of the stomach, so that he cannot sit in the bath Things
strengthening the ventricle.
without fear of sowning and such symptoms, his stomach must be strengthened
with oil of Quinces, Wormwood and Mastich, or else with a crust of bread
tosted, and steeped in muskedine, and strewed over with the powders of Roses,
Sanders, and so laid to the stomach, or behind near to the thirteenth
vertebra of the back, under which place, Anatomy teaches, that the mouth of
the stomach Epithemes.
lies. Epithemes shall be applied to the liver and heart, to temper the too
acride heat of these parts, and correct the immoderate dryness by their
moderate humidity.

Now they shall be made of refrigerating and humecting things, but chiefly
humecting; for too great coldness would hinder the penetration of the humidity
into the part lying within. The waters of Bug loss, and Violets, of each a
quarterne with a little white wine is convenient for this purpose. But that
which is made of French barley, the seeds of gourds, pompions, or Cowcumbers of
each three drams in the decoction, and mixed with much tempering with oil of
Violets, or of sweet almonds, is most excellent of all other. Let clothes be
dipped and steeped in such epithemes, and laid upon the part, and renewed as often
as they become hot by the heat of the part. And because in hecticke bodies, by
reason of the weakness of the digestive faculty, many excrements are usually
heaped up, and dried in the guts, it will be convenient, all the time of the
discase to use frequently glisters made of the decoction of cooling and
humecting herbs, flowers, and seeds wherein you shall dissolve Cassia with
sugar and oil of Violets, or water lillies. But because there often happen
very dangerous fluxes in a confirmed hecticke fever, which show the decay What
a flux happening in a hecticke fever Indicates.
of all the faculties of the body, and wasting of the corporaell substance, you
shall resist them with refrigerating and asisting medicines; and meats of
grosser nourishment, as Rice, and Cicers; and application of astringent and
strengthening remedies; and using the decoction of Oats or parched barley for
drink. Let the patient be kept How children be cured.
quiet and sleeping as much as may be, especially if he be a child.

For this fever frequently invades children by anger, great and long fear, or
the too hot milk of the nurse, overheating in the Sun, the use of wine and
other such like causes; they shall be kept in a ho^ and moystayre, have another
Nurse, and be anointed with oil of violets; to conclude, you shall apply
medicines which are contrary to the morbificke cause.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Wounds of the Epigastrium and of the whole lower belly.
THe wounds of the lowerbelly are sometimes before, sometimes behind, Their
differences.
some only touch the surface thereof, others enter in; some pass quite
through the body, so that they often leave the weapon therein, some happen
without hurting the contained parts; others grievously offend these parts, the
liver, spleen, stomach, guts, kidneyes, womb, bladder, Signs of a wounded
liver.
ureters, and great vessels, so that often times a great portion of the Kall
falls forth. We know the Liver is wounded, when a great quantity of blood comes
forth of the wound, when a pricking pain reaches even to the swordlike
gristle, to which the Liver adheares. Often times morecholer is cast up by vomit,
and the patient lies on his belly with more case, and content. Signs that the
stomach and smaller guts are wounded.


When the stomach or any of the small guts are wounded, the meat and drink
break out at the wound, the Ilia or flanks swell and become hard the hicker
troubles the patient, and often times he casts up more choler, and greevous pain
wrings Signs to know when the greater guts are wounded.
his belly, and he is taken with cold sweates, and his extreme parts wax cold.

If any of the greater gutts shall be hurt, the excrements come forth at the
wound: When the Spleen is wounded, there flows out thick and black blood,
the patient is oppressed with thirst, and there are also the other signs,
which we said use to accompany the wounded Liver. A difficulty of making water
troubles the patient whose reins are wounded, blood is pissed forth with the
Urine, and he has a pain Signs that the Kidneyes are hurt.
stretched to his groines and the regions of the Bladder and Testicles.

The Bladder or Vreters being wounded, the flanks are pained, and there is a
Tension Signs that the Bladder is wounded.
of the Pecten or share, blood is made in stead of urine, or else the urine is
very bloody, which also diverse times comes forth at the wound. When the womb
is wounded, the blood breaks forth by the privities, and the Symptoms are
like Signs that the womb is wounded.
those of the Bladder.

The wounds of the liver are deadly, for this part is the work house of the
blood, Prognostics.
wherefore necessary for life; besides by wounds of the liver the branches of
the Gateor Hollow veins are cut, whence ensues a great flux of blood not only
inwardly, but also outwardly, and consequently a dissipation of the spirits and
strength.

But the blood which is shed inwardly amongst the bowels putrefies and
corrupts, whence follows pain, a fever, inflammation, and lastly death. Yet
Paulus Aegineta Lib. 6. cap. 88.
writes, that the lobe of the Liver may be cut away without necessary
consequence of death. Also the wounds of the Ventricle and of the small Guts,
but chiefly of the Iejunum are deadly; for many vessels run to the Iejunum
or empty Gut, and it is of a very nervous and slender substance, and besides it
receives the choleric humor from the bladder of the Gall. So also the wounds
of the Spleen, Kidneyes, Vreters, Bladder, Womb and Gall, are commonly deadly,
but always ill, for that the actions of such parts are necessary for life;
besides, diverse of these are without blood and nervous, others of them receive
the moist excrements of the whole body, and lie in the innermost part of the
body, so that they do not easily admit of medicines. Furthermore, all wounds
which penetrate into the capacity of the belly, are judged very dangerous,
though they do not touch the contained bowels; for the encompassing and new
air entering in amongst the bowels, greatly hurts them, as never used to the
feeling thereof; add hereto the dissipation of the spirits which much weakens
the strength. Neither can the filth of such wounds be wasted away according to
the mind of the Surgeon, whereby it happens, they diverse times turn into
Fistula's, as we said of wounds of the Chest, and so at length by collection
of matter cause death. Yet I have dressed many who by Gods assistance and
favor have recovered of wounds passing quite through their bodies.

I can bring as a witness the steward of the Portingall Ambassador, whom I A
History.
cured at Melun, of a wound made with a sword so running through his body, that
a great quantity of excrements came forth of the wounded Guts, as he was a
dressing, yet he recovered.

Not long agone Giles le Maistre a Gentleman of Paris was run quite through
Another History.
the body with a Rapier, so that he voyded much blood at his mouth and
fundament diverse days together, whereby you know the Guts were wounded; and
yet he was healed in twenty days. In like sort the wounds of the greater
vessels are mortal, by reason of the great effusion of blood and spirits
which ensues thereupon.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The cure of wounds of the lower belly.
THe first cogitation in curing of these wounds ought to be whether they pierce
into the capacity of the Belly; for those which pass no further than to the
Peritonaeum shall be cured like simple wounds which only requre union. But
those which enter into the capacity must be cured after another manner. For often
times the Kall or Guts, or both fall forth at them.

A gut which is wounded must be sowed up with such a seame as Furriers or
Glovers The cure of a wounded Gut.
use, as we formerly told you; and then you must put upon it a powder made of
Mastich, Myrrh, Aloes and Bole. Being sowed up, it must not be put up
boysterously together and at once into its place, but by little and little, the
Patient lying on the side opposite to the wound. As for example, the right side
of the Guts being wounded and falling out by the wound, the Patient shall lie
on his left side, for the more easy restoring of the fallne down Gut, and so
on the contrary. If the lower part of the Guts being wounded slide through the
wound, then the Patient shall lie with his head low down, and his buttocks
raised up by putting a pillow under them; If the upper part be hurt, then must
he lie quite contrary, that the Guts falling downe-wards by such a site, may
give way to these which are fallne out through the wound. But often in this
case, the Guts having taken cold by the encompassing air, swell up and are
distended with wind, the which you must discuss before you put them into
their place, with a fomentation of the decoction of camomill, melilote,
aniseeds and fennel applied with a sponge or contained in a bladder; or else
with chickens, or whelps cut alive in the midst and laid upon the swelling;
for thus they do not only discuss the flatulency, but also comfort the
afflicted part. But if the inflation cannot thus be discussed, the wound shall
be dilated, that so the Guts may return the more freely to their place.

If the Kall shall fall out, it must be speedily restored to its place, for it
is very subject The cure when the Kall falls out.
to putrify; for the fat, whereof for the most part it consists, being exposed
to the air, easily looses its native heat, which is small and weak, whence a
mortification ensues. Hence is that of Hippocrates; If the Kall fall out, it
necessarily putrifies. The Surgeon shall know whether it putrify, or not,
by the blackness and the coldness Hip. Aph. 58. sect. 6.
you may perceive by touching it; neither must you when it putrifies presently
restore it to its place, for so the contagion of the putrefaction would spread
to the rest of the parts: but what soever thereof is putrefied shall be
twitched and bound hard with a string and so cut off, and the rest restored to
his proper place: but its good after cutting of it away to leave the string
still hanging thereat, that so you may pluck and draw forth whatsoever thereof
may by being too straight bound fall away into the capacity of the belly. Some
think it to be better to let the Kall thus bound to hang forth until that
portion thereof which is putrified fall away of itself, and not to cut it off.
But they are much deceived, for it hanging thus would not cover the guts, which
is the proper place. The Guts and Kall being put up, if the wound be great and
worth speaking of, it must be sowed with that future which is termed
Gastroraphia; but this kind of future is thus made. The needle at the first
putting in must only take hold of the peritonaeum, and then on the opposite
side only of the flesh, letting the peritonaeum alone, and so go along
putting the needle from without inwards, and from within outward, but so that
you only take the musculous flesh and skin over it, and then only the
peritonaeum, until you have sowed up all the wound. He which does otherwise
shall undergo this danger, that whereas the coat peritonaeum is of it self
without blood, it being divided, or wounded cannot of it self be united to it
self, therefore it requires an intercourse of flesh: otherwise unless it be
thus united by the benefit of the flesh intermixed therewith, there would
remain an uncurable Tumor after the wound is cicatrized on the outside. But
that which we said before according to Galens mind, that all the wounds must
be sowed, it is not Lib. 6. Metb. cap. 4.
so to be taken as if that the wound must be sowed up to the very end; for in
the lower part of the wound there must be left a certain small vent by which
the quitture may pass forth, which being wholly cleansed and exhausted, the
wound must be quite healed up. But the wounds which shall penetrate into the
substance of the liver, spleen, ventricles, and other bowels, the Surgeon
shall not suffer them to be without medicines as if they were desperate, but
here shall spare neither labor nor care to dress them diligently. For
doubtful hope is better than certain despair. The bladder, womb, and right
gut being wounded, detergent and agglutinative injections shall be put up by
their proper passages. I have read nothing as yet in any author of the wounds
of the Fat, for all of them refer the cure thereof to the wounds of the
Muscles. Yet I will say this by the way, that wounds of the fat how deep
soever they The cure of the wounded fat.
be, if they be only simple, may be dressed without putting in of any Tent,
but only dropping in some of my balsame, and then laying upon it a plaster of
Cratia Dei, or some such like, for so they will heal in a short time.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Wounds of the Groines, Yard and Testicles.
WHen the Groines and neighboring parts are wounded, we must first consider
whether they pierce to within: and if they do penetrate, to what inward parts
the come, whether to the bladder, the womb, or right gut: for these parts are
such near neighbors that often times they are all wounded with one blow. But
for the wounds of the Testicles, and genitall parts, because they are necessary
instruments for the preserving the species by generation, or a succession of
individualls, and to keep all things quiet at home, therefore the Surgeon
ought to be very diligent and careful for their preservation. Wherefore if
they should chance at any time to be wounded, they shall be dressed as we have
formerly delivered, the medicines being varyed according to the state of the
wound, and the appearing and happening symptoms; for it would be a thing of
immense labor to handle all things in particular.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Wounds of the Thighs and Legs.
WOunds which have been received on the inside of the Thighs, have often Why
wounds of the inside of the Thigh are often times deadly.
caused sudden death, if they have come to the vein Saphena, or the great
Artery, or the Nerves the associates of these vessels. But when they are
simple, there is nothing which may alter the usual manner of cure. Yet the
patient must be careful to lie in his bed: for the vulgar Italian proverb is
true. La mano al petto, la gamba al letto, [that is, the hand on the breast,
and the leg on the bed.] But when they penetrate more deeply into the
substance of the part, they bring horrid and fearful symptoms, as an
inflammation, an abscesse, from whence often times such abundance of matter
issues forth, that the Patient falls into an Atrophia and consumption.
Wherefore such wounds and ulcers require a careful and industrious Surgeon,
who may fitly make incisions necessary for the corrupt parts, and callosity of
the fistulous ulcer. Some Chirurgions have been so bold as to sow together
the end of the Tendons of the Ham, and of other joints, when they have been
quite cut asunder. But I durst never attempt it for fear of pain, convulsions
and the like horrid symptoms. For the wounds of that large Tendon which is
composed in the calfe of the Leg by the concourse of three The large Tendon
of the heel hard to consolidate.
muscles, and goes to the heel, I have observed that when it has been cut
with a sword, that the wounds have been long and hard to cure; and besides
when at the last they have been healed, as soon as the Patient has got out
of his bed, and endeavored to go, they have grown ill and broke open again.
Wherefore in such like wounds let the Patient have a care that he begin not to
go, or too boldly to use his hurt leg before it be perfectly cicatrized and
the scarre grown hard. Therefore that the patient may be in more safety, I
judge it altogether necessary, that he use to go with Crutches, for a good
while after the wound is perfectly healed up.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Wounds of the Nerves, and nervous parts.
THe continuity of the nervous parts is diverse ways loosed by the violent
incursion of external things; as by things which contuse, batter and grind in
Differences drawn from things wounded.
sunder, as by the blow of a stone, cudgel, hammer, lance, bullet out of a
gun, or crossebow; by the biting of greater teeth; or the pricking of some
sharp thing, as a needle, bodkin, penknife, arrow, splinter; or the puncture
of some venomous thing, as of a Sea Dragon; or the edge of some cutting thing,
as a sword or Rapier; or of stretching things which violently tear asunder the
nervous bodies. Hence therefore it is, that of such wounds some are simple,
others compound, and the compound, some more compound than other. For of these
some are superficiary and short, others deep and long; some run along the
nervous body, others run broadwayes; some cut the part quite asunder, others
only a portion thereof. The symptoms which follow upon such wounds are,
vehement pain, and Their symptoms.
de fluxion, inflammation, abscesse, fever, delirium, sowning, convulsion,
gangrene, sphacell; whence often death ensues by reason of that sympathy, which
all the nervous parts have with the brain. Amongst all the wounds of the
nervous parts, there Why a puncture of a nerve is deadly.
is none more to be feared than a puncture, or prick, nor any which causes
more cruel and dangerous symptoms. For by reason of the straitness of the
wound, medicines can neither be put in, nor the sanious matter pass forth: now
the sanious matter by long stay acquires virulencie, whereby the nervous parts
are tainted and swollne, suffer pain, inflammation, convulsions and infinite
other symptoms; of these the wounds are most dangerous, by which the nervous
and membranous bodies are but half cut asunder. For the portion whereof which
remains whole, by its drawing and contracting its self toward the original,
causes great pain and convulsion by sympathy. The truth hereof is evident in
wounds of the head, as when the pericranium is half cut, or when it is cut to
apply a Trepan. For the cutting thereof infers far greater pain, than when
it is cut quite asunder. Wherefore it is safer, to have the nervous body cut
quite off, for so it has no co^munity, nor consent with the upper parts,
neither does it labor, or strive to resist the contraction of its self; now
this contrariety, and as it were fight, is the cause of pain; yet there arises
another misery from such a wound, for the part whereinto the nerve which is
thus cut insunder passes, thence forwards loses its action.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the cure of wounds of the nervous parts.
IT is the ancient doctrine of the ancient Physicians, that the wounds of the
nervous A wound of the nervous parts indicates contrary to the general cure of
wounds.
parts should not presently be agglutinated (which notwithstanding the general
and first indication usually taken from the solution of continuity requires)
but rather, chiefly if they be too strait, that the punctures should be
dilated, by cutting the parts which are above them, and let them be kept long
open that the fifth may pass freely forth and the medicine enter well in. Yet
I in many cures have not followed this counsel, but rather that which the
common indication requires.

That cure is in fresh memory which I performed upon Monsieur le Cocque a
Procter A History.
of the spiritual court, who dwelt in our Ladies street; he gathering and
binding up some loose papers, run a penknife which was hid amongst them,
through his hand. Also one of his neighbors who went to spit a piece of beef,
thrust the spit through the midst of his hand; But I presently agglutinated
both their wounds, without any danger, dropping presently in at the first
dressing a little of my balsame warm, and putting about it a repelling and
astringent medicine, and by this means they were both of them healed in a
short time, no symptom thereupon happening. Yet I would not have the young
Surgeon to run this hazard, for first he must be well practiced and
accustomed to know the tempers and ha^ its of men; for this manner of curing
would not do well in a plethoricke body, or in a body replete with ill
humors, or endued with exquisite sense. Therefore in such a case it will be
safer to follow the course here set down. For wounds of the nerves do not
only differ from other wounds, but also among themselves in manner of curing.
For although all medicines which draw from far, and waste sanious humors, may
be reputed good for the wounds of the nerves; yet those which must be applied
to punctures and to those nerves which are not wholly laid open, ought to be
far more powerful, sharp and drying, yet so that they be not without biting,
that so penetrating more deep they may draw forth the matter, or else consume
and discuss that which either lies about the nerves, or moistens their
substance. On the contrary when the sinews are bared from flesh and the
Medecines fit for wounds of the nerves.
adjoining particles, they stand in need but of medicines, which may only
dry. Here you may furnish your selves with sufficient store of medicines good
for the nerves howsoever pricked. As. Terebinth. ven. and olei veteris an. j.
aquae vitae parum. Or. olei Terebinth. j. aquae vitae j. euphorb. ss. Or.
radices Dracotia, Brionia, valeriana, and gentiana exsiccatas, and in pulverem
redactas, misce cum decocto centaurij, aut oleo, aut exungia veteri; drop
hereof warm into the wound as much as shall suffice. Or else put some Hogs,
Goose, Capons, or Bears grease, old oil, oil of Lillyes or the like, to
Galbanum, pure Rozin, opopanax dissolved in aqua vitae and strong vinegar. Or.
olei hypericonis, sambuci, and de euphorbio an. j. sutphuris vivi subtiliter
pulverisati ss. gummi ammoniaci, bdellij, an. ij. aceti boni ij. vermium
terrest. praeparat. j. bulliant omnia simul ad consumptionem aceti. Let as much
hereof as shall suffice be dropped into the wound; then apply this following
cerate, which draws very powerfully.. olei supra scripti j. terebinth. venet.
ss. diachylonis albi cum gummi, x. ammoniac. bdellij in aceto dissolutorum an.
ij. resin. pint, gum. elemi, picis navalis an. v. cerae quod sufficit, fiat
ceracum satis molle. We must use somewhiles one, somewhiles another of these
medicines in punctures of the Nerves with choice and judgment, according to
their conditions, manner, depth, and the temperaments and habit of the wounded
bodies. But if the pain yield not to such remedies, but rather increase, what
wound of the Nerves must be burnt.
with the inflammation of the affected part, a swelling of the lips of the
wound, and sweating forth of a serous, thin and virulent matter or filth,
then you shall pour into it scalding oil, and shall touch three or four
times not only the surface of the wound but the bottom thereof with a ragge
dipped therein and tied to the end of a spatula. For this will take away the
sense from the Nerve, Tendon, or Membrane, like as if they were burnt with a
cautery, and so the pain will be eased. So in the A certain Anodyne in pain
of the teeth.
most grievous pains of rotten teeth, the thrusting of an hot iron into their
roots, or stopping them with cotton dipped in oil of Vitrioll, or aqua vitae,
gives most certain ease; for by burning the Nerve which is inserted into their
roots, the sense and so consequently the pain is taken away. So also in
malignant, gnawing, eating, Why Escharoticks must be used to spreading ulcers.
and spreading ulcers, which are always associated with much pain, the pain
ceases by applying an Escharoticke, as the powder of Alume, or Mercury, or
aegyptiacum made somewhat more strong than usual. That the young Surgeon may
be more ready for this practice and the use of the former remedies, I have
thought good to insert the following History both for the latenesse of the
thing and the pleasing memory of the most iaudible Prince.

Charles the ninth the French King being sick of a fever, Monsieur Chapellan
and A famous history.
Castellan his Physicians thought it fit he should be let blood; for the
performance whereof, there was called a Surgeon wondrous famous for that
business; but when as he by chance had pricked a nerve in stead of a vein,
the King cried out, that he felt a mighty pain in that place. Then I bid, that
the ligature should straight ways be loosed, otherwise the arm would
presently be much swelled. But he going slowly about it, behold the arm begun
to swell with such contraction, that he could not bend it, nor put it forth,
and cruel pain molested not only the pricked particle, but all the whole
member besides. I forthwith laid upon the wound a plaster of Basilico^, to
hinder the agglutination thereof, and then I wrapped all the arm in a double
linen cloth dipped in oxycrate, putting upon it an expulsive ligature, which
beginning at the wrist and ending at the top of the shoulder, might keep the
blood and spirits from fear of defluxion and inflammation. This being thus
performed, we went aside to consult what was necessary to be done, both to
assuage the pain, as also to divert the other symptoms, which usually happen
upon punctures of the nerves. I being desired, thus delivered my opinion, that
in my mind, there were nothing better, than presently to drop into the wound
some oil of Turpentine warmed and mixed with a little aqua vitae. And then all
the arm should be covered with a plaster of Diacalcitheos dissolved in
vinegar and oil of Roses, bound over and besides with the expulsive ligature,
which we formerly mentioned. For the oil and aqua vitae have a faculty to
penetrate into the bottom of the wound, and to exhaust and dry up, the serous
and virulent humor, which sweats from the substance of the pricked nerve; and
also to mitigate the pain by its actual heat. Furthermore the emplaster
Diacalcitheos has a faculty to dissolve the humor which has already fallen
down into the arm, and to hinder the entrance and defluxion of any new
matter. And the ligature is such as by its moderate astriction would serve to
strengthen the muscles, and to press out and repel the humors which were
fallen down into the upper part, and to prohibit that which is ready to fall
down. Mine advice being approved of the Physicians both in word and deed, the
pain was mitigated. But the humor stayed in the part, for the dissolving and
drying whereof, this following remedy was used.

far. hordei and orobi, an. ij. flor. chamaem. and melilot. an. p. ij butyr.
recentis sine sale jss. lixivij barbitonsoris quod sufficit, fiat cataplasma ad
formam pultis. By these remedies A discussing and drying cataplasme.
the King at the last after three months space was perfectly healed, so that
there remained no sign of the depraved action in the part. But if at any time
there shall be so great contumacie, that it will not yield to these means, but
that there is imminent danger of a convulsion; it will be better to cut it in
sunder whether Nerve, Tendon or Membrane, than to expose the patient to the
danger of a deadly convulsion; for thus indeed the peculiar action of that
part will be lost, but the whole body preserved thereby; for so we had
determined by common consent, that if the pain which afflicted the King would
not yield to the prescribed remedies, either to pour inscalding oil, or else
to cut the sinew quite asunder.

For the late and sad memory of Mistress Courtin dwelling in the street of the
holy-Crosse A History.
was in our minds, who of a vein not well opened in her arm fell into a
Gangraene and total mortification of that whole part, of which she died,
because she was not dressed with the formerly mentioned medicines. Yet we
must abstain from these too powerful remedies, when the pricked nerve shall
lie bare, for else the pain would be increased, and more grievous symptoms
follow. Wherefore as I have formerly wished, more mild medicines must be
applied, which may dry up the serous humor without biting or acrimonye, as.
terebinth. venet. in aq. ros. lotae ij. boli armen. subtiliter pulverisati, ij.
incorporentur simul. Our Balsame also is excellent in this case, and this of
Vigoes which follows.

. olei. rosar. omphacini jss. olei de terebinth. iij. succiplaniag. ss. semin.
hypericonis aliquantulii contriti. m. ss. tutiaepraepar. iij. calcis decies
lotae cum aqua plantagin. ij. antimonij An anodyne and Sarcotick Balsame.
i. sevi hircini, and vitulini, an v. vermium terrestrium cum vino lotorum jss.
bulliant omnia simul dempta tutia in cyatho decoctionis hordei, ad
comsumptionem aquae and vini, colentur, rursumque igni admoveantur, addendo
tutiam, and fiat linimentum cum cera alba, and ss. croci. This liniment
asswages pains, and covers the bared nerves with flesh. This cure of punctured
nerves, may with choice and judgment and observing the proportion of the parts
be transferred to the pricked Tendons and membranes. But take this as a
general and common rule, that all nervous bodies how soever hurt, are A
general rule for all wounds of all Nervous parts.
to be comforted by anointing them with hot oils, such as the oiles of Bays,
Lillies, of Worms, Sage, or some other such like remedy being applied to their
originalls and more notable passages; as to the original of the spinall
marrow, the armepits and groines. Neither do I think it fit in this place to
omit an affect which sometimes happens to the large Tendon of the heel, of
which we formerly made mention. For it often times is rent or torn by a small
occasion without any sign of injury or solution of continuity apparent on the
outside as by a little jumpe, the slipping aside of the foot, the too nimble
getting on horseback, or the slipping of the foot out of the stirrup in
mounting into the sadlde. When this chance happens it will give a crack like a
Coachmans whip; above the heel, where the tendon is broken, the depressed
cavity may be felt with your finger, there is great pain in the part, and the
party is not able to go. This mischance may be amended by long lying and
resting in bed, and repelling medicines applied to the part affected in the
beginning of the disease, for fear of more grievous symptoms; and then
applying the Black plaster, or Diacalcitheos or some other such, as need
shall require; neither must we hereupon promise to our selves or the patient
certain or absolute health. But on the contrary at the beginning of the
disease we must foretell, that it will never be so cured but that some relics
may remain, as the depression of the part affected and depravation of the
action and going; for the ends of this broken or relaxed Tendon by reason of
its thickenesse and contumacie cannot easily be adjoined, nor being adjoined,
united.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the wounds of the joints.
BEcause the wounds of the joints have something proper and peculiar to Why
wounds of the joints are malignant.
themselves, besides the common nature of wounds of the Nerves, therefore I
intend to treat of them in particular. Indeed they are always very dangerous,
and for the most part deadly, by reason of the nervous productions and
membranous Tendons wherewith they are bound and engirt, and into which the
Nerves are inserted: whereby it comes to pass, that the exquisite sense of
such like parts will easily bring malign symptoms, especially if the wound
possess an internal, or as they term it, a domestique part of them; as for
example, the armepits, the bending of the arm, the inner part of the wrist,
and ham, by reason of the notable Veins, Arteries and Nerves of these parts,
the loosed continuity of all which brings a great flux of blood, sharp pain
and other malignant symptoms, all which we must resist according to their
nature and condition, as a flux of blood with things staying bleeding; pain
with anodynes. If the wound be large and wide, the severed The cure.
parts shall be joined with a future, leaving an orifice in the lower part, by
which the quitture may pass forth. This following powder of Vigoes description
must be strewed upon the future.

. thuris, sang. draconis, boli armen. terrae sigill. an. ij. aloes, mastich.
an. j. fiat pulvis subtilis. And then the joint must be wrapped about with a
repercussive medicine composed of the whites of eggs, a little oil of Roses,
Bole, Mastich, and barley flower. If it be needful to use a Tent, let it be
short and according to the wound thick, lest it cause pain: and moreover let
it be anointed with the yolke of an egg, oil of Roses, washed turpenetine
and a little saffron. But if the wound be more short and narrow, it shall be
dilated, if there be occasion, that so the humor may pass away more freely.
You must rest the part, and beware of using cold, relaxing mollifying,
humecting, and unctuous medicines, unless peradventure the sharpness of the
pain must be mitigated. For on the contrary, astringent and desiccant
medicines are good, as this following cataplasme.

. furtur, macri, farin. hordei, and fabarum. an. iiij. florum cham ae. and
melil. an m. ss. terebinth. An astringent and drying cataplasme.
iij. mellis communis ij. ol. myrtini j oxymelitis, vel oxycrat. vellixivij
com. quantum sufficit, fiat cataplasma ad formam pultis. Or you may compose one
of the Lees of wine, Wheat branne, the powder of Oaken bark, cypressenuts,
galls and Turpentine and such like, that have an astringent, strengthening and
drying quality, and thereby asswaging pain, and hindering the defluxion of
humors. This following medicine is astringent and agglutinative.

. Terebinth. venet. ij. aq. vitaeparum, pulveris mastich. aloes, myrrhae, boli
armen. an. ij. And also our balsame will be good in this case, if so be that,
you add hereto so much powder which dryes without acrimonie as occasion shall
serve. I admonished you before to take heed of cold, and now again; for it is
hurtful to all wounds and ulcers, but especially to these of the nervous
parts; hence it is that many dye of small wounds in the winter, who might
recover of the same wounds though greater in the Summer. For cold according to
Hippocrates is nipping to ulcers, hardens the skin, Aphor. 20. sect. 5.
and hinders them from suppuration, extinguisheth natural heat, causes
blackenesse, cold aguish fits, convulsions and distentions. Now diverse
excrements are cast forth of wounds of the joints, but chiefly albugineous,
that is, resembling the white of an egg, and mucous, and sometime a very
thin water, all which favor of the nature What matter usually flows from
wounds of the joints.
of that humor which nourishes these parts. For to every part there is
appropriate for his nourishment and conservation, a peculiar Balsame, which by
the wound flows out of the same part, as out of the branches of the Vine. when
they are pruned, their radical moisture or juice flows; whence also a Callus.
proceeds in broken bones. Now this same mucous and albugineous humor, slow and
as it were frozen flowing from the wounded joints, shows the cold distemper of
the parts, which causes pain, not to be overcome by medicines only potentially
hot. Wherefore to correct that, we must apply things actually hot, as beasts
and swines bladders half full of a discussing decoction, or hot bricks
quenched in wine. Such actual heat helps nature to concoct and discuss the
superfluous humor impact in the joints, and strengthens them; both which are
very necessary, because the natural heat of the Why things actually hot must
be applied to the wounded joints. Of the site and posture of wounded joints.
joints is so insirme that it can scarce actuate the medicine unless it be
helped with medicines actually hot. Neither must the Surgeon have the least
care of the figure and posture of the part, for a vicious posture increases ill
symptoms, uses to bring to the very part though the wound be cured,
distortion, numnes, incurable contraction; which fault least he should run
into, let him observe what I shall now say; If the forepart of the shoulder be
wounded, a great boulster must be under the armepit, and you must carry your
arm in a scarf, so that it may bear up the lower part of the arm, that so
the top of the shoulder may be elevated some what higher, and that so it may be
thereby more speedily and happily agglutinated and consolidated. If the lower
part be wounded, when flesh begins to be generated and the lips of the wound to
meet, you must bid the patient to moove and stir his arms diverse ways ever
and anon, for if that be omitted or negligently done, when it is cicatrized
then it will be more stiff and less pliable to every motion; and yet there is
a further danger least the arm should totally loose its motion. If the wound
be upon the joint of the elbow, the arm shall be placed and swathed in a
middle posture, that is, which neither too straightly bows it, nor holds it too
stiffly out; for otherwise when it is cicatrized, there will be an impediment
either in the contraction or extension. When the wound is in the wrist, or
joints of the fingers either externally or internally, the hand must be kept
half shut, continually mooving a ball therein. For if the fingers be held
straight stretched forth, after it is cicatrized, they will be unapt to take up
or hold any thing, which is their proper faculty. But if after it is healed, it
remain half shut, no great inconvenience will follow thereon; for so he may
use his hand diverse ways to his sword, pike, bridle and in any thing else. If
the joints of the Hip be wounded, you must so place the patient that the thigh
bone may be kept in the cavity of the hucklebone, and may not part a hairs
breadth therefrom, which shall be done with linen boulsters and ligatures
applied as is fitting, and lying full upon his back. When the wound shall begin
to cicatrize, the patient shall use to moove his thigh every way, least the
head of the Thigh Bone stick in the cavity of the huckle-bone without motion.
In a wound of the knee, the leg must be placed straight out, if the patient
desire not to be lame. When the joints of the feet and toes are wounded, these
parts shall neither be bended in nor out, for otherwise he will not be able to
go.

To conclude, the site of the foot and leg, is quite contrary to that of the
arm and hand.

CHAP. XL. Of the wounds of the Ligaments.
THe wounds of the Ligaments, besides the common manner of curing these
Ligaments more dry than Nerves, and without sense.
of the Nerves, have nothing peculiar, but that they require more powerful
medicines, for their agglutination, desiccation and consolidating; both because
the Ligamentall parts are harder, and dryer, and also for that they are void of
sense. Therefore the foresaid cure of Nerves and joints may be used for these
wounds: for the medicines in both are of the same kind, but here they ought to
be stronger and more powerfully drying. The Theorie and cure of all the
symptoms which shall happen thereupon have been expressed in the Chapter of
curing the wounds of the nervous parts, so that here we shall need to speak
nothing of them, for there you may find as much as you will. Wherefore here
let us make an end of wounds, and give thanks to God the author and giver of
all good for the happy process of our labors, and let us pray that, that
which remains may be brought to a happy end, and secure for the health and
safety of good people.

The end of the tenth Book.
OF VVOUNDS MADE BY GVN SHOT, OTHER FIERY ENGEINES, AND ALL SORTS OF WEAPONS.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK.
The Preface.
I Have thought good here to premise my opinion of the original, increase, and
hurt of fiery Engines, for that, I hope it will be an ornament and grace to
this my whole treatise: as also to entice my Reader, as it were with these
junckets, to our following Banquet so much savouring of Gunpouder. For thus it
shall be known to all whence Guns had their original, and how many habits
and shapes they have acquired from poor and obscure beginnings; and lastly how
hurtful to mankind the use of them is.

Polydore Virgill writes that a Germane of obscure birth and condition was the
inventor Lib. 2. inventor (...).
of this new engine which we term a Gun, being induced thereto by this
occasion. He kept in a mortar covered with a tyle, or slate, for some other
certain uses a powder (which since that time for its chief and new known
faculty, is named Gunpouder.) Now it chanced as he struck fire with a steel
and flint, a spark thereof by accident fell into the mortar, where upon the
powder suddenly catching fire, casts the stone or tyle which covered the
mortar, up on high; he stood amazed at the novelty and strange effect of the
thing, and withal observed the formerly unknown faculty of the powder; so
that he thought good to make experiment thereof in a small Iron trunk framed
for that purpose according to the intention of his mind. When all things were
correspondent to his expectation, he first showed the use of his engine to the
Venetians, when they warred with the Genoveses about Fossa Clodia, in the year
of our Lord 1380. Yet in the opinion of Peter Messiah, their invention must
have been of greater antiquity; for it is read in the Chronicles of Cap. 8.
prim. par. ^ar. lect.
Alphonsus the eleaventh King of Castile, who subdued the Isles Argezires, that
when he beseiged the chief Town in the year of our Lord 1343. the beseiged
Moors shot as it were thunder against the assailants, out of Iron mortars. But
we have read in the Chronicles written by Peter Bishop of Leons, of that
Alphonsus who conquered Toledo, that in a certain sea fight fought by the King
of Tunis, against the Moorish King of Sivill, whose part King Alphonsus
favored, the Tunetans cast lightning out of certain hollow Engines or Trunkes
with much noise. Which could be no other, than our Guns, though not attained to
that perfection of art and execution which they now have.

I think the deviser of this deadly Engine has this for his recompense, that
his name should be hidden by the darkness of perpetual ignorance, as not
meriting for this his most pernicious invention, any mention from posterity.
Yet Andrew Thevet in his Cosmography published some few years agone, when he
comes to treat of the Suevi, the inhabitants of Germany, brings upon the
authority and credit of a certain old Manuscript, that the Germane the
inventer of this warlike Engine was by profession a monk and Philosopher or
Alchymist, borne at Friburge, Who the inventor of Guns.
and named Constantine Anclzen. Howsoever it was, this kind of Engine was
called Bombarda (i) a Gun, from that noise it makes, which the Greeks and
Latins according to the sound call Bombus: then in the following ages, time,
art and man's maliciousness The reason of the name.
added much to this rude and unpolisht invention. For first for the matter,
Brass and Copper, mettalls far more tractable, fusible and less subject to
rust, came as supplies to Iron. Then for the form, that rude and undigested
barrel, or mortar-like mass, has undergone many forms and fashions, even so
far as it is gotten upon wheels, that so it might run not only from the
higher ground, but also with more rapide violence to the ruin of mankind;
when as the first and rude mortars seemed not to be so nimbly traversed, nor
sufficiently cruel for our destruction by the only casting forth of Iron and
fire. Hence sprung these horrible monsters of Canons, double Canons, Bastards,
Musquits, field pieces; hence these cruel and furious beasts, Culverines,
Serpentines, Basilisques, Sackers, Falcons, Falconets, and diverse other names
not only drawn from their figure and making, but also from the effects of
their cruelty. Wherefore certainly I cannot sufficiently admire the wisdom of
our Ancestors, who have so rightly accommodated them with names agreeable to
their natures; as those who have not only taken them from the swiftest birds
of prey, as Falcons; but also from things most harmefull and hateful to
mankind, such as Serpents, Snakes, and Basilisks. That so we might clearly
discern, that these engines were made for no other purpose, nor with other
intent, but only to be employed for the speedy and cruel slaughter of men;
and that by only hearing them named we might detest and abhor them, as
pernicious enemies of our lives. I let pass other engines of this offspring,
being for their quantity small, but so much the more pernicious and harmefull,
for that they nearer assail our lives, and may traitorously and forthwith
seize upon us not thinking nor fearing any such thing; so that we can scarce
have any means of escape; such are Pistolls and other small hand-guns, which
for shortness you may carry in your pocket, and so privily The danger of
Pistolls.
and suddenly taking them forth oppress the careless and secure. Fowling
pieces which men usually carry upon their shoulders, are of the middle rank of
these engines, as also Muskets and Caleevers, which you cannot well discharge
unless lying upon a Rest, which therefore may be called Breast-guns for that
they are not laid to the cheek, but against the Breast by reason of their
weight and shortness; All which have been invented for the commodity of
footmen, and light horsemen. This middle sort of engine we call in Latin by a
general name Sclopus, in imitation of the sound, and the Italians who term it
Sclopetere; the French call it Harquebuse, a word likewise borrowed from the
Italians, by reason of the touchhole by which you give fire to the piece, for
the Italians call a hole Buzio. It is termed, Arcus (i) a Bow, for that at
this present it holds the same place in martial affairs, as the Bow did of
old; and as the Archers formerly, so at this day the Musketeers are placed in
front. From the same wretched shop and magazine of cruelty, are all sorts of
Mines, Countermines, pots of fire, trains, fiery Arrows, Lances, Crossebowes,
barrells, balls of fire, burning faggots, Granats, and all such fiery engines
and Inventions, which closely stuffed with fuel and matter for fire, and cast
by the defendants upon the bodies and Tents of the assailants, easily take fire
by the violence of their motion. Certainly a most miserable and pernicious
kind of invention, whereby we often see a thousand of heedelesse men blown up
with a mine by the force of gunpouder; otherwhiles in the very heat of the
conflict you may see the stoutest soldiers seized upon with some of these
fiery Engines, to burn in their harness, no waters being sufficiently
powerful to restrain and quench the raging and wasting violence of such fire
cruelly spreading over the body and bowels. So it was not sufficient to have
arms, Iron and fire to man's destruction, unless also that the stroke might
be more speedy, we had furnished them, as it were with wings, so to fly more
hastily to our own perdition, furnishing sithe-bearing death with wings so
more speedily to oppress man, for whose preservation, all things contained in
the world were created by God. Verily when I consider with my self all the
sorts of warlike Engines, which the ancients used, whether in the field in set
battles, as Bows, Darts, Crosse-bowes, A comparison of the ancient weapons
with the modern.
Slings; or in the assault of Cities, and shaking or overturning their walls,
as Rams, Horses, wooden towers, slings and such like; they seem to me
certain childish sports and games made only in imitation of the former. For
these modern inventions are such as easily exceed all the best appointed and
cruel Engines which can be mentioned or thought upon, in the shape, cruelty
and appearance of their operations. For what in the world is thought more
horrid or fearful than thunder and lightning? and yet the hurtfulnesse of
thunder is almost nothing to the cruelty of these infernal Engines; which may
easily appear by comparing together both their effects. Man alone of all
creatures is not always killed by being touched Plin. Lib. 2. Cap. 54.
with thunder; but it immediately kills all other things which are subject to
be touched therewith.

Nature bestowing this honor upon him, seeing so many creatures exceed him in
strength: For all things ly contrary to man; and man, unless he be
overthrown with it, does not dye thereof. But these fire-spitting Engines do
no more spare man, than they do other creatures, and kill without difference
from whence soever they come, whither soever they are carried, and howsoever
they touch. There are many, but more are said to be the remedies against
thunder; for beside the charms whereby Plin. Lib. 2. Cap. 55.
the ancient Romans did suppose they might be driven away, they never penetrate
deeper into ground than five foot, therefore such as were fearful thought
the deeper Caves most safe. Of those things which grow out of the earth they
do not touch the Bay tree, and that was the cause that it was counted a sign
of victory both in ancient and modern times. Wherefore Tiberius Caesar
otherwise a contemner S^^ton, in Tiberio.
of God and religion, as he who endued with the Mathematical sciences thought
all things governed by fate, yet because he exceedingly feared thunder, he
always carried a Laurel wreath about his neck when the air was troubled,
for that this kind of leaf is reported not to be touched by thunder. Some
report that he made him tents or Seals skins, because it touches not this
kind of creature of all these things that live in the Sea, as neither the
Eagle amongst birds, which for that is fained to be Jove's squire. But on the
contrary, charms, the victorious Bay, the Seal or Sea-calfe, the Eagle or any
such thing profits nothing against the violence The wondrous force of great
Ordinance.
of these fiery Engines: no not a wall of ten foot thick will advantage.
Lastly, this argues the immense violence of brazen Cannons above thunder, for
that thunder may be dispersed and driven away with the noise and ringing of
Bells, the sounding of Trumpets, the tinkling of brazen kettles, yea also by
the shooting of such great Ordinance; to wit, the clouds, by whose collision
and fight the Thunder is caused, being dispersed by this violent agitation of
the air, or else driven further to more remote parts of the skies. But their
fury once provoked, is stayed by no opposition, appeased by no remedy. As there
are certain seasons of the year, so also there are certain Regions of the
earth, wherein Thunder is seldom or never heard. Thunders are rare in Winter
and Summer, and that for contrary causes; for that in Winter the dense air is
thickened with a thicker coat of clouds, and the frosty and cold exhalation of
the earth extinguisheth what fiery vapors soever it receives; which thing
keeps Scythia and the cold countries about it free from Thunder. And on the
contrary, too much heat preserves Egypt. For hot and dry exhalations Plin.
Lib. 21 Cap. 50.
of the earth are condensed into very thin, subtle and weak clouds. But as
the invention, so also the harm and tempest of great Ordinance, like a
contagious pestilence is spread and rages over all the earth, and the skies at
all times sound again with their reports. The Thunder and Lightning commonly
gives but one blow, or stroke, and that commonly strikes but one man of a
multitude; But one great Cannon at one shot may spoil and kill an hundred men.
Thunder, as a thing natural falls by chance, one while upon an high oak,
another while upon the top of a mountain, and some whiles on some lofty tower,
but seldom upon man. But this hellish Engine tempered by the malice and
guidance of man, assailes man only, and takes him for his only mark, and
directs his bullets against him. The Thunder by its noise as a messenger sent
before, foretells the storm at hand; but, which is the chief mischief, this
infernal Engine roares as it strikes, and strikes as it roares, sending at one
and the same time the deadly bullet into the breast, and the horrible noise
into the ear. Wherefore we all of us rightfully curse the author of so
pernicious an Engine; on the contrary praise those to the skies, who endeavor
by words and pious exhortations to dehort Kings from their use, or else labor
by writing and operation to apply fit medicines to wounds made by these
Engines. Which has moved me, that I have written hereof almost with the first
of the French. But before I shall do this, it seems not amiss, so to
facilitate the way to the treatise I intend to write of wounds made by Gunshot,
to premise two Discourses, by which I may confute and take away certain
erroneous opinions which have possessed the minds of diverse; for that unless
these be taken away, the essence and nature of the whole disease cannot be
understood, nor a fitting remedy applied by him which is ignorant of the
disease.

The first Discourse which is dedicated to the Reader, refells and condemns by
The arguments of the following discourses.
reasons and examples the method of curing prescribed by John de Vigo, whereby
he cauterizes the wounds made by Gunshot, supposing them venenate; and on the
contrary proves that order of curing with is performed by suppuratives, to be
so salutary and gentle, as that prescribed by Vigo is full of error and
cruelty.

The second dedicated to the King, teaches that the same wounds, are of
themselves void of all poison, and therefore that all their malignity depends
upon the fault of the air, and ill humors predominant in the bodies of the
patients.

THE FIRST DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN VVOVNDS MADE BY GVNSHOT, ARE FREED FROM BEING
BVRNT, OR CAVTERIZED ACCORding to Vigoes Method.
IN the year of our Lord 1536. Francis the French King, for his acts in war
and peace styled the Great, sent a puissant Army beyond the Alps, under the
government and leading of Annas of Mommorancie high Constable of France, both
that he might releeve Turin with victuals, soldiers, and all things
needful, as also to recover the Cities of that Province taken by the Marquis
of Guast General of the Emperors forces. I was in the Kings Army the
Surgeon of Monsieur of Montejan General of the foot. The Imperialists had
taken the straits of Suze, the Castle of Villane, and all the other passages;
so that the Kings army was not able to drive them from their fortifications but
by fight. In this conflict there were many wounded on both sides with all sorts
of weapons, but cheefely with bullets. I will tell the truth, I was not very
expert at that time in matters of Surgery; neither was I used to dress
wounds made by Gunshot. Now I had read in John de Vigo that wounds made by
Gunshot were venenate or poisoned, and that Lib. 1. de ^ ner. Cap. 8.
by reason of the Gunpouder; Wherefore for their cure, it was expedient to
burn or cauterize them with oil of Elders scalding hot, with a little Treacle
mixed therewith. But for that I gave no great credit neither to the author,
nor remedy, because I knew that cau sticks could not be powered into wounds,
without excessive pain; I, before I would run a hazard, determined to see
whether the Chirurgions, who went with me in the army, used any other manner of
dressing to these wounds. I observed and saw that all of them used that Method
of dressing which Vigo prescribes; and that they filled as full as they could,
the wounds made by Gunshot with Tents and pledgets dipped in this scalding
Oil, at the first dressings; which encouraged me to do the like to those, who
came to be dressed of me. It chanced What chance may do in finding out of
remedies.
on a time, that by reason of the multitude that were hurt, I wanted this Oil.
Now because there were some few left to be dressed, I was forced, that I might
seem to want nothing, and that I might not leave the ^ undrest, to apply a
digestive made of the yolke of an egg, oil of Roses, and Turpentine. I could
not sleep all that night, for I was troubled in mind, and the dressing of the
precedent day, (which I judged unfit) troubled my thoughts; and I feared that
the next day I should find them dead, or at the point of death by the poison
of the wound, whom I had not dressed with the scalding oil. Therefore I rose
early in the morning, I visited my patients, and beyound expectation, I found
such as I had dressed with a digestive only, free from vehemency of pain to
have had gooodrest, and that their wounds were not inflamed, nor tumifyed; but
on the contrary the others that were burnt with the scalding oil were
feverish, tormented with much pain, and the parts about their wounds were
swollen. When I had many times tried this in diverse others, I thought thus much,
that neither I nor any other should ever cauterize any woundded with Gunshot.
When we first came to Turin, there was there a Surgeon far more famous
than all the rest in artificially and happily curing wounds made by Gun shot;
wherefore I labored with all diligence for two years time to gain his favor
and love, that so at the length, I might learn of him, what kind of Medicine
that was, which he honored with the glorious tittle of Balsame, which was so
highly esteemed by him, and so happy and succesfull to his patients; yet could
I not obtain it. It fell out a small while after that the Marshall of Montejan
the Kings Leiftenant, General there in Piemont dyed, wherefore I went unto my
Surgeon, and told him that I could take no pleasure in living there, the
favourer and Macenas of my studies being taken away; and that I intended
forthwith to return to Paris, and that it would neither hinder, nor discredit
him to teach his remedy to me, who should be so far remote from him. When he
heard this, he made no delay, but presently wished me to provide two Whelps,
I pound of earth-wormes, The description of oil of Whelps.
2 pounds of oil of Lillyes, six ounces of Venice Turpentine, and one ounce
of aqua vitae. In my presence he boiled the Whelps put alive into that oil,
until the flesh came from the bones, then presently he put in the Worms,
which he had first killed in white wine, that they might so be cleused from the
earthy dross wherewith they are usually repleate, and then he boiled them in
the same oil so long, till they became dry, and had spent all their juice
therein: then he strayned it through a towell without much pressing; and added
the Turpentine to it, and lastly the aqua vitae. Calling God to witness, that
he had no other Balsame, wherewith to cure wounds made with Gunshot, and bring
them to suppuration. Thus he sent me away as rewarded with a most precious
gift, requesting me to keep it as a great secret, and not to reveal it to any.

When I came to Paris, I went to visit Silvius the Kings professor of Physic
well known by name to all scholars for his great learning; he kept me long
that so I might dine with him, and diligently enquires of me, if I had observed
any new Method of curing wounds made by Gunshot, and combustions occasioned by
Gunpowder. Then I affirmed to him that Gun-pouder did not participate any
thing of Gun-pouder not poisonous.
poison, for that none of these things, whereof it is compounded are poisonous;
which reason ought to free the whole composition from suspicion of poison. And
that experience confirmed this reason, for I had seen many soldiers, who would
drink a great quantity of this powder with wine, because they were persuaded,
that this drink would free them from malign symptoms when they were wounded,
yet I give no credit to this persuasion; and lastly for that many without any
harm, strew this powder upon rebellious ulcers. For the Bullets, I affirm,
that they cannot conceive such heat, as to become causticke. For if you shoot
them out of a Gun against a hard stone, yet you may presently take them up
without any Bullets shot out of a Gun do not burn.
harm in your hands, though by striking upon the stone, they should become
more hot. For the combustions caused by Gunpouder, I observed no special nor
peculiar remedy, which might make their cure different from other combustions.
To which purpose I related this ensuing history.

One of the Marshall of Montejan his Kitchen boys, fell by chance into a
Caldron of Oil being even almost boiling hot; I being called to dress him,
went A History.
to the next Apothecaries to fetch refrigerating medicines commonly used in
this case: there was present by chance a certain old country woman, who
hearing that I desired medicines for a burn, persuaded me at the first
dressing, that I should lay to raw Onions beaten with a little salt; for so I
should hinder the breaking out of blisters or pustules, as she had found by
certain and frequent experience. Wherefore I thought good to try the force of
her Medicine upon A medicine hindering blistring in burns, or scalds.
this greasy scullion. I the next day found those places of his body whereto
the Onions lay, to be free from blisters, but the other parts which they had
not touched, to be all blistered.

It fell out a while after, that a German of Montejan his guard had his flasque
full of Gunpouder set on fire, whereby his hands and face were grievously
burnt: I A History.
being called, laid the Onions beaten as I formerly told you, to the middle of
his face, and to the rest I laid medicines usually applied to burns. At the
second dressing I observed the part dressed with the Onions quite free from
blisters and excoriation, the other being troubled with both; whereby I gave
credit to the Medicine. Besides also, I lastly told him this, that I had
observed, that that was the readiest to draw forth bullets shot into the body,
which sets the patients in the same posture and site, as he was when he
received his hurt. Which things when I had told him, together with many other
handled at large in this work, the good old man requested me to publish in
print my opinions concerning these things, that so the erroneous and hurtful
opinion of Vigo might be taken out of men's minds. To whose earnest entreaty
when I had assented, I first of all caused to be drawn and carved many
Instruments fit to draw forth Bullets and other strange bodies; then a short
while after I first published this work in the year of our Lord 1545. which
when I found to be well liked and approved by many, I thought good to set it
forth the second time somewhat amended in the year 1552. And the third time
augmented in many particulars in the year 1564. For I having followed many
wars, and detained as Surgeon in beseiged Cities, as Mets and Hesdin, had
observed many things under five Kings, whom I served with diligence and
content. I had learnt many things from most expert Chirurgions, but more from
all learned Physicians, whose familiarity and favor for that purpose I always
labored to acquire with all diligence and honest Arts; that so I might become
more learned and skillfull by their familiarity and discourse, if there was any
thing especially in this matter and kind of wounds, which was hid from me, or
whereof I was not well assured. Of which number I have known Wounds made by
Gunshot must be dressed with suppuratives.
very few, who any thing seen in this kind of operation either by study, or
experience in Wars, who have not thought that wounds made by Gunshot ought to
be dressed at the first with suppurative medicines, and not with scalding and
Causticke Oil.

For this I affirm, which then also I testified to this good man, that I have
found very many wounds made in the fleshy parts by Gunshot, as easily cured as
other wounds, which be made by contusing things. But in the parts of the The
causes of difficulty in this cure.
body where the bullet meets with bones and nervous particles, both because it
tears and rends into small pieces those things which resist, not only where
it touches, but further also, through the violence of the blow, therefore it
causes many and greevous symptoms, which are stubborn and difficult, and often
times impossible to cure, especially in bodies replete with ill humors, in an
ill constitution of the heaven and air, such as is hot, moist and foggy
weather, which therefore is subject to putrefaction; and in like manner a
freezing and cold season, which uses to mortify the wounded parts not only of
those that are hurt with Bullets, but in like sort with any other weapon; nor
only in bony and nervous particles, but also in musculous. Whereby you may
understand, that the difficulty of curing proceeds not from the venenate
quality of the wounds, nor the combustion made by the Gunpouder, but the
foulness of the patients bodies, and the unseasonablenesse of the air.

For proof whereof, I will set down, that which I not long agone observed in
a A History.
Scottish Nobleman the Earl of Gordon, Lord of Achindon, whom I cured at the
appointment of the Queen Mother. He was shot through both his thighs with a
Pistoil, the bone being not hurt nor touched; and yet the 32. day after the
wound he was perfectly healed, so that he had neither fever nor any other
symptom which came upon the wound. Whereof there are worthy witnesses, the
Archbishop of Glasco, the Scottish Ambassador, Francis Brigart and John
Altine, Doctors of Physic, as also James Guillemeau the Kings Surgeon, and
Giles Buzet a Scottish Surgeon, who all of them wondered that this Gentleman
was so soon healed, no acride medicine being applied. This I have thought good
to recite and set down, that the Readers may understand, that I for 30. years
ago had found the way to cure wounds made by Gunshot, without scalding oil or
any other, more acrid medicine; unless by accident the illness of the
patients bodies and of the air caused What makes Chirurgions sometimes use
cau^ curing wound^ made by Gunshot.
any malign symptoms, which might require such remedies besides the regular
and ordinary way of curing, which shall be more amply treated of in the
following discourse.

ANOTHER DISCOVRSE OF THESE THINGS, WHICH KING CHARLES THE NINTH, REturning
from the expedition and taking of Rouen, enquired of me concerning wounds made
by Gunshot.
FOr that it pleased your Majesty one day, together with the The occasion of
writing this discourse.
Queen Mother, the Prince of the Rock upon Yon, and many other Noblemen and
Gentlemen, to enquire of me, what was the cause that the far greater part of
the Gentlemen and common Soldiers which were wounded with Guns, and other
warlike Engines, all remedies used in vain, either dyed, or scarce and that
with much difficulty recovered of their hurts, though in appearance they were
not very great, and though the Chirurgions diligently performed all things
requisite in their Art; I have made bold to premise this Discourse to that
Tractate which I determine to publish concerning wounds made by Gunshot; both
to satisfy the desires of the Princes and of many Gentlemen, as also the
expectation they have of me, as being the Kings chief Surgeon, (which
place being given me by Henry the second, Charles the ninth, a son most
worthy of such a father, had confirmed) neither make I any question, but that
many who too much insist upon their own judgment, and not thoroughly consider
the things themselves, will marvel, and think it far from reason; that I
departing from the steps of my ancestors, and dissenting wholly from the
formerly received opinions, am far The argument of this discourse.
from their Tenants, who lay the cause of the malignitie of wounds made by
Gunshot, upon the poison brought into the body by the Gunpouder, or mixed with
the Bullets whilst they are tempered or cast. Yet for all this, if they will
courteously and patiently weigh my reasons, they shall either think as I do,
or at least shall judge this my endeavor and pains taken for the public
good, not to be condemned nor contemned.

For I shall make it evident by most strong reasons drawn out of the writings
of the Ancient both Philosophers and Physicians, and also by certain
experiments of mine own, and other Chirurgions, that the malignitie and
contumacie which we frequently meet withal in curing wounds made by Gunshot,
is not to be attributed either to the poison carried into the body by the
Gunpouder or Bullet, nor to burning imprinted in the wounded part by the
Gunpouder. Wherefore to come to our purpose, that opinion must first be
confuted, which accuses wounds made by Gunshot of poison; and we must teach,
that there is neither Gunpouder is not poison nous.
any venenate substance, nor quality in Gunpouder, neither if there should be
any, could it empoyson the bodies of such as are wounded. Which that we may
the more easily perform, we must examine the composition of such powder, and
make a particular enquiry of each of the simples, whereof this composition
consists, what essence they have, what strength and faculties, and lastly what
effects they may produce. For thus by knowing the simples, the whole nature of
the composition consisting of them, will be apparently manifest. Of what it is
made.


The simples which enter the composition of Gunpouder are only three,
Char-coales of Sallow or Willow, or of Hemp stalks, Brimstone, and salt
Peter, and sometimes a little aqua vitae. You shall find each of these, if
considered in particular, void of all poison and venenate quality. For first,
in the Char-coale you shall observe nothing but dryness, and a certain
subtlety of substance, by means whereof it fires so suddenly, even as Tinder.
Sulphur or Brimstone is hot and dry, but not in the highest degree, it is of an
oily and viscide substance, yet so that it does not so speedily catch fire as
the coal, though it retain it longer being once kindled, neither may it be so
speedily extinguished. Salt Peter is such, that many use it for Salt, whereby
it is evidently apparent that the nature of such simples is absolutely free
from all poison; but chiefly the Brimstone, (which notwithstanding is more Lib.
5. Cap. 73. Lib. 9. simpl. Cap 36.
suspected than the rest.) For Dioscorides gives Brimstone to be drunk, or
supped out of a rear Egg to such as are Asthmaticke, troubled with the Cough,
(spit up purulent matter, and are troubled with the yellow Iaundise.) But Galen
applies it outwardly to such as are bitten by venomous Beasts, to scabs,
teaters, and leprosyes. For the aqua vitae, it is of so tenuious a substance
that it presently vanishes into air, and also very many drink it, and it is
without any harm used in frictions of the exterior parts of the body. Whence
you may gather, that this powder is free from all manner of poison, seeing
these things whereof it consists and is composed, want all suspicion thereof.

Therefore the Germane horsemen, when they are wounded with shot, fear not to
drink off cheerfully half an ounce of Gunpouder dissolved in wine; hence
persuading themselves freed from such malign symptoms as usually happen upon
such wounds; wherein whether they do right or wrong I do not here determine;
the same thing many French Soldiers forced by no necessity, but only to show
themselves more courageous, also do without any harm; but diverse with good
success use to strew it upon ulcers, so to dry them. Now to come to these, who
think that the venenate quality of wounds made by Gunshot, springs not from
the powder, but from the Bullet wherewith some poison Bullets cannot be
poisoned.
has been commixt or joined, or which has been tempered or steeped in some
poisonous liquor.

This may sufficiently serve for a reply; that the fire is abundantly
powerful to dissipate all the strength of the Poison, if any should be poured
upon or added to the Bullet. This much confirms mine opinion, which every one
knows; The Bullets which the Kings soldiers used to shoot against the
Townsemen in the seige of Roue^n, were free from all poison; and yet for all
that they of the Town thought that they were all poisoned, when they found the
wounds made by them, to be uncurable and deadly. Now on the other side the
Townsemen were falsely suspected guilty of the same crime by the Kings Army,
when as they perceived all the Chirurgions labor in curing the wounds made by
the Bullets shot from Rouen, to be frustrated by their contumacy and malign
nature; each side judging of the magnitude and malignitie of the cause from the
unhappy success of the effect in curing. Even as amongst Physicians according
to Hippocrates, all diseases are termed As Galen notes adsent, 20. et 21. sect.
3. lib. 3. Epid.
pestilent, which arising from whatsoever common cause, kill many people; so
also wounds made by Gunshot, may in some respect be called pestilent, for that
they are more refractory, and difficult to cure than others, and not because
they partake of any poisonous quality, but by default of some common cause, as
the ill complexions of the patients, the infection of the air, and the
corruption of meats and drinks. For by these causes wounds acquire an evil
nature and become less yielding to medicines. Now we have by these reasons
convinced of error that opinion which held wounds made by Gunshot for
poisonous; let us now come to overthrow that which is held concerning their
combustion.

First it can scarce be understood how bullets which are commonly made of Lead,
Wounds made by Gunshot are not burnt
can attain to such heat, but that they must be melted; and yet they are so
far from melting, that being shot out of a Musket they will pierce through an
armor and the whole body besides, yet remain whole, or but a little
diminisht. Besides also if you shoot them against a stone wall, you may
presently take them up in your hand without any harm, and also without any
manifest sense of heat; though their heat by the striking upon the stone
should be rather increased, if they had any.

Furthermore, a Bullet shot into a barrel of Gunpouder, would presently set it
all on fire, if the Bullet should acquire such heat by the shooting, but it is
not so. For if at any time the powder be fired by such an accident, we must
not imagine that it is done by the bullet bringing fire with it, but by the
striking and collision thereof against some Iron, or stone that opposes or
meets therewith, whence sparks of fire procceding as from a flint, the powder
is fired in a moment. The like opinion we have of thatched houses, for they
are not fiered by the bullet which is shot, but rather by some other thing as
linen rags, brown paper, and the like, which rogues and wicked persons
fasten to their Bullets. There is another thing which more confirms me in
this opinion, which is; take a bullet of Wax, and keep it from the fire, for
otherwise it would melt, and shoot it against an inch board, and it will go
through it; whereby you may understand that Bullets cannot become so hot by
shooting, to burn like a cautery. But the Orifices The reason why wounds made
by Gunshot look black.
(may some say) of such wounds are always black. This indeed is true, but it
is not from the effect of heat brought thither by the Bullet, but the force of
the contusion.

Now the contusion is exceeding great, both because the Bullet is round, and
enters the body with incredible violence. Of which those that are wounded will
give you sufficient testimony, for there is none of them, which thinks not
presently upon the blow, that as it were some post, or thing of the like
weight, falls upon the affected member, whence great pain and stupiditie
possess the part, whereby the native hear and spirits are so much dissipated,
that a Gangreen may follow.

But for the Eschar which they affirm is made by the blow, and falls away
afterward, they are much mistaken. For certain particles of the membranes and
flesh contused and torn by the violence of the Bullet beguiles them; which
presently putrefying are severed from the sound parts by the power of nature
and the separating heat, which thing usually happens in all great Contusions.
But for all that these so many and weighty reasons may free the Powder from all
suspicion of Poison, and the Bullet from all, thought of burning; yet there are
many who insisting upon Philosophical arguments, raise new stirrs. For (say
they) the discharging a piece of Ordinance is absolutely like Thunder and
Lightning, which the rent and torn clouds cast from the middle region, upon
the earth; wherefore the Iron bullet which is shot out of the Cannon must needs
have a venenate and burning faculty. I am not ignorant that Lightnings
generated of a gross and viscous exhalation, breaking the cloud wherewith it
is encompassed, The reasons of our adversaries refelled.
never falls upon the earth, but brings fire with it, one while more subtle,
another while more gresse, according to the various condition of the matter
whence the exhalation has arisen. For Seneca writes that there are three
several kinds of Lightning Quaest. not. lib. 2. cap. 49.
differing in burning, condition and plenty. One of them penetrates or rather
perforates by the tenuity of the matter of the objects which it touches. The
other with a violent impetuosity breaks insunder and dissipates the objects,
by reason it has a more dense, compact and forcible matter, like as
Whirlewinds have. The third, for that it consists of a more terrestrial
matter, burns what it touches, leaving behind it the impression of the
burning. Also I know that Lightning is of a pestilent The stinking smell of
lightning.
and stinking nature, occasioned by the grossness and viscidity of the matter
whereof it is; which matter taking fire sends forth so loathsome and odious a
smell that the very wilde-beasts cannot endure it; but leave their Dens, if
they chance to be touched with such a lightening. Besides also, we have read in
the northern history of Olaus Magnus, that in some places after a Lightning,
you shall find a whole plain spread over with Brimstone, which Brimstone
notwithstanding is extinguished, unprofitable and of no efficacy. But grant
these things be thus, yet must we not therefore conclude, that the Bullets of
the great Ordinance carry poison and fire with them into the wounds. For though
there be many things like in Lightning and discharging great Ordinance, yet
they have no similitude either in matter or substance, but only in effects
whereby they shake, break insunder and disperse the bodies which withstand
them; For Lightning and Thunder do it by means of fire, and often times of a
stone generated in them, which is therefore termed, a Thunderbolt; But
Ordinance by the bullet carried by the force of the air, more violently
driving and forcing it forwards; Neither if any should by more powerful
arguments force me to yield that the matter of Lightning and shooting of
Ordinance are like, yet will I not therefore be forced to confess that wounds
made by Gunshot are combust. For according to Pliny, there are some Lightnings
which Quaest. 2. cap 51.
consisting of a most dry matter, do shatter in sunder all that withstands
them, but do not burn at all; others which are of somewhat a more humid
nature, burn no more than the former, but only black such things as they
touch; Lastly othersome of a more subtle and tenuous matter, whose nature (as
Seneca says) we must The wonderful nature of some lightning.
not doubt to be divine, if but for this reason, that they will melt gold and
silver, not harming the purse; a sword, not hurting the scabbard; the head of a
Lance, not burning the wood, and shed wine not breaking the vessel. According
to which decree I can grant, that these Lightnings which break in sunder,
melte and dissipate, and perform other effects so full of admiration, are like
in substance to the shot of great Ordinance; but not these which carry with
them fire and flame.

In proof whereof there comes into my mind the history of a certain
Soldier, out of whose thigh I remember I drew forth a Bullet wrapped in the
taffety of his A History.
breeches, which had not any sign of tearing or burning. Besides, I have seen
many who not wounded, nor so much as touched, yet notwithstanding have with the
very report and wind of a Cannon bullet, sliding close by their ears, fallne
down for dead, so that their members becoming livid and black, they have dyed
by a Gangrene ensuing thereupon. These and such effects are like the effects of
Lightnings which we lately mentioned, and yet they bear no sign nor mark of
poison. From whence I dare now boldly conclude, that wounds made by Gunshot are
neither poisoned, nor burnt. But seeing the danger of such wounds in these last
civil wars has been so great, universal and deadly to so many worthy
personages and valiant Why the wounds made by Gunshot some few years agone
were so deadly.
men, what then may have been the cause thereof, if it were neither
combustion, nor the venenate quality of the wound? This must we therefore now
insist upon and somewhat hardily explain.

Those who have spent all their time in the learning and searching out the
mysteries of Natural Philosophy, would have all men think and believe, that
the four Elements have such mutual sympathy, that they may be changed each
into other; so that they not only undergo the alterations of the first
qualities which are heat, coldness, dryness and moisture, but also the
mutation of their proper substances by rarefaction and condensation. For thus
the fire is frequently changed into air, the air into water, the water into
air, and the water into earth; and on the contrary, the earth into water, the
water into air, the air into fire; because these 4. first bodies The cause of
the transmutation of the Elements.
have in their common matter enjoyed the contrary and fighting, yet first and
principal qualities of all.

Whereof we have an example in the These bellows here mentioned by the Author,
are Bals made of Brass in form of a pear, with a very small hole in their
lesser ends: when you would fill them with water you must heat them very hot,
and so the air which is contained in them will be exceedingly rarefied, which
by putting them presently into water will be condensate as much, and so will
draw in the water to supply the place, ne detur Gacuum. The^ put them into the
fire, and it again rarifying the water into air will make them yield a
strong continued and forcible blast. The cause of the report and blow of a
Cannon. A History. The cause of an Earthquake.
Ball-bellowes brought out of Germany, which are made of brass, hollow and
round; and have a very small hole in them, whereby the water is put in, and so
put to the fire; the water by the action thereof is rarefied into air, and so
they send forth wind with a great noise, and blow strongly as soon as they
grow thoroughly hot. You may try the same with Chestnuts, which cast whole and
undivided into the fire, presently fly asunder with a great crack; because the
watery and innate humidity turned into wind by the force of the fire, forcibly
breaks his passage forth. For the air or wind raised from the water by
rarifaction, requires a larger place, neither can it now be contained in the
narrow filmes, or skins of the Chestnut, wherein it was formerly kept. Just
after the same manner Gunpouder being fiered, turns into a far greater
proportion of air, according to the truth of that Philosophical proposition,
which says, Of one part of earth, there are made ten of water; of one of
water, ten of air; and of one of air are made ten of fire. Now this fire not
possible to be ^ent in the narrow space of the piece, wherein the powder was
formerly contained, endeavors to force its passage with violence, and so casts
forth the Bullet lying in the way, yet so that it presently vanishes into air,
and does not accompany the Bullet to the mark, or object, which it batters,
spoils and breaks asunder. Yet the Bullet may drive the obvious air with
such violence, that men are often sooner touched therewith than with the
bullet, and dye by having their bones shattered and broken without any hurt on
the flesh which covers them; which as we formerly noted, it has common with
Lightning. We find the like in Mines, when the powder is once fiered, it
remooves and shakes even mountains of earth.

In the year of our Lord 1562 a quantity of this powder which was not very
great, taking fire by accident in the Arcenall of Paris, caused such a tempest,
that the whole City shoke therewith, but it quite overturned diverse of the
neighboring houses, and shook off the tyles and broke the windows of those
which were further off; and to conclude, like a storm of Lightning it laid
many here and there for dead, some lost their sight, others their hearing, and
othersome had their limbs torn asunder, as if they had been rent with wild
horses; and all this was done by the only agitation of the air into which the
fired Gunpouder was turned; Just after the same manner as winds pent up in
hollow places of the earth which want vents. For in seeking passage forth, they
vehemently shake the sides of the Earth, and raging with a great noise about
the cavities, they make all the surface thereof to tremble; so that by the
various agitation one while up, another down, it overturnes or carries it to
another place. For thus we have read that Megara and Aegina anciently most
famous Cities of Greece, were swallowed up and quite overturned by an
earthquake; I omit the great blusterings of the winds striving in the cavities
of the earth, which represent to such as hear them at some distance, the
fierce assailing of Cities, the bellowing of Bulls, the horrid roarings of
Lions, neither are they much unlike to the roaring reports of Cannons. These
things being thus premised let us come to the thing we have in hand.

Amongst things necessary for life, there is none causes greater changes in us
than the air; which is continually drawn into the Bowels appointed by
nature, and whether we sleep, wake, or what else soever we do, we continually
draw in, and breath it out. Through which occasion Hippocrates calls it Divine,
for that breathing through this mundane Orb, it embraces, nourishes, defends
and keeps in quiet peace all things contained therein, friendly conspiring
with the stars from whom a divine virtue is infused therein. For the air
diversely changed and affected by the stars, does in like manner produce
various changes in these lower mundane bodies. And hence it is that
Philosophers and Physicians do so seriously wish us to behold and consider the
culture and habit of places, and constitution of the air, when they treat of
preserving of health, or curing diseases. For in these the great power and
dominion of the air is very apparent, as you may gather by the four seasons
of the year; for in summer the air being hot and dry, heats and dries our
bodies; but in winter it produces in us the effects of winters qualities, that
is, of cold and moisture; yet by such order and providence of nature, that
although according to the varieties of seasons our bodies may be variously
altered, yet shall they receive no detriment thereby, if so be that the seasons
retain their seasonablenesse; from whence How the air becomes hurtful.
if they happen to digress, they raise and stir up great perturbations both
in our bodies and minds; whose malice we can scarce shun, because they
encompasse us on every hand, and by the law of nature enter together with the
air into the secret cabinets of our bodies both by occult and manifest
passages. For who is he, that does not by experience find both for the
commodity and discommodity of his health, the various effects of winds,
(wherewith the air is commixt) according as they blow from this or that
Region, or Quarter of the world. Wherefore seeing that the South wind is hot
and moist; the North wind cold and dry; the East wind clear and fresh; the
West wind cloudy; it is no doubt but that the air which we draw in by
inspiration carries together therewith into the bowels the qualities of that
wind which is then prevalent. When we read in Hippocrates, that changes
Aphor. 17. sect. 3.
of times, whether they happen by different winds, or vicissitude of seasons,
chiefly bring diseases; For northerly winds do condense, and strengthen our
bodies, and makes them active well colored and daring, by resuscitating and
vigorating the native hear. But southern winds resolve and moisten our
bodies, make us heavy headed, dull the hearing, cause giddiness, and make the
eyes and body less agile; as the Inhabitants of Narbon find to their great
harm, who are otherwise ranked among the most active people of France. But if
we would make a comparison of the seasons and constitutions of a year, by
Hippocrates decree Droughts are more wholesome and less deadly than Raines; I
judge for that too much humiditie is the mother of putrefaction, as you learn
by these countries which are blown upon Flesh quickly putrifies in maritime
places.
by a wind from Sea: For in these flesh which is kept for food, putrefies in
the space of an hour; and such ulcers as in other places are easily and
quickly healed, do there by the conflux and collection of matter become
inveterate and contumacious. Therefore as when the seasons of the year
successively fall out agreeable to their nature, and when each season is
seasonable, then either we are not sick at all, or assuredly with less
danger. So on the contrary the perfect constitution and health of our bodies
becomes worse and decaies, when the seasons of the year are depraved and
perverted in time and temper.

Now seeing that these many years the four seasons of the year have wanted
their seasonablenesse, the summer wanting his usual heat, and the winter its
cold, and all things by moisture and the dominion of the southern winds have
been humid and languide; I think there is none so ignorant in natural
Philosophy and Astrology, who will not think that the causes of the
malignitie and contumacie of those deseases which have so long afflicted all
France, are not to be attributed to the air and Heavens. For otherwise,
whence have so many pestilent and contagious diseases tirannized over so many
people of every age, sex and condition? whence have so many catarrhes, coughs
and heavinesses of the head, so many pleurisies, tumors, small poxes, meazells,
and Itches not admitting of digestion and remedies prescribed by Art? Whence
have we had so many venomous creatures, as Toades, Grasshoppers, Caterpillars,
Spiders, Waspes, Hornets, Beetles, Snailes, Vipers, Snakes, Lizards, Scorpions
and Efts or Nutes, unless from excessive putrefaction which the humidity of
the air, our native heat being liquid and dull, has caused in us, and the
whole kingdom of France? Hence also proceeds the infirmity of our native
heat, and the corruption of the blood and humors whereof we consist, which the
rainy Southwind has caused with its sultry heat. Wherefore in these last
years I have drawn little blood, which has not presently showed the
corruption of its substance by the black or greenish color, as I have
diligently observed in all such as I have bled, by the direction of Physicians,
either for prevention of future, or cure of present diseases. Whence it comes
to pass that the fleshy substance of our bodies could not but be faulty both
in temper and consistence; seeing that the blood whence it is generated had
drawn the seeds of corruption from the defiled air. Whence it fell out, that
the wounds which happened with loss of substance, could be scarce healed or
united, because of the depraved nature of the blood. For so the wounds and
ulcers of these which are troubled with the Dropsy, whose blood is more cold
or wholly waterish; so of Leprous persons, whose blood is In what bodies (...)
and wounds are not easily cured.
corrupt, and lastly of all such as have their bodies replete with ill juice,
or else are Cachecticke, will not easily admit of cure. Yea assuredly if but
the very part which is hurt swerve from its native temper, the wound will not
easily be cured.

Therefore seeing all these things, both the putrefaction of the Air, and
depraved humors of the body, and also the distemper of the affected parts
conspired together to the destruction of the wounded, what marvel was it, if
in these late civil wars, the wounds which were for their quantity small,
for the condition of the wounded parts but little, have caused so many and
grievous accidents and lastly death it self? Especially, seeing that the Air
which encompasseth us, tainted with putrefaction corrupts and defiles the
wounds by inspiration and expiration, the body and humors being already
disposed, or inclined to putrefaction.

Now there came such a stincke, which is a most assured sign of putresaction,
from these wounds when they were dressed, that such as stood by could scarce
endure it, neither could this stink be attributed to the want of dressing, or
fault of the Surgeon; for the wounds of the Princes and Nobility stunke as
ill as these of the common Soldiers. And the corruption was such, that if any
chanced to be undrest An argument of great putrefaction of the humors.
for one day, which sometimes happened amongst such a multitude of wounded
persons, the next day the wound would be full of worms. Besides also, which
furthermore argues a great putrefaction of humors, many had Abscesses in parts
opposite to their wounds, as in the left knee, when as the right shoulder was
wounded; in the left arm, when as the right Leg was hurt. Which I remember
befell the King of Navarre, the Duke of Nevers, the Lord Rendan and diverse
others. For all men had nature so overcharged with abundance of vicious humors,
that if it expelled not part thereof by impostumes to the habit of the body,
it certainly otherwise disposed of it amongst the inner parts of the body; for
in dissecting dead bodies, we observed that the Spleen, Liver, Lungs, and
other Bowels were purulent, and hence it was that the patients by reason of
vapors sent from them to the heart were troubled with continual fevers. But
the Liver and all the veinous parts being polluted, and so the generation of
the laudible blood hindered, they languished for want of fitting nourishment.
But when the Brain by vapors was drawn in to sympathize with the rest, they
were molested with Ravings and Convulsions. Wherefore if any thing succeeded
unprosperously in so great malignancie of wounds, the Surgeon was not to be
blamed, for that it were a crime to fight against God and the Air, wherein the
hidden scourges of the divine justice lie hid. Therefore, if according to the
mind of the great Hippocrates, who commands to bring all contused wounds to
suppuration, that so they may be healed, we endeavored to cure with such
medicines wounds made with Gunshot, and therefore contused; who can rightly be
angry with us, if we performed it not so well, by reason of these
putrifactions, All contused wounds must be brought to suppuration.
gangreens and mortifications which proceeded from the corrupt Air, for all
that we used not only suppuratives, but were often times forced to use other
medicines; so long turning aside from the cure of the disease, until we had
overcome the symptoms which much endanger the patient and customarily happen
upon such wounds, as also upon those which are made with a sword or any other
kind of weapon; As shall plainly appear in the following treatise, to which it
now seems high time that we betake our selves.

CHAP. I. A division of wounds drawn from the variety of the wounded parts,
and the Bullets which wound.
ALl wounds which are made in man's body by Gunshot, whether simple or compound,
are accompanied with contusion, dilaceration, distemper and A division of
wounds ^on the variety of the Wounded parts.
swelling. I say, all these possess either the noble parts, or ignoble, the
fleshy, nervous or bony, some whiles with rending and tearing asunder the
larger vessels, sometimes without harming them. Now these wounds are only
superficiary, or else pierce deep and pass quite through the body. But there
is also another division of these wounds taken from the variety of the Bullets
wherewith they are made. For some bullets are bigger, some less, some between
both, they are From the difference of Bullets.
usually made of Lead, yet sometimes of Steel, Iron, Brass, Tin, scarce any
of Silver much less of Gold. There arises no difference from their figure; for
almost all kinds of wounds of this nature are round. From these differences,
the Surgeon Wounds made by (...) shot (...) (...).
must take his Indications what to do, and what medicines to apply. The first
care must be, that he think not these horrid and malign symptoms, which
usually happen upon these kinds of wounds, to arise from combustion, or poison
carried with the Bullet into the wounded part, and that for these reasons we
have formerly handled at large. But rather let him judge they proceed from the
vehemency of the contusion, dilaceration and fracture, caused by the Bullets
too violent entry into the nervous and bony bodies. For if at any time the
bullet shall only light upon the fleshy parts, the wounds will be as easily
cured, as any other wound usually is, which is made with a contusing and round
kind of weapon, as I have often found by frequent experience, whilst I have
followed the wars, and performed the part of a Surgeon to many Noblemen
and common Soldiers, according to the counsel of such Physicians as were
there overseers of the cure.

CHAP. II. Of the signs of wounds made by Gunshot.
WOunds made by Gunshot are known by their figure, which is usually round; by
their color, as when the native color of the part decays, and Signs of
Wounds from their figure. From their color. From the feeling the blow.
in stead thereof a livid, greenish, violet or other color succeeds; by the
feeling or sense of the stroke, when in the very instant of the receiving
thereof, he feels a heavy sense as if some great stone, or piece of Timber,
or some such other weightything had fallen upon it; by the small quantity of
blood which issues out thereat, for when the parts are contused, within some
small while after the stroke From the bleeding.
they swell up, so that they will scarce admit a Tent, whence it is that the
blood is stopped, which otherwise would flow forth of the orifice of the wound;
by heat, From the heats of the Wound.
which happens either by the violentnesse of the motion, or the vehement
impulsion of the air, or the attrition of the contused parts, as the flesh and
nerves.

Also you may conjecture that the wounds have been made by Gunshot, if the
bones shall be broken, and the splinters thereof by pricking the neighboring
bodies cause defluxion and inflammation. But the cause that the Bullet makes so
great a contusion is, for that it enters the body not with any points or
corners, but Whence these wounds are so much confused.
with its round and sphericall body, which cannot penetrate but with mighty
force; whence it comes to pass that the wound looks black, and the
adjacent parts livid. Hence also proceed so many grievous symptoms, as pain,
Defluxion, Inflammation, Apostumation, Convulsion, Frenzy, Palsy, Gangreen
and mortification, whence lastly death ensues. Now the wounds do often cast
forth virulent and very much stinking filth, by reason of the great contusion,
and the rending and tearing of the neighboring particles. A great abundance
of humors flow from the whole body, and fall down upon the affected parts,
which the native heat thereof being diminished forsakes, and presently an
unnatural heat seazes upon it. Hither also tend an universal or particular
repletion of ill humors, chiefly if the wounds possess the nervous parts as
the joints. Verily neither a Stagge with his horn, nor a flint out of a sling
can give so great a blow, or make so large a wound, as a Leaden or Iron Bullet
shot out of a Gun, as that which going with mighty violence, peirces the body
like a Thunderbolt.

CHAP. III. How these wounds must be ordered at the first dressing.
THe wound must forthwith be enlarged, unless the condition of the part
Strange bodies must first be pulled forth.
resist, that so there may be free passage forth both for the Sanies, or
matter, as also for such things as are farced, or otherwise contained therein;
such as are pieces of their clothes, bombast, linen, paper, pieces of Maile
or Armor, Bullets, Haile-shot, splinters of bones, bruised flesh and the like,
all which must be plucked forth with as must celerity and gentleness as may
be. For presently after the receiving of the wound the pain and inflammation
are not so great, as they will be within a short time after. This is the
principal thing in performance of this work, that you place the patient just
in such a posture as he was in The manner how to draw them forth.
at the receiving of the wound; for otherwise the various motion and turning of
the Muscles will either hinder or straiten the passage forth of the contained
bodies. You shall if it be possible, search for these bodies with your finger,
that so you may the more certainly and exactly perceive them. Yet if the Bullet
be entered somewhat deep in, then you shall search for it with a round and
blunt probe, lest you put the patient to pain; yet often times you shall
scarce by this means find the Bullet. As it happened to the Marshall of
Brissac in the seige of Parpignan, who was wounded in his right shoulder with a
Bullet, which the Chirurgions thought to have entered into the capacity of his
body. But I, wishing the patient to stand just in the same manner as he did
when he received the wound, found at length the place where the Bullet lay, by
gently pressing with my fingers, the parts near the wound, and the rest which
I suspected; as also by the swelling, hardness, pain and blackness of the
part, which was in the lower part of the shoulder near unto the eight or ninth
spondill of the back. Wherefore the bullet being taken forth by making
incision in the place, the wound was quickly healed and the Gentleman
recovered. You shall well observe this, and rather believe the judgment of
your fingers, than of your probe.

CHAP. IIII. A description of fit Instruments to draw forth Bullets and other
strange bodies.
BOth the magnitude and figure of Instruments fit for drawing forth of Bullets
and other strange bodies, are various according to the diversity of the
incident occasions. For some are toothed, others smooth, others of another
figure and bigness; of all which sorts the Surgeon must have diverse in a
readiness, that he may fit them to the bodies and wound, and not the wounds
and bodies to his Instruments.

The Deliniation of such like Instruments. A toothed Crowes-Bill.


The crooked Cranes-bill, with teeth like a Saw.


The straight Cranes-bill being also toothed, fit for drawing forth haile-shot,
pieces of armor, splinters of bones, and such things as lie deep within.


The Ducks-bill.
This Ducks bill has a large round and toothed cavitie in the end, for so it
more easily takes hold of the Bullet when it lies amongst much Flesh.



Another Instrument fit for drawing forth of Bullets, which may be termed, a
Catch-bullet.
A. Shows the Trunk.

B. Shows the rod, or string, which opens and shuts the joint.

C. The joint.



Another Catch-bullet called a Lizards-nose, made for drawing out of bullets
which are somewhat flatted, by striking upon a bone.


The Parrots-beake is made for drawing forth pieces of maile thrust into the
flesh, flesh, or bones; and this is the figure thereof.
A. Shows the screw-pin. B. The hollowed part which receives, the round part
noted with. C. Which is opened and shut by the screw. D. D. falls, or stays,
which govern the running branch.



The Swannes bill opens with a screw: you may with this dilate the wounds, and
so put in a straight Cranes-bill, as pincers to pluck forth strange bodies.
The figure of both are here expressed.
But if these strange bodies, especially bullets and hail shot, be not too
deep in the wound, they may be taken forth with your Levatorie, or else by the
help of these Gimblets. These Gimblets are screwed into their pipes, or canes,
and enter with their screwed points into the Bullets, if that they be of Lead
or Tin, and of no harder metal; and so being fastened in them, bring them out
with them.



The figure of the Gimblet with his pipe, or cane.


Besides the Swans-bill which we lately mentioned, there are also other
Instruments fit to dilate and open the wounds; therefore called Dilaters, by
whose help the wound may be held open, that so the hidden bodies may be seen;
for when you press together the two ends of this Instrument, the other two
open and dilate themselves. You may also use them in dilating diverse other
parts of the body, as the Nose-thrils, fundament, and such like.

Dilaters.


The Instruments which follow are called Seton needles, or Probes; whose use
is, to draw through a flamula, so to keep the wound open, that you may the
better take forth any strange body. Besides also we use the same needles, to
search, or as it were to sound the deepenesse of wounds, and to find out the
Bullets. For they cannot put one to much pain because they have smooth and
round ends. So also all Probes wherewith we search for Bullets, must have
somewhat large, smooth and round ends. For seeing that the verges of the wound
meet together presently after What probes fit search these wounds.
the hurt, if the Probes be too small or slender, they will stick in the
inequality of the flesh, neither will they be able to come to the Bullet. But
if they be sharp and pointed, they will cause and renew the pain by pricking
the flesh they melt withal, and so hinder your intention of finding the
Bullet; Now you must be furnished with these Instruments of a different
length, according to the various thickness of the parts; for you cannot put
any through the thigh but such as are of good length.

Probes for to put slamulaes through a wound withal.


CHAP. IX. What dressing must first be used, after the strange bodies are
plucked or drawn out of the wound.
WHen the strange bodies are drawn or plucked out of the wound, by these means
we have formerly recited, the chief of the cure must be to heal the
contusion, and amend the distemper of the air if it be hot and moist, that
is, subject to putrefaction. This shall be don by medicines taken inwardly,
applied outwardly and put into the wound. Things to be inwardly used in diet
and Pharmacie I leave to the judgment of learned Physicians; for the
particular and topicke medicines, (unless from the present constitution of the
air, the condition of the wounded part, or from some other cause there be
danger of a Gangreene) you must use suppuratives, as you usually do in
contusions; such as are oil of Whelps A Caution in the use of suppuratives.
and that which we call a digestive; you must chiefly forbear suppuratives,
when as the wounded part is of a nervous nature. For all nervous parts requre
dryer medicines than fleshy, as we have formerly delivered speaking of wounds
of the joints; wherefore in wounds of the joints and nervous parts you shall
use more venice Turpentine than oil. Laurentius Iobertus the Kings Physician
and Chancellor of the University Why Escharotickes must be eschewed in these
kinds, if they be simple.
of Mompelier, in a treatise which he writ of wounds made with Gunshot,
forbids the use of Escharotickes both actual and potentiall, in these wounds,
if simple; for that they induce pain, inflammation, a fever, Gangraene and
other deadly symptoms. Besides also an eschar will hinder suppuration, which
is to be desired in this kind of wounds, that so the contused flesh may be
severed from the sound, least it be drawn to putrefaction by contagion. Which
easily happens when an How an Eschar may cause putrefaction.
Eschar is drawn, as a bar over it, for then the excrementitious humor
remains longer in the part, and the putridinous vapors hindered from passing
forth, are increased, and carried from the lesser vessels to the bigger, and
so over all the body. Wherefore, when you suspect putrefaction, letting alone
suppuratives, use in the first place such things as resist putrefaction, as
this following ointment.. pulver. alumin. The description of an Egyptiacum.
rochae, viridisaeris, Vitrioli, romani, mellis rosat. an. ij. aceti boni
quantum sufficit, bulliant omnia simul secundum artem, and fiat medicamentum ad
formam meliis. This by reason of the heat and subtlety of the substance, has
a faculty to induce and attenuate the humors, as also to call forth the native
heat drawn in and dissipated by the violent and forcible entrance of the
Bullet into the body; furthermore also it corrects the venomous contagion of
the virulent humor. Now this medicine shall be used, dissolved in Venegar or
aqua vitae, and be put into the wound with tents, or pledgets. The tents which
shall be used at the first dressing must be somewhat long and thick, that by
dilating the wound, they may make way for applycation of other remedies;
otherwise you may make injection with a syring, that so it may penetrate the
more powerfully. But this described Egyptiacum shall be tempered according to
the condition of the affected parts, for the nervous parts will be offended
with it as being How and when to temper this Egyptiacum.
too acride; but it may be qualified by admixture of oil of Turpentine and
Saint Iohn-wort. Also we may well be without this Egyptiacum when there is no
such pestilent constitution of the air, as was seen in the late Civil
wars. After the use of Egyptiacum you shall with emollient and lenitive
medicines procure the falling away of the Eschar, and such a medicine is this
following oil, being somewhat more than warm.

. Olei violati lib. iiij. in quibus coquantur catelli duo nuper nati, usque ad
dissolutionem ossium, addendo vermium terrestrium, ut decet praeparato^um, lb.
j. coquantur simul lent The oil of Whelps a digestive, anodyne, and fit
medicine to procure the falling away of an Eschar.
igne, deinde fiat expressio ad usum, addendo terebinth. venet. iij. aquae
vitae j. This oil has a wonderful force to assuage pain, to bring the wound
to suppuration, and cause the falling away of the Eschar. This ensuing oil is
made more easily.. olei seminis lini, and lilior. an. iij. unguent. basilic. j.
lique fiant simul and fiat medicamentum, put of this a sufficent quality into
the wound; for this being applied indifferent hot, has power to assuage pain,
to foften and humect the orifice of the wound, and help forwards suppuration,
which is the true manner of curing these kind of wounds, according to the rule
of Hippocrates, which wishes every contused wound to be presently brought to
suppuration, for so it will be less subject to a Phlegmon; and besides, all
Lib de ulter.
the rent and bruised flesh must putrify, dissolve and turn to quitture, that
new and good flesh may be generated in steed thereof.

La^rentius Ioubertus much commends this following medicine, of whose
efficacy, as yet, I have made no trial.. pulver. mercur. bis calcinati, j,
adipis porcirecentis, vel butyrs recentis, viij. Camphorae in aqua vitae
dissolutae, ij. misce omnia simul, addende tantillum olei liliorum, aut lini.
Experience taught him, and reason also shows, that The faculties of the powder
of Mercury.
this kind of remedy is very commendable; for the powder of Mercury, if mixed
with a gross and humecting matter, does in a short space turn the bruised
flesh into pus, without causing any great pain. For the Camphire, whether it
be hot or cold, in temper, it much conduces to that purpose, by reason of the
subtlety of the parts, whereof it consists. For by means of this quality the
medicines enter with more facility into the affected bodies, and perform their
parts; besides also Camphire refists putrefaction. Some drop into the wound
aqua vitae, wherein they have dissolved some calcined vitrioll. Which kind of
remedy is not suppurative, but yet much resists The force of ealcined vitrioll.
putrefaction, so that we may use it with good success, when the weather is
hot, moist, and foggie. But when the wound is made very near at hand, it
cannot but be burnt by the flame of the powder; in which remedies used for
burns, will be useful, How wounds made by Gunshot may be combait.
not omitting such as are fit for contusions. But for these parts which lie
next the wound, you shall not, unless at the first dressing apply,
refrigerating and astringent things, but rather emollient and suppurative. For
those things which have a refrigerating faculty, weaken the part, and hinder
suppuration. For astringents constipate the skin, which is the cause, that the
putride vapors shut up and hindered from transpiration Scarification.
and passage forth, a gangrene and mortification easily seize upon the part.
But if the contusion be great and diffuse it self more largely over the flesh;
the part must be much scarified; that so the contused and concreat blood, and
therefore subject to putrefaction, may be evacuated. But for these parts, which
somewhat further distant from the wound encompasse the contused flesh, they
require refrigerating and strengthening medicines, so to hinder the falling
down and settling of the humor in that part; such is this ensuing medicine..
Pull. boli. armen. sauguin. Dracon. Myrrhae. an. j succi solan. sempervivi,
portulac. an. iss. album iiij. ovorum. oxyrhodin. quantum An Astringent
repelling medicine.
sufficit; fiat linimentum, ut decet. You may use this, and the like until the
suspected symptom, be past fear. Neither must you have less care, of binding
up and rolling the part, than of your medicines; for it does not a little
conduce to the cure, to bind The binding up.
it so fitly up as it may be without pain. The wound at the beginning of the
cure, must be dressed but once in 24. hours, that is, until the wound come to
suppuration; How often the wound must be dressed in a day.
but when the quitture begins to flow from it, and consequently the pain and
fever are increased, it shall be dressed twice a day, that is every twelve
hours. And when the quitture flows more abundantly than usual, so that the
collection thereof is very troublesome to the Patient, it will be requisite to
dress it every 8 hours; that is thrice a day. Now when as this abundant
effluxe is somewhat slaked, and begins to decrease, it will suffice to dress
it twice a day. But when the ulcer is filled with flesh, and consequently casts
forth but little matter, it will serve to dress it once a day, as you did at
the first.

CHAP. VI. How you shall order it at the second dressing.
AT the second and following dressings, unless you suspect putrefaction, and a
Gangrene, you shall only put into the wound some of the oils formerly
described, adding to them the yolks of some eggs and a little saffron; and
use this medicine, until the wound come to perfect suppuration. Here you must
note Why wounds made by Gunshot are so long before they come to suppuration.
this, that these kinds of wounds are longer before they come to suppuration,
than other wounds made by any other sort of weapon; both for that the bullet,
as also the air which it violently carries before it, by much bruising the
flesh, on every side, dissipates the native heat, and exhausts the spirits of
the part. Which things hinder digestion, and often cause the matter to stink,
as also many other pernicious symptoms. Yet most usually pus or quitture
appears within three or four days, sooner and later according to the various
complexion, and temperament of the patients bodies, and the condition of the
ambient air in heat and cold. Then by little and little you must come to
detersives, adding to the former medicine some Turpentine washed in Rose,
Barley, or some other such like water, which may Why Turpentine must be washed.
wash away the biting thereof. If the encompassing air be very cold, you may
to good purpose add some aqua vitae; for by Galens prescript, we must use hot
medicines in winter, and less hot in summer. Then in the next place use
detersives, as Gal. lib. 3. Meth.
. aquae decoctionis hordei quantum sufficit, succi plantaginis, appij, agrimon.
centaurei A detergent medicine.
minoris, an. j, bulliant omnia simul; in fine decoctionis add terebinthinae
venetae iij. mellis rosat. ij. farin. hordei. iij. croci j. Let them be all
well mixed together and make a Mundificative of an indifferent confistence. Or.
succi clymeni, plantag. absinth. appij, an. ij. tereb. venet. 4. syrup.
absinth. and mellis ros. an. ij. bulliant omnia secundum artem, postea
colentur, in colatura add pulver. aloes, mastiches, Ireos Florent. far. hord.
an. j. fiat Mundificatiuum ad usum dictum. Or else. terebinth. venet. lotae in
aq. ros. v. olei ros. j. mellis ros. iij. myrrhae, aloes, mastich. aristoloch.
rotundae, an. iss. far. hord, iij. misce. Make a Mundificative, which you may
put into the wound Why tents must be neither too long, nor thick.
with tents, but such as are neither too long, nor thick, lest they hinder the
evacuation of the quitture and vapors, whence the wounded part will be
troubled with erosion, pain, defluxion, inflammation, abscesse, putrefaction;
all which severally of themselves, as also by infecting the noble parts, are
troublesome both to the part affected, as also to the whole body besides.
Wherefore you shall put into the wound no tents, unless small ones, and of an
indifferent consistence; lest (as I said) you hinder the passing forth of the
matter, or by their hard pressing of the part, cause pain, and so draw on
malign symptoms. But seeing tents are used both to keep open a wound so
long, until all the strange bodies be taken forth, as also to carry the
medicines, wherewithal they are anointed: even to the bottom of the wound.
Now if the wound be sinuous and deep, that so the medicine cannot by that
means arrive at the bottom and all the parts thereof, you must do you
business When you must use injections.
by injections made of the following decoction.. aq. hord. lib. 4. agrimon.
centaur. minor. pimpinellae, absinth. plantag. an. M. ss. rad. aristoloch.
rotund. ss. fiat decoctio An Injection.
ad lib. j. in colatura expressa dissolve aloes hepaticae iij. mellis ros. ij.
bulliant modicum. Inject some of this decoction, three or four times into the
wound, as often as you dress the patient; and if this shall not be sufficient
to cleanse the filth, and waste the spongious, putride and dead flesh, you shall
dissolve therein as much Aegyptiacum as you shall think fit for the present
necessity; but commonly you shall dissolve an ounce of Aegyptiacum in a pint of
the decoction. Verily Aegyptiacum does powerfully The quantity of Egyptiacum to
be used in an injection.
consume the proud flesh which lies in the capacity of the wound; besides also
it only works upon such kind of flesh. For this purpose, I have also made
trial of the powder of Mercury, and burnt Alome equally mixed together, and
found them very powerful, even almost as sublimate, or Arsenicke, (but that
these cause not such pain in their operation.) I certainly much wonder at the
largeness of the Eschar which arises by the aspersio^ of these powders. Many
Practitioners would have a great Why none of of the iniection must beleft in
the wound.
quantity of the injection to be left in the cavityes of sinuous ulcers, or
wounds; which thing I could never allow of. For this contained humor causes an
unnatural tension in these parts, and taints them with superfluous moisture,
whereby the regeneration of flesh is hindered; for that every ulcer as it is an
ulcer, requires to be dried, in Hippocrates opinion. Many also offend in the
too frequent use of Tents; for as they change the^ every hour, they touch the
sides of the wound, cause pain, and renew other malign symptoms; wherefore
such ulcers as cast forth more abundance of matter, I Hollow tents or pipes
could wish rather to be dressed with hollow tents, like those I formerly
described to be put into wounds of the Chest. You shall also press a linen
boulster to the bottom of the wound, that so the parts themselves may be
mutually condensed by that pressure The manner of binding up the wound.
and the quitture thrust forth; neither will it be amiss to let this boulster
have a large hole fitted to the orifice of the wound and end of the hollow tent
and pipe, that so you may apply a sponge for to receive the quitture, for so
the matter will be more speedily evacuated and spent, especially if it be bound
up with an expulsive ligature, beginning at the bottom of the ulcer, and so
wrapping it up to the top. All the boulsters and rowlers, which shall be
applied to these kinds of wounds, shall be dipped in Oxycrate, or red wine, so
to strengthen the part, and hinder defluxion. But you must have a special
care, that you do not bind the wound too hard, for hence will arise^ pain,
hindering the passage forth of the putredinous vapors and excrements, which the
contused flesh casts forth; and also fear of an Atrophia, or want of
nonrishment, the alimentary juyces being hindered from coming to the part.

CHAP. VII. By what means strange bodies, left in at the first dressing, may
be drawn forth.
IT diverse times happens, that certain splinters of bones, broken and
shattered asunder by the violence of the stroke, cannot be pulled forth at the
Two causes that make strange bodies hard to he taken forth.
first dressing, for that they either do not yield or fall away, or else
cannot be found by the formerly described instruments. For which purpose this
is an approved medicine to draw forth that which is left behind.

. radic. Ireos Florent. panac. and cappar. an. iij. aristoloch. rotund. mannae,
thuris. an. j. in pollinem redacta incorporentur cum melle rosar. and
terebinth. venet. an. ij. or. resin. pini siccae iij. pumicis combusti and
extincti in vino albo, radic. Ireos, aristolochiae, an. ss. thuris j. squamae
aris, ij. in pollinem redigantur, incorporentur cum melle rosato, fiat
medicamentum.

CHAP. VIII. Of Indications to be observed in this kind of wounds.
THe ulcer being cleansed and purged, and all strange bodies taken forth;
natures endeavors to regenerate flesh, and cicatrize it, must be helped
forwards with convenient remedies, both taken inwardly, and applied out-wardly.
To which things we may be easily and safely carried by indications drawn,
first from the essence of the disease, then from the cause; if as yet present
it nourish the disease. For that which Galen says, Lib. 3. Meth. that no
indication may be taken from the primitive cause and time; must be understood
of the time past, and the cause which is absent. And then from the principal
times of the disease, the beginning, increase, state, and declination; for each
of these four require their remedies. Others are taken from the temperament of
the patient, so that no Surgeon need doubt, that some medicines are fit for
choleric, othersome for phlegmatic bodies. Hither refer the indication
taken from the age of the patient; also it is drawn from his diet, for no man
must prescribe any slender diet to one who is always feeding, as to him who is
accustomed to cate but once, or twice a day. Hence it is that a diet consisting
only of Panada's is more fit for Italians, than for French men; for we must
give somewhat to custom, which is as it were another nature. Vocations and
daily exercises, are referred to diet, for other things besit husband men and
labors, whose flesh is dense and skin hardened by much labor, than idle and
delicate persons. But of all other, have diligent regard of that indication
which is drawn from the strength of the patient; for we must presently, (all
else The Indication which is drawn from the strength of the patient is the
chiefest of all other.
being neglected) succor the fainting, or decaying strength; wherefore if it
be needful to cut off a member that is putrified, the operation must be
deferred if the strength of the patient be so dejected, that he cannot have it
performed without manifest danger of his life. Also indication may be drawn
from the encompassing air, under which also is comprehended that, which is
taken from the season of the year, region, the state of the air and soil,
and the particular condition of the present and lately bypast time. Hence it
is we read in Guido, that wounds of the head are cured with far more
difficulty at Paris, than at Avignion; where notwithstanding on the Why wounds
of the head at Paris, and of the legs at Avignion are hard to be cured.
contrary, the wounds of the legs are cured with more trouble, than at Paris;
The cause is, the air is cold and moist at Paris; which constitution seeing it
is hurtful to the brain and head, it cannot, but must be offensive to the
wounds of these parts. But the heat of the ambient air at Avignion,
attenuates and dissolves the humors, and makes them flow from above downwards.
But if any object that experience contradicts this opinion of Guide, and say,
that wounds of the head are more frequently deadly in hot countries; let him
understand that this must not be attributed to the manifest and natural heat
of the air, but to a certain malign and venenate humor, or vapor dispersed
through the air, and raised out of the Seas; as you may easily observe in
those places of France and Italy which border upon the Mediterranean Sea. An
indication may also be drawn from the peculiar temper of the wounded parts,
for the musculous parts must be dressed after one, and the bony parts after
another manner. The different sense of the parts, indicates and requires the
like variety of remedies; An indication to be drawn from the quick and (...)
of the wounded parts
for you shall not apply so acride medicines to the Nerves and Tendons, as to
the ligaments which are destitute of sense. The like reason also, for the
dignity and function of the parts needful for the preservation of life; for
often times wounds of the brain, or of some other of the natural and vital
parts, for this very reason that they are defixed in these parts, divert the
whole manner of the cure, which is usually and generally performed in wounds.
Neither that without good cause, for often times from the condition of the parts,
we may certainly pronounce the whole success of the disease; for wounds which
penetrate into the ventricles of the brain, into the heart, the large
vessels, the chest, the nervous part of the midriffe, the Liver, ventricle,
small guts, bladder, if somewhat large are deadly; as also these which light
upon a joint in a body repleate with ill humors, as we have formerly noted.
Neither must you neglect that indication which is drawn from the situation of
the part, and the commerce it has with the adjacent parts, or from the figure
thereof; seeing that Galen himself would not have it neglected. But we must
consider in taking these Gal. lib. 7. Meth. et 2. ad Glauc.
forementioned Indications, whether there be a composition, or complication of
the diseases; for as there is one and that a simple indication, of one and that
a simple disease, so must the indication be various of a compound and
complicate disease. But there is observed to be a triple composition, or
complication of affects besides nature; for either a disease is compounded with
a disease, as a wound, or a phlegmon with a fracture of a bone; or a disease
with a cause, as an ulcer with a defluxion; or a disease with a symptom, as a
wound with pain, or bleeding. It sometimes comes to pass, that these three,
the disease, cause, and symprome, concur in one case or affect. In
artificially Gal. lib. 7. Meth.
handling of which, we must follow Galens counsel, who wishes in complicated
and compounded affects, that we resist the more urgent; then let us withstand
the cause of the disease, and lastly that affect, without which the rest cannot
be cured. Which counsel must well be observed; for in this composure of
affects, which distracts the Empericke; But on the contrary the rational
Physician has a way prescribed in a few and these excellent words, which if
he follow in his order of cure, he can scarce miss to heal the patient.
Symptoms truly as they are symptoms, yield no indication of curing, neither
change the order of the cure; for when the disease is healed, the symptom
vanishes, as that which follows the disease, as a shadow follows the body.
But symptoms do often times so urge and press, that perverting the whole
order of the cure, we are forced to resist them in the first How and when we
must take indication of curing from a symptom.
place, as those which would otherwise increase the disease. Now all the
formerly mentioned indications may be drawn to two heads; the first is, to
restore the part to its native temper; the other is that the blood offend not
either in quantity or quality; for when those two are present, there is nothing
which may hinder the repletion, nor union of wounds or Ulcers.

CHAP. IX. What remains for the Surgeon to do in this kind of wounds.
THe Surgeon must first of all be skillful and labor to assuage pain,
hinder defluxions, prescribe a diet in these six things we call Not natural,
forbidding the use of hot and acrid things, as also of wine; for such attenuate
the humors and make them more apt for defluxion. Therefore at Why such as are
wounded must keep a slender Diet,
the first let his diet be slender, that so the course of the humors may be
diverted from the affected part; for the stomach being empty and not well
filled, draws from the parts about it, whereby it consequently follows, that
the utmost and remotest parts are at the length evacuated; which is the cause,
that such as are wounded, must keep so spare a diet for the next days
following. Venery is very pernicious, for that it inflames the spirits and
humors far beyond other motions; whereby it happens that the humors waxing
hot, are too plentifully carried to the wounded and overheated part. The
bleeding must not be stanched presently upon the receiving of the wound, for
by the more plentiful effluxe thereof the part is freed from danger of
inflammation and fullness. Wherefore if the wound bleed not Why we must open a
vein in such as are wounded by Gunshot.
sufficiently at the first, you shall the next day open a vein, and take blood
according to the strength and plenitude of the patient; for there usually
flows no great store of blood from wounds of this nature; for that by the
greatness of the contusion and vehemency of the moved air, the spirits are
forced in, as also I have observed in those who have one of their limbs taken
away with a Cannon bullet. For in the time when the wound is received, there
flows no great quantity of blood, although there be large veins and arteries
torn in sunder thereby. But on the 4, 5, 6. or some more days after, the
blood flows in greater abundance, and with more violence, the native heat and
spirits returning into the part. The belly must be so qualified, that he may
have at the least one stool a day, either by nature, or Art; and if by Art,
then rather with a glister than purging medicines taken by the mouth, for that
the agitation of humors, chiefly in the first days of the disease, is to be
susspected, least we increase the defluxion falling down upon the wounded
part. Yet Galen writes that both the evacuations are here needful, that is,
blood-letting and Gal. Lib. 4. Meth. cap. 6.
purging, though the Patient be neither phethoricke, nor repleate with ill
humors. But the care hereof must be committed to the judgment of the learned
Physician. Pain if joined with inflammation shall be mitigated, by anointing
the parts near unto the wound with Unguent. nutritum, composed with the juice
of Plantaine, Housleeke, Nightshade and the like. Vnguentum Diacalcitheos
described by Galen Gal. Lib. 1 de comp. Med. secund. genesis c. (...).
dissolved with vinegar, oil of Poppyes and Roses is of no less efficacy; nor
unguent. de bolo, nor diverse other things of the same faculty, though properly
no anodynes, as those which are not hot and moist in the first degree, but
rather cold, but yet not so as to have any narcoticke faculty. Now these
forementioned things assuage pain for that they correct the hot distemper, and
stay the acride and choleric defluxions, whose violence is more than cold.
After the use of repercussives, it will be good to apply this following
cataplasme. Micae panis infusae in lacte vaccino lb. j. ss. bulliant parum
addendo olei violacei, and rosar. an. iij. vitellos ovorum nu. iiij. An Anodyne
and ripening Cataplasme
pulver. rosar. rub. flor. chamaem. and meliloti, an. ij. farin. fabar. and
hordei, an. j. misce, fiat cataplasma secundum artom. Also in this case you may
easily make a medicine, of bread crummes boiled in Oxycrate and oil of Roses.
The cure of Tumors, if any associate the wound, may be found in their proper
place. Natures motion, whether to suppuration, or any such thing, must still be
observed, and helped by the Physician and Surgeon, as the ministers or
servants thereof.

CHAP. X. Of Bullets which remain in the body, for a long time after the wound
is healed up.
LEaden Bullets lie in some parts of the body some whiles seven, eight or more
years, so that they neither hinder the agglutination of the wound, neither
does any other symptom happen thereupon, as I have diverse Why Leaden Bullets
lie in the body so many years without doing any harm.
times observed; until at length by the strength of nature forcing them, and
their proper weightines bearing them downwards, they show themselves in some
lower part, by their swelling or bunching forth, and so must be taken forth by
the hand of the Surgeon. For they say Lead has a certain sympathy and
familiarity with man's body, chiefly the fleshy parts thereof. Wherefore it
neither putrifies its self, nor causes the flesh to putrify; besides it has
an excellent faculty in cicatrizing old ulcers. But bullets of stone, Iron and
of any other metal, are of another nature, for they cannot remain any long
time in the body without hurt; for Iron will grow rusty, and so corrode the
neighboring bodies, and bring other malign symptoms. Yet a Leaden bullet
cannot remain any long time in nervous, or noble parts without danger.

CHAP. XI. How to correct the constitution of the air, so that the noble parts
may be strengthened, and the whole body besides.
But because as we have formerly told you, there are some times wherein even
small wounds made by Gunshot prove deadly, not by their own fault, but the
fault of the air; therefore also the Surgeon must have this care, that
Cordialls to strengthen the noble parts.
he correct the air with all diligence, and reduce it to a certain quality
and moderation of substance, and strengthen the noble parts and whole body
besides, which may be performed, by the following medicines, which are to be
taken inwardly and applied outwardly. In the morning three hours before meat
let the Patient take some certain quantity as the Physician shall think fit
of the electuary Diarbodon Abbatis, or Aromaticum rosatum, triasantalon,
biamoschum, laetificans Galeni, or some such other like. And you shall apply
some such Epitheme as is here described to the heart and Liver. aquae rosar.
iiij, aquae buglossae, aceti boni, an. ij. coriandri praeparati ss. A cordial
Epithem.
caryophill cortic. citri. an. j. sant. rub. ss. coralli utriusque ss.
camphorae j. croci ss. pulver. diarhod. Abbat. ij theriacae and Mithridatij an.
ss. pull. flo. chamaem and melil. an. iij. misce, fiat epithema. Let it be
applied warm by dipping a scarlet cloth therein. You shall frequently put
odorifferous and refrigerating things to the patients nose, to strengthen the
animal faculty, as,. aquaerosar. and aceti boni. an. iij. caryophyllorum,
nucis moschat, cinamomi conquassatorum, and Theriacae Galeni, an. j. Let a
linen ragge dipped herein, be now and then put to the patients nose; for the
same purpose he shall carry a Pomander about him, and often smell thereto. As
Pomandera.
ros. rub. violar. an. iij. baccarum myrti, juniperi, santal. rub. an. ijss.
styracis calamit. ij. aq. rosarum, quantum satis est: lique fiat simul cum
cerae albae quod sufficit, fiat ceratum ad comprehendendos supradictos pulvers
cum pillillo calido, and ducatur in pomum. Or,. rad. Ireos Florent. majoran.
calam. aromat. ladani, ^enzoini, rad. cyperi, caryophll. an. ij. Moschi, gra.
4. fiat pulvis cum gummi tragacanth. quod sufficit. Or else.. ladani puri j.
Benzoini ss, styracis calamit. vj. ireos Flor. ss caryophyll. iij. majoran.
ros. rub. calami aromat. an. ss, in pollinem redigantur omnia, and bulliant cum
aqua ros. quantum sufficit; colentur, colata liquefiant cum justa cerae albae
quantitate, styracis liquidae, j, fiat ad modum cerati, and Frontalls to cause
rest, and strengthen the animal faculty.
cum pistillo fiat pomum, addita moschi j. Also you may corroborate the animal
faculty by application of frontalls, as also procure sleep, and ease the pain
of the head; as,. aq. ros ij. olei ros. and papav. an. iss. aceti boni, j.
trochis. de camphora, ss. fiat from tale. Linen rags dipped herein may be
applied to the temples of the forehead, and often renewed; otherwise by their
heat, dryness, and hardness, they will cause watching in steed of sleep.
Neither must you in the mean time bind the head too hard, lest by
intercepting and hindering the pulsation of the temporal Artery, you increase
the pain of the head. You shall make a fire, in the patients chamber of
oderifferous woods, as Juniper, Bay Tree, the prunings or cuttings of Vines,
Rosemary, and Orris roots. For the same purpose, you may sprinkle the floor
with sweet water, if the patient be able to undergo such cost. As,.
majoranae, menthae, radic. cyperi, calami aromat. salviae, lavendulae,
faenicul. thymi, staechad. flor. chamam. A sweet water.
melilot. satureiae, baccarum lauri, and juniperi, an. M. iij. pulv.
caryophyll. nucis Moschat. an. j. aquae rosar. and vitae, an. lib. ij. vini
albi boni and odorifici. lb. x. bulliant omnia in balneo Mariae ad usum dictum.
You may also make perfumes to burn in his chamber, as thus,. carbonis salicis
viij. ladani puri ij. thuris masculi, ligni and baccarum Perfumes to burn.
Iuniperi, an. j. xyloaloes, benjoini, styracis calamit. an. ss. Nucis
moschatae, santal. citrin. an. iij. caryophill* styracis liquidae, an. ij.
zedoariae calami aromat. an. j. gummi tragacanth. aqua rosar. soluti, quod sit
satis; Make hereof perfumes in what fashion you please. For the rottenness and
corruption of bones we will treat thereof hereafter in its due place.

CHAP. XII. Certain memorable Histories.
HEre I think good for the benefit of young practitioners, to illustrate by
examples the formerly prescribed Method of curing wounds made by Gunshot. The
famous and most valiant Count of Mansfelt, Governor of the Duchy of
Luxembourge, Knight of the order of Burgundy, coming to the aid of the French
King, was at the battle of Moncontour, where in the conflict, he received so
great a wound at the joint of the left arm with a Pistol bullet, that the
bones were shivered and broken in so many pieces, as if they had bin laid upon
an Anvill and struck with an hammer: hence proceeded many The malign symptoms
which usually happens upon wounds made by Gunshot.
malign symptoms, as cruel and tormenting pain, inflammation, a fever, an
oedematous and flatulent tumor of the whole arm even to the fingers end, and a
certain inclination to a Gangraene: which to resist, Nicolas Lambert, and
Richard Hubert the Kings Chirurgions, had made many and deep scarifications.
But when I came to visit and dress him, by the Kings appointment, and had
observed the great stinch, and putrefaction, I wished that they would use
lotions of Aegyptiacum made somewhat stronger than ordinary, and dissolved in
venegar and aqua vitae, and do other things more largely spoken of in the
chapter of a Gangreene. For the patient had also a Diarrhaea or flux, whereby
he evacuated the purulent, and stinking filth which flowed from his wound.
Which how it might come to pass we will show at large when we come to treat
Matter may flow from the wounded Iimbes into the belly.
of the suppression of the Urine. For this seemed very absurd to many, because
that if this purulent humor flowed out of the arm into the belly, it must
needs flow back into the veins, be mixed with the blood, and by its
pernicious and contagious passage through the heart and liver, cause exceeding
ill symptoms, and lastly death. Indeed he often swounded by the ascent of the
filthy vapors raised from the ulcers to the noble parts; which to resist, I
wished him to take a spoonefull of aqua vitae with some Treacle dissolved
therein. I endeavored to repress the oedematous and flatulent Tumor
possessing all the arm with stoups dipped in oxycrate, to which was put a
little salt and aqua vitae; these stoups I stayed and held to the part with
double clothes, sowed as strait as I could. Such a compression held the broken
bones in their places, pressed their Sanies from the ulcers, and forced back
the humors flowing to the part into the center of the body. If at any time I
omitted this compression, the tumor was so increased, that I was in a great
deal of fear, least the native heat of the part should be suffocated.
Neither could I otherwise bind up the arm by reason of the excessive pain
which molested the patient upon the least stirring of the Arm. There were also
many Abscesses about his elbow and over all his arm bessdes. For the letting
forth of whose matter I was forced, to make new incisions; which he endured
very stoutly. At length I cured him with using a vulnerary potion, and by
cleansing the ulcers, and correcting the putrefaction with Aegyptiacum
dissolved in wine or honey of roses, and so poured A brief recid tall of the
manner of the cure.
into the ulcers, and repressing the growth of proud flesh, with the powder of
burnt Alome, drying it after the detersion with liniments. Now this I can
truly affirm and profess, that during the time of the cure, I took out
above threescore splinters of bones, and those necessarily, amongst which there
was one of the length of ones finger; yet by Gods assistance at length he
became sound in all things, but that he could not put forth, or draw in his
arm.

Not long after by the Kings command I went to see Charles Philip of Croy, Lord
of Auret, the Duke of Aschos brother, not far from Mounis a City of Henalt.
He kept his bed seven months by reason of a wound made by a Bullet the space
of three fingers above his knee. When I came to him, he was afflicted with
these symptoms, intolerable pain, a continual fever, cold sweats,
watchings, excoriation Horride symptoms occasioned by a wound made by Gunshot.
of the hippes by reason of his long lying upon them, his appetite dejected
with much thirst. He often sunk down as if he had the falling sickness, had a
desire to vomit, and a continual trembing or shaking so that he could not put
one hand to his mouth without the assistance of the other: he swounded
frequently by reason of the vapors ascending to the noble parts. For the
thighbone was broken long ways and sidewayes with many splinters of bones,
whereof some were plucked out and others remained sticking fast in. He besides
also had an ulcer in his groine which reached to the midst of his thigh, and
many other sinuous ulcers about his knee. All the muscles of his thigh and
leg were swollen with a flegmaticke, cold and flatulent humor, so that almost
all the native heat of those parts seemed extinct. All which things being
considered, I had scarce any hope to recover him, so that I repented my coming
thither. Yet at length putting some confidence in his strength, and prime of
youth, I began to have better hopes. Therefore with his Incisions wherefore
made.
good liking, first of all I make two incisions, so to let forth the matter,
which lying about the bone did humect the substance of the muscles. This had
happy success, and drew out a great quantity of matter; then I with a syring
injected much Aegyptiacum dissolved in wine, and a little aqua vitae into these
incisions, so to restrain and amend the purrifaction, repress the spongie,
loose and soft flesh, resolve the oedematous and flatulent tumor, assuage the
pain, and stir up and strengthen the native heat almost oppressed by the
abundance of excrementitious humors, so that it could scarsely assimulate any
nourishment and adjoyne it to the parts. Then I fomented the affected part with
Sage, Rose-mary, Time, Lavander, Chamomile and Melilot Wherefore I used
fomentations.
flowers and red-rose leaves boiled in white wine, and lie made of Oake-ashes,
adding thereto as much salt and vinegar as I judged requisite. This fomentation
did attenuate and draw forth the morbificke humor. Now we used them long and
often, so to waste the humor more by drying up and breathing through the
passages of the skin, more thereof than fell into the part. For this same
purpose, we ordained that Mixed or round frictions, as they term them.
he should use frictions with hot linen clothes, and that these should be made
from above downwards, from below upwards, and so on every side, and somewhat
long withal: For a short friction draws more humor into the part than it can
resolve: I wished that each other day they should lay bricks heated hot in the
fire about his leg, thigh, and soale of his foot; but they were to besomewhat
quenched, and sprinkeld with wine and vinegar, with a small quantity of aqua
vitae. Much watrish moisture by this moist heat, did sweat out of these parts,
the tumor was leslened, and the native heat A medicated Lie.
by little and little restored. Then shoupes dipped in lie made of Oake-ashes,
wherein Sage, Rosmarie, Lavender, salt, and cloaves, were boiled, some aqua
vitae added, were applied thereto; but the rowlers were so gently, and
artificially wrapped about, that he did easily endure them without any pain,
and that with such happy success, that if they were omitted but for one day,
the tumor became very great. But thick linen boulsters were laid upon the
lower cavities of the ulcers; that so the sanies or filth might be more easily
pressed forth. But I had always a special care that the orifices of the
ulcers should be kept open with hollow Tents or pipes put therein: and
sometimes this following cataplasme was applied to resolve the tumor.. Far.
hord. fabar. and orobi, an vj. mellis com. and tereb. an. ij. flo. chamam.
melil. and ros. rub. A discussing Cataplasme.
an. ss. pulv. rad. Ireos, Flor. cyper. Mast. an. iij. oxymel. simp. quantum
sufficit; fiat cataplasma ad formam pultis satis liquidae. And Emplastrum de
Vigo without mercury was applied thereto, whereby the pain was much assuaged,
and the tumor lessened: yet were they not applied before the parts were
thoroughly heated by the fomentation, frictions, and evaporations; for
otherwise this Emplaster could never have been activated, by reason of the
excessive coldness of the affected parts. Neither did we omit catagmaticke
powders, fit for the taking, and drawing forth of broken bones. He used a
vulnerary potion for 15, days. Also besides the particular frictions of the
affected parts, I appointed other general frictions of the whole body, which
was become very lean; for by these, blood together with the spirit was drawn
to the parts, and the acride, and fuliginous vapors were breathed forth.

To conclude, his fever and pains being assuaged, his appetite restored, by
feeding plentifully upon good meats according to his strength, he in a short
time became more lusty; and lastly by the singular mercy of God, recovered his
health perfectly, but that he could not very well bend his knee. I thought good
to recite these things, not to glory or brag of the happy success of those
patients, which have recovered by my means, and the favor of God; but that
thus I may more fully and perfectly by familiar examples instruct young
practitioners in the operations of Surgery.

CHAP. XIII. An Apology concerning Wounds made by Gunshot.
THere lately came to my hands a book written by a certain Physician, whereby
he endeavors to disproove and overthrow, that which I The occasion of writing
this Apology.
have hitherto writ, of the cure of wounds made by Gunshot. Assuredly if there
were no other harm, but the loss of my credit ensuing thereon, I would
willingly hold my peace, and stop his mouth by modest silence. But seeing the
safety of so many men, lies upon the judgment of this point, I have thought
good to withstand this error, least it, to the great destruction of mankind,
spread and diffuse it self any further. The use (says he) of suppurative
medicines, have killed many who have been but lightly wounded with The chief
heads of our adversaries Treatise.
Gunshot, but acride medicines, as Aegyptiacum have killed more. Neither is the
counsel of Hippocrates to be observed in curing this sort of wounds, who bids
that every contused wound be brought to suppuration. For seeing this is a new
kind of wound, it requires new, and not anciently used medicines. Now the
temper of the air changed from the natural constitution ought not to indicate
change of medicines; but much less must thunder and lightening be compared to
the shooting of Great Ordinance. These are the chief heads of this his book,
which because they dissent from the truth, and these things I have formerly
delivered, I have thought good here to confute. First, seeing Leaden bullets
which are usually shot out of Guns are round, obtuse and weighty, they cannot
wound the body without contusion and attrition; All wounds made by Gunshot are
contused.
Now no contusion can be cured without suppuration, not only according to the
opinion of Hippocrates, but also of Galen and all others who have written of
Physic. Neither must we invent new remedies, for these new kinds of wounds;
for the laws of the sacred and divine Art of Physic are nor obnoxious to
change, nor subject to the humor of men or times, as the decrees of Kings and
Emperors are. For these are stablished with immutable necessity, which
constancy neither consuming time, nor age, nor tyranny can pervert. Wherefore
neither these who with great praise are Physicians to Kings and Princes, I
mean Ioubert and Botallus, think it lawful for them to depart from the rule
of Hippocrates. And this they not only do and follow in curing and doing the
works of Art, but much and highly commend, confirm and propound to be
diligently observed by all, in their books which they have published
concerning the cure of these kinds of wounds. And yet these Physicians are
such, as daily conversant in Armies and Kings houses have healed and daily cure
as many wounded by Gunshot as this Physician our Antagonist has seen in all
his life. Neither only do these whom I have named thus cure these wounds, but
almost all that dress such kind of wounds do the like, so that if there be
nothing which may hinder, or indicate to the contrary they presently apply
suppuratives. And I wonder that he has not observed how his neighbor Doublet
the Empericke cures desperate wounds of this nature, with A suppurative
medicine of tried efficacy.
no other than a suppurative medicine, composed of Lard, the yolke of an Egg,
Turpentine and a little Saffron.

In the year 1538. There was at Turin whilst I was Surgeon there to the
Marshall of Montjan the Kings Leifetenant General in Piemont, a certain
Surgeon wondrous famous for curing these wounds, and yet he used nothing
else but the oil of Whelps, (the description whereof I at length obtained of
him with much entreaty and expense) and he used it not scalding hot, as some
have imagined, but powered it scarce warm into their wounds, and so did
mitigate their pain, and happily bring them to suppuration. Which afterward
almost all Chirurgions, after they had got the description hereof, when I
first published this Work, have used and daily do use with happy success.

But in contemning and condemning Aegyptiacum, I think he has no partaker;
The force of Egyptiacum against putrefaction.
seeing there as yet has been found no medicine more speedy and powerful to
hinder putrefaction, if beginning; or correct it if present. Now these wounds
often degenerate into virulent, eating, spreading, and malign ulcers, which
cast forth a stinking and carion-like filth, whence the part Gangrenates,
unless you withstand them with Aegyptiacum and other acrid medicines, being
greatly approved by the formerly named Physicians and all Chirurgions. But
(says he) this unguent is poisonous, and therefore has been the death of
many who have been wounded by Gunshot. Verily if any diligently enquire into
the composition of this ointment, and consider the nature of all and every the
ingredients thereof, he shall understand that this kind of Unguent is so far
from poison, that on the contrary it directly opposes and resists all poison
and putrefaction which may happen to a fleshy part, through occasion of any
wound.

It is most false and dissonant from the doctrine of Hippocrates to affirm,
that the seasons of the year swerving from the Law of nature, and the air,
not truly The force of the air in breeding and augmenting diseases.
the simple and elementary, but that which is defiled and polluted by the
various mixture of putrid and pestilent vapors, either raised from the earth,
or sent from above, make not wounds more malign and hard to cure at some times
than they are at othersome.

For the air either very hot, or cold, drawn into the body by inspiration or
transpiration, generates a condition in us like its qualities. Therefore why
may it not, when defiled with the putredinous vapors of bodies lying unburied
after great battles, and shipwracks of great Armadoes, infect with the like
quality our bodies and wounds?

In the year 1562. when the civil wars concerning Religion first begun A
History.
in France, at Pene a Castle lying upon the River Lot, many slain bodies were
cast into a Well, some hundred Cubits deep, so stinking and pestilent a vapor
arose from hence some two months after, that many thousand of people dyed all
over the Provence of Agenois, as if the Plague had been amongst them, the
pernicious contagion being spread twenty miles in compass; which none ought to
think strange, especially seeing the putride exhalations by the force of the
winds may be driven and carried into diverse and most remote regions, dispersed
like the seeds of the Pestilence; whence proceeds a deadly corruption of the
spirits, humors and wounds, not to be attributed to the proper malignitie, or
perverse cure of wounds, but to be the fault of the air.

Therefore Francis Daleschampe in his French Surgery, in reckoning up these
things which hinder the healing of Ulcers, has not omitted that common cause
which proceeds from the air defiled or tainted with the seeds of the
pestilence. For he had learnt from his Master Hippocrates that the mutations
Hip. Aph. 1. sect. 3.
of times chiefly bring diseases, and he had read in Guide, that this was the
chief occasion, that wounds of the head at Paris, and of the legs at
Avignion, were more difficultly healed. Lastly even Barbers and such as have
least skill in Surgery know, that wounds easily turn into a Gangreene in
hot and moist constitutions of the air.

Wherefore when the wind is southerly, the Butchers will kill no more flesh
than to serve them for one day. I have formerly declared the malignity of the
In our second discourse.
wounds occasioned by the air in the seige of Rouen, which spared none, no not
the Princes of the blood, who had all things which were requisite for their
health. Which caused me, made at length more skillful by experience, to use
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum and medicines of the like faculty in steed of
suppuratives, to wounds during all that season, that so I might withstand the
putrefaction and Gangreene which so commonly assailed them. But if the various
motion of the stars, can by their influxe send a Plague into the air, why
then may it not by depravation of their The power of the stars upon the Air
and our bodies.
qualityes infect, and as by poisoning corrupt both wounds and wounded bodies
obnoxious to their changes and that of the air? We learnt long since by
experience, that all pains but principally of wounds, grow worse in a rainy
and moist season, specially because in that southerly constitution the air
replete with thick and foggy vapors, causes the humors to abound in the body,
which forthwith easily fall upon the affected parts, and cause increase of
pain. But (says our Adversary) in the battle at Dreux and at S. Dennis which
were fought in winter, there dyed a great number of men who were wounded by
Gunshot: This I confess is true; but yet I deny, that it was occasioned by
applying suppuratives, or corrosives, but rather by the vehemency and
largeness of their wounds, and the spoil the Bullet made in their members,
but above all by reason of the cold. For cold is most hurtful to wounds and
ulcers (as Hippocrates testifies) it hardens Aoho. 20. sect. 5.
the skin and causes a Gangreene. If this my Gentleman had been with me in
the seige of Metz, he might have seen the Legs of many soldiers to have
rotted, and presently taken with a Gangreene to have fallne away, by the only
extremity of cold; If he will not believe me, let him make trial himself;
and go in winter to the Chapel at Mount Senis one of the Alpine hills, where
the bodies of such as were frozen to death in passing that way are buried, and
he shall learn and feel how true I speak. In the mean time I think it fit
to confute the last point of his reprehension.

He cavills for that I compared Thunder and Lightning with the discharging
pieces The similitude between Thunder and great Ordinance, maintained.
of Ordinance. Frst he cannot deny but that they are alike in effects. For it
is certain that the flame arising from Gunpouder set on fire, resembles
Lightning; in this also that you may see it before you hear the crack or
reporr. I judge for that the eye almost in a moment perceives its object; but
the ear cannot but in some certain space of time, and by distinct gradations.
But the rumbling noise is like in both, and certainly the report of great
Ordinance may be heard sometimes at forty miles distance, whilst they make any
great battry in the beseiging of Cities.

Besides also, Iron Bullets cast forth with incredible celerity by the fiered
Gun-pouder, throw down all things with a horrid force, and that more speedily
and violently by how much they resist the more powerfully by their hardness.
They report that Lightning melts the money not hurting the purse; Now many by
the only violence of the air agitated and vehemently moved by shooting a
piece of Ordinance, as touched with Lightning, have dyed in a moment, their
bones being shivered and broken, no sign of hurt appearing in the skin.

The smell of Gunpouder when it is fiered, is hurtful, fiery and sulphurous,
just like that which exhales or comes from bodies killed with Lightning. For
men do not only shun this smell, but also wild Beasts leave their Dens
if touched with Lightnings. Now the cruelty of great Ordinance makes no less
spoil amongst buildings, nor slaughter amongst men and beasts, than Lightnings
do, as we have formerly shown by examples, not only horrid to see, but even
to hear reported, as of Mines, the Arcenall of Paris, the City of Malignes.
These may seem sufficient to reach, that Thunder and Lightning have a great
similitude with the shooting of great Ordinance, which notwithstanding I would
not have alike in all things. For they neither agree in substance, nor matter,
but only in the manner of violent breaking asunder the objects.

Now let us see and examine what manner of cure of wounds made by Gunshot Our
adversaries method, and manner of cure, reproved.
our adversary substitutes for ours. For he would have suppuratives used and
applied, yet such as should not be hot and most in quality, or of an
Emplasticke consistence, but hot and dry things. For (says he) here is not
the same reason as in Abscesses, where the Physician intends nothing but
suppuration. But here because a contusion is present with the wound, this
requires to be ripened with suppuratives, but the wound to be dried.

Now to answer this objection, I will refer him to Galen, who will teach him
the nature of suppuratives; from whom also he may learn that great regard is
to be Gal. lib. 9. simpl. 10. Method.
had of the cause and more urgent order in the cure of compound diseases; then
would I willingly learn of him, whether he can heal a wound made by Gunshot,
not first bringing that which is contused to perfect maturitie. If he affirm
he can, I will be judged by whatsoever Practitioners he will, to judge how
obscure these things are. Whereby you may the better understand there is
nothing more commodious than our Basilicon and oil of Whelps to ripen wounds
made by Gunshot, if so be that putrefaction, corruption, a Gangreen or some
other thing do not hinder. Then would he have Oxycrate poured into these
wounds to stay their bleeding, which if it cannot so be stayed, he would have
a medicine applied consisting of the white of an Egg, Bole Armenicke, oil of
Roses and salt. But I leave it to other men's judgment, whether these medicines
have power to stay bleeding if put into the wound; certainly they will make it
bleed the more. Vinegar put into a wound does not stay but causes bleeding. A
History.
For Vinegar seeing it is of a tenuious substance and biting, it is no doubt
but that it will cause pain, defluxion and inflammation.

To which purpose I remember I put to stanch bleeding, for want of another
remedy, a medicine wherein was some Vinegar, into a wound received by a Moore,
an attendant of the Earl of Roissy, hurt with a Lance, run through his arm
before Bologne by an English horseman. But he comes again to me a little
after, complaining and crying out that all his arm burnt like fire; wherefore
I was glad to dress him again, and put another medicine into his wound, and
laid an astringent medicine upon the wound, but poured it not therein.

And then above all other remedies he extolls his Balsame composed of Oil of
Wax, and Myrrh beaten together with the white of an Egg; which he says is
equal in operation to the natural Balsame of Peru. For he affirms that this
has a faculty to consume the excrementitious humidity of wounds, and so
strengthens the parts that no symptom afterward troubles them. Yet he says,
this does not so well heal and agglutinate these wounds, as it does others
which are cut. Balmes are fit to heal simple but not contused wounds.
Verily it is ridiculous to think that contused wounds can be healed after
the same manner as simple wounds may, which only require the uniting of the
loosed continuitie.

Therefore neither can these Balsames be fit remedies to heal wounds made by
Gunshot, seeing by reason of their dryness they hinder suppuration, which
unless it be procured the patient cannot be healed. Wherefore such things
ought not to be put into wounds of this nature, before they be ripened, washed
and cleansed from their filth. Yet can I scarce conceive, where we shall be able
to find out so many Chemists which may furnish us with these things
sufficiently to dress so many wounded soldiers as usually are in an Army, or
whence the soldiers shall have sufficient means to bear the charge thereof.
Also that which he says is absurd, that these Balsames must be put into the
wounds without Tents; and presently forgetting himself, he says, It will not
be amiss, if there be a little and slender Tent put into the wound, which
may only serve to hinder the agglutination thereof. But how can these Balsames
come to the bottomes of wounds without Tents, when as it is their chief
property to carry medicines even to the innermost parts of the wounds, and
always keep open a free passage for the evacuation of the quitture? But it is
note worthy, that after he has rejected unguentum Aegyptiacum, he
nevertheless bids to apply it, from the beginning until the contusion come to
perfect maturation, dissolving it in a decoction of the tops of wormwood, S.
John Wurt, the lesser Centory and Plantaine, and so injecting it Egyptiacum
howsoever made is a clenser not a suppurative.
into the wound. Besides also a little after he gives another way of using it,
which is, to boil a quantity of Honey of Roses in plantaine water, carefully
sciming it, until it be boiled to the consistence of Honey, and then to add
as much Aegyptiacum thereto, and so to make an ointment most fit to bring these
wounds to supputation. But I leave it for any skillful in Surgery to judge,
whether such medicines can be suppuratives, or whether they be not rather
detersives. Last of all he writes, that these wounds must be dressed but every
fourth day. And if there be a fracture of the bone joined with the wound, then
to moove nothing after the first dressing until the eighth day after; then
presently in another place he faith, it will be good, and expedient, to drop
ten or twelve drops of the formerly described Balsame every day into the
wound. Verily such doctrine which neither agrees with its self nor the truth,
cannot but much pusle a Novice and young Practitioner in Surgery, who is not
yet versed in the Art, or the operations thereof.

CHAP. XIIII. Another Apology, against those who have labored with new
reasons to prove, that wounds made by Gunshot are poisoned.
SOme few months agone, I visited a patient together with some learned
Physicians and skillfull Chirurgions. Now they, as it often times The occasion of
this Apology.
happens, in way of discourse, begun to argue of the condition and quality of
wounds made by Gunshot, and endeavored to prove that they might be poisoned,
by five reasons. Not truly through the occasion of the Gunpouder, for they all
confessed that it was free from poison, whether you have regard to its essence,
or to its composition; but by the Bullet, into which the poison may be
transfused and incorporated. The first reason is, that The reasons of our
adversaries that the Bullets may be poisoned, set down and confuted.
Lead seeing it is of a rare and spongious nature, which the easiness of
melting and softness argues, is very fit to drink and soake in what liquors
so ever you please. But me thinks this conclusion is very weak; for in all
mixtures made by Art, such as this is whereof we speak, there are two things
to be considered; that is to say, the matter of the things which enter into the
mixture, and the form: for the matter, such bodies must be either liquid, or
soft or friable; and lastly such as may be broken and divided into small
particles, that so they may easily in all parts concur and be conjoined and
united. But for their form, there ought to be a certain affinity, consent
and simpathy. You may perceive this by water and oil; for each of them though
of a liquid substance, and such as may easily be mixed with diverse other
things, yet cannot they be mixed the one with the other by reason of their
antipathy of forms. For thus gold and silver are so agreeing with Lead, that
as often as they are molten, Lead is mixed with them. But Brass shuns Lead as
much as gold and silver fly Tin and white Lead. If therefore Brass and Lead
being melted cannot be mixed together, though contained under the same Genus,
and common nature of Mettalls; how then can it be commixt with another thing
distinct in the whole kind, much more in species, and form, to wit, poison?
Their second reason is this; Iron, say they, which is more dense, solid, and
less porous, may receive some venenate substance and quality, as the Arrows
of the Ancients which were dipped in poison, testify; therefore must Lead much
more be capable thereof. I answer, that the surface of Iron may be poisoned,
but not the inner part or substance by mixture therewith. But here the
question is of union, but not of anointing or inunction.

The third reason is thus framed; Though (say they) Lead casts off and purges
it self from the dross and unpure parts, yet that is no argument, that it
will not commix, or soake its self in some strange liquor or body; for thus
Steel, being the most solid Iron, receives the temper which hardens it by the
artificial pouring upon it or quenching it in liquors contrary thereto in
their whole kind. I answer, that Steel admits into it by that quenching and
tempering, none of the juices or liquors wherewith it is watered or quenched.
For if that were necessary, it might be better and more easily performed, when
the metal is first cast, than when it is beaten into plates, or bars; which
answer shall serve to confute their fourth reason; wherein they say, that
bullets may be made so poisonous by the commixture of the juices of
Muncks-hood, Oleander, Crowe-foote, and other such like things which in their
whole substance are contrary to ours, that the wound which is made with them
cannot but be poisoned.

But I on the contrary affirm, that mixture is only of these things, which
may not only be put, but also stick thereto, and be mutually united; but how
can water, or any other liquid juice so much as only stick to Lead, as that
which is a solid and firm body, it is so far from being united therewith?
You may give more certain judgment hereof by experience, than by reason;
wherefore let melted Lead be put into the foresaid juices or the like; then
when the lead is cold, weigh each of them severally, and you shall find, that
both of them retain the same weight they formerly had. Which is a most
certain argument that neither the Lead has mixed or united it self with the
juices, nor the juices lost any part of their substance.

Their fifth reason is thus; A Bullet shot out of a Gun against some hard
stone, grows not so hot, but that you may presently without any harm take it
up in your hand. Therefore it is false, that the poison commixt and united with
the Bullet can be dissipated by the fire and flash of Gunpouder. The answer to
this objection is easily. For when we say, that although the Bullet may be
infected by poison perfectly commixt with the Lead, yet all the force of the
poison would be dissipated by the fire; we would have you thus to understand
us, that we do not mean this of that fire which is made by the powder at the
discharging of the Piece, but of that by force whereof the molten head is mixed
and conjoined with the venenate juice, so to make one of many. For this fire
exercising its force upon the venenate juices, hindered by the intercourse of no
Medium, and that for some space of time, and not for an instant, it may, if not
consume, yet much weaken their strength.

If there be any, who will not be satisfied by these reasons, let him consult,
and read Matthiolus. There are (says he) some of these latter times wholly
ignorant of things, who (if we may say the truth) have been so madly foolish,
that they said it was fit and requisite to put Treacle and Mithidate and such
like Antidotes In praefat. (...) 6. Diascor.
amongst Gold and Silver that was melted to make Cups, that so receiving the
faculties of the Antidote they might resist poison. But how absurd and
ridiculous their opinion is, let them judge (for it needs no clearer reproof)
who have but a little knowledge in natural things, but chiefly in Mettalls.

These are my reasons, these the authorities of men excelling in learning and
judgment, that confirm me in my ancient and former opinion, that wounds made
by Gunshot do not partake of any venenate quality.

CHAP. XV. How wounds made by Arrows differ from such as are made by Gunshot.
WOunds made by Arrows and Bolts shot out of Crosse-bowes and such Wounds made
with Arrows and such like things, are often without contufion. But are
oft-times poisoned.
like things, differ chiefly in two things, from these which are made by
Gunshot. The first is, for that they are often times without contusion, which the
other never are. The other is, for that they often times are poisoned. In both
these respects, their cure is different from the other. But the cure of these
wounds made by Arrows is different in it self, by reason of the variety and
diverse sorts of Darts or Arrows.

CHAP. XVI. Of the diversities of Arrows and Darts.
Arrows and Darts are different amongst themselves both in matter and in form
or figure, in number, making, faculty or strength; In matter, for that The
differences of Arrows. In matter. In sign.
some of them are of wood, some of Reeds, some are blunt headed, others have
piles or heads of Iron, Brass, Lead, Tin, Horn, Glass, Bone. In figure,
for that some are round, others cornered, some are sharp pointed, some barbed,
with the barbs standing either to the point, or shafts, or else acrosse, or
both ways; but some are broad aad cut like a Chissell. For their bigness,
some are three foot long, some less. For their number, they differ in that,
because some have one In bigness. In number, In making.
head, others more. But they vary in making, for that some of them have the
shaft put into the head, others the head into the shaft; some have their heads
nailed to the shaft, others not, but have their heads so loosely set on, that
by gentle plucking the shaft, they leave their heads behind them, whence
dangerous wounds proceed. But they differ in force, for that some hurt by
their Iron only, others In force.
besides that, by poison, wherewith they are infected. You may see the other
various shapes here represented to you in the following Figure.

The Figures of diverse sorts of Arrows.


CHAP. XVII. Of the difference of the wounded parts.
THe Wounded parts are either fleshy or bony; some are near the joints, others
seated upon the very joints; some are principal, others serve them; some are
external, others internal. Now in wounds where deadly signs appear, its fit
you give an absolute judgment to that effect; least you make the Art to be
scandalled by the ignorant. But it is an inhumane part, and much digressing
from Art, to leave the Iron in the wound; it is sometimes difficult to take it
out, You must not leave the weapon in the wound.
yet a charitable and artificial work. For it is much better to try a
doubtful remedy, than none at all.

CHAP. XVIII. Of drawing forth Arrows.
YOu must in drawing forth Arrows shun incisions and dilacerations of Veins
and Arteries, Nerves and Tendons. For it is a shameful and The manner of
drawing forth (...) and such weapons.
bungling part to do more harm with your hand, than the Iron has done. Now
Arrows are drawn forth two ways, that is, either by extraction, or
impulsion. Now you must presently at the first dressing pull forth all strange
bodies, which that you may more easily and happily perform, you shall set the
Patient in the same posture, as he stood when he received his wound; and he
must also have his Instruments in a readiness, chiefly that which has a slit
pipe and toothed without, into which there is put a sharp iron style, like the
Gimblets we formerly mentioned for the taking forth of Bullets; but that it
has no scrue at the end, but is larger and thicker, so to widen the pipe, that
so widened it may fill up the hole of the Arrows head where into the shaft was
put, and so bring it forth with it, both out of the fleshy as also out of the
bony parts, if so be that the end of the shaft be not broken, and left in the
hole of the head. That also is a fit Instrument for this purpose, which opens
the other end toothed on the outside, by pressing together of the handle. You
shall find the Iron or head that lies hid by these signs, there will be a
certain roughness and inequality observable on that part if you feel it up
and down with your hand; the flesh there will be bruised, livid, or black,
and there is heaviness and pain felt by the patient both there and in the
wound.

A deliniation of Instruments fit to draw forth the heads of Arrows and Darts,
which are left in the wound without their shafts.


A hooked Instrument fit for to draw forth strange bodies, as pieces of Maile,
and such other things as it can catch hold of, which may also be used in
wounds made by Gunshot.



But if by chance either Arrows, Darts or Lances, or any winged head of any
other weapon, be run through and left sticking in any part of the body, as the
Thigh, with a portion of the shaft or staff slivered in pieces, or broken off;
then it is fit the Surgeon with his cutting mullets should cut off the end
of the staff or shaft, and then with his other mullets pluck forth the head,
as you may see by this Figure.



CHAP. XIX. How Arrows broken in a wound may be drawn forth.
But if it chance that the weapon is so broken in the wound, that it cannot be
taken hold on by the formerly mentioned Mullets, then must you draw, or pluck
it out with your Crane, or Crows bill, and other formerly described
Instruments. But if the shaft be broken near the head, so that you cannot take
hold thereof with your Cranes bill, then When to draw forth the weapon on the
coutrary side.
you shall draw it forth with your Gimblet which we described before to draw
forth bullets; for if such a Gimblet can be fastened in Bullets, it may far
better take hold of wood. But if the head be barbed, as usually, the English
arrows are, then if it may be conveniently done, it will be very fitting to
thrust them through the parts. For if they should be drawn out the same way
they went in, there would be no small danger of breaking or tearing the
Vessels and Nerves by these hooked barbes. Wherefore it is better to make a
section on the other side whither the head tended, and so give it passage forth
if it may be easily done; for so the wound will be the more easily cleansed
and consolidated. But on the the contrary, if the point tend to When by the
same way it went in.
any bone, or have many muscles or thick flesh against the head thereof, as it
happens sometimes in the Thighs, Legs and Arms; then you must not thrust
the head thorough, but rather draw it out the same way it came in, dilating the
wound with fit Instruments, and by skill in Anatomy shunning the larger Nerves
and Vessels. Therefore for this purpose put a hollow Dilater into the wound,
and therewith take hold of both the barbes or wings of the head; and then take
fast hold of the head with your Cranes-bill, and so draw them forth all three
together.

A Dilater hollowed on the inside, with a Cranes-bill to take hold of the
barbed head.


CHAP. XX. What to be done, when an Arrow is left fastened or sticking in a bone.
But if the weapon be so depact and fastened in a bone that you cannot drive it
forth on the other side, neither get it forth by any other way than that it
entered in by; you must first gently moove it up and down, if it stick A
Caution.
very fast in, but have a special care that you do not break it, and so
leave some fragment thereof in the bone; then take it forth with your Crows
bill, or some other fit Instrument formerly described. Then press forth the
blood, and The benefit of bleeding in wounds.
suffer it to bleed somewhat largely, yet according to the strength of the
Patient and nature of the wounded part. For thus the part shall be eased of the
fullness and illness of humors, and less molested with inflammation,
putrefaction and other symptoms which are customarily feared. When the weapon
is drawn forth, and the wound once dressed, handle it, if simple, as you do
simple wounds; if compound, then according to the condition and manner of the
complication of the effects; Certainly the Oil of Whelps formerly described
is very good to assuage pain. To conclude, you shall cure the rest of the
Symptoms according to the method prescribed in our Treatise of wounds in
general, and to that we have formerly delivered concerning wounds made by
Gunshot.

CHAP. XXI. Of poisoned wounds.
IF these wounds at any time prove poisoned, they have it from their primitive
The signs of poisoned wounds.
cause, to wit, the empoisoned Arrows, or Darts of their enemies. You may
find it out both by the property of the pain; if that it be great and
pricking, as if continually stung with Bees, for such pain usually ensues in
wounds poisoned with hot poison, as Arrows usually are; Also you shall know it
by the condition of the wounded flesh; for it will become pale and grow livid,
with some signs of mortification. To conclude, there happen many and malign
symptoms upon wounds which are empoysoned, being such as happen not in the
common nature of usual wounds. Therefore presently after you have plucked
forth the strange bodies, encompasse the wound with many and deep
scarrifications, Remedies in poisoned wounds.
apply ventoses with much flame, that so the poison may be more powerfully
drawn forth; to which purpose the sucking of the wound, performed by one whose
mouth has no soarenesse therein, but is filled with oil, that so the poison
which he sucks may not stick, nor adhere to the part, will much conduce.
Lastly, it must be drawn forth by rubefying, vesicatory and caustic
medicines, and assailed by ointments, cataplasmes, emplasters, and all sorts of
local medicines.

The end of the Eleventh Book.
OF CONTVSIONS AND GANGREENS. THE TWELFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
A Contusion, according to Galen, is a solution of Continuity in the flesh or
bone, caused by the stroke of some heavy and Gal. Lib. de artis const^^^t.
obtuse thing, or a fall from an high. The symptom of this disease is by
Hippocrates called Peliosis, and Melasma, that Sect. 2. lib. de fracturis.
is to say, blackness and blewnesse; the Latins tear me it Sugillatum. There
are diverse sorts of these Sugillations or blacknesses, according as the blood
is poured forth into the more inward or outward part of the body. The blood is
poured forth into the body, when any (for example) falls from an high, or has
any heavy Causes of Bruises and Sugillations.
weight falls upon him, as it often happens to such as work in Mines, or are
extremely racked or tortured; and sometimes by too loud and forcible
exclamation. Besides also by a Bullet shot through the body, blood is poured
forth into the bellies, and so often evacuated by the passages of the Guts and
bladder. The same may happen by the more violent and obtuse blows of a hard
Trunchion, Club, Stone, and all things which may bruise and press the blood
out of the vessels either by extending or breaking them. For which causes also
the exterior parts are contused, or bruised sometimes with a wound, sometimes
without, so that the skin being whole, and as far as one can discern,
untoucht, the blood poures it self forth into the empty spaces of the muscles,
and between the skin and muscles; which affect the Ancients have termed
Ecchymosis; Hippocrates calls it by a peculiar name Nausiosis, for that in this
affect the swollne veins seem as it were to vomit, Sect. 2. lib. de fract.
and verily do vomit or cast forth the superfluous blood which is contained in
them. From these differences of Contusions are drawn the indications of
curing, as shall appear by the ensuing discourse.

CHAP. II. Of the general cure of great and enormous Ccontusions.
THe blood poured forth into the body, must be evacuated by visible and not
visible evacuation. The visible evacuation may be performed by bloodletting,
Cupping-glasses, horns, scarification, horeseleeches and fit purgative
medicines; if so be the patient have not a strong and continual fever; The
not visible evacuation is performed by resolving and sudorificke potions,
baths, and a slender diet. Concerning Blood-letting Galens opinion is plain,
where he bids, in a fall from an high place, and generally Ad sentent. 62.
sect. 3. lib. de Articulit.
for bruises upon what part soever they be, to open a vein, though the parties
affected are not of a full constitution; for that unless you draw blood by
opening a vein, there may inflammations arise from the concreate blood, from
whence without doubt evil accidents may ensue. After you have drawn blood
give him four ounces of Oxycrate to drink; for that by the tenuity of its
substance hinders the coagulation of the blood in the belly, or in stead
thereof you may use this following potion.. rad. Gentianae iij; bulliant in
Oxycrato; in colatura dissolve A potion to dissolve and evacuate clotted blood.
rhci electi j. fiat potio. These Medicines dissolve, and cast forth by
spetting and vomit the congealed blood, if any thereof be contained in the
ventricle or lungs; it will be expedient to wrap the patient presently in a
sheep skin, being hot and newly taken from the sheep, and sprinkled over
with a little myrrh, cresses and falt, A hot sheeps skin.
and so to put him presently in his bed, and then cover him so that he may
sweat plentifully. The next day take away the sheeps-skinne, and anoint the
body with the following anodyne and resolving unguent.. unguent. de althaea vj.
olei Lumbrie. chamaem. anethi. an ij. terchinth. venetae iiij. farinae
foenugrae. rosar. rub. pulverisat. pull. A discussing ointment.
myrtillorum, an j. fiat litus ut dictum est. Then give this potion which is
sudorificke and dissolves the congealed blood.. Ligni guaiaci viij. radicis
enulae camp. consolid. A sudorificke potion to dissolve congealed blood.
majoris, ireos Florent. polypod. querni, seminis coriandri, anisi, an ss.
glycyrhiz. ij. nepeta, centaurcae, caryophyl. cardui ben. verbena, an, m. s.
aquae fortanae lib. xij. Let them be all beaten and infused for the space of
twelve hours, then let them boil over a gentle fire until the one half be
consumed; let the patient drink some half pint of this drink in the
morning, and then sweat some hour upon it in his bed, and do this for seven
or eight days. If any poor man light upon such a mischance, who for want of
means cannot be at such cost, it will be good, having wrapped him in a
sheet, to bury him up to the chin in Dung mixed with some hay or straw, and
there to keep him, until he have sweat sufficiently. I have done thus to many
with very good success. You shall also give the patient potions made with
syrups which have power to hinder the coagulation and putrefaction of the
blood; such as syrup of Vinegar, or Lemons, of the juice of Citrons and such
others to the quantity of an ounce dissolved in scabious, or Carduus water.
You may also presently Surupe hindering putrefaction and congealing of blood.
after the fall give this drink, which has power to hinder the coagulation of
the blood, and strengthen the bowels.

. Rhei elect. in pull. redacti j, aquae rubiae majoris, and plantagin. an. j.
theriacae ss. syrupi de rosis siccis, ss, fiat potus. Let him take it in the
morning for four or five A drink for the same purpose.
days. In steed hereof you may make a potion of one dram of Sperma ceti
dissolved in buglosse or some other of the waters formerly mentioned, and half
an ounce of syrup of Maiden-haire; if the disease yield not at all to these
formerly prescribed medicines, it will be good to give the patient for nine
days, three or four hours before meat some of the following powder.. rhei
torrefacti, rad. rub. majoris, centaurei, gentianae, aristolo. rotundae, an.
ss. give j. hereof with syrup of Venegar A powder for the same.
and Carduus water. They say that the water of green Walnuts, distilled by an
Alembicke, The distilled water of green Walnuts. Baths.
is good to dissolve congealed and knotted blood. Also you may use bathes made
of the decoction of the roots of Orris, Elecampane, Sorrel, Fennel,
Marsh-mallowes, Water-ferne, or Osmund the waterman, the greater Comfery; the
seeds of Faenugreeke; the leaves of Sage, Marjerome; the flowers of Camaemile,
Melilore and the like. For a warm bath has power to rarifie the skin, to
dissolved the clotted blood, by cutting the tough and mitigating the acride
humors, by calling them forth into the surface of the body, and relaxing the
passages thereof; so that the rebellious qualities being overcome, there ensues
an easy evacuation of the matter by vomit, or expectoration, if it flote in
the stomach, or be contained in the chest; but by stool and Urine, if it lie
in the lower parts; by sweates and transpiration if it lie next under the skin.
Wherefore bathes are good for those who have a Peripneumonia or inflammation of
their Lunges, or a Pleurisy, according to the mind of Hippocrates, if so be
that they be used, when the fever begins to be assuaged; for so they mitigate
pain, Lib. 3. de vict. deuteronomy. and lib. 3. de morb.
help forwards suppuration, and hasten the spitting up of the purulent matter.
But we would not have the patient enter into the bath, unless he have first
used general remedies, as blood-letting and purging; for otherwise there will
be no small danger, least the humors diffused by the heat of the bath, cause a
new defluxion into the parts affected. Wherefore do not thou by any means
attempt, to use this or the like remedy, having not first had the advice of a
Physician.

CHAP. III. How we must handle Contusions, when they are joined with a wound.
EVery great Contusion forthwith requires blood-letting, or purging, or both;
and these either for evacuation, or revulsion. For thus Hippocrates in a
contusion of the Heel, gives a vomitory potion, the same day, or else Sect. 2.
lib. fract.
the next day after the heel is broken. And then if the Contusion have a wound
associating it, the defluxion must be stayed at the beginning, with an ointment
made of Bole Armenicke, the whites of eggs, and oil of roses, and smyrtles,
with the pouders of red roses, Allome and mastich. At the second dressing apply
a digestive made of the yoalke of an egg, oil of violets and Turpentine. This
folfowing Cataplasme shall be applied to the near parts to help forwards
suppuration.. A suppurative Cataplasme.
rad althae, and lilio. an. iiij. sol. malv. violar. senecionis, an. M. ss.
coquantur complete, and passentur per setaceum, addendo butyrirecentis and olei
viol. an. iij. farinae volatilis quant. sufficit; fiat cataplasma ad formam
pultis liquidae. Yet have a care in using of Cataplasmes, that A caution to be
observed.
you do not too much exceed; for too frequent and immoderate use of them makes
wounds plegmonous, sordide and putride. Wherefore the wound after it is come to
suppuration must be cleansed, filled with flesh and cicatrized; unless happily
the contused flesh shall be very much torn, so that the native heat forsake
it, for then it How contused wounds must be sowed
must be cut away. But if there be any hope to agglutinate it, let it be sowed,
and other things performed according to Art; but the stitches must not be made
so close together, as when the wound is simple, and without contusion; for such
wounds are easily inflamed and swell up, which would occasion either the
breaking of the thread or flesh, or tearing of the skin.

CHAP. IV. Of these Contusions which are without a wound.
IF the skin being whole and not hurt, as far as can be discerned, the
flesh which lies under it be contused, and the blood poured forth under the
skin make an Ecchymosis, then the patient must be governed according to Art
Phlebotomie.
until the malign symptoms, which commonly happen, be no more to be feared.
Wherefore in the beginning draw blood on the opposite side, both for evacuation
and revulsion. The contused part shall be scarified with equal scarifications;
then shall Scarifying. Cupping glasses.
you apply cupping-glasses or horns, both for evacuation of the blood which
causes the tumor and Tension in the part; as also to ventilate and refrigerate
the heat of the part, least it turn into an Abscesse. Neither must we in the
mean while omit gentle purging of the belly. The first topicke medicines ought
to be astrictives Astrictives how good in Contusions.
which must lie some short while upon the part, that so the Veins, and
Arteries may be as it were straightened and closed up, and so the defluxion
hindered; as also that the part it self may be strengthened. This may be the
form of such a remedy,. Albumina everum nu. iij. olei myrtini and rosacei, an.
j. boli armeni, and sanguin. dracon. an. After astrictives must follow
discussives.
ss. nucum cupress. gallarum, pull. aluminis usti, an. ij. incorporentur omnia
addendo aceti parum, fiat medicamentum. Then you shall resolve it with a
fomentation, Cataplasme, and discussing emplaisters.

CHAP. V. By what means the contused part may be freed from the fear and
imminent danger of a Gangreene.
GReat Contusions are dangerous even for this cause, for that a Gangreene Sect.
2. lib. de fract.
and mortification sometimes follows them; which Hippocrates teaches to
happen, when as the affected part is grown very hard and liquide. Wherefore
when the part grows livide and black, and the native color The cause of a
Gangreene.
thereof, by reason of the affluxe of the concreate blood, is almost extinct;
chiefly, to ease the part of that burden, cupping glasses and horns shall be
applied to the part it self being first scarified with a Lancet, or else the
following Instrument termed a Scarificator, which has 18 little wheels sharp
and cutting like a razour, which The use of a Scarificator.
may be straitened and slacked by the pins noted by D. and P. This instrument
is to be commended for that it performs the operation quickly and gently, for
it makes 18 incisiones in the space that you make one with a Lancet or knife.

A Scarificator.
A. Shows the cover. B. The Box, or Case.



Then shall you foment the part with strong Venegar wherein the roootes of
radish or of Dragons, Cuckow-pint, Saelomons Seal, Auripigmentum and the like
have been boiled; for such acride things do powerfully heat, resolve and draw
the A fomentation to discuss and draw to the skin.
concreate blood from the inner part of the body unto the skin, which by its
settling in the part affected, prohibits the entrance of the vital spirits, the
preservers of its integrity; yea also extinguisheth the native heat of the
same part. Now we must not use these things but with great discretion, least
so we draw not only that blood which is poured forth of the vessels, but also
the other which is contained in the vessels. Moreover also we must not use
them, unless when the defluxion is stayed. For small contusions (which Galen
judges by the softness of the contused part) it will be sufficient to apply
to discuss them, Virgins wax dissolved and In sect. 2. lib. de fiactur.
mixed with Cummim seeds, Cloves, the root of black Briony, (which has a
wonderful faculty to discuss all blackenesses and sugillations) for the same
purpose, you may also apply wormwood bruised and so warmed in a dish and
sprinkled over with a little white wine. Also fry wormwood with oil of
cammomill, branne, the powder of Cloves, and Nutmegs, adding thereto a little
aqua vitae, then put it all in a linen cloth and apply it hot to the part. The
following emplaster does powerfully discuss congealed blood.. Picis nigrae ij.
Gum. Elemi. ij. styracis A discussing plaster.
liquidae and terebinth. com. an. ss. pull. sulphuris vivi. j. Liquefiant simul,
fiat Emplastrum; and let be spread upon leather and so applied.

CHAP. VI. Of that strange kind of symptom which happens upon contusions of
the ribs.
THe flesh contused sometimes by great violence becomes mucous and swollen, or
puffed up like Veale, which the butchers blow up, the skin Hip. sect. 3. lib.
de art. sent, 58. and 65.
remaining whole. This is seen and happens chiefly in that flesh which is
about the ribs; for this being bruised either by a blow, or fall, or
resitencie, or any other such like cause; if you press it with your hand, a
certain windiness goes out thereof with a small whyzzing, which may be
heard, and the print of your finges will remain as in oedema's. Unless you
quickly make fit provision against this symptom, there is gathered in that
space which the flesh departing from the bones, leaves empty, a certain
purulent sanies, which diverse times fowls and corrupts the ribs. It will be
cured, if the mucous tumor be presently pressed, and straightly bound with
ligatures, yet so that you hinder not the breathing, when as the affect happens
upon the ribs and parts of the Chest. Then apply to the Remedies for a mucous
and flatulent tumor of the ribs. The cause.
part a plaster of Oxycroceum or diachylon Ireatum with the emplaister de
meliloto; also discussing fomentaions shall be used.

The cause of such a tumor is a certain mucous phlegm; seeing that nature is
so weak that it cannot well digest the nourishment, and assimulate it to the
part: but leaves fomething as it were half concocted. No otherwise than the
conjunctive coat of the eye is sometime so lifted up and swollen by a stroke,
that it startes as it were out of the orb of the eye, leaving such filth or
matter as we see those which are bleard eye to be troubled withal; because
the force and natural strength of the eyes is become more weak, either by the
fault of the proper distemperature, or the abundance of moisture which flows
thither, as it happens in those tumors which are against nature. For
flatulencies are easily raised from a watrish and flegmatique humors wrought
upon by weak heat, which mixed with the rest of the humor, the tumor becomes
higher.

CHAP. VII. A discourse of Mumia, or Mummie.
PEradventure it may seem strange what may be the cause, why in this Treatise
of curing contusions, or bruises, I have made no mention of giving Mummie
either in bole, or potion to such as have fallen from high places, or have been
otherwise bruised, especially seeing it is so common Mummie a frequent and
usual medicine in contusions.
and usual, yea the very first and last medicine of almost all our
practitioners at this day in such a case. But seeing I understood, and had
learnt from learned Physicians, that in using remedies, the indication must
always be taken from that which is contrary to the disease, how could I? how
can any other give Mummie in this kind of disease, seeing we cannot as yet
know what Mummie is, or what is the The reason that the Author makes no mention
thereof amongst his medicines.
nature and essence thereof? So that it cannot certainly be judged, whether it
have a certain property contrary to the nature and effects of contusions. This
how it may have, I have thought good to relate somewhat at large; neither do
the Physicians who prescribe Mummie, nor the Authors that have written of it,
nor the Apothecaries that fell it, know any certainty thereof. For if you read
the more ancient, Serapio and Avicen, to the modern Matthiolus and Thevet, you
shall find quite different opinions. Ask the Merchants who bring it to us,
ask the Apothecaries who buy it of them, to fell it to us, and you shall hear
them speak diversely hereof, The opinion of the Arabians concerning it.
that in such variety of opinions, there is nothing certain and manifest.
Serapio and Avicen have judged Mummie to be nothing else but Pissasphalthum;
now Pissasphaltum is a certain forth or foame rising from the Sea, or Sea,
waters; this same foame as long as it swimmes upon the water is soft and in
some sort liquid: but being driven upon the shore by force of tempest, and
working of the sea, and sticking in the cavityes of the rocks, it concreates
into somewhat a harder substance than dried pitch, as Dioscorides faith.
Belonius says, that Mummie is only known to Egypt and Greece. Others write
that it is man's flesh, taken from the carcases of such as are dead, and covered
over in the Lib. 4. cap. 84.
sands in the desartes of Arabia; in which Country they say the sands are
sometimes carried and raised up with such force and violence of the winds,
that they Another opinion of Mummie.
overthrow and suffocate such passingers as they meet withal; the flesh of
these dried by the sand and wind they affirm to be Mummy.

Mathiolus following the more usual and common opinion, writes that Mummie is
nothing else than a liquor flowing from the Aromaticke embalments of dead
bodies, which becomes dry and hard. For understanding whereof you must know
Another.
from all manner of antiquity, that the Egyptians have been most studious in
burying and embalming their dead; not for that end that they should become
medicines for such as live, for they did not so much as respect or imagine so
horride a wickedness. But either for that they held an opinion of the general
resurrection, or that in these monuments they might have something, whereby
they might keep their dead friends in perpetual remembrance.

Thevet not much dissenting from his own opinion, writes that the true Mummie
is taken from the monuments and stony tombs of the anciently dead in Egypt,
the chinkes of which tombs were closed, and cimented with such diligence; but
the enclosed bodies embalmed with precious spices with such art for eternity,
that the linen vestures which were wrapped about the^ presently after their
death, may be seen whole even to this day; but the bodies themselves, are so
fresh that you would judge them scarce to have been three days buried. And yet
in those Sepulchers and Vaultes from whence these bodies are taken, there have
been some corpse of two thousand years old. The same, or their broken members
are brought to Venice from Syria and Egypt, and thence dispersed over all
Christendom. But according to the different condition of men, the matter of
their embalments were diverse; for the bodies of the Nobility or Gentry are
embalmed with Myrrh, Aloes, Saffron, and other precious spices, and Drugs; but
the bodies of the common sort whose poverty and want of means could not
undergo such cost, were embalmed with asphaltum or piss asphaltum.

Now Mathiolus says that all the Mummie which is brought into these parts is
of this last kind and condition. For the Noble men and chief of the province
so What our Mummie usually is.
religiously addicted to the monuments of their ancestors, would never suffer
the bodies of their friends, and kindred to be transported hither for filthy
gain, and such detested use, as we shall show more at large at the end of this
work.

Which thing sometimes moved certain of our French Apothecaries, men
wondrous audacious, and covetous, to steal by night the bodies of such as
were hanged, and embalming them with salt and Drugges they dried them in an
Oven, so to sell them thus adulterated in steed of true Mummie. Wherefore we
are thus compelled both foolishly and cruelly to devour the mangied and
putride particles of the carcasses of the basest people of Egypt, or of such as
are hanged, as though there were no other way to help or recover one bruised
with a fall from a high place, than to bury man by an horrid insertion in
their, that is, in man's guts. Now if this Drugge were any way powerful for
that they require, they might perhaps have some pretense, for this their more
than barbarous inhumanity.

But the case stands thus, that this wieked kind of Drugge, does nothing help
the diseased, in that case, wherefore and wherein it is administered, as I have
tried Mummie is no way good for contusions,
an hundred times, and as Thevet witnesses, he tried in himself, when as he
took some thereof by the advice of a certain Jewish Physician in Egypt, from
whence it is brought; but it also inferres many troublesome symptoms, as the
pain of the heart or stomach, vomiting and stink of the mouth.

I persuaded by these reasons, do not only my self prescribe any hereof But
hurtful, and how?
to my patients, but also in consultations, endeavor what I may, that it be
not prescribed by others. It is far better according to Galens opinion in
Method. med. to drink some oxycrate, which by its frigidity restraines the
flowing blood, and by its tenuity of substance dissolves and discusses the
congealed clotts The effects of oxycrate in Contusions.
thereof. Many reasons of learned Physicians (from whom I have learned this
history of Mummie) drawn from Philosophy, whereby they make it apparent, that
there can be no use of this or that Mummie in contusions, or against flowing or
congeased blood, I willingly omit, for that I think it not much beneficial to
Chirurgions to insert them here. Wherefore I judge it better to begin to
treat of Combustions, or Burns.

CHAP. VIII. Of Combustions and their differences.
ALL Combustions whether occasioned by Gunpowder, or by scalding oil, water,
some metal or what things soever else, differ only in The reason and
syptomes of Combustions.
magnitude. These first cause pain in the part, and imprint in it an
unnatural heat. Which savouring of the fire, leaves that impression, which
the Greeks call Empyreuma. There are more or less signs of this impression,
according to the efficacy of the thing burning, the condition of the part
burned, and stay upon the same. If the Combustion be superficiary, the skin
rises into pustles and blisters, unless it be speedily prevented. If it below
or deep in, it is covered with an Eschar or crust, the burnt flesh by the
force of the fire turning into that crusty hardness. The burning force of the
fire, upon whatsoever part it falls, leaves a hot distemper therein,
condensates, contracts, and thickens the skin, The cause of the blisters
rising upon burns.
whence pain proceeds; from pain there comes an attraction of humors, from
the adjacent and remote parts. These humors presently turned into watrish or
serous moisture, whilst they seek to pass forth, and are hindered thereof by
the skin condensated by the action of the fire, they lift it up higher, and
raise the blisters which we see. Hence diverse Indications are drawn, whence
proceeds the variety of medicines for burns. For some take away the
Empyreuma, that is, the heat of the fire (as we term it) and assuage the
pain; other hinder the rising of blisters; othersome are fit, to cure the
ulcer, first to procure the falling away of the Eschar, then to cleanse,
generate flesh and cicatrize it. Remedies fit to assuage pain, and take away
Variety of medicines to take away the heat and assuage the pain.
the fiery heat, are of two kinds; for some do it by a cooling faculty, by
which they extinguish the preternaturall heat, and repress or keep back the
blood and humors, which flow into the parts by reason of heat and pain. Others
endued with contrary faculties, are hot and attractive; as which by relaxing
the skin, and opening the pores, resolve and dissipate the serous humors, which
yield both beginning, and matter to the pustles, and so by accident assuage the
pain and heat. Refrigerating things, are cold water, the water of Plantaine,
Nightshade, Henbane, Hemlocke; the juyces of cooling herbs, as Purselaine,
Lettuce, Plantaine, Housleeke, Poppye, Mandrake and the like. Of these some may
be compounded, as some of the forenamed juyces beaten with the white of an
egg; Clay beaten and dissolved in strong Venegar; roch Alome dissolved in
water, with the whites of eggs beaten therein; writing ink mixed with Venegar
and a little Camphire; Vnguentum nutritum, and also Populeon newly made. These
and the like shall be now and then renewed chiefly at the first, until the
heat and pain be gone. But these same remedies must be applied warm, for if
they should be laid, or put to cold, they would cause pain, and consequently
defluxion; besides also their strength could not pass, or enter into the part,
or be brought into action; but so applied they assuage pain, hinder
inflammation and the rising of blisters.

CHAP. IX. Of hot and attractive medicines to be applied to burns.
AMongst the hot and attractive things which by rarifying, drawing out, and
dissolving, assuage the pain and heat of combustions, the fire challenges How
fire may assuage the pain of burning.
the first place, especially when the burning is but small. For the very common
people know and find by daily experience, that the heat of the lightly burnt
part vanishes away, and the pain is assuaged, if they hold the part which is
burnt some pretty while to the heat of a lighted candle, or burning coals; for
the similitude causes attraction. Thus the external fire whilst it draws
forth the fire which is internal and inust into the part, is a remedy against
the disease it caused and bred. It is also an easily made and approved remedy,
if they presently after the burn apply to the grieved part raw Onions beaten
with some salt. Now you must note, that this medicine takes no place, if it be
once gone into an Beaten Onions good for burns and how.
ulcer, for it would increase the pain and inflammation; but if it be applied
when the skin is yet whole and not excoriated, it does no such thing, but
hinders the rising of pustles and blisters. Hippocrates for this cause also
uses this kind of remedy in procuring the fall of the Eschar. If any endeavor
to gainesay the use of this remedy by that principle in Physic, which says,
that contraries are cured by contraries, and therefore affirm that Onions
according to the authority of Galen, being hot in the fourth degree, are not
good for combustions; let him know that Onions Lib. 5. simpl.
are indeed potentially hot, and actually moist, therefore they rarifie by
their hot quality, and soften the skin by their actual moisture, whereby it
comes to pass that they attract, draw forth, and dissipate the imprinted
heat, and so hinder the breaking forth of pustles; To conclude, the fire as we
formerly noted, is a remedy against the fire. But neither are diseases always
healed by their contraryes (says Galen) but sometimes by their like; although
all healing proceed from the contrary, this word contrary, being more largely
and stricktly taken; for so also a Phlegmon is often cured by resolving
medicines, which heals it by dissipating the matter thereof. Therefore Onions
are very profitable for the burnt parts, which are not yet exulcerated or
excoriated: But there are also many other medicines good to hinder the rising
of blisters; such is new horse-dung fried in oil of wall-nuts or Roses, and
applied to the parts. In like manner the leaves of Elder or Dane-wort boiled in
oil of nuts, and beaten with a little salt. Also quinched lime poudered and
mixed with Vnguentum Rosatum. Or else the leaves of Cuckow-pint and Sage beaten
together with a little salt. Also Carpenters Glue dissolved in water and
anointed upon the part with a feather, is good for the same purpose. Also
thick Vernish which pollishers or sword cutlers use, But if the pain be more
vehement, these medicines must be renewed 3 or 4 times in a day and a night, so
to mittigate the bitterness How often in a day these must be dressed.
of this pain. But if so be we cannot by these remedies hinder the rising of
blisters, then we must presently cut them as soon as they rise, for that the
humor contained in them, not having passage forth, acquires such acrimonie that
it eats the flesh which lies under it, and so causes hollow ulcers: So by
the multitude of causes and increase of matter the inflammation grows greater,
not only for nine days (as the common people prattle) but for far longer
time; also some whiles for less time, if the body be neither repleat with ill
humors, nor plethoricke, and you have speedily resisted the pain and heat by
fit remedies. When the combustion shall be so great Medicines for an Eschar.
as to cause an Eschar, the falling away must be procured by the use of
emollient and hamective medicines, as of greases, oils, butter, with a little
basilicon, or the following ointment.

. Mucagin. psillij. and cydon. an. iiij. gummi, trag. ij. extrahantur cum aqua
parietariae, olei lilliorum iiss. cerae novae q. s. fiat unguentum molle. For
ulcers and excoriations you shall apply fit remedies, which are those that are
without acrimony, such as unguentum album camphoratum, desiccativum rubrum,
unguentum rosatum, made without Venegar, or nutritum composed after this
manner.. lithargyri auri iiij. A description of Nutritum.
ol. rosat. iij. ol. depapaver. iiss. ung. populeon. iiij. camphorae j. fiat
unguentum in mortario plumbeo secundum artem. Or oil of Eggs tempered in a
Leaden mortar. Also unquenched lime many times washed and mixed with unguentum
rosatum, or fresh butter without salt, and some yolks of eggs hard roasted.
Or.. Butyri recent. fine sale, ustulati, and colati vj. vitell. over. iiij.
cerus. lotae in aqualplantag. vel rosar. ss. tutkiae similiter lotae, iij.
plumbi usti, and loti, ij. Misceantur omnia simul, fiat linimentum ut decet. Or
else,. cort. sambuc. viridis, and olei rosat. an. lib. j. bulliant simul lento
igne, postea colentur, and add olei ovorum iiij. pull. ceruss. and tuthiae
praepar. an. j. cerae albae quantum sufficit, fiat unguent. molle secundum
artem. But the quantity of drying medicines may always be increased or
diminished according as the condition of the ulcer shall seem to require. The
following remedies, are fit to assuage pain, as the mucilages of Line seeds,
of the seeds of Psilium, or Flea-wort, and quinces extracted in rosewater, or
fair water, with the addition of a little camphire; and least that it dry too
speedily, add thereto some oil of Roses. Also five or six yoalkes of eggs
mixed with the mucilages of Line seed, the seed of Psilium, and quinces often
renewed, are very powerful to assuage pain, The women which attend upon the
people in the Hospital in Paris, do happily use this medicine against
burns.. Lard. conscisilibram unam; let it be dissolved in Rosewater, then A
remedy for burns commonlyumed in the Hospital of Parts.
strained through a linen cloth, then wash it four times with the water of
hen-bane or some other of that kind, then let it be incorporated with eight
yolks of new laid egg, and so make an ointment. If the smart be great, as
usually it is in these kinds of wounds, the ulcer or sores shall be covered
over with a piece of Tiffany, least you hurt them, by wiping them with somewhat
a course cloth, and so also the matter may easily come forth, and the
medicines easily enter in. Also you must have a care when the eyelids, lips,
sides of the fingers, neck, the armepits, hammes, and bending of the elbow are
burnt, that you suffer not the parts to touch one the other, without the
interposition of some thing; otherwise in continuance of time they would grow
and stick together. Therefore you shall provide for this, by fit placing the
parts, and putting soft linen rags between them. But you must note, that
deep combustions, and such as cause a thicker Eschar, are less painful,
than such as are but only superficiary. The truth hereof you may perceive by
the example Why deep combustions are less painful than superficiarie.
of such as have their limbs cut off, and seared or cauterised with an hot
Iron; for presently after the cauterising is performed they feel little pain.
For this great combustion takes away the sense, the vehemency of the sensory
or thing affecting the sense, depriving the sensitive parts of their sense; As
we have formerly noted when we treated of wounds and pains of the Nerves. The
falling away of such Eschars shall be procured by somewhat a deep
scarification which may pierce even to the quick, that so the humors which lie
under it may enjoy freer perspiration, and emollient medicines may the freelier
enter in, so to soake, moysten and soften the Eschar that it may at length fall
away. The rest of the cure shall be performed by detergent and sarcoticke
medicines, adding to the former ointments mettalline pouders, when the present
necessity shall seem so to requre. But we cannot justly say in what
proportion and quantity each of these may be mixed, by reason of that variety
which is in the temper and consistence of bodies, and the stubbornness and
gentleness of diseases. After a burn the scarre which remains is commonly
rough, unequal, and ill favored: therefore we will tell you in our treatise
of the plague how it must be smoothed, and made even.

I must not here omit to tell you, that Gunpowder set on fire does often so
penetrate Marks or spots made in the face by corns of Gunpowder cannot be
taken away.
into the flesh, not ulcerating nor taking off the skin, and so insinuate and
thoroughly fasten it self into the flesh by its tenuity, that it cannot be
taken or drawn out thence by any remedies, no not by Phoenigmes nor
vesicatoryes, nor scarification, nor ventoses, nor horns, so that the prints
thereof always remain, no other-wise than the marks which the Barbarians
burn in their slaves which cannot afterward be taken away or destroyed by any
Art.

CHAP. X. Of a Gangreene and Mortification.
Certainly the malign symptoms which happen upon wounds, and the solutions
of Continuity are many, caused either by the ignorance or negligence of the
Surgeon; or by the Patient, or such as are about him; or by the malignity
and violence of the disease: but there can happen no greater than a Gangreene,
as that which may cause the mortification and death of the part, and often times
of the whole body; wherefore I have thought good in this place to treat of a
Gangreene, first giving you the definition, then showing you the causes,
signs, prognostickes, and lastly the manner of cure. Now a Gangreene is a
certain disposition, and way to the mortification of the part, which it
seaseth upon, dying by little and little. For when there is a perfect
mortification, it is called by the Greeks Sphacelos, by the Latins Syderatio,
our countrymen Gal. 2. ad Glauconem.
term it the fire of Saint Anthony or Saint Marcellus.

CHAP. XI. Of the general and particular causes of a Gangreene.
THe most general cause of a Gangreene is, when by the dissolution of the
harmony and joint temper of the four first qualities, the part is made The
general cause of a Gangreene.
unapt to receive the faculties, the Natural, Vital, and Animal spirits, by
which it is nourished, lives, feels, and mooves. For a part deprived by any
chance of these, as of the light, languishes and presently dies. Now the
particular causes are many: and these either primitive, or antecedent. The
primitive or external are combustions, caused by things either actually or
potentially burning; The particular causes.
actually as by fire, scalding oil or water, gunpowder fired and the like. But
potentially by acride medicines; as Sublimate, vitrioll, potentiall cauteries
and other things of the same nature: for all these cause a great inflmmation in
the part. But the ambient air may cause great refrigerations, and also a
Gangreene, which caused Cold causes a Gangreene.
Hippocrates lib. de Aer. to call great refrigerations of the brain
Sphacelisme. Therefore the unadvised and unfit application of cold and
narcoticke things, a fracture, luxation and great confusion, too strait
bandages, the biting of beasts, especially of such as are venomous; a puncture
of the Nerves and Tendons, the wounds of the nervous parts and joints,
especially in bodies which are plethorike and repleate with ill humors, great
wounds whereby the vessels which carry life are much cut, whence an aneurisma,
and lastly many other causes, which perturbe that harmony of the four prime
qualities which we formerly mentioned, and so infer a Gangreene.

CHAP. XII. Of the Antecedent causes of a Gangreene.
NOw the antecedent or internal and corporeal causes of a Gangreene, are
plentiful and abundant defluxions of humors hot or cold, falling into How
defluxions cause a Gangreene.
any part. For seeing the faculty of the part is unapt and unable to sustain
and govern such plenty of humors, it comes to pass that the native heat of
the part is suffocated and extinct for want of transpiration. For the Arteries
are hereby so shut or pent up in a strait, that they cannot perform their
motions of contraction and dilatation, by which their native heat is preserved
and tempered. But then the Gangreene is chiefly uncureable when the influxe of
humors An untureable Gangreene.
first takes hold of the bones, and inflammation has its beginning from them.
For in the opinion of Galen; all these kind of affects which may befall the
flesh, are also incident to the bones. Neither only a Phlegmon or
inflammation, but also Lib. de tumor. prater nature.
a rottenness and corruption does often times first invade and begin at the
bones; for thus you may see many who are troubled with the Leprosy and French
disease, to have their skin and flesh whole and fair to look on, whose
bones notwithstanding are corrupt and rotten, and often times are much decayed in
their proper substance. This mischief is caused by a venomous matter, whose
occult quality we can scarce express by any other name than poison inwardly
generated. Often times also there is a certain acrid and stinking filth
generated in flesh with a malign and old ulcer, with which if the bones chance
to be moystned they become foul and at length mortified: of which this saying
of Hippocrates is extant, Ulcers of a Aph. 5, sect. 6.
years continuance or longer, must necessarily foul the bone, and make the
scarres hollow.

Whither also belongs this saying of the same party; An Erysipelas is ill in
the laying bare of a bone. But this flowing venenate and gangrenous matter is
somewhiles hot, as in pestilent Carbuncles, which in the space of four and
twenty hours by causing an escharre, bring the part to mortification:
otherwhiles cold, as we see it diverse times happens in parts which are possessed
with a Gangreene, A Gangreene by effluxe of a cold matter.
no pain, tumor, blackness, nor any other precedent sign of a Gangreene
going before. For John de Vigo says, that happened to a certain gentlewoman
of Genoa under his cure.

I remember the same happened to a certain man in Paris, who supping merrily A
notable History.
and without any sense of pain, went to bed, and suddenly on the night time a
Gangreene seized on both his legs, caused a mortification without tumor,
without inflammation; only his legs were in some places spread over with
livid, black and green spots, the rest of the substance retaining his native
color: yet the sense of these parts was quite dead, they felt cold to the
touch, and if you thrust your lancet into the skin no blood came forth.

A Council of Physicians being called, they thought good to cut the skin,
and flesh lying under it, with many deep scarifications; which when I had
done, there came forth a little black, thick and as it were congealed blood;
wherefore this remedy as also diverse other, prooved to no purpose, for in
conclusion a blackish color coming into his face, and the rest of his body,
he dyed frantic. I leave it to the Readers judgment, whether so speedy, and
suddenly cruel a mischief could proceed from any other than a venenate
matter; yet the hurt of this venenate matter is not peculiar, or by its self.

For often times the force of cold, whether of the encompassing air, or the too
immoderate Simple cold may cause a Gangreene.
use of Narcoticke medicines, is so great, that in a few hours it takes away
life from some of the members, and diverse times from the whole body, as we may
learn by their example, who travel in great snowes, and over mountains
congealed, and horrd with frost and ice. Hence also is the extinction of the
native heat and the spirits residing in the part, and the shutting forth of
that which is sent by nature to aid or defend it. For when as the part is
bound with rigide cold, and as it were frozen, they cannot get nor enter
therein. Neither if they should enter into the part, can they stay long there,
because they can there find no fit habitation, the whole frame and government
of nature being spoiled, and the harmony of the four prime qualities
destroyed, by the offensive dominion of predominant cold their enemy. whereby
it comes to pass, that flying back from whence they first came, they leave
the part destitute and deprived of the benefit of nourishment, life, sense and
motion.

A certain Briton an Hostler in Paris, having drunk soundly after supper,
cast A History.
himself upon a bed; the cold air coming in at a window left open, so took
hold upon one of his legs, that when he waked forth of his sleep, he could
neither stand nor go. Wherefore thinking only that his leg was numbe, they
made him stand to the fire; but putting it very nigh, he burnt the sole of his
foot without any sense of pain, some fingers thickness, for a mortification
had already possessed more than half his leg. Wherefore after he was carried
to the Hospital, the Surgeon who belonged thereto, endeavored by cutting
away of the mortified leg to deliver the rest of the body from imminent
death; but it proved in vain; for the mortification taking hold upon the upper
parts, he dyed within three days, with thoublesome belching and hicketting,
raving, cold sweat, and often swounding. Verily all that same winter, the cold
was so vehement that many in the Hospital of Paris lost the wings or sides of
their nose-thrills, seized upon by a mortification without any putrefaction.

But you must note, that the Gangreene which is caused by cold, does first and
principally seize upon the parts most distant from the heart, the fountain of
heat, What parts are usually taken by a Gangreene occasioned by cold.
to wit, the feet and legs; as also such as are cold by nature, as gristly
parts, such as the nose and ears.

CHAP. XIII. Of the signs of a Gangreene.
THe signs of a Gangreene which inflammation or a phlegmon has caused, are
pain and pulsation without manifest cause, the sudden Sect. 2. lib. de fract.
changing of the fyery and red color into a livid or black, as Hippocrates
shows where he speaks of the Gangreene of a broken heel. I would have you
here to understand the pulsificke pain not only to be that which is caused by
the quicker motion of the Arteries, but that heavy and What a pulsificke pain
is.
pricking which the contention of the unaturall heat does produce by raising a
thick cloud of vapors from these humors which the Gangreene sets upon. The
signs of a Gangreene caused by cold, are, if suddenly a sharp pricking and
burning pain assaileth the part; for penetrabile frigus adurit (i) peircing
cold does burn: if a Sgnes of a Gangreene proceeding of cold.
shining redness as if you had handled snow, presently turn into a livid
color; if in stead of the accidental heat which was in the part, presently
cold and numbenesse shall possess it, as if it were shook with a quartain
fever. Such cold if it shall proceed so far as to extinguish the native
heat, brings a mortification upon the Gangreene; also often times convulsions
and violent shaking of the whole body, wondrous troublesome to the brain and
the fountains of life. But you shall know Signs of Gangreenes proceeding from
strait bandages, or ligatures, etc.
Gangreenes caused by too straight bandages, by fracture, luxation, and
contufion, by the hardness which the attraction and flowing down of the
humors has caused; little pimples or blisters spreading or rising upon the
skin by reason of the great heat, as in a combustion; by the weight of the
part occasioned through the defect of the spirits not now sustaining the burden
of the member; and lastly from this, the pressing of your finger upon the part,
it will leave the print thereof as in an aedema; and also from this, that the
skin comes from the flesh without any manifest cause.

Now you shall know Gangreenes arising from a bite, puncture, aneurisma, or
wound in plethoricke and ill bodies, and in a part endued with most Signs of a
Gangreene occasioned by a bite, puncture, etc.
exquisite sense, almost by the same signs as that which was caused by
inflammation.

For by these and the like causes, there is a far greater defluxion and
attraction of the humors than is fit, when the perspiration being intercepted
and the passages stopped, the native heat is oppressed and suffocated. But this
I would admonish the young Surgeon, that when by the forementioned signs
he shall find the Gangreene present, that he do not defer the amputation
for that he finds some sense, or small motion yet residing in the part.

For often times the affected parts are in this case moved not by the motion of
the whole muscle, but only by means, that the head of the muscle is not yet
taken with the Gangreene: with mooving it self by its own strength, also
mooves its proper and continued tendon and tail though dead already; wherefore
it is ill to make any delay in such causes.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Prognostickes in Gangreenes.
HAving given you the signs and causes to know a Gangreene; it is fit we also
give you the prognosticke. The fearcenesse and malignity thereof is so great,
that unless it be most speedily withstood the part it self will dye, and also
take hold of the neighboring parts by the contagion of its mortification:
which has been the cause that a Gangreene by many has been termed an
Esthiomenos. For such corruption creepes out like poison, and like fire Why a
Gangreene is called Esshiomenos.
eats gnawes and destroys all the neighboring parts, until it has spread
over the whole body. For as Hippocrates writes, Lib. de vulner. capitis; Mortui
and viventis nulla est proportio (i) There is no proportion between the dead
and living. Wherefore it is fit presently to separate the dead from the living;
for unless that be done, the living will dye, by the contagion of the dead. In
such as are at the point of death The quick impatient of the dead.
a cold sweat flows over all their bodies: they are troubled with ravings, and
watchings, belchings, and hicketing molest them; and often swoundings invade
them, by reason of the vapors abundantly and continually raised from the
corruption of the humors and flesh, and so carried to the bowels and
principal parts, by the Veins, Nerves, and Arteries. Wherefore when you have
foretold these things to the friends of the patient; then make haste to fall to
your work.

CHAP. XV. Of the general cure of a Gangreene.
THe Indications of curing Gangreenes are to be drawn from their differences,
Various Indications of curing of a Gangreene.
for the cure must be diversely instituted according to the essence and
magnitude. For some Gangreenes possess the whole member; others only some
portion thereof; some are deep; othersome superficial only. Also you must
have regard to the temper of the body. For soft and delicate bodies, as of
children, women, Eunuchs, and idle persons, require much milder medicines,
than those who by nature and custom, or vocation of life, are more strong and
hardy, such as husbandmen, laborers, mariners, huntsmen, potters, and men of
the like nature who live sparingly and hardly. Neither must you have respect to
the body in general, but also to the parts affected; for the fleshy and
musculous parts, are different from the solid, as the Nerves and joints, What
parts soonest taken hold of by a Gangreene.
or more solid, as the Vertebrae. Now the hot and moist parts, as the
Privities, mouth, womb, and fundament, are easilyer and sooner taken hold of
by putrefaction; wherefore we must use more speedy means to help them.
Wherefore if the Gangreene be cheefely occasioned from an internal cause, he
must have a diet prescribed for the decent and fitting use of the six things
not natural. If the body be plethoricke, or full of ill humors; you must
purge, or let blood by the advice of a Physician. Against the ascending up of
vapors to the noble parts, the heart must cheefely be strengthened with
Treacle dissolved in Sorrel, or Carduus water; with a bole of Mithridate, the
conserves of Roses and Buglosse; and with Opiates made for the present purpose
according to Art; this following Apozeme shall be outwardly applied to the
region of the A cordial Epithemae.
heart.. aquae rosar. and nenuphar. an. iiij. aceti scillitici j. corallorum,
santalorum alborum and rubrorum, rosar. rub. inpulver. radactarum, and spodij,
an. j. mithrid. and theriacae, an. ijss. trochiscorum de Caphura, ij. flor.
cordial. in pollin. redactarum. p. ij. croci j. ex omnibus in pollinem
redactis, fiat epithema. Which may be applied upon the region of the heart with
a scarlet clot or sponge. These are usually such as happen in the cure of every
Gangreene.

CHAP. XVI. Of the particular cure of a Gangreene.
THe cure of a Gangreene, caused by the too plentiful and violent defluxion of
humors suffocating the native heat, by reason of great Plegmons, is performed
by evacuating and drying up the humors, which putrify by The cure of a
Gangreene made by inflammation.
delay and collection in the part. For this purpose scarifications and
incisions, great, indifferent, small, deep and superficiary according to the
condition of the Gangreene, are much commended; that so the burdened part may
enjoy the benefit of perspiration; and the contained humors, of difflation, or
evacuation of their footy excrements. Let incisions be made when the affect is
great, deep in, and near to mortification. But scarifications may be used
when the part first begins to putrefie; for the greatness of the remedy must
answer in proportion to that of the disease. Wherefore if it penetrate to the
bones, it will be fit, to cut the skin and flesh with many and deep
incisions, with an incision knife made for that purpose, yet take heed of
cutting the larger nerves and vessels, unless they be wholly putrified, for if
they be not yet putrified, you shall make your incisions in the spaces between
them; if the Gangreene be less, we must rest satisfied with only scarifying
it. When the scarifications and incisions are made, we must suffer much blood
to flow forth, that so the conjunct matter may be evacuated. Then must we
apply and put upon it such medicines as may by heating, drying, resolving,
clensing and opening, amend and correct the putrefaction, and by peircing to
the bottom may have power to overcome the virulencie already impact in the
part. For this purpose Lotions made of the lie of the Ashes of fig tree, or
Oak wherein Lupines have bin thoroughly boiled are good. Or you may with less
trouble make a medicine with salt water, wherein you may dissolve Aloes and
Aegyptiacum, adding in the conclusion a little Aqua vitae; for aqua vitae and
calcined vitrioll are singular medicines for a Gangreene. Or,. acet. opimi lb.
j. mel. ros. iiij. syrup. acetosi iij. salis com. v. bulliant simul, add aq.
vitae. lb. s. Let the part be frequently washed with this medicine, for The
description of an Egyptiacum.
it has much force to repress Gangreenes. After your Lotion, lay Aegyptiacum
for a Liniment and put it into the incisions; for there is no medicine, more
powerful against putrefaction, for by causing an Eschar, it separates the
putride flesh from the sound. But we must not in this kind of affect expect
that the putride flesh may of it self fall from the sound; but rather cut off
with your incision knife or sissers, whatsoever thereof you can, and then put
to it Egyptiacum as often as need shall require. The knowledge hereof may be
acquired from the color, smell, and sensiblenesse of the flesh its self. The
description of the Egyptiacum, whose wondrous effects I have often tried in
these causes, is this.. floris aris, aluminis roch. mellis com. an. iij. aceti
acerrimi v. salis com. j. vitrioli romans ss. sublimatipul. ij bulliant omnia
simul ad ignem, fiat unguent. If the force of the putrefaction in the part be
not so great, a weaker Aegyptiacum may serve. When you have put in the
Aegyptiacum, then presently lay the following Cataplasme thereupon. For it
hinders putrefaction, resolves, cleanses and dryes up the virulent sanies, and
by the dry subtlety of the parts penetrates into the member, strengthens it,
and asswages the pain.. farin. fabar. hor dei orobi, lent. lupin. an. lb. s.
sal. com. mellis rosat. an. iiij. succi absinth. marrub. an. iiss. aloes,
mastiches, myrrhae, and aqua A strigents that may be used in cure of a
Gangreene.
vit. an. ij, oxymelitis simpl. quantum sufficit; fiat Cataplasma molle
secundum artem; Somewhat higher than the part affected, apply this following
astringent, or defensitive, to hinder the flowing down of the humors into the
part, and the rising up of the vapors from the putride part into the whole
body.. oleirosati, and myrtill. an 4. succi plantag. solani, sempervivi, an.
ij. album ovorum 5. boli armeni, te^rae sigillata subtiliter pulver^satorum,
an. j. oxycrati quantum sufficit, misce ad usum dictum. But these medicines
must be often renewed. If the grief be so stubborn that it will not yield to
the described remedies, we must come to stronger, to wit, Cauteries, after
whose application, Galen bids to put upon it the juice of a Leeke with Gal. 2.
ad Glauconem.
salt beaten and dissolved therewith, for that this medicine has a peircing
and drying faculty, and consequently to hinder putrefaction. But if you
prevail nothing with Cauteries, then must you come to the last remedy and
refuge, that is, the amputation of the part; For according to Hippocrates, to
extreme diseases exquisitly Aphor. 6. sect. 11.
extreme remedies are best to be applied. Yet first be certain of the
mortification of the part; for it is no little or small matter to cut off a
member without a cause.

Therefore I have thought it fit to set down the signs, whereby you may know
a perfect and absolute mortification.

CHAP. XVII. The signs of a perfect Necrosis or Mortification.
YOu shall certainly know that a Gangreene is turned into a Sphacell, or
mortification, and that the part is wholly and thoroughly dead, if it look of a
black color, and be colder than stone to your touch, the cause of which
coldness is not occasioned by the frigiditie of the air; if there be a great
softness of the part, so that if you press it with your finger it rises not
again, but retains the print of the impression. If the skin come from the
flesh lying under it; if so great and strong a smell exhale (especially in an
ulcerated Sphacell) that the standers by cannot endure or suffer it; if a
sanious moisture, viscide, green or blackish flow from thence; if it be quite
destitute of sense and motion, whether it be pulled, beaten, crushed, pricked,
burnt, or cut off. Here I must admonish the young Surgeon, that he be not
deceived concerning the loss or privation of the sense of the part.

For I know very many deceived as thus; the patients pricked on that part would
say they felt much pain there. But that feeling is often deceiptfull, as that
which A note concerning the unsensiblenes of the part.
proceeds rather from the strong apprehension of great pain which formerly
reigned in the part, than from any faculty of feeling as yet remaining. A most
clear and manifest argument of this false and deceitful sense appears after
the amputation of the member; for a long while after they will complain of the
part which is cut away.

Verily it is a thing wondrous strange and prodigious, and which will scarce be
A wondrous symptom.
credited, unless by such as have seen with their eyes, and heard with their
ears the patients who have many months after the cutting away of the Leg,
grievous, ly complained that they yet felt exceeding great pain of that Leg so
cut of. Wherefore have a special care least this hinder your intended
amputation; a thing pitiful, yet absolutely necessary for to preserve the
life of the patient and all the rest of his body, by cutting away of that
member which has all the signs of a Sphacell and perfect mortification; for
otherwise the neglected fire will in a moment spread over all the body, and
take away all hope of remedy; for thus Hippocrates wishes: Sect. 7. Lib. 6.
Epidem.
That Sections, Vstions, and Terebrations must be performed as soon as need
requires.

CHAP. XVIII. Where Amputation must be made.
IT is not sufficient to know that Amputation is necessary; but also you must
learn in what place of the dead part, it must be done, and herein the The
controversy decided.
wisdom and judgment of the Surgeon is most apparent. Art bids to take
hold of the quick, and to cut off the member in the sound flesh; but the same
art wishes us, to preserve whole that which is sound, as much as in us lies. I
will show thee by a familiar example how thou may carry thy self in these
difficulties. Let us suppose, that the foot is mortified even to the anckle;
here you must attentively mark in what place you must cut it off. For unless
you take hold of the quick flesh in the amputation, or if you leave any
putrefaction, you profit nothing by amputation, for it will creep and spread
over the rest of the body. It befits Physic ordained for the preservation of
mankind, to defend from the iron or instrument and all manner of injury, that
which enjoyes life and health. Wherefore you shall cut off as little of that
which is sound as you possibly can; yet so that you rather cut away that which
is quick, than leave behind any thing that is perished, according to the
advice of Celsus. Yet often times the commodity of the action of the Lib. 7. Cap.
33.
rest of the part, and as it were a certain ornament thereof, changes this
counsel. For if you take these two things into your consideration they will
induce you in this propounded case and example, to cut off the Leg some five
fingers breadth under the knee. For so the patient may more fitly use the rest
of his Leg and with less trouble, that is, he may the better go on a
wooden Leg; for otherwise, if according to the common rules of Art, you cut
it off close to that which is perished, the patient will be forced with trouble
to use three Legs in stead or two.

For I so knew Captain Francis Clerk, when as his foot was stricken off with
an An observable History.
iron bullet shot forth of a man of war, and afterward recovered and healed
up, he was much troubled and wearied with the heavy and unprofitable burden of
the rest of his Leg. wherefore though whole and sound he caused the rest
thereof to be cut off, some five fingers breadth below his knee; and verily
he uses it with much more ease and facility than before in performance of any
motion. We must do otherwise if any such thing happen in the Arm; that is,
you must cut off a little of the sound part as you can. For the actions of the
Legs much differ from these of the arms, and chiefly in this that the body
restsnot, neither is carried upon the arms, as it is upon the feet and Legs.

CHAP. XIX. How the section or amputation must be performed.
THe first care must be of the patients strength, wherefore let him be
nourished with meats of good nutriment, easy digestion, and such as generate
many spirits; as with the yolks of Eggs, and bread tosted and dipped in Sack
or Muskedine. Then let him be placed, as is fit, and drawing the muscles
upwards toward the sound parts, let them be tied with a strait ligature a
little above that place of the member which is to be cut off, with a strong and
broad fillet like that which women usually bind up their hair withal; This
ligature has a The Ligature of the part.
threefold use; the first is, that it hold the muscles drawn up together with
the skin, so that retiring back presently after the performance of the work,
they may cover the ends of the cut bones, and serve them in stead of boulsters
or pillowes when they are healed up, and so suffer with less pain the
compression in susteining the rest of the body; besides also by this means the
wounds are the sooner healed and cicatrized; for by how much more flesh or
skin is left upon the ends of the boner, by so much they are the sooner
healed and cicatrized. The second is, for that it prohibites the flux of blood
by pressing and shutting up the veins and arteries. The third is, for that it
much dulls the sense of the part by stupefying it; the animal spirits by the
strait compression being hindered from passing in by the Nerves: Wherefore when
you have made your ligature, cut the flesh even to the bone with a sharp and
well cutting incision knife, or with a crooked knife, such as is here expressed.

A crooked knife fit for dismembring; or a dismembring knife.


Now you must note, that there usually lies between the bones, a portion of
certain muscles, which you cannot easily cut with a large incision or
dismembring A caution to be observed.
knife; wherefore you must carefully divide it and separate it wholly from the
bone, with an instrument made neately like a crooked incision knife. I thought
good to advertise thee hereof; for if thou should leave any thing besides
the bone to be divided by the saw, you would put the patient to excessive
pain in the performance thereof; for soft things as flesh tendons and
membranes, cannot be easily cut with a saw. Therefore when you shall come to
the bared bone, all the other parts being wholly cut asunder and divided, you
shall nimbly divide it with a little saw about some foot and three inches
long, and that as near to the sound flesh as you can. And then you must smooth
the front of the bone which the saw has made rough.

The Figure of such a Saw.


CHAP. XX. How to stanch the bleeding when the member is taken off.
WHen you have cut off and taken away the member, let it bleed a little
according to the strength of the patient, that so the rest of the part may
afterward be less obnoxious to inflammation and other symptoms; Then let the
Veins and Arteries be bound up as speedily and straightly as you can; that so
the course of the flowing blood may be stopped and wholly stayed. Which may be
done by taking hold of the vessels with your Crows beak, whereof this is the
figure.

The Crows beak fit for to draw the vessels forth of the flesh wherein they
lie hid, that so they may be tied or bound fast.


The ends of the vessels lying hid in the flesh, must be taken hold of and
drawn with this How to draw forth the vessels and bind them.
instrument forth of the muscles whereinto they presently after the amputation
withdrew themselves, as all parts are still used to withdraw themselves toward
their originalls. In performance of this work, you need take no great care,
if you together with the vessels comprehend some portion of the neighboring
parts, as of the flesh, for hereof will ensue no harm; but the vessels will
so be consolidated with the more ease, than if they being bloodlesse parts
should grow together by themselves. To conclude, when you have so drawn them
forth, bind them with a strong double thread.

CHAP. XXI. How after the blood is stanched, you must dress the wounded member.
WHen you have tied the Vessels, loose you Ligature which you made above the
place of amputation; then draw together the lips of the How the lips of the
dismembered part are to be joined together.
wound with four stitches made acrosse, having taken good hold of the flesh;
for thus you shall draw over the bones that part of the skin and cut muscles
drawn upwards before the amputation, and cover them as close as you can, that
so the air may the less come at them, and that so the wound may be the more
speedily agglutinated. But when we say, draw together the lips of the wound
with four sti^ches, you must not so understand it, as that you must endeavor,
to draw them so close as to touch each other, for that is impossible; for the
stitches would sooner break out, and so the part would lie bare. Wherefore it
will be sufficient to draw them indifferent close together, that so you may
suffer the skin and flesh thereunder to enjoy its former liberty which it
possessed before the drawing up, and so in fine by natures assistance, the wound
may be the more easily agglutinated.

CHAP. XXII. How you must stop the bleeding, if any of the bound up vessels
chance to get loose.
THe business hitherto being performed as we said, if peradventure it happen
that any bandage of any of the vessels be unloosed; then must you again bind
the member with that kind of Ligature which you did before the amputation
thereof. Or else, which is better, more easily and less painful, let your
servant taking hold of the member with both his hands, pressing his fingers
strait, stop the passage of the loosed vessel, for so he may stanch the
bleeding. Then let the worke-master take a needle some four fingers long,
square, and having sharp edges, drawing after it a three or four doubled
strong thread. With this let him bind the vessel after the following manner.
Let him thrust his needle on the outside into the flesh, some half fingers
breadth from the loosed vessel until he come to the end thereof, then let him
put it about it, and bring it back again, but so that there be no more than
the space of a fingers breadth between the going in, and coming forth of the
needle. In this, space let him put a linen ragge three or four times doubled,
and thereupon bind some what strait the two ends of the thread together. For so
he shall hinder the knot from hurting the flesh which lies under it in the
bindings, and also add strength thereto. For so the bound up orifice of the
vessel will in short space be agglutinated to the adjoining flesh, and The
Heamorrhagie of small vessels is not to be regarded
that so firmly, that there has never been seen, any one drop of blood to
have flowed from a vessel so bound up. But if the blood which flows forth
proceed from any small vessel, you must not use this suture and ligature, nor
make any such great matter thereof; for it will quickly be stanched by the only
application of Astringents presently to be mentioned.

CHAP. XXIII. How to perform the residue of the cure of the amputated member.
NOw must we show what medicines are fitting to be applied after the amputation
of a member; which are Emplasticks, as these which exceedingly conduce to
green wounds. As. boli arm. iiij. farin. vol. iij. An emplastick medicine.
picis, resinae, an. ij. pulverisentur omnia subtiliss. and simul mixtis fiat
pulvis; herewith let the wound be strewed, and lay thereupon dry Lint; but let
the following repercussive or defensitive be applied to the member.

. Album ovorum vj. boli arm. sang. drac. gypsi, terrae sigill. aloes,
mastiches, gallar. combust. A repercus^ive.
an. ij. in pollinem redigantur omnia, and been agitentur, addendo olei rosarum
and myrtil. an. j. fiat defensitivum ad formam mellis. This ointment must be
applied upon stoopes dipped in Oxycrate, and that so that it may not only
cover the cut member, but also be spread further and cover the neighboring
parts; as when the Leg is cut off, it must be laid upon the joint, and
spread higher than the knee, some four fingers upon the thigh; for it has not
only a repercussive faculty, but it also strengthens the part, hinders
defluxion by tempering the blood, aswaging pain, and hindering inflammation. It
will also be good to moisten your double clothes and bandages in Oxycrate; then
must you place the member in an indifferent posture upon a pillow stuffed with
oaten husks or chafe, Stagges hair, or wheat branne. How to place the
member and how often to dress it.
It must not be stirred after the first dressing (unless great necessity urge)
for four days in winter, but somewhat sooner in summer. For the ligatures
wherewith the vessels are bound, they must not be loosed, or otherwise taken
away, before the mouths of the vessels are covered with their glue or flesh,
lest by too much haste you cause a new flux of blood. This agglutination will
be performed by applying refrigerating, astringent, and emplasticke medicines,
such as this following powder.

. boli arm. farin. hord. picis. res. gypsi, an. iiij. Aloes, nucum cup. cort.
granat. an. j. An emplastick powder.
incorporentur omnia simul, fiat pulvis subtilis: herewith let the whole ulcer
be strewed over for three or four days space; which being ended, let only
the seats of the vessels be poudred therewith, and that for eight or ten
days, so that we need no further doubt of the agglutination of the vessels.
In the mean space let the digestive be applied to the rest of the Ulcer until
it be come to suppuration; for then you shall give over your digestive, and
betake you to detersive and mundificative medicines: As

. terebinth. ven. lotae in aqua vitae vj. mellis ros. colati iiij. succi
plan^ag. Apij, Detersives.
centaur, minoris, an. ij. bulliant omnia simul usque ad consumptionem succorum
auferantur abigne, addendo farinae fab. and hord. an. j. theriac. Gal. ss.
aloes, myrrhae, aristoloch. an. iij. croci j. fiat mundificativum.

But seeing the case stands so that the Patients imagine they have their
members yet entire, and yet do complain thereof (which I imagine to come to
pass, for Why after dismembring the patients complain of pain as if the part
were yet remaining on.
that, the cut nerves retire themselves toward their original, and thereby
cause a pain like to convulsions; for as Galen writes in his book, De motu
musculorum, That contraction is the true and proper action of a nerve and
muscle: and again, extension is not so much an action as a motion:) now we
must endeavor to give remedy to this symptom. Which may be done by anointing
the spine of the back and all the affected part with the following Liniment,
which is very powerful against Convulsions, the Palsy, numnesse, and all cold
affects of the nervous bodies.

salviae, chamaepytheos, majoranae, rorismar. menth. rutae, lavendulae, an. m.
j. flor. cham^mel. An ointment for the spine of the back against all affects
of the nerves.
melilot. summit. aneth. and hyperici, an. p. ij. baccarum lauri and juniperi
an. ij. radicis pyrethri ij. mastic. assae odorat. an. iss. terebinth. venet
lb. j. olei lumbr. aneth. catell, an. vj. olei terebinth. iij. axung. hum. ij.
croci j. vini albi ^doriferi lib. j. cerae quantum sufficit, contundenda
contundantur pulverisanda pulverisentur, deinde macerentur omnia in vino per
noctem, postea coquantur cum oleis and axungia praedictis in vase duplici, fiat
linimentum secundum artem, in fine add aquae vitae iiij. Besides, in dressing
these wounds, the Surgeon must use diligence to procure the falling away of
the ends or scalls of the How to procure the falling away of the ends of the
bones.
bones, which the saw and the appulse of the air never before coming hereto,
have tainted; which may be done by applying to their ends actual cauteries,
that is, hot irons, in using of which you must have a special care that you
touch not the sensible parts with fire; neither must the bones themselves be
forcibly plucked off, but gently moved by little and little, so that you shall
think you and the patient have exceedingly well performed your parts if they
fall away at the thirtyeth day after the Amputation. All these things being
performed, you shall hinder the growth of proud flesh with the cathaereticks,
such as are burnt vitrioll, the powder of Mercury, Cathaereticks.
and other things, amongst which is Alome burnt and poudered, which is
excellent in these kind of wounds whether by its self or mixed with others.
You shall use these and such like, even unto the perfect agglutination and
cicatrization of the wound, and you may of your self devise other things, such
as these, as occasion shall offer its self.

CHAP. XXIIII. What just occasion moved the Author to devise this new form of
remedy, to stanch the blood after the amputation of a member; and to forsake
the common way used almost by all Chirurgions; which is, by application of
actual cauteries.
VErily I confess, I formerly have used to stanch the bleeding of members
after amputation, after another manner than that I have a little before
mentioned. Whereof I am ashamed, and agreived; But what should I do? I had
observed my masters whose method I intended to follow, always to do the
like; who thought themselves singularly well appointed to stanch a flux of
blood, when they were furnished with various store of hot Irons and causticke
medicines, Hot Irons not to be used.
which they would use to the dismembered part, now one, then another, as they
themselves thought meet. Which thing cannot be spoken, or but thought upon
without great horror, much less acted. For this kind of remedy could not but
bring great and tormenting pain to the patient, seeing such fresh wounds made
in the quick and sound flesh are endewed with exquisite sense. Neither can any
causticke be applied to nervous bodies, but that this horrid impression of the
fire will be presently communicated to the inward parts, whence horrid
symptoms ensue, and often times death it self. And verily of such as were
burnt, the third part scarce ever recovered, and that with much ado, for that
combust wounds difficultly come to cicatrization; for by this burning are
caused cruel pains, whence a Fever, Convulsion, and often times other
accidents worse than these. Add hereunto, that when the eschar fell away, often
times a new haemorrhagye ensued, for stanching whereof they were forced to use
other causticke and burning Instruments. Neither did these good men know any
other course; so by this repetition there was great loss and waste made of the
fleshy and nervous substance of the part. Through which occasion the bones were
laid bare, whence many were out of hope of cicatrization, being forced for the
remainder of their wretched life to carry about an ulcer upon that part which
was dismembered; which also took away the opportunity of fitting or putting too
of an artificial leg or arm in stead of that which was taken off.

Wherefore I must earnestly entreat all Chirurgions, that leaving this old,
and too too cruel way of healing, they would embrace this new, which I think
was taught me by the special favor of the sacred Deity; for I learnt it not
of my masters, nor of any other, neither have I at any time found it used by
any. Only I have read in Galen, that there was no speedier remedy for
stanching of blood, than Lib. 5. Meth.
to bind the vessels through which it flowed toward their roots, to wit, the
Liver and Heart.

This precept of Galen, of binding and sowing the Veins and Arteries in the
new wounds, when as I thought it might be drawn to these which are made by the
amputation of members, I attempted it in many; yet so that at first in my
budding practice thereof, I always had my cauteries and hot Irons in a
readiness, that if any thing happened otherwise then I expected in this my new
work, I might fetch succor from the ancient practice, until at length
confirmed by the happy experience of almost an infinite number of particulars,
I bid eternally adieu, to all hot Irons and cauteries which were commonly used
in this work. And I think it fit that Chirurgions do the like. For antiquity
and custom in such things as are performed by Art, ought not to have any sway,
authority or place contrary to reason, as they often times have in civil
affairs; wherefore let no man say unto us, that the Ancients have always done
thus.

CHAP. XXV. The practice of the former precepts is declared, together with a
memorable history of a certain soldier, whose arm was taken off at the Elbow.
I Think it fit to confirm by an example the prescribed method of curing a
Gangreene and Mortification. Whilst I was Surgeon to the A History:
Marshall of Montejan at Turin, a certain common soldier received a wound on
his wrest with a musket bullet, by which the bones and tendons being much
broken, and the nervous bodies cruelly torue, there followed a Gangreen, and at
length a mortification even to the Elbow; besides also an inflammation seized
upon the middle part of his Chest, and there was as it were a certain
disposition to a Gangreene, whereby it followed that he was painefully and
dangerously troubled with belchings, hickettings, watchings, unquietness and
frequent swoundings, which occasioned many Chirurgions to leave him as
desperate. But it so it fell out, that I overcome by his friends entreaty,
undertook the cure of this wretched person, destitute of all humane help.
Wherefore knowing the mortification by its signs, I cut off the arm by the
elbow as speedily as I could, making first the ligature, where of I made
mention; I say I took it off not with a saw, but only Dismembring at a joint.
with an incision knife, cutting in sunder the ligaments which held the bones
together, because the sphacell was not passed the joint of the Elbow. Neither
ought this section to be accounted strange, which is made in a joint; for
Hippocrates Sect. 4. lib. de Art.
much commends it, and says that it is easily healed, and that there is
nothing to be feared therein besides swounding, by reason of the pain caused
by cutting the common tendons and ligaments. But such incision being made, the
former Ligature could not hinder, but much blood must flow from thence, by
reason of the large vessels that run that way. Wherefore I let the blood to
flow plentifully so to disburden the part, and so afterward to free it from
the danger and fear of inflammation and a Gangreene; then presently I stanched
the blood with an hot Iron, for as yet I knew no other course. Then gently
loosing the Ligature I scarifie that part of the brawn of the Arm which was
Gangreenated, with many and deep incisions, shunning and not touching the
inner part, by reason of the multitude of the large vessels and Nerves which
run that way; then I presently applied a cautery to some of the incisions,
both to stanch the bleeding, and draw forth the virulent sanies which remained
in the part. And then I assailed and overcame the spreading putrefaction by
putting and applying the formerly prescribed medicines; I used all sorts of
restrictive medicines, to stay the inflammation of the Chest; I also applied
Epithema's to the region of the heart, and gave him cordial potions and boles,
neither did I desist from using them until such time as his belching,
hicketting and swoundings had left him. Whilst I more attentively intended
these things, another mischeife assailes my patient, to wit, Convulsions, and
that not through any fault of him or me, but by the naughtiness of the place
wherein he lay, which was in a Barn every where full of chinkes and open on
every side, and then also it was in the midst of winter raging with frost and
snow and all sorts of cold; neither had he any fire or other thing necessary
for preservation of life, to lessen these injuries of the Air and place; Now
his joints were contracted, his teeth set, and his mouth and face were drawn
awry, when as I pitying his case made him to be carried into the neighboring
Stable which smoaked withmuch horse dung, and bringing in fire in two
chafendishes, I presently anointed his neck and all the spine of his back,
shunning the parts of the Chest, with liniments formerly described for
convulsions; then straight way I wrapped him in a warm linen cloth, and
buried him even to the neck in hot dung, putting a little fresh straw about
him; when he Burying in hot horse dung helps Convulsions.
had stayed there some three days, having at length a gentle scowring or flux
of his belly, and plentiful sweat, he begun by little and little to open his
mouth and teeth which before were set and close shut. Having got by this means
some opportunity better to do my business, I opened his mouth as much as I
pleased, by putting this following Instrument between his Teeth.

A Dilater made for to open the mouth and Teeth by the means of a screw in the
end thereof.


Now drawing out the Instrument I kept his mouth open by putting in a willow
stick on each side thereof, that so I might the more easily feed him with
meats soon made, as with Cowes milk and rear eggs, until he had recovered
power to eat, the convulsion having left him. He by this means freed from
the Convulsion, I then again begun the cure of his arm, and with an actual
cautery sear the end of the bone, so to dry up the perpetual affluxe of
corrupt matter.

It is not altogether unworthy of your knowledge, that he said, how that he
was wondrously delighted by the application of such actual cauteries, a
certain tickling running the whole length of the arm by reason of the gentle
diffusion of the heat by applying the causticke; which same thing I have
observed in many others; especially in such as lay upon the like occasion in
the Hospital of Paris. After this cauterizing there fell away many and large
scalles of the bone, the freer appulse of the air than was fit making much
thereto; besides when there was place for fomentation, with the decoction of
red Rose leaves, A fomentation for a Convulsion.
Wormwood, Sage, Bay leaves, flowers of Chamomile, Melilote, Dill* I so
comforted the part that I also at the same time by the same means drew and
took away the virulent Sanies, which firmly adhered to the flesh and bones.
Lastly, it came to pass, that by Gods assistance, these means I used, and my
careful diligence, he at length recovered. Wherefore I would admonish the
young Surgeon, that he never account any so desperate, as to give him for
lost, content to have let him go with prognostics; for as an ancient Doctor
writes; That as in Monsters or miracles in diseases.
Nature, so in diseases there are also Monsters.

The end of the Twelfth Book.
OF ULCERS, FISTVLA'S, AND Haemorrhoides. THE THIRTEENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the nature, causes, and differences of Ulcers.
HAving already handled and treated of the nature, difference, causes, signs
and cure of fresh and blood wounds, reason and The diverse acceptions of an
Ulcer.
order seem to require that we now speak of Ulcers; taking our beginning from
the ambiguity of the name. For according to Hippocrates, the name of Ulcer most
generally taken Sent. 34. sect. 3. lib. defract.
may signify all or any solution of Continuity; In which sense it is read,
that all pain is an Ulcer. Generally, for a wound and Ulcer properly so
called; as appears by his Book, de Vlceribus. Properly, as when he says, it
is a sign of death when an Ulcer is dried up through an Atrophia, or defect of
nourishment. We Sect. 1. pr^g.
have here determined to speak of an Ulcer in this last and proper
signification. And according thereto we define an Ulcer to be the solution of
Continuity in a soft What an Ulcer properly is.
part, and that not bloody, but ^ordide and unpure, flowing with qui^^ure,
Sauies or any such like corruption, associated with one or more affects against
nature, which hinder the healing and agglutination thereof; or that we may give
you it in fewer words according to Galens opinion; An ulcer is a solution of
Continuity, caused by Lib. de conflict Artis^ap. 6. The internal causes.
Erosion. The causes of Ulcers are either internal or external. The internal
are through the default of humors peccant in quality rather than in quantity,
or else in both, and so making erosion in the skin and softer parts by their
acrimonie and malignitie; Now these things happen either by naughty and
irregular diet, or by the ill disposition of the entrails, sending forth and
emptying into the habit of the body this their ill disposure. The external
causes are, the excess of cold seazing upon any part, especially more remote
from the fountain of heat, whence follows pain, The external causes.
whereunto succeeds an attraction of humors and spirits into the part, and the
corruption of these so drawn thither by reason of the debility or extinction
of the native heat in that part, whence lastly ulceration proceeds. In this
number of external causes may be ranged, a stroke, contusion, the application
of sharp and acrid medicines, as causticks, burns; as also impure contagion,
as appears by the virulent ulcers acquired by the filthy copulation or too
familiar conversation of such as have the French disease. How many and what the
differences of Ulcers are, you may see here described in this following Scheme.

A Table of the differences of Ulcers.
An Ulcer is an impure solution of continuity in a soft part, flowing with
filth and matter or other corruption, whereof there are two chief differences,
for one Is simple and solitary without complication of any other affect against
nature and this varies in differences, either Proper which are usually drawn
from three things, to wit figur. whence one Ulcer is called Round or circular.
Sinuous, and variously spread. Right or oblique. Cornered, as triangular
Quantity, and that either according to their Length; whence an Ulcer is long,
short, in different. Breadth; whence an Ulcer is broad, narrow indifferent.
Profundity; whence an Ulcer is deep, superficiary, indifferent.
Equality or inequality, which consists, In those differences of dimensions
whereof we last treated, I say in length, breadth and profundity, wherein they
are either alike or of the same manner, or else unlike and so of a different
manner.

Or common and accidental, and these drawn, either From their time; whence an
Ulcer is termed new, old, of short or long cure and ^uration. From their
appearance; whence one is called an apparent Ulcer; another a hidden and occult
Ulcer. From their manner of generation; as if it be made by a heavy, brusing,
cutting, pricking or corroding thing; whence a cut, torn and mixed Ulcer. From
their site; whence an Ulcer before, behind, above, below, in the head, tail,
or belly of a Muscle. From that part it seazes upon, whence an ulcer in the
flesh and skin, or feeding upon the gristles or bones, such as these of the
nose, the palate of the mouth, and ears. From other common accidents; whence a
Telephian Ulcer; that is, such an Ulcer as Telephus had. A Chironian, which
needs the hand and art of Chiron. A Canckrous which resembles a Cancer.

Is compound and many and various ways complicated, as With the cause, whence
an Ulcer Is Cacochymicke, Catarrhoicke or venenate, that is, with a Cachochymia
or Repletion of ill humors, a Catarrhe, or poison cherishes or feeds.
With the disease, as from Distemper, whether simple or compound, whence an
Ulcer is, Hot. Cold. Day. M^st. Mixed.
Swelling or Tumor, whence a Phlegmonous, Erysipelous. Oedematous. Scirrhous,
Cancrous Ulcer.
Solution of continuitie, or any other discommoditie, whence a rough, callous,
fistulous, cavernous, sinuous Ulcer, with luxation, facture, etc.
With the Symptom, whence, According, eating, painful, sordid and virulent
Ulcer. With the cause and disease, With the cause and Symptom, Examples
whereof may be taken from that we have formerly delivered.
With the disease and Symptom, With the cause, disease and Symptom.



CHAP. II. O^ the signs of Ulcers.
THere are various signs of Ulcers according to their differences. For it is
the sign of a putride Ulcer, if it exhale a noy some, grievous, stinking and
The signs of a putr^d Ulcer.
carion-like vapor, together with filthy matter. An eating Ulcer is known by
the eating in, hollownesse and wearing away of the part wherein it resides,
together with the adjoining parts. A sordide Ulcer may be known by the
grossness and viscidity of the excrements it sends forth, and by the loose
and spongy softness, or the crusted inequality of the flesh which grows over
it. A cavernous Ulcer, by the streghtnesse of the orifice, and largeness and
deepenesse of the windings within. A fistulous Ulcer, if to the last mentioned
signs there accrue a callous hardness of the lips or sides of the Ulcer. A
cancrous Ulcer is horrible to behold with the lips turned back, hard and
swollne, flowing with virulent and stinking corruption, and sometimes also
with bloody matter, together with the swelling and lifting up of the adjacent
veins. An untemperate, or as they term it, a distempered Ulcer, is such as is
nourished by some great distemper whether hot or cold, moist or dry, or
compounded of these. An ill Vlc^^ cac^ethes.
na^^red or malign Ulcer is Gal. cap. 5. lib. 4. Meth.
known by the difficulty of curing and rebellious contumacy to remedies
appointed according to art and reason. We know a catarrhous Ulcer, if the
matter which feeds it flow to it from some varices thereunto adjoining, or
dilated, swollne and broken-veines, or from some entraile, or from the whole
body being ill affected. An Apostumatous Ulcer is perceived by the presence of
any tumor against nature, whose kind may be found out by sight and handling.
Telephian Ulcers, are such as affected Telephus, and Chironian (in whose cure
Chiron excelled) are Ulcers which may be known by their magnitude not much
putride, and consequently not sending forth any ill smell, not eating, not
tormenting with pain, but having their lips swollne and hard, and therefore
ill to be healed. For although they may be sometimes cicatrized, yet it being
but slender may easily be broken, and the Ulcer renewed. They are almost like
an ulcerated Cancer, but that they are accompanied with swelling in the
adjacent parts; they are also worse than these which are termed Cacoethe, that
is, ill natured or malign; whence it is that Fernelius thought they had a
hidden cause of malignitie, besides the common default of the humor, and that
such as can scarce be driven away; such commonly are left after the plague.
Com. ad a^hor. 22. sect. 5.
Wherefore Galen thinks such to be malign as will not suppurate or yield any
quitture.

CHAP. III. Of the prognostics of Ulcers.
THe bone must necessarily scaill, and hollow scarres be left by malign Ulcers
of a years continuance or longer, and rebellious to medicines fitly Aph. 45.
sect. 6.
applied. The bone must scaill by reason of the continual affluxe, and wearing
by the acrimony of the humor, which looses the composure and glue by which the
parts thereof are joined together. But the scars must become hollow, for that
the bone (whence all the flesh takes its first original) or some portion
thereof, being taken from under the flesh, as the foundation thereof, so much
of the bulcke of the flesh must necessarily sink down, as the magnitude of
the portion of the wasted bone comes unto.

You may know that death is at hand, when the Ulcers that arise in or before
diseases, are sudainly either livid or dried, or pale and withered. For such
dryness Hip. progn. lib. 1. cap. 8. Aph. 65. sect. 5.
shows the defect of nature, which is not able to send the familiar and
accustomed nutriment to the part ulcerated. But the livid or pale color is not
only an argument of the overabundance of choler and melancholy, but also of
the extinction of the native heat. In Ulcers where tumors appear, the
patients suffer no convulsions, neither are frantic; for the tumor being in
the habit of the body possessed with an Ulcer, argues that the nervous parts
and their original are free from the noxious humors. But these tumors suddenly
vanishing and without manifest cause, as without application of a discussing
medicine, or bleeding, those who have them on their backs have convulsions and
distensions, for that the spine of the back is almost wholly nervous; but such
as have them on their fore parts, become either frantic, or have a sharp
pain of their side, or pleurisy, or else a dysentery if the tumors be
reddish; for the forepart of the body is replenished and overspread with many
and large vessels, into whose passages the morbificke matter being translated,
is presently carried to these parts which are the seats of such diseases.

Soft and loose tumors in Ulcers are good, for they show a mildness and
gentleness Aph. 67. sect. 5.
of the humors, but crude and hard swellings are naught; for all digestion in
some measure resembles elixation. Ulcers which are smooth and shining are ill,
for they show that there resides an humor malign by its acrimony, which frets
asunder the roots of the hairs, and depraves the natural construction of the
pores of the skin; whence it is that such as are troubled with Quartaine agues,
the Leprosy or Aph. 4. sect. 5.
Lues venerea, have their hair fall off.

A livid flesh is ill in Ulcers which cause a rottenness or corruption of the
bones lying under the flesh; for it is an argument of the dying hear and
corruption of the bone, whence the flesh has its original and integrity.

These Ulcers which happen by occasion of any disease, as a Dropsy, are hard to
be Hip. lib. de (...). Gal. cap. 2. and 5. lib. Meth. 4.
cured; as also those whereinto a varix or swollne vessel continually casts in
matter; which a present distemper ^oments; which have swollne, hard and callous
lips; and such as are circular or round. An Hypersarcosis, or fleshy
excrescence usually happens to Ulcers not diligently mundified; and if they
possess the arms or Legs they cause a Phlegmon or some other tumor in the
groines, chiefly if the body be full of ill humors, as Avicen has noted. For
these parts by reason of their rarity and weakness are fit and subject to
defluxions. Albucrasis writes that for nine causes Ulcers are difficultly
replenished with flesh and cicatrized. The first for want of For what causes
Ulcers are said to heal.
blood, in a bloodlesse body; the second by reason of ill humors and the
impurity of the blood; the third by the unfit application of unconvenient
medicines; the fourth by reason of the sordidnesse of the Ulcer; the fifth by
the putrefaction of the soft and carionlike flesh encompassing the Ulcer; the
sixth when they take their original from a common cause which every where
^ages with fury, such as are those which are left by the pestilence; the
seventh by reason of the callous hardness of the lips of the Ulcer. The
eighth when the heavens and air are of such condition as ministers fuel to
the continuance of the Ulcer, as at Sarogoza in Aragon; the ninth when the
bones which lie under it are waisted by rottenness.

An Ulcer that casts forth white, smooth, equal quitture, and little or no
stinking, is easily healed; for it argues the victory of the native heat, and
the integrity of the solid parts. We term that smooth quitture which is
absolutely concocted, neither What pu^ or matter is (...), equal and white.
yields any asperity to the touch, whereby we might suspect that as yet any
portion of the humor remains crude; we call that equal wherein you can note
no diversity of parts; and white not that which is perfectly so, but that which
is of an ash color, as Galen observes. But it is ill, if when the cure is
indifferently forward, a flux Ad s^^tent. 32 sect* 2. de fract.
of blood suddenly break forth in those Ulcers which beat strongly by reason
of the great inflammation adjoined therewith. For as Hippocrates observes, an
effusion Aph. 21. sect. 7.
of blood happening upon a strong pulsation in Ulcers is evil; for the blood
breaking out of an Artery cannot be stayed but by force; and also this blood is
so furious by reason of the heat and inflammation the nourishers of this
Ulcer, that it breaks its receptacles, and hence ensues the extinction of the
native heat, whence the defect of suppuration and a Gangreene ensues. Now for
that there flows two Two sorts of excrements flow from a malign Ulcer.
sorts of excrements from malign Ulcers, the more thin is termed Ichor or
sanies, but the more gross is named sordes; that is virulent and flows from
pricked nerves, and the Periostia when they are evil affected; but the other
usually flows from the Ulcers of the joints, and it is the worser if it be
black, reddish, ash-colored, if muddy or unaequall like wine Lees, if it
stink. Sanies is like the water wherein flesh has been washed, it argues the
preternaturall heat of the part, but when it is pale colored, it is said to
show the extinction of the heat.

CHAP. IIII. Of the general cure of Ulcers.
AN Ulcer is either simple or compound. A simple Ulcer, as an Ulcer has one
and that a simple indication, that is, exsiccation; and that more than in a The
curing of a simple Ulcer consists in exsiccation.
wound, by how much an Ulcer is moister than a wound. There are many
indications proposed for the cure of a compound Ulcer, in respect of which Galen
would have us to keep this order, that we have the first regard of the most
urgent, then Gal. 7. Meth. cap. 12.
of the cause, then of that, which unless it be taken away, the Ulcer cannot
be healed. By giving you an example you may easily understand the meaning
hereof. Imagine on the inside of the Leg a little above the ancle, an Ulcer
very painful, hollow, putride, associated with the rottenness of the bone,
circular, having hard and swollen Lips, and engirt with the inflammation and
varices of the neighboring parts. If you take this to cure before you do any
thing about the Ulcer, unless you be called upon by that which urges, as by
vehemence of pain, you must first use general means by calling and advising
with a Physician; For in Galens opinion, if the Gal Lib. 4. de companed.
secund. genesis
whole body require a preparation, then must that be done in the first place;
for in some Ulcers purgation only will be sufficient; in some bloodletting;
others are better by using both means, which is as the cause of the Ulcer
proceeds from a repletion or illness of humors. Now by these means having
taken away the cause of the Ulcer, you must come to the particular cure
thereof, beginning with that which is most urgent. Wherefore you must first
assuage the pain by application of things contrary to the cause thereof, as if
it proceed from a Phlegmonous distemper, which has long possessed, distended
and hardened the part, it must be eased by evacuation. First, bathing it with
warm water, to mollify and relaxe the skin, that so you may the more easily
evacuate the contained humors; then shall you draw away portion of the matter
causing the swelling and pain by scarrification, if the patient shall be of
sufficient courage, or else by application of hose-leaches if he be more faint
hearted; and then you shall temper the heat there of by applying Vnguentum
refrigerans Galeni.

To conclude, you shall attempt all things which we have formerly delivered
(in our treatise of Tumors) to take away the swelling thereof. When you have
brought this to that pass you desire, you shall come to those which are such,
that it cannot be taken away or healed without them, which shall be done by
orderly helping the defects against nature which were conjoined with the Ulcer,
to wit, the rottenness of the bone, which you shall help by actual
cauteries; and in the mean while you shall draw the Ulcer into another form,
to wit, cornered, and you shall cut away the callous hardness, and help the
rottenness. Then must you procure the falling away of the Eschar, and then
provide for the scailing of the bone by the means formerly prescribed, lastly
the mundified Ulcer must be filled with flesh.

For generating of flesh two causes must concur, the efficient and material;
The The things conducing to the generating of flesh.
efficient is, the good temper both of the whole body, as also of the Vlcerated
part. For this prevailing, there will be an attraction, digestion, apposition
and assimulation of the laudible juice to the part affected; verily the
laudible temper is preserved by like things, but the vicious is amended by
contraries. The matter to be spent upon flesh, is laudible blood, which
offends neither in quality, nor quantity. In this regeneration of the flesh
there appear two kinds of excrements, the one more thin and humide called
Sanies, the other more gross termed Sordes. Both of these for that they are
contrary to nature, do therefore hinder the regeneration of flesh, and
therefore must be taken away by applying their contraryes, as by things drying
in the first degree, and more strongly or weakly detergent according to the
complexion of the part and the whole body, and the plenty and quality of the
excrementitious humor, and the uncleanness of the Ulcer. For the part must be
preserved by the use of the like, but the ulcer overcome by application of
things contrary thereto. After that by natures endeavor and the Chirurgions
help the Ulcer is replete with flesh, it must be cicatrized, that is, covered
with a callous skin What a scarre is.
in stead of the true and native skin. It may be cicatrized by strewing of very
drying pouders having very little or no acrimony. Thus Alume and vi^rioll being
burnt and made into powder, and thinly strewed upon the part do quickly
cicatrize the former fleshy work. To this purpose also serve, the root of
Aristolochia, Aloes, Things causing cicatrization.
burnt Lead, Pomegranat pills burnt, Litharge, Tutia, and also plates of Lead
besmeared with quicksilver, whose efficacy for this purpose Chirurgions
sometimes find more certain and powerful than any other remedies.

CHAP. V. Of a distempered Ulcer.
BEfore we speak of a distempered Ulcer, it is meet; least that the
Surgeon Signs of a distempered Ulcer.
take one distemper for another, briefly to relate the signs of each. You may
know that an Ulcer is associated with a dry distemper by your sight, as if the
Ulcer be as it were wrinckled, if it send forth little or no moisture; also it
is known by touch, if it feel rough and hard. You shall correct Remedies for
a dry distempered Ulcer.
this distemper by humecting medicines, as fomenting it with warm water
according to Galens opinion, or else with Hydraelaeum (i.) Oil and water mixed,
but always you must first purge, if the body shall abound with ill humors, or
use Phlebotomie if the body be plethoricke; otherwise you shall draw more
humors into the part than it can bear. Now you shall so long ^oment it, until
the flesh which is about it begin to look red, wax soft and moist, and the
part it self be a little swollne. If you proceed further, you will resolve
all the humor which you have drawn thither, and so your labor is in vain.
After the ^omentation apply such a remedy to the ulcerated part.

. cremoris hordei ij. fol. malva in aq. coct. j. pingued. porci iss. mellis
com. ss. mis^e in mortario and fiat unguentum.

You shall know a moist distemper associates the Ulcer by the plenty of the
excrementitious Signs of to^ moist an Ulcer.
humor, which the Ulcer sends forth; by the spongie and fungous softness and
growth of the flesh about it. You shall amend this by drying remedies, such as
these are, which we term sarcoticks, having always regard to the plenty of
the humor, the proper temper of the part, and other indications formerly
mentioned. Amongst other remedies Galen much commends Alume water, for it
dries, Gal. lib, 1^ simp, cap 7.
clenses and corroborates the affected part. Also this ensuing fomentation may
be applied to good purpose. rum rosar. rub. absinth. beton. tapsi barbati, an.
m. j. gallarum, nucum cupressi, an. ij. aluminis rochae j. fiat decoctio in
vino ansiero, instituatur fotus; Then let Empl. de cerussa or De minio be
applied to the Ulcer. Also I have found by experience that the powder of burnt
alome lightly strewed upon the Ulcer is very effectual in this case. You shall
know that an hot distemper associates the Ulcer by Signs of a hot distempered
Ulcer.
redness, or yellowness thereof, by the heat manifest to your touch, and the
propriety of the pain. Then must you have recourse to refrigerating things,
such as ^ng. Rosatum Mes. Refrigerans Gal. Populeon; stoopes and clothed
dipped in plantaine water, Nightshade water, or Oxycrate. I have often found by
experience that scarrification, or Leaches being applied, did more conduce than
any other remedy. For so the chafed blood, which by that means is apt to
corrupt, is drawn away, and the part its self is also freed of that burden.

We know a cold distemper by the whitish or pale color, by the touch of the
Surgeon, Signs of a cold distempered Ulcer.
and speech of the patient complaining of the coldness of the ulcerated part.
You shall correct this by applying and putting bottles filled with water about
the part, or else Swines bladders half filled with the following decoction.

rum origani, pulegij, chamaem. meliloti, an. m. j. absinth. majoranae,
salviae, rorismar. an. m ss. fiat decoctio in vino generoso, addendo aquae
vitae quod sufficit. Also the Ulcer may conveniently be fomented with spunges
dipped in the same decoction, and let there be applied thereto Empl.
Oxycroccum; emp. de meliloto; de Vigo cum mercuris, and sine mercurio. But if a
mixed and compound distemper be joined to the Ulcer, the medicines must in like
manner be mixed and composed. The residue of the Chirurgions care and pains
must be spent upon the proper and peculiar cure of the Ulcer, as it is an
Ulcer; which we said in the former Chapter was contained in detersion,
regenerating flesh and cicatrization thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of an Ulcer with pain.
THere often times so great pain accompanies Ulcers, that it calls thereto the
counsel of the Physician. Wherefore if it proceed from any distemper, it
shall be taken away by remedies proper against that distemper, such as we
mentioned in the former Chapter. But if it do not so cease, we must go on to
Narcoticks. Such are cataplasmes of the leaves of Mandrakes, water lillies,
Hen-bane, Nightshade, Hemlocke, the seeds of Poppy and Oils of the same; to
which also may be added Opium, Populeon, and other things of like faculties.
But if a malign The matter of Narcoticke cataplasmes.
acrimonie and virulency of an humor corroding and eating the flesh lying
under it and the lips about it, cause and make the pain, you shall neither
assuage it by anodynes, nor Narcoticks; for by application of gentle medicines
it will become worse and worse. Wherefore you must betake you to Cathaereticks;
For strong medicines Catheraeticks have power to assuage pain.
are fittest for strong diseases. Wherefore let a pledget dipped in strong and
more than ordinarily powerful Aegyptiacum, or in a little oil of Vitrioll, be
applied to the Ulcer; for these have power to tame this raging pain, and
virulent humors. In the mean season let refrigerating things be put about the
Ulcer, least the vehemence of acrid medicines cause a defluxion.

CHAP. VII. Of Ulcers with overgrowing or proudnesse of flesh.
Ulcers have often times proud or overgrowing flesh in them, either by the
negligence of the Surgeon, or fault of the patient. Against this, Things
wasting superfluous flesh.
drying and gently eating or consuming medicines must be applied; such as are
Galls, cortex thuris, Aloes, T^tia, Antimony, Pompholix, Vitrioll, Lead, all of
them burnt and washed if need require. Of these pouders you may also make
ointments with a little oil and wax; but if the proud flesh, as that which is
hard and dense yield not to these remedies, we must come to causticks, or else
to iron, so to cut it off. For in Galens opinion, the taking away of proud
flesh is no work of nature, (as the generating, restoring and agglutinating of
the flesh is) but Lib. (...). Meth. cap. 6.
it is performed by medicines which dry vehemently, or else by the hand of the
Surgeon; wherefore amongst the remedies fit for this operation, the powder
of mercury with some small quantity of burnt Alume, or burnt Vitrioll alone,
seem very effectual to me. Now for the hard and callous lips of the Ulcer,
they must be For the callous lips of Ulcers.
mollyfied with medicines which have such a faculty, as with Calves, Goose,
Capons or Ducks grease, the oiles of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Worms, Whelps,
Oesipus, the mucilages of Marsh-mallowes, Lineseede, faenugreeke seed, Gum
Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Bdellium, of which being mixed may be made Emplaisters,
unguents, and liniments, or you shall use Empl. Diachylon, or de Mucaginibus,
De Vigo cum mercurio. To conclude, after we have for some few days used such
like remedies, you may apply to the Ulcer a plate of Lead rubbed over with
Quick silver; for this is very effectual to smooth an Ulcer and depresse the
lips; if you shall prevail nothing by this means, you must come to the
causticks, by which if you still prevail nothing, for that the lips of the
Ulcer are so callous that the caustickes cannot pierce into them, you must
cleave them with a gentle scarification, or else cut them to the quick, so to
make way, or as it were open a window for the medicine to enter in, according
to Galen. Neither in the interim must you omit Hippocrates his advice, which
is, that by the same Lib. 4. Meth. cap. 2.
operation we reduce the ulcer if round, into another figure, to wit, long or
triangular.

CHAP. VIII. Of an Ulcer putride and breeding worms.
Worms are diverse times bred in ulcers, whence they are called wormie ulcers;
the cause hereof is the too great excrementitious humidity prepared The cause
of worms breeding in Ulcers.
to putrefie by unnatural and immoderate heat. Which happens, either for that
the ulcer is neglected, or else by reason of the distemper and depraved humors
of all the body, or the affected part; or else for that the excrementitious
humor collected in the ulcer, has not open and free passage forth; as it
happens to the ulcers of the ears, nose, fundament, neck of the womb, and
lastly to all sinuous and cuniculous ulcers. Yet it does not necessarily follow
that all putrid ulcers must have worms in them; as you may perceive by the
definition of a putride ulcer which we gave you before. For the cure of such
ulcers after general means, the worms must first be taken forth, then the
excrementitious humor must be drawn away, whence they take their original.
Therefore you shall foment the ulcer with the ensuing decoction, which is of
force to kill them; for if any labor to take forth all that are quick he will
be much deceived; for they often times do so tenaciously adhere to the ulcerated
part, that you cannot pluck them away without much force and pain.

. absinth. centaur. majoris, marrub ij, an. M. j. fiat decoctio ad lb. ss. in
qu^ dissolve A fomentation to kill the worms.
aloes ss. unguenti agyptia^i j. Let the ulcer be fomented and washed with this
medicine, and let pledgets dipped herein be put into the ulcer; or else if the
ulcer be cuniculous or full of windings, make injection therewith which may go
into all parts thereof.

Archigenes much commends this following medicine.. Cerusae, poli j montani,
an. Gal. 4. comp. med.
ss. picis navalis liquidae quantum sufficit, misce in mortario pro linimento.
If the putrefaction be such that these medicines will not suffice for the
amendment thereof, you must come to more powerful, or to cauteries also, or
hot Irons, or to section; yet you must still begin with the more gentle, such
as this of Galens description.

. cerae. ij. cerusae j. olei ros. ij. salis amnon. ss squam. aris ij. thur.
alum. ^rug. malicor. calcis vivae, an. j. fiat emplastrum. Or. terebinth. lotae
ij. cer^ albae ss liquefiant simul addendo sublimati, ss. salis torrefacti, and
vitrioli calcinati, an. j. fiat mundificativum. Or you must use our Aegyptiacum
alone, which has Sublimate entering into the composition thereof; but in the
interim the circuit of the Ulcer must be defended with refrigerating, and
defensative things for fear of pain.

CHAP. IX. Of a sordide Ulcer.
ASordide Ulcer after the cure of the body in general, shall be healed with
detergent medicines; the indication being drawn from the gross and tough
excrement, which with the excrementious Sanies, as it were besieging, and
blocking up the ulcerated parts, weakens and as it were dulls the force of
medicines though powerful, which causes us to begin the cure with
fomentations and lotions as thus.

. Lixivij com. lb. j. absinth. marr^. appij. centaur. utriusque, hypericonis,
an. M. ss. A detergent lotion.
coquantur, colaturae, quae sufficiat, add mellis rosati j. ungunti aegyptiaci
ss. fiat fo^us. Then use the following detersive medicine:. succi appij, and
plantag. an. ij. mellis com. j. terebinth. iss. pull. ^reos Florent. and aloes.
an. ss. fiat medicamentum.

The Surgeon must well consider, at how many dressings he shall be able to
wash away the gross sordes or filth sticking close to the Ulcer, and dry up
the excrementitious sanies. For often times these things may be done at one
dressing; but in others who have more quick sense or feeling, not so soon.
But when the Ulcer is freed of such gross Sordes or filth, you must forbear
to use more acride things for fear of pain, defluxion, inflammation, and
erosion, whereby the Ulcer would become more hollow. Wherefore then we shall
be content to apply remedies which dry and cleanse without acrimony, that we
may so help natures endeavors in generating Detergent medicines without
acrimony.
flesh. Such remedies are the pouders of Aloes, Mastich, Myrrh, Orris,
Litharge, Antimony, roots of Gentian, Barley flower, and the like, which being
strewed upon the Ulcer, you shall cover it with Lint, and put over that a plate
of Lead, rubbed over with quicksilver; and you shall put on these detersives
and desiccatives more or less strong, as you shall find it requisite and
necessary. For the too plentiful A caution very observable in use of detergent
things.
use of drying and detersive things, does in time hollow the Ulcers, whereby it
comes to pass that in short time in like sort, a greater quantity of Sanies
flows from the Ulcer, the proper substance of the flesh being dissolved by the
force or acrimony of the detersive medicine; as also the proper alimentary
humor, which flowed to the part, being in like sort, a greater quantity of
Sanies flowed from the Ulcer, the proper substance of the flesh being dissolved
by the force or acrimony of the detersive medicine, as also the proper
alimentary humor, which flowed to the part, being in like sort defiled: which
thing beguiles the unskilful Surgeon. For by how much he sees the Ulcer
flow more plentifully with sanies, he endeavors by so much the more to exhaust
and dry up with more acrid medicines these humidities as if they were
excrementitious; But Galen has long ago admonished us to take heed hereof,
setting forth a History of a certain Empericke who dressing a sordide Ulcer
with a green, acrid and eating medicine, dissolved the flesh, and so
consequently made the Ulcer more hollow, and caused more pain and defluxion;
whereby it happened that continually adding more acrid medicines, he
continually by his ignorance and unskilfulnesse increased the colliquation of
the flesh, the largeness of the ulcer and excrementitious humidity. Wherefore
we A distinction to be observed concerning the impurity of ulcers.
must take special care, whether the sordide Ulcer grow each day worse, by its
proper fault and the impurity of the whole body besides, or else by the
colliquation of the flesh and corruption of the benign and alimentary humor
sent thither for the nutrition of the part, by the too frequent and unskilful
use of too acrid a medicine. You may conjecture this by the increase of the
pain without reason, and by Diligent regard must be had of the patients bodies
and the affected parts.
the heat and redness of the lips of the Ulcer. Therefore you must
principally have regard to this, that you give each of your patients his fit
measure, that is, a convenient and agreeable medicine to each of their
strengths, taking indication from the strength, distemper, and consistence of
the whole body and affected part; for there is a great deal of difference
whether you apply a medicine to a plowman or labourer, or to an Eunuch and
woman, or whether to the Leg, or eyes. For these medicines which to a dense
and hard body and part are only detergent and drying, the same are to delicate
and tender bodies and parts cathaereticke and eating, by colliquation of the
flesh, and corruption of the nourishment, making an increase of Sordes or
filth; on the contrary those things which do laudibly and sufficiently cleanse
the flesh in a soft body and dry up the sanies, these same things applied to a
hard body increase the sordes and sanies by suffering them to breed, neither
are they of sufficient power to wash away the tenacious impurity of a dense
body. Wherefore the skillful Surgeon will see when he must be take himself
from too strongly cleansing and eating medicines, to these which are more mild.

CHAP. X. Of a virulent, eating and malign Ulcer which is termed Cacoethes,
and of a Chironian Ulcer.
VIrulent and eating Ulcers differ not unless in magis and minus, for we
term How virulent and eating ulcers differ.
it a virulent Ulcer which sends forth a virulent sanies, which is properly
called Virus. This Virus, or virulency, when it becomes more malign, gnawes
and feeds upon the parts which lie under, and are adjoining to the Ulcer, and
makes an eating Ulcer. Such Ulcers are by Galen called Dysepulotica, that is,
Gal. Lib. 4 de comp. mod. sec. genera.
difficultly to be cicatrized; for, says he, it happens that the Ulcer is
Dysepuloticke, either for that the part affected may be vitiated either in the
habit or temper thereof, so that it may corrupt the humor which flows thither;
such an Ulcer is by a particular name termed Cacoethes; or for that by reason
of the evil quality of the blood flowing thither and eating the part, the part
affected being too moist cannot How a chironian ulcer differs from an eating,
see before, Cap, 2.
heal up. He further adds that a Chironian Ulcer is far more malign than
these Ulcers which are termed Cacoethe.

For the cure; by reason that all these Ulcers have a large extent, for some
are more malign and ill to be cicatrized than othersome; it is also necessary
to have diverse medicines ready and at hand distinct both in their faculties and
the degrees thereof; so that it is no marvel if they often fail of their
purpose, who with the same medicine dress and think they shall heal all
malign Ulcers. This following medicine described by Asclepiades is much
commended by Galen.

. squamae aeris, aeruginis rasae, an. j. cera lb. ss. resinae laricis. jss.
quae liquari possunt Gal, lib, 4. sec; gen, Cap, 5.
aridis affundantur, and make an emplaister to be laid only upon the Ulcer;
for you must lay a defensative about the Ulcer for fear of inflammation. But
Galen says, that the following Epuloticke of Primion excells the rest, as that
which to desperate Ulcers, (which many have taken in hand and left as
uncurable,) was of certain and approoved use.

soreos iij aluminis scissilis, calcis viuae, an ij. thuris, gallarum, an.
iiij. cerae, lb. j Gal, lib, a, de comp, med, sec* genesis Cap, 6.
and iij. sevi vitulini lb. j. and vij. olei veteris quantum sufficit, fiat
emplastrum.

CHAP. XI. An advertisement to the young Surgeon touching the distance of
times wherein malign Ulcers are to be dressed.
TO show the use of Asclepiades his medicine described in the former Chapter,
Gal, lib, 4, de comp, med: sec. gen: Cap. 5.
and convince the error of these Chirurgions, who think they do well for
their patients, if they twice or thrice on a day dress malign Ulcers, I have
here thought good to digress a little from my purpose and to interpose Galens
authority. Rightly (says Galen) has Asclepiades added these words to the
formerly described medicine: And loose this after three days, and foment the
Ulcer, and fasten the same emplaister being washed, and apply it again; for
unless the medicine adhere long to the skin, it will do no good. Which thing
notwithstanding many Physicians have been ignorant of, thinking if they wiped
away the Sanies from the Ulcer thrice on a day, they should do better than
those who did the save but twice a day. But those who dress it but once a day,
are reprooved by the patients as negligent. But they are much mistaken; for you
must remember, as we have delivered in most of our writings, that the qualities
of all neighboring bodies do mutual actuate and affect each other in some
degree, although the one thereof be much more powerful; for by this reason in
space of time they become somewhat alike, though they otherwise differ much;
But when the quality of the medicine shall be like in species to the body to
be cured, there follows the better success. Wherefore he which moved by
these reasons first appointed to use the emplaster formerly applied, is worthy
of commendations; and we ought to follow him much the rather, seeing that which
he found out by reason, is approoved by experience. Neither did he unadvisedly
command to foment the wound every third day, that is, at every dressing; for
seeing it is a powerful medicine, therefore it stands in need of mitigation.
Thus much Galen, whose opinion grounded Galens reason further explained.
on reason, he can again confirm with another reason. It is already
sufficiently known, that medicines can do nothing in us unless by the force
of the native heat, which stirs up the faculty of the medicine to operation.
But in Ulcers which are absolutely malign, the native heat of the affected
part is very languid, being broken and debilitated by the presence of the
preternaturall heat; so that it stands in need of a great space of time to
actuate the virtue and faculty of the medicine. Wherefore, if in that time,
when as the native heat has much moved and stirred up the faculty of the
medicine, the ulcer be loosed or opened, and that emplaister cast away which
was laid upon the part, and a fresh one laid in steed thereof; the heat
implanted in the part is either dissipated by the contact of the air, or is
weakened and driven in; and that endeavor which was made by the emplaister was
to no purpose, being as it were stopped in the midst of the course. But a new
emplaister being laid on, the heat of the part must undergo a new labor, so
to stir up the faculty to bring it to act.

For all medicines are, what they are, in faculty. Equal to this is their
error, who by too often renewing their emplaisters on the same day, do too
powerfully Medicines are only such in faculty.
cleanse; for so they do not only take away the excrementitious humors, both
Sordes and Sanies, but also the alimentary juice; to wit, the Rob, Cambium, and
Gluten, which are the next matter for procreating of laudible flesh. Wherefore
it is not good to dress Ulcers so often in one day, and to loose them to apply
new emplaisters, unless some grievous symptom (as pain) force us to do it,
which requires to be assuaged and mittigated by the often changing and renewing
of Anodyne medicines.

CHAP. XII. How to bind up Ulcers.
FOr the binding up of Ulcers, you must always begin your bandage at the
Ulcer. Now the Rowler must be so large that it may not only cover The
beginning of your binding must be at the Ulcer.
and comprehend the Ulcer, but also some portion of the adjacent parts above
and below; and let it press the Ulcer with that moderation, that it may only
press out the excrementitious humors. For so the ulcer will become dry, and
consequently more near to healing, as it is observed by Hippocrates. Let this
be the measure of your binding, that it be neither too strait for hence would
ensue Hip. lib. de ulc.
pain and defluxion; nor too laxe, for such is of no use. You may moysten your
boulsters and Rowlers in oxycrate or in red and astringent wine, especially in
Summer; when you have bound it up the part must be kept quiet. For according to
Hippocrates, those who have an ulcer in the leg, ought neither to stand, nor
sit, but to lie on a bed. Wherefore when the legs are ulcerated the arms
must be exercised, by handling, lifting up and casting down of diverse things.
But on the contrary if Revulsion into contrary parts.
the arms be ulcerated, the legs must be exercised with walking, or
frictions from above downwards, if the patient cannotendure to walk. So the
humors and spirits which with more violence and greater plenty run down to
the part affected, may be drawn back and diverted.

CHAP. XIII. Of the cure of particular ulcers, and first of those of the eyes.
FOr that (in Galens opinion) the diverse indication in curing diseases is
drawn from the condition of the part, to wit, the temper, complexion, site,
sigure, 4. Methodi.
use, dull or quick sense; Therefore having breefely handled the general cure
both of simple and compound and implicit ulcers, I think it fit to treat of
them now as they are distinguished by the parts, beginning with these of the
eyes. These according to Celsus, are sometimes caused by pustules, or a sharp
defluxion which frets or eats in sunder the coats thereof, or else by a
stroke.

Paulus sets down these differences of the ulcers of the eyes; If (says he) a
small, little and hollow ulcer be upon the horny coat, it is by the Greeks
termed Botryon; Lib. 6. cap. 6. lib. 3. Botryon. Caloma.
but if it be broader and less deep, it is termed Caloma; about the circle of
the Iris or Rainebow, it is called Argemon. If it be crusty and sordid, it is
termed Epicauma. Argomon. Ep^cauma. The cure.
These in general require the same cure as the former, that is, to be
mundified, incarnated, dried and cicatrized; but the part affected indicates
more gentle medicines. Wherefore having purged the patient and taken some blood
both from his arm, as also from his veins and temporal Arteries, and bathed
him if it be needful; to divert the defluxion you shall to his shoulders apply
cupping glasses with scarrification; or else bread newly drawn out of the
oven, and sprinkled with aqua vitae or some good wine shall be applied to the
original of the spinall marrow. But you shall apply to the forehead and
temples an astringent emplaister made of emplastrum contra rupturam, ung.
Comitissae, and Resiccativum rubrum mixed together. But this ensuing Collyrium
described by Celsus and approved by Hollerius, shall be dropped into the eye..
aeris usti, cadmiae ustae and lotae, an. j. ex aqua ^ingatur collyrium quod
liquore ovi dissolvatur. But in the mean time you must diligently observe
whether you put the A Collyrium to cleanse the Ulcers of the eyes.
eye to any great pain. Wherefore now and then by putting anodyne medicines
thereto, it will be good to comfort it. Also you may make collyria of the
decoction of Plantaine, faenugreeke, wormwood, with a little quantity of Sugar
Candy, tutia, gum tragacanth, myrrh and vitrioll dissolved therein. When the
ulcer i^ mundifyed, the following sarcoticke will be of good use.

. sarcocollae in lacte muliebri nutritae, iij. pull. diaireos simplicis, gum.
arabici, tragacanth. A sarcoricke Collyri^m.
an. ss. mucilaginis faenugraeci quantum sufficit ut inde fiat collyrium. But
you must note that for moist Ulcers, powders are more convenient than Collyria.

When the ulcer is playned or filled with its proper flesh, it may be
cicatrized with the following collyrium.. tutiae, cadmiae ut decet praeparatae,
cerusae, antimonij, olibani, an. ss. myrrhae, sarcocollae, sanguinis Draconis,
aloes, opij, an. ss. cum aqua planta. An ^pulotick Collyrium.
ginis fiat collyrium; or the powder only may be conveniently strewed thereon.

Celsus has noted that the cicatrizing of the eyes is incident to two dangers,
that is, Lib. 6. cap. 6.
least they be too hollow, or else too thick. If too hollow, they must be
filled by the following remedy,. Papaveris lachrimae, ss. sagapeni, opopanacis,
an. ss. aruginis j. A Collyrium for hallow scarres.
cumini iij. piperis ij. cadmiae lotae and cerusa, an. iss. cum aqua pluviali
fiat collirium. But if the scars be thick or gross, the following remedy will
extenuate them. cinamom. acaciae, an. ss. cadmiae elotae, croci, myrrhae,
papaveris lachrymae, gum. arabici, an. j. piperis albi, thuris, an. iss. aris
combusti, iij. cum aqua pluviali fiat collyrium. But The scarres of the Horny
coa^ are white and these of the Adnata red.
if the scarre be upon the cornea or horny coat, so that it cover the pupilla
or sight, the sight will be intercepted by the densenesse of the membrane. Here
you must also observe, that the scarres that are on the Cornea are white, but
these on the Adnata are red, because this is spread over with more little veins
than that.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Ozaena and Ulcers of the Nose.
THe Ozaena is a deep and stinking Ulcer in the inside of the nose, sending
forth many crusty and stinking excrements. Celsus says that such ulcers Lib.
6. cap. 8. Ga. Lib. 3. de comp. med. secund. locos cap. 3. The cure.
can scarsely be healed. It is caused (as Galen says) by the distillation of
acride and putride humors from the head into the nosethrills about the
mammillary processes. For the cure, the patient must eat sparingly, and his
meat must neither be sharp nor strong; the humor being prepared must be
purged; the head dried and strengthened, that so it may neither admit the
excrementitious humors, nor send them down; then must we come to the part
affected with the Ulcer. The Ulcer must be dried with a repelling medicine,
such as is the juice of Pomegranats boiled to the half in a brass vessel;
the powder of Calamint, Cresses, white Hellebore, the juice of Cresses with
Alume and other things which you may read in Celsus.

Galen out of Archigenes wishes, to draw up into the nosethrills the juice of
Calamint, or that the Calamint it self being dried, and made into powder, may
be blown with a quill into the nose. Others use this following powder.. ros.
rub. mint. calam. arom. rad. angelica, gentian, macis, caryop. an. ss. camph.
ambrae, an. gr. iiij. mosch. gr. vj. fiat pulvis subtilissimus. Manardus writes
that the Urine of an Ass, though a nasty Lib. 20. epist. 5.
medicine, is an excellent remedy in this affect. But if the inveterate and
contumacious evil do not yield to these remedies, then you must have recourse
to Coprose, Verdigreece, sal ammoniacum, and Alume with Vinegar. It diverse
times happens that the Ulcer spreading on, comes to take hold of the Ossa
ethmoidea or sive-like bones; in which case you must not forcibly pluck them
out; but refer the whole business An injection when the Ozaena shall come to
the Oss^ Ethmoideae.
to nature, and expect when they shall come away of themselves, making in the
mean while injections into the nosethrils of aqua vitae, wherein Cephalicke
pouders have been steeped for the greater drying.

CHAP. XV. Of the Ulcers of the mouth.
OF this tribe are the Aphthae, Ulcers familliar to little children, according
to Hippocrates. They often times begin at the gums, and by the palate of Aph.
24, sect: 3 Celsus lib, 6, cap, 11. Gal com, ad (...), lib. ep^^^m.
the mouth creep into the uvula, throtle, and over all the mouth, as Celsus
says. Galen makes two kinds of Aphtha's; the one of easy cure, such as that
which usually troubles children by reason of the acrimony of the nurses milk;
the other is malign by reason of an affluxe of an evil humor (that is,
venenate and malign) into the mouth.

For the cure, it shall be good to abstain from all acride things, and if it
be a sucking The cure.
child, it will not be amiss to temper the nurses milk with refrigerating
meats, bathing the whole body, and fomenting the dugges with warm water; for
all the members in children are most tender, and as it were mucous, and their
mouths are unaccustomed to meats and drinks. For topicke medicines, you must
make choice of such which may quickly and readily work the effect; for here
the condition of the affected part is such, that they cannot long remain and
adheere thereto. Therefore if the Ulcer be malign, it must be lightly touched
with aqua fortis which has been used in separating mettalls and which besides
is tempered with six parts of common water. You may for the same purpose use
the oils of Vitrioll, Sulphur, Antimony, Mercury water and the like.

Aetius wishes you to touch and correct such Ulcers with a lock of wool
dipped in scalding oil, and so fastened to the end of a probe, until they
wax white and become smooth or plain. For so their eating and spreading force
will at length be bridled, and laudible flesh grow up in place of that which is
eaten. After such burning it will be good to wash the mouth with the following
gargarisme, which also of its self alone will serve to cure Aphtha's, which
are not malign. A gargatisme for the Aphthae.


. hordei integri p. j. plantag. ceterach, pilosellae, agrimonia, an. M. j. fiat
decoctio ad lb. j. in qua dissolve mellis rosati j. diamoron, ss. fiat
gargarisma. You may also make other gargles, of Pomegranate pills, Balausties,
Sumach, Berberies, red roses being Lib. 6. meth. Cap. 10.
boiled, and dissolving in the strayned liquor Diamoro^ and Dianucum with a
little Alume. For Galen writes, that simple Ulcers of the mouth are healed with
things which dry with moderation; now Diamoron and Dianucum are such. But
others Ulcers of the palate must be quickly aed carefully dressed.
stand in need of strong medicines, with such like. If the palate be seized
upon, we must use the more diligence and care; for there is danger, least being
the part is hot and moist, the bone which lies under which is rare and humide,
may be corrupted by the contagion and fall away, and the voice or speech be
spoiled. If the Ulcer be pockie, omitting the common remedies of Ulcers, you
must speedily be^ake your self to the proper antidote of that disease, to wit,
quicksilver.

Fistulous Ulcers often take hold on the Gummes, whence the root of the next
tooth becomes rotten, and so far that the acrimonie of the Sanies often times
makes its self a passage forth on the outside under the chinne; which thing
puts many into Aetius lib. 6. cap. 3. Celsus lib. 6. cap. 13.
a false conceit of the scrophulae or Kings evil, and consequently of an
uncurable disease. In such a case Aetius, and Celsus counsel is, to take out
the rotten tooth, for so the Fistula will be taken away, the Gum pressing and
thrusting its self into the place of the tooth which was taken forth; and so
the cause nourishing the putrefaction being taken away, (that is, the tooth)
the rest of the cure will be more easy. The Ulcers of the tongue may be cured
by the same remedies by which the rest of the mouth; yet those which breed on
the side thereof endure very long, and you must look whether or no there be
not some sharp tooth over against it, which will not suffer the Ulcer in that
place to heal; which if there be, then must you take it away with a file.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Ulcers of the Ears.
Ulcers are bred in the auditory passage both by an external cause, as a
stroke, or fall, as also by an internal, as an abscesse there generated. They
Their causes
often times flow with much matter, not there generated, for such Ulcers are
usually but small and besides in a spermaticke part, but for that the brain
does that way disburden its self.

For the cure, the chief regard must be had of the antecedent cause, which
feeds The cure.
the Ulcer, and it must be diverted by purging medicines, Masticatories and
Errhines. This is the form of a Masticatory. rum. Mastic. j. staphisagr. and
pyreth. an. j. cinam. A masticatory
and caryoph. an. ss. fiant Masticatoria, utatur mane and vesperi. But this is
the form of an Errhine. rum succi betonic. mercurial: and melissa, an ss. vini
albi j, misce and frequenter An Errhine.
naribus attrahatur. For topicke medicines we must shun all fatty and oily
things, as Galen sets down in Method. medendi, where he finds fault with a
certain follower of Thessalus who by using Tetrapharmacum, made the Ulcer in
the ear grow each day more filthy than other, which Galen healed with the
Trochisces of Andronius dissolved in Vinegar, whose composure is as follows.
rum balaust. ij, alumin. The composition of Andronius his trochisces.
j. atrament. suitor. ij, myrrhae. j, thur. aristoloch. gallarum, an. ij, salis
Ammon. j, excipiantur omnia melicrato, and ^t trochisci. Galen in the same
place witnesses, that he has healed inveterate Ulcers and of two years old
of this kind, with the scailes of Iron made into powder, and then boiled in
sharp Vinegar until it acquired the Scailes of Iron.
consistence of Honey: Moreover an Oxes gall dissolved in strong Vinegar, and
dropped in warm, amends and dryes up the putrefaction wherewith these Ulcers
flow. Also the scailes of Iron made into powder boiled in sharp Vinegar, dried
and strewed upon them. But if the straitness of the passages should not give
leave to the matter contained in the windings of the ears to pass forth, then
must it be drawn out with an Instrument thereupon called a Pyoulcos, or
matter-drawer, Of the Pyoulcos Galen makes mention 2 ad Gia^ con^.
whereof this is the figure.

The figure of a Pyoulcos, or matter-drawer.


CHAP. XVII. Of the Ulcers of the Windpipe, Weason, stomach and Gutts.
THese parts are ulcerated either by an external cause as an acride medicine,
or poison swallowed down; or by an internal cause, as a malign The Causes.
fretting humor which may equal the force of poison generated in the body, and
restrained in these parts. If the pain be increased by swallowing or
breathing, it is the sign of an Ulcer in the weazon, or windepipe joining
thereto; But the pain is most sensibly felt when as that which is swallowed is
either Signs.
sour or acride, or the air breathed in, is more hot or cold than ordinary.
But if the cause of pain lie fastened in the stomach, more greevous symptoms
urge; for sometimes they swound, have a nauseous disposition and vomiting,
convulsions, gnawings, and pain almost intolerable, and the coldness of the
extreme parts; all which when present at once, few escape unless such as are
young, and have very strong bodies. The same affect may befall the whole
stomach, but because both for the bitterness of pain, and greatness of
danger, that Ulcer is far more greevous which takes hold of the mouth of the
Ventricle, honored by the Ancients with the name of the heart; therefore
Physicians do not make so great a reckoning of that Gal. lib. 5. de loc.
affect. cap. 5.
which happens in the lower part of the stomach. Now we know that the Guts are
ulcerated if Pus, or much purulent matter come forth by stool; if blood come
that way with much griping; for by the Pus staying and as it were gathered
together in that place, there is as it were a certain continual Tenesmus, or
desire to go to stool. Now all such Ulcers are cured by meats and drinks,
rather than by medicines, according to Galen. Therefore you must make choice of
all such meats and drinks Lib. 4. and 5. Method.
as are gentle, and have a lenitive faculty, shunning acride things; for Tutia,
Lytharge, Ceruse, Verdigreece and the like, have no place here, as they have
in other Ulcers. But when as the Ulcer shall be in the Gullet or Weazon, you
must have a care that The cure.
such things may have some viscidity or toughness, and be swallowed by little,
and little, and at diverse times; otherwise they will not m^^h avail, because
they cannot make any stay, in these commune ways of breath and meat; therefore
they presently slip down and flow away; wherefore all such things shall be
used in form of an How to take medicines for Ulcers of the throat.
Eglegma, to be taken lying on the back, and swallowed down by little and
little, opening the muscles of the throat, least the medicine passing down
suddenly and in great quantity, cause a cough, a thing exceeding hurtful to
these kinds of Ulcers. When they must be cleansed, you shall have crude honey,
which has a singular faculty, above all other detergent things, in these kind
of Ulcers. But when they can conveniently swallow, you shall mix Gum
Tragacanth dissolved in some astringent decoction. In Ulcers of the stomach
all acride things (as I have formerly advised) Why acride things must be
shunned in these Ulcers.
must be shunned, as those which may cause pain, inflammation and vomit, and
besides hinder the digestion of the meat. Therefore let them frequently use a
ptisan, and sugered gellyes wherein Gum Tragacanth, and bole Armenicke have
been put, the decoction of Prunes, Dates, Figs, Raisons, Honey, Cowes milk
boiled with the yoalkes of eggs, and a little common honey. When they are to
be agglutinated, it will be convenient to make use of austere, astringent, and
agglutinative things which want all acrimony, and ungrateful taste, such as
are Hypocistis, Pomegranate flowers and pills, terra sigillata, sumach, acacia
a decoction of quinces, the Lentiske wood, the tops of Vines, of brambles,
myrtles, made in astringent wine, unless there be fear of inflammation. Their
drink shall be Hydromel water with Sugar, syrup of Violets and Iujubes. Honey
mixed with other medicines is a very How powerful Honey is to cure such kind
of Ulcers.
fitting remedy for Ulcers of the guts and other parts more remote from the
stomach; for if you shall use astringent medicines alone of themselves, they
will stick to the stomach; neither will they carry their strength any
further; but honey mixed with them, besides that it distributes them to the
rest of the body, and helps them forwards to the affected parts; also clenses
the Ulcers themselves. Here also Asses milk may with good success be used in
stead of Goats or Cowes milk. The use of a valnerary potion is almost
commendable, if so be that it be made of such herbs and simples, as by a
certain tacit familiartiy have respect to the parts affected. But the Ulcers
of the Guts have this difference amongst themselves, that if the greater guts
be affected, you may heal them with a Glyster and injections, made also sharp
to correct the putrefaction; such as are those which are made of Barley
Egyptiacum good for the Ulcers of the greater guts. Lib. 5. meth.
water, or wine with Aegyptiacum. But if the small guts be ulcerated, they must
be rather healed by potions and other things taken at the mouth, for that (as
Galen says) these things which are put up into the body by the Fundament, do
not commonly ascend, to the small or slender guts, but such as are taken at the
mouth cannot come unless with the loss of their faculty, so far as the
great guts.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Ulcers of the Kidneyes and Bladder.
Ulcers are caused in the Kidnyes and Bladder, either by the use of acride
meats, drinks, or medicines, as Cantharides; or else by the collection of an
acride humor bred in that place, sent or fallen thither; or else by the rupture
Causes.
of some vessel, or an abscesse broken and degenerated into an Ulcer, as it
sometimes comes to pass. They are discerned by their site, for the pain and
heaviness of Ulcers of the Reins comes to the Loins, and the Pus or matter
is evacuated well and Signs.
thoroughly mixed with the Urine.

Neither does the Pus which flows from the renies stink so ill, as that which
is cast Hip. Aphor. 81 sect 4.
forth of the bladder; the reason is, for that the bladder being a bloodlesse,
fleshlesse and membranous part has not such power to resist putrefaction; that
pus which flows Aphor. 76. sect. 4.
from the Kidneyes never flows without water; and although by long keeping in
an Vrinall, it at length subsides or falls to the bottom, and may be seen
separated; yet when it is first made, you may see it perfectly mixed with the
Urine; but that Pus which Ap^^or. 77. sect. 4.
flows from the bladder is often times made alone without Urine; and usually it
comes to pass that the Pus, or matter which flows from the ulcerated Kidnyes,
has in it certain caruncles, or as it were hairs, according to the rule of
Hippocrates. Those who in a thick Urine have little ca^uncles, and as it were
hairs come forth together therewith, they come from their Kidnyes; but on the
contrary those who have certain bran-like scailes come from them in a thick
Urine, their bladder is scabby or troubled with a scabby Ulcer.

For the cure; it is expedient that the belly be soluble either by nature; or
Art and The cure.
the use of mollifying Glysters. And it is good to vomit sometimes, so to draw
back the humors by whose confluxe into the affected part the Ulcer might be
seed and made more sordide and filthy. You must beware of strong purgations,
least the humors Why we must shun strong purges.
being moved and too much agitated, the matter fit to nourish the Ulcer may
fall down upon the Kidnyes or bladder. The ensuing potion is very effectual
to mundifie those kind of Ulcers.

. Hordei integri, M. ij. glycyrrhizae ras. and contus. ss. rad. acetosae and
petrosel. an. Things to cleanse these Ulcers.
vj. fiat decoctio ad lb. j. in colatura dissolve mellis dispum. ij. Let him
take every morning the quantity of four Ounces. Gordonius exceedingly commends
the following Trochisces.. quator sem. frig. maj. mundatorum, sem. papaveris
albi, sem. malvae, portul. cydon. baccarum myrti, tragacanth. gum. arab. nucum
pinearum mund. Trochisces for the Ulcers of the Kidnyes and bladder.
pistach. glycyrrhizae mund. ^ucaginis sem. psilij, amygd. dulc. hordei mund,
an. ij. bol. armeni, sang. drac^spodij, rosarum, myrrhae an. ss. excipiantur
hydromelite, and fingantur trochisci singuli ponderis ij. Let him take one
thereof in the morning dissolved in Barley water or Goats milk. Galen bids to
mix honey and diureticke things with medicines made for the Ulcers of the
Reins and bladder, for that they gently move 4. Method.
Urine, and are as vehicles to carry the medicines to the part affected. Ulcers
of the bladder are either in the bottom thereof, or at the neck and urinary
passage.

If they be in the bottom, the pain is almost continual; if in the neck,
the pain Signs to know what part of the ^ladder is ulcerated.
then pricks and is most terrible when they make water and presently after.
The Ulcer which is is the bottom sends forth certain scaly or skinny
excrements together with the Urine; but that which is in the neck, causes
almost a continual Tentigo. Those which are in the bottom are for the most
part incurable, both by reason of the bloodlesse and nervous nature of the
part, as also for that the Ulcer is Why ulcers in the bottom of the bladder
are uncureable.
continually chased and troubled by the acrimony of the Urine, so that it can
hardly be cicatrized. For even after making of water some relics of the Urine
always remain in the bottom of the bladder, which could not therefore pass
forth together with the rest of the Urine, for that for the passing forth of
the Urine, the bladder being distended before, falls and is complicated in its
self. Ulcers of the bladder are healed with the same medicines as those of the
reins are; but these not only taken by the mouth but also injected by the
urinary passage. These injections may be made of Gordonius his Trochisces
formerly prescribed, being dissolved in some convenient liquor; but because
Ulcers of the bladder cause greater and more sharp pain than those of the
Kidnyes, therefore the Surgeon must be more diligent in using Anodynes. For
this purpose, I have often by experience found, that the oil of hen-bane made
by expression gives certain help. He shall do the same with Caraplasmes and
liniments applied to the parts about the Pecten and all the lower belly and
perinaeum, as also by casting in of Glisters. If that they stink, it will not
be amiss to make injection of a little Aegyptiacum dissolved in wine,
plaintaine Egyptiacum for the ulcers of the bladder.
or rose water. For I have often used this remedy in such a case with very
prosperous success.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Ulcers of the womb.
Ulcers are bred in the womb either by the confluxe of an acride, or biting
humor, fretting the coats thereof, or by a tumor against nature degenerating
into an Absesse, or by a difficult and hard labor; The causes.
they are known by pain at the perinaeum, and the effluxe of Pus and San^es
by the privity All of them in the opinion of Avicen are either putride, when as
the Sanies breaking forth is of a stinking smell, and in color resembles Lib.
3. sect. 12. tract. 2, cap. 5. Signs.
the water wherein flesh has been washed; or else sordide, when as they flow
with many virulent and crude humors; or else are eating or spreading Ulcers,
when as they cast forth black Sanies, and have pulsation joined with much
pain. Besides they differ amongst themselves in site, for either they possess
the neck and are known by the sight, by putting in a speculum; or else are in
the bottom, and are manifested by the condition of the more liquid and serous
excrements, and the site of the pain. They are cured with the same remedies
wherewith the ulcers of the mouth to wit, with aqua fortis, the oil of
Vitrioll and antimony, and other things made The cure.
somewhat more mild, and corrected with that moderation, that the ulcerated
parts of the womb may be safely touched with them; it is requisite that the
remedies which are applied to the Ulcers of the womb, do in a moment that
which is expected of them, for they cannot long adhere or stick in the womb,
as neither to the mouth. Galen says that very drying medicines are exceeding
fit for the Ulcers of the womb, that so the putrefaction may be hindered or
restrained, whereto this Why strongly drying things are good for Ulcers of the
womb.
part as being hot and moist is very subject; besides that the whole body unto
this part as unto a sink sends down its excrements. If an ulcer take hold of
the bottom of the womb, it shall be cleansed and the part also strengthened
by making this following injection. hordei integri p. ij. guajaci. j. rad.
Ireos. ss. absinth. plant. centaur. utriusque, an. M. j fiat decoct. in aqua
fabrorum ad lb. ij. in quibus dissolve mellis vosati, and An in^ection for an
Ulcer in the bottom of the womb.
syrupi de absinthio, an. iij. fiat injectio. For amending the stinking smell I
have often had certain experience of this ensuing remedy.. vinirub. lb. j.
unguent. agyptiaci ij. bulliant parum. Thus the putrefaction may be corrected
and the painful maliciousness An injection hindering putrefaction.
of the humor abated. Ulcers when they are cleansed must presently be
cicatrized; that may be done with Alume water, the water of plantaine wherein a
little vitrioll or Alume have been dissolved. Lastly, if remedies nothing
availing, the Ulcer turn into a Cancer, it must be dressed with anodynes and
remedies proper for a Cancer, which you may find set down in the proper
treatise of Cancers. The cure of Ulcers of the fundament was to be joined to
the cure of these of the womb; but I have thought good to refer it to the
treatise of Fistula's, as I do the cure of these of the vrinary passage to the
Treatise of the Lues venerea.

CHAP. XX. Of the Varices and their cure by cutting.
AVarix is the dilatation of a Vein, some whiles of one and that a simple
branch, otherwhiles of many. Every Varix is either straight or crooked, What a
Varix is and what be the differences thereof.
and as it were infolded into certain windings within its self. Many parts of
the body are subject to Varices, as the temples, the region of the belly under
the Navill, the testicles, womb, fundament, but principally the thighs and
legs. The matter of them is usually melancholy blood, for Varices often grow
in men of a malancholy temper, and which usually feed on The matter.
gross meats, or such as breed gross and melancholy humors. Also women with
child, are commonly troubled with them, by reason of the heaping together of
their suppressed menstruall evacuation. The precedent causes are a vehement
concussion of the body, leaping, running, a painful journey on foot, a fall,
the carrying of a The causes.
heavy burden, torture or Racking. This kind of disease gives manifest signs
thereof Signs.
by the largeness, thickness, swelling and color of the Veins.

It is best not to meddle with such as are inveterate; for of such being cured
there The cure.
is to be feared a refluxe of the melancholy blood to the noble parts, whence
there may be imminent danger of malign Ulcers, a Cancer, Madness or
suffocation.

When as many Varices and diversely implicit are in the legs, they often
swell with congealed and dried blood, and cause pain which is increased by
going and compression. Such like Varices are to be opened by dividing the vein
with a Lancet, and then the blood must be pressed out, and evacuated by
pressing it upwards The cutting of Varices
and downwards; which I have often times done, and that with happy success to
the patients, whom I have made to rest for some few days, and have applied
convenient medicines. A Varix is often cut in the inside of the leg a little
below the knee, in which place commonly the original thereof is seen. He
which goes about to intercept a Varix downwards from the first original and
as it were fountain thereof, makes the cure far more difficult. For hence it
is divided as it were into many rivelets, all which the Surgeon is forced to
follow.

A Varix is therefore cut or taken away so to intercept the passage of the
blood and For what intention a Varix must be cut.
humors mixed together therewith, flowing to an Ulcer seated beneath; or else
least that by the too great quantity of blood, the vessel should be broken,
and death be occasioned by a haemorrhagie proceeding from thence. Now this is
the manner of cutting it. Let the patient lie upon his back on a bench or
table, then make a ligature Paulus cap. 82. lib. 6. The manner how to cut it.
upon the leg in two places the distance of some four fingers each from
other, wherein the excision may be made, for so the Vein will swell up and
come more in sight, and besides you may also mark it with ink; then taking
the skin up between your fingers cut it longwayes according as you have marked
it, then free the bared vein from the adjacent bodies; and put thereunder a
blunt pointed needle (least you prick the vein) thread with a strong double
thread, and so bind it fast; and then let it be opened with a Lancet, in the
middle under the Ligature just as you open a vein, and draw as much therehence
as shall be fit. Then straight make a Ligature in the lower part of the
forementioned Vein, and then cut away as much of the said Vein as is
convenient between the Ligatures, and so let the ends thereof withdraw
themselves into the flesh above and below; let these ligatures alone until
such time as they fall away of themselves. The operation being performed, let
an astringent medicine be applied to the wound and the neighboring parts;
neither must you stir the wound any more for the space of three days. Then
do all other things as are fit to be done to other such affects.

CHAP. XXI. Of Fistula's.
A Fistula is a sinuous, white, narrow, callous and not seldom unperceivable
Ulcer. It took its denomination from the similitude of a reeden What a
Fistulai^.
(Fistula) that is, a pipe, like whose hollownes it is. A Fistula is bred in
sundry parts of the body, and commonly follows upon Abscesses or Ulcers not
well cured.

A Callous is a certain fleshy substance, white, solid, or dense and hard, dry
and What a Gallousus.
without pain, generated by heaping up of dried excrementitious phlegm, or
else adult melancholy, encompassing the circuit of the Ulcer, and substituting
its self into the place of laudible flesh. The Sinus or cavity of a Fistula is
sometimes dry, and The differences of Fistula's.
otherwhile drops with continual moisture: sometimes the dropping of the
matter suddenly ceases, and the orifice thereof is shut up, that so it may
deceive both the Surgeon and the Patient with a false show of an absolute
cure; for within a while after it will open again and run as formerly it did.
Some Fistula's are bred by the corruption of a bone, others of a nerve, others
of membranes, and others of other parts of the body. Some run straight in,
others and that the greater part, have turnings and windings; some have one,
others have more orifices and windings; some are at the Joints, others
penetrate into some capaoity of the body, as into the chest, belly, guts, womb
bladder; some are easily, others difficultly cured, and some wholly uncurable.
There are diverse signs of Fistula's according to the variety The signs.
of the parts they possess; for if that which you touch with the end of your
probe make resistance, and resound, then you may know that it is come to the
bone; and then if the end of the probe slip up and down as on a smooth and
polite superficies, it is a sign that the bone is yet sound; but if it stop
and stay in any place as in a rough way, then know that the bone is eaten,
rough and perished; sometimes the bone lies bare, and then you need not use
the probe. Besides also it is a sign that The sign that the bone is ba^e from
the condition of the matter which is cast fur^h.
the bone is affected, if there be a purulent efflux of an unctuous or oily
matter, not much unlike that marrow wherewith the bone is nourished. For every
excrement shows the condition of the nourishment of the part whence it is
sent; in a Fistula which penetrates to a Nerve, the patient is troubled with a
pricking pain, especially when you come to search it with a probe, especially
if the matter which flows down be more acrid. Often times if it be cold, the
member is stupefied the motion Aetius tetra. 4. sect. 2 cap. 55.
being weakened; besides also the matter which flows from thence is more
subtle, and somewhat like unto that which flows from the bones, yet not oily
nor fat, but sanious and viscous resembling the condition of the alimentary
humor of the Nerves. The same usually appears and happens in Fistula's which
penetrate to the Tendons and those membranes which involve the muscles. If the
Fistula be within the flesh, the matter flowing thence is more thick and
plentiful, smooth, white and equal. If it descend into the Veins or
Arteries, the same happen as in those of the Nerves; but that there is no such
great pain in searching with your probe, nor no offense or impediment in the
use of any member: yet if the matter of the Fistulous Ulcer be so acrid, as
that it corrode the vessels, blood will flow forth; and that more thick if it
be from a vein, but more subtle and with some murmuring if from an Artery. Old
Fistula's and such as have run for many years, if suddenly Old Fistula's if
closed prove mortal.
shut up, cause death, especially in an ancient and weak body.

CHAP. XXII. Of the cure of Fistula's.
FOr the cure; in the first place it will be expedient to search the Fistula;
and that How to find out the windings and cavities of Fistula's.
either with a wax size, a probe of lead, gold or silver, to find out the
depth and windings or corners thereof. But if the Fistula be hollowed with two
or more orifices, and those cuniculous, so that you cannot possibly and
certainly search or find them all out with your probe; then must you cast an
injection into some one of these holes, and so observe the places where it
comes forth, for so you may learn how many, and how deep or superficiary
cavities there be; then by making incisions you must lay open and cut away the
callous parts. You must make incisions with an incision knife or razour, or
else apply actual or potentiall cauteries; for nature cannot unless the
Callous substance be first taken away, restore or generate flesh or
agglutinate the distant bodies. For hard things cannot grow together, unless
by the interposition of glue, such as is laudible blood; but a callous body on
all sides possessing the surface of the ulcerated flesh, hinders the flowing of
the blood out of the capillary veins for the restoring of the lost substance
and uniting of the disjoined parts. If you at any time make causticke
injections into the Causticke injections.
Fistula, you must presently stop the orifice thereof, that so they may have
time to work the effect, for which they are intended. Which thing we may
conjecture by the tumor of the part, the digesture of the flowing matter, and
its lesser quantity. Then you must hasten the falling away of the Eschar, and
then the Ulcer must be dressed like other Ulcers. But often times the Callous
which possesses the sinuous cavity of a Fistula, overcome by the power of acrid
and escharoticke medicines comes Colsu^ lib. 5.
whole forth, and falls out like a pipe, and so leaves a pure Ulcer underneath
it. Which I observed in a certain Gentleman, when I had washed with strong
Aegyptiacum diverse times a Fistulous Ulcer in his thigh shot through with a
bullet; then presently by putting in my Balsame formerly described, he grew
well in a short time. Fistula's which are near great vessels, Nerves or
principal intrailes, must not be meddled with, unless with great caution.
When a Fistula proceeds by the fault of a Remedies for a Fistula proceeding
from a corrupt bone.
corrupt bone, it is to be considered whether that fault in your bone be
superficiary, or deeper in, or whether it is wholly rotten and perished. For if
the default be superficiary it may easily be taken away with a desquammatory
Treapan; but if it penetrate even to the marrow, it must be taken forth with
cutting mullets, first having made way with a Terebellum. But if the bone be
quite rotten and perished, it must be wholly taken away, which may be fitly
done, in the joints of the fingers, the radius of the Cubite and Leg; but no
such thing may be attempted in the socket of the Huckle bone, the head of the
Thigh bone, or any of the Rack bones when they are mortified, neither in those
Fistula's, which are of their own nature uncurable; but you shall think you
have discharged your duty and done sufficiently for the Patient, if you leave
it with a prognosticke. Of this nature are Fistula's which penetrate The cure
of what Fistula's may be attempted, and which may not.
even to the bowels, which come into the parts orespread with large vessels
or Nerves, which happen to effeminate and tender persons, who had rather dye by
much, than to suffer the pain and torment of the operation. Like caution must
be used, when by the cutting of a Fistula there is fear of greater danger, as
of convulsion if the disease be in a nervous part. In these and the like cases
the Surgeon shall not set upon the perfect cure of the disease, but shall
think it better to prevent by all A palliative cure of a Fistula.
means possible that the disease by fresh supplies become no worse, which may
be done if he prevent the falling down of any new defluxion into the part; if
by an artificial diet he have a care that excrementitious humors be not too
plentifully generated in the body; or so order it, that being generated they
may be evacuated at certain times, or else diverted from the more noble to the
base parts. But in the mean space it shall be requisite to waist the faulty
flesh, which grows up more than is fitting in the Ulcer, and to cleanse the
sordes or filth, with medicines, which may do it without biting or acrimony
and putrefaction.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Fistula's in the Fundament.
FIstula's in the Fundament are bred of the same causes as other kinds of The
causes.
Fistula's are; to wit, of a wound or abscesse not well cured, or of a
haemorrhoide which is suppurated. Such as are occult, may be known by dropping
Signs.
down of the sanious and purulent humor by the Fundament and the pain of the
adjacent parts. But such as are manifest by the help of your probe you may
find whither they go and how far they reach. For this purpose the
Surgeon shall put his finger into the Fundament of the patient, and then put
a Leaden probe into the orifice of the Fistula, which if it come to the finger
without interposition of any medium, it is a sign it penetrats into the
capacity of the Gut. Besides also then there flows not only by the fundament
but also by the orifice which the malign humor has opened by its acrimony,
much matter, somewhiles sanious, and often times also breeding Worms. Fistula's
may be judged cuniculous, and running into many turnings and windings, if the
probe do not enter far in, and yet not withstanding more matter flows
therehence than reason requires should proceed from so small an Ulcer.

You may in the o^ifices of all Fistula's, perceive a certain callous wart,
which the common Chirurgions term a Hens arse. Many symptoms accompany
Fistula's Symptoms.
which are in the Fundament, as a Tenesmus, strangury and falling down of the
Fundament. If the Fustula must be cured by manual operation, let the patient
lie so upon his back, that lifting up his legs, his thighs may press his
belly, then let the Surgeon, having his nail pared, put his finger
besmeared with some ointment The art of binding and cu^ing a Fistula of the
Fundament.
into the patients Fundament; then let him thrust in at the orifice of the
Fistula a thick Leaden needle drawing after it a thread consisting of thread
and horse hairs woven together, and then with his finger taking hold thereof
and somewhat crooking it, draw it forth at the Fundament, together with the end
of the thread. Then let him knit the two ends of the thread with a draw or
loose knot, that so he may straiten them at his pleasure. But before you bind
them you shall draw the thread somewhat roughly toward you as though you
meant to saw the flesh therein contained, that you may by this means cut the
Fistula without any fear of an Haemorrhagye, or flux of blood.

It sometimes happens that such Fistula's penetrate not into the Gut; so that
the finger by interposition of some callous body cannot meet with the needle
or probe. Then it is convenient to put in a hollow iron or silver probe so
through the cavity thereof to thrust a sharp pointed needle, and that by
pricking and cutting may destroy the callous; which thing you cannot perform
with the formerly described leaden probe, which has a blunt point, unless
with great pain.

The description of a hollow Silver probe to be used with a needle, as also a
Leaden probe.
A. Shows the Needle.

B. The hollow probe.

C. The needle with the probe.

D. The Leaden needle drawing a thread after it.



The Callus being waisted, the Fistula shall be bound as we formerly mentioned
That which is superficiary needs no binding, only it must be cut with a crooked
scalprum, and the Callus being consumed, the rest of the cure must be
performed after the manner of other Ulcers. But you must note, that if any
parcel of the Callous body remain untoucht by the medicine or instrument, the
Fistula reviving again will cause a relapse.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Haemorrboides.
HAemorrhoides, as the word usually taken, are tumors at the extremities What
they are.
of the veins encompassing the Fundament, caused by the defluxion of an humor
commonly melancholicke, and representing a certain kind of Varices. Some of
these run at an hole being opened, which sometimes in space of time Their
differences.
contracts a Callus; others only swell, and cast forth no moisture; some are
manifest; others lie only hid within. Those which run, commonly cast forth
blood mixed with yellowish serous moisture, which stimulates the blood to
break forth, and by its acrimony opens the mouths of the veins. But such as
do not run, are either like blisters, such as happen in burns, and by
practitioners are usually called vesicales, and are caused by the defluxion of
a phlegmatic and serous humor; or else represent a Grape, whence they are
called Wales, generated by the afflux of blood laudible in quality, but
overaboundant in quantiry; or else they express the manner of a disease,
whence they are termed morales, proceeding from the suppression of
melancholicke blood; or else they represent warts, whence they are styled
Verrucales, enjoying the same material cause of the generation as the morales
do.

This affect is cause of many accidents in men; for the perpetual effluxe of
blood Symptoms.
extinguisheth the vivide and lively color of the face, calls on a dropsy,
overthrowes the strength of the whole body. The flux of Haemorrhoides is
commonly every month, sometimes only four times in a year. Great pain,
inflammation, an Abscesse which may at length end in a Fistula, unless it be
resisted by convenient remedies, do often times forerunne the evacuation of the
Haemorrhoides. But if the Haemorrhoides flow in a moderate quantity, if the
patients brook it well, they ought not to be stayed, for that they free the
patients from the fear of imminent evils, as melancholy, leprosy, strangury
and the like. Besides, if they be stopped without a Sent. 37. sect: 6, epid.
cause, they by their refluxe into the Lungs cause their inflammation, or else
break the vessels thereof, and by flowing to the Liver cause a dropsy by the
suffocation of the native heat; they cause a dropsy and universal leanenesse
on the contrary, if they flow immoderately, by refrigerating the Liver by loss
of too much blood; wherefore when as they flow too immoderately, they must be
stayed with a pledget of hares down dipped in the ensuing medicine.. pull.
aloes, thuris, balaust. sang draconis, A remedy for the immoderate flowing of
the Heamor^hoides.
an. ss. incorporentur simul cum ovi albumine, fiat medicamentum ad usum. When
they are stretched out and swollne without bleeding, it is convenient to beat
an Onion roasted in the embers with an Oxes gall, and apply this medicine to
the swollen places, and renew it every five hours. This kind of remedy is very
prevalent For suppressed Heamorrhoides.
for internal Haemorrhoides; but such as are manifest may be opened with
horsleaches, or a Lancet. The juice or mass of the herb called commonly Dead
nettle or Arkeangell, applied to the swollen Haemorrhoides opens them, and makes
the congealed blood flow there hence. The Fungus and Thymus being diseases
about the fundament are cured by the same remedy. If acrimony heat and pain
do too cruelly afflict the patient, you must make him enter into a bath, and
presently after apply to the ulcers (if any such be) this following remedy..
Olei ros. iiij. cerusae j. Litharg. ss cerae novae, vj. opij j. fiaet unguent.
secundum artem. Or else. thur is, myrrhae, croci, an. j. opij j. fiat unguentum
cum oleo rosarum and mucagine sem. psilij, addendo vitellum unius ovt. You may
easily prosequute the residue of the cure according to the general rules of
Art.

The end of the Thirteenth Book.
OF BANDAGES, OR, LIGATURES. THE FOURTEENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the differences of Bandages.
BAndages, wherewith we use to bind, do much differ amongst themselves. But
their differences (in Galens opinion) are chiefly Lib. de fascijs.
drawn from six things; to wit, their matter, figure, length, breadth,
making, and parts whereof they consist. Now the matter of Bandages is
threefold; Membranous or of skins, which is accommodated peculiarly to the
fractured grisles of the Nose; of Woollen, proper to inflamed parts, as those
which have need of no astriction; of Linen, as when any thing is to be fast
bound: and of Linen clothes, some are made of flax, othersome of hemp, as
Hippocrates observes. But Bandages do thus differ amongst Sect. 3. de Chir.
offic.
themselves in structure, for that some thereof consist of that matter which is
sufficiently close and strong of it self, such are the membranous; others are
woven, as the linen ones. But that Linen is to be made choice of for this
use, and judged What cloth best for rowlers.
the best, not which is new and never formerly used, but that which has
already been worn and served for other uses, that so the Bandages made
thereof may be the more soft and pliable: yet must they be of such strength,
that they may not break with stretching, and that they may straightly contain
and repel the humor ready to flow down, and so hinder it from entering the
part. These, besides, must not be hemmed nor stitched, must have no lace nor
seame; for hems and seames by their hardness press into, and hurt the flesh
that lies under them. Lace, whether in the midst or edges of the rowler, makes
the Ligature unequal. For the Member where it is touched with the Lace, as
that which will not yield, is pressed more hard; but with the cloth in the
middle more gently, as that which is more laxe. Furthermore, these Ligatures
must be of clean cloth, that if occasion be, they may be moystened or
steeped in liquour appropriate to the disease, and that they may not corrupt,
or make worse that liquour by their moistening therein. Now the Bandages which
are made of Linen clothes must be cut long-waies, and not athwart, for so
they shall keep more firm and strong that which they bind, and besides, they
will be always alike, and not broader in one place than in another. But they
thus differ in figure, for that some of them are rolled up, to which nothing
must be sowed, for that they ought to be of a due length to bind up the
member: others are cut or divided, which truly consist of one piece, but that
divided in the end (such are usually taken to bind up the breasts) or else in
the midst; others are sowed together, which consist of many branches sowed
together, and ending in diverse heads, and representing diverse figures, such are
the Bandages appropriated to the head. But they thus differ in length, for that
some of them are shorter, others longer: so in like sort for breadth; for some
are broader, others narrower. Yet we cannot certainly define nor set down
neither the length, nor breadth of Rowlers, for that they must be various,
according to the different length and thickness of the members or parts.
Generally they ought both in length and breadth to fit the parts, whereunto
they are used. For these parts require a binding different each from other, the
head, the neck, shoulders, arms, breasts, groines, testicles, fundament,
hips, thighs, legs, feet and toes. For the parts of Bandages, we term one
part their body, another their heads. By the body we mean their due length
and breadth; but their ends, whether they run long-waies or a-crosse, we
according to Galen, term them their heads. Com. ad sect. 22. sect. 2. de
offic. chir.


CHAP. II. Shows the indications and general precepts of fitting of Bandages
and Ligatures.
THere are, in Hippocrates opinion, two indications of fitting Bandages or 1.
and 2. sect. lib. de fract.
Ligatures; the one whereof is taken from the part affected; the other from the
affect it self. From the part affected: so the leg, if you at any time bind
it up, must be bound long-waies; for if you bind it overthwart, the binding
will loosen as soon as the patient begins to go, and put forth his leg,
for then the muscles take upon them another figure. On the contrary the Arm
or Elbow must be bound up, bending in and turned to the breast, for otherwise
at the first bending, if it be bound when it is stretched forth, the Ligature
will be slacked, for that (as we formerly said) the figure of the muscles is
perverted. Now for this indication, let each one persuade himself thus much,
That the part must be bound up in that figure, wherein we would have it
remain.

Now for that indication which is drawn from the disease, if there be a hollow
ulcer, sinuous and cuniculous, casting forth great store of Sanies, then must
you begin We must always begin our ligatures at the bottom of a sinus.
the ligature and binding from the bottom of the sinus, and end at the orifice
of the ulcer; and this precept must you always observe, whether the sinus be
sealed in the top, bottom, middle, or sides of the ulcer. For thus the filth
therein contained shall be emptied and cast forth, and the lips of the ulcer
too far separated, shall be joined together; otherwise the contained filth
will eat into all that lies near it, increase the ulcer, and make it
uncurable by rotting the bones which lie under it with this acride sanies or
filth. But some Ligatures are remedies Hipp. sent. 4. sect. 2. offic.
of themselves, as those which perform their duties of themselves, and whereto
the cure is committed, as are these which restore to their native unity, those
parts which are dis-joyned: others are not used for their own sakes, but only
to serve to hold fast such medicines as have a curative faculty. This kind of
Ligature is either yet a doing, and is termed by Hippoc. Deligatio operans; or
else done and finished, Initio 2. sect. off.
and is called, Deligatio operata: for the first, that the Ligature may be well
made, it is fit that it be close rolled together, and besides, that the Surgeon
hold it stiff and strait in his hand, and not carelessly, for so he shall bind
up the member the better. Also he must in the binding observe, that the ends of
the Rowler, and consequently their fastening may not fall to be on the affected
or grieved part; for it is better that they come above or below, or else on the
side: besides also, he must have a special care that there be no knot tied
upon the same place, or upon the region of the back, buttocks, sides, joints,
or back part of the head, or to conclude in any other part upon which the
Patient uses to lean, rest or lie. Also on that part where we intend to sow
or fasten the Rowlers, you must double in their ends, that so the fastening or
suture may be the stronger, otherwise how close soever they shall be wrapped or
rolled about the member, yet will they not remain firm, especially if they be
of a great breadth. For the second kind of Ligature, to wit, that which is
already done and finished; the Surgeon, the performer thereof, must consider to
what end it was done, and whether he has performed it well and fitly, as also
neatly and elegantly, Ligatures must not be only lightly, but also neatly
performed.
to the satisfaction both of himself and the beholders. For it is the part of
a skillful Workman every where handsomely and rightly to perform that which
may so be done.

In fractures and luxations and all dislocations of bones, as also in wounds
and contusions, you must begin your bandage with two or three windings or
wraps about upon the place, and that (if you can) more straightly than in other
places, that so the set bones may be the better kept in their places, and that
the humors, if any be already fallen thither, may by this strait compression
be pressed forth, as also to hinder and prevent the entrance in of any other
which may be ready to fall down. But in fractures (as those which never
happen without contusion) the blood flows, and is pressed forth of its proper
vessels, as those which are violently battered and torn, which causes
sugillation in the neighboring flesh, which first looks red, but afterward
black and blue by reason of the corruption of the blood poured forth under the
skin. Wherefore after these first windings, which I formerly mentioned, you
must continue your rolling a great way from the broken or luxated part; he
which does otherwise, will more and more draw the blood and humors into the
affected part, and cause Impostumes, and other malign accidents. Now the blood
which flows, goes but one way downwards, but that which is pressed is Gal.
com. ad sent. 25. sect. 1. lib. de fract.
carried as it were in two paths, to wit, from above downwards, and from
below upwards. Yet you must have a care that you rather drive it back into
the body and bowels, than toward the extremities thereof, as being parts which
are incapable of so much matter, and not furnished with sufficient strength to
suffer that burden, which threatens to fall upon it, without danger and the
increase of prenaturall accidents. But when this mass and burden of humors is
thrust back into the body, it is then ruled and kept from doing harm by the
strength and benefit of the faculties remaining in the bowels and the native
heat.

CHAP. III. Of the three kinds of Bandages necessary in fractures.
TWo sorts of Ligatures are principally necessary for the Surgeon, according
to Hippocrates, by which the bones as well broken as dislocated Sent. 24. sect
2. offic.
may be held firm when they are restored to their natural place.

Of these some are called Hypodesmides, that is, Under-binders: others,
Hypodesmides.
Epidesmi, that is, Over-binders. There are sometimes but two under-binders
used, but more commonly three. The first must first of all be cast over the
fracture, and wrapped there some three or four times about, then the Surgeon
must mark and observe the figure of the fracture; for as that shall be, so
must he vary the manner of his binding. For the ligature must be drawn strait
upon the side opposite to that whereto the luxation or fracture most inclines,
that so the bone which stands forth may be forced into its seat, and so forced
may be the more firmly there contained. Therefore if the right side be the
more prominent or standing forth, thence must you begin your ligation, and so
draw your ligature to the left side. On the contrary, if the left side be more
prominent, beginning there, you shall go toward the opposite side in binding
and rolling it. Here therefore would I require a Surgeon to be Ambidexter,
(.i.) having both his hands at command, that so he may the more exquisitly
perform such variety of ligations. But let him in rolling, bend or move this
first ligature upwards, that is, toward the body, for the former reasons. But
neither is this manner of ligation peculiar to fractures, but common to them
with luxations: for, into what part soever the luxated bone flew, then when it
is restored, that side must be bound the more loosely and gently whence it
departed, and that on the contrary more hard unto which it went. Therefore the
ligature must be drawn from the side whereunto the bone went; so that on this
side it be more loose and soft, and not straightly pressed with boulsters or
rowlers, that so it may be more inclined to the side opposite to the luxation.
If the ligation be other-wise performed, it succeeds not well, for the part is
relaxed, and moved out of its natural seat: wherefore there will be no small
danger, lest the bone be forced out again, and removed from its place,
whereinto it was restored by art and the hand. Which thing Hippocrates so much
feared, that on the contrary he willed that the set bone should be drawn
somewhat more unto the part contrary to that whereunto it was driven by force,
than the natural and proper site thereof should require. But to return to our
former discourse of the three Ligatures: The first under-binder being put on,
we then take the second, with which we in like sort begin at the fracture,
but having wrapped it once or twice about there, for that, as we formerly said,
we must not force back, and press so much blood toward the extremities, as
we must do toward the body and bowels. Wherefore this Ligature shall be
drawn from above downe-wards, gently straining it to press forth the blood
contained in the wounded part: When by rolling you shall come to the end of
that part, then you shall carry back again that which remains thereof, to
wit, upwards; But otherwise you may take the third under-binder, wherewith you
may When the third under-binder is necessary. Epidesmi.
begin to roll, whereas you left with the second, and you may carry it thus,
rolling it from below upwards. These under-bindings thus finished, apply your
boulsters, after them your over or upper-bindings, which are often times two, but
sometimes three. The first has two heads, and is wrapped both from the right
hand and the left, for the preservation of the first under-binder and the
boulsters, and restoring the muscles to their native figure. The two other
which remain, consist of one head, and the one of them must be rolled from
below upwards, the other from above downwards, after such a manner, that they
may be directly contrary to the under-binders; as if they were rolled from the
right hand, then these must be from the left. Now this is the manner of
Hippocrates his Ligation, which, for that it is now grown out of use, we must
here set down that which is in common use. They do not at this time use any
over-binders, but that which we termed the third under-binder serves our
Surgeons in stead of the three forementioned The manner of binding now in use.
over-binders. Wherefore they carry this third under-binder, wrapped from below
upwards (as we formerly said) contrary to the first and second under-binder; as
if these begun on the right side, this shall be rolled from the left, and
shall end whereas the first under-binder ended. And you must not only draw it
indifferently hard, but also make the spires and windings more rare. This third
rowler is of this use in this manner of Ligation, that is, it restores the
muscles to their native figure, from whence they were somewhat altered by the
drawing and rolling of the two former Ligatures. But you must always have
regard, that you observe that What mean to be observed in wrapping the
Ligatures.
measure in wrapping your Ligatures, which reason, with the sense of the
patient, and ease in suffering, prescribes; having regard that the tumor become
not inflamed. Also the habit of the body ought to prescribe a measure in
Ligation: for tender bodies cannot away with so hard binding as hard. Verily,
in fractures and luxations, the humors by too strait binding are pressed into
the extreme parts of the body; whence grievous and often times enormous Oedema's
proceed: for healing whereof the Ligature must be loosed, and then the
tumified parts pressed by a new rolling, which must be performed from below
upwards, and so, by forcing the matter of the Tumor thither, it may be helped;
for there is no other hope or way to drive the humor back again. He which
does this, forsakes the proper cure of the disease, so to resist the symptom,
which the Surgeon shall never refuse to do, as often as any necessary cause
shall require it. For this cause Hippocrates bids, that the Bandages be loosed
every three days, and then to ^oment the part with hot Why Hippoc. bids to
loose the Ligatures every third, day.
water, that so the humors, which (drawn thither by the vehemence of pain)
have settled in the part, may be dissolved and dispersed, and itching and other
such like symptoms prevented. The fear of all accidents being past, let the
Ligation be sooner or later loosed, and more slacked than it formerly was
accustomed; that so the blood and laudible matter, whereof a Callus may ensue,
may flow more freely to the affected part.

CHAP. IIII. Of the binding up of Fractures associated with a wound.
IT sometimes happens, that a Fracture is associated by a wound, and yet How to
bind up a Fracture with a wound.
for all this it is fit to bind the part with a Ligature, otherwise there will
be no small danger of swelling, inflammation, and other ill accidents, by
reason of the too plentiful affluxe of humors from the neighboring parts. But
it is not fit to endeavor to use that kind of binding which is performed with
many circumvolutions or wrappings about. For, seeing the wound must be
dressed every day, the part must each day necessarily be stirred, and the
Ligature, consisting of so many windings, loosed; which thing will cause pain,
and consequently hinder the knitting and uniting which is performed by rest.
Therefore this kind of binding may be performed by one only rolling about the
wound, and that with a rowler which consists of a twice or thrice doubled
cloth, made in manner of a boulster, and sewed with as much conveniencie as you
can, that it may be so large as to encompasse and cover all the wound, for
these reasons; which shall be delivered at large in our Treatise of Fractures.
But if the wound run long-wayes, let the boulsters and splints be applied to
the sides of the wound, that so the lips of the wound may be pressed
together, and the contained filth pressed forth. But if it be made over-thwart,
we must abstain from boulsters and splints: for that, in Galens opinion, they
would dilate the wound, and the purulent Ad sent. 12. sect. de fract.
matter would be pressed out, and cast back into the wound.

CHAP. V. Certain common precepts of the binding up of Fractures and Luxations.
IN every Fracture and Luxation, the depressed, hollow and extenuated parts,
such as are near unto the joints, ought to be filled up with boulsters, or
clothes put about them, so to make the part equal, that so they may be equally
and on every side pressed by the splints, and the bones more firmly contained
in their seats. So when the knee is bound up, you must fill the ham or that
cavity which is there, that so the ligation may be the better and speedilier
performed. The same must be done under the armepits, above the heel, in the
arm near the wrest; and, to conclude, in all other parts which have a
conspicuous inequality by reason of some manifest cavitie. When you have
finished your binding, then enquire of the patient, whether the member seem
not to be bound too strait. For if he say, that Hipp. sent. 37. and 38. sect.
1. de fract.
he is unable to endure it so hard bound, then must the binding be somewhat
slackned. For, too strait binding causes pain, heat, defluxion, a gangrene,
and lastly, a sphacell or mortification: but too loose is unprofitable, for
that it does not contain the parts in that state we desire. It is a sign of a
just ligation that is neither too The signs of too strait and loose binding up.
strait nor too loose, if the ensuing day the part be swollen with an oedematous
tumor, caused by the blood pressed forth of the broken place; but of too strait
ligation, if the part be hard swollen; and of too loose, if it be no whit
swollen, as that which has pressed no blood out of the affected part. Now if a
hard tumor, caused by too strait binding, trouble the patient, it must
presently be loosed, for fear of more grievous symptoms, and the part must
be fomented with warm Hydraeleum; and another indifferent, yea verily, more
loose ligature must be made in stead thereof, as long as the pain and
inflammation shall continue; in which time and for which cause, you shall lay
nothing upon the part which is any thing burdensome. When the patient begins
to recover, for three or four days space, especially if you find him of a
more compact habit and a strong man, the ligature must be kept firm and not
loosed. If on the third day, and so until the seventh, the spires or windings
be found more loose, and the part affected more slender; then we must judge it
to be for the better. For hence you may gather, that there is an expression and
digestion of the humors, causing the tumor made by force of the ligation.
Verily, broken bones fitly bound up, are better set, and more firmly
agglutinated, which Why we must make more strait ligation on the broken part.
is the cause, why in the place of the fracture the ligation must be made the
straiter, in other places more loosely. If the fractured bone stand forth in
any part, it must there be more straightly pressed with boulsters and splints. To
conclude, the seventh day being past, we must bind the part more straightly than
before: for that then inflammation, pain, and the like accidents, are not to
be feared. But these things which we have hitherto spoken of the three kinds
of Ligatures, cannot take place in each fractured part of the body, as in the
chaps, collar-bones, head, nose, ribs. For, seeing such parts are not round and
long, a Ligature cannot be wrapped about them, as it may on the arms, thighs,
and legs, but only be put on their outsides.

CHAP. VI. The uses for which Ligatures serve.
BY that which we have formerly delivered, you may understand that Ligatures
are of use to restore those things which are separated and The first benefit of
Ligatures.
moved forth of their places, and join together those which gape; as in
fractures, wounds, contusions, sinewous ulcers, and other like affects against
nature, in which the solution of continuitie stands in need of the help of
Bandages, for the reparation thereof. Besides also, by the help of The second.
Bandages these things are kept asunder or separated, which otherwise would
grow together, against nature; as in Burns, wherein the fingers and the hams
would mutually grow together; as also the arme-pits to the chests, the chin to
the breast, unless they be hindered by due Ligation. Bandages do also conduce
to refresh emaciated parts: wherefore if the right leg waste for want of
nourishment, the left The third.
leg, beginning at the foot, may be conveniently rolled up even to the
groine. If the right arm consume, bind the left with a strait Ligature,
beginning at the hand, and ending at the arme-pit. For thus a great portion of
blood from the boundup part is sent back into the vena cava, from whence it
regurgitates into the almost empty vessels of the emaciated part. But I would
have the sound part to be so bound, that thereby it become not painful; for
a dolorifick ligation causes a greater attractation of blood and spirits, as
also exercise: wherefore I would have it during that time to be at rest, and
keep holy day. Ligatures also conduce to the stopping of bleedings: which you
may perceive by this, that when you open a The fourth.
vein with your launcet, the blood is presently stayed, laying on a boulster
and making a ligature. Also Ligatures are useful for women presently after
their delivery; for their womb being bound about with Ligatures, the blood
wherewith their The fifth.
womb was too much moistened, is expelled, the strength of the expulsive
faculty being by this means stirred up to the expulsion thereof: and it also
hinders the empty womb from being swollen up with wind, which otherwise would
presently enter thereinto. This same Ligature is a help to such as are with
child, for the more easy carrying of their burden; especially those whose
Child lies so far The sixth.
down-wards, that lying as it were in the den of the hippes, it hangs between
the thighs, and so hinders the free going of the mother. Therefore the woman
with child is not only eased by this binding of her womb with this Ligature,
which is commonly termed, the navill Ligature; but also, her child being held
up higher in her womb, she has fr^e^r and more liberty to walk. Ligatures
are in like sort The seventh.
good for revulsion and derivation: as also for holding of medicines which are
laid to a part, as the neck, breast or belly. Lastly, there is a triple use of
Ligatures in The eighth, the particular use of ligatures in the amputation of
members.
amputation of members, as arms and legs. The first to draw and hold upwards
the skin and muscles lying under it, that the operation being performed, they
may, by their falling down again, cover the ends of the cut off bones; and so
by that means help forwards the agglutination and cicatrization; and when it
is healed up, cause the lame member to move more freely, and with less pain;
and also to perform the former actions, this, as it were, cushion or boulster
of musculous flesh lying thereunder. The second is, they hinder the bleeding by
pressing together the veins and arteries. The third is, they by strait binding
intercept the free passage of the animal spirits, and so deprive the part
which lies thereunder of the sense of feeling, by making it, as it were, stupid
or number.

CHAP. VII. Of Boulsters or Compresses.
BOulsters have a double use; the first is to fill up the cavities and those
parts The first use of Boulsters.
which are not of an equal thickness to their ends. We have examples of
cavities in the Arme-pits, Clavicles, Hams and Groines; and of parts which grow
small toward their ends, in the arms toward the wrests, in the legs
toward the feet, in the thighs toward the knees. Therefore you must fill
these parts with boulsters and linen clothes, that so they may be all of one
bigness to their ends.

The second use of boulsters, is to defend and preserve the first two or three
Rowlers The second use of them.
or Under-binders, the which we said before must be applied immediately to the
fractured part. Boulsters, according to this two fold use, differ amongst
themselves, for that when they are used in the first mentioned kind, they must
be applied athwart; but when in the latter, long-wayes or downright.

You may also use Boulsters, lest the too strait binding of the Ligatures cause
The third use of them.
pain and trouble to the new set bones. A three or four times doubled cloth
will serve for the thickness of your Boulsters, but the length and breadth
must be more or less, according to the condition of the parts and disease for
which they must be applied.

CHAP. VIII. Of the use of Splints, Junks, and Cases.
HAving delivered the uses of Ligatures and Boulsters, it remains that we say
somewhat of the other things, which serve to hold the bones in their places; as
Splints, Junks, Cases, and such other like. Splints The matter of Splints.
are made and composed of past board, of thin splinters of wood, of leather,
such as sho^-soales are made with; of the rindes of trees, or plates of Latin,
or lead, and such other like, which have a gentle and yielding stiffenesse; yet
would I have them made as light as may be, lest they by their weight become
troublesome to the afflicted part. But for their length, breadth, and number,
let them be fitted agreeable to the part whereto they must be used. Let also
their figure be straight or crooked according to the condition of the member
whereto they must be applied. You must have a special care, that they run
not so far as the swellings out, or eminencies of the bones; as the ancles,
knees, elbowes, and the like, lest they hurt them by their pressure: also you
must have a care, that they be smaller at their ends, and thicker in their
middles, whereas they lie upon the broken bone. The use of splints is, to hold
fast and firm, that they may Their use.
stir no way the broken and luxated bones, after they be set and restored to
their places. That they perform this use, it is fit there be no thick
boulsters under them, nor over many rowlers; for so through so thick a space,
they would not so straightly press the part. Junkes are made of sticks the
bigness of ones finger, wrapped What Junkare.
about with rushes, and then with linen cloth: they are principally used in
fractures of the thighs and legs. Cases are made of plates of Latin, or else
of some light wood; their use is, to contain the bones in their due figure,
when the patient is to The matter and use of Cases.
be carried out of one bed or chamber into another, or else has need to go
to stool: lastly, if we must rest somewhat more strongly upon the broken or
luxated members, these Cases will hinder the bones from stirring or flying out
on the right side or left, above or below, we sleeping or waking, being willing
or unwilling; and in like sort left being not as yet well knit, or more loosely
bound up for fear of pain, inflammation, or a gangrene, they hang down,
fall, or fly in sunder by reason of the inequalities of the bed. Such Cases,
Junkes, and the like, which serve for restoring and fast holding of broken and
luxated bones, we may, according to Hippocrates his mind, call them in
general Glossocomia. All which things, the Glossocomium, a general name for
such things.
young Surgeon, which is not as yet exercised in the works of Art, can scarce
tell what they are. But in the mean time, whilst that he may come to be
exercised therein, or see others perform these operations, I, as plainly as
possibly I could, have in words given him their portraiture or shape.

The end of the fourteenth Book.
OF FRACTURES. THE FIFTEENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. What a Fracture is, and what the differences thereof are.
A Fracture, in Galens opinion, is the solution of continuitie in a Lib. 6.
method.
bone, which by the Greeks is called Catagma. There are many sorts of hurting
or offending the bones: as the drawing them a-sunder, luxation, or putting them
out of joint; their unnatural growing together, their cutting or dividing
a-sunder; contusion, abscesse, putrefaction, rottenness, laying bare the
periostium being violated or lost; and lastly, that whereof we now treat, a
Fracture. Again, the varieties of Fractures are almost infinite. For one is
complete and perfect, another imperfect; one runs long-wise, another
transverse, another oblique; one while it is broken into great pieces, another
while into little and small scales, which have either a blunt, or else a sharp
end, and prick the adjacent bodies of the muscles, nerves, veins or arteries.
It sometimes happens, that the bone is not broken into splinters, that is,
long-wayes, but together, and at once into two pieces overthwart, which
Fracture is called Raphanedon, that is, after the manner of What it is for a
bone to be broken Raphanedon.
a Raddish.

A Fracture is made Caryedon, or like a nut, when as the bone flies into many
What Caryedon, or Alphitidon.
small pieces, severed each from other, as when a Nut is broken with a hammer
or mallet upon an Anvile: Which fracture is also termed Alphitidon, by reason
of the resemblance it has to meal or flower; and such is often seen in
fractures made by bullets, shot out of guns and such fiery engines. Contrary to
these are those fractures which are called Schidacidon, as rent into splinters,
or after the manner of What Schidacidon.
a board or piece of timber, that is, right-downe, and along the bone: and
these fractures are either apparent to the eye, or else not apparent, and
therefore called Capillarie, being so small, as that they cannot be perceived
by the eye, unless you put ink upon them, and then shave them with your
Scrapers. Sometimes the bone is only pressed down by the stroke, sometimes on
the contrary it flies up, as if it were vaulted. They call it attrition, when
the bone is broken into many small fragments, and as it were scales or chips.
The fragments of fractured bones are sometimes smooth and polished, otherwhiles
unequal, and as it were sharp and rough with little teeth, or pricks. Some
fractures touch only the surface of the bone, fetching off only a scale;
othersome change not the site of fractured bones, but only cleaves them
length-waies, without the plucking away of any fragment; othersome penetrate
even to their marrow.

Furthermore some Fractures are simple and alone by themselves; othersome are
accompanied with a troop of other affects and symptoms; as a wound,
haemorrhagye, inflammation, gangrene, and the like. Hereunto you may also add
the differences drawn from the parts which the Fractures possess; as from the
head, ribs, limbs, joints, and other members of the body. Add also these
which are taken from the habit of bodies, aged, young, full of ill humors, well
tempered; almost all which have their proper and peculiar indications for
curing. Now the causes The causes of fractures.
of Fractures, are the too violent assaults or strokes of all external things,
which may cut, bruise, break, or shake: in this number of causes may also be
reckoned falls from high places, and infinite other things, which would be long
and tedious to reckon up.

CHAP. II. Of the signs of a Fracture.
WE may know by evident signs that a bone is broken: the first whereof, and
most certain, is, when by handling the part which The first sign of a broken
bone.
we suspect to be broken, we feel pieces of the bone severed a-sunder, and
hear a certain crackling of these pieces under our hands, caused by the
attrition of the shattered bones. Another sign is taken from the impotencie of
the part, which chiefly bewrayes Another.
its self, when both the bones, the leg, and brace-bones, the ell and wand
are broken. For if only the brace-bone or wand be broken, the Patient may go
on his leg, and stir his arm: for the brace-bone serves for the sustaining
of the muscles, and not of the body, as the leg bone does. The third A third.
sign is drawn from the figure of the part changed besides nature: for it is
there hollow, from whence the bone is flowne or gone, but gibbous or bunching
out whither it is run. Great pain in the interim torments the patient by
reason of the wronged periostium, and that membrane which involves the marrow
and the sympathy of the adjacent parts which are compressed or pricked.

CHAP. III. Of Prognostics to be made in Fractures.
We must prognosticate in Fractures, whether they are to end in the
destruction or welfare of the patient; or whether their cure shall be long or
short, easy, or else difficult and dangerous; and lastly, what accidents and
symptoms may happen thereupon. He shall easily attain to the knowledge of
all these things, who is not only well seen in the anatomicall description of
the bones, but also in the temper, composition and complexion of the whole
body. Wherefore in the first place, I think good to admonish the Surgeon of
this, that in winter when all is stiff with cold, by a little fall, or Why
bones are more brittle in frostie weather.
some such slight occasion, the bones may be quickly and readily broken. For
then the bones, being dried by the dryness of the air encompassing us, become
more brittle; which every one of the Vulgar usually observe to happen both in
waxen and tallow candles: but when the season is moist, the bones are also more
moist, and therefore more flexible and yielding to the violence of the obvious
and offending body. Wherefore also you may gather this to the framing of your
Prognostics, That bones by reason of their natural dryness are not so easily
agglutinated Why the solution of continuity in bones is not so easily repaired.
Gal. in art par.
and consolidated as flesh; though in Children, according to Galen, by reason
of the abundance of their humiditie, the lost substance may be repaired,
according (as they term it) to the first intention, that is, by restoring of
the same kind of substance or matter. But in others, about the Fractures a
certain hard substance usually concreats, of that nourishment of the broken
bone which abounds, which glues together the fragments thereof, being fitly put
together. This substance is then termed a Callus, and it is so hardened in
time, that the bone thereafter in the broken part is seen to be more firm and
hard than it is in any other: therefore that usual saying in Physic is not
without reason; That rest is necessary for the uniting of broken bones. For
the Callus is easily dissolved, if they be moved before their perfect and
solid agglutination. The matter of a Callus ought to be indifferent and
laudible in quantity and quality, even as blood which flows for the
regeneration of the lost flesh in wounds. It is fit, that there may be
sufficient matter for such a Callus, that the part have a laudible temper,
otherwise there either will be no Callus, or certainly it will grow more slowly.
Fractures are far more easily repaired in young Why bones sooner knitin young
bodies.
bodies than in old: for in these there is plenty of the primigenious and
radical moisture, that is laudably holding and glutinous; and in the other
there is store of watrish and excrementitious. By this you may easily
conjecture, that you cannot certainly set down a time necessary for the
generating a Callus: for in some it happens later, in some sooner: the cause of
which variety is also to be referred to the constitution of the year and
region, the temper and diet of the Patient, and manner of Ligation. For, those
Patients whose powers are weak, and blood watrish and thin, in these the
generation of a Callus uses to be more slow: On the contrary, Meats of gross
and tough nourishment conduce to the generation of a Callus.
strong powers hasten to agglutinate the bones, if there be plenty of gross
and viscous matter; whereby it comes to pass, that meats of grosser nutriment
are to be used, and medicines applied which may help forwards the endeavor
of nature, as we shall declare hereafter. When the bones are broken near unto
the joints, the motion afterward uses to be more difficult, especially if the
Callus, which is substituted, be somewhat thick and bunching forth. But if,
together with the violence Fractures at joints dangerous.
and force of the Fracture, the joints shall be broken and bruised, the motion
will not only be lost, but the life brought in danger, by reason of the
greatness of the inflammation, which usually happens in such affects, and the
excess of pain in a tendinous body. These fractures wherein both the bones of
the arm or leg are broken, are more difficult to cure, than those which
happen but to one of them. For they are handled and kept in their places with
more difficulty, because that which Hipp. sect. 18. and 19. sect. i. de
fracturis.
remains whole, serves the other for a rest or stay to which it may lean.
Moreover, there is longer time required to substitute a Callus to a great bone,
than to a little one. Again these bones which are more rare and spongie, are
sooner glued together by the interposition of a Callus, than these which are
dense and solid. A Callus sooner grows in sanguine, than in choleric bodies.
But broken bones cannot be so happily agglutinated, nor restored in any body,
but that always some asperity or unequal protuberancie may be seen on that
part where the Callus is generated. Wherefore the Surgeon ought to make
artificial Ligations, that the Callus may Ligations conduce to the handsomnes
of a Callus.
not stand out too far, nor sink down too low. That Fracture is least
troublesome which is simple; on the contrary, that is more troublesome which
is made into splinters; but that is most troublesome and worst of all which is
in small and sharp fragments, because there is danger of convulsion by pricking
a nerve, or the periostium. Sometimes the fragments of a broken bone keep
themselves in their due place: they also often times fly forth thereof, so that
one of them gets above another; which when it happens, you may perceive an
inequality by the depression of the one part and the bunching forth of the
other, as also pain by the pricking: besides also the member is made shorter
than it was, and than the sound member on the opposite side is, and more swollen
by the contraction of the muscles toward their original. Wherefore when a
bone is broken, if you perceive aniething so depressed, Extension must
presently be made after the bone is broken.
presently putting your hand on both sides above and below, stretch forth the
bone as forcibly as you can; for otherwise, the muscles and nerves, stretched
and contracted, will never of their own accord suffer the bones to be restored
to their proper seat and themselves. This extension must be performed in the
first days, for afterward there will happen inflammation: which being
present, it is dangerous to draw the nerves and tendons too violently; for
hence would ensue an impostume, convulsion, gangrene and mortification.
Therefore Hippocrates forbids Sent. 36. sect. 3. de fract.
you to defer such extension until the third, or fourth day. Fractures are
thought dangerous, whose fragments are great, and fly out, especially in these
bones which are filled with marrow on the inside. When broken or dislocated
bones cannot be restored to themselves and their natural place, the part wastes
for want of nourishment; both for that the natural site of the veins,
arteries and nerves is perverted, as also because the part it self lies
immovable, or scarce moveable: whereby it comes to pass, that the spirits
do not freely flow thereto, as neither the nutritive juice comes thither in
sufficient plenty. When the dislocated or broken member is troubled with any
great inflammation, it is doubtful whether or no a In inflammations the
restoring of the bone must not be attempted.
convulsion will happen, if we attempt to restore it, or the parts thereof to
their seat: therefore it is better, if it may be done, to defer the reducing
thereof so long, until the humor which possesses the part be dissolved, the
tumor abated, and the bitterness of pain mitigated.

CHAP. IV. The general cure of broken and dislocated bones.
TO cure a broken and dislocated bone, is to restore it to its former figure
and site. For the performance whereof, the Surgeon must propose three things to
himself: The first is, to restore the bone to its place: The second Three
things to be performed in curing broken and dislocated bones.
is, that he contain or stay it being so restored: The third is, that he
hinder the increase of malign symptoms and accidents; or else if they do
happen, that then he temper and correct their present malignitie. Such
accidents are pain, inflammation, a fever, abscesse, gangrene and sphacell.
For the first intention, you may easily restore broken or dislocated bone, if
presently, as soon as the mischance is got, or else the same day, you endeavor
to restore it: for the bitterness of pain or inflammation, which may trouble
the patient, is not as yet very great, neither is the contraction of the
muscles upwards as yet very much or stubborn. Therefore first of all, the
Patient with his whole body, but How to put the bones in their places.
especially with the broken or dislocated part, as also the Surgeon, must be
in some place which has good and sufficient light. Then let trusty and
skillful attendants be there, good ligatures, and also, if need so require,
good engines. His friends which are present, let them see and hold their peace,
neither say, nor do any thing which may hinder the Work of the Surgeon. Then
putting one hand above, that is, toward the center of the body, and the other
below, as near as he can to the part affected, let him stretch forth the
member: for if you lay your hand any distance from the part affected, you will
hurt the sound part by too much compression, neither will you much avayle your
self by stretching it at such a distance. But if you only endeavor below with
your hand or ligature, assisting to make extension Hipp. sent. 60. sect. 2. de
fract.
thereof, it will be dangerous if there be nothing above which may withstand
or hold, lest that you draw the whole body to you. This being done, according
as I have delivered, it is fit the Surgeon make a right or straight extension
of the part affected: for when the bone is either broken or out of joint, there
is a contraction of the muscles toward their original, and consequently of
the bones by them, as it is observed by Galen. Wherefore it is impossible to
restore the bones to their Adsent. 1. sect. 1. de fract.
former seat, without the extension of the muscles. But the part being thus
extended, the broken bones will sooner and more easily be restored to their
former seat. Which being restored, you shall presently with your hand press
it down, if there be any thing that bunches or stands out. And lastly, you
shall bind it up, by applying boulsters and splints as shall be fit. But if
the bone be dislocated or forth of joint, then presently after the extension
thereof, it will be requisite to bend it somewhat about, and so to draw it in.
The Surgeon is sometimes forced to use engines When instruments or engines are
necessary.
for this work, especially if the luxation be inveterate, if the broken or
luxated bones be great; and that in strong and rustic bodies, and such as have
large joints: for that then there is need of greater strength, than is in the
hand of the Surgeon alone. For, by how much the muscles of the Patient are the
stronger, by so much will they be contracted more powerfully upwards toward
their originals. Yet have a care that you extend them not too violently, lest
by rending and breaking a-sunder the muscles and nerves, you cause the
forementioned symptoms, pain, convulsion, a palsy and gangrene: all which
sooner happen to strong and aged bodies, What bodies are sooner hurt by violent
extension.
than to children, eunuchs, women, youths, and generally all moist bodies,
for that they are less hurt by violent extension and pulling, by reason of
their native and much humiditie and softness. For thus skins of leather,
moystened with any liquor, are easily retched and drawn out as one pleases:
but such as are dry and hard, being less tractable, will sooner rend and
tear, than stretch further out. Therefore the Surgeon shall use a mean in
extending and drawing forth of members, as shall be most agreeable to the
habits of the bodies. You may know the bone is set, and Signs of a bone well
set.
the setting performed as is fit, if the pain be assuaged; to wit, the fibers
of the muscles, and the other parts being restored to their former site, and
all compression, which the bones moved out of their places have made, being
taken away; if, to your feeling there be nothing bunching out, nor rugged, but
the surface of the member remain smooth and equal; and lastly, if the broken
or dislocated member compares with its opposite in the composure of the joints,
as the knees and ancles answer justly and equally in length and thickness. For
which purpose it must not suffice the Surgeon to view it once, but even as
often as he shall dress it. For it may happen, that the bone which is well
set, may by some chance, as by the Causes and signs of the relapse of a set
bone.
Patients unconsiderate turning himself in his bed, or as it were a convulsive
twitching of the members or joints whilst he sleeps, the muscles of their
own accord contracting themselves toward their originals, that the member may
again fall out; and it will give manifest signs thereof by renewing the
pain, by pressing or pricking the adjacent bodies: which pain will not cease,
before it be restored to its place: and hereof the Surgeon ought to have
diligent care. For if, whilst the Callus is in growing, one bone ride over
another, the bone it self will afterward be so much the shorter, and
consequently the whole member; so that if this error shall happen in a broken
leg, the Patient will halt ever after, to his great grief, and the Surgeons
shame. Wherefore the Patient shall take heed, as much as in him lies, that he
stir not the broken member, before that the Callus be hardened. Such diligent
care needs not be had in dislocations. For these once set, and artificially
bound up, do not afterward so easily fall forth as broken bones.

The second scope is, that the bones which shall be restored may be firmly
kept in their state and place. That shall be done by Bandages; as ligatures,
boulsters, and other things, whereof hereafter we shall make particular
mention. Hither tend proper and fit medicines, to wit, applying of oil of
Roses with the whites of Eggs, and the like repelling things; and then
resolving medicines, as the present necessity shall require. It will be
convenient, to moysten your rowlers and boulsters in oxycrate for this purpose,
or else in Rose vinegar, if the Fracture be simple, or with red wine, or the
like liquor warm (in Galens opinion) if a wound be joined to the Ad sent. 21.
sect. 1. de fract.
fracture; and it will be fit to moysten fractures oftener in Summer: For so the
part is strengthened, the defluxion being repelled, whereby the inflammation
and pain are hindered. You must desist from humecting and watering the part
when the symptoms are past, lest you retard the generating of a Callus; for
which you must labor by these means which we shall hereafter declare. To
this purpose also conduces the rest and lying of the part in its proper figure
and site accustomed in health, that so it may the longer remain in the same
place unstirred. Besides also, it is expedient then only to dress the part,
when it is needful, and with those things that are requisite, shunning, as
much as may be, inflammation and pain. That figure What the middle figure is,
and why best.
is thought the best, which is the middle, that is, which contains the muscles
in their site, which is without pain; so that the Patient may long endure it
without labor or trouble. All these thing being performed, the Patient must be
asked, Whether the member be bound up too strait? If he answer, No, (unless
peradventure a little upon the fracture or luxation, for there it is fit it
should be more straightly bound) then may you know that the binding is moderate.
And this Fit time for loosing of Ligatures in fractures and dislocations.
same first ligation is to be kept in fractures without loosing for three or
four days space, unless peradventure pain urge you to the contrary. In
dislocations the same binding may be kept for seven or eight days, unless by
chance some symptom may happen, which may force us to open it before that
time: for the Surgeon must with all his art have a care to prohibit the
happening of evil accidents and symptoms, which, how he may bring to pass,
shall be declared in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V. By what means you may perform the third intention in curing
fractures and dislocations, which is, the hindering and correction of accidents
and symptoms.
THat we may attain unto this third scope, it is requisite we handle as gently
and without pain, as we may, the broken or dislocated member; Four choice
means to hinder accidents.
we drive away the defluxion ready to fall down upon the part by medicines,
repelling the humor, and strengthening the part; we, by appointing a good
diet, hinder the begetting of excrements in the body, and divert them by
purging and phlebotomie. But if these accidents be already present, we must
cure them according to the kind and nature of each of them: for they are
various. Amongst which is reckoned itching, which in the beginning torments the
Patient: this arises from a collection and suppression of subacride vapors,
The causes and differences of itching.
arising from the blood, and other humors under the skin. Whence a light
biting, which causes a simple itch, or else a more grievous and acride one,
from whence (in Galens opinion) proceeds a painful itching. Wherefore such
matter, as the Ad sent. 4. sect. 1. de fract.
cause, being evacuated, all itching cease. But this cannot easily and freely
be evacuated and breathed out, because the pores of the part are shut up, and
as it were oppressed with the burden of the emplaisters, boulsters, and
ligatures, which are put about the part. Hereunto may be added, that the part
its self does not so perfectly perform and enjoy its wonted faculties and
actions: by which it comes to pass, that the heat thereof is more languide
than may suffice to discuss the fuliginous matter there collected. Wherefore
it will be convenient to loose the ligatures Remedies against the itching.
every third day, that, as by loosing their ties, their sanious and fuliginous
excrements, shut up under the skin, may freely pass forth, lest in
continuance they should fret and ulcerate it; as it happens to most of those
who provide not for it by loosing their ligatures. Besides also, the part must
be long fomented with hot water alone, or else with a decoction of sage,
chamomile, roses, and melilote made in wine and water: for long fomenting
attenuates and evacuates, but shorter fills and mollifies, as it is delivered by
Hippocrates. Also gentle frictions, performed with your hand, or a warm linen
cloth upwards, to the right side and left, and circularly to every side, are
good. But if the skin be already risen into blisters, they must be cut, lest
the matter contained thereunder may corrode and ulcerate the skin: then must
the skin be anointed with some cooling and drying medicine; as, Ung. album
Camphoratum Rhasis, Desiccativum rubrum, unguentum rosatum sine aceto; adding
thereto the powder of a rotten post, or prepared Tutia, or the like. Other
accidents more grievous than these, do often happen, but Hipp. sent. 46. sect.
3. de fract.
we will treat of them hereafter. But if the scales of the bone underneath be
quite severed from the whole, then must they be presently taken forth,
especially if they prick the muscles: But if the bone be broken into splinters,
and so prominent out of the wounded flesh as that it cannot be restored into
its seat, it must be cut off with your cutting mallets, or parrats beak, as
occasion shall offer its self. In the interim, you must have a care that the
part enjoy perspiration, and by change of place and rising, now and then it may
be as it were ventilated: also you must see that it be not over-burdened,
neither too strait bound, otherwise it will be apt to inflammation. Thus much
concerning fractures and dislocations in general: now we must descend to
particulars, beginning with a fracture of the Nose.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fracture of the Nose.
THe Nose is gristly in its lower part, but bony in the upper. Wherefore it
Hipp. sent. 46. sect. 2. de art.
suffers no fracture in the gristly part (unless peradventure a Seeds) but only
a depression, distortion or contusion. But a fracture often happens to the bony
part, and so great a depression to the in nerside, that unless it be provided
for by diligent restoring it, the nose will become flat, or wrested aside,
whence there will be difficulty of breathing. That this kind of fracture may
be restored, How to reduce the nose into its natural figure.
that bone which stands too far out must be pressed down; but that which is
deprest, must be lifted up with a spatherne, or little stick handsomely
fashioned and wrapped about with cotton or a linen ragge, so to avoid pain.
Therefore you shall hold the spatherne in one hand, and reduce and order it
with the other. The bone being restored, directories or tents of a convenient
bigness shall be put into the nose; which tents shall be made of sponge, or
flax, or a piece of a beasts or sheeps lungs. For these things are soft, and
do not only hinder the bones of the Nose that they fall no more, but also
lift them up higher. And then the Nose shall be in some sort stayed with
boulsters on each side, even until the perfect agglutination of the bones,
lest the figure and straitness should be vitiated and spoiled. I have often
times put golden, silver and leaden pipes into fractured noses, and fastened
them with a thread to the Patients night cap, which, by one and the same means,
kept the bones from being again deprest, gave the matter free passage forth,
and nothing hindered the breathing. In the mean time we must see, that we do not
press the Nose with too strait binding, unless peradventure some other thing
persuade; lest they become either too wide, too flat, or crooked. If any wound
accompany the fracture, that shall be cured after the same manner, as the
wounds of the head. The fracture restored, the following medicine, which has a
faculty to repel and repress the defluxion, to strengthen and keep the part
in its due posture, and to dry up and waste the matter which has already
fallen down, shall be applied to the Nose, and all the other dry parts.

. thuris, mastiches, boli armeniae, sanguinis draconis. an. ss. aluminis
rochae, A fit astringent and drying medicine.
resinae pini. an. ij. pulverisentur subtilissime: Or else,. farinae volatilis
ss. albuminum ovorum quantum sufficit, incorporentur simul, and fiat
medicamentum.

Neither shall you use any other art to cure the cartilagineous part of the
nose being fractured. Wherefore Hippocrates terms that solution of continuitie
that Sent. 47. sect. (...). de art. and Gal. in Com.
there happens, A fracture, as if it were in a bone; because he could find no
other name more fitly to express it: for a gristle, next to a bone, is the
hardest of all the parts of our body. A Callus uses to grow in fractured
noses, unless something hinder within the space of twelve or fifteen days.

CHAP. VII. Of the Fracture of the lower Jaw.
THe lower Jaw runs into two, as it were, horns or tops: the one whereof A
description of the lower Jaw.
ends sharp, and receives a tendon from the temporal muscle; the other ends
blunt and round under the mammillarie process, and it is there implanted in a
small cavitie; it is joined together in the middle of the chin by Symphysis,
and is marrowie within. The Fracture, The manner of restoring a broken Jaw.
which happens thereto, is restored by putting your fingers into the Patients
mouth, and pressing them on the inside and outside, that so the fractured bones
put together may be smoothed and united. But if they be broken wholly athwart,
so that the bones lie over each other, extension must be made on both sides on
contrary parts, upwards and downwards, whereby the bones may be composed and
joined more easily to one another. The teeth in the mean while, if they be
either shaken or removed out of their sockets, must be restored to their former
places, and tied with a gold or silver wyar, or else an ordinary thread, to the
next firm teeth, until such time as they shall be fastened, and the bones
perfectly knit by a Callus. To which purpose the ordered fragments of the
fractured bone shall be stayed, by putting a splint on the outside, made of
such leather as shoe soales are made; the midst thereof being divided at the
Chin, and of such length and breadth as may serve the Jaw: then you shall make
ligation with a ligature two fingers broad, The description of a fit ligature
for the under Jaw.
and of such length as shall be sufficient, divided at both the ends, and cut
long-waies in the midst thereof; that so it may engirt the chin on both sides.
Then there will be four heads of such a ligature so divided at the ends; the
two lower whereof being brought to the crown of the head, shall be there
fastened and sowed to the Patients nightcap. The two upper drawn athwart
shall likewise be sowed as artificially as may be, to the cap in the nappe of
the neck. It is a most certain sign, that the Jaw is restored and well set,
if the teeth fastened therein stand in their due rank and order. The patient
shall not lie down upon his broken jaw, lest the fragments of the bones should
again fall out, and cause a greater defluxion. Unless inflammation, or some
other grievous symptom, shall happen, it is strengthened with a Callus within
twenty days; for that it is spongious, hollow, and full of marrow, especially
in the midst thereof: yet sometimes, it heales more In what time it may be
healed.
slowly, according as the temper of the patient is, which takes also place in
other fractured bones. The agglutinating and repelling medicine, described in
the former chapter, shall be used; as also others, as occasion shall offer it
self. The Patient must be fed with liquid meats, which stand not in need of
chewing, until such time as the Callus shall grow hard, lest the scarce or
ill-joyned fragments should fly insunder with the labor of chewing. Therefore
shall he be nourished with water-grewell, ponadoes, cullasses, barley
creames, gellies, brothes, rear eggs, restaurative liquors, and other things
of the like nature.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Fracture of the Clavicle or Collar-bone.
AS the nature and kind of the fractured Clavicle shall be, so must the cure
and restoring thereof be performed. But howsoever this bone Hipp. sect. 63.
sect. 1. de art.
shall be broken, always the end fastened to the shoulder and shoulder blade,
is lower than that which is joined to the chest; for that the arm draws it
downe-wards. The collar-bone, if broken athwart, is more easily restored and
healed, than if it be cloven long-wayes. For, every bone broken athwart does
more easily return into its former state or seat, whiles you lift it up on
this or that side with your fingers. But that which is broken schidacidon, or
into splinters, or long-waies, is more difficultly joined and united to the
ends and fragments: for those pieces, which were set, will be plucked asunder,
even by the least motion of the arms; and that which was knit with the
shoulder, will fall down to the lower part of the breast. The reason of which
is, the Collar-bone is not moved of its self, but consents in motion with the
arm. In restoring this or How to restore the fractured Clavicle. The first way.
any other fracture, you must have a care that the bones ride not one over
another, neither be drawn nor depart too far in sunder: therefore it will be
here convenient, that one servant draw the arm backwards, and another pull the
shoulder toward him the contrary way; for so there will be made, as I may so
term it, a counter-extension. While which is in doing, the Surgeon with his
fingers shall restore the fracture, pressing down that which stood up too
high, and lifting up that which is pressed down too low. Some, that they may
more easily restore this kind of The second way.
fracture, put a clew of yarne under the Patients arme-pit; so to fill up the
cavity thereof: then they forcibly press the elbow to the ribs, and then force
the bone into its former seat. But if it happen, that the ends of the broken
bones shall be so The third way.
deprest, that they cannot be drawn upwards by the forementioned means: then
must the Patient be laid with his back, just between the shoulders, upon a
pillow hard stuffed, or a tray turned with the bottom upwards, and covered
with a rugge or some such thing. Then the servant shall so long press down
the Patients shoulders with his hands, until the ends of the bones, lying hid
and pressed down, fly out and show themselves. Which being done, the Surgeon
may easily restore or set the fractured bone. But if the bone be broken so into
splinters that it cannot be restored, and any of the splinters prick and
wound the flesh, and so cause difficulty of breathing, you then must cut the
skin even against them, and with your instrument lift up all the depressed
splinters, and cut off their sharp points; so to prevent all deadly accidents,
which thereupon may be feared. If there be many fragments, they, after they
are set, shall be covered with a knitting medicine made of wheat flower,
frankincense, bole armenicke, sanguis draconis, resina pini, made into powder,
and mixed with the whites of eggs, putting upon it splints, covered with How
to bind up the fractured clavicle.
soft worn linen rags; covered over likewise with the same medicine, and
then three boulsters dipped in the same; two whereof shall be laid upon the
sides, but the third and thickest upon the prominent fracture, so to repress
it and hold it in. For thus the fragments shall not be able to stir or lift
themselves up further than they should, either to the rightside or left. Now
these Boulsters must be of a convenient thickness and breadth, sufficient to
fill up the cavities which are above and below that bone. Then shall you make
fit ligation with a rowler, having a double head cast crosse-wise, of a hands
breadth, and some two else and a half long, more or less, according to the
Patients body. Now he shall be so rolled up, as it may draw his arm somewhat
backwards, and in the interim his arme-pits shall be filled with boulsters,
especially that next the broken bone; for so the Patient may more easily suffer
the binding. Also you shall wish the Patient, that he of himself bend his arm
backewards, and set his hand upon his hip, as the Country Clownes use to do,
when they play at leap-frogge. But how great diligence soever you use It is a
difficult matter perfectly to restore a fractured clavicle.
in curing this sort of fracture, yet can it scarce be so performed, but that
there will some deformity remain in the part: for that a ligature cannot be
rolled about the collar-bone, as it may about a leg or an arm. A Callus often
times grows on this bone, within the space of twenty days, because it is rare
and spongious.

CHAP. IX. Of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
THe Greeks call that Omoplata, which the Latins term Scapula, or Scapulae An
anatomicall description of the shoulder blade.
patella, that is, the shoulder blade. It is fastened on the back to the ribs,
nowle, the Vertebrae of the chest and neck; but not by articulation, but only
by the interposition of muscles, of which we have spoken in our Anatomy. But
on the forepart it is articulated after the manner of other bones with the
collar-bone, the shoulder, or arme-bone: for with its process, which
represents a prick or thorn, and by some, for that it is more long and
prominent, is called Acromion, (that is, as you would say, the top or spire of
the said shoulder blade) it receives the Collar-bone. Therefore some
Anatomists, according to Hippocrates as they suppose, call all this
articulation of the Collar-bone with the hollowed process of the
shoulder blade, Acromion. There is another process of the said Blade-bone,
called Cervix om^platae, or the neck of the Shoulder Blade: this truly is
very short, but ending in a broad and sinuated head, provided for the receiving
of the Shoulder or arme-bone. Not far from this process is another, called
Coracoides, for that the end thereof is crooked like a Crows beak. This keeps
the shoulder bone in its place, and conduces to the strength of that part. The
shoulder blade may be fractured in any part thereof, that is, either on the
ridge, How many ways the shoulder blade may be broken.
which runs like a hill, along the midst thereof, for its safety, as we
see in the Vertebrae of the back. So also in the broader part thereof it may
be thrust in and deprest; and also in that articulation, whereby the top of
the shoulder is knit to it. According to this variety of these fractured parts,
the happening accidents are more grievous or gentle.

We know the spine or ridge of the Shoulder Blade to be broken, when a
dolorificke inequality is perceived by touching or feeling it. But you may
know, that the broader or thinner part thereof is depressed, if you feel a
cavity, and a pricking pain molest the part, and if a numnesse trouble the
arm, being stretched forth. The fragments, if they yet stick to their bone,
and do not prick the flesh, The cure.
must be restored to their state and place, and there kept with agglutinative
medicines, and such as generate a Callus, as also with boulsters and rowlers
fitted to the place. But if they do not adhere to the bone, or prick the
flesh lying under them, then must you make incision in the flesh over against
them, that so you may take them out with your Crows beak. But although they
stir up and down, yet if they still adhere to the periostium and ligaments,
(if so be that they trouble not the muscles by pricking them) then must they
not be taken forth: for I have oftener than once observed, that they have
within some short time after grown to the adjacent bones. But if they, being
wholly separated, do not so much as adhere to the periostium, then must they
necessarily be plucked away; otherwise within some short space after, they will
be driven forth by the strength of nature, for that they participate not any
more in life with the whole. For that which is quick, says Hippocrates, uses
to expel that which is dead far from it. The truth whereof was Lib. de vuln.
Capitis. A history.
manifested in the Marquis of Villars, who at the battle of Dreux was wounded
in his shoulder with a pistol bullet, certain splinters of the broken bone
were plucked forth with the pieces of his harness, and of the leaden bullet;
and within some short space after, the wound was cicatrized, and fully and
perfectly healed. But more than seven years after, a defluxion and
inflammation arising in that place by reason of his labor in arms, and the
heaviness of his armor at the battle of Mont-contour, the wound broke open
again; so that many shivers of the bone, Nature of its own accord makes it
self way to cast forth strange bodies and matters. Why a fracture in the joint
of the shoulder is deadly.
with the residue of the leaden bullet, came forth of themselves. But if the
fracture shall happen in the neck of the shoulder blade or dearticulation of
the shoulder, there is scarce any hope of recovery; as I have observed in
Anthony of Burbon, King of Navarre; Francis of Lorraine, Duke of Guise; the
Count Rhingrave Philibert, and many other in these late civil wars. For there
are many large vessels about this dearticulation, to wit, the axillary vein
and artery, the nerves arising from the Vertebrae of the neck, which are
thence disseminated into all the muscles of the arm. Besides, also
inflammation and putrefaction arising there are easily communicated by reason
of their neighborhood to the heart and other principal parts, whence
grievous symptoms, and often times death it self, ensues.

CHAP. X. Of the fracture and depression of the Sternon, or Breast Bone.
THe Sternum is sometimes broken, otherwiles only thrust in without a
fracture. The inequality perceivable by your feeling, shows a fracture, Signs
that the sternum is broken.
as also the going in with a thrust with your finger, and the sound or noise of
the bones crackling under your fingers. But a manifest cavity in the part, a
cough, spitting of blood, and difficulty of breathing by compression of the
Signs that it is deprest.
membrane investing the ribs and the lungs, argue the depression thereof. For
the restoring of this bone, whether broken or deprest, the patient must be laid
on his The cure.
back, with a cushion stuffed with tow or hay under the vertebrae of the
back, as we set down in the setting of the Collar-bone. Then a servant shall
lie strongly with both his hands on his shoulders, as if he would press them
down, whilst the Surgeon, in the mean time pressing the ribs on each side,
shall restore and set the bone with his hand; and then the formerly described
medicines shall be applied for to hinder inflammation, and assuage pain;
boulsters shall be fitted thereto, and a ligature shall be made crosse-wayes
above the shoulders, but that not too strait, lest it hinder the Patients
breathing. I by these means, at the appointment A history.
of Anthony of Burbon King of Navarre, cured Anthony Benand a Knight of the
Order, who had his breast plate bended and driven in, with an iron bullet shot
out of a Field-Peece, as also his sternum together therewith, and he fell down
as dead with the blow; he did spit blood for three months after I had set the
bone: yet for all this he lives at this day in perfect health.

CHAP. XI. Of the fracture of the ribs.
THe true ribs, for that they are bonie, may be broken in any part of them. But
the bastard ribs cannot be truly broken unless at the back bone, In what
place the short ribs may be broken.
because they are only bonie in that part, but gristly of the foreside toward
the breast bone; wherefore there they can only be folded or crooked in. These
which are subject to fractures, may be broken inwards and outward. But often
times it comes to pass, that they are not absolutely broken, but cleft into
splinters, and that sometimes inwards, but not outward. Thus the fissure does
oft-times not exceed the middle substance of the rib; but sometimes it so
breaks through it all, that the fragments and splinters do prick and wound the
membrane, which invests and lines them on the inside, and then there is great
danger. But when the fracture is simple without a wound, compression, puncture
of the membrane, and lastly, without any other symptom; then the danger is
less. Therefore Hippocrates wishes, that these, who are thus affected, fill
themselves more freely Sent. 56. sect. 3. de art.
with meat; for that moderate repletion of the belly, is (as it were) a
certain prop or stay for the ribs, keeping them well in their place and state:
which rule chiefly takes place in fractures of the bastard ribs. For such as
have them broken, usually feel themselves better after, than before meat. For
emptiness of meat, or of the stomach, makes a suspension of the ribs, as not
underpropped by the meat. Now that fracture which is outwardly, is far more
easy to heal, than that which Why an internal fracture of the ribs is deadly.
is inwardly; for that this pricketh the membrane or Pleura, and causes
inflammation, which may easily end in an Empyema. Add hereunto, that this is
not so easily to be handled or dealt withal, as the other: whereby it comes
to pass, that it cannot be so easily restored; for that these things cannot
be so fully and freely performed in this kind of fracture, which are
necessary to the setting of the bone, as to draw it out, hold it and join it
together. It is therefore healed within twenty days, if nothing else hinder.
The signs of fractured ribs are not obscure; for by The signs.
feeling the grieved part with your fingers, you may easily perceive the
fracture by the inequality of the bones, and their noise or crackling,
especially, if they be quite broke asunder. But if a rib be broken on the
inside, a pricking pain, far more grievous than in a Pleurisy, troubles the
Patient; because the sharp splinters prick the Costall membrane: whence great
difficulty in breathing, a cough and spitting of blood ensue. For blood,
flowing from the vessels broken by the violence The cause of spitting blood
when the ribs are broken.
of the thing causing the fracture, is (as it were) sucked up by the lungs, and
so by a dry cough carried into the weazond, and at length spit out of the
mouth. Some, to pull up the bone that is quite broken and deprest, apply a
cupping glass, and that is ill done: for there is caused greater attraction of
humors, and excess of pain by the pressure and contraction of the adjacent
parts, by the cupping-glasse; wherefore Hippocrates also forbids it. Therefore
it is better to endeavor to restore Sent. 51. sect. 3. de art. Paulus lib. 6.
cap. 96. Avicen. 4. The cure.
it after this following manner. Let the Patient lie upon his sound fide, and
let there be laid upon the fractured side an emplaister made of Turpentine,
rosin, black pitch, wheat flower, mastick and aloes, and spread upon a strong
and new cloth. When it has stuck there some time, then pluck it suddenly
with great violence from below upwards: for so the rib will follow together
therewith, and be plucked and drawn upwards. It is not sufficient to have
done this once, but you must do it often, until such time as the Patient
shall find himself better, and to breathe more easily. There will be much
more hope of restitution, if, whilst the Surgeon do this diligently, the
Patient forbear coughing, and hold his breath. Otherwise, if necessity urge,
as if sharp splinters with most bitter tormenting pain prick the Costall
membrane overspred with many nerves, veins, and arteries, which run under the
ribs, whence difficulty of breathing, spitting of blood, a cough and fever
ensue; then the only way to deliver the Patient from danger of imminent death,
is, to make incision on the part, where the rib is broken, that so laying it
bare, you may discern the pricking fragments, and take them out with your
instrument, or else cut them off. And if you make a great wound by incision,
then shall you few it up, and cure it according to the common rules of curing
wounds. Now Diet, Phlebotomie and Purgation, which (as Hippocrates says) A
simple fracture may be cured only by Surgerie.
are not very needful in a simple fracture, for that there are no symptoms,
which may require such remedies; yet, they, by reason of the complicated
symptoms, as a convulsion, fever, Empyema, and the like, must here be
prescribed, by the advice of the Physician which over-sees the cure. A Cerate,
and other remedies fitting the occasion, shall be applied to the grieved part:
no other ligatures can be used, than such as are fit to hold fast and stay the
local medicines. There is no other rule of site and lying, than such as is
taken from the will and content of the Patient.

CHAP. XII. Of certain preternaturall affects which ensue upon broken ribs.
MAny symptoms ensue upon fractured and contused ribs: but amongst the rest,
there are two which are not common, whereof we will treat in this place. The
first is, the inflation, or rising up of the contused flesh, which also ensues
upon light affects of the bone, which have bin neglected at the beginning. But
the flesh is not merely puffed up of its self, but also with a certain
phlegmatic, glutinous and viscous humor gathering thereinto. The cause hereof
is, the weakness of the digestive faculty of the part, occasioned by the
stroke and distemper; which therefore cannot assimulate the The cause.
nourishment flowing more plentifully than it was wont, either drawn thither
by means of the pain, or sent thither by a blind violence of nature, stirred
thereto by a desire of its own preservation. Wherefore this half crude humor
remaining there, raises much flatuling from its self, or else wrought upon by
the weaker heat, it is resolved into cloudy vapors; whence it comes to
pass, that the flesh is swollen up in that place, and the skin on the
contrary grows soft, as if it were blown The signs.
up with a quill. Therefore laying your hand thereon, you may hear the noise
of the wind going forth thereof, and see a cavity left in the part, as it is
usually seen in oedematous tumors. Unless you remedy this inflation, there
will ensue an inflammation, fever, abscesse, difficulty of breathing; and
lastly, that second kind of affect, whereof we have determined to treat in
this Chapter, to wit, the putrefaction, corruption, or blasting of the ribs. An
abscesse, and the separation of the flesh from the bone, is the cause hereof:
for hence it comes to pass, that the bone, despoyled of its natural and
fleshly clothing wherewith it was cherished, is easily offended by the touch
of the entering air, which it never formerly felt, and so at length it
becomes (as it were) blasted: which when it happens, they spit up filth, and
so fall into a consumption, and at length dye. To withstand all these
inconveniences, you must, as speedily as you can, restore the fractured bones
by the formerly The cure.
delivered means. And then this mucous tumor must be resolved by proper
heating and discussing medicines, and kept down by boulsters and rowlers; that
so the flesh may touch the bone, and cover it as it usually did. But the
ligature shall not be made so strait, as to hinder the ribs from their wonted
motion in expiration and inspiration. If the tumor degenerate into an Abscesse,
it shall be speedily opened, lest the matter, kept in too long, corrupt the bone
which lies under it, by the contagion of its putrefaction. The Ulcer being
opened, the matter shall be evacuated by putting a pipe into the ulcer; the
end whereof shall be bound about with a thread, lest it fall into the capacity of
the chest, and that it may be drawn forth at your pleasure.

CHAP. XIII. Of the fracture of the Vertebrae, or Rack-bones of the back, and
of their processes.
THe Vertebrae are some-whiles broken, otherwhiles bruised, or strained The
affects of the vertebrae.
on the inside, whereby it comes to pass, that the membranes which invest the
spinall marrow, as also the spinall marrow its self, are compressed and
straitened, which cause many malign accidents; which, whether they be curable
or not, may be certainly foretold by their magnitude. Amongst these symptoms,
are the stupidity, or numnesse and palsy of the arms, legs, fundament and
bladder, which diminish, or else take away from them the faculty of sense and
motion; so that their urine and excrements come from them against their wills
and knowledge, or else are wholly suppressed. Which when they happen (says
Hippocrates) you may foretell that death is at hand, by reason that Sect. 2.
Prorh.
the spinall marrow is hurt. Having made such a prognosticke, you may make an
The cure of fractured Vertebrae.
incision, so to take forth the splinters of the broken vertebrae, which,
driven in, press the spinall marrow, and the nerves thereof. If you cannot do
this, at least you shall apply such medicines as may assuage pain, and hinder
inflammation; and then the broken bones shall be restored to their places, and
contained therein by those means which we shall mention when we come to treat
of the luxation of the spine. But if that the processes only of the vertebrae
be broken, the fragments The cure of the processes.
shall be put in their places, unless they be quite severed from their
periostium. But if they be severed, you shall open the skin and take them
forth, and then dress the wound as is fit. We understand, that only the
processes of the vertebrae are Signs that only the processes are fractured.
broken, if, in the absence of the forementioned symptoms of numnes and the
palsy, you, laying your finger upon the grieved part, feel something, as a
bony fragment, shaking and moving thereunder, with a certain crackling noise,
and cavitie, and depression; and then, if when the Patient holds down his
head, and bends his back, he feel far more pain, than when he stands up
straight on his feet. For in stooping, the skin of the back is somewhat
stretched forth, and extended, and also forced upon the sharp Splinters of the
fragments, whence proceeds a dolorificke solution of continuitie, and a
pricking: in standing straight up, on the contrary, the stretched skin is
relaxed, and consequently less molested by the sharp fragments. The fractured
processes of the vertebrae easily heal, unless they be associated with some
other more grievous symptom which may hinder; such as is a certain great
contusion, and the like. For, as we formerly said out of Hippocrates, All rare
and spongie bones are knit by a Callus within a few days.

CHAP. XIV. Of the fracture of the holy-bone.
ALso the Holy-bone in a certain part thereof, which may be easily healed, may
be broken by the blow of bruising things, as by a bullet shot What fracture of
the Holy-bone curable and what not.
out of a musket, as I have observed in many. But if the fracture violate,
together with the vertebrae thereof, the spinall marrow contained therein, then
the Patient can scarce escape death, for the reasons showed in the former
Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Of the fracture of the Rumpe.
THe Rumpe is composed of four bones: the first whereof has a cavitie, The
description of the rump.
wherein it receives the lowest vertebrae of the Holy-bone: the other three are
joined together by Symphysis or Coalition; at the end of these hangs a certain
small gristle. The fracture of these bones shall be cured by putting your
finger into the Patients fundament, and so thrusting it even to The cure.
the fractured place. For, thus you may thrust the fragment forth, and fit and
restore it to the rest of the bones by your other hand lying upon the back.
But that it may be the sooner healed, it is fit the Patient keep his bed,
during all the time of the cure. But if there be a necessity to rise, he
shall so sit in a perforated seat, that there may be nothing which may press
the broken part; and fitting remedies for healing fractures shall be applied,
as occasion shall offer its self.

CHAP. XVI. Of the fracture of the Hip, or Os Ilium.
THe Hip consists of three bones: The first is named Os Ilium, the Haunch-bone;
The description of the Hip.
the other, Os Ischion, the Huckle bone; the third, Os pubis, the Share-bone.
These three bones in men of full growth, are so fast knit and joined together,
that they can by no means be separated; but in children they may be separated
without much ado. This bone may be broken in any part thereof, either by a
stroke, or by a fall from high upon any hard body. You shall know the
fracture by the same kind of signs, as you know others, to wit, The signs.
pain, pricking, a depressed cavitie, and inequality, and also a numnesse of
the leg of the same side. The splinters of the bones (if quite broke off)
must by making incision The cure.
be taken away at the first dressing: in performance of which operation, you
must have a care, that you hurt not with your instrument the heads of the
muscles, nor any vessels, especially which are great; nor lastly, that large
nerve which is sent into the muscles of the thigh and leg. On the contrary,
such fragments as are not broken or severed from their periostium, shall be
smoothed and set in order with your fingers, as is fitting. Other things shall
be done according as art and necessity shall persuade and require.

CHAP. XVII. Of a fracture of the Shoulder, or Arme-bone.
THe Arme-bone is round, hollow, full of marrow, rising up with an indifferent
The description of the arm or shoulder bone.
neck, and ending on the upper part into somewhat a thick head. On the lower
part it has two processes, the one before, the other behind: between which
there is (as it were) an half circle, or the cavity of a pulley, each end
whereof leads into its cavitie, of which one is interior, another exterior;
that by these (as it were) hollow stops, the bending and extension of the arm
might be limited: lest that the bone of the cubite, if the circle should have
been perfect, sliding equally this way and that way, might, by its turning,
have gone quite round, as a rope runs in a pulley; which thing would much
have confused the motion of the Cubite. For so the extension, or bending it
back, would have been equal to the necessary bending it inwards. It is very
expedient that a Surgeon know these things, that so he may the better know how
to restore the fractures and luxations of this part. If one of the fragments of
this broken The cure.
bone shall lie much over the other, and the patient have a good strong body,
then the arm shall be much extended, the Patient being so set upon a low
seat, that he may not rise, when the fracture shall be a-setting, and so
hinder the begun work; and also, that so the Surgeon may the more easily
perform his operation upon the Patient seated under him: yet Hippocrates,
regarding another thing, would have the Patient to sit higher. But you must
have a care, that the shoulder bone it self be drawn directly down-wards, and
the cubit so bended as when you put it into a scarf. For if any one set this
bone, lifting the arm upwards, or other-wise extending it, then must it be
kept in that posture: for otherwise, if the figure be changed, the setting will
quickly be spoiled, when as you come to put the arm in a scarf. Wherefore
the Surgeon must diligently and carefully observe, How the arm must be placed
when the bone is set.
that in setting a broken arm, he put it in such a posture, that resting on
the breast, it look down toward the girdle. You must have a care in laying
the splints, and rolling your ligatures, that they hurt not, nor press too
hard upon the joints. For, in the opinion of Hippocrates, by the pressure of
parts which are nervous, Sect. 3. offic. sect. 1. de fract.
fleshlesse, and consequently endued with exquisite sense, by the splints there
is danger of most grievous pain, inflammation, denudation both of the bone and
nerve; but chiefly, if such compression hurt the inner part, toward which the
arm is bended: wherefore the splints made for this place must be the shorter.
Therefore, after the Arme-bone is set, the arm shall be laid upon the breast
in a right angle, and there bound up in a scarf, lest that the Patient, when
he has need to stir, spoil and undo the setting, and figure of the broken
bone. But the arm In what time it will knit.
must be kept in quiet, until such time as the fragments shall be confirmed
with a Callus, which usually is in forty days, sooner or later, according to
the different constitutions of bodies.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the fracture of the Cubit, or the Ell and Wand.
IT sometimes happens, that the Cubite and Wand are broken together The
difference*
and at once, and otherwhiles that but the one of them is fractured. Now they
are broken either in their midst or ends; their ends (I say) which are either
toward the elbow, or else toward the wrest. That fracture is worst of all,
wherein both the bones are broken, for then the member is made wholly impotent
to perform any sort of action, and the cure is also more difficult; for the
member cannot so easily be contained in its state: for that bone which remains
whole, serves for a stay to the arm, and hinders the muscles from being drawn
back, which usually draw back and shrink up themselves, whenever both
bones are broken. Hence it is, that that fracture is judged the worst, wherein
the Cubir or Ell bone is broken. But that is easiest of all, wherein only the
Wand is broken, for so the The cure.
fractured part is sustained by the Ell-bone: When both the bones are broken,
there must be made a stronger extension, for that the muscles are the more
contracted. Therefore, whenever either of them remains whole, it does more
service in sustaining the other, than any either ligatures of splints, for that
it keeps the muscles right in their places. Wherefore, after the bones shall be
set and rolled up with ligatures and splints, the arm must be so carried up
in a scarf put about the neck, that the hand may not be much higher than the
elbow, lest the blood and other humors may fall down thereinto. But the hand
shall be set in that posture which is between prone and supine, for so the
Wand shall lie directly under the Ell, as we have read it observed by
Hippocrates. The reason is, for that by a supine figure Sent. 3. sect. 1. de
fract.
or situation, both the bone and muscles are perverted: for first, for the
bone, the Apophysis, styloides and Olecranum of the Cubit, ought to be in an
equal plain, and to be seated each against other; which is not so in a supine
figure, as wherein the Processus styloides of the Cubit is set against the
inner process of the arm bone. But in muscles, for that, like as the
insertion and site of the head of a muscle is, such also is the site of the
belly thereof, and lastly, such the insertion of the tail thereof; but by a
supine figure, the muscles arising from the inner process of the arm bone and
bending the cubit, shall have their tail placed in an higher and more
exterior site. In the interim, you must not omit, but that the Patients arm
may, with as little pain as possibly you can, be bended and extended now and
then, lest by the too long rest of the tied up part, and the intermission of
its proper function, the bones of the joint may be sowdred together by the
interposition, and as it were glue of the defluxion which falls abundantly into
the joint of the Ell-bow, and neighboring parts, whence the stiffenesse and
unmoveablenesse thereof, as if there were a Callus grown there: from whence it
may happen, that the arm thereafter may neither be bended, nor extended, which
I have observed to have happened to many. Whereof also Galen makes mention, and
calls this kind of Com. in lib. de art.
vitiated conformation Ancyle and Ancylosis. If a wound also associate a
fracture of the arm, then see, that you put about it plates of Latin, or
Past-bord, and make a convenient Ligature, and that the fragments of the bones
be kept in the same state wherein they were set and restored. Moreover, let him
lay his arm upon a soft pillow or cushion, as the following Figure shows you.

The figure of a fractured Arm, with a wound bound up, and seated, as is fit.


CHAP. XIX. Of the fracture of a Hand.
THe bones of the Wrest, and After-wrest, may be broken: but, Sect. (...). de
fract. sent. 9.
in Hippocrates opinion, chiefly by that kind of fracture which is called a
Seeds; now if they shall happen to be broken, this shall be the manner of
restoring them. Let the Patient lay forth his hand upon some even The cure.
and smooth table, then let your servant stretch forth the broken bones, and
the work-master restore them thus extended, and put them in their proper seats.
But being restored, they must be kept in their places by such remedies as are
used in other fractures; to wit, cerates, compresses, linen clothes, and
splints. Now the fractured fingers shall be tied or bound to their neighbors,
that so they may the more easily, as bound to a stake, be kept in that state
wherein they have been put by the hand of the Workman. But these bones, seeing
they are of a rare and spongie nature, are in a short time and easily
strengthened, or knit by a Callus. These things To what purpose the carrying of
a bail in a fractured hand serves.
being done, the hollownesse or palm of the hand shall be filled with a Tennis
ball, for thus the broken bones shall not only be more easily kept in their
places, but also the fingers themselves shall be kept in a middle posture, that
is, not wholly open, nor quite shut. If they be kept in any other figure, the
ensuing Callus will either deprave or quite abolish that action of the hand,
whereby we take hold of any thing. The case stands otherwise with the fractured
Toes; for they shall be kept straight and even out, lest they should hinder
our going or standing.

CHAP. XX. Of the fracture of a Thigh.
IT is a hard thing to bring the fragments of the broken thigh together to be
set, by reason of the large and strong muscles of that part; which whilst they
are drawn back toward their original, by a motion both natural and
convulsive, they carry together with them the fragment of the bone, whereinto
they are inserted. Therefore, when as Why the bone of the thigh is more
difficultly set.
the fracture of this bone shall be restored, the Patient must lie upon his
back with his leg stretched forth, and the Surgeon must strongly and with
great force extend the thigh; but if he alone shall not be able sufficiently to
extend it, he shall employ two other strong attendants, by whose joynt-helpe
the fragments may be fitted and set each against other. For this purpose, when
as the strength of the hand was not sufficient, the Ancients used an
Instrument, called a Glossocomium, whereof this is the figure.

The figure of a Glossocomium, or Extender.


In stead of this Glossocomium, you may make use of my pulley; for Hippocrates
Sent. 67. and 68. sect. 2. de fract.
in this bone when it is broken, does approve of extension so great, that
although by the greatness of the extension the ends of the fragments be
somewhat distant a-sunder, an empty space being left between; yet
notwithstanding would he have ligature made. For it is not here as it is in
the extensions of other bones, whereas the casting about of Ligatures keeps the
muscles unmovable: but here, in the extended thighs, the deligation is not of
such force, as that it may stay and keep the bones and muscles in that state,
wherein the Surgeon has placed them. For, seeing that the muscles of the thigh
are large and strong, they overcome the ligation, and are not kept under by it.
The Surgeon, in setting it, shall also consider, that the thigh bone is
hollowed on the inner side, but gibbous on the outside, therefore it must be
set in its native figure. Otherwise, if any, unmindefull of this
consideration, The natural and internal crookedness must be preserved in
setting the bone.
would have it straight, he shall make his Patient halt all his life after:
wherefore this inner and native hollownesse must be filled up and preserved by
putting in a compresse or boulster, spread over with unguentum rosatum, or the
like glutinous thing that it may not fall off: for thus also the ligation shall
the more faithfully keep the fragments of the bone in their places. Moreover,
compresses shall be applied The part to be bound up, must be made plain
either by nature or art.
to the more slender and less protuberating parts of the thigh, as those which
are next the ham and knee, that so the whole ligation may be alike, and
consequently the more firm. Now ligatures, as we formerly noted, are ordained
for three things. The first is, that the bones may be kept in that state
wherein they were set, until they be strengthened by a Callus. The second is,
to hinder defluxion, which easily falls into the broken and luxated parts, both
by reason of pain, as also by weakness. The third is, to stay and hold fast
the splints and medicines which are applied. Inflammation is hindered by
repressing and hindering the blood and other humors, ready to flow down, from
entering into the part, and by pressing those humors, which are preternaturally
contained in the part, into the neighboring parts above and below. Wherefore
there must no small care be had of preparing ligatures, to wit, that they be
made of choice and well woven cloth, yet not course or rough; and let them be
of such length and breadth, as the Surgeon, persuaded by an artificial
conjecture, shall judge to be fit for the thickness and length of the member,
and greatness of the fracture: for ligatures ought to be of breadth to involve
and cover all the fractured part, and a great part of that which is sound. But
seeing that in my Book of Bandages, I have seemed chiefly to set down and
approve the manner of binding used by Hippocrates, now I The manner of binding
used by Surgeons at this day.
think good here in this place to describe that which is in common use amongst
our Surgeons.

Our Surgeons therefore at this day require three Ligatures for fractures, the
first whereof they presently cast upon the hurt part, whether broken or
dislocated, or only strained, making the first wrappings upon it; so that they
most and straitliest bind it there, but less and more loosely on both sides
thereof. Such circumvolutions, or wrappings, are drawn upwards, and there
ended. They must be rolled Why the windings of the upper ligatures must be
thicker and straiter than the lower.
thick, and not wide; for so if they presently follow, and lie one upon
another, they will hold the bones more firmly, and more far and wide press
forth and repress the superfluous blood from the sound part. They presently in
like sort cast the second ligature upon the very fracture, giving it two
wraps, then going down-wards; yet so, as that they are opener or wider, and
farther distant each from other, and not so close together, as the
circumvolutions of the first ligature; that so they may press the humors the
less to the extremities of the part, as those which cannot receive and bear,
without inflammation and danger of a gangrene, such abundance of humors, for
that they are not sufficiently spacious, as also more remote from the fountain
of native heat, which is greater in the center than in the circumference. At
the lower end of the hurt part the circumvolutions either end, or else are
twined thence back again. They cast on the third ligature in that lower end
Why the third ligature must be rolled contrary to the two first.
of the hurt part, and roll it smoothly and gently upwards, the windings being
made contrary to the windings of the first and second ligatures; that they may
so draw back into their natural state the muscles, which peradventure have
been drawn aside by the force of the former wrappings. These ligations
finished, they apply three splints of past-bord, or some such matter; the first
below the fracture, and that truly more broad, and of sufficient length; and
then two others, one on each side, distant each from other some fingers
breadth, to the end to keep the bone that it do not stir to this side or
that, being wrapped about with Tow or Cotton. Then they think of placing or
laying the part, to which purpose they propound The Surgeon must be mindful
of three things in placing the member.
to themselves three scopes. The first is, that the part may lie soft; the
second, smooth, or even; the third, somewhat high. The hurt part ought truly
to lie soft, for that hard lying presses it, and causes pain and inflammation;
which whiles the Patient cannot patiently endure, he is forced to change his
place, whilst he every way seeks ease for his pain: and thus he now and then
moves the fractured part, which ought to be kept quiet without any motion. It
must lie smooth or even, because an unequal or uneven site distorts or draws
awry the part, whilst one portion of the hurt part is borne up, and sustained
by that which lies under it; but the other hanging down has nothing
thereunder, whereupon it may rest. Therefore Hippocrates bids us diligently to
take heed, that the heel do not hang down, Sect. 2. de fract.
nor the foot remain without a pillow, for hence pain and a troublesome
defluxion of humors is to be feared. But the part ought to lie somewhat high,
that the defluxion may be hindered, which is easily stirred up by a prone and
declining site: for if the foot shall be placed in a lower figure, the blood
which flows thither from the leg, will cause inflammation. But on the
contrary, if it be higher, nothing can flow down thereinto. Therefore
absolutely not only the foot, but also the thigh and leg, are to be placed
higher than the rest of the body: yet, keeping such a mean, that the part may
not be too much distended, as Hippocrates admonishes Sent. 33. and 56. sect.
2. de fract.
us. In the mean time, this hurt leg or side, ought to be of equal length
with the sound, and for that purpose it must be stayed on both sides with
Junks, as we shall show you hereafter, when we come to speak of a broken leg.
The bandage being performed as we have said, the following night, and the next
day the Patient feels the member more straightly bound, than when it was first
wrapped; yea, verily the knee is lifted up into a soft tumor by the expression
of the humor from the wounded part: but on the contrary, the ensuing day the
ligation is slackned and relaxed, some portion of the humor contained in the
part being digested. Also the next day all things are perceived more loose,
there being made a larger resolution of the humor. Then therefore the Bandages
must be loosed, and that When the first ligation must be loosed.
not only, lest that the fragments of the bones should fall forth of their
place, but also that we may gratify the Patient by that alteration or change
of place, and besides that we may avoyde itching, which usually happens to
parts too long bound up, by reason of the suppression of acride and fuliginous
excrements, which use to be gathered in great quantity in a part at rest and
bound up, both from the excrementitious humors, wherewith the part is
moistened, and the alimentarie humors in a part which is idle and at quiet; by
reason the difflation and transpiration are hindered by want of exercise, and
the pores of the skin shut up by the abundance of the ligatures: so that by
the suppression thereof, many have not only an itching, but also, the skin
being broke by the acrimonie of these, as well vapors as humors, which are
kept shut and pent up, have ulcers break forth. Therefore when such accidents
shall be feared, the part shall so long be fomented with warm water and oil,
as you shall think fit: for, such fomenting asswageth pain, relaxeth that
which was too much straitened by the binding, and amends the refrigeration of
the part, caused by the repercussion and expression of the blood and spirits,
the native and internal heat being by this means revived. If, together with
the tumor, there be a contusion and sugillation, it must be the longer
fomented, that the excrementitious humor residing in the part may be digested.
But if this quantity of time shall not suffice, then must you use stronger
digestives: yet have a care you use them not too long; for so you should hinder
the generation of a Callus. Therefore that saying of Hippocrates must here be
remembered, which says, That a weak fomentation, and the short time of using
one does attract, but not discuss; but a Sent. 15. sect. 3. (...) offic.
longer and stronger wastes the flesh. Besides also, you must have regard to
the temper and habit of the Patient; for fomentations, used to plethorick
bodies, draw superfluous humors to the part. The Ancients bid, that the
ligatures be loosed every third day, until their seventh day; but after the
seventh, on every seventh day: but hereof nothing can be certainly and
perpetually decreed. For, according to the accidents the Patients must be
dressed sooner or later, more often or seldom, renewing the ligatures, and the
rest of the dressing. Therefore, if no symptom urge, I would have none of
these things, which are done to the Patient at the first dressing, to be moved,
unless as slowly and seldom as you may. For you hinder the knitting of the
bone, if you never so little move the ends of the fragments thereof: for, as
you see wood is joined together by glue, and pewter with sowder; so the
fragments of bones are, by the providence of nature, glued and sowdred together
by a Callus. Wherefore broken bones have very much need of rest, to the
generating of Rest necessary for the knitting of set bones.
a Callus; otherwise, the matter thereof flowing down, quickly flows away,
and nothing is done. You may much help forwards the generation of a Callus,
which is begun about the thirteenth or fifteenth day, by applying an
emplaister made with the white of an egg, having the powder of red rose
leaves, and wheat flower mixed therewith, and other Catagmatick plasters,
which shall hereafter be described in speaking of the fracture of a leg.

CHAP. XXI. Of the fracture of the Thigh nigh to the joint, or the upper or
lower head of the bone.
A Fracture sometimes happens at the joint of the hip in the neck of the
thigh bone, as I once observed in an honest matron. I being called to A
history.
her, when I had observed the hurt Thigh to be shorter than the whole, with the
outward prominencie of the Ischium, which at the first sight I supposed to
proceed from the head of the thigh bone, I presently persuaded my self it was
a dislocation and no fracture; I then therefore extended the bone, and forced
(as I thought) the head thereof into its cavitie. The equality of both the
legs in bigness which followed upon this extension, increased my persuasion
that it was a dislocation. The next day I visited her the second time, and
found her in great pain, her hurt leg the shorter, and her foot wrested
inwards. Then I loosed all her ligatures, and perceived such a prominencie as I
did formerly. Wherefore I end voured again to force in the head of the bone,
as I formerly did. But as I was busied therein, I heard a little crackling, and
also I considered, that there was no cavitie nor depression in the joint, by
which signs I certainly persuaded my self, that the bone was broken, and not
dislocated. Neither only such kind of Fractures, but also the separation of
the appendix or head of this bone from its place, may induce one to think it a
dislocation; which thing has sometimes deceived some heedlesse Surgeons, who
have not dreamt of the divulsion or Another fracture of the thigh, resembling a
luxation.
separation of the appendix from the top of the Thigh Bone, but have judged it
only a dislocation. Then therefore (that I may return to my former narration)
I set the bone, and joined the fragments together, laid thereupon splints with
compresses, made ligations with a rowler, having two heads wrapped about the
joint, and the body crosse-wise, and I defended her foot with a Case, that
none of the clothes might press it. I fastened a rope to a post, and so let
it come down into the midst of the bed, and tied many knots thereon, for the
better taking hold and lifting up her self; the which thing you must always
do in fractures and dislocations of the thigh and leg, that so your Patients
may have some stay, whereby they may succor themselves with their hands, as
often as they desire to rise, or lift themselves up in their beds, or go to
stool; as also, that they may give perspiration, and as it were ventilation to
the loins, buttocks, rumpe, and other parts, compressed and wearied with long
lying, for want whereof they are molested with heat and pain; whence ulcers
arise, which oft-times torment the Patient with such tormenting heat and
pain, that he is even consumed by a fever, watchings, and want of rest. This
opportunity of raising the body out of the bed, is by so Why the fracture of
a bon. near a joint is more dangerous.
much the more needful in this place, by how much the fracture is nearer the
joint: for there it is more dangerous than in the midst of the thigh, and
consequently more difficult to dress and heal, for that the part is
bloodlesse, and by reason of the multitude of the nerves, tendons and
ligaments, which are obnoxious to many malign symptoms. But the Surgeon must
have diligent care in this kind of fracture, and must look often that the
bone, which is set, do not fall forth again, which easily happens here by any
light stirring of the body, and the like occasion, for that the thigh has but
one only bone. Therefore, as often as the Bandages shall be loosed, and the
fracture dressed, he shall attentively view the figure of the bone, and the
magnitude of the affected part, comparing it with the sound; for the set and
composed fragments of the broken bone, can scarce fall asunder, but that the
one must lie upon the other. But before it be knit, the part must be extended
and restored to its state, that so the Patient may not halt during the residue
of his life. For I have read it written in Avicen, that scarce any do so well
recover a fractured Lib. 3. sen. 6. tract. 1. c. 14.
thigh, that they do not halt thereof: therefore the Patient must be careful,
that he move himself, or his body, as little as he can. Many of the
Ancients have set down the time of the consolidation of this bone to be
fifty days: but (as I formerly said) there can be no certain or determinate
time hereof. But in what time soever this bone shall be knit, the Patient must
not In what space the thigh bone may be knit.
stand or go thereon presently upon it; for that there remains a weakness
in the part a long time after, so that the Patients are forced to use Crutches
to go withal, in the mean space while they recover more strength.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Fracture of the Patella, or whirle-bone of the Knee.
THe Whirle-bone of the knee is often times contused, but not so frequently
broken: yet when that happens, it goes into two or three pieces, sometimes The
differences.
long-wise, sometimes athwart. Sometimes it is broken in the midst, and
some-whiles shivered into many splinters, and all these either with, or without
a wound. The signs are, impotencie in going, a hollownesse Signs.
in that place, and a sensible separation of the fragments of the hurt part,
and the crackling of these parts under your hand. It is set after this manner;
Wish the Patient Cure.
to stretch forth his leg, yea, he must keep it extended all the while,
until it be knit; and therefore left he should bend it unawares, the
hollownesse of the Ham shall be filled with a boulster: for by bending of the
knee, the set fragments of the whirle-bone would again fly in sunder. This
being done, the fragments shall by the hand of the Surgeon be set as is
fitting, and be kept so set by the application of convenient remedies, making
ligatures, and applying Junks, as we said must be done in a fracture of the
Thigh Bone. And lastly, you must observe and do in this, as in the fracture of
a leg. For the Prognostic, this I affirm, That I have seen none of those
who have had this bone fractured, who have not halted during the rest of their
lives. The cause hereof is, the knitting by the concretion of a Callus hinders
the free bending of the knee; going, especially on even Why those halt who have
had this bonefractured.
ground is more easy to the Patient, but an ascent is far more difficult,
and absolutely painful. The Patient must necessarily for this kind of
fracture lie or keep his bed, at the least for forty days.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a broken Leg.
THis kind of Fracture is cured after the same manner as that of the arm or
cubit. Hippocrates admonishes us, that the Tibia, or Leg-bone is Sent. 65.
sect. 2. de fract.
more dangerous to be broken, and more difficult and slow to be healed than the
Fibula, or Shin-bone; because that is the thicker, and as it were the upholder
of the whole bulk of the body: but this other is but as it were a certain
additament or assistant, provided for the staying or bearing up of the muscles
of the leg, by which the foot is moved. The leg bone being only broken, the
signs thereof are perceived only in the inner part of the leg; for that the
Shin-bone being whole, suffers it not to throw or cast forth its self. On the
contrary, when the Shin-bone only is broken, the signs thereof appear only
in the external part of the leg; because the leg bone, being opposed
thereto, does not suffer it to cast in its self, and with its fragments to
turn inwards. But when both the bones are broken, the signs of the fracture
may equally appear both Signs that both the bones are broken.
here and there. But when only one of these bones are broken, the fracture is
far more easy to dress and heal, because that which remains whole, is a
much more firm stay to that which is hurt, than any splints can be. But that
I may the better instruct and make ready the Surgeon for the restoring of this
fracture, I will illustrate the matter by an example from my self. John
Nestor, Doctor of Physic, Richard Hubert, and I, went together to visit a
Patient at the Place of the Friar A history.
Minorites. Wherefore, intending to pass over the Seine within sight of the
place, I endeavored to make my horse take boat, and therefore switched him
over the buttocks. The Jade, madded herewith, so struck at me with his heels,
that he brake both the bones of my left leg, some four fingers breadth above
my ankle. Then I, fearing some worse mischief, and lest the Jade should double
his blow, flew back; and as I fled back, the broken bones flew in sunder; and
breaking through the flesh, stocking and boot, showed themselves, whereby I
felt as much pain, as it is credible a man was able to endure. Wherefore I was
presently carried into the boat, that so I might be carried to the other side
of the water to be dressed: but the stirring of the boat as they rowed, almost
killed me with bitterness of pain, for that the sharp fragments of the bones
were rubbed against the flesh which lay next them. Being ferried over, as I was
conveyed into the next houses, my pain was much increased, whilst lifted by
the hands of diverse persons, one while up, another down, sometimes to the left
side, otherwhiles to the right with my whole body, and all the parts thereof.
When at the length, I was laid upon a bed, I was somewhat freed from the
bitterness of my pain, and had time to wipe off the sweat, which ran down
over all my body. Then was I dressed with such a medicine, as the time and
place would afford; we composed it of the white of an egg, wheat flower,
soote of a chimney, and melted butter. For the rest, I entreated Richard A
soon made medicine.
Hubert, that he would handle me, as if he knew me not, neither that, moved
for love of me, he should remit any thing of the severitie of art, but
chiefly, that he What to do when the leg is broken.
would stretch my foot straight out, and if the wound were not sufficiently
wide, that he would enlarge it with his incision knife, that so he might the
more easily set the broken bones in their due place; that he would with his
fingers (whose judgment is far more certain than the best made instruments)
search, whether the splinters which were in the wound were quite severed from
the bone, and therefore to be taken forth; that he would with his hand press
forth the blood, and the clods of blood which were in a great quantity
concrete at the mouth of the wound; that he would bind up and place my leg in
that site and manner, as he thought best: which is, that he should have three
rowlers in a readiness; the first whereof he should cast directly upon the
wound, so that he should begin his ligation at the wound: also he should put
splints about it; some three, but others two fingers breadth, of the length of
half a foot, somewhat depressed and hollowed, whereby they might be the more
easily put about the leg, more straightly at their ends, and a fingers distance
each from other, which at the last he should bind with fillets, like those
wherewith Women use to bind up their hair; yet so, that the binding might be
more strait upon the wound: and that he would fill the cavitie of the ham, and
of the ancles, with boulsters made of flax wrapped in linen clothes: that he
would fortify the sides of my leg with Junkes made of bents or little
sticks, and lined with linen cloth, stretched from my heel to my groine, and
bound over in four places; so that the strait figure of the leg might
scarcely be perverted by any force: that he would gently, and smoothly lift up
my leg to an indifferent height: and lastly, that he should arm it from the
violence of external injuries, by putting it in a box or case. But you must
note, that the fit placing or laying of the leg is a matter of such moment,
that if any error be here committed, it will cause no less than lamenesse.
For if it be lifted up higher than is fit, the Callus will be hollow on the
foreside; if lower, then it will be gibbous or bunching forth. Neither also do
they commit a small error, who do not fill up the cavities at the ancles
after the forementioned manner: for, hereupon the heel will be much afflicted,
whilst it is forced to sustain a tedious and painful compression, which at
length brings a hot distemper, because the spirits cannot freely flow thereto;
which I, finding by experience, not knowing the cause, wished them ever now and
then to lift up my heel, whereby it might enjoy the benefit of perspiration,
and the spirits have free entrance thereinto, and the contained vapors passing
forth. To conclude, my hurt leg was laid upon a cushion after the manner you
see here described.

The figure of a Leg fractured with a wound, and bound up.


CHAP. XXIV. Of some things to be observed in Ligation, when a fracture is
associated with a wound.
THis, taken out of the doctrine of the Ancients, ought to be kept firm and
ratified, That Ligation must be made upon the wound; otherwise That the
ligation must be most strait upon the wound.
the wounded part will presently lift it self up into a great tumor, receiving
the humors pressed thither by the force of the Ligation made on this and that
side, above and bolow, whence ensue many malign symptoms. You may make trial
hereof upon a sound fleshie part; for if you bind it above and What symptoms
ensue the want of binding upon the wounded part.
below, not touching that which is in the midst, it will be lifted up into a
great tumor, and change the flourishing and native color into a livide or
blackish hue, by reason of the flowing and abundance of the humors pressed
forth on every side from the neighboring parts. Therefore such things will
happen much the rather in a wounded or ulcerated part. But for this cause, the
ulcer will remain unsuppurated and weeping, crude and liquid sanies flowing
there-hence, like unto that which usually flows from inflamed eyes. Such
sanies, if it fall upon the bones, and make any stay there, it, with the touch
thereof, burns and corrupts them, and so much the more, if they be rare and
soft. These will be the signs of such corruption of Signs of the corruption
of the bones.
the bones; if a greater quantity, and that more filthy sanies, flow from the
ulcer, than was accustomed, or the nature of a simple ulcer requires; if the
lips of the ulcer be inverted; if the flesh be more soft and flaccid about
them; if a sorrowful sense of a beating, and also deep pain torment the
Patient by fitts; if, by searching with your Probe, you perceive the bone to be
spoiled of its periostium; and lastly, if you find it scaily and rough, or
also if your Probe be put down somewhat hard, it run into the substance of
the bone. But we have treated sufficiently hereof in our particular Treatise of
the rottenness of the bones. But certainly such rottenness will never happen
to the bone, if the hurt part be bound up, as is fit, and according to art.
Wherefore I judge it not amiss, again to admonish the Surgeon of this, That
as far as the thing shall suffer, he make his rowlings upon When the wounded
part must be omitted in ligation.
the wound; unless by chance there be such excessive pain and great
inflammation, that, through occasion of such symptoms and accidents, he be
diverted from this proper and legitimate cure of the disease. Therefore then,
because nothing more can be done, let him only do this, which may be done
without offense; that is, let him supply the defect of ligation and rowlers,
with a linen cloth, not too weak, nor too much worn, being twice or thrice
doubled, and which may serve to compass the wound and neighboring parts once
about: let him sew the edges thereof at the sides of the wound, lest he be
forced to stir the fragments of the bones (which once set ought to be kept
unmoved) as often as the wound comes to be dressed. For, broken bones do not
require such frequent dressing, as wounds and ulcers do. By this it appears,
that as want of binding, and too much looseness in absence of pain and a
Phlegmon, so also too strait ligation, when pain is present, brings a Phlegmon
and Abscesse to the wound. Therefore let all things here, according to the
forementioned rules and circumstances, be indifferent. I have for this purpose
thought good to re^terate these things, because you shall as yet find many,
who follow the practice of Paulus, and make many circumvolutions here and
there, above and below the wound, which presently they carry crosse-wise. But
this cross or lattice-like kind of ligation is wholly to be disliked, and
that Lattice like binding to be shunned.
only to be used which we have described, according to the mind of
Hippocrates. Now it is time, that I return to the former history of my
mishap, and declare what was done to me after that first dressing, which I have
formerly mentioned.

CHAP. XXV. What was used to the Authors Leg after the first dressing.
I Being brought home to mine own house in Paris in the afternoon, they
took from me, out of the Basilica of the left arm, some six ounces of blood.
And then at the second dressing the lips or edges of the wound and places
thereabout were anointed with unguentum rosatum, which, by a joint consent of
Vnguentum rosatum, wherefore good in fractures.
the Ancients, is much commended in the beginnings of fractures: for it will
assuage pain, and hinder inflammation, by repelling the humors far from the
wounded part: for it is cold, astringent and repelling, as the composition
thereof shows; for it is made ex oleo omphacino, aqua rosacea, pauco aceto and
cera alba. Therefore I used this ointment for six days; I dipped the
compresses and rowlers somewhiles in oxycrate, otherwhiles in thick and
astringent red wine, for the strengthening of the part, and repressing the
humors; You must have a care, that the compresses and rowlers grow not hard by
dryness.
which two things we must have a care of in Hippocrates opinion, in fractures
especially with a wound. Wherefore if at any time the compresses or rowlers
seemed to dry, I now and then moystened them with the oxycrate, or rose
vinegar: for, by their too much dryness, pain and inflammation happen; and if
they bind the part somewhat more strait, they hurt it also by their hardness.
You shall see many surgeons, who in this kind of affect, from the beginning to
the end, use only astringent and emplastick medicines, wholly contrary to the
method set down by Hippocrates, and commended by Galen. For, by the continued
use of such things, the pores and breathing places of the skin are shut up;
whence the fuliginous excrement being suppressed, the external heat is
increased, and itching caused, and at length an ulcer by the fretting of the
acride and serous humor long suppressed. Whereby you may learn, that astringent
and emplastick medicines must not be used above six days. In stead hereof
you shall use the emplaisters, which I shall presently describe. In the
beginning of my disease I used so spare a diet, that for nine days, I ate
nothing each day, but twelve stewed prunes, and six morsels of bread, and
drank a Paris pint of sugared water, of which water this was the composition.

. sacc. albis. xii. aquae font. lb xii. cinam. iii. bulliant simul secundum
artem: The description of a sugared water.
Otherwhiles I used syrup of maidens hair with boiled water: Otherwhiles, the
divine drink (as they term it) whereof this is the composition.. aquaecoctae
lb. vi. sacc. albis. iiii. succ. lim. i. agitentur and transvasentur saepius in
vasis vitreis. I was purged when need required with a bole of Cassia with
Rubarbe. I used also suppositories of Castle soape to make me go to stool;
for, if at any time I wanted due evacuation, a preternaturall heat presently
seized upon my kidneyes. With this, though exquisite manner of diet, I could
not prevail, but that a fever took me upon the eleventh day of my disease,
and a defluxion, which turned into an Abscesse, long flowing with much matter.
I think the occasion hereof was some portion The causes of a fever and
abscesse, ensuing upon a fracture.
of the humor suppressed in the bottom of the wound; as also by too loose
binding, by reason that I could not endure just or more strait binding; and
lastly, scales or shivers of bones quite broke off, and therefore unapt to be
agglutinated: for these therefore putrefying, drew by consent the proper
nourishment of the part into putrefaction, and by the putredinous heat thence
arising, did plentifully administer the material and efficient cause to the
defluxion and inflammation. I was moved to think they were scales, severed
from their bone, by the thin and crude sanies flowing from the wound, the much
swollen sides of the wound, and the Signs of scales severed from their bones.
more loose and spongie flesh thereabouts. To these causes, this also did
accrue, one night amongst the rest, as I slept, the muscles so contracted
themselves by a violent motion, that they drew my whole Leg upwards; so that
the bones, by the vehemence of the convulsion, were displaced, and pressed the
sides of the wound; neither could they be perfectly composed or set, unless by
a new extension and impulsion, which was much more painful to me than the
former. My fever, when it had lasted with me seven days, at length enjoyed a
Crisis and end, partly by the eruption of matter, and partly by sweat, flowing
from me in a plenteous manner.

CHAP. XXVI. What may be the cause of the convulsive twitching of broken
members.
THis contraction, and (as it were) convulsive twitching, usually happens to
fractured members in the time of sleep. I think the cause thereof is, for
that the native heat withdraws its self while we sleep, into the Why the
extreme parts are cold when we sleep.
center of the body; whereby it comes to pass, that the extreme parts grow
cold. In the mean while, nature, by its accustomed providence, sends spirits
to the suply of the hurt part. But because they are not received of the part
evil affected and unapt thereto, they betake themselves together, and
suddenly, according to their wonted celerity, thither from whence they came,
the muscles follow their motion: with the muscles, the bones, whereinto they
are inserted, are together drawn; whereby it comes to pass, that they are
again displaced, and with great torment of pain, fall from their former
seat. This contraction of the muscles is toward their original.

CHAP. XXVII. Certain Documents concerning the parts, whereon the Patient must
necessarily rest, whilst he lies in his bed.
THose who have their Leg or the like bone broken, because they are hindered
by the bitterness of pain, and also wish for their cure or consolidation, The
natural faculties languish in the parts by idleness, but are strengthened by
action.
are forced to keep themselves without stirring, and upon their backs in their
beds for a long time together. In the mean space, the parts whereupon they
must necessarily lie, as the heel, back, holy-bone, rumpe, the muscles of the
broken thigh or leg remain stretched forth and unmovable, set at liberty
from their usual functions. Whereby it comes to pass, that all their strength
decays, and grows dull by little and little. Moreover also, by the
suppression of the fuliginous and acride excrements, and want of perspiration,
they grow preternaturally hot; whence defluxion, an abscesse and ulcer, happen
to them, but principally to the holy-bone, the rumpe and heel: to the former,
for that How, and what ulcers happen upon the fracture of the leg, to the
rumpe and heel.
they are defended with small store of flesh; to the latter, for that it is of
more exquisite sense. Now the ulcers of these parts are difficulty healed, yea,
and oft-times they cause a gangrene in the flesh, and a rottenness and
mortification in the bones there-under, and for the most part a continued
fever, delirium, convulsion, and (by that sympathy which generally accompanies
such affects) a hicketing. For the heel and stomach are two very nervous
parts, the latter in the whole body thereof, and by a large portion of the
nerves of the sixth conjugation; but the other by the great tendon passing
under it, the which is produced by the meeting, and as it were growing together
of the three muscles of the calfe of the leg. All which are deadly, both by
dissipation of the native heat by the feverish, and that which is
preternaturall; as also by the infection of the noble parts, whose use the life
cannot want, by carrion-like vapors. When as I considered all these things
with my self, and (become more skillful by the example of others) understood
how dangerous they were, I wished them now and then to lift my heel up out of
Remedies for the prevention of the foresaid ulcers.
the bed; and taking hold of the rope which hung over my head, I heaved up my
self, that so the parts, pressed with continual lying, might transpire, and
be ventilated. Moreover also I rested these parts upon a round cushion, being
open in the middle, and stuffed with soft feathers, and laid under my rumpe and
heel, that they might be refreshed by the benefit and gentle breathing of the
air: and I did oft-times apply linen clothes, spread over with unguentum
rosatum, for the asswaging of the pain and heat. Besides also, I devised a
Casse of Lattin, wherein the The use of a Lattin Casse.
broken leg being laid, is kept in its place, far more surely and
certainly than by any Junks; and moreover also, it may all be moved to and
again at the Patients pleasure. This Casse will also hinder the heel from
lying with all its body and weight upon the bed, putting a soft and thick
boulster under the calfe, in that place where the Casse is hollow: besides
also, it arms and defends it against the falling down and weight of the
bed-clothes, having a little arch made over and above, of the same matter. All
which shall be made manifest unto you by the following figure.

The figure of a Casse.
A A. Show the bottom or belly of the Casse.

B B. The wings or sides to be opened and shut at pleasure:

C. The end of the wings, whereto the sole or arch is fitted.

D D. The Arch.

E E. The Sole.

F F. An open space, whereat the heel hangs forth of the Casse.



Now it remains, that I tell you what remedies I applied to the Abscesse which
happened upon my wound. When therefore I perceived an Abscesse to breed, I
composed a suppurative medicine of the yoalks of eggs, common oil,
turpentine, A suppuratis (...) medicine.
and a little wheat flower, and I used it until it was opened: then to cleanse
it I used this following remedy.

. syrupi rosati and terebinth. venetae, an. ii. pulveris radicis ireos
florentiae, aloes, A d^te: ^ive.
mastiches, farinae hordei, an. ss. incorporentur omnia simul and fiat
mundificativum: but I had a care, that the place, whereat I conjectured the
quite severed scales of the bones must break forth, should be filled with
tents made of sponge or flax, that so, by this means, I might keep the ulcer
open at my pleasure. But I put into the Catagmatick powders have power to cast
forth the scales of bones.
bottom of the ulcer catagmatick and cephalicke powders, with a little burnt
Alum to procure the egresse of the formerly mentioned scales. These at length
cast forth, I cicatrized the ulcer with burnt Alum. For, this having a drying
and astringent faculty, confirms and hardens the flesh, which is loose and
spongie, and flowing with liquid sanies, and helps forwards natures endeavor
in cicatrization. For, the fragments of the bones, they, by reason of their
natural dryness and hardness, cannot be joined and knit together by
themselves without a medium: but they need a certain substance, which,
thickning and concreting at their ends, does at length The causes both
efficient and material of a Callus.
glue them together, and (as it were) fasten them with soder. This substance
has its matter of the proper substance and marrow of the bones; but the form
from the native heat, and emplastick medicines, which moderately heat. For, on
the contrary, these medicines, which, by their too much heat, do discuss and
attenuate, do (as it were) melt and dissolve the matter of the Callus, and so
hinder the knitting. Wherefore for this purpose, I would wish you to make use
of the following emplasters, of whose efficacy I have had experience: for,
hence they are called knitting or consolidating plasters.

. olei myrtill. and rosarum omphac. an. lb. ss. rad. altheae lb. ii. rad.
fraxini, and fol. cjusdem, rad. consolidae majoris and fol. ejusdem, fol.
salicis an. m. i. fiat decoctio in sufficienti Medicines conducing to the
generation of a Callus.
quantitate vini nigri, and aquaefabrorum, ad medi^tatis consumptionem, add in
colatura pulveris myrrhae and thuris an. ss. adipis hirci lb. ss. terebinth.
lotae iiii. mestiches iii. lithargyri auri and argenti an. ii. boli armeni^,
and terrae sigillata, an. i. ss. minii vi. cerae albae quantum sufficit, fiat
emplastrum, ut artis est. In stead hereof you may use the black emplaister,
where of this is the description.

. lithargyri auri lb. i. olei and aceti lb. ii. coquantur simul lento igne
donec nigrum and The black plaster.
splendens reddatur emplastrum, and non adhaereat digitis. Or else,. olei
rosat. and myrtill. an. ii. nucum cupressi, boli armen. sanguinis drac.
pulverisatorum an.. ss. emplastri diachalciteos iiii. liquefaciant simul, and
fiat emplastrum secundum artem. In defect of these, you may use a Cere-cloth,
or tela Gualteri, whereof this is the description.

. pulveris thuris, farinae volatilis, mastiches, boli arm. resinae pini, nucum
cupressi, rubiae tinctorum, an. ii. sevi arietini and cerae albae an. lb. ss.
fiat emplastrum: into which The description of a Spa^adrapum or cere-cloth.
(whilst it is hot) dip a warm linen cloth, for the forementioned use.
Emplastrum Diacalcithios, by the common consent of all the Ancients, is much
commended for fractures: but it must undergo different preparations, according
to the condition of the time, for in summer it must be dissolved in the juice
of plantaine and nightshade, lest it should heat more than is fit. It is
convenient, in the interim, to have regard to the temper of the affected
bodies; for neither are the bodies of children to be so much dried as these of
old men: otherwise, if such drying medicines should be applied to young bodies
as to old, the matter of the Callus would be dissolved, it would be so far
from concreting; wherefore the Surgeon must take great heed in the choice of
his medicines. For, often times remedies, good of themselves, are by use made
not good, because they are used and applied without judgment: which Medicines
good of themselves, not good by event.
is the cause that often times pernicious accidents happen, or else the Callus
becomes more soft, hard, slender, crooked, or lastly concretes more slowly by
the great error, and to the great shame of the Surgeon.

CHAP. XXVIII. By what means we may know the Callus is a breeding.
THen I knew that my leg begun to knit, when as less matter than was When
the Callus is breeding the ulcer must be seldom dressed.
usual came from the ulcer, when the pain slackened, and lastly; when as the
convulsive twitchings ceased; which caused me to judge it fit to dress it
seldomer than I was used to do. For, by the frequent detersion in dressing an
ulcer, whilst a Callus is breeding, the matters whereof it is to be made, are
drawn away and spent, which are (as they term them) Ros, Cambium, and Gluten,
which are the proper and genuine nourishments both of the bony, as also of the
fleshie substance. I by other signs also conjectured the breeding of the
Callus, to wit, by the sweating of a certain dewie blood out of the edges and
pores of the wound, which gently dyed and bedewed the boulsters and ligatures,
proceeding from the effluxe of the subtler and gentler portion of that matter,
which plenteously flowed down for the breeding of a Callus. As also, by a
tickling and pleasing sense of a certain vapor, continually creeping, with a
moderate and gentle heat, from the upper parts even to the place of the wound.
Wherefore thence forwards Hipp. sent. 43. sect. 1. de fract.
I somewhat loosened the ligation, lest, by keeping it too strait, I should
hinder from entering to the fragments of the bones, the matter of the Callus,
which is a portion of the blood, temperate in quality, and moderate in
quantie. Then therefore I thought good, to use nourishments fit to generate
more gross, thick and tenacious blood, and sufficient for generating a
Callus; such as are the extremities, tendinous Meats fit for generating a
Callus.
and gristly parts of beasts, as the heads, feet, legs and ears of Hoggs,
Oxen, Sheep, Kids; all which I boiled with Rice, French Barley, and the like,
using somewhiles one, somwhiles another, to please my stomach and palate. I
also sometimes fed upon frumity, or wheat sodden in Capon broth with the yoalks
of eggs; I drank red, thick and astringent wine, indifferently tempered with
water. For my second course, I ate chestnuts and medlars: neither do I without
some reason, thus particularize my diet: for that gross nourishments,
especially if they be friable and fragile, as beef is, are alike hurtful (for
as much as pertaines to the generating of a Callus) as light meats are. For
that makes the Callus too dry, these too tender. Wherefore Galen pronounces
these meats only fit for generating a Callus, which are neither Lib. 6. meth.
cap. (...)*
fragile nor friable, neither serous and thin, nor too dry; but indifferent
gross, and also viscide, fat and tough. These meats, digested by the stomach
into Chilus; are sent into the guts, and from hence, by the mesaraick veins,
into the Gate-veine, and the hollow part of the Liver, thence into the
Hollow-veine, and so into the Veins dispersed over all the body and the parts
thereof. There are also some of these veins which carry blood into the bones;
but in the large cavities of the bones is marrow contained, as in the small a
certain marrowie substance, proportionable thereto, being their proper
nourishment. The generation of marrow is from the grosser portion of the blood;
which flows into the greater cavities of the bones by larger veins and
arteries, but into the less by lesser, which end in their pores and small
passages. For, in large bones you may observe large and apparent passages, by
which the veins and arteries enter for the forementioned use. By the same
ways the nerves also insinuate themselves, from whence proceeds a membrane
which involves the marrow of the bones, the which by that means is endued with
most exquisite sense, as experience teaches; which is the cause that makes
many Why the marrow may seem to have sense of feeling.
believe, that the marrow has sense of feeling, because the membranes thereof
being hurt cause most bitter pain. Therefore out of the marrow and the proper
substance of the bone, there sweats a certain gross and terrestrial juice,
whereof, by the power of the assimilating faculty, which serves in stead of
the formative, a Callus grows and knits. Simple fractures of the leg are
usually knit in fi^tle days; In what space the leg is usually knit.
but through the occasion of the wound and the scales quite broke off, and
other accidents which befell me, it was three whole months before the
fragments of the bones were perfectly knit, and it was also another month,
before I could go upon my leg without the help of a Crutch. Going was
painful to me for some few days, because the Callus had taken up some place
of the muscles: for, before my former freedom of motion could return again
to the broken and knit part, it was necessaire, that the Tendons and Membranes
should separate themselves by little and little from the scarre. In the
performance of all these things, I had the diligent and faithful assistance
amongst the Surgeons, to omit Physicians, of Anthony Portall, the Kings
Surgeon.

CHAP. XXIX. Of those things which may hinder the generation of a Callus, and
how to correct the faults thereof, if it be ill formed.
HAving already spoken of the signs of a Callus beginning to concrete, of its
generation and the manner thereof: it now remains, that we treat of those
things which hinder the generation thereof; and what on the contrary help
forwards the conformation and concretion thereof. Now these things which either
wholly hinder, or else retarde the generation of a Callus, have a strong and
powerful discussive and attenuating Discussing and unctuous medicines hinder
the generation of a Callus.
faculty; or else they are unctuous, oily and moist. For, by such the juice,
whereof the Callus ought to be, is either melted and consumed, or else grows
soft, and is relaxed. But on the contrary, those things which help forwards a
Callus must be drying, incrassating, thickening, hardening and emplasticke,
moderately hot and What helps forward the generation thereof.
astringent. But for moist and relaxing medicines, they ought to have no place
here, unless when it happens that the Callus is ill formed, that is, too
thick, or crooked, or otherwise ill shapen, whereby it may be wasted and
broken, so to be restored again after a better manner. Yet notwithstanding,
such things are not to be attempted, unless when the Callus is yet green, and
so depraved, that the fault thereof does very much pervert the native
conformation of the part, and exceedingly offend the action. Then therefore in
such a case, the place must be fomented with a decoction of a sheeps head and
guts, wherein shall be boiled the roots of Marsh-mallowes, of Brionie, the
seeds of Line, of Faenugreeke, Pigeons dung, Bay Berries, and the like. You
shall also use this following ointment and plaster.

. unguenti de Althaea iiii. olei liliorum, and axungiae anseris an. i. aquae
vitae parum, liquefiant simul, fiat linimentum quo liniatur pars. Then apply
this following emplaister.

. emplast. de Vigo cum mercurio, cerati oesypati descriptione Philagrii, an.
iii. olei anethini and liliorum an. i. liquefiant omnia simul, fiat emplastrum;
let it be spread upon leather for the foresaid use. When by this means the
Callus shall seem to be sufficiently mollified, it shall be broken, and the
bones restored to their natural state, and the cure of the fracture to be
followed as at the beginning. If the Callus be become too hard through age, it
is better not to break it, but to let it alone, lest some What Callus must not
be broken, though distorte, or otherwise ill conformed.
worse accident befall the Patient. For it may so fall out, that by your
laboring to break it, the bone may break in some other part, before it break
in that which is knit by the Callus. Therefore the discreet Patient had rather
live lame, than for eschewing it, to undergo the hazard of his life. If the
Callus be too gross, it shall be diminished (if it be as yet fresh) with
emollient, resolving, and powerfully astringent medicines, which have force to
dissolve, dry and exhaust. It will also be good strongly to rubb the Callus
with oil of Bays, wherein Saltpeter, or some other kind of Salt has been
dissolved, then wrapped about with a Rowler, to bind it very straightly, putting
a leaden plate thereon, whereby the flowing down of the nourishing humor into
the part, may be forbidden; that thus by little and little the Callus may decay
and diminish. If on the contrary, it any ways happen, that the Callus The
causes of too slender a Callus.
be more thin and slender, or grows more slowly, for that it is too straightly
bound, or because the idle part is longer kept in quiet than is fit, without
exercising of its proper function (which cause is to be reckoned amongst the
chief causes of the leaneness, even for this reason, for that exercise stirs
up the native heat of the part, the worker of digestion and nutrition) or else
for that they feed upon such nourishments as offend in quality, or quantity, or
both, or for that the ligature used to the part is too often loosed, or because
the part its self is too hastily and before the time put to undergo solid
offices and motions. According to the variety of causes, medicines shall be
applied. For if the ligature of the part be too strait, it shall be loosed,
Remedies therefore.
yea verily the fractured place, the ligature being taken away, shall be quite
freed from ligation, and a new kind of ligature must be made, which must be
rolled down from the root of the vessels, that is, from the armepitts, if the
arm; or from the groine, if the leg be broken, to the fracture: yet so, as
that you may leave it untouched or taken in, for thus the blood is pressed from
the fountain and spring, and forced into the affected part, by a way quite
contrary to that, whereby we have formerly taught in fear of inflammation, to
hinder it from entrance into the affected part. Also gentle frictions and
fomentations with warm water may be profitably made, from which you must then
disist when the part shall begin to grow hot and swell. If any too long
continue these frictions and fomentations, he shall resolve When we must
desist from fomenting and frictions.
that which he has drawn thither. For this we have often times observed, that
frictions and fomentations have contrary effects, according to the shortness
and continuance of time. Pications will also conduce to this purpose, and other
things which customarily are used to members troubled with an atrophi^, or want
of nourishment.

CHAP. XXX. Of fomentations which be used to broken bones.
Diverse fomentations are used to broken bones for several causes. When Warm
water.
we use warm water for a fomentation, we mean that, which is just between
hot and cold, that is, which feels luke warm to the hand of the Physician and
Patient. A fomentation of such water used for The effects thereof.
some short space does moderately heat, attenuate and prepare for resolution,
the humor which is in the surface of the body; it draws blood and an
alimentarie humor to the part laboring of an Atrophia; it asswages pain,
relaxes that which is too much extended, and moderately heats the member
refrigerated through occasion of too strait binding, or by any other means. On
the contrary, too hot fomenting cools by accident, digesting and discussing
the hot humor which was contained in the member. We mean a short time is spent
in fomenting, when the Notes of short, just, and too long fomenting.
part begins to grow red and swell; a just space, when the part is manifestly
red and swollen: but we conjecture, that much or too much time is spent thereon,
if the redness, which formerly appeared, go away, and the tumor, which lifted
up the part, subside. Also in fomenting, you must have regard to the body
whereto it is used. For if it be plethorick, an indifferent fomentation will
distend the part with plenty Fomentations hurt plethorick bodies.
of superfluous humors; but if it be lean and spare, it will make the part
more fleshie and succulent. Now it remains, that we say somewhat of the
fracture of the bones of the feet.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the fracture of the bones of the feet.
THe bones of the Instep, back and toes of the feet, may be fractured as the
Why the fractured bones of the foot must be kept in a strait postur^.
bones of the hands may. Wherefore these shall be cured like them, but that
the bones of the Toes must not be kept in a crooked posture, as the bones of
the fingers must, lest their action should perish or be depraved. For as we
use our legs to walk, so we use our feet to stand-Besides also the Patient
shall keep his bed until they be knit.

The end of the fifteenth Book.
OF DISLOCATIONS, OR, LUXATIONS. THE SIXTEENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the kinds and manners of Dislocations.
A Dislocation is the departure or falling out of the head of a What a Luxation
properly so called is. What a Luxation not properly so called is.
bone from its proper cavitie, into an unaccustomed place besides nature,
hindering voluntary motion. There is another kind of Luxation, which is caused
by a violent distention, and as it were a certain divarication, and
dilatation, or extension into length and breadth of the ligaments, and all the
nervous bodies, which contain, strengthen, and bind together the joints. Thus
those who have been tormented and racked, have that thick ligament which is in
the inner cavitie of the huckle bone too violently extended: Those who have
suffered the Strappado, have the ligaments, encompassing the articulation of
the Arme-bone, with the shoulder blade, forcibly and violently distended. Such
also is their affect whose foot is strained by slipping. There is a third kind
of Luxation, when as The third kind of Dislocation.
those bones which are joined contiguous, and one (as it were) bound to the
sides of another, gape or fly asunder: as in the Arm, when the ^ll parts from
the wand; in the leg, when the one focile flies from the other: yet this may
be referred to the second sort of dislocations, because it happens not without
dilatation, or else the breaking of the ligaments. There is also a fourth added
to these, as when the Epiphyses The fourth.
and heads of bones are plucked from the bone whereon they were placed or
fastened: which unproperly called kind of Luxation, has place chiefly in the
bones of young people, and it is known by the impotencie of the part, and by
the noise and grating together of the crackling bones when they are handled.
Now the bones of young folks are also incident to another casualtie: for as the
bones of old people are broken by violence by reason of their dryness and
hardness, thus the bones of children are bended or crooked in by reason of
their natural softness and humiditie.

CHAP. II. Of the differences of Dislocations.
SOme Dislocations are simple, others compound. We term them simple What
Luxations are simple
which have no other preternaturall affect joined with them; and such compound,
as are complicated with one or more preternaturall affects; as when a
dislocation is associated with a wound, fracture, great What compound.
pain, inflammation, and an abscesse. For, through occasion of these we are
often compelled so long to let alone the luxation, until these be remitted of
themselves, or by our art. Some Dislocations are complete and perfect, as when
What a complete Luxation is.
the bone wholly falls out of its cavitie: othersome are unperfect, as when it
is only lightly moved, and not wholly fallen out; wherefore we only call them
subluxations or strains. Differences of Luxations are also drawn from the
place: for What a subluxation or strain.
sometimes the bone is wrested forwards, otherwhiles backwards, upwards,
down-wards; somewhiles it may be wrested, according to all these differences of
site, and otherwhiles only according to some of them. Differences are also
taken from the condition of the dislocated Joint in greatness and littleness,
from the superficiarie or deep excavation of the sinus or hollownesse; and
lastly from the time, as if it be lately done, or of some long continuance. I
have judged it fit to set down all these, for that there are several
indications of curing, according to the variety of each of these, as we shall
teach hereafter.

CHAP. III. Of the causes of Dislocations.
THere are three general causes of Luxations, internal, external, and
hereditarie. The internal are excrementitious humors and flatulencies,
Internal causes of dislocations.
which, settling into the joints with great force and plenty, do so make
slipperie, soften and relaxe the ligaments which bind together the bones, that
they easily fall out of their cavities; or else they so fill and distend these
ligaments, and make them so short, that being contracted, they also contract
the appendices of the bones from whence they arise, and so pluck them from the
bone whereon they are placed, or else draw the heads of the bones out of their
cavities, chiefly if the violence of a noxious humor does also concur, which
possessing and filling up the cavities of the joints, puts them from their
seats, as it often times happens to the joint of the hip by Sciaticaes, and to
the Vertebrae of the spine, by whose Luxation people become gibbous, or
otherwise crooked. But external causes of External causes.
Dislocations are, falls from high, bruising and heavy blows, the Rack,
Strappado, slipping in going, and all such like things, which may force the
heads of the bones to fly out of their seats, or cavities, which also happens
sometimes to infants in their birth, when as they are too carelessly and
violently drawn forth by the Midwife, so that either their arms or legs are
put out of joint. Hereditarie causes are such Hereditary causes.
as the Parents transfuse into their offspring: hence it is, that crooked not
necessarily, but often times are generated by crooked, and lame by lame. The
truth whereof is evident by daily experience. Besides also Hippocrates himself
averres, Sect 3. sent. 88. and 94 sect. 82. 4. sent. 3. and 4. lib. de art.
that infants in the very womb may have their Joints dislocated by a fall,
blow and compression, and by the too much humidity and loosenes of the Joints:
whence also we see many crook legged and footed from their nativitie; so that
none need marvel or make any doubt hereof. We have read it observed by Galen
In librum de Artic. that children may have impostumes in their mothers wombs,
which may Children may have impostumes in their mothers wombs.
cast forth quitture, the ulcers being opened of their own accord, and be
cicatrized by the only benefit of nature. It also happens to many from their
first conformation, that the cavities of their Joints are less deprest than
they should be, and that their verges are more dilated than they ought to be;
whereby it happens that the heads of the bones can the less enter into them.
It falls out, that othersome have the ligaments, appointed by nature for
fastening together the bones of the joint, whether inserted or placed about, so
weak, that from their first original they are not of sufficient strength, or
else abound with much phlegm, either bred together with them, or flowing from
some other place; so that by their too much slipperinesse they less faithfully
contain the knittings or articulations of the bones. In all these, as the
bones are easily dislocated, so they may presently be easily restored without
the assistance of a Surgeon, as I have sometimes observed in some.

CHAP. IIII. The signs of dislocations.
SOme of the signs whereby we come to the knowledge of a luxated The common
sign of all dislocations.
bone, are common to all dislocations; others are proper only to several
Luxations. It is a common sign, that there is always a tumor in that part
whereto the bone runs, and a hollownesse on that side from whence it is
flowne. Now the proper signs shall be showed, when as we come to treat of the
particular kinds of Luxations. We know a perfect Dislocation by the lost
action of the part, that is to say, the lost motion; pain also breeds a
suspicion of a dislocation: for the head of the bone, which (moved out of its
place) is forced into another, presses the flesh, and distends the nerves also
moved out of their place. Hereto also conduces the comparing of the sound joint
with that which is hurt, in which collation, it is fit the sound part, which is
compared with the hurt, be no ways, neither by nature nor any accident,
wronged, nor deformed, nor withered or decayed, nor swollen above measure,
otherwise it may cozen and deceive you, if you be less wary. Labor Signs
of an unperfect dislocation.
and difficulty of action in moving, is a sign of an uncomplete Luxation, or
strain. Now we thus know, that the ligaments, serving to the connection of the
articulations, are extended and relaxed, if the head of the bone, pressed with
your fingers, be easily driven unto the contrary part, and suddenly fly thence
back again; if thrusting your finger into the joint, it easily enter, nothing
resisting it, as though all were empty within; if the motion be difficult, or
none at all.

CHAP. V. Of Prognostics to be made upon luxations.
ALl Joints may be perverted or luxated, but all of them cannot in like manner
be restored. For the head may be dislocated, but thereupon present What
luxations be uncureable.
death ensues, by reason of the compression of the whole spinall marrow
presently at the original thereof; such also is the dislocation of a vertebra
of the spine, and of the Jaw Bone, which, slipped forth on both sides, has
caused inflammation, and a great tumor before that it be set. The bones of
other Joints, as they are more or less dislocated, and moved out of their
seats, so may they be more easily or difficultly restored. For, by how much
they are the less moved out of their places, by so much they are the more
quickly, and by how Why those bones which are hardly dislocated, are hard to be
set.
much they are the further, by so much they are the more slowly and difficultly
set. Also an indication, taken from the figure of the luxated bone, gives a
sign of the easy or hard restoring of the dislocation; as in the Arm, by how
much the bones be the more easily dislocated, by so much once luxated they are
the more easily restored. Bones do not easily fall out of joint in fleshie
bodies; but when they chance to be put out, they are not easily got in again.
For in such, the articulation is straightly on every side held in by the
thickness of the muscles, and the plenty of the fat lying thereabouts. On the
contrary, such as are lean, especially those who formerly have been more
fat, have their joints more laxe, whereby it comes to pass, that their bones
may easily be put forth of joint: besides also, through the default of the
digestive faculty, they have their joints replete with mucous humors; whence
it is, that the heads of the bones, as standing in a slipperie place, are the
less stable, as it is recorded by Hippocrates. But slender bodies, which are
naturally dry, compact and dense, have their muscles and ligaments more strong
and Sect. 1. de arti^. sent. 29.
dry; wherefore their bones are the more difficultly displaced, and displaced,
the more difficultly set. Some bones, joined amongst themselves, do sometimes
fly asunder, as when the shoulder blade flies from the collar-bone at the
Acromion, and Celsus lib. 8. cap. 11.
in the Arm the Ell from the Wand, and in the Leg the one focile from the
other, and the Heele-bone from the Ancle. Bones thus separated will never be
joined together again, will never recover their former comely figure, never
their strength of action. For, then it most usually happens, that the ligaments
are either broke asunder, or else resolved and become laxe. Those whose bones
are dislocated by an external cause, they, after they be set, may easily fall
out again, for that the ligaments, moystened and bedewed with an
excrementitious humor, cannot firmly hold them: often times the ligaments are
not wholly broken, but only in some portion thereof; and hence the action of
the part either perishes, or is debilitated. Also that dislocation is
uncureable, when as the ligaments, steeped and swollen up with an
excrementitious humiditie, are so much shortened and contracted in their
length, as they have acquired in their breadth: and thus they draw away and
pluck off the appendices of the bones from whence they arise, and by reason
Why the plucking of an append^x from a bone is uncureable.
the bone and the appendix do enter and receive each other by many cavities
and prominencies, therefore they cannot, by how skillful hand soever they be
handled, be again fitly placed and put together. Old and inveterate
dislocations, wherein a tough humor possessing the cavitie is concrete in stead
of the head of the bone, are not to be restored; as neither when the heads of
the luxated bones have by continual attrition made themselves a new cavitie in
the neighboring bone: neither if they be restored, is the restitution firm
and of continuance; because the natural cavitie is possessed by another
matter, and the new made near thereto cannot well and faithfully contain the
received head of the bone. Those who have their shoulder dislocated, may use
their hand for many actions, as well as the opposite sound hand; for the weight
of the body is not sustained by the hands, as it is by the legs. And by how
much the hand is the more exercised, by so much the arm becoms the more
corpulent. Contrarily, if the thigh bone be dislocated, especially if it be
wrested inwards, the whole leg quickly decays by an atrophia, because the
part does absolutely lose all motion: for by the opinion of Hippocrates, the
performance Hipp. sent. 88. sect. 3. de art.
of the proper action increases strength, and makes the part in better plight;
but idleness debilitates and makes it lean. If a great wound and fracture be
joined with a luxation, there is danger, lest while we use extension for
restoring the part, we draw the nerves too violently, and so break the nerves,
veins and arteries, whence would ensue fear of inflammation, convulsion, and
other malign symptoms. Wherefore Hippocrates judges it better in such a
concourse and complication Sent. 10 sect. 5. lib. 6. epid and sect. 3. de art.
sent 88.
of preternaturall affects, absolutely not to meddle at all with the setting of
the dislocated bone: for, by attempting the restitution, certain death; but by
omitting it only lamenesse is to be feared. Every dislocation must be restored
before inflammation You must not endeavor to set an inflamed joint.
come; but if it be already present, you must presently be careful to take it
away. For other things, let the Patient rest, lest if the affect be irritated,
the increase and excess of pain cause a convulsion, gangrene, and lastly
death, as I remember I have sometimes observed. Therefore when inflammation, and
other malign symptoms shall be mitigated and corrected, then may you
endeavor to restore the luxation, especially if the habit of the body and
member affected may admit it. For if the body be slender, delicate and tender,
then the restitution will be more speedy and facile. But on the contrary,
more difficult, if it be gross and compact; And let thus much suffice for
prognostics in Luxations.

CHAP. VI. Of the general cure of Dislocations.
FOr all that I have heretofore delivered the general method of curing Five
intentions in curing dislocations.
Fractures and dislocations, yet it shall not be unprofitable to repeat here
in this place, those things which may be accommodated to this Treatise of
curing Luxations. Now he that will cure Dislocations, must have regard to five
intentions, which it will be fitting to perform in order. The first is, of
Holding; The second, of Drawing or Extending; The third, of Forcing in; The
fourth, of Placing in convenient figure and site; The fifth, of Correcting the
concomitant, or following symptoms.

The first scope, which we said was of Holding, is meant either of the whole
body, The benefit of holding the member in dislocations.
or else of some part thereof only. The whole body must be holden by the
strong embracement of your servant or attendant, when as the shoulder, the
vertebrae, or the thigh-bones are dislocated. But in the dislocation of the
Collar-bone, elbow, hand, knee, or foot and leg, it is sufficient only to
hold the part straightly in your hands. There is necessity of holding either the
body, or else some part thereof, lest, while the dislocated bone is extended,
the whole body follow by continuance of parts, if there be nothing which may
hinder: for if the body should follow him that draws or extends, all the
work-masters labor and endeavor to restore it, is to no purpose. The use of
the second scope, that is, of Drawing or Extending, The use of intension.
is, that there may be a free space and distance between the luxated bones, by
which distance the dislocated bone may the more freely be forced into its
cavitie. But the manner of drawing or extending is different in quantity and
manner, according to the various strength of the muscles and ligaments, and
dislocation of the bones to this or that part. Therefore this work is almost
always performed by the hands; which when they cannot suffice, we must use the
assistance of instruments and engines, whose figures you shall see hereafter
delineated. But that you may not do amiss, you may so far use extension,
until the head of the bone be brought just against its cavitie. When the
Surgeon has brought it to this pass, then must he hasten to the third
intention, which is, to put the head of the bone first moved The manner of
setting it, or putting it into its place.
and gently bended, into its cavitie. For he must have a special care, that
he force it no other way than into its proper cavity: for it would be
dangerous, lest he should turn it from one extreme into another, and the bone,
for examples sake, of the thigh, which was dislocated into the forepart by too
violent forcing, by exceeding the middle cavitie, may be driven and dislocated
into the hinder part. To shun this, the bone shall be put back the same way
that it fell out, which may be easily done in fresh and late happening
dislocations. We understand that the bone is set Signs that the bone is set.
by the noise, or as it were a popp, or sound like that, which solid and
sounding bodies, being fully and forcibly thrust into their cavities, do make;
by the similitude and consent in figure, magnitude and all conformation of the
affected part with the sound, and lastly, by the mitigation of the pain. The
fourth scope, which is of the The benefit of sit placing the member.
convenient site of the part, must be so fulfilled, that the bone after it is
set may be kept in its cavity, and not fly forth again. Wherefore if the
arm be dislocated, it shall be carried bound up in a scarf: if the thigh,
knee, leg, or foot be luxated, they shall be fitly laid in a bed; but in the
interim the Surgeon, presently after he has set them, shall have a care, that
the affected joint be wrapped about with stoups and clothes, or compresses
steeped in rose vinegar, and spread with convenient medicines, then let it be
bound with an artificial deligation, rolling the ligatures unto the part
contrary to that whereto the dislocated bone flew. For the which purpose The
manner of binding up the set joint.
thicker boulsters shall be there applied whence the bone came out, otherwise
there will be some danger, lest it should be again displaced: when these
things are done, he shall for four or five days space meddle with nothing
about the Dislocation, unless pain, or some such like symptom happen. For
then the fifth scope The cure of inveterate ^uxations.
will call us from that cessation and rest, which is, to correct the symptoms
and complicate affections, as pain, inflammation, a wound, fracture, and
others, whereof we have spoken abundantly in our Treatise of Fractures. Before
we attempt to set inveterate dislocations, we must endeavor to humect the
ligaments, tendons and muscles by fomentations, cataplasmes, emplaisters,
liniments, and other remedies, that so these parts may be more obedient to the
Surgeons hand: then must the dislocated bones be moved, with a gentle motion up
and down, to and again, that by this means the excrementitious humor, which
by continuance of time has flowed down, may wax hot, be attenuated, resolved
or made slipperie, and also the fibers of the muscles, ligaments, and nervous
bodies, placed about the joint for the defense thereof, may be loosed, that so
they may presently be more freely extended. But if a great swelling, pain and
inflammation urge, we must first think of asswaging and curing them, then of
the restoring the Dislocation.

CHAP. VII. The description of certain engines, serving for the restoring of
Dislocations.
BEfore I come to the particular kinds of Dislocations, I think it not amiss
to describe three sorts of Bandages, and give you their figures, These
ligatures are not for deligation, but extension.
as those which are most fit to hold and extend Dislocations. The first
Ligature, designed by this letter A, is made for holding the member. The
second, marked with the letter B, is fit for drawing or extension, and consists
of one knot. The third, whereto the letter C is put, consisting of two knots,
is to hold or bind more straightly.

The delineation of the three Ligatures.


I have thought good also to delineate the following Engine, made for to draw
and extend more powerfully, when the hand will not serve. It is made like a
Pulley, marked with these letters D D. Within this there lie hid three wheels,
through whose furrows runs the rope which is to be drawn, marked with this
letter H. At the ends of the Pulley are hooks fastened, the one of which is to
fasten the Pulley to a Post, the other is to draw the ligature fastened to the
part. The Boxes or Cases wherein the Pulley is kept, is maked with B B. Their
covers are marked with A A. A screw pin which may be twined, and so fastened to
a Post, that so one of the ends of the Pulley may be hooked thereto, is signed
with C. A Gimlet (marked by F.) to make a hole in a Post, so to let in the
screw pin. You may see all these things expressed in this following figure.

A Pulley.


Some Practitioners in stead of this Pulley make use of the hereafter described
Instrument, which they term Manubrium versatile, or a Hand-vice. The end
thereof is fashioned like a Gimblet, and is to be twined into a Post. Within
that handle lies a screw with a hooked end, whereto the string or ligature must
be fastened. Now the screw-rod or male-screw runs into the female by the
twining about of the handle: and thus the ligature is drawn as much as will
suffice, for the setting the dislocated bone.

Manubrium versatile, or, A Hand-vice.


Having delivered these things thus in general, now I come to treat of the
Luxations of each part, from the Jaw Bone even to the toes of the feet.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Dislocation of the Jaw Bone.
THe Jaw Bone is dislocated by many occasions, and not seldom by The causes.
yawning, and other more strong openings of the mouth. It is more frequently
luxated into the fore, than into the hind part, by reason of Differences.
the mammillarie additaments, which hinder it from falling backe-wards. The
dislocation is sometimes but on one side, otherwhiles on both. If the Signs
that only one part is dislocated.
one side only be luxated, it (together with the chin) is drawn awrie unto the
contrary side which is not dislocated; the place is hollow from whence it is
flowne, but swollen whither it is gone; the Patient cannot shut his mouth, but
is forced to gape, so that he cannot eat; the Jaw, together with the teeth
therein, hangs somewhat forwards; neither do the teeth answer fitly to one
another, but the Doggeteeth are under the shearers. But if both sides be
dislocated, all the Jaw and Chin Signs that both sides are dislocated.
hang forwards and toward the breast; besides also, the temporal muscles
appear distended, spittle runs out of the Patients mouth against his will,
the lower teeth stand further forth than the upper, which is the occasion that
the mouth cannot be shut, neither the tongue have free volubilitie to speak,
the Patient stammering in his speech. When it is dislocated on both sides, it
is more difficultly restored, and Prognostics.
all the symptoms are more vehement; wherefore it must be set with all speed,
otherwise the Patient will presently have grievous pain about his throat,
inflammation, a fever, whereupon often times death ensues within ten days, by
reason of the five branches of nerves, which, arising from the second and fifth
conjugation of the Why death quickly ensues upon the dislocation of both sides
of the jaw.
brain, are distributed into the moving muscles thereof, which, too violently
extended, bring the forementioned symptoms. Practitioners affirm, that the
Jaw, twelve days after it is set, is free from the danger of relapse. If it
have been dislocated some few days, before you go about to restore it, you
must use softening and relaxing medicines to it: but when it is put in the
joint, apply a medicine made of the whites of eggs, and oil of roses, to
assuage pain, and apply clothes dipped in oxycrate. At the second dressing you
shall apply such things as have power to agglutinate and strengthen the
ligaments and other relaxed parts, and also to keep it being restored in its
place. This shall be the form of such a medicine.

. Pulv. boli armeni, sang. draconis, farinae volat. mastich. picis, resinae,
an.. ss. An astringent medicine.
albuminis ovorum q. s. fiat medicamentum: afterward you may use Emplast.
Diacalcitheos dissolved in oil of Roses and Vinegar, and other things, as
occasion shall be.

CHAP. IX. How to set the Jaw dislocated forwards on both sides.
FIrst of all the Patient must be placed upon the ground, or some low seat
with his face upwards, and his head must be firmly held by your servant, The
first manner of setting a jaw bone.
that so it may be the more immovable: then the Surgeon shall put both his
thumbs, wrapped in clothes (left he hurt them by rubbing them upon the
Patients teeth, as also to keep them from slipping) into the Patients mouth,
and press with them the larger teeth of the luxated Jaw, but put his other
fingers without under his chin, and so lift up the whole Jaw with them. But if
the operation cannot be thus done, for that the mouth on the inside is so shut
and closed that the thumbs Another.
cannot be put thereinto, then must you thrust in wooden wedges made of soft
wood, as hazle or fur, being cut square, and of some fingers thickness.
These shall be wedged in on each side above the grinders; then cast a ligature
under his chin, whose ends your servant shall hold in his hands, and setting
his knees upon the Patients shoulders, shall pull them upwards; then at the
same time the Surgeon shall press downwards the wooden wedges. The Jaw-bones
thus restored, shall be kept so by convenient ligation, and dressed with
medicines, as it is fitting; and in the mean space you must forbid the Patient
to speak, or needlessly to open his mouth. Wherefore he must abstain from hard
meats, and such as require much chewing, Dict.
until his pain be quite passed, and use only spoone-meats, as
Barley-creames, ponadoes, jellies, cullasses, brothes, and the like.

CHAP. X. Of restoring the Jaw dislocated forwards but on one side.
THe Patient must be placed on a low seat, so that he may be under the What
the Surgeon.
Surgeon, then your servant, standing at his back, shall hold his head firm
and steddie, that it may not follow the Surgeon drawing, extending, and doing
other things necessary for restoring it. Then the Surgeon, putting his thumb
between the grinders, shall press down the Jaw, and gently drawing it aside,
force it into its cavitie: in the mean while, also the Patient, What the
Patient ought to do.
as much as in him lies, shall help forwards the Surgeons endeavor, in opening
his mouth as little as he can; lest the muscles should be extended; and he
shall only gape so wide as to admit the Surgeons thumb, for so the temporal
muscles shall be restored to their place, and favor the restitution. If he
open his mouth as wide as he can, they will be extended after a convulsive
manner; if on the contrary he shut his teeth too close, there will be no
passage for the Surgeons Thumb unto his grinding teeth. Some there be which
affirm, that the Jaw Bone may sometimes Signs that the Jaw is dislocated
backwards.
be dislocated toward the hind part, and that then the mouth is so close
shut, that the Patient cannot open it nor gape, and that the lower rank of
teeth stands further in, and nearer the throat than the upper. Now for
restoring it, the Patients The Cure.
head must be straightly holden behind, whilst the Surgeon, the mean while
putting both his thumbs into the Patients mouth, holding his other fingers
without under the parties chin, he shall, by shaking it, draw it to him, or
forwards, and so restore it to its place. For my own part, I confess I never
saw this kind of Luxation, and I easily persuade my self, that it can scarce
ever happen, for the reason I gave in the former Chapter. But nevertheless, if
it by any means chance to happen, yet can it not be a perfect Luxation, but an
imperfect one; the Jaw being only but a little thrust back to the throat to
those mammillarie additaments. And then it may easily be restored by lifting or
drawing forth the Jaw, and suddenly forcing it from below upwards.

CHAP. XI. Of the Luxation of the Collar-bone.
AS the Collar-bones may be broken, wrested and crooked, so also they
Differences of the luxated Collar-bones.
may be dislocated. Now they are dislocated, either against the sternum, or
against the shoulder blade, or acromion thereof: yet both these kinds of
dislocations are very rare, by reason of the strait and firm connection which
the Collar-bone has with the foresaid parts; but chiefly where it is joined to
the sternum, it can scarce be deprest, for that it is as it were underpropt
with the first rib. But it may be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, The Cure.
and side-wise, and according to this variety there must be diverse ways to
restore it; yet generally the Collar-bone is put into its place by moving or
extending the arm. But if need require, the Patient shall be laid upon the
ground with his face upwards, a Tray with the bottom upwards, a hard stuffed
Cushion, or the like thing being put under his shoulders: for thus it will so
come to pass, that the shoulder and chest will stand so forth, that presently
by lifting up, by pressing down, or drawing forth the arm forwards or
backwards, as the bone shall be flowne out to this or that part, you may restore
it; for thus the prominencie may be forced into its cavitie. But it will be
requisite to bind it up, and lay boulsters thereon, and to give it rest, as if
it were fractured. Galen writes; that when he was five and thirty years old,
whilst he exercised himself in the place of Exercise, his Collar-bone was so
far Com. ad. sent. 62. sect. 1. de art.
separated from the Acromion, that there was the space of three fingers
between them. And that this Luxation was restored in forty days space, by so
strait and strong a Ligation, that he perceived the motion of the beating
arteries under the bone. But you shall find very few, who will suffer such
strain ligation so long, though it be never so necessary. Verily, this kind
of Luxation is hard to be known, but far more difficult to be healed. I have
known many Surgeons deceived, who have taken the Luxation of the Collar-bone
for the dislocation of the top of the shoulder. For then the Epomis or top of
the shoulder swells, and the place from whence the Collar-bone is flowne, is
depressed with a manifest cavity, with vehement pain, inflammation, and
impotencie of lifting up, or otherwise moving the arm, or performing other
actions which are done by the help of the shoulder. Certainly, if this bone,
when it is dislocated, be not set, the Patient shall be lame during his life,
so that he shall not be able, neither to put his hand to his head nor mouth.

CHAP. XII. Of the Luxation of the Spine, or Backbone.
THe Backe-bone consists of many bony vertebrae, like rowles or wheels
mutually joynted or knit together, by their smoothness and circular An
anatomicall description of the Spine.
form conspiring to an aptness of moving or bending forwards. For if it
should consist of one bone, we should stand continually with the trunk of our
bodies immovable, as thrust thorough with a stake. The vertebrae have a hole
passing through the midst of them, whereby the marrow, passing this way out
from the brain as by a pipe, may serve for the generation of the sensitive and
motive nerves, and their distribution into all parts beneath the head. For
which purpose it is perforated with many holes on the sides, through each
whereof certain conjugations of the nerves pass forth into the rest of the
body, and veins and arteries pass in for the propagation of nourishment and
life. The whole exterior face of the Spine is rough, and as it were armed with
four sorts of apophyses or The variety of the processes of the Spine.
processes, whereof some stand up, others down; some direct, others
transverse. Wherefore from these thornie and sharp processes, the whole has
acquired the name of the Spina. The vertebrae the further from the neck they
are, the greater they grow, so that those which are the lowest, are the
largest: for it is agreeable to reason, that that which bears, should be
bigger than that which is borne. Hence we see, that the Holy-bone is placed
under the rest as a foundation. The side processes Gal. cap. 7. lib. 13. de usu
partium.
of the Rack-bones of the Chest, besides the benefit of defending the spinall
marrow shut up therein from external injuries, have also another, which is,
they firm and fasten the bones of the ribbs by a strong tie. There lies a
gristle, and a ^ough, and (as it were) albuminous humor between the vertebrae,
which makes them, as also all the other joints of the body, slipperie, and fit
for motion: the Spine is flexible with notable agilitie forwards only, but not
backewards, for that so there would be continual danger of breaking the Hollow
ascendent vein, and the great descending artery running thereunder. Therefore
the dearticulations of the vertebrae, mutually strengthened with strong
ligaments, do look more backewards. I have thought good to premise these
things of the nature of the Spine, before I come to the Dislocations happening
thereto: I willingly omit diverse other things which are most copiously
delivered by Galen, content only to add thus Lib. 13. de usu partium.
much; That there is nothing to be found in the whole structure of Man's bones,
which more clearly manifests the industry of Gods great workmanship, than this
composure of the Spine and the vertebrae thereof.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Dislocation of the Head.
THe head stands upon the neck knit by dearticulation to the first vertebra
The connection of the head with the first Rack-bone of the neck
thereof, by the interposition of two processes which arise from the basis
thereof, near the hole through which the marrow of the brain passes down
into the back bone, and they are received by fit cavities, hollowed in this
first vertebra These processes sometimes fall out of their cavities, Prognosti^
and cause a dislocation behind, whereby the spinall marrow is too violently
and hard compressed, bruised and extended, the chin is fastened to the breast,
and the Patient can neither drink nor speak: wherefore death speedily
follows upon this kind of Luxation, not through any fault of the Surgeon, but
by the greatness of the disease, refusing all cure.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Dislocation of the vertebrae, or Racke-bones of the neck.
THe other vertebrae of the neck may be both dislocated and strained.
Dislocation verily, unless it be speedily helped, brings sudden death: The
danger hereof.
for, by this means the spinall marrow is presently oppressed at the very
original thereof, and the nerves, there-hence arising, suffer also together
therewith, and principally those which serve for respiration; whereby it
comes to pass, that the animal spirit cannot come and disperse its self
into the rest of the body lying thereunder; hence proceed sudden
inflammation, the squinsie, and a difficulty, or rather a defect of breathing.
But a strain or incomplete Signe^ sympto^ their (...) tion.
Luxation brings not the like calamity: by this the vertebrae, a little moved
out of their seats, are turned a little to the hind or fore part, then the
neck is wrested aside, the face looks black, and there is difficulty of
speaking and breathing. Such, whether dislocation or strain, is thus restored.
The Patient must be set upon The Cure.
allow seat, and then one must lean and lie with his whole weight upon his
shoulders; and the mean while the Surgeon must take the Patients head, about
his ears, betwixt his hands, and so shake and move it to every part, until
the vertebra be restored to its place. We may know it is set by the sudden
ceasing of the pain, which Signs of their restitution.
before grievously afflicted the Patient, and by the free turning and moving
his head and neck every way. After the restoring it, the head must be inclined
to the part opposite to the Luxation, and the neck must be bound up about the
dearticulation of the shoulder; but yet so, that the ligature be not too
strait, lest by pressing the weazon and gullet, it straiten the passages of
breathing and swallowing.

CHAP. XV. Of the Dislocated Vertebrae of the Back.
THe Rack bones of the back may be dislocated inwards, outward, to the
Differences and signs.
right side, and to the left. We know they are dislocated inwards, when as they
leave a depressed cavitie in the spine; outwardly, when they make a bunch on
the back; and we know they are luxated to the right or left side, when as
they obliquely bunch forth to this or that side. The vertebrae are dislocated
by a Causes.
cause either internal, or external, as is common to all other Luxations; the
internal is either the defluxion of humors from the whole body, or any part
to them and their ligaments; or else a congestion proceeding from the proper
and native weakness of these parts; or an attraction arising from pain and
heat. The external is a fall from high upon some hard body, a heavy and
bruising blow, much and often stooping, as in Dressers and Lookers to
Vineyards, and Paviers, decrepite old men; and also such, as through an
incureable dislocation of the Thigh Bone, are forced in walking to stoop
down, and hold their hand upon their thigh. But a vertebra cannot be forced or
thrust inwards, unless by a great deal of violence; The danger of a vertebra
dislocated inwards.
and if it at any time happen, it is not but with the breaking of the ties and
ligaments, for they will break rather than suffer so great extension. Such a
dislocation is deadly, for that the spinall marrow is exceedingly violated by
too strait compression, whence proceeds dullness, and loss of sense in the
members lying thereunder. Neither is restitution to be hoped for, because we
cannot through the belly Hipp. sent. 51. sect. 3. de art. and Gal. in com.
force it into its place: the urine is then suppressed, as also the excrements of
the belly; sometimes on the contrary, both of them break forth against the
Patients mind, the knees and legs grow cold, their sense and motion being
lost. Such things happen more frequently, when the spine is luxated inwards,
than when it is dislocated outward, for that the nerves, thence arising, run
and are carried more inwardly into the body. Besides, the pressed Spinall
marrow becomes inflamed; and that being inflamed, the parts of the same kind,
and such as are joined thereto, are also inflamed by consent, whence it
happens, that the bladder cannot cast forth the urine. Now where the sinews
are pressed, they can no more receive the irradiation of the animal faculty.
Hence follows the deprivation of the sense and motion in the parts whereto
they are carried, therefore the contained excrements do no more provoke to
expulsion by their troublesome sense, neither are pressed to keep them in;
thence proceeds their suppression, and hence their breaking forth against their
wills. But the spine outwardly dislocated, scarce causes any compression of the
marrow or nerves.

CHAP. XVI. How to restore the Spine outwardly dislocated.
THe vertebrae outwardly dislocated, when as they stand bunching forth, then it
is fit to lay and stretch forth the Patient upon a table, The cure.
with his face downe-wards, and straightly to bind him about with towels under
the armpits, and about the flanks and thighs. And then to draw and extend, as
much as we can, upwards and downe-wards, yet without violence: for unless such
extension be made, restitution is not to be hoped for, by reason of the
processes and hollowed cavities of the vertebrae, whereby, for the faster
knitting, they mutually receive each other. Then must you lie with your hands
upon the extuberancie, and force in the prominent vertebrae. But if it cannot
be thus restored, then will it be convenient to wrap two pieces Another manner
of cure.
of wood, of four fingers long, and one thick, more or less, in linen
clothes, and so to apply one on each side of the dislocated vertebrae, and so
with your hands to press them against the bunching forth vertebrae, until you
force them back into their seats, just after the manner you see it here
delineated.



In the mean while have a care, that you touch not the processes which stand
up How to keep the restored vertebrae in their places.
in the ridge of the Spine, for they are easily broken. You may know that the
vertebrae are restored by the equal smoothness of the whole Spine. It is fit,
after you have restored it, to bind up the part, and lay splints or plates of
Lead neatly made for that purpose upon it; but so, that they may not press the
crists or middle processes of the vertebrae, which I formerly mentioned, but
only the sides: then the Patient shall be laid upon his back in his bed, and
the splints long kept on, lest the vertebrae should fall out again.

CHAP. XVII. A more particular inquiry of the Dislocation of the Vertebrae,
proceeding from an internal cause.
THe vertebrae are in like sort luxated by the antecedent cause, as we have
formerly said, which is caused by the natural imbecillitie of the parts,
principally of the nervous ligament, by which all the vertebrae are bound each
to other; this ligament comes not to the spinall marrow, but only binds
together the vertebrae on their outsides. For, besides the two membranes
proceeding from the two Meninges of the Brain, wherewith the marrow is
covered, there is a third strong and nervous coat put upon it, lest; whilst
the spine is diversely bended, the bended marrow should be broken. This third
coat arises from the pericranium, as soon as it arrives at the first
vertebrae of the neck. Now that Ligament, wherewith we said the joints of the
vertebrae were mutually knit and fastened, is encompassed with a tough and
glutinous humor for the free^r motion of the vertebrae. Sometimes another cold,
crude, gross and viscide humor, confused and mixed herewith by great
defluxions and catarrhes, begets a tumor, which does not only distend the
nerves proceeding forth of the holes of the vertebrae, but also distends the
ligaments wherewith they are bound together: which so distended, and (as it
were) drawn aside, do draw together with them the vertebrae, one while toward
the right side, another while to the left, somewhiles inwards, otherwhiles
outward, and thus move them out of their seats, and dislocate them. A
dislocated vertebra, standing forth and making a bunch, is termed in Greek
Cyphosis, (Those thus affected we may call, Bunch-backt.) But when it is
depressed, it is named Cyphosis. Lordosis. Scoliosis.
Lordosis, (Such we may term, Saddle-backt.) But when the same is luxated to
the right or left side, it makes a Scoliosis (or Crookedness,) which wresting
the spine, draws it into the similitude of this letter S. Galen adds a fourth
default of the Com. ad sent. 2. sect. 3. lib. (...) art.
vertebrae, which is, when their joints are moved by reason of the looseness
of their ligaments, the vertebrae yet remaining in their places, and he calls it
a Seisis (or shaking). They also note another defect peculiar to the Spinall
marrow, which is, when Seisis.
as it (the vertebrae being not moved whereto it adheres) is plucked and
severed from The separation of the spinall marrow from the encompassing
vertebrae.
them: this disease is occasioned by a fall from on high, by a great stroke,
and by all occasions which may much shake, and consequently depresse the
spinall marrow, or by any other means remove, or put it forth of its place.
Scarce any recovers of this disease, for many reasons, which any exercised in
the art, may easily think upon: But let us return to the internal cause of
Luxations. Fluid and soft bodies, such as Childrens, usually are very subject
to generate this internal cause of defluxion. If external occasions shall
concur with these internal causes, the vertebrae will sooner be dislocated.
Thus Nurses, whilst they too straightly lace the breasts The error of Nurses in
binding and lacing of Children.
and sides of girls, so to make them slender, cause the breast bone to east
its self in forwards or backwards, or else the one shoulder to be bigger or
fuller, the other more spare and lean. The same error is committed, if they
lay children more frequently and longupon their sides, than upon their backs;
or if, taking them up when they wake, they take them only by the feet or
legs, and never put their other hand under their backs, never so much as
thinking that children grow most toward their heads.

CHAP. XVIII. Prognostics of the Dislocated Vertebrae of the back.
IF in Infancy it happen that the vertebrae of the back shall be dislocated,
the ribbs will grow little or nothing in breadth, but run outward before;
therefore the chest loses its natural latitude, and stands out with a sharp
point. Hence they Hipp. sent. 6. sect. 3. de art.
become asthmaticke, the lungs and muscles which serve for breathing, being
pressed together and straitened; and that they may the eas^ier breathe, they
are forced to hold up their heads, whence also they seem to have great
throats. Now because the weazon being thus pressed, the breath is carried
through a strait passage; therefore they whease as they breath, and snort in
their sleep, for that their lungs, which receive and send forth the breath or
air, be of less bigness: besides also, they are subject to great
distillations upon their lungs, whereby it comes to pass, that they are
shorter lived. But such as are bunch-backed below the midriffe, are incident to
diseases of the kidneyes and bladder, and have smaller and slenderer thighs
and legs, and they more slowly and sparingly cast forth hair and have
beards; to conclude, they are less fruitful, and more subject to barrenness,
than such as have their crookedness above their midriffe. The Bunches which
proceed from external causes are often times cureable; but such as have their
original from an inward cause are absolutely uncureable, unless they be
withstood at the first with great care and industry. Wherefore such as have it
by kind, never are helped. Such as, whilst they are yet Children, before
their bodies be come to perfect growth, have their Spine crooked and bunching
out, their bodies use not to grow at the Spine, but their legs and arms come
to their perfect and full growth; yet the parts belonging to their breasts and
back, become more slender. Neither is it any wonder, for seeing Why, when the
spine is luxated, the parts belonging to the chest are nourished and grow the
less.
the veins, arteries, and nerves are not in their places, the spirits do
neither freely, nor the alimentarie juices plenteously flow by these straightened
passages, whence leanness must needs ensue: but the limbs shall thence have no
wrong, for that not the whole body, but the neighboring parts only are
infected with the contagion of this evil. When diverse vertebrae, following
each other in order, are together and Why the Luxation of one vertebra is more
dangerous than of many.
at one time dislocated, the dislocation is less dangerous, than if one alone
were luxated. For, when one only vertebrae is dislocated, it carries the
Spinall marrow so away with it, that it forces it almost into a sharp angle;
wherefore being more straightly pressed, it must necessarily be either broken or
hurt, which is absolutely deadly, for that it is the brains substitute. But
when diverse vertebrae are dislocated at once, it must of necessity be forced
only into an obtuse angle, or rather a semicircle; by which compression it
certainly suffers, but not so, as that death must necessarily ensue thereof.
Hereto may seem to belong that which is pronounced by Hippocrates; A circular
moving of the vertebrae out of their places is less dangerous Sent. 51. sect.
3. lib. de art.
than an angular.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Dislocation of the Rumpe.
THe Rumpe often times is after a sort dislocated inwards by a violent fall upon
the buttocks, or a great blow; in this affect the Patient cannot bring his
heel to his buttockes, neither, unless with much force, bend The signe^.
his knee. Going to stool is painful to him, neither can he sit unless in a
hollow chair. That this (as it were) dislocation may be restored, you must
The C^re.
thrust your finger in by the Fundament, even to the place affected, as we have
said in a fracture: then must you strongly raise up the bone, and with your
other hand at the same time join it rightly on the outside with the
neighboring parts; lastly it must be strengthened with the formerly mentioned
remedies, and kept in its place. Now it will be recovered about the twentieth
day after it is set. During all which time the Patient must not go to stool,
unless sitting upon a hollow seat, lest the bone, as yet scarce well
recovered, should fall again out of its place.

CHAP. XX. Of the Luxation of the Ribs.
THe Ribs may by a great and bruising stroke be dislocated, and fall Cause^.
from the vertebrae whereto they are articulated, and they may be driven
inwards, or side-waies. Of which kind of Luxation, though there be no
particular mention made by the Ancients, yet they confess, that all the bones
may fall, or be removed from their seats or cavities, wherein they are received
and articulated. The sign of a Rib dislocated and slipped on Signs.
one side, is, a manifest inequality, which here makes a hollownesse, and there
a bunching forth; but it is a sign that it is driven in, when as there is only
a depressed cavitie where it is knit and fastened to the vertebrae. Such
dislocations cause diverse symptoms, as difficulty of breathing, the hurt rib
hindering the free moving of the chest; a painfulnesse in bowing down, or
lifting up the body, occasioned by a pain counterfeiting a pleurisy; the
rising or pu^^ing up of the musculous flesh about the rib, by a mucous and
flatulent humor there generated: the reasons whereof we formerly mentioned in
our Treatise of Fractures. To withstand all these, the Cure.
dislocation must be forthwith restored, then the puffing up of the flesh must
be helped. Wherefore, if the dislocated. Rib shall fall upon the upper side of
the vertebrae, the Patient shall be set upright, hanging by his arms upon the
top of some high door or window: then the head of the rib, where it stands
forth, shall be pressed down, until it be put into its cavity. Again, if the
rib shall fall out upon the lower side of the vertebra, it will be requisite,
that the Patient bend his face do (...)wards, setting his hands upon his knees;
then the dislocation may be restored by pressing or thrusting in the knot or
bunch which stands forth. But if the luxated rib fall inwards, it can no more
be restored or drawn forth by the hand of the Surgeon, than a vertebra which is
dislocated toward the inside, for the reasons formerly delivered. Gal. Com. ad
sent. 3. sect. 1. de art.


CHAP. XXI. Of a Dislocated shoulder.
THe shoulder is easily dislocated, because the ligaments of its dearticulation
are soft and loose; as also for that the cavitie of the shoulder blade is not
very deep; and besides, it is every where smooth and polite, no otherwise than
that of the shoulder bone, for that it is herein received. Add hereunto, that
there is no internal Why there is no internal ligament from the arme-bone to
the shoulder blade.
ligament from bone to bone, which may strengthen that dearticulation, as is in
the leg and knee. Wherein notwithstanding, we must not think nature
defective, but rather admire Gods providence in this thing; for that this
articulation serves not only for extension and bending, as that of the Elbow,
but besides, for a round or circular motion, as that which carries the arm
round about, now up, then down, according to each difference of site. The
shoulder bone, which Hippocrates calls the Arme-bone, may be dislocated
Differences of a luxated shoulder.
four manner of ways; upwards, downe-wards, or into the Arme-pit, forwards
and outward, but never backwards, or to the hind part. For, seeing that there
the cavitie of the blade-bone, which receives the head of the arm-bone, which
Hippocrates calls a Joint, lies and stands against it; who is it that can but
imagine Sent. 1. sect. 1. lib. de art.
any such dislocation? In like sort it is never dislocated inwardly, for on
this part it has the flesh of a strong muscle, termed Deltoides, lying over
it, besides also the back and acromion of the Blade, and lastly, the
anker-like or beake-like process, all which four hinder this joint from
slipping inwards. Now Hippocrates says, that he has only seen one kind of
Dislocation of this bone, to wit, that which is downe-wards or to the arme-pit:
and certainly it is the most usual and frequent, wherefore we intend to handle
it in the first place. When the shoulder is dislocated down-wards into the
Arme-pit, a depressed cavitie may be perceived in the upper Signs of the
shoulder dislocated downe-wards.
part of the joint; the acromion of the Blade shows more sharp and standing
forth than ordinary, for that the head of the shoulder bone is slipped down,
and hid under the arme-pit, causing a swelling forth in that place; the Elbow
also casts it self (as it were) outward, and stands further off from the
ribs; and though you force it, yet can you not make it to touch them; the
Patient cannot lift up his hand to his care on that side, neither to his mouth,
nor shoulder. Which sign is not peculiar to the luxated shoulder, but common
to it, affected with a contusion, fracture, inflammation, wound, abscesse,
scirr^us, or any defluxion upon the nerves, arising out of the vertebrae of the
neck, and sent into the arm: also this arm is longer than the other. Lastly
(which also is common to each difference of a luxated shoulder) the Patient can
move his arm by no kind of motion without sense of pain, by reason of the
extended and pressed muscles, some also of their fibers being broken. There are
six ways to restore the shoulder luxated down-wards into the arme-pit. The
first is, when it is performed with ones fist, or a towell. The second, The
ways to restore it.
with a clew of yarne, which put under the arme-pit, shall be thrust up with
ones heel. The third, with ones shoulder put under the Arme-hole, which manner,
together with the first, is most fit for new and easily to be restored
luxations, as in those who have loose flesh, and effeminate persons, as
children, eunuchs, and women. The fourth, with a ball put under the Arme-pit,
and then the Arm cast over a piece of wood held upon two men's shoulders, or
two standing posts. The fifth, with a Ladder. The sixth, with an Instrument,
called an Ambi. We will describe these six ways, and present them to your
view.

CHAP. XXII. Of the first manner of setting a Shoulder, which is with ones fist.
FIrst, let one of sufficient strength, placed on the opposite side, firmly
hold the Patient upon the joint of the Shoulder, lest he move up and down with
his whole body, at the necessary extension, working and putting it in: then
let another, taking hold of his arm above the elbow, so draw and extend it
downe-wards, that the head thereof may be set just against its cavitie,
hollowed in the blade-bone. Then at last let the Surgeon lift and force up Gal.
com. ad sent. 23. sect. 1. de art.
with his fist the head of the bone into its cavitie. Here this is chiefly to
be observed, that in fresh luxations, especially in a body soft, effeminate,
moist, and not over corpulent, that it sometimes comes to pass, that by the
only means of just extension, the head of the bone, freed from the muscles and
other particles wherewith it was, as it were, entangled, will betake it self
into its proper cavitie; the muscles being by this means restored to their
place and figure, and drawing the bone with them, as they draw themselves
toward their heads, as it were with a sudden gird or twitch: wherefore in
many, whilst we thought no such thing, it sufficed for restitution A perfect
setting the luxated shoulder by extension only.
only to have extended the arm. But if the Luxation be inveterate, and the
hand cannot serve, then must the Patients shoulder be fastened to a Post with
the forementioned Ligature, or else committed to ones charge, who may stand at
his back, and hold him fast. Then the arm shall presently be tied about, a
little above the elbow, with a fillet, whereto a cord shall be fastened; which,
being put or fastened to the Pulley, shall be drawn or stretched forth, as
much as need shall require. Lastly the Surgeon, with a towell, or such like
Ligature, fastened about his neck, and hanging down, and so put under the
Patients arme-pit near to the Luxation, shall, raising himself upon his feet
with the whole strength of his neck, lift up the shoulder, and also at the
same time bringing his arm to the Patients breast, shall set the head of the
shoulder bone, forced with both his hands into its cavitie, as you may see by
this ensuing figure.

An expression of the first manner of putting a Shoulder into Joint.


Then must you cover all the adjacent parts with a medicine made ex farina
volatili, bolo armenio, myrtillis, pice, resina and alumine, beaten into
powder, and mixed with the white of an egg. Then must the hollownesse under
the arm be filled with a clew of Woollen or Cotton yarne, or a linen cloth
spread over with a little oil of Roses or Myrtles, a little vinegar, and
unguentum rosatum, or infrigidans Galeni, lest it stick to the hairs, if
there be any there. The part must afterward be bound up with a ligature,
consisting of two heads, of some five fingers breadth, and two else long, more
or less, according as the body shall require. The midst thereof shall be put
immediately under the arme-pit, and then crossed over the lame shoulder, and so
crossing it as much as shall be fit, it shall be wrapped under the opposite arm.
And lastly, the arm shall be laid upon the breast, and put in a scarf, in a
middle figure almost to right angles, so that by lifting up the hand he may
almost touch his sound shoulder, lest the bone, newly set, may fall out again;
neither shall the first dressing be stirred, until four or five days be
past, unless the greatness of some happening symptom divert us from this our
purpose.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the second manner of restoring a Shoulder, that is, with the
heel; when as the Patient by reason of pain can neither sit, nor stand.
THe Patient must be laid with his back on the ground upon a Cover-lid, or
Mat, and a clew of yarne or leathern-ball, stuffed with tow or cotton, Hipp.
sent. 12. sect. 1. de art.
of such bigness as may serve to fill up the cavitie, must be put under his
arm-pit, that so the bone may straight-wayes the more easily be forced by the
heel into its cavitie. Then let the Surgeon sit beside him, even over against
the luxated shoulder; and if his right shoulder be luxated, he shall put his
right heel to the ball, which filled up the arme-pit; but if the left, then
the left heel: then let him forthwith draw toward him the Patients arm,
taking hold thereof with both his hands, and at the same instant of time
strongly press the arme-pit with his heel. Whilst this is in doing, one shall
stand at the Patients back, who shall lift up his shoulder with a towell, or
some such thing fitted for that purpose, and also with his heel press down
the top of the shoulder blade: another also shall sit on the other side of the
Patient, who, holding him, shall hinder him from stirring this way or that way,
at the necessary extension in setting it, as you may see it expressed by the
following figure.

The expression of the second manner of restoring a Shoulder.


CHAP. XXIV. Of the third manner of restoring a Shoulder.
SOme one who is of a competent height and strength shall put the sharp part
of the top of his shoulder under the Patients arme-pit, and also at the same
time shall somewhat violently draw his arm toward his own breast, so that
the Patients whole body may (as it were) hang thereby. In the mean time
another, for the greater impression, shall lay his weight on the luxated
shoulder, shaking it with his whole body. Thus the shoulder, drawn
downe-wards by the one which stands under the arme-hole, and moved and shaken
by the other, who hangs upon it, may be restored into its seat, by the help
of the Surgeon concurring therewith, and with his hand governing these violent
motions, as the following figure shows.

The figure of the third manner of putting a Shoulder into Joint.


CHAP. XXV. Of the fourth manner of restoring a dislocated Shoulder.
YOu must take a perch, or piece of Wood (somewhat resembling that which the
Water-bearers of Paris use to put on their shoulders) some two inches broad,
and some six foot long; in the midst hereof let there be fastened a clew of
yarne, or ball of sufficient bigness to fill up the cavitie of the arme-hole.
Let there be two pins put in, one on each side of the ball, each alike distant
therefrom, with which, as with stays, the shoulder may be kept in, and upon
the ball, that it slip not away from it. Let two strong men, taller than the
Patient, either by nature or art, put this perch upon their shoulders; then let
the Patient put his arme-pit upon that place where the ball stands up; the
Surgeon must be ready to pull his hanging arm downe-wards. Thus the Patient
shall (as it were) hang on the perch with his shoulder, and so the head of the
bone shall be forced into its cavitie, as this ensuing Figure declares;
wherein you may see the perch or yoke, with the two wooden pins and ball
fastened in the midst, delineated by its self.

The figure of the fourth manner of restoring the Shoulder.


CHAP. XXVI. Of the fifth manner of putting the Shoulder into joint, which is
performed by a Ladder.
YOu may also restore a Shoulder dislocated into the Arme-pit, by the help of
a Ladder, after the following manner. Let some round body, as a ball, or clew
of yarne, which (as we formerly said) may serve to fill the Arme-pit, be
fastened upon one of the upper steps of a Ladder; at the foot of the Ladder set
a low stool, whereupon let the Patient mount; then bind both his legs, and
also his sound arm behind his back, lest, when you are about your operation,
he hinder and spoil all you do, by laying his hand, or setting his foot upon
the Ladder. Then let his Arm be presently put over the step of the Ladder, and
his Arme-pit put upon the there fastened bal, the Patient in the mean while
being wished to come with his whole body as near unto the steps of the Ladder
as he is able; for otherwise, besides that there is no other hope of restoring
the Luxation, there would be no small danger of breaking the shoulder bone.
Also let him take heed, that he put not his head between the steps. Then his
Arm, bound above the Elbow with fille^^ing, or some other ligature fit for
that purpose, shall be drawn down by the hand of some that assist you, and at
the same time let the stool be plucked from under his feet, so that he may
hang upon the Ladder. Thus by this means the head of the Shoulder will be
restored by its self, the endeavor of the Surgeon assisting, and pressing
down the shoulder blade, and moving it to and again. The bone being set, the
stool, which a little before was plucked from under the Patients feet, shall
be put there again, that he may, with the more ease and less pain, pull
back his Arm from the step of the Ladder. For if he should lift it high up to
draw it over, there would be danger, lest being newly set, and not well stayed,
the head of the bone might fall out again. I have thought good to have all
these things here expressed, that you may learn this operation, as if you see
it done before you.

The delineation of the fifth manner of restoring a Shoulder.


I have not thought fit in this place to omit the industry of Nicholas Picart,
the Duke of Guise his Surgeon; who being called to a certain Countryman to
set his Shoulder being out of joint, and finding none in the place besides the
Patient and his wife, who might assist him in this work, he put the Patient,
bound after the forementioned manner, to a Ladder; then immediately he tied a
staff at the lower end of the Ligature, which was fastened about the Patients
arm above his Elbow; then put it so tied under one of the steps of the Ladder,
as low as he could, and got astride thereupon, and sat thereon with his whole
weight, and at the same instant made his wife to pluck the stool from under
his feet: which being done, the bone presently came into its place, as you may
see by the following figure.

Another figure expressing the fourth manner of restoring a dislocated Shoulder.


Another figure to the same purpose.


If you have never a Ladder, you may use a piece of Wood, laid a-crosse upon
two Posts. Also you may use a door, as the other figure shows, wherein you
must observe a flat piece of Wood or spatula with strings thereat, whose use
shall be shown in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXVII. The sixth manner of restoring a Shoulder, luxated into the
Arme-pit.
HIppocrates writes, that this is the best way of all to restore a dislocated
Shoulder. You must take a wooden spatula of some four or five fingers
breadth, and some two fingers thickness or less, but some yard Sect. 1. lib.
1. de (...). sent. 19.
or thereupon long; the one end thereof must be narrow and thin, with a round
head standing up and lightly hollowed, that put under the Arme-pit, it may
receive part of the head of the shoulder bone, the which for that purpose must
not bend toward the ribs, but to the top of the Shoulder. This upper part of
the spatula must be wrapped about with a linen or woollen ragge, The
description of the Glosso^omium termed Am^i.
or some such soft thing, that it may be the softer, and hurt the less; and
then it must be so thrust under the Arme-pit, that it may thoroughly penetrate
into the inner part between the ribs, and the head of the Shoulder Bone. There
must, besides in this spatula, be two holes in three several places, each
alike distant from other, through which let soft strings be put, whereby it may
be tied to the arm, stretched all the length thereof even to the fingers, in
one place a little below the head of the shoulder bone, in another a little
above the elbow, and the third at the wrest, that so they may hold it firm.
Therefore let the distances of the holes be fitted to this purpose; but
principally you must have a care of this, that the upper part of the spatula
reaching beyond the head of the arm, enter even to the innermost Cavity of the
arme-pit; then, a cross pin or piece of wood must be made fast through two
posts or a frame, and well fastened thereto, and thereupon the Arm with the
spatula must be so put over, that the pin may be under the arme-pit, the body
weighing one way, and the arm another: which being done, the arm must be
drawn down one way, and the body another about the pin. Now this cross pin
must be put on such a height that the patient may stand on tipp-toes. Now this
is the very best way of restoring a shoulder. In stead of two posts or a frame,
you may make shift with a ladder, door, beds posts, and such like things as
shall be there present. I have heard Henry Arvet, a very good surgeon of
Orleans say, that he never attempted this manner of putting into joint a
shoulder dislocated into the arme-pit without good success, unless by chance
(which also is noted by Hippocrates) that the flesh is Sect. 1. de art. sent.
21.
grown into the cavity, and the head of the bone has made it self another
cavity in the place whereinto it is fallen; for in this case the bone will
either not be restored, or else not remain in its place, but fall back
notwithstanding into the new hollowed cavity, which serves it in stead of its
natural socket or cavity. But I must here admonish young Surgeons, that if the
bone be not restored at the first endeavor and onset, that they do not
despair and presently desist from their intended operation, but they must
wind about, and gently move the joint: for so at the length it will be more
easily moved, and enter into the natural cavity. When it is in, it must be
bound up with compresses and rowlers after the forementioned manner.

To the former figures I have thought good to add this, which expresses the
manner of restoring a shoulder luxated into the arme-pit with a spatula, after
the manner Hip. sent. 64. 4. de arti^.
of Hippocrates. This spatula fastened with an iron pin to the standing frame
may be turned, lifted up, and pressed down at your pleasure. A. shows the
wooden spatula. B. The frame or standing posts.

Hippocrates his Glossocomium termed Ambi.


For the more certain use of this instrument the patient must sit upon a seat
which must be somewhat lower than the standing frame, that so the spatula which
is How to make use of the Ambi.
thrust into the arme-pit may be the more forcibly deprest, so to force in the
head of the shoulder bone; the patients feet must also be tied, that he may
not raise himself up whilst the Surgeon endeavors to restore it. Now he shall
then endeavor to restore it, when he shall have bound the stretched forth arm
of the dislocated shoulder unto the spatula, and thrust the one end thereof
under the slipped forth head of the shoulder bone, as we have formerly showed;
for then by pressing down the other end of the spatula which goes to the hand,
the bone is forced into its cavity. You must diligently observe the wooden
spatula, which therefore I have caused to be expressed by it self, which
Hippocrates calls Ambi, whose head is a little hollowed where it is noted
with this letter B. The whole spatula is marked with this letter A. with three
strings hanging thereat, provided for the binding of the arm, that it may be
kept steady, as you may perceive by the ensuing figure.

The figure of an Ambi fitted to a dislocated shoulder.


There are other additions to this Ambi, whose figure I now exhibited to your
view, by the invention of Nicholas Picart the Duke of Lorrain's Surgion, the
use and knowledge whereof, bestowed upon me by the inventor himself, I would
not envy the studious reader.

Another figure of an Ambi with the additaments.
AA. Show the two ears, as it were, stops made to hold and keep in the top of
the shoulder, lest it should slip out when it is put into the frame or
supporter.

BB. The frame or supporter whereon the Ambi rests.

CC. The pin or axeltree which fastens the Ambi to the supporter.

DD. Screw-pinnes to fasten the foot of the supporter that it stir not in
the operation.

EE. The holes in the foot of the supporter, whereby you may fasten the
screw-pins to the floor.



CHAP. XXVIII. How to restore a shoulder dislocated forewards.
IT is seldom that the shoulder is luxated toward the foreside; yet there is
nothing so stable and firm in our bodies which may not be violated by a
violent assault; so that those bones do also fall out of joint; whose
articulations are strengthened for the firmer connection with fleshly, nervous,
gristly and bony stays or bars. This you may perceive by this kind of
dislocated shoulder, strengthened as it were with a strong wall on every hand;
to wit, the Acromium and the end of the collar bone, seeming to hinder it, as
also the great and strong muscles, Epomis and Biceps. Hippocrates, shut up
within the strait bounds of the Com. ad sen. (...) and 23. sect. 1 de articulis.
lesser Asia, never saw this kind of dislocation, which was observed fivetimes
by Galen. I profess I have seen it but once, and that was in a certain Nun,
which weary of the Nunnery, cast her self down out of a window, and bore the
fall and weight of her body upon her elbow, so that her shoulder was dislocated
forewards. This kind of dislocation is known by the depravation of the
conformation or figure Signs.
of the member, by the head of the shoulder wrested out toward the breast, as
also the patient cannot bend his elbow. It is restored by the same means as
other Cure.
luxations of other parts, to wit, by strait holding, extending, and forcing
in. Therefore the patient must be placed upon the ground with his face
upwards, and then you must extend the shoulder otherwise than you do when it
is luxated into the arme-pit. For when it falls into the arme-hole, it is
first drawn forewards, then forced upwards, until it be brought just against
the cavity whereinto it must enter. But in this kind of luxation, because the
top of the shoulder is in the fore parts of the dearticulation shut up with
muscles, opened both to the outer, as also to the inner part, you must work to
the contrary; to wit, to the hind part. But first of all you must place a
servant at the back of the patient, who may draw back a strong and broad
Bandage cast about the arme-pit (such as is the Carchesius, which consists
Sent. 23. sect. 1. de art.
of two contrary and continued strings) lest that when the arm shall be
extended, the shoulder follow: also you must put a clew of yarne to fill up the
armepit. Then must you extend the arm, casting another ligature a little above
the elbow, and in the interim have a care that the head thereof fall not into
the arme-pit, which may be done both by putting the forementioned clew under
the arm, and drawing the head another way; then must you permit, by slacking
your extension, the joint freed from the encompassing muscles, to be drawn and
forced into its cavity, by the muscles forcible recoiling, as with an unanimous
consent, into themselves and their originals, for thus it will easily be
restored, and such extension only is sufficient thereto.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the shoulder luxated outwardly.
THe dislocation also of the shoulder to the outward parts seldom happens; but
yet, if it may at any time happen, the extension of the arm will be very
difficult, but yet more difficult toward the outward part than toward Signs.
the inward; there is a depressed cavity perceived toward the chest; but
externally a bunching forth, to wit, in that part from whence the head of the
shoulder bone is fled. For the restoring hereof, the patient must be The cure.
laid flat on his belly, and the elbow must be forcibly drawn contrary to that
whereto it is fled, to wit, inwardly to the breast; and also the standing forth
head of the arm-bone, must be forced into its cavity, for thus it shall be
easily restored. But into what part soever the shoulder bone is dislocated, the
arm must be extended and What to be done to hold in the shoulder after it is
restored.
drawn directly downwards. After the restitution fitting medicines shall be
put about the joint. Let there be somewhat put into the arme-pit which may
fill it up, and let compresses or boulsters be applied to that part to which
the luxated bone fell; then all these things shall be strengthened and held
fast with a strong and broad two headed ligature put under the armepit, and so
brought acrosse upon the joint of the shoulder, and thence carried unto the
opposite arme-pit by so many windings as shall be judged requisite. Then the
arm must be put and carried in a scarf to right angles, which figure must be
observed not only in every luxation of the shoulder, but in each fracture of
the arm also, for that it is less painful, and consequently, such as the
arm may stand the longest therein without moving.

CHAP. XXX. Of the shoulder dislocated upwards.
THe head of the shoulder also may sometimes be luxated into the upper part.
Which when it happens, it shows it self by bunching forth Signs.
at the end of the Collar bone, the hollowness of the arme-pit is found larger
than usual, the elbow flies further from the ribs than when it fell
downwards, now the arm is wholly unable to perform the usual actions. It is
fit for the restitution of such a luxation, that the Surgeon stoop down, and
put his shoulder under the patients arm, and then stand up as high as he can
upon his feet, Cure.
and therewithal press down the head of the shoulder bone into the cavity,
or else make some other to do it. Otherwise it is fit to lay the Patient upon
his back on the ground, and whilst some one extends the affected arm by
drawing it downe-wards, the Surgeon with his own hand may force down the head
of the bone into its cavity. The operation performed, the same things shall be
done as in other luxations, compresses being applied to that part whereto the
bone flew, and it being also bound up with ligatures. Now you may understand in
these four forementioned kinds of dislocations, that the bone which was
luxated is restored, by the sound which shall be heard as you force it in, by
the restitution of the accustomed actions, which are perceived by the bending,
extending, and lifting it up, by the mitigation of the pain, and lastly by the
collation and comparing of the affected arm with the sound, and by its
similitude and equality therewith.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the dislocation of the Elbow.
THe Elbow may also be four manner of ways dislocated, to wit, inwardly, The
Author seems not to agree with Hipp. Sent. ult. Sect. 3. fract. and Celsus in
the setting down the kinds of a dislocated Elbow.
outwardly, upwards and downwards. By the part which is inwards, I mean that
which looks toward the center of the body, when as the arm is placed in a
natural site, to wit, in a middle figure between prone and supine; I make the
outward part, that which is contrary thereto. By the upper part I mean that
which is toward the heaven, and by the lower that which is next to the earth:
and by how much the joint of the elbow consists of more heads and cavities,
than that of the shoulder, by so much when it is luxated it is the more
difficultly set, and it is also more subject to inflammation, and to grow hard
thereupon, as Hippocrates says. Now the joint of the elbow is more difficultly
dislocated than that of the shoulder, and more hardly set, for that the bones
of the cubit and arm do receive and enter each other by that manner of
articulation which is termed Ginglymus, as we have formerly more at large
treated in our Anatomy, and a little before in our treatise of fractures. The
Elbow is therefore dislocated, for that the processes thereof are not turned
about the shoulder bone in a full orb, and by an absolute turning. Wherefore
if at any time the cubit be bended more straightly and closely than that the
inner process can retain its place and station in the bottom of its sinu^,
the hind process falls out and is dislocated backwards. But when as the
foreprocesse is extended more violently, and forced against the bottom of its
cavity, it flies and departs out of its place as beaten or forced thence, and
this kind of luxation is far more difficultly restored than the former: add
hereunto that the utter extremity of the cubite, which is called Olecranum, is
the higher, but the other inner is The Author does not agree with Hippocrates
and Celsus, in setting down the notes of these dislocations: for those notes
which are here attributed to an outward and inward luxation, these Celsus has
given to an elbow dislocated toward the fore and out part; and those which are
here attributed to the elbow dislocated upwards and down-wards; those Celsus
has attribured to a dislocation to the out and in-sides. Inflammation hinders
reposition.
the lower; whence it is that every one can better and more easily bend than
extend their cubits. Therefore such a dislocation is caused by a more violent
force, than that which is made to the inner side. The sign of this luxation
is, the arm remains extended, neither can it be bended, for the inner
process stays in the external cavity, which is hollowed in the bottom of the
shoulder bone, which formerly was possessed by the inner part of the Olecranum;
which thing makes the restitution difficult, for that this process is kept, as
it were, imprisoned there. But when it falls out dislocated to the fore part,
the arm is crooked, neither is it extended, and it is also shorter than the
other. But if the elbow be fallen out of its place according to the other
manner of dislocations, to wit, upwards or downwards, the natural figure
thereof is perverted, for the arm is stretched forth, but little
notwithstanding bended toward that part from whence the bone went, that is,
figured after a middle manner between bending and extending thereof. What
kind soever of dislocation shall befall it, the action of the Elbow will
either not be at all, or certainly not well until that it be restored to its
former place; there is a swelling in the part wherinto it is flowne, and a
cavity there from whence it is fled, which also happens in the dislocations of
all other parts. Furthermore, one dislocation of the Elbow is complete and
perfect, another imperfect. The latter as it easily happens, and through a
small occasion, so it is easily restored; but on the contrary a perfect, as it
hardly happens, and not unless with great violence, so it is not so easily
restored again, especially if that you do not prevent inflammation, for being
inflamed it makes the restitution either difficult, or wholly impossible,
principally that which falls outward.

CHAP. XXXII. How to restore the Elbow, dislocated outwardly.
YOu may know that the elbow is dislocated outwardly, if at any time you Sign.
shall observe the arm to be distended, and not able to be bended. Wherefore
you must forth with undertake the restitution thereof, for fear of defluxion
and inflammation, which the bitterness of pain usually causes, upon what part
soever the luxation happen. There is one manner of restoring it, Cure.
which is, you must cause one to hold hard and steady the patients arm a
little under the joint of the shoulder, and in the mean while let the Surgeon
draw the arm, taking hold thereof with his hand, and also force the
shoulder bone outward, and the eminency of the cubit inwards, but let him by
little and little draw and extend the arm, wresting it gently this way and
that way, that he may bring back the bone which fell out into its cavity. I
have thus expressly delivered this, that the young Surgeon may understand,
that the arm must not be bended for the restoring of this kind of
dislocation; for restitution cannot so be hoped for, because by this kind of A
Caution.
luxation the inner process of the cubit possesses the place of the exterior
process in the cavity of the shoulder bone. Wherefore, whilst the arm is
bended or crooked, the cubit is only lifted up, and not drawn into its seat.
But if we cannot attain to the restitution thereof with our hands alone, you
must cause the dislocated arm lightly bended to embrace a post, then must the
end of the cubit called Olecranum be tied or bound about with a strong ligature
or line, and then wrested into its cavity by putting a battoon or staff into
the ligature, as is demonstrated by this ensuing figure.

A figure which shows the way how to restore the Elbow, by putting it about a
post, with a battoone.


A figure which shows how to restore the elbow by only casting a line about it.


There is also another more exquisite way of restoring it, which is expressed
by the latter figure, wherein a line of some inch breadth is cast about the
Olecranum of the arm, embracing a post or pillar, and it is drawn so long,
until the dislocated bone be brought into its seat. Now we know that the bone
is returned into its place, and restored, when the pain cease, and the
figure and whole natural conformation is restored to the arm, and the bending
and extending thereof is easy, and not painful.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the dislocation of the Elbow to the inside, and of a complete
and uncompleat luxation.
IF the Elbow be dislocated to the inner part, the arm must be strongly and
powerfully extended, then bended quickly and with sudden violence, The cure.
so that his hand may smite upon his shoulder. Some put some round thing into
the bought of the Elbow, and upon that do suddenly force the Elbow to the
shoulder, as we have formerly said. If the Cubit bone be only lightly moved
out of its place into the upper or lower place, it is easily restored by
drawing and forcing it into its cavity, after this following manner. Let two
extend the arm, taking hold thereof at the shoulder and wrest, and each draw
toward himself; and also the Surgeon (who shall there be present) shall force
the bone which is dislocated from that part whereunto it is bended, unto the
contrary: after he shall thus have restored it, he shall lay the arm in a
straight angle, and so bind it up, and apply fit medicines formerly mentioned,
and so let him carry it in a scarf put about his neck, as we said in the
dislocation of the shoulder. Hippocrates Sent. 63. sect. 3. defract.
bids, that the patient, after it is set, shall often endeavor to bend his
hand upwards and downwards, and also extend and bend his arm, yea, and also
to attempt to lift up some heavy thing with his hand; for so it will come to
pass, that the ligaments of this joint may become more soft, ready, and able
to perform their accustomed functions, and also the bones of the cubite and
shoulder shall be freed from the affect termed Ancylosis, whereto they are
incident by the luxations of this part. Now Why the elbow is most subject to
Ancylosis.
Ancylosis is a certain preternaturall agglutination, co-agmentation, and as
it were union of sundry and several bones in the same joint, which afterward
hinders the bending and extension thereof. Now, a Callus is generated in the
Elbow sooner than in any other articulation, whether it remains out, or be
put into joint, by reason that by rest and cessation from the accustomed
actions, a viscide humor which is placed naturally in the joints, as also
another which is preternaturall, drawn thither by pain, flows down, and is
hardened, and gleweth the bones together, as I have observed in many, by reason
of the Idleness and too long rest of this part. Wherefore, that we may
withstand this affect, the whole ligation must be loosed sooner and oftener than
otherwise, that is to say, every third day, and then the patients arm must be
gently moved every way. Within the space of twenty, or twenty five days, these
restored bones recover their strength, sooner or later, according to the
happening accidents. It is necessary also that the Surgeon know that the Radius
or Wand sometimes falls out when the cubite or Ell is wholly dislocated;
wherefore he must be mindful in setting the cubit, that he also restore the
Wand to its place; in the upper part it has a round process lightly hollowed,
wherein it receives the shoulder bone: it has also an eminency which
admits the two-headed muscle.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the dislocation of the Styliformis or bodkin-like process of
the cubit or ell.
THe process of the Ell called Styloides, being articulated to the wrest by
Diathrosis, by which it is received in a small cavity, is dislocated, and
falls Differences and causes.
out sometimes inwards, somewhiles outward. The cause usually is the falling
of the body from high upon the hands. It is restored, if that you force it into
its seat, diligently bind it, and apply thereto very astringent and drying
medicines. But yet, though you shall diligently perform all things which may
be Cure.
done in dislocations, yet you shall never so bring it to pass that this bone
shall be perfectly restored, and absolutely put into the place where hence it
went: which thing we have read, observed by Hippocrates; when (says he) the
greater bone, to wit the Ell, is removed from the other, that is the wand, it
is not easily restored to its Sent. 1. sect. 2. and sent. ult. sect. 3. de
fract.
own nature again; for that, seeing that neither any other common connection
of two bones, which they call Symphysis or union, when it is drawn asunder and
destroyed, may be reduced into its former nature, by reason these ligaments
wherewith they were formerly contained, and as it were continued, are too
violently distended and relaxed, whence it happens, that I have in these cases
often observed, that the diligence and care of the Surgeon has nothing availed.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the dislocation of the Wrest.
We understand by the wrest, a certain bony body, consisting of a composure
of eight bones knit to the whole cubit by Diarthrosis. For the wrest considered
wholly in its self, is knit and articulated Here, as before chap. 31, the
Author dissents from Celsus and Hippocrates in expressing the names and signs
of these dislocations.
with the Ell and wand: with that, against the little finger; with this,
against the thumb: for thus as it were by two connexions, the joint is made
more firm. Yet may it be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, and toward the
sides. We say it is luxated inwardly when the hand stands upwards, but
outwardly, when it is crookt in and cannot be extended. But if it chance to be
dislocated sidewayes, it stands awry either toward the little finger, or else
toward the thumb, as the luxation befalls to this or that side. The cause
hereof may seem to depend upon the different dearticulation of the Ell and wand
with the hand or wrest. For the wand, which is articulated on the lower part
with the wrest at the thumb, by its upper part, whilst it receives the
outward swelling or condyle of the Ell in its cavity, performs the circular
motions of the hands. But the cubit or ell, which in like sort is connected on
the lower part by Diarthrosis at the little finger with the wrest, being
articulated on the upper part with the shoulder bone bends and extends, or
stretches forth the hand. There is one way to restore the formerly mentioned
dislocations. The arm on one side and the hand on another must be extended upon
a hard resisting and smooth place, so that it may lie flat; and you must have a
care that the part whence the dislocated bone fell be the lower in its site
and place, and the part whether it is gone, the higher. Then to conclude, the
prominencies of the bones must be pressed down by the hand of the Surgeon,
until by the force of compression and site the luxated bones be thrust and
forced into their places and cavities.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the dislocated bones of the Wrest.
THe wrest consists of eight bones, which cannot unless by extraordinary
violence be put or fall out of their places. Yet if they shall at any time
fall out, they will show it by the tumor of the part whereto they are gone,
Sign.
and by the depression of that wherefrom they are fled. They may be restored,
if the diseased hand be extended upon a table; and if the bones shall be
dislocated inwards, the hand shall be placed with the palm upwards, then the
Surgeon shall, with the palm of his hand, press down the eminencies of the
Cure.
bones, and force each bone into its place. But if the luxation be outward,
he shall lay the palm next to the table, and press it after the same manner.
To conclude, if the luxation shall be toward either side, the luxated bones
shall be thrust toward the contrary, and the restored bones shall be presently
contained in their places with fit remedies, binding, rolling, and carrying the
hand in a scarf.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the dislocated bones of the After-wrest.
THere are four bones in the Palm or After-wrest, the two middlemost Celsus
lib. (...). Cap. 18.
whereof cannot be dislocated sidewayes, because they are hindered and kept from
falling aside by the opposition of the parts, as it were resisting them.
Neither can that which answers to the little finger, nor that whereon the
forefinger rests, be dislocated toward that side which is next the middle
bones, whereof we now spoke, but only on the other side, freed from the
neighborhood of the bones: but all of them may be dislocated inwardly and
outwardly. They may be restored as those of the Wrest.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the dislocated Fingers.
ALso the bones of the fingers may be four several ways dislocated, in Why
the dislocated fingers may be easily restored.
wardly, outwardly, and toward each side. To restore them, they must be laid
straight upon a table, and so put into joint again. For thus they may be
easily restored, by reason their sockets are not deep, and their joints are
shorter, and ligaments less strong. In twelve days space they will recover
their strength, as also those dislocations that happen to the Wrest and
After-wrest.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of a dislocated Thigh or Hipp.
THe Thigh or Hipp may be dislocated, and fall forth toward all the four Hip.
sent. 68. sect. 3. de art.
parts. But most frequently inwards, next to that outward, but very seldom
either forwards or backwards. A subluxation cannot happen in this joint, as
neither in the shoulder, especially from an external cause, contrary to which
it usually happens in the elbow, hand, knee, and foot. The cause hereof is, for
that the heads of the thigh and shoulder bone are exactly round, and the
sockets which receive them have certain borders and edges encompassing them:
Gal. com. ad sent. 47. sect. 4. de art.
hereunto may be added, that strong muscles encompasse each dearticulation, so
that it cannot come to pass that part of the heads of such bones may be
contained in the cavity, and other parts stand or fall forth, but that they
will quickly be restored to their places by the motion and wheeling about of
the joint, and the strength of the A subluxation may befall the Thigh from an
internal cause.
encompassing muscles. But a subluxation may seem to happen in these parts
from an internal cause. For then the ligaments and ties being softened and
relaxed, cannot draw and carry back the head of the bone standing forth so far
as the edges of the socket. If the Hip be dislocated toward the inner part,
that leg becomes longer and larger than the other, but the knee appears
somewhat lower, and looks outwardly with the whole foot, neither can the
patient stand upon his leg. To conclude, the head of the Thigh Bone bewrayes it
self lying in the groin, with a swelling manifest both to the eye and hand;
now the leg is longer than that which is sound, for that the head of the
thigh is out of its socket or cavity, and situated lower, to wit, in the groin,
therefore the leg is made by so much the larger. Now the knee stands forth,
because necessarily the lower head of the thigh bone stands contrary to the
socket. For this is common to all dislocated bones, that when as the
dislocation happens toward the one side, the other end of the bone flies out
to the contrary. Whence it is, that if the upperhead of the Thigh Bone shall
fall inwards, then the other head, which is at the knee, must necessarily look
outward. The like happens in other dislocations. The leg cannot be bended
toward the groine, for that the dislocated bone holds the extending muscles of
the same part so stiffely stretched out, that they cannot yield, or apply
themselves to the benders. For flexion or bending ought to precede extension,
and extension flexion.

CHAP. XL. Prognostics belonging to a dislocated Hipp.
THere is this danger in the dislocations of the Hipp, that either the bone Why
the thigh bone dislocated is difficultly restored, or restored easily falls out
again.
cannot be put into the place again, at least unless with very much trouble,
or else being put in, that it may presently fall out again. For if the tendons
of the muscles, the ligaments, and other nervous parts of the member be hard
and strong, they by reason of their contumacy and stiffenesse will hardly
suffer the bone to return to its place. If that they be soft, loose,
effeminate and weak, they will not contain the restored bone in its place.
Neither will it be any better contained, if that short, but yet strong and
round, ligament, which fastens the head of the Thigh Bone on the inside in the
Socket or Cavity of the huckle bone, be broken or relaxed. Now it may be
broken by some violent shocke or accident, it may be relaxed by the congestion
and long stay of The breaking and relaxation of the internal ligament.
some excrementitious, tough, and viscous humor lying about the joint, through
which means it waxes soft. But if it be broken, how often soever the bone be
restored, it will presently fall out again. If it be relaxed, there is only
this hope to contain the restored bone, that is, to consume and draw away the
heaped up humidity by application of medicines and Cauteries of both kinds,
for which purpose those are more effectual which do actually burn, for that
they dry and strengthen more powerfully. Leanenesse of the body, and the want
of Aponeuroses, that is, of Gal. com. ad sent. 42 sect. 4. de art.
broad tendont and external ligaments, whereof many encompasse the knee,
increases the difficulty of containing it in the place. But the parts adjoining
to the dislocated and not set bone fall away by little and little, and consume
with an Atrophia or want of nourishment; both because the part it self is
forced to desist from the accustomed actions and functions, as also for that
the veins, arteries, and nerves being more straightened and put out of their
places, hinder the spirits and nourishment from flowing so freely as they
ought, to the part: whence it comes to pass, that the part it self made more
weak, the native heat being debilitated through idleness, it can neither
attract the alimentary juice, neither can it digest and assimulate that little
thereof which flows and falls thereto. Verily the Thigh Bone, as long as it
is forth of the cavity, grows no more, after the manner as the other bones of
the body do, and therefore in some space of time you may perceive it to be
shorter than the sound bone. Notwithstanding the bones of the leg and foot
are not hindered of their growth, for that they are not out of their proper
places. Now for that the whole leg appears more slender, you must think that
happens only by the extenuation and leanness of the proper muscles thereof.
The same thing happens to the whole hand, in the largest acception, when as the
shoulder is out of joint, unless that the calamity and loss hereof is the
less. For the shoulder being forth of joint you may do something with your
hand, whereby it will come to pass that no small portion of nourishment may
flow down into these parts. But the Thigh Bone being dislocated, especially
inwards in a child unborn, or an infant, much less alimentary nourishment
flows to that part, because it can much less use the foot and leg by reason
of the dislocation of the Hipp, than it can do the hand by a luxation of the
shoulder. But now we must thus understand that which is said by Hippocrates,
That dislocated bones and not restored do decrease or are hindered from their
just growth, to be Hippocrates explained sect. 1. and (...). lib. de art.
only in those who have not yet attained to their full and naturally appointed
growth in every demension. For in men of full growth, the bones which are not
restored, become more slender, but yet no shorter, as appears by that which
he has delivered of the shoulder.

CHAP. XLI. Of the signs of the Hipp, dislocated outwardly or inwardly.
THe thigh bone or Hipp when it is dislocated outwardly, and not restored,
after some time the pain is assuaged, and flesh grows about it, the head of
the bone wears it self a new cavity in the adjoining Hipp, whereinto it
betakes it self, so that at the length the patients may go without a staff,
neither so deformed a leanness will waste their leg. But if the luxation
happen inwards, a greater leanness will befall them, by reason that the
vessels naturally Ad sent. 51. sect. 3. de art.
run more inwardly, as Galen observes in the dislocation of the Vertebrae to
the inside; therefore it comes to pass that they are more grievously
oppressed: besides the thigh bone cannot wagge or once stir against the
share-bone: wherefore if the bone thus dislocated be not restored to its joint
again, then they must cast their leg about as they walk, just as we see
oxen do. Wherefore the sound leg whilst they go, takes much less space
than the lame, because this, whilst it stirs or moves, must necessarily
fetch a compass about, but that performs its motion in a right line.
Besides, whilst the patients stand upon their lame leg to put forwards the
sound, they are forced to stand crooked, whereupon they are forced to stay
themselves with a staff that they fall not.

Furthermore those who have this bone dislocated either backwards or outward,
Signs of the thigh bone dislocated out-wards.
so that it cannot be restored, have the part it self grow stiff and hard;
which is the cause why the ham may be bended without great pain, and they may
stand, and go upon the tops of their toes; besides also, when they desire ^o
go faster, they are forced to stoop, and strengthen themselves by laying
their hand on their lame thigh at every step, both for that their lame leg is
the shorter, as also because the whole weight of the body should not lie wholly
or perpendicularly upon the joint or head of the thigh bone. Yet in continuance
of time, when they are used to it, they may go without any staff in their
hands. Yet in the interim, the sound leg becomes more deformed in the composure
and figure, because, whilst it succors the opposite and lame leg by the firm
standing on the ground, it bears the weight of the whole body, in performance
wherereof the ham must necessarily now and then bend. But on the contrary, when
as the head of the thigh being dislocated inwards is not put into the joint, if
the patient be arrived at his full growth, after that the head of the bone has
made it self a cavity in the neighboring bone wherein it may rest, he may be
able to walk without a staff, because the dislocated leg cannot easily be
bended toward the groine or ham, and he will sooner rest upon his heel than
upon his toes. This kind of dislocation if it be inveterate, can never be
restored. And these things happen, when as the thigh bone is dislocated
inwards, or when the internal ligament which fastens the dearticulation shall
be broken or relaxed. But the contrary shall plainly appear if the
dislocation shall happen to be outward; for then the lame leg becomes the
shorter, because the head of the thigh flies into a place higher than its
cavity, and the muscles of that part are contracted toward their original,
and convulsively draw the bone upwards together with them. The whole leg,
together with the knee and foot looks inwards, they cannot go upon their
heels, but upon the setting on of the toes. The leg may be bended, which it
cannot be in a dislocation of the thigh inwards, as Paulus shows. Therefore
we Paul. Aeg. lib. 6. cap. 8. Hip. sent. 91. sect. 3. lib. de artic.
must diligently observe that sentence of Hippocrates which is read with a
negative, in these words. Sed neque conflectere quemadmodum sanum crus possunt,
that they ought to be read with an affirmative after this manner. Sed
conflectere etc. quin and crew ipsum etc. But now the lame leg will better
sustain the weight of the body in an external, than in an internal
dislocation; for then the head of the thigh is more perpendicularly subject to
the whole weight of the body. Therefore when in success of time it shall by
wearing have made it self a cavity in the neighboring bone, which in time
will be confirmed, so that there will remain no hope of restoring the
dislocation, nevertheless the patient shall be able to go without a staff,
for that then no sense of pain will trouble him; whence it follows, that the
whole leg also will become less lean, for that going is less painful,
neither are the vessels so much pressed as in that dislocation which is made
inwardly.

CHAP. XLII. Of the thigh bone dislocated forewards.
IT seldom happens that the thigh is dislocated forwards; yet when as it
shall happen, it is known by these signs. The head of the thigh lies toward
the share; whence the groines swell up, and the buttocke on the contrary is
wrinkled and extenuated by reason of the contraction of the muscles; the
patient cannot extend his leg without pain, no verily, not so much as bend it
toward the groine, for that the fore muscle which arises from the
haunch-bone, is so pressed by the head of the thigh, that it cannot be
distended; neither can the ham be bended without very much pain. But the lame
leg is equal at the heel with the other leg, yet the patient cannot stand
upon the setting on of the toes; therefore when he is forced to go, he
touches the ground with his heel only, yea, verily the sole of his foot is
less inclined to the fore side, neither does it seldom happen, that the
urine, by this accident, is suppressed; because the head of the thigh oppresses
the greater nerves from whence those arise which are carried to the Stopping of
urine by reason of an internal dislocation of the thigh bone.
bladder, which through the occasion of this compression is pained and inflamed
by consent: now when inflammation shall seize upon the Sphinct muscle, the
urine can scarcely flow out, for that it is hindered by the swelling.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the thigh bone dislocated backwards.
Seldom also is the thigh bone dislocated backwards, because the hind part of
the cavity of the huckle-bone is deeper and more depressed than Signs.
the fore; whence it is that the dislocation of the thigh to the inner part is
more frequent than the rest. The patient can neither extend nor bend his leg
by reason of the much compression and tension of the muscles which encompasse
the head of the thigh by this kind of luxation. But the pain is increased when
he would bend his ham, for that then the muscles are the more strongly
extended. The lame leg is shorter than the sound: when the Buttocks are
pressed, the head of the thigh is perceived hid amongst the muscles of that
part; but the opposite groine is laxe, soft, and deprest with a manifest
cavity. The heel touches not the ground, for that the head of the thigh is
plucked back again by the muscles of the buttocks amongst which it lies hid,
but principally by that which is the larger, and which is said to make as it
were the pillow or cushion of the buttocks; for this is much more pressed in
this kind of dislocation than the rest: whence it is, that the patient cannot
bend his knee, because the extension of the nervous production or large tendon
which covers the knee is so great. But if the patient will stand upon the foot
of his luxated leg without a staff, he shall fall down backwards, for that
the body is inclined to that part, the head of the thigh being not directly
underneath for the propping or bearing up of the body; wherefore he is forced
to sustain himself upon a crutch on his same side. Having premised these
things of the differences, signs, symptoms and prognostics, it now
remains, that we briefly describe the different ways of restoring them,
according to the difference of the parts whither it is fallen. First, you must
place the patient upon a bench or table, grovelling, The general cure.
or with his face upwards, or upon one side, laying some soft quilt or coverlid
under him, that he may lie the easier. Now you must place him so, that the part
unto which the bone is flown, may be the higher, but from whence it is fled,
the lower. For if the thigh bone be dislocated outward or backwards, then
must the patient be laid grovelling; if inwardly, upon his back; if forwards,
then upon his side. Then must extension and impulsion be made toward the
cavity, that so it may be forced thereinto: but if the dislocation be fresh,
and in a soft body, as a woman, child, and such like, whose joints are more
laxe, it shall not be any ways needful to make great extension with strong
ligatures for the restoring it; the Surgeons hand shall suffice, or a List or
towell cast about it. In the interim the bone shall be kept fast with
compresses applied about the joint: then the Surgeon shall extend the thigh,
taking hold thereof above the knee, in a straight line, and so set it directly
against the cavity, and then presently thrust it thereinto. For thus shall he
restore it, if so be that in thrusting it, he lift up the head thereof
somewhat higher, lest the lips of the cavity force it back, and hinder it from
entering. Now because unless there be just extension, there can be no
restitution hoped for, it is far better in that part, that is, to extend it
somewhat more than is necessary, yet so, that you do not endanger the breaking
of any muscles, tendon or other nervous body. For, as Hippocrates Sect. 2. lib.
de fract.
writes, when as the muscles are strong and large, you may safely extend them,
if so be that you displace nothing by the force of the extension. If your hand
will not suffice to make just extension, you must use the help of an Engine,
such as is our Pulley, fastened to two posts, so much of the rope being let
forth, and drawn up again, as shall suffice for the business in hand; in the
performance whereof, it is fit that the patients friends absent themselves from
this sad spectacle, and that the Surgeon be resolute, and not deterred from
his business by no lamentation, neither of the patient nor his friends. But
for that we write these things chiefly for the benefit of young practicioners,
it seems meet, that having delivered these things in general, of restoring
the thigh bone, that we run over these generalities in each particular,
beginning with that dislocation which is made inwardly.

CHAP. XLIV. Of restoring the Thigh Bone dislocated inwards.
IT is fit to place the patient after the foresaid manner, upon a table or
bench, in the midst whereof shall stand fastened a wooden pin of a foots length,
and as thick as the handle of a spade uses to be; but it must be wrapped about
with some soft cloth, lest the hardness hurt the buttocks, betwixt which it
must stand, as we read that Hippocrates did in the Sect. 2. lib. de fract.
extension of a broken leg. The wooden pin has this use, to hold the body
that it may not follow him that draws or extends it; and that the extension
being made as much as is requisie, it may go between the perinaeum and the head
of the dislocated thigh. For thus there is no greatneed of counter-extension
toward the upper parts; and besides it helps to force back the bone into its
cavity, the help of the Surgeon concurring, who twining somewhiles to this, and
otherwhiles to that side, does direct the whole work. But when the extension
has need of counter-extension, then it is How to make extension and
counter-extension in this kind of fracture.
needful you have such ligatures at hand, as we have mentioned in the
restoring of a dislocated shoulder, to be drawn above the shoulder. One of
these shall be fastened above the joint of the hip, and extended by a strong
man; another shall be cast above the knee by another with the like force. But if
you cannot have a wooden pin, another strong and like ligature shall be put upon
the joint directly at the hip, and held stiff by the hands of a strong man,
yet so that it may not touch the head of the thigh by pressing it, for so it
would hinder the restoring thereof. This manner of extension is common to four
kinds of luxation of the thigh bone. But the manner of forcing the bone into its
cavity, must be varied in each, according to the different condition of the
parts whereunto the head inclines; to wit, it must be forced outward if it
be fallen inwards, and contrary in the rest, as the kind of the dislocation
shall be. Some too clownish and ignorant knot-knitters fasten the lower
ligature below the ankle, and thus the joints of the foot and knee are more
extended than that of the hipp or huckle-bone, for that they are nearer to the
ligature, and consequently to the active force: but they ought to do
otherwise; therefore in a dislocated shoulder, you shall not fasten the
ligatures to the hand or wrest, but above the elbow. But if the hands shall not
be sufficient for this work, then must you make use of engines. Wherefore then
Ligatures made for extension must be fastened near the part to be extended.
the patient being placed as is fit, and the affected part firmly held, some
round thing shall be put into the groine, and the patients knee, together with
his whole leg shall be drawn violently inwards, toward the other leg. And in
the mean while, the head of the thigh shall be strongly forced toward the
cavity of the huckle-bone; and so at length restored, as the following figure
shows.

A figure which manifests the way of restoring the thigh. bone dissocated
inwards.


When the head of the thigh by just extension is freed from the muscles
wherewith A general precept.
it was infolded, and the muscles also extended that they may give way and
yield themselves more pliant, then must the rope be somewhat slaked, and then
you must also desist from extending, otherwise the restitution cannot be
performed, for that the stronger extension of the engine will resist the hand of
the Surgeon, thrusting and forcing it into the cavity. This precept must be
observed in the restoring of this and other dislocations. You shall know that
the thigh is restored by the equality of the legs, by the free and painelesse
extension and inflection of the lame leg. Lastly, by the application of
agglutinative medicines (whereof we have formerly spoken) the restored bone
shall be confirmed in its place; to which purpose ligation shall be made, the
ligature being first cast upon the place whereinto the head of the thigh fell,
and thence brought to the opposite or sound side by the belly and loins. In
the mean while the cavity of the groine must be filled with somewhat a thick
bolster which may keep the head of the bone in the cavity. Neither must you
omit junks stretched down even to the ankles, as we have observed in the
fracture of the thigh. Then must both the thighs be bound together, whereby the
dislocated member may be unmovable, and more and more strengthened. Neither
must this dressing be loosed, until four or five days be passed, unless
peradventure the sudden happening of some other more grievous symptom shall
persuade otherwise. To conclude, the patient must be kept in his bed for the
space of a month, that the relaxed muscles, nerves and ligaments may have
space to recover their former strength, otherwise, there is danger left the
bone may again fall out by the too forward and speedy walking upon it. For the
site of the thigh it must be placed and kept in a middle figure, yet this
middle Sect. 2. lib. de fract.
figure consists in the extension, not in the flexion, as it is demonstrated by
Hippocrates, for that such a figure is familiar and accustomable to the leg.

CHAP. XLV. Of restoring the Thigh dislocated outwardly.
THE patient must be placed grovelling upon a table in this kind of
dislocation also, and ligatures as before, cast upon the hip and lower part of
the thigh, then extension must be made downwards, and counter-extension
upwards; then presently the head of the bone must be forced by the hand of the
Surgeon into its place. If the hand be not sufficient for this purpose, our
pulley must be used, as the following figure shows.

A figure which expresses the manner of restoring the Thigh luxated outward.


This kind of dislocation is the easilyest restored of all these which happen
in the When it is that only extension serves for the restoring the dislocated
thigh.
thigh or hip, so that I have diverse tmes observed the head of the thigh to
have been drawn back into its cavity by the only regresse of the extended
muscles into themselves toward their originals, somewhiles with a noise or
pop, otherwhiles without, which being done, laying a compresse upon the joint,
you shall perform all other circumstances as before in an internal dislocation.

CHAP. XLVI. Of restoring the Thigh dislocated forewards.
WHen the thigh is luxated forewards, the patient must be laid upon his sound
side, and tied as we have formerly delivered. Then the Surgeon shall lay a
Boulster upon the prominent head of the bone, and have a care that his servant
firmly hold it: then immediately just extension being made, he shall with his
hand force the bone into the cavity; but if his hand will not serve, he shall
attempt it with his knee. Then to conclude he shall use the rest of the things
formerly mentioned to contain the restored bone.

CHAP. XLVII. Of restoring the Thigh dislocated backwards.
THe patient shall be placed grovelling upon a table or bench, and the member
extended, as in the rest, one ligature stretched from the groine, another from
the knee; then the Surgeon shall endeavor to force back with his hand that
which stands up, and also to draw away the knee from the sound leg. The bone
thus placed and restored, the cure requires nothing else, than to be bound up
and kept long in bed, lest that the thigh, if it should be moved, the nerves
being yet more loose, might again fall out, For the thigh is in great danger
of relapse, for that the cavity of the Huckle-bone is only deprest, as far
as it goes in, and the burden of the hanging or adjoining Thigh is heavy.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the dislocation of the Whirle-bone of the knee.
THe Whirle-bone of the knee may fall forth into the inner, outter, upper and
lower part; but never to the hind part, because the bones which it The
differences.
covers do not suffer it. To restore it, the patient must stand with his foot
firmly upon some even place, and then the Surgeon must force The cure.
and reduce it with his hands from the part into which it is preternaturally
slidden. When it shall be restored, the cavity of the ham shall be filled up
with bolsters, so that he may not bend his leg, for if it be bended, there is
no small danger of the falling back of the whirl-bone. Then a case or box shall be
put about it, on the side especially whereto it fell, being made somewhat flat
and round resembling the whirl-bone its self, and it shall be bound on with
ligatures, and medicines so fast that it may not stir a jot. After the part
shall seem to have had sufficient rest, it is fit that the patient try and
accustom by little and little to bend his knee, until at length he shall
find that he may easily and safely move that joint.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the dislocated Knee.
THe knee also may be dislocated three manner of ways, that is, into the
inner, outer, and hind part, but very seldom toward the foreside and that The
differences.
not without some grievous and forcible violence; for the Whirle-bone lying
upon it, hinders it from slipping out, and holds it in. The other ways are
easy, because the cavity of the leg-bone is superficiary and very smooth, but
the cavity of the lower end of the thigh bone is made in the manner of a spout
or gutter, and besides the head thereof is very smooth and slippery; but the
whole joint is much more laxe than the joint of the Elbow: so that as it may be
the more easily dislocated, so may it the better be restored; and as it may be
the more easily, so may it Ad^ sect. 3. de fract.
be the more safely dislocated, for that inflammation is less to be feared
here, as it is observed by Hippocrates. Falls from high, leaping, and too
violent running are the causes of this dislocation. The sign thereof is the
disability of bending or lifting up the leg to the thigh, so that the patient
cannot touch his buttocke with his heel. The dislocation of the knee which is
inwardly and outwardly is restored with indifferent How to restore a knee
dislocated backwards.
extension and forcing of the bones into their seats from those parts whereunto
they have fallen. But to restore a dislocation made backwards, the patient
shall be placed upon a bench of an indifferent height, so that the Surgeon may
be behind him who may bend with both his hands and bring to his buttocks the
patients leg put betwixt his own legs. But if the restitution do not thus
succeed, you must make a clew of yearn, and fasten it upon the midst of a
staff, let one put this into the cavity of his ham, upon the place whereas the
bone stands out, and so force it forwards; then let another cast a ligature of
some three fingers breadth upon his knee, and draw it upwards / with his hands,
then presently and at once they all shall so bend and crook the lame leg
that the heel thereof may touch his buttocks.

CHAP. L. Of a knee dislocated forewards.
BUt if the knee be dislocated forwards (which seldom happens) the patient
shall be placed upon a table and a convenient ligation made above, The cure.
and another close beneath the knee. Then the Surgeon shall so long press
down with both his hands the bone which is out of joint, until it shall
return to its place again. To which purpose if the strength of the hand will
not serve to make just extension each way, you may make use of our engine, as
you may perceive by this following figure.

A figure showing the manner of restoring a knee dislocated forwards.


You shall know that the bone is restored by the free and painelesse extension
of the leg; then will their be place for medicines, boulsters and
strengthening ligatures. In the mean space the patient shall forbear going,
so long as the part shall seem to require.

CHAP. LI. Of the separation of the greater and lesser Focile.
THe Fibula or lesser Focile is fastened and adheres to the Tibia, leg bone,
The joining of the leg and shin (...)*
or greater Focile without any cavity, above at the knee and below at the
ankle. But it may be plucked or drawn aside three manner of ways, that is,
forwards, and to each side: this chance happens when in going we take no sure
footing, so that we slip with our feet this way and that way as in (...)
slippery place, and so wrest it inwards or outward; for then the weight of our
body lying upon it, draws the leg, as it were, infunder, so that the one
Focile is dislocated or separated from the other. The same may happen by a fall
from an high place, or some grievous and bruising blow: besides also, their
appendices are sometimes separated from them. For the restoring of all these
into their proper places, it is fit they The cure.
be drawn and forced by the hand of the Surgeon into their seats: then shall
they be straightly bound up, putting compresses to that part unto which the
Fibula flew; beginning also your ligation at the very luxation, for the
forementioned reasons. The patient shall rest forty days, to wit, as long as
shall be sufficient for the strengthening of the ligaments.

CHAP. LII. Of the Leg-bone or greater Focile dislocated and divided from the
Pasterne bone.
ALso the Leg-bone is sometimes dislocated, and divided from the pasterne bone,
as well inwardly, as outwardly; which may be known by the Differences and
signs.
swelling out of the bone to this or that part; if it be only a subluxation or
strain, it may be easily restored, by gently forcing it into the place
again. After the bone shall be restored, it shall be kept so by compresses and
fit deligation, by cross and contrary binding to the side opposite to that
toward which the bone fell, that so also in some measure it may be more and
more forced into its place. In the mean time you must have a care that you do
not too straightly press the great and large tendon which is at the heel. This
kind of dislocation is restored in forty days, unless some accident happen
which may hinder it.

CHAP. LIII. Of the dislocation of the Heel.
WHosoever leaping from an high place have fallen very heavy upon their heel,
have their heel dislocated and divided from the pasterne bone. This
dislocation happens more frequently inwardly than outwardly, because the
prominency of the lesser Focile embraces Causes and differences.
the pasterne bone; whence it is, that there it is more straightly and firmly
knit. It is restored by extension and forcing it in, which will be no very
difficult matter, unless some great defluxion or inflammation hinder it. For
the binding up, it must be straitest in the part affected, The cure.
that so the blood may be pressed from thence into the neighboring parts; yet
using such a moderation, that it may not be painful, nor press more
straightly than is fit, the nerves and gross tendon which runs to the heel.
This dislocation is not confirmed before the fortieth day, though nothing
happen which may hinder it. Yet usually it happens that many symptoms ensue
by the vehemence of the contusion. Wherefore it will not be amiss to handle
them in a particular chapter.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Symptoms which follow upon the contusion of the Heel.
IT happens by the vehemence of this contusion, that the veins and arteries
do as it were vomit up blood both through the secret Why bloodletting
necessary in the fracture of a heel.
passages of their coats, as also by their ends or orifices, whence an
Ecchymosis or blackness over all the heel, pain, swelling, and other the like
ensue, which implore remedies, and the Surgeons help, to wit, convenient diet,
and drawing of blood by opening a vein (of which though Hippocrates makes no
mention, yet it is here requisite Hip. sect. 3. de fracturis.
by reason of the fever and inflammation) and if need require purgation,
principally such as may divert the matter by causing vomit, and lastly, the
application of local medicines, chiefly such as may soften and rarifie the
skin under the heel, otherwise usually hard and thick (such as are fomentations
of warm water and oil) so that diverse times we are forced to scarifie it
with a lancet, shunning the quick flesh. For so at length the blood poured
forth into the part, and there heaped up, is more easily attenuated and at
length resolved. But these things must all be performed before the
inflammation seize upon the part, otherwise there will be danger of a
convulsion. For the blood, when it falls out of the vessels, readily putrefies,
by Why the heel is subject to inflammation.
reason the density of this part hinders it from ventilation and dispersing to
the adjacent parts. Hereto may be added that the large and great Tendon which
covers the heel, is endued with exquisite sense, and also the part it self is
on every side spread over with many nerves. Besides also there is further danger
of inflammation by lying upon the back and heel, as we before admonished you
in the Fracture of a leg. Therefore I would have the Surgeon to be here most
attentive and diligent to perform these things which we have mentioned, lest
by inflammation a Gangrene and mortification (for here the sanious flesh
presently falls upon the bone) happen together with a continued and sharp
fever, with trembling, hicketting and raveing. For the corruption of this part
first by contagion assailes the next, and thence a fever assailes the heart by
the arteryes pressed and growing hot by the putride heat, and by the nerves and
that great and notable tendon made by the concourse of the three Gal. ad sent.
2^. sec. 2. (...) fract.
muscles of the calfe of the leg, the muscles, brain and stomach are evilly
affected and drawn into consent, and so cause convulsions, raving and a deadly
hicketting.

CHAP. LV. Of the dislocated pasterre or Ancle-bone.
THe Astragalus or Pasterne bone may be dislocated and fall out of its Sig^es.
place to every side. Wherefore when it falls out toward the inner part, the
sole of the foot is turned outward, when it flies out to the contrary, the
sign is also contrary: if it be dislocated to the foreside, on the hind side
the broad Tendon coming under the heel is hardened and distended; but if it be
luxated backwards, the whole heel is as it were hid in the foot: neither does
this kind of dislocation happen without much violence. It is restored by
extending it with the hands, and forcing it into the Cure.
contrary part to that from whence it fell. Being restored it is kept so by
application of medicines and fit ligation. The patient must keep his bed long
in this case, lest that bone which susteines and bears up the whole body, may
again sink under the burden, and break out, the sinews being not well knit
and strengthened.

CHAP. LVI. Of the dislocation of the Instep and back of the foot.
THe bones also of the Instep and back of the foot may be luxated, and that
either upwards or downwards, or to one side, though seldom sidewise, for the
reason formerly rendered, speaking of the dislocation of the like bones of the
hand. If that they stand upwards, then must the patient tread Cure.
hard upon some plain or even place, and then the Surgeon by pressing them
with his hand shall force them into their places; on the contrary, if they
stand out of the sole of the foot, then must you press them thence upwards,
and restore each bone to its place. They may be restored after the same manner
if they be flowne out to either side. But you must note that although the
ligatures consist but of one head in other dislocatious, yet here Hippocrates
would have such used as have two heads, for that the dislocation happens more
frequently from below upwards, or from above Sent. 14. sect. 2. lib. de fract.
downwards, than sidewise.

CHAP. LVII. Of the dislocation of the Toes.
NOw the Toes may be four ways dislocated, even as the fingers of The
differences.
the hand; and they may be restored just after the same manner, that is, extend
them directly forth, and then force each joint into its place, and lastly bind
them up as is fitting. The restitution of all of them is easy, for that they
cannot far transgress their bounds. To conclude, Cure.
the bones of the feet are dislocated and restored by the same means as those
of the hands, but that when as any thing is dislocated in the foot, the
patient must keep his bed, but when any thing is amiss in the hand, he must
carry it in a scarf. The patient must rest twenty days, that is, until he
can firmly stand upon his feet.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the symptoms, and other accidents which may befall a broken
or dislocated member.
MAny things may befall broken or dislocated members by the means of the
fracture, or dislocation; such as are bruises, great pain, inflammation, a
fever, impostume, gangrene, mortification, ulcer, fistula, and atrophia, all
which require a skillful and diligent Surgeon for their cure. A confusion
happens by the fall of some heavy thing upon the part, or by a fall from high,
whence follows the effusion of blood poured out under Remedies for a confusion.
the skin: which if it be poured forth in great plenty, must be speedily
evacuated by scarification, and the part eased of that burden, lest it should
thence gangrenate. And by how much the blood shall appear more thick and the
skin more dense, by so much the scarification shall be made more deep. You may
also for the same purpose apply leaches.

Concerning pain we formerly said, that it usually happens by reason that the
What may happen by pain.
bones are moved out of their places, whence it happens that they become
troublesome to the muscles and nerves by pricking and pressing them. Hence
ensue inflammations, as also impostumation and a fever, often times a gangrene,
and in conclusion a mortification corrupting and rotting the bones; otherwhiles
a sinuousulcer or fistula. But an Atrophia and leanenesse arises by the sloth
and idleness of the member decaying all the strength thereof, and by too strait
ligation intercepting the passages of the blood otherwise ready to fall and
flow thither.

Now the leanness which is occasioned by too strait ligation receives cure by
the Remedies for the leanenesse or Atrophia of any member.
slackening of the ligatures wherewith the member was bound. That which
proceeds from idleness is helped by moderate exercise, by extending, bending,
lifting up and depressing the member, if so be that he can away with exercise.
Otherwise he shall use frictions and fomentations with warm water. The
frictions must be moderate in hardenesse and gentleness, in length and
shortness. The same moderation shall be observed in the warmness of the water,
and in the time of fomenting. For What measure to be used in fomenting.
too long fomenting resolves the blood that is drawn. But that which is too
little or short a space draws little or nothing at all: after the fomentation,
hot and emplastick medicines made of pitch, turpentine, euphorbium, pellitory
of Spain, sulphur, and the like, shall be applied. They shall be renewed
every day more often or seldom, as the thing it self shall seem to require.

These medicines are termed Dropaces; whose form is thus. picis nigrae,
ammoniaci, bdelii, gummi elemi in aqua vitae dissolutorum an. ii. olei laurini
i. pulveris piperis, A dropax.
zinziberis, granorum paradisi, baccarum lauri et juniperi, an. ii. fiat
emplastrum secundum artem, extendatur super alutam. It is also good to bind
about the opposite Binding of the sound part opposite to the emaciated.
sound part with a ligature, yet without pain; as if the right arm shall decay
for want of nourishment, the left shall be bound, beginning your ligation at
the hand, and continuing it to the Arme-pit. If this mischance shall seize upon
the right leg, then the left shall be swathed up from the sole of the foot to
the groine. For thus a great portion of the blood is forced back into the vena
cava, or hollow vein, and from this being distended and over full, into the
part affected and gaping with the vessels almost empty; besides also it is
convenient to keep the sound part in rest, that so it may draw the less
nourishment, and by that means there will be more store to refresh the weak
part.

Some wish also to bind up the decaying member with moderate ligation; for How
to bind up the emaciated part.
thus, say they, the blood is drawn thither; for when as we intend to let
blood by opening a vein with a lancet, we bind the arm. Also it is good to
dip it into water somewhat more than warm, and hold it there until it grow
red and swell; for thus blood is drawn into the veins, as they find, which
use to draw blood of the saphena and salvatella. Now if, when as these things
and the like be done, the lame part grow hot, red and swollen, then know that
health is to be hoped for; but if the contrary happen, the case is desperate,
wherefore you need attempt nothing further.

Furthermore, there is sometimes hardness left in the joints, after fractures
and Signs that an Atrophia is cureable.
dislocations are restored. It is fit to soften this, by resolving the
contained humor by fomentations, liniments, cataplasmes, emplasters made of the
roots of Marsh-mallowes, briony, lillies, line seed, fenugreek seed, and the
like, and also of gums dissolved in strong vinegar, as Ammoniacum, bdelium,
opopanax, labdanum. sagapenum, styrax liquida, and Adeps anserinus,
gallinaceus, humanus, oleum liliorum, and the like. Also you must wish the
patient to move the part ever now and then, every day, yet so, that it be not
painful to him, that so the pent up humor may grow hot, be attenuated, and
at length discussed, and lastly the part it self restored as far as art can
perform it; for often times it cannot be helped any thing at all. For if the
member be weak and lame by reason that the fracture happened near the joint,
for the residue of his life the motion thereof uses to be painful and
difficult, and often times none at all, especially if the Callus which grows
there be somewhat thick and great, and lastly, if the joint it self shall be
contused and broken by the stroke, as it oft-times happens in wounds made by
Gunshot.

The End of the sixteenth Book.
OF DIVERSE OTHER PRETER NATURAL AFFECTS, WHOSE CURE IS COMMONLY PERFORMED BY
SURGERY. THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of an Alopecia, or the falling away of the hairs of the head.
AN Alopecia is the falling away of the hair of the head, and sometimes also
of the eyebrows, chin and other parts; the Gal. c. 2. lib. 1. de comp. med.
securlocos.
French commonly call it the Pelade. Phisicians term it the Alopecia, for that
old Foxes subject, by reason of their age, to have the scab, are troubled often
times with this disease. This affect is caused either through defect of
nourishment fit to The cause.
nourish the hairs, as in old age through want of the radical humidity, or by
the corruption of the alimentary matter of the same, as after long fevers, in
the Lues venerea, leprosy, the corruption of the whole hody and all the
humors, whence follows a corruption of the vapors and fuliginous
excrements; or else by the vicious constitution of the pores in the skin in
rarity, and constriction or density, as by the too much use of hot ointments
made for coloring the hair, or such as are used to take off hair, therefore
called Depilatoria, or by the burning of the skin, or loss thereof, having a
scarre in stead thereof, by reason of whose density the hair cannot spring
out, as by too much laxity the fuliginous matter of the hair stays not, but
presenly vanishes away. The Alopecia which comes by old age, a consumption,
burn, baldness, leprosy and What Alopecia uncurable. What curable, and how.
a scald head, is uncurable: that which admits of cure, the cause being taken
away, is helped. Wherefore, if it proceed from the corruption of humors, let a
Phisician be called, who as he shall think it fit, shall appoint diet,
purging and phlebotomie. Then the Surgeon shall shave off that hair which is
remaining, and shall first use resolving fomentations, apply Leaches and Horns
to digest the vicious humor which is under the skin, then shall he wash the
head to take away the filth with a lie wherein the roots of Orris and Aloes
have been boiled. Lastly, he shall use both attractive fomentations and
medicines for to draw forth the humor which is become laudable in the whole
body by the benefit of diet fitly appointed. But if the Alopecia shall happen
through defect of nourishment, the part shall be rubbed so long with a course
linen cloth, or a fig leaf, or onions, until it wax red; besides also the
skin shall be pricked in many places with a needle, and then ointments applied
made of Labdanum, pigeons dung, stavisager, oil of bays, turpentine and wax,
to draw the blood and matter of the hairs. If the hair be lost by the Lues
venerea, the patient shall be anointed with quicksilver to sufficient
salivation. To conclude, as the causes of this disease shall be, so must the
remdies be fitted which are used.

CHAP. II. Of the Tinea, or scalde Head.
THE Tinea (let me soterme it in Latin, whilst a fitter word may be found) or
a scald head, is a disease possessing the musculous skin of the head or Lib. 1.
de comp. med. sect. locos.
the hairy scalpe, and eating thereinto like a moth. There are three
differences thereof, the first is called by Galen scaly or branlike, for that
whilst it is scratched it casts many branlike scales: some Practitioners term
it a dry scall, because of the great adustion of the humor causing it. Another
is called ficosa, a fig-like scall, because when it is dispoyled of the crust
or scab which is yellow, there appear grains of quick and red flesh, like to
the inner seeds or grains of figs, and casting out a bloody matter. Galen
names the third Achor, and it is also vulgarly termed the corrosive or ulcerous
scall, for that the many ulcers wherewith it abounds are open with many small
holes flowing with liquid sanies like the washing of flesh, stinking, corrupt
and carrion-like, somewhiles livid, somewhiles yellowish. These holes, if they
be somewhat larger, make another difference which is called Cerion or Favosa
(that is, like a honey comb) because as Galen thinks, the matter which flows
Cap. 8. lib. citati.
from these, resembles honey in color and consistence. They all proceed of an
humor which is more or less vicious, for a less corrupt humor causes a
scaly, a more corrupt, the fig-like, but the most corrupt produces the
ulcerous. If it shall happen to an infant by reason of the fault and contagion
of the nurse, or else presently after it is borne, it scarce admits of cure;
neither must we attempt that before the child come to that age, that he may be
able to endure the cure and medicines. But you may in the mean while apply the
leaves of Colworts or beets besmeared with fresh butter, or other gentle
medicine having a faculty to mollify and open the passage for the shut up
matter. Those who are of sufficient age to away with medicines, The cure.
may bleed, purge, bathe, according to art by the advice of a Phisician. For
local medicines in a scaly scall, softning and discussing fomentations shall
be appointed, For a scaly scall.
made of the roots of marsh-Mallowes, Lillies, Docks, Sorrel boiled in lie
with a little vinegar added thereto. The head shall be twice in a day fomented
with such a decoction, and on the sixth day the hair being shaven off, it
shall be scarified, and then leaches and horns put to it so scarified. Then
it shall be forth with anointed with oil of stavisager mixed with black
soap, both to draw and repress the malignity of the humor impact in the part.
You may also use the following medicine even to the perfect cure of the
disease, as that which is much commended in this kind of disease by Vigo,
Gordonius, and Guido; it is thus made.. elleb. albi and An ointment for a
scalled head.
nigri, uttrament. auripigmenti, lithargyri auri, calcis viva, vitriol. alum.
galla. fulig. ciner. faecis vini usti, an ss. argenti vivi extincti, iii.
aeruginis aeris ii. fiat pulvis qui incorporetur cum succo boraginis,
scabiosae, fumariae, oxylapathi, aceti, an. quart. i. olei antiqui lib. i.
bulliant usque ad consumpt succorum, in fine decoctionis cineres ponantur,
addendo picis liquidae ss. cerae quantum sufficit, fiat unguentum: These
authors testify that this will heal any kind of scall. Certainly none can
dislallow of it who well considers the engredients and composure thereof.

A crusty also or fig-like scall shall be so long fomented with the prescribed
fomentation, until the crusts or scabs fall off, yet there is nothing so good
and effectual The cure of a crusty scall.
as Cresses beaten or fried with hogs suet. For it will make it fall off in the
space of four and twenty hours, besides, if it be continued it will heal
them thoroughly, A poultis of Cresses.
as I have known by experience, and reason also stands therewith; for
according to Galen, Cresses are hot and dry. When the crusts shall be fallen
away, the parts affected Lib. 7. simpl.
shall be anointed with the formerly prescribed ointment. I have cured many
with a little oil of vitrioll, and sometimes also with Aegyptiacum made
somewhat more strong than ordinary. But if the root of the hairs appear
rotten, they shall be plucked out one by one; yet if such putrefaction shall
possess the whole hairy sculpe, and trouble all the roots of the hair, that
you may pluck them out the more readily, and with less pain, you may
besmeare a cotton cloth on the rougher side with this following medicine..
picis nigrae vi. picis res. ii. pull. viridis aeris, A plaster to pluck away
the hair at once,
and vitriol. romans an. i. vel ss. sulphur. viv. ss. coquantur omnia simul in
aceti acerrimi quantitate sufficient, fiat medicamentum ad usum: let it be
applied to the head, and remain on for two days; then let it be quickly and
forcibly plucked away against the hair, that so the hairs sticking to the
plaster may by that means be plucked away therewith: you shall use this
medicine so long as need shall seem to require.

For the third kind of scall which is termed a Corrosive or ulcerous, the first
indication The cure of an ulcerous scall.
is to cleanse the ulcers with this following ointment.. unguenti enulati cum
mercurio duplicato, aegyptiaci, an. iii. vitriol. albi in pulverem redacti i.
incorporentur simul, fiat unguentum ad usum; also you may use the formerly
described ointment. But if any pain or other accident fall out, you must with
stand it by the assistance and direction of some good Physician; verily these
following medicines against all kinds of Scalls have been found out by reason,
and approved by use.. Camphur. ss. alum. roch. vitriol. vir. aeris, sulph.
vivi, fulig. forn. an. vi. olei amygd. dulcium and axungiae porci, aii. ii.
incorporentur simul in mortario, fiat unguentum. Some take the dung which lies
rotting in a sheepfold; they use that which is liquid, and rub it upon the
ulcerated places, and lay a double cloth dipped in that liquor upon it. But if
the patient cannot be cured with all these medicines, and that you find his
body in some parts thereof troubled in like sort with crusty ulcers, I would
wish that his head might be anointed with an ointment made of Axungia, argentum
vivum, and a little Sulphur, and then fitsom emplastrum Vigonis cum mercurio
into the fashion of a cap; also some plasters of the A contumacious scall must
be cured as we cure the Lues Venerea.
same may be applied to the shoulders, thighs and legs, and so let him be kept
in a very warm chamber, and all things done as if he had the Lues venerea.
This kind of cure was first (that I know of) attempted by Simon Blanch the
Kings Surgeon, upon a certain young man, when as he in vain had diligently
tried all other usual medicines. A scalled head oft-times appears very
loathsome to the eye, casting forth virulent and stinking sanies; at the first
it is hardly cured, but being old, far more difficultly. For diverse times it
breaks out afresh, when you think it killed, by reason of the impression of
the malign putrefaction remaining in the part, which wholly corrupts the
temper thereof. Moreover, oft-times being healed, it has left an Alopecia
behind it, a great shame to the Surgeons. Which is the reason, that most of
them judge it best to leave the cure thereof to Empericks and women.

CHAP. III. Of the Vertigo, or Giddiness.
THE Vertigo is a sudden darkening of the eyes and sight by a vaporous What the
Vertigo is, and the causes thereof.
and hot spirit which ascends to the head by the sleepy arteryes, and fills
the brain, disturbing the humors and spirits which are contained there, and
tossing them unequally, as if one ran round, or had drunk too much wine. This
hot spirit oft-times rises from the heart upwards by the internal sleepy
arteryes to the Rete mirabile, or wonderful net; otherwhiles it is generated
in the brain, its self being more hot than is fitting; also it oft-times
arises from the stomach, spleen, liver and other entrals being too hot. The
sign of this disease is the sudden The signe^.
darkening of the sight, and the closing up as it were of the eyes, the body
being lightly turned about, or by looking upon wheels running round, or whirle
pits in waters, or by looking down any deep or steep places. If the original
of the disease proceed from the brain, the patients are troubled with the
headache, heaviness of the head, and noise in the ears, and oft-times they
lose their smell. Paulus Aegineta for the cure bids us to open the arteries of
the temples. But if the matter of the Lib. 6.
disease arise from some other place, as from some of the lower entrals, such
opening of an artery little avails. Wherefore then some skillful Physician
must be consulted, with who may give directions for phlebotomie, if the
original of the disease proceed from the heat of the entrals; by purging, if
occasioned by the foulness of the stomach. But if such a Vertigo be a
critical symptom of some acute disease affecting the Crisis by vomit or
bleeding, then the whole business of freeing the patient A critical Vertigo.
thereof must be committed to nature.

CHAP. IV. Of the Hemicrania, or Megrim.
THE Megrim is properly a disease affecting the one side of the head, right, or
left. It sometimes passes no higher than the temporal muscles, otherwhiles it
reaches to the top of the crown. The cause of such pain proceeds either
from the veins and external arteryes, or from the meninges, or from the very
substance of the brain, or from the pericranium, or the hairy scalpe covering
the pericranium, or lasty, from putride vapors arising to the head from the
ventricle, womb, or other inferior member. Yet an external cause may bring
this affect, to wit, the too hot or cold constitution of the encompassing air,
drunkenness, gluttony, the use of hot and vaporous meats, some noisome vapor
or smoke, as of Antimony, quicksilver, or the like, drawn up by the nose,
which is the reason that Goldsmythes, and such as gilde metals are commonly
troubled with this disease. But whence foever the cause of the evil
proceeds, it is either a simple distemper, or with matter: with matter, I
say, which again is either simple or compound. Now, this affect is either The
differences.
alone, or accompanied with other affects, as inflammation and tension. The
heaviness of head argues plenty of humor; pricking, beating and tension
shows that there is plenty of vapors mixed with the humors, and shut up in
the nervous, arterious, or membranous body of the head. If the pain proceed
from the inflamed meninges, a fever follows thereon, especially, if the
humor causing pain do putresie. If the pain be superficiary, it is seated
in the pericranium. If profound, deep and piercing to the botome of the eyes,
it is an argument that the meninges are affected, and a fever ensues, if there
be inflammation, and the matter putresie: and then often times the tormenting
pain is so great and grievous, that the patient is afraid to have his head
touched, if it be but with your finger, neither can he away with any noise, or
small murmuring, nor light, nor smells however sweet, no nor the fume of Vine.
The pain is sometimes continual, otherwhiles by fits. If the cause of the
pain In what kind of Megrim the opening of an Artery is good.
proceed from hot, thin and vaporous blood, which will yield to no medicines, a
very necessary, profitable and speedy remedy may be had by opening an artery in
the temples, whether the disease proceed from the internal or external
vessels. For hence always ensues an evacuation of the conjunct matter, blood
and spirits. I have experimented this in many, but especially in the Prince de
la Roche sur-you. His Physicians, A history.
when he was troubled with this grievous Megrim, were Chapaine, the Kings, and
Castellane, the Queens chief Physicians, and Jews Duret, who notwithstanding
could help him nothing by bloodletting, cupping, bathes, fictions, diet or
any other kind of remedy either taken inwardly or applied outwardly. I being
called, said, that there was only hope one way to recover his health, which
was to open the artery of the temple in the same side that the pain was; for I
thought it probable, that the cause of his pain was not contained in the veins,
but in the (...), in which case by the testimony of the ancients, there was
nothing better than the opening or bleeding of an artery, whereof I had made
trial upon my self to my great good. When as the Physicians had approved of
this my advice, I presently betake my self to the work, and choose out the
artery in the pained temple, which was both the more swollen and beat more
vehemently than the rest. I open this, as we use to do in the bleeding of a
vein, with one incision, and take more than two sawcers of blood flying out
with great violence, and leaping; the pain presently ceased, neither did it
ever molest him again. Yet this opening of an Artery is suspected by many, for
that it is troublesome to stay the gushing forth blood, and cicatrize the
place, by reason of the density, hardness, and continual pulsation of the
artery, and lastly, for that when it is cicatrized there may be danger of an
Aneurisma. Wherefore they think it better first to divide the skin, then to
separate the artery from all the adjacent particles, and then to bind it in
two places, and lastly divide it, as we have formerly told you must be done in
Varices. But this is the opinion of men who fear all things where there is no
cause; for I have learnt by frequent No danger in opening an artery.
experience that the apertion of an artery, which is performed with a Lancet,
as we do in opening a vein, is not at all dangerous; and the consolidation
or healing is somewhat flower than in a vein, but yet will be done at length,
but that no flux of blood will happen, if so be that the ligation be fitly
performed, and remain so for four days with fitting pledgets.

CHAP. V. Of certain affects of the eyes, and first of staying up the upper
eye-lidde when it is too laxe.
OF the diseases which befall the eyes, some possess the whole substance
thereof, as the Ophthalmia, a Phlegmon thereof: others are proper and peculiar
to some parts thereof, as that which is termed Gutta ferena to the opticke
nerve. Whence Galen made a threefold difference of the Differences.
diseases of the eyes, as that some happened to the eye by hurting or offending
the chief organ thereof, that is, the crystalline humor; others by hindering
the animal faculty, the chief causer of sight, from entering into them; and
lastly, other some by offending the parts subservient to the prime organ or
instrument. Now of all these diseases, the eye has some of them common with
the other parts of the body, such as are an ulcer, wound, phlegmon, contusion
and the like: other some are peculiar and proper to the eye, such as are the
Aegilops, Cataracta, Glaucoma, and diverse others of this kind. Some have their
upper eie-lid fall down, Paul. Aegin. lib. 8. cap. 6.
by reason that the upper skin thereof is relaxed more than is sufficient to
cover the eye, the gristle in the mean while not relaxing it self together
therewith. Hence proceeds a double trouble; the first, for that the eye cannot
be easily opened; the other, because the hairs of the relaxed eyelid run in
toward the eye, and become troublesome thereto by pricking it. The cause of
such relaxation is either a particular The cause.
palsy of that part, which is frequent in old people, or the defluxion or
falling down of a watrish humor, and that not acride or biting; which
appears by this, that those who are thus affected have a rank of hairs
growing under the natural rank, by reason of the abundance of heaped up
humor, as it is most probable. For thus a wet and marish ground has the
greatest plenty of grass. Now if this same humor were acride, it would cause
an itching, and consequently become troublesome to the patient, and it would
also fret insunder and destroy the roots of the other hairs, so far it is
from yielding matter for the preternaturall generation of new. It is fit,
before you do any thing for the cure, that you mark with ink the portion The
cure.
thereof which is superfluous, and therefore to be cut away, lest if you should
cut off more than is requisite, the eyelid should remain turned up, and so
cause another kind of affect, which the ancients have called Ectropion. Then
the eye being covered, take and lift up with your fingers the middle part of
the skin of the eyelid, not taking hold of the gristle beneath it, and then
cut it athwart, taking away just so much as shall be necessary to make it as it
were natural; lastly, join the lips of the wound together with a simple
future of three or four stiches, that so it may be cicatrized; for the
cicatrization restraines the eie-lid from falling down so loosly, at least
some part thereof being taken away. There ought to be some measure, and heed
taken in the amputation, otherwise you must necessarily run into the one or
other inconvenience, as if too much be cut away, then the eye will not be
covered, if too little, then you have done nothing, and the patient is troubled
to no purpose. If there shall be many hairs grown preternaturally, you shall
pluck them away with an instrument made for the same purpose; then their roots
shall be burned with a gentle cautery, the eye being left untoucht, for a scar
presently arising will hinder them from growing again.

CHAP. VI. Of Lagophthalmus, or the Hare eye.
SUch as have their eie-lids too short, sleep with their eyes open, for that
they cannot be covered by the too short skin of the eyelids: the Greeks term
this affect, Lagophthalmos. The cause is either Paulus Aegin. lib. 6. cap. 10.
internal or external: internal, as by a Carbuncle, Impostume, or Ulcer:
external, as by a wound made by a sword, burn, fall, and the like. If this
mishap proceed by reason of a cicatrization, it is cureable, if so that the
short eyelid be of an indifferent thickness. But if it have bin from the
first conformation, or by some other means, whereby much of the substance is
lost, as that which happens by burning and a carbuncle, then it is uncureable.
For the cure, you shall use relaxing and emollient fomentations, then the
skin shall be divided above the whole scarre, in figure of an half moon,
with the The cure.
horns looking downwards. Then the edges of the incision shall be opened,
and lint put into the middle thereof, that so it may hinder the lips from
joining together again. Then shall you apply a plaster upon the lint, and so
bind up the part with a fitting ligature that may somewhat press upon the
whole eye, lest it should lift it self somewhat upwards again, and so return
into its ancient, but not natural figure. But in cutting the skin, you must
take care that your incision harm not the gristle; for if it be cut, the
eie-lid falls down, neither can it be afterward lifted up. But now for the
lower eyelid: it is subject to sundry diseases, amongst which there is one
which answers in proportion to that, which we late mentioned, which is, when
as it is lifted upwards little or nothing, but hangs and gapes, and cannot be
joined with the upper, and therefore it does not cover the eye, which affect is
familiar Ectropion, or the turning up or out of the Eyelid.
to old people; it is called Ectropion, and it may be helped by the means
formerly delivered.

CHAP. VII. Of the Chalazion, or Haile-stone, and the Hordeolum or Barly-corne
of the eyelids.
THe Chalazion is a round and clear pimple which grows upon the upper Paul.
cap. 16. lib. 6.
eie-lid, it is also moveable and may be stirred this way and that way with
your fingers: the Latins call it Grando, for that it resembles a Hailstones
Another pimple not much unlike this grows sometimes upon the verges of the
eyelids above the place of the hairs. It is termed Hordeolum, by reason of
the similitude it has with a barley corn. The matter of these is contained in
its proper The cure.
cist or skin, and therefore is hardly brought to suppuration. At the first
beginning it may be resolved and discussed. But when as it is once grown and
concrete into a plaster or stone-like hardness, it is scarce cureable.
Wherefore it is best to perform the cure by opening them, that so the
contained matter may flow, or be pressed forth. If the pimple or swelling be
small, then thrust it through with a needle and thread, and leave the thread
therein of such length that you may fasten the ends thereof with a little of
the emplaster called Gratia Dei like glue to the forehead, if it be on the
upper eyelid; or to the cheeks, if on the lower. You must draw through a fresh
one every second day, as is usually done in chirurgicall setons. For thus at
length the swelling will be destroyed and made plain.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Hydatis or Fatness of the Eyelids.
THe Hydatis is a certain fatty substance like a piece of fat seated and lying
What Hydatis is.
under the skin of the upper eyelid. It is a disease incident to children,
who are of a more humid nature: wherefore it is a soft and loose tumor making
the whole eyelid, which it possesses, oedematous; so that, as if depressed
with a weight, it cannot be lifted up. It has its name, for that it has as it
were a bladder distended with a whayish humor, which kind of fault is
observed by Galen in the liver. Those, who are thus affected, have their eyes
look Com. ad aphor. 55. sect. 7.
red, and flow with tears, neither can they behold the sun, or endure the
light. The cure is performed by cutting off the superfluous substance, not
hurting the neighboring The cure.
parts; and then presently put some salt into the place whence it was taken out
(unless the vehemence of pain hinder) that so the place may be dried and
strengthened, and the rest of the matter (if any such be) may be consumed, and
hindered from growing again. Lastly, you shall cover the whole eye with the
white of an Egg dissolved in rose water, or some other repercussive.

CHAP. IX. Of the Eye. lids fastened or glewed together.
SOmetimes it comes to pass that the upper eyelid is glewed or fastened to
the under, so that the eye cannot be opened, or so that the one of them may
stick or be fastened to the white coat of the eye, or to the Paulus cap. 15.
lib. 6.
horny. This fault is sometimes drawn from the first original, that is, by
the default of the forming faculty in the womb (for thus many infants are born
with their singers fastened together, with their fundaments, privities and
ears unperforated) the eye in all other respects being well composed. The
cause of this affect sometimes proceeds from a wound, otherwhiles from a burn,
scald or impostumation, The cause.
as the breaking of the small pox. It is cured by putting in a fit instrument,
and so opening them; but with such moderation, that you touch not the horny
coat, for otherwise it would fall out. Therefore you must put the end or point
of your probe The cure.
under the eyelids, and so lifting them up (that you hurt not the substance of
the eye) divide them with a crooked incision knife.

The incision made, let the white of an egg beaten with some rose water be put
into the eye; let the eyelids be kept open, yea let the patient himself be
careful that he often turn it upwards, and lift it up with his fingers, not
only that the medicine may be applied to the ulcer, but also that they may
not grow together again. In the night time let a little pledget dipped in
water, and that either simple, or wherein some vitrioll has bin dissolved, be
laid thereon. For thus you shall hinder the eyelids from joining together
again. Then on the third day the parts or edges of the eie-lids shall be
touched with waters drying without biting or acrimony, that so they may be
cicatrized. But if the eyelid adhere to the horny coat at the pupilla or
apple of the eye, the patient will either be quite blind, or very ill of
sight. For the scarre which ensues will hinder the shapes of things from
entering to the crystalline humor, and the visive spirits from passing forth to
the objects. For prognostickes, you may learn out of Celsus, that this cure is
subject to a relapse, so that it may be A disease subject to relapse.
shunned neither by diligence nor industry, but that the eyelid will always
adhere and cleave to the eye.

CHAP. X. Of the itching of the Eyelids.
MAny have their Eyelids itch vehemently by reason of salt phlegm, which
often times excoriating and exulcorating the parts themselves, yields a sanies,
which joins together the eyelids in the night time as if they were glewed
together, and maks them watery and bleared. This affect does so torment the
patients, that it often times makes them require the Physicians help. Wherefore
general medicines being premised, the Ulcers shall be washed with the
following Collyrium.. aquae mellis in balneo mariae destillatae iii. sacchari
candi. i. aloes lotae and in pollinem redactae ss. fiat collyrium. Which A
detergent collyrium.
if it do no good, you may use this which follows.. Ung. Aegyptiac. i.
dissolve in aquae plantaginis quantitate sufficienti. Let the ulcerated
eie-lids betouchd with a soft linen rag dipped therein, but with care that none
thereof fall upon the eye. But when the patient goes to bed, let him cause them
to be anointed with the following ointment, very effectual in this case..
axungiae porci et butyri recentis, an. ss. tuth. praepar. ss. antimon. in aquae
euphrasiae praeparati, ii. camphor aegra. iiii. misce, et in mortario plumbeo
ducantur per tres horas, conflatum indeunguentum, servetur in pyxide plumbea.
Some commend and use certain waters fit to cleanse, dry, bind, strengthen,
and absolutely free the eyelids from itching and redness; of which this is
one.

. aquae euphrag. faeniculi, chelidon. an ss. sarcocal. nutritae ii. vitriol.
romans i. misceantur simul and bulliant unica ebullitione; postea coletur liquor,
and servetur ad usum dictum. Or else.. aquaeros. and vini alb. boni an. iiii.
tuth. praepar. aloes an. i. flor. aeni ii. camphor. gra. ii. Let them be
boiled according to art, and kept in a glass to wash the eyelids. Or else,.
vini albi lbss. salis com. i. let them be put into a clean barbars basin and
covered, and kept there five or six days, and be stirred once a day, and let
the eyelids be touched with this liquor. Some wish that the patients urine be
kept all night in a barbers basin, and so the patients eie-lids be washed
therewith. Verily in this affect we must not fear the use of acride medicines,
for I once You need not fear to use acride medicines in the itching of the
eyelids. Lib. 2. cap. 4. fract. 3.
saw a woman of fifty years of age, who washed her eyelids when they itched
with the sharpest vinegar she could get, and affirmed that she found better
success of this than of any other medicine. Vigo prescribes a water whose
efficacy above other medicines in this affect, he says, has bin proved; and
that it is to be esteemed more worth than gold, the description thereof is
thus.. aq. ros. vini albi oderiferi mediocris vinosit atis an. iiii. myrobalan.
citrini trit. iss. thuris ii. bulliant omnia simul usque ad consumptionem
tertiae partis; deinde immediate addantur floris aris ii. camph. gr. ii. Let
the liquor be kept in a glass well stopped for the foresaid use.

CHAP. XI. Of Lippitudo, or Bleare-eyes.
THere are many whose eyes are never dry, but always flow with a thin, acrid
and hot humor, which causes roughness, and upon small occasions
inflammations, blear or blood-shot eyes, and at length also Strabismut or
sqinting. Lippitudo is nothing else but a certain white filth flowing What
lippitudo is.
from the eyes, which often times agglutinates or joins together the eyelids.
This disease often troubles all the life time, and is to be cured by no remedy:
in some it is cureable. Such as have this disease from their infancy, are not
to be cured, for it remains with them till their dying day. For large heads,
and such as are repleate with acride or much excrementitious phlegm, scarce
yield to medicines. There is much difference whether the phlegm flow down by
the internal vessels under the scull, or by the external which are between
the skull and the skin, or by both. For if the internal veins cast forth this
matter, it will be difficultly cured, if it be cured at all. But if the
external vessels cast it forth, that cure is not unprofitable, which having
used medicines respecting the whole body, applies astringent medicines to the
shaved crown, as Empl. contra rupturam, which may streighten the veins, and as
it were suspend the phlegm, uses cupping, and commands frictions to be made
toward the hind part of the head, and lastly, makes a Seton in the neck.
There are some who cauterize the top of the crown with a hot iron, even to
the bone, so that it may cast a scaile, thus to divert and stay the defluxion.
For local A Collyrium of vitrioll to stay the defluxions of the eyes.
medicines, a Collyrium made with a good quantity of rosewater, with a little
vitrioll dissolved therein, may serve for all.

CHAP. XII. Of the Ophthalmia, or inflammation of the Eyes.
AN Ophthalmia is an inflammation of the coat Adnata and consequently What
Ophthalmia is, and the causes thereof.
of the whole eye, being troublesome by the heat, redness, beating,
renitency, and lastly pain. It has its original either by some primitive
cause or occasion, as a fall, stroke, dust, or small sand flying into the
eyes. For the eye is a smooth part, so that it is easily offended by rough
things, as says Hippocrates, lib. de carnibus. Or by an antecedent cause, as a
defluxion falling upon the eyes. The signs follow the nature of the material
cause, Signs.
for from blood especially cholerike and thin, it is full of heat, redness and
pain; from the same allayed with phlegm all of them are more remiss. But if
a heaviness possess the whole head, the original of the disease proceeds
therfrom. But if a hot pain trouble the forehead the disease, may be thought to
proceed from some hot distemper of the Dura water, or the pericranium; but if
in the very time of the raging of the disease the patient vomit, the matter of
the disease proceeds from the stomach. But from whence soever it comes there
is scarce that pain of any part of the body, which may be compared to the
pain of the inflamed eyes. Verily the greatness of the inflammation has
forced the eyes out of their orb, and broken them asunder in diverse. Therefore
there is no part of Physic more blazed abroad than for sore eyes. For the
cure, the Surgeon shall consider and intend three things, diet, the evacuation
The cure.
of the antecedent and conjunct cause, and the overcomming it by topicke
remedies. The diet shall be moderate, eschewing all things that may fill the
head with vapors; and those things used that by astriction may strengthen the
orifice of the ventricle, and prohibit the vapors from flying up to the head;
the patient shall be forbidden the use of wine, unless peradventure the
disease may proceed from a gross and viscide humor, as Galen delivers it. The
evacuation of the matter flowing into the eye, shall be performed by purging
medicines, phlebotomy in Com. ad aphor. 31. sect. 6.
the arm, cupping the shoulders and neck with scarification, and without: and
lastly, by frictions, as the Physician that has undertaken the cure shall
think it fit. Galen Lib. 13. meth. cap. ult.
after universal remedies for old inflammations of the eyes, commends the
opening of the veins and arteryes in the forehead and temples, because for the
most part the vessels therabouts distended with acride, hot and vaporous blood,
cause great and vehement pains in the eye.

For the impugning of the conjunct cause, diverse topic medicines shall be
applied, according to the four sundry times or seasons that every phlegmon
usually has. For in the beginning, when as the acride matter flows down with
much violence, repercussives do much conduce (...) and tempred with resolving
medicines, are good also in the increase.. aq. ros. et plantag. an. ss.
mucagin. gum. Tragacanth. ii. album. ovi quod sufficit, fiat collyrium, let it
be dropped warm into the eye, and let a double cloth dipped in the same
collyrium be put upon it. Or,. mucag. sem. psil. An percussive medicine.
and cydon. extractae in aq. plant. an. ss. aq. solan. and lactis muliebris,
an. i. trochise. alb. rha. i. fiat collyrium, use this like the former. The
veins of the templesmay be streightene^ by the following medicine.. bol. arm.
sang. drac. and mast. an. i. ss. alb. ovi, aquae ros. and acet. an. i. tereb.
lot. and ol. cidon. an.. ss. fiat defensivum. You may also use ungde Astringent
emplasters.
Bolo, empl. diacal. or contrarupturam dissolved in oil of myrtles, and a
little vinegar. But if the bitterness of the pain be intolerable, the
following cataplasme shall be applied.. medul. pomor. sub. ciner. coctorum.
iii. lactis muliebris ss. let it be applied to the eye, the formerly prescribed
collyrium being first dropped in. Or,. mucag. An anodine cataplasme.
sem. psil. and cidon. an. ss. micae panis albi in lacte infusi, ii. aquae ros.
ss. fiat cataplasma. The blood of a turtle Dove, Pigeon or Hen drawn by
opening a vein under the wings, dropped into the eye, asswageth pain. Baths
are not only anodine, but also stay the defluxion by diverting the matter
thereof by sweats; therefore Galen much The efficacy of Bathes in pains of the
eyes. Adaphor. sect. 7.
commends them in such defluxions of the eyes as come by fits. In the state
when as the pain is either quite taken away or assuaged, you may use the
following medicines.. sarcocol. in lacte muliebri nutritae, i. aloes lotain aq.
rofar. ii. trochis. alb. rha. ss. sacchar cand. ii. aquae ros. iii. fiat
collyrium. Or,. sem. faeniculi, and fanug. an. Detergent Colllicia.
ii. flo chamae. and melil. an. m. ss. coquantur in aq. com. ad iii. colaturae
add tuthiae praep. and sareoc. nutritae in lacte muliebri. an. i. ss. sacchari
cand. ss. fiat collyrium ut artis est. In the declination the eye shall be
fomented with a carminative decoction, and then this collyrium dropped
thereinto.. sarcoc. nutritae ii. aloes and myrrh. an. i. aq. ros. and euphrag.
an. ii. fiat collyrium, ut artis est.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Proptosis, that is, the falling or starting forth of the
eye, and of the Phthisis, and Chemosis of the same.
THe Greeks call that affect Proptosis, the Latins procidentia or Exitus
oculi, when as the eye stands, and is cast out of the orb by the occasion of a
matter filling and lifting up the eye into a greater bigness, and largeness
of substance. The cause of this disease is sometimes external, as by too
violent strayning to vomit, by hard labor in childbirth, by excessive and
wondrous The cause.
violent shouting, or crying out. It sometimes happens that a great and
cruel pain of the head, or the too strait binding of the forehead and temples
for the easing thereof, or the palsy of the muscles of the eye, give beginning
to this disease. Certainly sometimes the eye is so much distended by the
defluxion of humors, that it breaks in sunder, and the humors thereof are
shed, and blindness enfues thereof, as I remember befell the sister of Lewis
de Billy merchant, dwelling at Paris near S. Michael's bridge. The cure shall be
diversified according to the causes. Therefore universal medicines being
premised, cupping glasses shall be applied to the original The cure.
of the spinall marrow, and the shoulders; as also cauteries, or Setons: the
eye shall be pressed or held down with clothes doubled and steeped in an
astringent decoction made of the juice of Acacia, red roses, the leaves of
poppy, henbane, roses and pomegranate pills: of which things poultisses may be
made by addition of barley meal and the like.

There is sometimes to be seen in the eye an affect contrary to this, and it
is termed Atrophia. By this the whole substance of the eye grows lanke and
decays, and The Atrophia of the eye.
the apple it self becomes much less. But if the consumption and emaciation
take hold of the pupil only, the Greeks, by a peculiar name and different
from the general, term it a Phihisis, as Paulus teaches. Contrary causes
shall be opposed to each affect; hot and attractive fomentations shall be
applied; frictions shall be used The Phihisis thereof. Lib. 3. cap. 22.
in the neighboring parts, and lastly all things shall be applied which may
without danger be used to attract the blood and spirits into the parts.

There is another affect of the eye, of affinity to the Proptosis, which by the
Greeks is termed Chemosis. Now this is nothing else than when both the eyelids
are turned The ^sis. Paulus li. 3. cap.
up by a great inflammation, so that they can scarce cover the eyes, and the
white of the eye is lifted much higher up than the black. Sometimes the Adnata
changing his wont, looks red; besides also, this affect may take its
original from external causes, as a wound, contusion and the like. But
according to the variety of the causes, and the condition of the present affect
fixed and remaining in the part, diverse remedies shall be appointed.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Ungula, or Web.
THE Ungula, Pterygion or Web is the growth of a certain fibrous and
membranous flesh upon the upper coat of the eye called Adnata, arising more
frequently in the bigger, but sometimes in the lesser corner toward the
temples. When it is neglected, it covers not only the Adnata, but also some
portion of the Cornea, and coming to the pupil it self hurts the sight
thereof. Such a Web sometimes adheres not at all to the Adnata, but is only
stretched over it from the corners of the eye, so that you may thrust a probe
between it and the Adnata: it is of several colors, somewhiles red;
somewhiles yellow, somewhiles duekish, and other-whiles white. It has its
original either from external causes, as a blow, fall, and the like; or from
internal, as the defluxion of humors into the eyes. The Ungula What Web
curable, and what incurable.
which is inveterate, and that has acquired much thickness and breadth, and
besides does difficultly adhere to the Adnata, is difficultly taken away,
neither may it be helped by medicines whereby scars in the eyes are
extenuated. But that which covers the whole pupil must not be touched by
the Surgeon, for being cut away, the scar which is left by its density
hinders the entrance of objects to the cristalline humor, and the egresse of
the animal spirit to them. But oftentimes it is accompanied with an
inflammation of the eyes, a burning itching, weeping defluxion, and swelling of
the eyelids. That the cure may rightly and happily proceed, he The cure.
must first use a spare diet, purging medicines shall be given, and blood taken
away by opening a vein, especially, if there be great inflammation. For
particular remedies, this excrescence shall be eaten away, or at least kept
from growth by dropping into the eye collyrium of vitrioll described in wounds
of the eyes. But if that we profit nothing by this means, it remains, that
we take it away with the hand after the following manner.

You shall set the patient upon a form or stool, and make him lean much
back, The cutting of the Web.
and be so held firmly, that he may not fall nor stir; then must you open
his sore eye, putting therein the speculum oculi formerly described in treating
of the wounds of this part, and then must you lift up the Web it self with a
sharp little hook, with the point turned a little in, and put under the midst
of the Web; when you have lifted it a little up, thrust a needle threaded with
a smoth thread between it and the Adnata, then taking hold of the hook, and
the two ends of the thread drawn through with the needle, and lifting up the
Web by them, you shall gently begin to separate it from the substance of the
eye lying there-under, beginning at the original thereof with a crooked
incision knife, and so prosecute it even to the end, yet so as you hurt no part
of the Adnata, nor Cornea.

The figures of little hooks, a needle, and crooked incision knife. Little
Hooks. A needle. A crooked incision knife.


Then must it be cut off with a pair sissers, and the white of an egg beaten
with some Rose Water laid thereon, and often renewed. Afterward the eye must
every day be opened, lest coming to cicatrization, the eyelids shall be
glewed together in that part whereas the Web is taken away, which also shall
be hindered by putting of common salt, sage and cummin seeds into the eye,
being first champed and chawed in the mouth. There are some who in stead of the
crooked knife separate the Web from the Adnata with a horses hair, others do
it with a goose quill made ready for the same purpose, taking heed that they
hurt not the caruncle at the corner by the nose, for it will follow if that you
draw the Web away too violently; and if it be cut, there will remain a hole,
through which during the rest of the life a weeping humor will continually
flow, a disease by the Greeks termed Rhyas. If after the cutting, there be fear
of inflammation, linen rags moystned in repelling medicines, formerly
prescribed in wounds of the eye, shall be laid thereupon.

CHAP. XV. Of the Aegilops, fistula lachrimosa, or weeping Fistula of the eye.
AT the greater corner of the eye there is a glandule, made for the receiving
The use of the glandule at the greater corner of the eye.
and containing the moisture which serves for the lubricating and humecting
the eye, least it should dry by continual motion. This Glandule sometimes by a
sanguine or pituitous defluxion falling violently from the brain, swells,
impostumates and ulcerates with an ulcer, not seldom degenerating The
differences.
into a fistula, so that in success of time it rotteth the bone that lies
under it: of such fistulaes, some are open outwardly, and these usually have
their original from a phlegmon; other some are inwardly, and those are such as
at first swelled by the defluxion or congestion of a phlegmatic matter, so
that there appears no hole outwardly, but only a tumor of the bigness of a
pease; this tumor being pressed, flows with a sanious, serous and red, or
otherwise with a white and viscide matter, and that either by the corner of the
eye, or by the inside of the nose. Some have this matter flowing continually,
others have it only monthly, which is proper Periodicall and Typical
Fistulaes.
also to some fistulaes. Such weeping fistulaes if they become old, cause an
Atrophia of the eye, and sometimes blindness, and a stinking breath. Therefore
we must diligently and speedily by physical and chirurgicall means resist
the breeding disease. Wherefore, having used general medicines, we must come
to particulars. Therefore if the ulcer be not sufficiently wide, it shall be
enlarged by putting tents of sponge therein. The flesh of the Glandule
increasing more than is fit, shall be corrected by The cure.
putting therein the cathaereticke pouders of Mercury, calcined vitrioll, or
some aqua fortis, or oil of vitrioll, and lastly, by a potentiall cautery. If
you cannot prevail by these means, and that the bone begins to rot, and the
patient be stout hearted, then use an actual cautery whose use is far more
effectual, ready, certain and excellent The efficacy of an actual cautery.
than a potentiall cautery, as I have tried in many with happy success. In my
opinion it makes no matter, whether the cautery be of gold, silver or iron; for
the efficacy it has, proceeds not from the matter, but from the fire. Yet if
we must religiously observe and make choice of metals, I had rather have it
of Iron, as that which has a far more drying and astringent faculty than gold,
for that the element of earth bears the chief sway thererein, as appears
by the waters which flow through iron mines. Wherefore you shall cause to be
made a triangular Iron, sharp at the end, that it may the more speedily
penetrate. And then the sound eye and adjacent parts being well covered and
defended, and the patients head firmly holden in ones hands, lest the patient
being frighted, stir himself in the very instant of the operation. But a
plate of iron somewhat depressed in the midst, for the cavity of the greater
corner, shall be applied and fitted to the pained eye. This plate shall be
perforated that the hot Iron may pass thereby to the fistula lying thereunder,
and so may only touch that which is to be cauterized.

The figure of a cautery, and a plate with a hole therein.


After the bone is burnt with the cautery, a collyrium made of the whites of
eggs Things to be done after the cauterizing.
beaten in plantaine and nightshade waters must be poured into the hole it
self, the eye and all the neighboring parts; but the patient shall be laid
in bed, with his head somewhat high, and the collyrium shall be renewed as often
and as soon as you shall perceive it to grow dry. Then the fall of the Eschar
shall be procured by anointing it with fresh butter; when it is fallen away,
the ulcer shall be cleansed, filled with flesh, and lastly cicatrized.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Staphiloma, or grape. like swelling.
STaphiloma is the swelling of the horney and grape-like coat, bred What a
Staphiloma is, and the causes thereof?
through the occasion of an humor flowing down upon the eye, or by an ulcer,
the horney coat being relaxed, or thrust forth by the violence of the pustule
generated beneath. It in shape resembles a grape, whence the Greeks style it
Staphyloma. This tumor is sometimes blackish, otherwhiles whitish. For if the
horney coat be ulcerated and fretted in sunder, so that the grapie coat show
it self, and fall through the ulcer, then the Staphyloma will look black
like a ripe grape, for the utter part of the Uvea is blackish. But if the
Cornea be only relaxed and not broken, then the swelling appears of a
whitish color like an unripe grape. The Ancients Paulus and Aetim.
have made many kinds or differences thereof. For if it be but a small hole
of the broken Cornea by which the Uvea shows or thrusts forth its self,
they then termed it Myocephalon, that is, like the head of a fly. But if the
hole were large, and also callous, they called it Clavus, or a nail; If it
were yet larger, then they termed it Acinus, or a grape. But in what shape or
figure soever this disease shall happen, it brings Every Staphiloma infers
incurable blindness.
two discommodities, the one of blindness, the other of deformity. Wherefore
here is no place for surgery to restore the sight, which is already lost, but
only to amend the deformity of the eye; which is by cutting off that which is
prominent. But you must take heed that you cut away no more than is fit, for so
there would be danger of pouring out the humors of the eye.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Hypopyon, that is, the sappurate or putrefied eye.
PUS, or Quitture is sometimes gathered between the horny and grapy coat from
an internal, or external cause; From an internal, as by a The cause.
great defluxion, and often times after an inflammation, but externally, by a
stroke, through which occasion a vein being opened has poured forth blood
thither, which may presently be turned into Quitture. For the cure, universal
remedies being premised, cupping-glasses shall be applied, with scarification,
and frictions used. Anodine and digestive collyria shall be poured from above
downwards. Galen writes that he has sometimes evacuated this matter, the
Cornea being opened at the Iris, in which place all the coats meet, concur
and are Lib. 4. method. cap. ult.
terminated. I have done the like, and that with good success, James
Guillemeau the the Kings Surgeon being present, the Quitture being expressed
and evacuated after the apertion. The Ulcer shall be cleansed with Hydronel, or
some other such like medicine.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Mydriasis, or dilatation of the pupil of the eye.
MYdriasis is the dilatation of the pupil of the eye; and this happens
either by nature or chance: the former proceeds from the default of The cause.
the first conformation, neither is it curable; but the other is of two sorts;
for it is either from an internal cause, the offspring of an humor flowing
down from the brain, wherefore Physical means must be used for the cure
thereof. Now that which comes by any external occasion, as a blow, The cure.
fall or contusion upon the eye, must be cured by presently applying
repercussive and anodyne medicines, the defluxion must be hindered by diet
skilfully appointed, phlebotomie, cupping, scarification, frictions, and other
remedies which may seem convenient. Then must you come to resolving medicines;
as the blood of a Turtle Dove, Pigeon, or Chicken reeking hot out of the vein,
being poured upon the eye and the neighboring parts. Then this following
cataplasme shall be applied thereto.. farinae fabar. and hordei an. iiii. ol.
rosar. and myrtillor. an. i. ss. pull. ireos flor. ii. cum sapa fiat cataplasma.
You may also use the following fomentation.. rosar. rub. A digesting Cataplasme.
and myrtill. an. m. i. florum melil. and chamam. an. p. i. nucum cupress. i.
vini austeri lb. ss. aq. rosar. and plantag. an. iii. make a decoction of them
all for a fomentation to be used with a sponge.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Cataract.
A Cataract is called also by the Greeks Hypochyma, by the Latins, A Cataract.
suffusic. Howsoever you term it, it is nothing else but the concretion of an
humor into a certain thin skin under the horny coat, just against the apple
or pupil, and as it were swimming upon the watery humor; and whereas the
place ought to be empty, opposing it self to the internal faculty of seeing,
whereby it differs from spots and scars growing upon the horny The
differences.
coat and Adnata. It sometimes covers the whole pupil, otherwhiles but the
one half thereof, and somwhiles but a small portion thereof. According to this
variety the sight is either quite lost, weak, or somewhat depraved; because
the animal visive spirit cannot in its entire substance pass through the
density thereof. The defluxion of the humor whence it proceeds, is either
caused by an external occasion, Causes.
as a stroke, fall, or by the heat or coldness of the encompassing air,
troublesome to the head and eyes; or else it is by an internal means, as the
multitude; or else the acride hot and thin quality of the humors. This disease
also sometimes takes its original from gross and fumid vapors sent from a
crude stomach, or from vaporous meats or drinks, up to the brain, and so it
falls into the eyes, where by the coldness, straitness and tarrying in the
place, they turn into moisture, and at length into that concretion or filme
which we see: The signs may be easily drawn, Signs.
from that we have already delivered. For when the cataract is formed and ripe,
it resembles a certain thin membrane spread over the pupil, and appears of a
different color, according to the variety of the humor whereof it consists,
one while white, another while black, blew, ash-colored, livid, citrine,
green. It sometimes resembles quicksilver, which is very trembling and
fugitive, more than the rest. At the first when it begins to breed they
seem to see many things, as flies flying up and down, hairs, nets, and the
like, as if they were carelessly tossed up and down before their eyes: sometimes
every thing appears two, and somewhiles less than they are; because the
visive spirit is hindered from passing to the objects by the density of the
skin, like as a cloud shadowing the light of the Sun. Whence it is that the
Patients are duller sighted about noone, and surer and quicker sighted in the
morning and evening, for that the little visive spirit diffused through the
air, is dispersed by the greater light, but contracted by the less. Now if
this filme cover half the pupil, then all things show but by halfes; but if
the midst thereof be covered and as it were the center of the Christalline
humor, then they seem as if they had holes or windows: but if it cover it
all, then can he see nothing at all, but only the shadows of visible bodies,
and of the Sun, Moon, Stars, lighted candles, and the like luminous things,
and that but confusedly and as by conjecture.

CHAP. XX. The physical cure of a beginning Cataract.
A Beginning Cataract is hindered from growing and concretion by Diet for such
as are troubled with a Cataract.
diet conveniently and artificially prescribed, by the abstinence from wine,
especially more strong and vaporous, and forbearing the use of meats, which
yield a flegmaticke juice and vaporous, as pease, beans, turnips, chestnuts,
and lastly all such things as have the faculty of stirring up the humors, and
causing defluxion in the body, such as are all salt and spiced meats, as also
garlike, onions, mustard. The immoderate use of venery hurts more than all the
rest, for that it more violently exagitates the whole body, weakens the brain
and head, and begets crude humors. Let his bread be seasoned with some fennel
seeds, for it is thought to have a faculty Bread seasoned with fennel seeds.
of helping the fight, and clearing the eyes, and dissipating the misty vapors
in the stomach before they can ascend to the brain. Wherefore by the same
reason it is good to use marmelade of quinces, conserve of roses, and common
drige powder, or any such like composed of things good to break wind, or
corroborate the ventricle. Phlebotomie and purging, if they be requisite, shall
be fitly appointed: Ventoses shall be applied to the shoulders and neck; the
phlegmatic matter shall be diverted and evacuated by the mouth with using
masticatories in the morning. There be some which believe that a beginning
cataract may be dissipated and discussed by often rubbing the eyelids with the
fingers, and in like sort by the often and earnest beholding of the Stars,
and the Moon when it is at the full, looking-glasses, diamonds, and all other
such like bright shining things. I believe that by beams plentifully How
bright shining things may dissipart a beginning Cataract.
and suddenly brought and diffused over the eye, directly opposite against some
bright shining thing, it may seem to have a penetrating, dividing, dissolving,
as also a consuming and drying faculty. Besides, also the hot breath of him who
holds in his mouth, and chaweth fennel seeds, aniseeds, coriander-seeds,
nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves, and the like, has a great faculty, the eyes being
first gently rubbed with the finger, it being breathed in, near at hand and
often received, to heat, attenuate, resolve, digest, and diffuse the humor
which is ready to concrete. Moreover, this collyrium of John Vigo is thought
very powerful to clear the eyes, strengthen the sight, hinder suffusions, and
discuss them if at any time they concrete and begin to gather.. hepatis
hircini sani and recentis lib. ii. calami aromatici and A Collyrium dissipating
a beginning Cataract.
mellis an. (...). succiruta, iii. aquae chelidoniae, faniculi, verbenia
cuphosiae, an. iii. piperis longi, nucis moschatae, caryophyllorum an. ii.
croci ii. floris rorismarini aliquantum contriti, m. (...). sarcocolla, aloes
hepaticae, an. iii. fellis raiae, leporis and perdicis, an. (...)i. terantur
omnia, tritisque add sacchari albi ii. mellis rosati vi. conjiciantur in
alembicum vitreum and distillentur in balnco Mariae; Let this distilled liquor
be often dropped into the eyes. But if you prevail nothing by all these
medicines, and that the cloudy and heaped up humor does daily increase and
thicken, then must you abstain from remedies, and expect until it be no more
heaped up, but thickened, yea until it seem to be grown somewhat hard. For so
at length it may be couched with a needle; otherwise if this same skin shall
not be ripe, but more tender than is fitting, when you shall come to the
operation, it will be broken and thrust through with the needle, and not
couched. On the contrary, if it be too hard, it will resist the needle,
neither will it suffer it self to be easily couched. Wherefore it is
requisite that the A Cataract must not be couched unless it be ripe.
Surgeon know when it is ripe, and he must diligently observe the signs
whereby he may discern a ripe Cataract from an unripe; and that which is
cureable, from that which is uncurable. For that only which is ripe and curable
is to be couched; that which is unripe, that is, such an one as is more tender,
and as it were crude, and that which is more hard and dense, and lastly, that
which is uncureable must not be attempted at all.

CHAP. XXI. By what signs ripe and curable cataracts may be discerned from
unripe and uncurable ones.
IF the sound eye being shut, the pupil of the sore or suffused eye, after it
shall be rubbed with your thumb, be presently dilated and diffused, and with
the like celerity return into the place, figure, color and state, it is
thought by some to show a ripe and confirmed cataract. But an unripe and not to
be couched, if the pupil remain dilated and diffused for a long while after.
But it is a common sign of a ripe, as also more dense and consequently
uncurable suffusion, to be able to see nor distinguish no visible thing beside
light and brightness; for to discern other objects shows that it is not yet
ripe. Therefore the sound eye being shut and pressed, the pupil of the other
rubbed with your thumb, is dilated, enlarged, swells and is more diffused;
the visive spirits by this compression being as it were forced from the sound
into the fore eye. But these following cataracts are judged uncurable, that is,
such as are great, such as when the eyelid is rubbed are nothing dilated or
diffused, whose pupil becomes no broader by this rubbing: for hence you may
gather that the stopping or obstruction is in the opticke nerve, so that how
cunningly and wellsoever the cataract be conched, yet will the Patient
continue blind; you shall do no more good in couching a Uncurable Cataracts.
cataract, which is in an eye consumed and wasted with a Phthisis. Also that
cataract is uncurable which is occasioned by a most grievous disease, to wit,
by most bitter and cruel pains of the head, or by a violent blow. Such as are
of a plaister-like, green, black, livid, citrine and quicksilver-like color,
are usually uncurable. On Curable Cataracts.
the contrary, such as are of a Chestnut color, or of a sky or seawater
color, with some little witness; yield great hope of a happy and
successful cure.

CHAP. XXII. Of the couching a Cataract.
AFter you shall know by the forementioned signs, that the Cataract is curable,
When to couch a Cataract.
it remains that you attempt the couching thereof, but so, that there be
nothing which may hinder. For if the pain of the head, cough, nauseousnes or
vomiting at that time trouble the patient, you shall then bestow your labor in
vain: Wherefore you must expect until these symptoms be gone. Then make
choice of a season fitting for that purpose, that is, in the decrease of the
moon, when the air is not troubled with thunder nor lightening, and when as
the Sun is not in Aries, because that sign has dominion over the head. Then
let the Surgeon consult a Physician whether purging or bloodletting be
convenient for the Patient, so to resist plethoricke symptoms, otherways
ready to yield matter for relapse. Two days after you must make choice of a
place furnished with indifferent or competent The place
light, and the Patient being fasting shall be placed in a strait chair, so
that the light may not fall with the beams directly upon him, but sidewise.
The eye which shall be cured must be made more steady, by laying and binding
wool upon the other: Then the Surgeon shall feate and place himself directly
against the Patient upon a seat somewhat higher, and bidding the Patient put
his hands down to his girdle, he shall hold the patients legs between his
knees. One shall stand at the Patients back who shall hold his head and keep
it from stirring; for by a little stirring he may lose his sight for ever.
Then must you prepare and make ready The needle
your needle, and thrust it often into some strong thick cloth, that it may
be as it were smoothe by this motion, and for the performance of the work in
hand with the less pain somewhat warmed. It must be made of iron or steel,
and not of gold or silver, it must be also flatted on the sides, and sharp
pointed, that so it may the better pierce into the eye, and wholly couch the
Cataract once taken hold of; and lest it should slip in the Surgeons hand, and
be less steady, it shall be put into a handle, as you may see by the
following figure.

A needle inserted in a handle for the couching of Cataracts.


All things being thus in a readiness, you must bid the patient to turn the
sight of his eye toward his nose, and the needle must be boldly thrust (for it
is received in a place that is void, and only filled with spirits) directly
by the coat Adnata, in the middle space between the lesser corner and the horny
coat, just against the midst of the Cataract, yet so, as that you hurt no vein
of the Adnata, and then by stirring it as it were diversely until it come to
the midst of the pupil and suffusion. When it is come Gal. lib. 10. de usts
partium. cap. 5. Cells. lib. 7.
thither, the needle must be inclined from above downwards to the suffusion,
and there to be stirred gently until by little and little it couch or bring
down the Cataract as whole as may be beneath the compass of the pupil; let
him still follow it though couched with his needle, and somewhat violently
depresse, and keep it down for some short space, that so it may rest and stay
in that lower place whether it is depressed. The Surgeon shall try whether it
firmly remain there or no, bidding the patient presently to move his eye; For
if it remain constantly so, and do not return The sign of a Cataract well
couched.
again, the cure is perfect. Then must the needle be lifted up by little and
little, neither must it presently be taken forth, that if the Cataract should
bear up, or rise again, that it might again, and so often (whilst the work
is yet hot, and all things in a readiness) be couched toward the lesser
corner, until it be fully and surely hid. Then must you draw back the needle
gently, and after the same manner as you put it in; lest if you use not
moderation, you bring back the Cataract, from whence you couched it, or
grievously offend the crystalline humor, the prime instrument of sight, or the
pupil with danger of dilating thereof. Some as soon as the work is done,
give the patient something in his hand to look upon: but Paulus approves Lib.
6. cap. 21.
not thereof, for he fears lest his endeavoring or striving to see, may draw
back the Cataract. Wherefore it is more wisdom and better, presently after
the drawing What to be done after the couching of a Cataract.
forth of the needle, to put on a soft ragge the white of an egg beaten in
rose water with a little choice alume, and so apply it to the eye and
neighboring parts for to bind and binder the inflammation; then also you must
together therewith bind up the sound eye, lest by stirring to see, it might
together therewith draw and move the fore eye, by reason of the sympathy and
consent they mutually have by the opticke nerves. After all things are thus
performed, the patient shall be laid in a solt bed, and so placed, that his
head may lie somewhat high; let him be laid far from noise, let him not speak,
nor eat any hard thing that may trouble his jaws, wherefore let him feed upon
liquid meats, as ponado, barley cream, cullisses, gellyes, rear eggs, and other
meats of the like nature. At the end of eight days the ligature that binds up
his eyes shall be loosed, and his eyes washed with rose water, and putting on
spectacles, or some taffaty, the patient shall by little and little accustom
himself to the light, lest he should be offended by the sudden meeting with
light. But if the suffusion, after some short while after, lift it self up
again, it must be couched again, but through a new hole, for the eye is
pained and tender in the former place. It sometimes happens by the touch of the
needle that the Cataract is not couched whole, but is broken into many pieces;
then therefore each of them must be followed, and couched severally: if there
be any very small particle which scapes the needle, it must be let alone, for
there is no doubt but that in process of time it may be dissolved by the force
of the native heat. There are also some Cataracts Of a Cataract which is broken
to pieces.
which at the first touch of the needle are diffused and turn into a substance
like to milk or troubled water, for that they are not thoroughly ripe, yet
these put us in good hope of recovery, and it be but for this, that they can
never afterward concrete into one body as before. Wherefore at the length they
are also discussed by the strength of the native heat, and then the eye
recovers its former splendour. If that any other symptoms come unlooked for,
they shall be helped by new counsels and their appropriate remedies.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the stopping of the passage of the ears, and the falling of
things thereinto.
IT sometimes happens that children are born without any holes in their
ears, a certain fleshy or membranous substance growing The cause.
in their bottom or first entrance. The same may also happen afterward by
accident, they being ulcerated by some impostume or wound, and the ear shut up
by some fleshy excrescence or scar. When as the stopping is in the bottom of
the cavity, the cure is more difficult than if it were in the first entrance.
But there The cure.
is a double way of cure; for this substance, whatsoever it be, must either be
cut out, or else eaten away and consumed by acrid and catheriticke medicines;
in performance of which there is need of great moderation of the mind and hand.
For it is a part endued with most exquisite sense and near the brain,
wherefore by handling it too roughly, there is fear of distension of the
nerves, and consequently of death.

Sometimes also the preternaturall falling of strange bodies into this passage,
makes a stopping of the ears, such as are fragments of stones, gold, silver,
iron and the like metals, pearls, cherry-stones, or kernels, peafe and other
such like pulse. Now solid and bonie bodies still retain the same magnitude;
but pease, seeds and kernels, by drawing the moisture there implanted into
them, swell up, and cause vehement pain by the distension of the neighboring
parts, wherefore the sooner they are drawn forth, the better it is for the
patient. This shall be done with small pincers and instruments made in the
shape of earepicks. But if you profit nothing thus, then must you use such
gymblets as are made for the drawing forth of bullets shot deep into the body.
Little stones and bodies of the like stony hardness shall be The concussive
force of sneesing.
forced forth by the brain, provoked to concussion by sneesing, and by dropping
some oil of almonds first into the passage of the ear, that the way may be
the more slippery; for it will come to pass by this sneesing, or violence of
the internal air forcibly seeking passage out, that at length they may be
cast forth, the mouth and nostrils being stopped with the hand. But if we
cannot thus prevail, it remains, that we cut open the passage with an
incision knife, so much as shall be sufficient for the putting in and using of
an instrument for to extract them. If any creeping things of little creatures,
as fleas, ticks, pismires, gnats and the like, which sometimes happens, shall
get therein, you may kill them by dropping in a little oil and vinegar. There
is a certain little creeping thing, which for piercing and getting into the
ears, the French call Perse-oreille (we an Eare-wigge). This, if it chance to
get into the ear, may be killed by the foresaid means, you may also catch it,
or draw it forth by laying half an apple to your ear, as a bait for it.

CHAP. XXIV. Of getting of little bones and such like things out of the jaws
and throat.
SOmetimes little bones and such like things in eating greedily use to stick,
or as it were fasten themselves in the jaws or throat. Such bodies The cure
different according to the places where they stick.
if you can come to the sight of them shall be taken out with long, slender
and crooked mallets made like a Cranes beak. If they do not appear, nor there
be no means to take them forth, they shall be cast forth by causing vomit, or
with swallowing a crust of bread, or a dry fig gently chawed, and so swallowed;
or else they shall be thrust down into the stomach, or plucked back with a
leeke, or some other such like long and stiff crooked body anointed with oil
and thrust down the throat. If any such like thing shall get into the Weazon
you must cause coughing by taking sharp things, or else sneesing, so to cast
forth whatsoever is there troublesome.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Toothache.
OF all pains, there is none which more cruelly tormenteth the patients The
Tooth ach a most cruel pain.
than the Toothache. For we see them oft-times after the manner of other
bones to suffer inflammation, which will quickly suppurate, and they become
rotten, and at length fall away piecemeale; for we see them by daily
experience to be eaten and hollowed, and to breed worms, some portion of them
putrefying. The cause of such pain is either internal, or external and
primitive. The internal is a hot or cold defluxion of humors The cause
thereof.
upon them, filling their sockets, and thence consequently driving out the
teeth; which is the reason that they stand sometimes so far forth, that the
patient neither dares nor can make use of them to chaw for fear of pain; for
that they are loose in their sockets by the relaxation of the gums, caused by
the falling down of the defluxion. When as they are rotten and perforated even
to the roots, if any portion of the liquor in drinking, fall into them, they
are pained as if you thrust in a pin or bodkin, the bitterness of the pain is
such. The signs of a hot defluxion are sharp Signs of this or that defluxion.
and pricking pain, as if needles were thrust into them, a great pulsation in
the root of the pained tooth and the temples, and some ease by the use of cold
things. Now the signs of a cold defluxion are a great heaviness of the head,
much and frequent spitting, some mitigation by the use of hot remedies. In the
bitterness of pain we must not presently run to Tooth-drawers, or cause them
presently to go in hand to pluck them out. First consult a Physician, who may
prescribe remedies according to the variety of the causes. Now here are three
intensions of cureing. The first is concerning diet; the other for the
evacuation of the defluxion or antecedent Three scopes of curing.
cause; the third for the application of proper remedies for the asswaging of
pain. The two former scopes, to wit, of diet, and diverting the defluxion by
purging, phlebotomie, application of cupping glasses to the neck and
shoulders, and fcarification, do absolutely belong to the Physician. Now for
proper and to pick medicines they shall be chosen contrary to the cause.
Wherefore in a hot cause, it is good washing the mouth with the juice of
Pomgranats, plantaine water, a little vinegar A cold and repercussive lotion
for the mouth.
wherein roses, balaustiae and sumach have been boiled. But such things as
shall be applied for the mitigating of the pain of the teeth, ought to be
things of very subtle parts, for that the teeth are parts of dense consistence.
Therefore the ancients have always mixed vinegar in such kind of remedies..
rosar. rub. sumach. hordei, an. m. ss. seminis hyoscyami conquassati ii.
santalorum an. i. lactucae summitatum rubi, solani, plantaginis, an. m. ss.
bulliant omnia in aquae lib. iiii. and pauco aceto ad hordei crepaturam. Wash
the mouth with such a decoction being warm. You may also make Trochisces for
the same purpose after this manner.. sem. hyoscyami, sandarachae, coriandri,
Trochisces for a hot defluxion.
opii an. ss. terantur and cum aceto incorporentur, formentur que trochisci
apponendi dentibus dolentibus. Or else,. seminis portulacae, hyoscyami,
coriandri, lentium, corticis santali citrini, rosar. rub. pyrethri, camphorae,
an. ss. Let them all be beaten together with strong vinegar, and made into
trochisces, with which being dissolved in rose water, let the gums and whole
mouth be washed when need requires. But if the pain be not assuaged with
these, you shall come to narcoticks, which may Narcoticks.
stupefie the nerve; as,. seminis hyoscyami albi, opii, camphorae, papaveris
albi, an. quantum sufficit, coquantur cum sapa, et denti applicentur. Besides,
you must also put this following medicine into the ear of the pained side..
opii and castorei, an. i. misceantur cum oleo rosato: It has sometimes availed
in swollen and distended gums, being first lightly scarified, to have applied
leaches, for the evacuation of the conjunct matter, as also to have opened the
veins under the tongue, or these which are behind the ears. For I remember
that I, by these three kinds of remedies, assuaged great pains of the teeth.
Yet there be some who in this affect open not these veins which are behind
the ears, but those which are conspicuous in the hole of the ear in the upper
part thereof.

Pain of the teeth arising from a cold cause and defluxion, may be helped by
these remedies; boil rosemary, sage, and pellitory of Spain in wine and
vinegar, and add thereto a little aqua vitae, in this liquor dissolve a little
treacle, and wash your teeth therewith. Others mingle Gum ammoniacum dissolved
in aqua vitae with a little sandar acha and myrrh, and lay it to the pained
tooth, after Vigoes counsel. Mesue thinks that beaten garlic carried in
the right or left hand, asswages the pain, as the teeth ache upon the right or
left side. But I being once troubled with grievous pain in this kind,
followed the counsel of a certain old woman, and laid garlic roasted under
the embers to my pained tooth, and the pain forthwith ceased. The same remedy
used to others troubled with the like affect, had like success. Moreover, some
think it availeable if it be put into the auditory passage. Others drop into
the ears oil of castoreum, or of cloves, or some such other chemicall oil.
It is good also to wash the teeth with the following decoction.. rad. pyrethri
ss. menthe et rutae an. p. i. bulliant in aceto, and with this decoction being
warm, wash the teeth. Some like fumes better, and they make them of the seeds
of Coloquintida and Hot fumes.
mustard, and other like; they take the smoke by holding their mouths over a
funnell. Other some boil pellitory of Spain, ginger, cinnamon, alume, common
salt, nut megs, cipresse nuts, anise and mustard seeds, and euphorbium in
oxycrate, and in the end of the decoction add a little aqua vitae, and receive
the vapor thereof through a funnell: as also they wash their teeth with the
decoction, and put cotton dipped therein into the ear, first dropping in a
little thereof. Some there are which affirm that to wash the teeth with a
decoction of Spurge is a very good and anodyne medicine in the toothache. I
have often times assuaged intolerable pains of the teeth by applying
vesicatories under the ear, to wit, in that cavity whereas the lower
Vesicatories.
jaw is articulated with the upper: for the vein, artery and sinew which are
distributed to the roots of the teeth, lie thereunder. Wherefore the blisters
being opened, a thin liquor runs out, which does not only cause, but also
nourish or feed the disease. But if the tooth be hollowed, and that the patient
will not have it pulled out, there is no speedier remedy, than to put in caustic
medicines, as oil of vitrioll, aqua fortis, Causticks.
and also a hot iron; for thus the nerve is burnt insunder, and loses its
sense. Yet some affirm that the milky juice that flows from Spurge made into a
paste with Olibanum and amylum, and put into the hollowed tooth, will make it
presently to fall away in pieces. When the Gums and Cheeks are swollen with a
manifest tumor, then the patient begins to be somewhat better and more at
ease. For so by the strength of nature, the tumor causing the pain is carried
from within outward. But of what nature soever the matter which causes the
pain be, it is convenient to intercept the course thereof with Empl. contra
rupturam, made with pitch and mastick, and applied to the temple on that side
where the tooth aketh.

CHAP. XXVI. Of other affects of the teeth.
THe teeth are also troubled with other preternaturall affects. For sometimes
they shake by relaxation of the gums, or else become corrupt and rotten, or
have worms in them, or else are set on edge. For the first, the gummes are
relaxed either by an external or primitive cause, as a fall or Causes of
loosnesse of the teeth.
blow: or else by an internal or antecedent, as by the defluxion of acrid or
waterish humors from the brain, or through want of nourishment in old bodies.
If the teeth grow loose by the means of the decaying gums, the disease is then
incurable: but you may withstand the other causes by the use of such things as
fasten the teeth, shunning on the contrary such as may loosen them. Therefore
the patient must not speak too earnestly, neither chaw hard things. If they
become loose by a fall or blow, they must not be taken forth, but restored and
fastened to the next that remain firm, for in time they will be confirmed in
their sockets, as I tried in Anthony de la Rue a tailour, who had his jaw
broken with the pommell of a dagger, and three of his teeth loosened and almost
shaken out of their sockets; the jaw being restored, A History.
the teeth were also put in their places, and bound to the rest with a double
waxed thread; for the rest, I fed the patient with broths, gellyes, and the
like, and I made astringent gargarismes of cypress nuts, myrtle berries, and a
little alum boyld in oxycrate, and I wished him to hold it a good while in his
mouth: by these means I brought it so to pass, that he within a while after
could chaw as easily upon those teeth, as upon the other. I heard it reported
by a credible person, that he saw a Lady of the prime nobility, who instead of
a rotten tooth she drew, made a sound tooth, drawn from one of her waiting
maids at the same time, to be substituted and inserted, which tooth in process
of time, as it were taking root, grew so firm, as that she could chaw upon it
as well as upon any of the rest. But as I formerly said, I have this but by
hearsay.

Now the teeth are corroded or eaten in by an acride and thin humor
penetrating The causes of hollow teeth.
by a plenteous and frequent defluxion even to their roots, and being there
contained, it putrefies, and becoming more acride, it does not only draw the
teeth into the contagion of its putrefaction, but also perforats and corrodes
them.

The putrefaction may be corrected, if after general medicines, you put oil
of vitrioll or aqua fortis into the hole of the eaten tooth: or else, if you
burn the tooth The cure.
it self to the root with a small iron wyar being red hot: you shall thrust
this hot iron through a pipe or cane made for the same purpose, lest it should
harm any sound part by the touch thereof, and thus the putrefaction, the cause
of the arrosion, may be stayed. But if the hole be on the one side between two
teeth, then shall you file away so much of the sound tooth as that you may have
sufficient liberty to thrust in your wiar without doing any harm.

The forms of Files made for filing the teeth.


Worms breeding by putrefaction in the roots of the teeth, shall be killed by
the use of causticks, by gargles or lotions made of vinegar wherein, either
pellitory of Causes of worms in the teeth.
Spain has bin steeped, or Treacle dissolved also; Aloes and Garlike are good
to be used for this purpose.

Setting the teeth on edge happens to them by the immoderate eating of acride
or tart things, or by the continual ascent of vapors endued with the same
quality, Causes of setting the teeth an edge.
from the orifice of the ventricle to the mouth, or by a cold defluxion,
especially of acride phlegm, falling from the brain upon the teeth, or else
by the too excessive use of cold or stupising liquors. This affect is taken
away, if after general medicines and shunning those things that cherish the
disease, the teeth be often washed with aqua vitae, or good wine wherein sage,
rosemary, cloves, nutmegs and other things of the like nature have bin boiled.

CHAP. XXVII. Of drawing of teeth.
TEeth are drawn, either for that they cause intolerable pains, which will
not yield to medicines, or else for that they are rotten and hollowed, so that
they cause the breath to smell; or else for that they infect the sound and
whole teeth, and draw them into the like corruption, or because they stand out
of order. Besides, when they are too deep and strongly rooted, so that they
cannot be plucked out, they must often times be broken of necessity, that so you
may drop some caustic thing into their roots, which may take away the sense,
and consequently the pain. The hand must be used with much moderation in the
drawing out of a tooth; for the Jaw is sometimes dislocated by the A caveat in
drawing of teeth.
too violent drawing out of the lower teeth. But the temples, eyes and brain
are shaken with greater danger by the too rude drawing of the upper teeth.
Wherefore they must first be cut about, that the gums may be loosed from them,
then shake them with your fingers, and do this until they begin to be loose;
for a tooth which is fast in, and is plucked out with one pull, oft-times
breaks the jaw, and brings forth the piece together therewith, whence follow a
fever and a great flux of blood not easily to be stayed (for blood or pus
flowing out in great plenty is, in Celsus opinion, Lib. 7. cap. 18.
the sign of a broken bone) and many other malign and deadly symptoms: some
have had their mouths drawn so awry, during the rest of their lives, so that
they could scarce gape. Besides, if the tooth be much eaten, the hole thereof
must be filled either with Lint, or a cork, or a piece of lead well fitted
thereto, lest it be broken under your forceps, when it is twitched more
straightly to be plucked out, and the root remain, ready in a short time to
cause more grievous pain. But judgment must be used, and you must take
special care lest you take a sound tooth for a pained one; for oft-times the
patient cannot tell, for that the bitterness of pain by neighborhood is
equally diffused over all the jaw. Therefore for the better plucking out a The
manner of drawing teeth.
tooth, observing these things which I have mentioned, the patient shall be
placed in a low seat, bending back his head between the Tooth-drawers legs;
then the Tooth-drawer shall deeply scarifie about the tooth, separating the
gums therfrom with the instruments marked with this letter A. and then if
spoiled as it were of the wall of the gums, it grow loose, it must be shaken
and thrust out by forcing it with the three-pointed levatory noted with this
letter B. but if it stick in too fast, and will not stir at all, then must
the tooth be taken hold of with some of these toothed forcipes marked with
these letters C. D. E. now one, then another, as the greatness, figure, and
site shall seem to require. I would have a tooth-drawer expert and diligent in
the use of such toothed mullets; for unless one know readily and cunningly how
to use them, he can scarce so carry himself, but that he will force out three
teeth at once, oft-times leaving that untoucht which caused the pain.

The effigies of Forcipes or mullets for the drawing of teeth.


Instruments for scraping the teeth, and a three-pointed levatory.


The form of another Instrument for drawing of teeth.


After the tooth is drawn, let the blood flow freely, that so the part may be
freed What to be done when the tooth is plukt out.
from pain, and the matter of the tumor discharged. Then let the tooth-drawer
press the flesh of the gums on both sides with his fingers whereas he took
out the tooth, that so the socket that was too much dilated and often times torn
by the violence of the pluck, may be closed again. Lastly, the mouth shall be
washed with oxycrate; and if the weather be cold, the patient shall take heed
of going much in the open air, lest it cause a new defluxion upon his teeth.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of cleansing the Teeth.
Pieces of meat in eating sometimes stick between the teeth, and becoming
corrupt by long staying there, do also hurt the teeth themselves, Causes of
foul or rusty teeth.
and spoil the sweetness of the breath. He that would eschew this, ought
presently after meat to wash his mouth with wine mixed with water, or
oxycrate, and well to cleanse his teeth that no slimy matter adhere to them.
Many folks teeth by their own default gather an earthy filth of a yellowish
color, which eats into them by little and little, as rust eats into iron.
This rusty filthiness, or as it were mouldiness of the teeth, does also often
times grow by the omitting of their proper duty, that is, of chawing. Whence
soever this slimy The cure.
filth proceeds, we must get Dentifrices to fetch it off withal, and then the
teeth must be presently rubbed with aqua fortis and aqua vitae mixed together,
that if there be any thing that has escaped the Dentifrices, it may be all
fetched off; yet such acride washings are hurtful to the sound teeth, for that
they by little and little consume A caution in the use of acride things.
and waste the flesh of the gums.

Dentifrices shall be made of the root of marsh mallows boiled in white wine
and Alume; and as when the teeth are loose we must abstain from such things
as are hard to be eaten and chawed, but much more from breaking of such things
as are of a bony consistence, also here we must shun all things that by their
toughness stick to the teeth. Many for the cleansing of the teeth, commend a
powder made of scuttle bones, purple shells, pumice stone, burnt alume, and
hearts horn, and a little cinnamon, which is a singular remedy for the teeth
howsoever affected. Many other are content with bread only tosted and beaten;
but this following water is very effectual to whiten the teeth.. sal. ammon.
and gemmei, an. i. alum. roch. ss. aquae ros. quod A water to whiten the teeth.
sufficit, destillentur. And let the teeth be cleansed with this distilled
liquor.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the impediment and contraction of the Tongue.
THe tongue is sometimes tied and short from the nativity; as when the The
cause of being tonguetied.
liberty of the tongue is restrained by the subject and neighboring as well
membraines as muscles, being either too short or too hard. Sometimes this
disease happens after they are borne by some accident or preternaturall affect,
as by too hard a scarre left by the healing of an ulcer under the tongue. The
patient at his beginning to speak, is too slow in speaking, but presently
leaving his slownesse he becomes too quick, so that he stammers. If the
disease The cure.
proceed from the astriction and shortness of the ligamentall membrane lying
under the tongue, then the in incision shall be made broadwise, having great
care that the veins and arteries which are there, be not violated, for fear
lest they should cause a haemorrhagy not easily to be stayed: Then the mouth
shall be presently washed with oxycrate, and some lint dipped in syrup of
dried roses, or honey of roses put into the midst of the incision, lest the
part of the ligament, especially on the night time when the tongue is silent
and at rest, should grow to the rest of the ligament. For the same purpose the
finger shall be often thrust this way, and the tongue more violently rowld up
and down, and thrust out of the mouth. Yet sometimes this ligament is so thick
and short, and therefore holds down the tongue so close, that you cannot come to
cut it with a knife or lancet without great and manifest danger of death by
bleeding: Therefore in such a case a needle and thread shall be thrust through
it, and so the Another way to cut it.
thread shall be tied straiter and straiter every day, until by little and
little this ligamentall tie of the tongue, which by its immoderate shortness
intercepts the liberty of the motion shall be consumed and broken.

CHAP. XXX. Of superfluous Fingers, and such as stick together.
EAch hand has naturally five fingers only; whatsoever is more or less The
differences.
is against nature: and if there be fewer, it is a fault not to be helped by
art. But if there be more, that for the most part may be helped by art:
superfluous fingers usually grow by the thumb, or the little finger, but
seldom otherwise, These are either wholly fleshy, or have bones of their kind
and nails upon them. Those which are of a bony nature do either arise from
the joints of the natural fingers, and are joynted like them, and so are often
times moveable, or else from some middle space of a joint, and these have not
power to stir or move. Now they are sometimes equal in magnitude to the
natural fingers to which they grow, yet more frequently they are shorter.
Those which are only fleshy, are easily amputated and made even with a razour;
but such as are also bony cannot be cut off, unless with the cutting mullets
herafter described, and this is a disease of the fingers in number. There is
also another disease in figure, for they sometimes stick together, and
otherwhiles they are very little separated. This fault happens either from the
first original by the error of the formative faculty; or else it happens
afterward by accident, as by a wound or burn ill cured. For neighboring
fingers being ulcerated do easily grow together, unless they be kept a sunder
by a linen ragge. And if they by chance shall grow together by a little and
thin skin and flesh, they shall forthwith be divided with a sharp razour; but
if they be joined by the interposition of a more gross and dense substance, to
wit, the nerves, tendons, and vessels, being knit together on each side, it
will be best not to meddle at all with the dividing them.

Cutting Mullets neatly made for the cutting off superfluous Fingers.


Neither must we omit, that many have their nails run with such bony
sharpness The cure of nails running into the flesh of the fingers.
into the flesh of their fingers lying under them, that they cause most cruel
pain; neither commonly do you avail any thing by paring them; for growing up
within a while after, they press downwards again with the more violence.
Therefore the Surgeon is often forced to cut away all the flesh whereinto the
sharpness of the nail runs. Which I have done in many with happy success.
Many have corns growing upon their fingers in diverse fashions: They are taken
off by paring away by little How to take off the corns of the fingers.
and little the callous hardness, and then laying a head of garlic beaten
thereon. Yet the cure is more quick and certain which is performed by
caustickes, as aqua fortis, or oil of vitrioll.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the too short a Praepuce, and of such as havebin circumcised.
WHen as the Praepuce or foreskin is too short, it cannot cover the glans. This
happens either by nature, to wit, by the first conformation, or afterward by
some accident, as to those whom religion and the custom The cause.
of their nation bids to be circumcised. The cure is thus. The Praepuce is
turned up, and then the inner membrane thereof is cut round, and great The cure.
care is had, that the vein and artery which are there between the two
membranes of the Praepuce, be not cut in sunder. Hence it is drawn downward by
extension, until it cover the glans, a deficcative emplaster being first put
between it and the glans, lest they should grow together. Then a pipe being
first put into the urinary passage, the praepuce shall be there bound until
the incision be cicatrized. This cure is used to the Jews, when having abjured
their religion full of superstitions, for handsomnesse sake, they would cover
the nut of their yard with a praepuce, and so recover their cut off skin.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Phymosis and Paraphymosis, that is, so great a constriction of
the praepuce about the Glans or Nut, that it cannot be bared or uncovered at
Pleasure.
THe prepuce is straitened about the Glans two ways; for it either covers the
whole nut, and so straightly encompasses the end thereof, that it cannot be drawn
upwards, and consequently the nut cannot be uncovered; or else it leaves the
Glans bare under it, being fastened so stiffely to the roots thereof, that it
cannot be turned up, nor drawn down, or over the Glans. The first manner of
constriction is termed Phymosis, the latter Paraphymosis. The Phymosis happens
either by the fault The causes.
of the first conformation, or else by a scarre, through which occasion the
praepuce has grown lesser, as by the growing of warts. Now Paraphymosis is
often occasioned by the inflammation of the yard, by impure copulation; for
hence ulcers breed between the praepuce and Glans, with swelling, and so great
inflammation, that the praepuce cannot be turned back. Whence it is that they
cannot be handled and cured as you would, and a gangrene of the part may
follow, which may by the contagion The cure.
bring death to all the body, unless it be hindered and prevented by amputation:
but if a scar be the cause of the constriction of the praepuce, the patient
being placed in a convenient site, let the praepuce be drawn forth and
extended, and as much as may be stretched and enlarged, then let the scarre be
gently cut in three or four places on the inner side with a crooked knife, but
so, that the gashes come not to the outside, and let them be an equal distance
each from other. But if a fleshy excrescence or a wart shall be the occasion of
this straitness and constriction, it shall be consumed by the same remedies,
by which the warts of the womb and yard are consumed or taken off. But when as
the praepuce does closely adhere to the Glans on every side, the cure is not to
be hoped for, much less to be attempted.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of those whose Glans is not rightly perforated, and of the too
short or strait ligament, bridle, or Cord of the yard.
SOme at their birth, by evil conformation, have not their Glans perforated in
the middle, but have only a small hole underneath, toward the bridle The cause.
and ligament of the yard, called the cord. Which is the cause, that they do
not make water in a strait line, unless they turn up their yard toward their
belly, neither by the same reason can they beget children, because through this
fault of conformation, the seed is hindered from being cast directly into the
womb. The cure is wholly chirurgicall, and is thus performed. The praepuce The
cure.
is taken hold of and extended with the left hand, but with the right hand, the
extremity thereof, with the end of the Glans, is cut even to that hole which is
underneath. But such as have the bridle or ligament of the yard too short, so
that the yard cannot stand straight, but crooked, and as it were turned
downwards; in these also the generation of children is hindered, because the
seed cannot be cast directly and plentifully into the womb. Therefore this
ligament must be cut with much de xterity, and the wound cured after the manner
of other wounds, having regard to the part.

Children also are sometimes borne into the world with their fundaments
unperforated, Such as are borne without a ho^ their fund^ are not long lived.
for a skin preternaturally covering the part, hinders the passage forth of
the excrements; those must have a passage made by art with an instrument, for
so at length the excrements will come forth: yet I have found by experience,
that such children are not naturally long lived, neither to live many days
after such section.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the causes of the stone.
THE stones which are in the bladder have for the most part had their first
original in the reins or kidneys, to wit, falling down from thence Why
children are subject to the stone in the bladder.
by the ureters into the bladder. The cause of these is twofold, that is,
material and efficient. Gross, tough, and viscide humors, which crudities
produce by the distempers of the bowels and immoderate exercises, chiefly
immediately after meat, yield matter for the stone; whence it is that children
are more subject to this disease than those of other ages. But the efficient
cause is either the immoderate heat of the kidneys, by means whereof the
subtler part The cause.
of the humors is resolved, but the grosser and more earthy subsides, and is
hardened as we see bricks hardened by the sun and fire; or the more remiss
heat of the bladder, sufficient to bake into a stone the faces or dregs of
the urine gathered in great plenty in the capacity of the bladder. The
straightness of the ureters and urenary passage may be accounted as an
assistant cause. For by this means the thinner portion of the urine flows
forth, but that which is more feculent and muddy being stayed behind, grows
as by scaile upon scaile, by addition and collection of new matter into a stony
mass. And as a week oftentimes dipped by the Chandler into melted tallow, by
the copious adhesion of the tallowy substance presently becomes a large candle;
thus the more gross and viscide faeces of the urine stay as it were at the
bars of the gathered gravel, and by their continual appulse are at length
wrought and fashioned into a true stone.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the signs of the stone of the Kidneys and bladder.
THE signs of the stone in the reins, are the subsiding of red or yellow sand
in the urine, a certain obscure itching at the kidneys, and the sense of a
weight or heaviness at the loins, a sharp and Why the thigh i^ ^umme in the
stone of the reins.
pricking pain in moving or bending the body, a numnesse of the thigh of the
same side, by reason of the compression caused by the stone, of the nerves
discending out of the vertebrae of the loins of the thigh. But when the stone
is in the bladder, the fundament and Signs of the stone in the bladder.
whole perinaeum is pressed as it were with a heavy weight, especially if the
stone be of any bigness, a troublesome and pricking pain runs to the very end
of the yard, and there is a continual itching of that part, with a desire to
scratch it: hence also by the pain and heat there is a tension of the yard,
and a frequent and needless desire to make water, and sometimes their urine
comes from them drop by drop. A most grievous pain torments the patient in
making water, which he is forced to show by stamping with his feet, bending of
his whole body, and the grating of his teeth. He Why such as have a stone in
the bladder are troubled with the falling of the fundament.
is often times so tormented with excess of pain, that the Sphincter being
relaxed, the right gut falls down, accompanied with the swelling heat and
pain of the Haemorrhoid veins of that place. The cause of such tormentis, the
frequent striving of the bladder to expel the stone wholly contrary to the
nature thereof, whereto by sympathy the expulsive faculty of the guts and all
their parts of the belly come as it were for supply. The sediment of the urine
is gross and viscid, and oft-times like the whites of eggs, which argues the
weakness of the native heat not attenuating the juices. The patient looks
of a pale and yellowish complexion and hollow eyed, by reason of the almost
continual watching which is caused by the bitterness of pain; yet may it
more certainly be known by putting in, or searching with a Cathaeter. How to
sear^n for the stonein the bladder with a Cathaeter.
Which to do, the patient shall be wished to stand with his body somewhat
stooping, leaning against somewhat with his back, and holding his knees some
foot asunder. Then the Cathaeter being bigger or lesser as the body shall
require, and anointed with oil or butter, shall be thrust with a skillful
hand into the passage of the urine, and so into the capacity of the bladder.
But if the Cathaeter cannot come to that capacity, the patient shall be placed
in such a posture; then shall he be laid upon his back on a bench, or the feet
of a bed, with his knees bended, and his heels drawn to his buttocks, after
which manner he must almost lie when he is to be cut for the stone, as shall be
shown hereafter. For thus the Cathaeter is more easily thrust into the
bladder, and shows there is a stone by the meeting and obscure sound of the
obvious, hard and resisting body. You must have sundry Cashaeters, that they
may serve for every body bigger and lesser, and these must be crooked, smooth
and hollow. When being thrust into the urenary passage (which before unawares I
omitted) they come to the neck of the bladder, they must not be thrust
straight into the bladder, but taking hold of the yard with the left hand, they
must be gently thrust with the right directly into the bladder, especially in
men, by reason of the length and crookedness of the way, which trends in the
form of this letter S. It is not so in The figure of the neck of the bladder
is different in men and women.
women by reason of the shortness and straitness of the neck of the bladder.
It is fit your Cathaeters be hollow or fistulous in manner of a pipe, that
they may receive a silver wiar or string, that may hinder the gross and
viscide humor, clotted blood, or the like, from stopping the further end of
the Cathaeter, through which the suppressed urine ought to pass and be made.
But now as soon as we perceive that the Cathaeter is come into the capacity of
the bladder, the wiar must be drawn forth, that so the urine may the freelier
flow out by the hollownesse of the Cathaeter. You may perceive the shapes of
these instruments by this following figure.

The figure of Cathaeters, and of a silver string or wiar.


CHAP. XXXVI. Prognostickes in the stone.
WHen the stone is cast forth of the kidney (whereas it bred by little and
little) and is so driven into one of the ureters, that it wholly stop it, yet
thereupon there follows no suppression of the urine; for seeing nature has
made diverse parts of our body double, all the urine flows into the other
ureter. But if they shall be both stopped with stones, there is no doubt but
the urine will be wholly suppressed, and death ensue by the suffocation and
extinction of the native heat, by How death may ensue by the suppression of the
urine.
the urine flowing back by the rivelits of the veins over all the whole body.
Such as have a small stone cast forth of their reins into the cavity of the
ureters, these, until this stone be fallen into the bladder, have cruel pain
with gripings, with often desire to go to stool and make water, but oft-times
do neither. For such oft-times have their bellies distended with flatulencies:
an argument hereof is their continual belching, or breaking of wind. But by
sneesing and coughing, or any other concussion of the whole body, a pricking
pain is forthwith felt, whereas the stone stops, especially if it be either
rough, or have sharp points like horns. This pain is communicated to the hip
and thigh by sympathy, and some have the stones drawn up as it were with
great violence. To these may be added the Colicke, choleric vomiting, and
almost a general sweat. The stone in the kidneys is most commonly bred in such
as are ancient, by reason of the weakness of the expulsive faculty. But the
stone in the bladder happens to such as are more young, because the native
heat is more vigorous in such, and strong and inordinate motions increase the
strength of the expulsive faculty. When the stone is in the bladder, and the
urine appears bloody, it is the sign of a small, as also a prickly and rough
stone, for thus it more casily enters into the neck of the bladder, and
exulcerateth it being fleshy, whence the blood comes away with the urine, and
most cruel pain as of needles thrust into the flesh, especially after labor
and much exercise: on the contrary, a larger and more smooth stone will not
cause such tormenting pain, and it causes a milkie water. The shapes of
stones bred in the kidneys are various, according to the variety of the
strainers through which they pass whilst they are bred. Verily I have seen Why
stones of the kidneys have sundry shapes.
stones which represented the figure of grayhounds, hogs and other creatures,
and things wholly contrary to man's nature, by the production of their prickles
and as it were branches. Some are four square, others longish and like a
finger, other some of a round figure with many protuberancies like a pine apple
kernel; neither is the variety less in magnitude, number and color: for some
are yellowish, others whitish, red, ash-colored or some other like, according
to the various temper of the affected bodies. The stones of choleric and lean
men usually concrete by preternaturall heat and dryness; but those of
phlegmatic or fat bodies, of a certain as it were congelation and
obstruction of the passages. A stone falling sometimes from the bottom of the
bladder into the passage of the urine quite stops it up, and thence follows a
total suppression of the urine. Therefore then the patient shall be placed
upon his back and his legs being lifted up on high, he shall be shaken and
tossed up and down, just as one would shake up a sack to fill it; for thus it
is forced back into the bladder from whence it came, from the passage of the
urine whereinto it was got; yet it may also be forced back by thrusting in a
Cathaeter. The pain which afflicts such as have the stone is some whiles
continual, yet more frequently it comes by fits and returns, sometimes
monthly, other whiles yearly. Such as have the stone in the kidneys make for
the most part waterish urine. Women are Why men are more subject to to the
stone than women.
not so subject to the stone as men, for they have the neck of their bladder
more short and broad, as also more straight; wherefore the matter of the stone
by reason of the shortness of the passage is evacuated in gravel, before it
can be gathered and grow into a stone of a just magnitude; yet stones breed in
some women and those equally as big as in men, and therefore they are to be
cured by section and the like remedies. When the stone exceeds the bigness
of an egg, it can scarce be taken away without the tearing of the bladder,
whence happens an unvoluntary shedding of the water, curable by no art,
because the bladder, seeing it is nervous and without blood, being once torn
admits no consolidation, add hereto that inflammation and a What stones ca^
taken out of the bladdes without killing the patient.
gangrene often following the rending of the bladder bring inevitable death.
The patient runs the same hazard, if along stone be pulled out sidewise with
your instrument, or if it be enclosed in a membrain (which kind of stone can
scace be found with a Cathaeter) and so be fastened to the bladder, or
otherwise if the stone it self be fastened into the substance of the bladder,
or lastly if by any chance the Surgeon being about to pluck out the stone
shall hurt the body of the bladder with his instruments. Yet stones of an
indifferent bigness are more safly extracted out of the bladder than those
which are less, and the patient more frequently and happily recovereth. For
they do not escape from the instrument, and the patient being used a long while
to endure pain, as that which has been a long time a growing, does more easily
and constantly away with the inflammation, pain and other symptoms, which
happen after cutting, yea in cutting. Having thus spoken of the causes, signs,
places, symptoms and prognostics, we must come to the cure, beginning with
that part which is termed Prophylactice, that is, the preventing part.

CHAP. XXXVII. What cure is to be used when we fear the stone.
DIet must first be appointed, which by the convenient use of the six What
diet such must use as fear the stone.
things not natural (as they term them) may heap up small store of gross,
tough and viscide humors in our bodies. Therefore cold and cloudy air is to
be shunned. They must abstain from fish, beef, porke, water-foule, pulse,
cheese, milk meats, fried and hard eggs, rice, cakes and all pastry,
unleavened bread, and lastly all manner of obstructing meats. Also garlike,
onions, leeks, mustard, spices, and lastly all things which overheat the blood
and humors must be shunned, especially if you fear that the stone is concrete
by the heat of the reins. Standing and muddy waters, thick and troubled
wines, bear, and such kind of liquors must be eschewed. Saciety in meats and
drinks is to be shunned, as that which breeds crudities. Also long watching and
continual labor because they inflame the blood, cause crudities, and
preternaturall heat must carefully be eschewed, as also all more vehement
passions of the mind. If the body be plethoricke, then it must be evacuated
by phlebotomie, purging and vomiting, which is accounted for a singular remedy
for the prevention of this disease. For the performance of all which things a
Physician shall be consulted. But because Physicians are not in every place and
always at hand, I have thought good to set down these following medicines;
yet we must first remember this counsel of Galen; The Lib. 13. method.
use of diuretics, and strong purging medicines is hurtful, as often as there
is inflammation in the reins and bladder, for so the confluxe of the humors to
the affected parts is the greater, whence the inflammation and pain are
increased.

Wherefore first using relaxing medicines, as six drams of Cassia newly
drawn, with iv. of Rubarbe in powder mixed therewith; then lenitive and
refrigerating medicines shall be inwardly and outwardly used, such as is this
following syrup.. summitatum malv. bismal. and violar. an. m. ss. rad. alth.
i. glycyr. ss. 4. sem. frigid. A lenitive and lubricating syrup.
major. an. i. fiat decoctio.. pradict. decoctionis lb. ss. in colatura
dissolve sacch. albiss. ii. mellis albi iss. fiat syrupus secund. artem; let
the patient use this often. This following apozeme is also very effectual for
the same purpose.. rad. aspar. gramin. polyp. quercini, A diuretic Apoz^me.
passul. mund. an. ss. betonic. herniar. agrimon. omnium capill. and pimpinell.
an. m. ss. 4. sem. frigid. major. and sem. f^nic. an. i. folior. sen. vi. fiat
decoct. ad lb. ss. incolatura dissolve syrupi de Alth^^ and de ^erniar. an.
iss. Make a clear apozeme and let it be aromatized with a little cinnamon, for
two doses; let him take the first dosis in the morning two hours before meat,
and the other at four of the clock in the afternoon. Moreover this following
broth has an excellent and certain power to prevent the stone.. hordei integr.
p. i. radic. petroselini, acetos. foenicul. cichor. brusci an. i. 4. sem.
frigidorum A di^^etick and ^h.
conquassatorum. an. ss. fol. acetos. portul. lactucae, summitatum malvae, and
violar. an. m. ss. bulliant in aqua fluviatili cum gallo gallinaceo and crure
vitulino; let the broth be kept, and let the Patient take thereof six ounces
for four days; in the morning two hours before meat, with an ounce of the
juice of Citrons gently warmed with the same broth at the time of the taking
thereof; for thus, much urine will be made in a short while after, full of a
sandy sediment and a gross viscide humor. Whereby you may certainly gather
that this kind of broth is very effectual to cleanse the passages of the
urine, neither in the interim, does it any harm to the stomach and other
parts by which it passes: so that it may be rightly esteemed a medicinal
nourishment. You may also profitably use this following powder.. nucleorum
mespilorum A diu^etick powder.
i. pull. elect. diamarg. frig. ii. 4. sem. frigid. majorum mund. glycyrhizae
rasae, i. sem. saxifrag. ii. sem. milii solis, genist. pimpinel. brusci and
asparag. an. i. sem. altheae, iss, succh. albiss. vi. fiat pulvis; let him take
a spoon full in the morning three hours before meat. Also some think that lie
made of the stalks and husks of beans is The lie made of the ashes of bean
stalks a diu^etick. Anodine glisters in the stone.
a good preservative against this disease. Besides the use of this following
glyster has done good to many.. fol. lactuc. scariol. portul. an. m. i. flor.
viol. and nenuph. an. p. i. fiat decoctio. ad lib. i. in colatura dissolve
cassiae fistulae i. mellis viol. and sacch. rub. an. iss. olei viol. iiii. siat
clyster. This which follows is the fitter to assuage the pain.. flo. cham.
melil. summitat. aneth. berul. an. p. ii. fiat decoctio in lacte vaccino; in
colatura dissolve cassiae fistul. and sacchar. alb. an. i. vitellos ovorum number.
ii. olei anethini, and chamaem. an ii. fiat clyster. In the interim let the
kidneys be anointed on the outside with unguentum rosatum, refrigerans Galen.
and populeon used severally, or mixed together, laying thereupon a double
linen cloth dipped in oxycrate. But if the concretion of the stone be of a
cold cause, the remedies must be varied, as follows;. terebinth. venet. i.
cort. citri ii. aquae coct. ii. fiat potio. Or else,. cassiaerecent. extract.
vi. benedict. lax. iii. aq. foenicul. ii. aq. asparag. i. fiat potio; let him
take it Remedies against the stone of the kidneys coming from a cold cause.
three hours before dinner: this following apozeme is also good.. rad. cyper.
bardan. and gram. an iii. bismal. cum toto, beton. an. m. ss. sem. milii solis,
bardan. urtic. an ii. sem. melon. glycyrhiz. ras. an. iiss. ficus number. 4. fiat.
decoct. ad quart. iii. in express^ colatura, dissolve syrup. de caphan. and
oxymilitis scillitici an. i. ss. sacchar. albis. iii. fiat apozema pro tribus
dosibus, clarificetur and aromatiz. cum. i. cinam. and ss. sant. citrin. let
him take four ounces three hours before dinner. Or else,. rad petrosel.
foenicul. an. i. saxifrag. pimp. gram. and bardan. an. m. ss. quatuor seminum
frig. major. mundat. and milii. solis an. ii. fiat decoctio, cape de colatura
lb. ss. in qua dissolve sacch. rub. and syrup. capill. ven. an. i. ss. Let it
be taken at three doses, two hours before meat. The following powder is very
effectual to dissolve the matter of the stone.. sem. petrosel. and rad.
ejusdem mundat. an ss. sem. cardui, quem colcitrapam vocant, i. let them be
dried in an oven or stone with a gentle fire, afterward let them be beaten
severally and make a powder, whereof let the patient take i. ss. or two
scruples with white wine, or chicken broth fasting in the morning by the space
of three days. Or,. coriand. praep. iv. anis. marathri, ganor. alkakengi,
milii solis, an ii. zinzib. and cinam. an. ii. turbith. electi i. cari ii.
galang. nucis moschat. and lapid. judiaci an. i. fol. senna mund. ad duplum
omnium, diacrydi^ ii. ss. misce, fiat pulvis: the dosis is about i. with white
wine three hours before meat. Against the flatulencies which much distend the
guts in this kind of disease, glisters shall be thus made;. malv. bismal.
pariet. origani, calament. Carminative glisters.
flo. chamaem. sumitat. anethi, an. m. ss. anisi, carvi. cumini, foenic. an.
ss. baccar. laur. iii. semin. rutae ii. fiat decoctio, in colatura, dissolve
bened. lax. vel diaphaenic. ss. consect. bac. lauri iii. sacchar. rub. i. olei
aneth. chamaem. and rutar. an. i. fiat clyster. Or,. olei nucum and vini mal.
an. lb. ss. aq. vitae. ss. fiat clyster; let it be kept long, that so it may
have the more power to discuss the wind.

CHAP. XXXVIII. What is to be done, when the stone falls out of the Kidney
into the Ureter.
OFt-times it falls out that the reins using their expulsive faculty force
down the stone (whose concretion and generation the Physicians Signs of the
stone stopping in the ureter.
by the formerly prescribed means could not hinder) from themselves into the
ureters; but it stays there either by reason of the straightness of the
place, or the debility of the expulsive faculty. Therefore then cruel pain
tormenteth the patient in that place whereas the stone sticks, which also by
consent may be communicated to the hippe, bladder, ^esticles and yard, with a
continual desire to make water and go to stool. In this case it behooveth
the Physician that he supply the defect of nature, and assist the weak
endeavors.

Therefore let the patient if he be able mount upon a trotting horse, and ride
upon Remedies (...) force ^own the stone sticking in the ureter.
him the space of some two miles, or if he can have no opportunity to do, so,
then let him run up and down a pair of stairs until he be weary, and even
sweat again; for the stone by this exercise is oft-times shaken into the
bladder; then presently shall be given or taken by the mouth such things as
have a lenitive and relaxing faculty, as oil of sweet almonds newly drawn
and that without fire, and mixed with the water of pellitorie of the wall and
white wine. Let frictions of the whole body be made from above downwards with
hot clothes; let Ventoses with a great flame be applied one while to the
loins, and another while to the bottom of the belly, a little below the
grieved place; and unless the patient vomit of his own accord, or by the
bitterness of his pain, let vomiting be procured with a draught of water and
oil luke warm; for vomiting has much force to drive down the stone, by
reason of the compression of the parts, which is caused by such an endeavor:
lastly, if the stone descend not by the power of these remedies, then the
patient must be put into a Semicupium, that is, a Halfe-bath, made of the
following decoction.. malvae, bismal. cum toto an. m. ii. beton. nasturt.
saxifrag. berul. parietar. violar. A decoction for a bath.
an. m. iii. semin. melonum, milii solis, alkekengi an. vi. cicer. rub lb. i.
rad. appii, gram. faeniculi, and eryngii, an. iiii. in sufficienti quantitate
aquae pro incessu; coquantur ista omnia inclusa sacco; herein let the patient
sit up to the navell: neither is is fit that the patient tarry longer in such a
bath than is requisite, for the spirits are dissipated, and the powers resolved
by too long stay therein. But on the contrary, if the patient remain as long
as is sufficient in these rightly made, the pain is mitigated, the extended
parts relaxed, and the passages of urine opened and dilated, and thus the stone
descends into the bladder. But if it be not moved by this means any thing at
all out of the place, and that the same total suppression of urine do as yet
remain, neither before the patient entered into the bath the putting of a
Cat^aeter into the bladder did any thing avail, yet notwithstanding he shall
try the same again after the patient is come out of the bath, that he may be
thoroughly satisfied whether peradventure there may be any other thing in these
first passages of the yard and neck of the bladder, which may withold the
urine; for the Cathaeter will enter far more easily, the parts being relaxed
by the warmenesse of the bath: then inject some oil of sweet almonds with a
syringe into the Urethra or passage of the yard; whilst all these things are
in doing, let not the patient come into the cold air. But here I have thought
good to describe a chair for a bath, wherein the patient may fitly sit.

The figure of a chair for a Semicupium.
A. Shows the whole frame of the Chair.

B. The hole wherein the patient must sit.

C. The Cisterne that holds the water.

D. A Cock to empty the water when it grows cold.

E. A Funnell whereby to pour in warm water.



There may also be another decoction made for the bath, as thus:. rad. raph.
alth. an. lb. ii. rad. rusc. petrosel. and asparag. an. lb. i. cumin. foenicul.
ameos an. iiii. sem. lini, faenug. an. vi. fol. marub. parietar. florum
chamaem. melil. anethi, an. m. ii. bulliant omnia secundum artem in aquae
sufficienti, and vini albi odoriferi exigua quantitate ad consumptionem tertiae
partis pro Semicupio. Also the same decoction may be used for glisters, adding
thereto two yolks of eggs, and four ounces of oil of lillies, with i. of
oil of Juniper, which has a certain force to assuage the pain of the stone
and colic. But a far less quantity of the decoction in a glister must be
used in these diseases, than usually is appointed in other diseases; otherwise
there will be danger lest the guts being distended should more press upon the
kidneys and ureters, troubled in some sort with inflammation, and so increase
the pain and other symptoms. This following cataplasme shall be profitably
applied to the grieved place, to wit, the loins or flanks and bottom of the
belly, for it is very powerful to assuage pain, and help forwards the falling
down of the stone.. rad. alth. and raphani, an. iiii. pariet. foenic.
senecionis, nasturt. berul. an. m. i. herniariae m. ss. omnibus in
aquasufficienti An Anodine Cataplasme.
decoctis, and deinde contritis, add olei aneth. chamaem. and pingued,
cuniculi, an. ii. farin. cicer. quantum sufficit, fiat cataplasma ad usum
praedictum. After by these means the Signs of the stone fallen out of the
ureter into the bladder.
stone forced out of the ureter is fallen into the bladder, the pain presently
(if there be but one stone, for sometimes more with much gravel do again fall
into the ureter) is mitigated, and then the patient is troubled with an itching
and pricking at the end of his yard and fundament. Therefore then unless he
be very weak, it is fit that he ride and walk a foot, and take iv. of
species Lithontribon in four doses with white wine, or the broth of red Cicers
three hours before dinner and supper. Besides, let him plentifully drink good
wine, and after he has drunk, let him hold in his urine as long as he can;
that so it being gathered in greater plenty, it may presently thrust the stone
out of the bladder with the more force: for which purpose you may also inject
the following liquor into the bladder.. syrupi capill. ven. i. aquae alkekengi
iii. olei scorpionum. ss. Let it be injected into the bladder with a syringe.

CHAP. XXXIX. What must be done the stone being fallen into the neck of the
bladder, or passage of the yard.
AFter the stone is fallen out of the capacity of the bladder, and stops in the
neck thereof, or passage of the yard, the Surgeon shall have a special care
that he do not force or thrust back the stone from whence it came, but rather
that he press it gently with his fingers to the end of the yard, the passage
being first made slippery by injecting some oil of sweet almonds. But if it
stop in the end of the Glans, it must be plucked out with some crooked
instrument; to which if it will not yield, a Gimblet with a pipe or case
thereto, shall be put into the passage of the yard, and so it shall be gotten
out, or else broken to pieces by the turning or twining about of the Gimblet,
which I remember I have diverse times attempted and done; for such Gimblets are
made with sharp screwes, like ordinary Gimblets.

The delineation of a Gimblet made to break the stones in the passage of the
yard, together with its pipe, or case.


The effigies of another lesser Gimblet.
Verily what Gimblets soever are made for this business, their body nor point
must be no thicker than a small probe; lest whilst they are forced or thrust
into the urethra, or urinary passage, they might hurt the bodies next unto them
by their violent entrance.



CHAP. XL. What course must be taken, if the stone sticking in the Urethra or
urinary passage, cannot be gotten out by the forementioned arts.
BUT if the stone be more thick, hard, rough and remote from the end of the
yard, than that it may be gotten out by the means formerly mentioned in the
precedent chapter, and if that the urine be wholly suppressed When the yard may
besafely cut.
therewith; then must you cut the yard upon the side with a straight wound: for
you must not make incision on the upper part for fear of a flux of blood, for
a large vein and artery lies thereunder; nor in the lower part, for so it
would scarce ever heal again, for that it is a bloodlesse part, and besides,
the continual and acride falling of the urine would hinder the agglutination:
wherefore the incision must be made on the side, on that part whereas the stone
most resists and swells out. For that part is the more fleshie; yet first the
end of the skin of the prepuce must be much drawn up so to cover the Glans,
which being done, the Urethra shall be tied with a thread a little above the
stone, that so the stone may be stayed there, and may not fall back again.
Therefore then, incision being made, the stone must be taken forth, and the
skin which was drawn more violently to cover the Glans is to be let go back
again; for so it will come to pass that a whole part of the skin may cover
the cut yard, and so it may be the more speedily united and the urine may
naturally flow out. I have by this means oft-times taken forth the stone with
the instruments here delineated.

Instruments fit to take the stone forth of the opened Urethra, or urenary
passage of the yard.


Then for the agglutination, if need require, it will be requisite to sew up
the lips of the wound, and apply this agglutinative medicine following.. tereb
venet. iiii. gum. elemi, i. sang. dracon and mastic. an. ss. fiat medicamentum
ut dictum est: then the An agglutinative medicine.
whole yard must be covered over with a repercussive medicine made of the
whites of eggs, with the powder of bole armenick, aloes, farina volatilis, and
oil of roses. Lastly, if need so require, a wax candle, or leaden string
anointed with Venice turpentine shall be thrust into the Urethra to hasten the
agglutination, and retain the natural smoothness and straightness of the
urenary passage, lest peradventure a caruncle how to hasten the agglutination.
grow therein.

CHAP. XLI. What manner of section is to be made when a stone is in a boys
bladder.
HItherto we have showed, by what means it is convenient to draw small stones
out of the ureter, bladder and passage of the urine; now will we briefly show
the manner of taking of greater stones out of the bladder, which is performed
by incision and iron instruments, and I will deliver the practice thereof first
in children, then in men, and lastly in Why the boy must be shaken before
cutting.
women. First therefore let the Surgeon take the boy (upon whom it is
determined the work shall be performed) under the arm holes, and so give him
five or six shakes, that so the stone may descend the more downwards to the
neck of the bladder. The must you cause a strong man sitting upon a high seat
to lay the child upon his back with his face from himward, having his hips
lying upon his knees. The How to place the child before dissection.
child must lie somewhat high that he may breathe the freelier, and let not the
nervous parts be too much stretched, but let all parts be loose and free for
the drawing forth of the stone. Furthermore, it is fit that this strong man,
the child's legs being bended back, wish the child, that putting his legs to
his hams, that he draw them up as much as he can, and let the other be sure he
keep them so; for this site of the child much conduces to well performing of
the work. Then let the Surgeon thrust two of the fingers of his left hand as
far into the child's fundament as he is able; but let him with his other hand
press the lower belly, first wrapping a cloth about his hand, that so the
compression may be the less troublesome, and lest inflammation should happen
rather by this means than by the incision. Now the compression has this use,
to cause the stone descend out of the bottom of the bladder into the neck
thereof under the os pubis, whither after it is arrived, it must be there kept,
and as it were governed by the command of your hand, lest it should slide from
that place whereto you have brought it. These things thus done, nothing now
remains, but that the Surgeon, with a wound some two fingers breadth distant
from the fundament, cut through all the flesh even to the stone on the left
side of the perinaeum. But in the interim, Where to divide the perinaeum.
let him beware that he hurt not the intestinum rectum; for it may, and usually
does happen, that whilst the stone is brought out of the bottom of the
bladder to the neck thereof, this gut is doubled in: now if it be cut with
your incision knife, it comes to pass that the excrements may sometimes come
out at the wound, and the urine by the fundament, which thing has in many
hindered the agglutination and consolidation of the wound; yet in some others it
has done little harm, because Nature very powerful in children.
in this tender age many things happen, which may seem to exceed nature: the
incision being made, the stone must be plucked forth with the instrument here
expressed.

Hooks to pull stones forth of childrens bladders.


The stone being drawn out, a small pipe shall be put into the wound, and
there kept for some space after, for reasons hereafter to be delivered; then
his knees shall be bound together, for thus the wound will the sooner close
and be agglutinated. General rules must be reduced to particular bodies.
The residue of the cure shall be performed by reducing the general cure of
wounds, to the particular temper of the child's age, and the peculiar nature of
the child in cure.

CHAP. XLII. How to cut men, for the taking out of the stone in the bladder.
Seeing we cannot otherwise help such men as have stones in their bladders, we
must come to the extreme remedy, to wit, cutting. But the patient must What to
be done before dissection.
first be purged, and if the case require, draw somebloud; yet must you not
immediately after this, or the day following hasten to the work, for the
patient cannot but be weakened by purging and bleeding. Also it is expedient
for some days before to foment the privities with such things as relaxe and
soften, that by their yielding, the stone may the more easily be extracted. Now
the cure is thus to be performed; The patient shall be placed upon a firm table
or bench with a cloth many times How to lay the patient.
doubled under his buttocks, and a pillow under his loins and back, so that he
may lie half upright with his thighs lifted up, and his legs and heels drawn
back to his buttocks. Then shall his feet be bound with a ligature of three
fingers breadth cast about his ankles, and with the heads thereof being drawn
upwards to his neck, and cast about it, and so brought downwards, both his
hands shall be bound to his knees, as the following figure shows.

The figure of a man lying ready to be cut for the stone.


The patient thus bound, it is fit you have four strong men at hand; that is,
two to hold his arms, and other two who may so firmly and straightly hold the
knee with one hand, and the foot with the other, that he may neither move his
limbs, nor stir his buttocks, but be forced to keep in the same posture with
his whole body. Then the Surgeon shall thrust into the urenary passage even to
the bladder, a silver or Why the probe must be ^it on the outside.
iron and hollow probe, anointed with oil, and opened or slit on the out
side, that the point of the knife may enter thereinto, and that it may guide
the hand of the workman, and keep the knife from piercing any farther into the
bodies lying there-under. The figure of this probe is here expressed.

Probes with slits in their ends.


He shall gently wrest the probe, being so thrust in, toward the left side,
and also Why the s^ame of the perinaeum must not be cut.
he who stands on the patients right hand, shall with his left hand gently
lift up his Cods, that so in the free and open space of the left side of the
perinaeum, the Surgeon may have the more liberty to make the incision upon the
probe which is thrust in and turned that way. But in making this incision, the
Surgeon must be careful that he hurt not the seame of the perinaeum and
fundament. For if that seame be cut, it will not be easily consolidated, for
that it is callous and bloudlesse, therefore the urine would continually drop
forth this way. But if the wound be made too near the fundament, there is
danger, lest by forcible plucking forth of the stone he may break some of the
haemorrhoide veins, whence a bleeding may ensue, which is scarce to be stopped
by any means, or that he may rend the sphincter muscle, or body of the
bladder, so that it can never be repaired. Therefore it must be made the space
of two fingers from the fundament, according to the straightness of the
fibers, that so it Where to make the wound to take forth the stone.
may be the more easily restored afterward. Neither must the incision thus
made, exceed the bigness of ones thumb, for that it is afterward enlarged by
putting in the Crows beak and the dilater, but more by the stone as it is
plucked forth. But that which is cut, is neither so speedily nor easily healed
up, as that which is torn. Then presently put into the wound some one of these
silver instruments delineated That which is torn is sooner healed than that
which is cut.
here below, and called by the name of Guiders, for that they serve as guides
to the other instruments which are to be put into the bladder; these are made
with a round and prominent head, whereby it may be put into the described
cavity of the probe, and they are noted by these letters A. A. then there are
others marked with the letters B. B. and called by the like name, and are to be
put under the former, being made forked at the end, that so it may, as it were,
embrace the end of the former.

The figures of Guiders of two sorts.


Now the probe is to be drawn forth, and the Guiders to be thrust and turned
up and down in the bladder, and at length to be stayed there by putting in the
pin; yet such Guiders as want a pin are fitter for the hand, and are by some
called spathoe. Then must they be held betwixt the Surgeons fingers. It will be
also necessary for the Surgeon to put another instrument called the Ducks bill
between the two Guiders into the capacity of the bladder, he must thrust it in
some what violently, and dilate it so thrust in with both his hands, turning it
every way to enlarge the wound as much as shall be sufficient for the admitting
the other instruments which are to be put into the bladder; yet it is far
better for the patient, if that the wound may with this one instrument be
sufficiently dilated, and the stone pulled forth with the same without the help
of any other.

The effigies of an instrument called a Ducks bill.


Which if you have not in a readiness, and the largeness of the stone require
more dilatation, then must you put in this Dilater, for being put into the
bladder, and the handle pressed together, it will dilate the incision as much
as you desire.

The figure of a Dilater shut and opened.


The wound by the help of this instrument being dilated as much as is
sufficient' then put in the straight Ducks-bill before described, or the
crooked here express.

Crooked Forcipes like a Ducks-bill.


The stone may be sought and taken hold of with these instruments, and being
taken hold on, the branches of the instrument shall be tied together, lest
they should suffer that to slide away which they have once taken hold of.
Neither shall the stone be suddenly plucked out, but easily shaken too and
again, and at the length gently drawn forth. Yet you must beware that you do
not press it too straightly in the forcep^, lest you should break it in
pieces: Some, lest it should slip away, when they have once taken hold thereof,
put their two fingers into the fundament, and put them above the stone that it
may not fall out, nor slip back again, which I think conduces much to the
easy extraction of the stone. There are others who strengthen this
comprehension by putting in on each side above and below these winged
instrument, so that the stone can slip forth on no side.

Winged instruments to hold the stone with the Ducks-beake.


The figure of another.


The figure of another winged instrument, the end of whose handle is fastened by
a screw, as also a bended iron plate which is marked with this letter A. for
the firmer holding thereof.


After the stone is by these means drawn forth, observe diligently whether it
be worn on any side, and as it were laevigated; for that happens by the
wearing or A note of more stones than one.
rubbing of one or more stones upon it, yet there is no surer way to know this,
than by searching with a Cathaeter. The one end of the following instrument may
supply the want of a Cathaeter or probe, and the other may serve for a scoop or
Cleanser.

A cleanser or scoop whereby you may search whether there be any more stones
behind, as also cleanse or purge the bladder from gravel, clots of blood, and
other such bodies, as use to remain behind after the drawing forth of the
stone.


For if other stones remain behind, they shall be drawn forth as the
former, How to cleanse the bladder.
which being done, the end of the instrument, which is crooked and hollowed
like a scoop or spoone, shall be thrust by the wound into the bladder, and
therewith you shall gather together and take out what gravel soever, clotted
blood, and the like refuse as shall be there, for that they may yield matter
for another stone. But if you find that the stone which is in the bladder be
too great, so that it may not be plucked How to break a stone that cannot be
taken out whole and at once.
forth without great and fearful rending of the bladder, it will be better to
take hold thereof with this Crows bill and so break it to pieces.

The effigies of a toothed Crowes-bill made neatly to break greater stones,
with a screw to force it together.


This Crows bill has only three teeth, and those sharp ones on the inside,
of which two are placed above, and one below, which is the middle-most, so that
it falls between the two upper. When the stone is broken, all the pieces
thereof must be taken forth, and we must have a special care, lest any piece
thereof lie hid; for that in time, increased by the access of a tough and
viscous matter, or conjoined with other fragments by the interposition of the
like matter as glue, may rise to a stone of a large bigness.

CHAP. XLIII. What cure must be used to the wound, when the stone is taken
forth.
THE stone being drawn out, if the greatness of the wound so require, it Of
sewing the wound when the stone is taken forth.
shall have one or two stiches with a needle and thread, leaving only so much
space as shall be sufficient to put in a pipe for the use we shall hereafter
show, your thread must be of crimson silk waxed, and let it not be too small,
lest it by binding should cut asunder the fleshy lips of the wound, or rot in a
short time, either by the moisture of the urine, or matter flowing from the
ulcer. Therefore you shall take up much flesh with the skin in sewing it, lest
the lips of the wound being torn, your labor prove in vain, and so you are
forced to trouble the patient with making a new one. Things being thus
performed, a silver pipe shall be put through the wound into the bladder,
whereof I have here given you diverse forms, that you may take your choice, and
so fit them to the wounds, and not the wounds to them, which often times in want
of instruments the Surgeons are forced to do, to the great harm of the
patient.

Silver pipes to be put into the bladder when the stone is drawn out.


These must have no holes in their sides (as those here expressed) but only in
their ends, that all the matter of the wound, and the filth gathered and
concrete in the bladder may flow and be carried forth this way. When clear
urine shall begin to flow out of the wound, there shall be no more need of a
pipe; therefore if you continue it, and keep it longer in the wound, there is
some danger lest nature accustomed to that way, may afterward neglect to send
the water through the urethra, or urenary passage. Neither must you forget to
defend the parts near to the wound with the following repercussive medicine,
to hinder the defluxion and inflammation, which are incident by reason of the
pain.. album. ovorum. nu. iii. pull. boli armeni, sanguinis dracon. an. iii.
olei ros. i. pilorum leporinorum quantum sufficit, make a A repercussive
medicine.
medicine of the consistence of honey.

CHAP. XLIV. How to lay the patient after the stone is taken away.
ALL things which we have recited being faithfully and diligently performed,
the patient shall be placed in his bed, laying under him as it were a pillow
filled with bran, or oate chafe, to drink up the urine which flows from
him. You must have diverse of these pillowes, that they may be changed as need
shall require. Sometimes after the drawing forth of the stone, the blood in
great quantity falls into the Cod, which unless Remedies for the Cod, lest
it gangrenate.
you be careful to provide against, with discussing, drying, and consuming
medicines, it is to be feared, that it may gangrenate. Wherefore if any
accidents happen in curing these kind of wounds, you must diligently withstand
them. After some few days a warm injection shall be cast into the bladder by
the wound, consisting of the waters of plantain, nightshade and roses, with a
little syrup of dried roses. It will help to temper the heat of the bladder
caused both by the wound and contusion, as also by the violent thrusting in of
the instruments. Also it sometimes happens, that after the drawing forth of the
stone, clots of blood and other impurity may fall into the urenary passage, and
so stop the urine that it cannot flow forth. Therefore you must in like sort
put a hollow probe for some days into the urethra, that keeping the passage
open, all the grosser filth may flow out together with the urine.

CHAP. XLV. How to cure the wound made by the incision.
YOu must cure this wound after the manner of other bloody wounds, What things
hasten the union.
to wit, by agglutination and cicatrization, the filth, or such things as may
hinder, being taken away by detergent medicines. The patient shall hasten the
agglutination if he lie crosse-legged, and keep a slender diet until the
seventh or ninth day be past. He must wholly abstain from wine, unless it
be very weak; in stead thereof let him use a decoction of barley and licorish,
or mead, or water and sugar, or boiled water mixed with syrups of dried roses,
maidenhaire, and the like. Let his meat be ponado, raisons, stewed prunes,
chickens boiled, with the cold seeds, lettuce, purslaine, sorrel, borage,
spinach, and the like. If he be bound in his belly, a Physician shall be
called, who may help it, by appointing either Cassia, a glister, or some other
kind of medicine, as he shall think good.

CHAP. XLVI. What cure is to be used to Ulcers, when as the urine flows
through them, long after the stone is drawn out.
MAny after the stone is drawneout, cannot have the ulcer consolidated,
therefore the urine flows out this way continually by little and little, and
against the patients will during the rest of his life, unless the Surgeon
help it. Therefore the callous lips of the wound must be amputated, so to
make a green wound of an old ulcer; then must they be How to make a fresh
wound of an old ulcer.
tied up, and bound with the instrument we term a Retinaculum or stay; this
must be perforated with three holes, answering to three other on the other
side, needles shall be thrust through these holes, taking hold of much flesh,
and shall be knit about it: then glutinative medicines shall be applied, such
as are Venice Turpentine, gum Elemi, sanguis Draconis, bole armenick, and the
like; after five or six days the needles shall be taken out, and also the
stay taken away. For then you shall find the wound almost glewed, and there
will nothing remain but only to cicatrize it.

The figure of a Retinaculum or Stay.
A. shows the greater. B. the lesser, that you may know that you must use
diverse according to the different bigness of the wound.



If a Retinaculum or stay be wanting, you may conjoyne the lips of the wound
after What to do in want of a stay.
this following manner. Put two quilles somewhat longer than the wound, on each
side one, and then presently thrust them through with needles having thread in
them, taking hold of the flesh between, as often as need shall require, then
tying the thread upon them. For thus the wound shall be agglutinated, and the
fleshy lips of the wound kept from being torn, which would be in danger if the
needle and thread were only used.

CHAP. XLVII. How to take stones out of women's bladders.
WE know by the same signs that the stone is in a woman's bladder as we do in
a man's, yet it is far more easily searched by a Cathaeter, How to search for
the stone in women.
for that the neck of the bladder in the shorter, broader, and the more
straight. Wherefore it may not only be found by a Cathaeter put into the
bladder, but also by the fingers thrust into the neck of the womb, turning
them up toward the inner side of the Os pubis, and placing the sick woman in
the same posture as we mentioned in the cure of men. Yet you must observe that
maids younger than seven years old, that are troubled with the stone, cannot
be searched by the neck of the womb, without great violence. Therefore the
stone must be drawn from them by the same means as from boys, to wit, by
thrusting the fingers into the fundament; for thus the stone being found out,
and the lower belly also pressed with the other hand, it must be brought to the
neck of the bladder, and then drawn forth by the forementioned means. Yet if
the riper years of the patient permit it to be done without violence, the
whole work shall be more easily and happily performed, by putting the fingers
into the neck of the womb, for that the bladder is nearer the neck of the
womb, than it is to the right gut. Wherefore the fingers thus thrust in, a
Cathaeter shall be presently put into the neck of the bladder. This Cathaeter
must be hollow, or slit on the outside like those before described, but not
crooked, but straight, as you may perceive by the following figure.

A Cathaeter upon which, being put into the Bladder, the neck thereof may be
cut, to draw out a stone from a woman.


Upon this instrument the neck of the bladder may be cut, and then with the
Dilater made for the same purpose, the incision shall be dilated as much as
need requites; yet with this caution, that seeing the neck of a woman's bladder
is the shorter, it admits not so great dilatation as a man's, for otherwise
there is danger that it may come to the body of the bladder, whence an
unvoluntary shedding of the water may ensue and continue thereafter. The
incision being dilated, the Surgeon putting one or two of his fingers into the
neck of the womb, shall press the bottom of the bladder, and then thrust
his crooked instruments or forcipes in by the wound, and with these he shall
easily pluck out the stone, which he shall keep with his fingers from slipping
back again. Yet Laurence Collo the Kings Surgeon, and both his suns (than
whom I do not know whether ever there were better cutters for the stone) do
otherwise perform this operation; for they do not thrust their fingers into
the fundament or neck of the womb, but contenting themselves with putting in
only the Guiders (whereof we formerly made mention) into the passage of the
urine, they presently thereupon make a straight incision directly at the mouth
of the neck of the bladder, and not on the side, as is usually done in men.
Then they gently by the same way thrust the forcipes hollowed on the outside
formerly delineated, and so dilate the wound by tearing it as much as shall be
sufficient for the drawing of the stone forth of the bladder. The residue of
the cure is the same with that formerly mentioned in men: yet this is to be
added, that if an ulcer grow in the neck of the bladder by reason of the
rending it, you may by putting in the speculum matricis, dilate the neck of the
womb, that fitting remedies may be applied with the more ease.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the suppression of the Urine by internal causes.
BEsides the formentioned causes of suppressed urine, or difficulty of making
of water, there are many other, lest any may think that the urine is stopped
only by the stone or gravel, as Surgeons think, who in this In suppression
of the urine we must not presently fly to diuretics.
case presently use diuretickes. Therefore the urine is suppressed by external
and internal causes. The internal causes are clotted blood, tough phlegm,
warts, caruncles bred in the passages of the urine, stones, and gravel; the
urine is sometimes suppressed, because the matter thereof, to wit, the serous or
whayish part of the blood, is either consumed by the feavourish heat, or
carried other ways by sweats or a scouring; sometimes also the flatulencie
there contained, or inflammation arising in the parts made for the urine and
the neighboring members, suppresses the urine. For the right gut if it be
inflamed, intercepts the passage of the urine, either by a tumor whereby it
presses upon the bladder, or by the communication of the inflammation. Thus by
the default of an ill affected liver, the urine is often times suppressed in such
as have the dropsy; or else by dullness or decay of the attractive, or
separative faculty of the reins by some great distemper, or by the default of
the animal faculty, as in such as are in a frenzy, lethargy, convulsion,
apoplexy. Besides also a tough and viscide humor falling from the whole body
into the passages of the urine, obstructs and shuts up the passage. Also too
long holding the water sometimes causes this affect. For when the bladder is
distended above measure, the passage thereof is drawn together and made more
strait: hereto may be added that the too great distension of the bladder is a
hinderance that it cannot use the Why the too long holding the urine causes
the suppression thereof.
expulsive faculty, and straiten it self about the urine to the exclusion
thereof; hereto also pain succeeds, which presently dejects all the faculties
of the part which it seazeth upon. Thus of late a certain young man, riding on
horseback before his Mistress, and therefore not daring to make water, when he
had great need so to do, had his urine so suppressed that returning from his
journey home into the city, he could A history.
by no means possible make water. In the mean time he had grievous pain in
the bottom of his belly and the perinaeum, with gripings and a sweatall over
his body, so that he almost sowned. I being called, when I had procured him to
make water by putting in a hollow Cathaeter, and pressing the bottom of his
belly, whereof he forthwith made two pints; I told them that it was not
occasioned by the stone, which notwithstanding the standers by imagined to be
the occasion of that suppression of urine. For thence forward there appeared no
signs of the stone in the youth, neither was he afterward troubled with the
stopping of his urine.

CHAP. XLIX. A digression concerning the purging of such things as are
unprofitable in the whole body by the urine.
IThink it not amiss to testify by the following histories, the providence of
nature in expelling by urine such things as are unprofitable in the whole body.
Mounsieur Sarret the Kings secretary was wounded in the right arm with a
pistol bullet; many and A history.
malign symptoms happened thereupon, but principally great inflammations,
flowing with much sanies and pus or quitture: it sometimes happened that without
any reason this purulent and sanious effluxe of matter was stayed in the
inflammation; whereof while we solicitously enquired into the cause, we found
both his stools and water commixed with much purulent filth, and this through
the whole course of the disease, whereof notwithstanding by gods assistance he
recovered, and remains whole and sound; we observed that as long as his arm
flowed with this filthy matter, so long were his excrements of the belly and
bladder free from the sanious and purulent matter: as long on the contrary as
the ulcers of the arm were dry, so long were the excrements of the guts and
bladder sanious and purulent. The same accident befell a Gentleman called
Mounsieur da la Croix, who received a deadly wound with a sword on the left A
history.
arm, though German Chavall, and Master Rasse most expert Surgeons, and
others, who together with me had him in cure, thought it was not so for this
reason, because the pus cannot run so long a way in the body, neither if it
were so, could that be done without the infection and corruption of the whole
mass of blood, whilst it flows through the veins; therefore to be more
probable that this quantity of filth, mixed with excrements and urine, flowed
by reason of the default of the liver, or of some other bowell, rather than
from the wounded arm: I was of a contrary opinion How the pus may flow from
the wounded arm, by the urine and excrements.
for these following reasons. First for that which was apparently seen in the
patient; for as long as the excrement and urine were free from this purulent
matter, so long his arm plentifully flowed therewith; this on the contrary
being dry, much purulent matter was voided both by stool and urine. Another
was, that as our whole body is perspirable, so it is also (if I may so term
it) confluxible. The third was an example taken from the glasses which the
French term Monte-vins (that is, Mount-wines) for if a glass that is full of
wine be set under another that is filled with water, you may see the wine raise
it self out of the lower vessel to the upper through the midst of the water,
and so the water descend through the midst of the wine, yet so, that they do
not mix themselves, but the one take and possess the place of the other. If
this may be done by art, by things only natural, and to be discernd by our
eyes, what may be done in our bodies, in which by reason of the presence of a
more noble soul, all the works of nature are far more perfect? What is it
which we may despair to be done in the like case? For does not the laudible
blood flow to the guts, kidneyes, spleen, bladder of the gall, by the impulse
of nature together with the excrements, which presently the parts themselves
separate from their nutriment? Does not milk from the breasts flow sometimes
forth of the wombes of women lately delivered? Yet that cannot be carried
down thither, unless by the passages of the mamillary veins and arteryes,
which meet with the mouths of the vessels of the womb in the middle of the
streit muscles of the Epigastrium. Therefore no marvel if according (...). de
^ac. affect. ^ cap. 4.
to Galen the pus unmixt with the blood flowing from the whole body by the
veins and arteryes into the kidneyes and bladder, be cast forth together with
the urine. These and the like things are done by nature, not taught by any
counsel or reason, but only assisted by the strength of the segregating and
expulsive faculty; and certainly we presently dissecting the dead body,
observed that it all, as also all the bowels thereof, were free from
inflammation and ulceration, neither was there any sign or impression of any
purulent matter in any part thereof.

CHAP. L. By what external causes the urine is suppressed; and prognostickes
concerning the suppression thereof.
THere are also many external causes, through whose occasion the urine may be
suppressed. Such are bathing and swimming in cold water; the too long continued
application of Narcoticke medicines upon the Reins, perinaeum and share; the
use of cold meats and drinks, and such other like. Moreover, the dislocation
of some Vertebra of the loins to the inside, for that it Why the dislocation
of a vertebra of the loins may cause a suppression of urine.
presses the nerves disseminated thence into the bladder; therefore it causes
a stupidity or numnesse of the bladder. Whence it is, that it cannot perceive
it self to be vellicated by the acrimony of the urine, and consequently it is
not stirred up to the expulsion thereof. But from whatsoever cause the
suppression of the urine proceeds, if it persevere for some days, death is to
be feared, unless either a fever, Why the suppression of the urine becomes
deadly.
which may consume the matter of the urine, or a scouring or flux, which may
divert it, shall happen thereupon. For thus by stay it acquireth an acride and
venenate quality, which flowing by the veins readily infecteth the mass of
blood, and carried to the brain much molests it by reason of that similitude
and sympathy of condition which the bladder has with the Meninges. But nature,
if A fever following thereon helps the suppression of urine.
prevalent, easily freeth it self from this danger by a manifest evacuation by
stool, otherwise it must necessarily call as it were to its aid, a feavourish
heat, which may send the abounding matter of this serous humidity out through
the skin, either by a sensible evacuation as by sweat; because sweat and
urine have one common matter: or else disperse and breath it out by
transpiration, which is an insensible excretion.

CHAP. LI. Of bloody Urine.
SOME piss pure blood, others mixed, and that either with urine, and then The
differences
that which is expelled resembles the washing of flesh newly killed; or else
with pus, or matter, and that either alone or mixed with the urine. There may
be diverse causes of this symptom, as the too great quantity Causes.
of blood gathered in the body, which by the suppression of the accustomed and
periodicall evacuation, by the courses or haemorrhoids, now turns its course to
the reins and bladder; the fretting asunder of some vessel by an acride
humor, or the breaking thereof by carrying or lifting of some heavy burden,
by leaping, falling from high, a great blow, the falling of some wait upon the
loins, riding post too violently, the too immoderate use of venery, and lastly,
from any kind of painful and more violent exercise, by a rough and sharp stone
in the kidneys, by the weakness of the retentive faculty of the kidneys, by a
wound of some of the parts belonging to the urine, by the too frequent use of
diureticke and hot meats and medicines, or else of things in their whole nature
contrary to the urenary parts; for by these and the like causes, the reins are
often times so enflamed, that they necessarily impostumate, and at length the
impostume being broken it turns into an ulcer, casting forth quitture by the
urine. In so great variety of the causes of bloody urine, we may gather whence
the causes of Signs of what causes they proceed.
this symptom may arise, by the depraved action of this, or that part, by the
condition of the flowing blood, to wit, pure or mixed, and that either with the
urine alone, or with pus. For example, if this bloody matter flow from the
lungs, liver, kidneies, dislocated Vertebrae, the straight gut, or other the
like part: you may discern it by the seat of the pain and symptoms, as a
fever; and the propriety of the pain, and other things which have preceded,
or are yet present. And we may gather the same by the plenty and quality, for
if, for example, the pus flow from an ulcer of the arm, the purulent matter
will flow by turns, one while by the urine, so that little is cast forth by
the ulcer; then presently on the contrary the urine becomes more clear. That
purulent matter which flows from the lungs by reason of an Empyema, or from the
liver, or any other bowell placed above the midriffe, the pus which is cast
forth with the urine, is both in greater plenty and more exactly mixed with the
urine, than that which flows from the kidneyes and bladder. It neither belongs
to our purpose, or a Surgeons office, either to undertake, or deliver the cure
of this affect. It shall suffice Cure.
only to note that the cure of this symptom is not to be hoped for so long
as the cause remains. And if this blood flow by the opening of a vessel, it
shall be stayed by astringent medicines; if broken, by agglutinative; if
corroded or fretted asunder, by sarcoticke.

CHAP. LII. Of the signs of ulcerated Kidneyes.
I Had not determined to follow or particularly handle the causes of bloody
urines, yet because that which is occasioned by the ulcerated reins or bladder
more frequently happens, therefore I have thought good briefly to speak
thereof in this place. The signs of an ulcer of the reins are, pain in the
loins, matter howsoever mixed with the urine, never evacuated by it self, but
always flowing forth with the urine, and residing in the botome of the
chamberpot, with a sanious and read sediment, fleshy and as it were bloody
fibers swimming up and Why the matter which flows from the kidneyes is less
stinking than that which flows from the bladder.
down in the urine, the smell of the filth is not so great as that which
flows from the ulcerated bladder, for that the kidneyes, seeing they are of a
fleshy substance, do far better ripen and digest the purulent matter than
the bladder which is nervous and bloodlesse.

CHAP. LIII. Of the signs of the ulcerated Bladder.
ULCERS are in the bottom of the bladder and the neck thereof. The signs of
an ulcer in the bladder are, a deep pain at the sharebones; Differences.
the great stinch of the matter flowing therefrom; white and thin skins
swimming up and down in the water. But when the ulcer possesses the neck of
the bladder, the pain is more gentle, neither does it trouble before the
patient come to make water, but in the very making thereof, and a little while
after.

But it is common both to the one and the other, that the yard is extended in
making of water, to wit, by reason of the pain caused by the urine fretting of
the ulcerated part in the passage by: neither is the matter seen mixed with the
urine, as is usual in an ulcer of the upper parts, because it is powered forth
not together with the urine, but after it.

CHAP. LIVE. Prognostics of the ulcerated Reins and Bladder.
ULCERS of the kidneies are more easily and readily healed than those of Why
ulcers of the bladder are cured with more difficulty.
the bladder; for fleshy parts more speedily heal and knit, than bloodlesse
and nervous parts. Ulcers which are in the bottom of the bladder, are
uncurable, or certainly most difficult to heal, for besides that they are in
a bloodlesse part, they are daily vellicated and exasperated by the continual
affluxe of the contained urine; for all the urine is never evacuated: now that
which remains after making water, becomes more acride by the distemper and
heat of the part, for that the bladder is always gathered about it, and
dilated and straightened according to the quantity of the contained urine:
therefore in the Ischuria, that is, the suppression or difficulty of making
water, you may sometimes see a quart of water made at once. Those which have
their legs fall away, having an ulcer in their bladder, are near their deaths.
Ulcers arising in these parts, unless they be consolidated in a short time,
remain uncureable.

CHAP. LV. What cure must be used in the suppression of the Urine.
IN curing the suppression of the urine, the indication must be taken from the
nature of the disease, and cause thereof, if it be yet present or not. Scopes
of curing.
But the diversity of the parts, by which being hurt, the Ischuria happens,
intimates the variety of medicines, neither must we presently run to
diuretickes, and things breaking the stone, which many Empericks do. For hence
grievous and malign symptoms often arise, especially if this suppression To
what suppression of the urine diuretics must not be used.
proceed from an acride humor, or blood pressed out by a bruise, immoderate
venery, and all more vehement exercise, a hot and acride potion, as of
Cantharides, by too long abstaining from making water, by a Phlegmon, or ulcer
of the urenary parts. For thus the pain and inflammation are increased, whence
follows a gangrene, and at length death. Wherefore attempt nothing in this case
without the advice of a Physician, no not when you must come to Surgery. For
^iureticks can scarce have place in another case, than when the urenary
passages are obstructed by gravel, To which and when to be used.
or a gross and viscide humor, or else in some cold country, or in the
application of Narcoticks to the loins, although we must not here use these
before we have first made use of general medicines: now Diuretickes may be
administered sundry ways, as hereafter shall appear.

. agrimon. urtic. parietar. surculos rubros habentis, an. m. i. rad. asparag.
mundat. iiii. gran. alkekengi, nu. xx. sem. malvae ss. rad. acor. i. bulliant
omnia simul in sex libris aquae dulcis ad tertias, deinde coletur. Let the
patient take iiii. hereof with i. of sugar candy, and drink it warm fasting
in a morning, three hours before meat. Thirty or forty Ivy berries beaten in
white wine, and given the patient to drink some two hours before meat, are
good for the same purpose. Also i. of nettle seeds made into fine powder and
drunk in chicken broth, is good for the same purpose. A decoction also of
Grummell, Goats saxifrage, pellitory of the wall, white saxifrage, the roots
of parsley, asparagus, acorus, bruscus, and orris drunk in the quantity of
some three or four ounces, is profitable also for the same purpose. Yet this
following water is commended above the rest to provoke urine, and open the
passages thereof, from what cause soever the stoppage thereof proceed.. radic.
osmund. regal. cyp. A diureticke water.
bismal. gram. petrosel. foenic. an. ii. raph. crassior. intaleol. iiii.
macerentur per noctem in aceto albo acerrimo, bulliant postea in aquae
fluvialis lb. x. saxifrag. crist. marin. rub. tinct. milii solis, summitat.
malvae, bismal. an. p. ii. berul. cicer. rub. an. p. i. sem. melon. citrul. an.
ii. ss. alkekengi, gra. xx. glycyrhiz. i. bulliant omnia simul ad tertias: in
colatura infunde per noctem fol. sen. oriental. lb. ss. fiat iterum parva
ebullitio, in expressione colata infunde cinam. elect. vi. colentur; iterum
colatura injiciatur in alembicum vitreum, postea tereb. venet. lucid. lb ii.
aq. vitae vi. agitentur omnia simul diligentissime. Lutetur alembicum luto
sapientiae, fiat destillatio lento igne in balneo mariae. Use it after the
following manner.. aq. stillatitiae prescriptae ii. aut iii. According to the
operation which it shall perform, let the patient take it four hours before
meat. Also raddish water destilled in balneo mariae is given in the quantity of
iiii. with sugar, and that with good success. Bathes and semicupia, or half
bathes artificially made, relaxe, soften, dilate, and open all the body;
therefore the prescribed Why the use of diuretickes is better after bathing. To
cleanse the ulcers of the kidneyes and bladder.
diuretickes mixed with half a dram of Treacle may be fitly given at the going
forth of the bath. These medicines following are judged fit to cleanse the
ulcers of the kidneyes and bladder. Syrup of maiden hair, of roses, taken in
the quantity of i. with hydromel, or barley water: Asses or Goats milk are also
much commended in this affect, because they cleanse the ulcers by their ferous
or whayish portion, and agglutinate by their cheeselike. They must be taken
warm from the dugge, with honey of roses or a little salt, lest they corrupt
in the stomach; and that to the quantity of four ounces, drinking or eating
nothing presently upon it. The following Trochisces are also good for the same
purpose.. quatuor sem. frigid. major. Trochisces to heal the ulcers of the
kidneies.
seminis papaveris albi, portulac. plantag. cydon, myrtil, gum. tragacanth. et
arub. pinear. glycyrrhi. mund. hordei mund. mucag. psilii, amygdal. dulcium,
an. i. boli armen. sanguin. dracon. spodii, rosar. mastich. terra, sigil.
myrrhae, an. ii. cum oxymelite, conficiantur secundum artem trochisci. Let the
patient take ss. dissolved in whay, ptisan, barley water, and the like; they may
also be profitably dissolved in plantaine water, and injected into the bladder.
Let the patient abstain from wine, and instead thereof let him use barley
water, or hydromel, or a ptisan made of an ounce of raisins of the Drink in
stead of wine.
sun, stoned and boiled in five pints of fair water, in an earthen pipkin well
leaded, or in a glass, until one pint be consumed, adding thereto of
liquorice scraped and beaten i. of the cold seeds likewise beaten two drams.
Let it, after it has boiled a little more, be strayned through an hypocras
bag, with a quarterne of sugar, and two drams of choice cinnamon added
thereto, and so let it be kept for usual drink.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Diabete, or inabilty to hold the Urine.
THe Diabete is a disease, wherein presently after one has drunk, the urine
is presently made in great plenty, by the dissolution of the retentive What
Diabete is.
faculty of the reins, and the depravation of immoderation of the attractive
faculty. The external causes are the unseasonable and immoderate use of hot
and diureticke things, and all more violent and vehement The causes.
exercises. The internal causes are the inflammation of the liver, lungs,
spleen, but especially of the kidneyes and bladder. This affect must be
diligently distinguished from the excretion of morbifick causes by urine. The
loins in this disease are molested with a pricking and biting pain, and there
is a continual and unquenchable thirst: and although this disease proceed from
a hot distemper, yet the urine is not colored, Signs.
red, troubled, or thick, but thin, and white or waterish, by reason the matter
Why the urines are watrish.
thereof makes very small stay in the stomach, liver, and hollow vein, being
presently drawn away by the heat of the kidneyes or bladder. If the affect long
endure, the patient for want of nourishment falls away, whence certain death
ensues. For the cure of so great a disease, the matter must be purged, which
causes or feeds the inflammation or phlegmon, and consequently blood must be
let. We must abstain The cure.
from the four cold seeds, for although they may profit by their first
quality, yet will they hurt by their diuretic faculty. Refrigerating and
astringent nourishments must be used, and such as generate gross humors, as
Rice, thick and astringent wine mixed with much water. Exceeding cold, yea
Narcotick things shall be applied Narcoticke things to be applied to the loins.
to the loins, for otherwise by reason of the thickness of the muscles of those
parts, the force, unless of exceeding refrigerating things, will not be able to
arrive at the reins; of this kind are oil of white poppy, henbain, opium,
purslain, and lettuce seed, mandrage vinegar, and the like: of which,
cataplasmes, plasters, and ointments, may be made, fit to corroberate the
parts, and correct the heat.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Strangury.
THe Strangury is an affect having some affinity with the Di^be^e, as that
wherein the water is unvoluntarily made, but not together at once, but by drops,
continually and with pain. The external causes of a strangury What the
Strangury is.
are, the too abundant drinking of cold water, and all too long stay in a cold
place. The internal causes are, the defluxion of cold humors into the urenary
parts, The causes.
for hence they are resolved by a certain palsy, and the sphincter of the
bladder is relaxed, so that he cannot hold his water according to his desire:
inflammation also and all distemper causes this affect, and whatsoever in some
sort obstructs the passage of the urine, as clotted blood, thick phlegm,
gravel, and the like. And because, according to Galens opinion, all sorts of
distemper may cause this discase, diverse medicines shall be appointed according
to the difference of the distemper. Therefore against a cold distemper
fomentations shall be provided of a decoction of mallows, Com. ad aphor. 15.
sect. 3.
roses, origanum, calamint, and the like, and so applied to the privities: then
presently after let them be anointed with oil of bays, and of Castoreum, and
the like. Strong and pure wine shall be prescribed for his drink, and that not
only in this cause, but also when the Strangury happens by the occasion of
obstruction, caused by a gross and cold humor, if so be that the body be not
plethoricke. But if inflammation together with a Plethora or fullness has
caused this affect, we may, according to Galens advice, heal it by
blood-letting. But if obstruction be in fault, that shall be taken Adaphor.
48. sect. 7.
away by diuretickes either hot or cold, according to the condition of the
matter obstructing. We here omit to speak of the Dysuria, or difficulty of
making water, because the remedies are in general the same with those which
are used in the Ischuria, or suppression of urine.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Cholike.
Whenever the Guts being obstructed, or otherwise affected, the excrements
are hindered from passing forth, and if the fault be in the small guts, the
affect is termed Volvulus, Ileos, and miserere mei, but if it be in the great
rguts, it is called the Cholick, from the part affected, which is the Colon,
that is, the continuity of the greater What Ileos, or iliaca pass^o is. What
(...) passio or the Cholick^^s. Lib. 3. Lib. 3. c. 43.
guts; but especially that portion of the greater guts, which is properly and
especially named Colon, or the cholicke Gut. Therefore Avicen rightly defines
the Cholicke, A pain of the Guts wherein the excrements are difficultly
evacuated by the fundament. Paulus Aegineta reduces all the causes of the
Colicke how various soever to four heads, to wit, to the grossness, or
toughness of the humors impact in the coats of the guts: flatulencies
hindered from passage forth: the inflammation of the guts: and lastly, the
collection of acride and biting humors. Now we will treat of each of these in
particular. Almost the same causes produce the grossness of humors, and
flatulencies in the guts, to wit, the use of flatulent, and phlegmatic,
^ough, and viscide meats, yea also of such as are of good nourishment, if
sundry thereof, and of sundry kinds be eaten at the same meal, and in greater
quantity than is fit. For hence crudity and obstruction, and at length the
collection of flatulencies, whereon a tensive pain ensues. This kind of
Cholick is also caused by the use of crude fruits, and too cold drink, drunken
especially when as any is too hot by exercise, or any other way: for thus the
stomach and the guts continued thereto, are refrigerated, and the humors and
excrements therein contained are congealed, and, as it were, bound up. The
Cholicke The manner of the Stone chollicke.
which is caused by the inflammation of the kidneyes, happens by the Sympathy
of the reins pained or troubled with the stone or gravel contained in them or
the ureters. Therefore then also pain troubles the patient at his hips and
loins, because the nerves, which arising from the vertebrae of the loins, are
oppressed by the weight of the stones and gravel, about the joint of the hippe
are disseminated into the muscles of the loins and thigh. Also the ureters are
pained (for they seem nothing else but certain hollow nerves) and also the
cremaster muscles, so that the patients testicles may seem to be drawn
upwards with much violence. Hence great, phlegmatic, and choleric vomiting,
and sweat of the whole body, all which do not surcease before that the stone,
or gravel shall be forced down into the bladder. Now vomiting happens in
this affect, for that the ventricle by reason of its continuity and
neighborhood which it has with the guts, suffers by consent or sympathy. For
the stomach is of the same kind or matter as the guts are, so that the guts
seem nothing else but a certain production of the stomach. Therefore if at
any time nature endeavor to expel any thing that is troublesome in the
kidneyes, ureters, coats How a hot distemper causes the Cholicke.
of the guts, mesentery, pancreas, and hypochondryes, it causes a Colicke with
pain and vomiting. A hot and dry distemper also causes the Colicke, producing
a pricking and biting pain by drying the excrements shut up in the guts, as
also by wasting as it were the radical humors of that place provided for the
lubricating of the guts. Acride, viscide, and tough phlegm causes the same.
There is also another cause of the Collicke which is not so common, to wit, the
twining of the guts, that is, when The folding of the guts the cause of the
colic.
they are so twined, folded, and doubled, that the excrements, as it were,
bound in their knots, cannot be expelled, as it manifestly happens in the
rupture called Enterocele, by the falling of the guts into the cod. Likewise
also worms generated in the Collicke Gut, whilst that they mutually fold or
twine themselves up, do also twine the Colon it self and fold it with them.
Also the too long stay of the excrements in the guts, whether it shall happen
by the peculiar default of the too hot and dry body of the patient, or by his
diet, that is, the use of too dry meats, or exercises and pains taken in the
heat of the sun, or by the greatness of business, the mind being carried
away, causes the Collicke, with headache, and plenty of vapors flying upwards.

I remember I once dissected the body of a boy of some twelve years old, who A
history.
had his guts folded with many as it were ties or knots, of the restrained, too
hard and dry excrements, the which he cast out by his mouth a little before his
death, which brought him to his end, being not helped in time by fitting
medicines. Now these are the causes of the Colic, according to the opinion of
the ancient and modern Physicians, of whose signs I judge it not amiss here
to treat in particular. You shall Signs whereby we know that the collic^
proceeds from this or that cause.
know the patient is troubled with the stone colic by the pain which is
fixed and as it were kept in one place, to wit, of the kidneys; by his former
manner of life, as, if the patient has formerly voyded stones or gravel
together with his urine; by the pain of the hips and testicles for the
formerly mentioned causes, and lastly, by that the patient casts forth by
stool or urine, for that the great and laborious endeavor of nature to cast
forth the stone which is in the kidneys, is propagated by a certain sympathy,
and like study of the neighboring parts stirring up the expulsive faculties
each to his work. The signs of a flatulent colic are, a tensive pain, such
as if the guts were rent or torn in pieces, together with a noise or rumbling
in the belly. The force of the shut up wind is sometimes so great, that it
rendeth or teareth the guts in sunder, no otherwise than a swines bladder too
hard blown up. Which when it happens, the patient dies with much vomiting,
because the stomach oppressed with wind, can contain nor embrace no meat. The
colic which is occasioned by the too long keeping in of the excrements, is
accompanied with the weight and pain of the belly, the tension of the guts,
headache, apparent hardness of the belly, and the complaint of the patient that
he has not gone to stool in a long time. That which proceeds from a choleric
inflammation, yields a sense of great heat and pulsation in the midst of the
belly, by reason of the veins and arteries which are in the pancreas and coats
of the guts, and there are the other signs of a Phlegmon, although also this
as it were inflammation may arise also from salt, acride and viscous phlegm,
which nature can neither expel upwards by vomit, nor downwards by stool, this
sundry times is associated with a difficulty of making water, for that when as
the right gut is inflamed the bladder is pressed by reason of their society or
neighborhood. The colic which proceeds from the contorsion of the guts shows
it self by the excessive cruelty of the pain, arising for that the guts are
not in their due site and place, and because the excrements by their too long
detension acquire a preternaturall heat; and this is the cause of the death of
many such as have Ruptures, for that the gut falling down from the natural
place into the Cod, being a preternatural place, is red oubled and kept thereas
it were bound, whereby the excrements being baked becoming more acridly hot
cause inflammation, and by raising up flatulencies increase the distension
through all the guts, until at length a deadly Ileos or colic arising, they
come forth at the mouth. For prognostics; it is better to have the pain in
the colic to wander up and down, than to be Avicen li. 3. Hip. aphor. 10.
sect. 4.
fixed; it is good also that the excrements are not wholly suppressed. But the
evil signs that here appear pronounce the affect either difficult or deadly.
Now these show that it is deadly, intolerable tormenting pain, continual
vomiting, cold sweat, coldness of the extreme parts, hickiting by reason of
the sympathy the stomach has with the guts, a Frenzy by the consent of the
brain with the stomach, and oft-times a convulsion by drawing the matter into
the nerves. But such as have griping and pain about their navil and loins,
which can neither be helped by medicine nor otherwise, it ends in a Dropsy.
The cure must be diversified according to the variety of the causes, The cure.
for the stone colic is cured by medicines proper to the stone; that which is
caused by an Enterocele, is cured by the only restoring the gut to its place;
that which is occasioned by worms, requires medicines fit to kill and cast
forth the worms. But that which proceeds from the weakness and refrigeration
of the guts and stomach, is cured by neating and strengthening medicines as well
applied out-wardly as taken in inwardly by the mouth, or otherways. The
beginning of the cure of that which is occasioned by tough phlegm and
flatulencies, is by the mitigation of the pain, seeing there is nothing which
more dejects the powers than pain. To this Baths and anodine fomentations.
purpose shall you provide bathes, Semicupia, fomentations of mallows,
marsh-mallowes, violet leaves, penyroyall, fennel, Origanum, the seeds of time
and faenugreek, flowers of camomill, melilore, and other such like, which have
power to heat, dry, attenuate, and rarifie the skin, so to dissipate the wind.
But all such must be actually hot. Also the belly may be anointed with this
following ointment.. olei cham^m. An ointment.
aneth. butyr. recent. an. i. sem. apii, petros. and galang. an. ss. aq. vitae,
ol. salviaaut thymi chimice extract. q. s. The following liniment is much
commended by Hollerius.. olei rut. and nardi, an. vi. galbani cum aq. vit.
dissoluti ii. liquefactis simul add Z^betaegr. iv. croci, gr. vi. fiat
linimentum. Also little bags made with millet, oats and salt fried with a
little white wine in a frying pan, shall be applied hot upon the belly and
flanks, and renewed before they grow cold. You may, in stead of these bags,
use ox Why glysters in the col^ick must be given in less quantity.
bladders half filled with a decoction of resolving things; as salt, rosemary,
thime, lavander, bay berries and the like: then inject a glyster being thus
made.. quatuor remol. an. m. i. orig. puleg. calamenth. an. m. ss. anisi, carui
an. m. ss. flor. aneth. an. p. 1. bulliant in hydromele ad lib. i. in qua
dissolve bened. laxat. mellis anthosati, sacc. rub. an. i. olei aneth. and
chamaem. an. iss. Let a glyster be made to be injected at twice; for the guts
being stretched out cannot contain the accustomed dosis of a glyster: also
this following glyster is much approved.. vini malvat. and olei nucum, an. iii.
aqua vitae, i. olei juniperi, and rut. per quintam essent. extract. an. iii.
Let this be injected as hot as the patient can endure. I have oft-times as by
miracle helped intolerable pain caused by the wind colic and phlegm with
this glyster. Avicen prescribes a carminative glyster made of hysope, origanum,
acorus, aniseeds and English galengall. Let the patient feed upon meats of good
juice and easy digestion, as broths made with the yolks of eggs, saffron, hot
herbs and a nutmeg; let him drink good wine, as Muskedine, or Hypocras made
with good wine so to heat the stomach and guts. For in Galens opinion, all
windiness is generated by a remiss heat. But if the pain shall continue, a
large Cupping-glasse shall be applied to the navill to draw and dissipate the
windiness; the belly shall be bound with strong and broad ligatures, to
strengthen the guts, and discuss the matter of flatulencies. The patients
taught by nature, use this remedy, whilst none admonishing them, they press
the belly with their hands in the bitterness of pain. But if the pain cannot
be thus appeased, we must come to such medicines as work Specific medicines.
by an occult property, as the dried gut of a Wolf, for a dram thereof made
into powder is given in wine with good success. That colic which is caused
by a choleric The cure of a choleric colic.
inflammation requires contrary medicines, to wit, bloodletting and a
refrigerating diet; potions made of Diacatholicon and Cassia dissolved in
barley water, also cooling glysters. Avicen prescribes narcoticks, for that
being cold, they are contrary to the morbi^ick cause which is hot and dry; such
are pills of Philonium. Also pills of Hyerapicra in the quantity of iv. with
opium and saffron, of each one grain, may be used. Also baths are appointed,
made of water wherein mallows, marsh-mallowes, violet leaves, flowers of white
lillies, lettuce, purslaine, have bin boiled, to correct the acrimonie of the
choleric and hot humors, whence the disease and symptom arises. That
colic which is like to this, and proceeds from salt, acride, thick and tough
phlegm, is cured, the humor being first attenuated and diffused, and at
length evacuated by medicines taken by the mouth and otherwise according to the
prescription of the learned Phisi^ian. But Avicen cures that which is
occasioned by the suppression of the hardened excrements, and twining of them
by meats which have an emollient faculty, such as humecting broths, as that
which is made of an old cock tired with running, and threshed to death, and so
boiled with dill, polypody and a little salt, until the flesh fall from the
bones; also he uses detergent glysters such as this which follows.. betae, m.
i. furfuris, p. i. ficus, nu. x. alth. m. i. fiat decoctio a^ lb. i. in qua
dissolve nitri and muriae an. ii. sacch. rub. i. ol. sesamini, ii. But if the
obstruction be more contumacious, you must use more powerful ones made ex
cyclamin. centa^rio, and hiera diacolocinth. ad ii. But if the obstruction do
notwithstanding remain, so that the excrements come forth at the mouth,
Marianus Sanctus wishes (by the counsel of many who have so freed themselves
from this deadly symptom) to drink three pounds of quicksilver with water
only. For the doubled and as it were twined up gut is unfolded by the weight
of the quicksilver, and the The force of quicksilver in the unfolding of the
guts. A history.
excrements are deprest and thrust forth, and the worms are killed which gave
occasion to this affect. John of S. Germans that most worthy Apothecary has
told me that he saw a Gentleman who when as he could not be freed from the
pain of the colliok by any means prescribed by learned Physicians, at length
by the counsel of a certain Germane his friend, drank three ounces of oil of
sweet almonds drawn without fire, and mixed with some white wine and pellitory
water, and swallowed a leaden bullet besmeared with quicksilver, and that
bullet coming presently out by his fundament, he was wholly freed from his
colic.

CHAP. LIX. Of Phlebotomie, or Blood-letting.
PHlebotomie is the opening of a vein, evacuating the blood with the rest of
the humors; thus Arteriotomie, is the opening of an Artery. What Phleboto^ie
is.
The first scope of Phlebotomie is the evacuation of the blood offending in
quantity, although oft-times, the Physicians intention is to draw forth the
blood which offends in quality, or either way by opening The^.
a vein. Repletion which is caused by the quantity is twofold, the one ad
vires, that is, to the strength, the veins being otherwise not very much
swelled; this Repl^tion twofold.
makes men infirm and weak, nature not able to bear this humor, of what
kind soever it be. The other is termed ad vasa, that is, to the vessels, the
which is so called comparatively to the plenty of blood, although the strength
may very well away therewith. The vessels are oft-times broke by this kind of
repletion, so that the patient casts and spits up blood, or else evacuats it by
the nose, womb, haemorrhoids, or varices. The repletion which is ad vires is
known by the heaviness and wearisomnesse of the whole body; but that which is
ad vasa is perceived by their distension The signs.
and fullness, both of them stand in need of evacuation. But blood is only to
be let by opening a vein, for five respects: the first is to lessen the
abundance of (...) scopes in letting blood.
blood, as in Phlethorick bodies, and those who are troubled with inflammation
without any plenitude. The second is for divertion, or revulsion, as when a
vein of the right arm is opened to stay the bleeding of the left nosthrile.
The third is to allure or draw down, as when the saphena is opened in the
ankle to draw down the courses in women. The fourth is for alteration or
introduction of another quality, as when in sharp fevers we open a vein to
breathe out that blood which is heated in the vessels, and cooling the residue
which remains behind. The fifth is to prevent imminent diseases, as when in the
Spring and Autumn we draw blood by opening a vein in such as are subject to
spitting of blood, the squinancie, pleurisy, falling sickness, apoplexy,
madness, gout, or in such as are wounded, for to prevent the inflammation
which is to be feared. Before blood letting, if there be any old excrements in
the guts, they shall be evacuated by a gentle glyster, or suppository, lest
the mesaraicke veins should thence draw unto them any impuritie. Blood must,
From whom we must not draw blood.
not be drawn from ancient people unless some present necessity require it,
lest the native heat which is but languid in them should be brought to extreme
debility and their substance decay; neither must any in like sort be taken from
children, for fear of resolving their powers by reason of the tenderness of
their substance, and rareness of their habit. The quantity of blood which is to
be let, must be considered by the strength of the patient, and greatness of
the disease: therefore if the patient be weak, and the disease require large
evacuation, it will be convenient to part the letting of blood, yea by the
interposition of some days. The vein of the forehead When and for what it is
necessary.
being opened is good for the pain of the hind part of the head; yet first we
foment the part with warm water, that so the skin may be the foster, and the
blood drawn into the veins in greater plenty. In the squinancie the veins
which are under the tongue must be opened assant, without putting any ligatures
about the neck for fear of strangling. Phlebotomie is necessary in all
diseases which stop or hinder the breathing, or take away the voice or speech,
as likewise in all contusions by a heavy stroke, or fall from high, in an
apoplexy, squinancie, and burning fever, though the strength be not great,
nor the blood faulty in quantity or quality, blood must not be let in the
height of a fever. Most judge it fit to draw blood from the veins most remote
from the affected and inflamed part, for that thus the course of the humors
may be diverted, the next veins on the contrary being opened the humors may
be the more drawn into the affected part, and so increase the burden and
pain. But this opinion of theirs is very erroneous, for an opened vein
always evacuates and disburdens the next part. For I have sundry times opened
the veins and arteries of the affected part, as of the hands and feet in the
Gout of these parts; of the temples in the Megrim; whereupon the pain always
was somewhat assuaged, for that together with the evacuated blood, the
malignitie of the Gout, and the hot spirits (the causers of the headache or
Megrim) were evacuated. For thus Galen wishes to open 13. meth. cap. ul^.
the arteries of the temples in a great and contumacious defluxion falling upon
the eyes, or in the Megrim or headache.

CHAP. LX. How to open a vein, and draw blood from thence.
THE first thing is, to seat or place the patient in as good a posture How to
place the patient.
as you can, to wit, in his bed if he be weak; but in a chair if strong, yet
so, that the light may fall directly upon the vein which you intend to open.
Then the Surgeon shall rub the arm with his Rubbing the arm.
hand, or a warm linen cloth, that the blood may flow the more plenitfully
into the vein. Then he shall bind the vein with a ligature Binding it before
we open the vein.
a little above the place appointed to be opened, and he shall draw back the
blood upwards toward the ligature from the lower part; and if it be the right
arm, he shall take hold thereof with his left hand, but if the left, then with
his right hand, pressing the vein in the mean time with his thumb a little
below the place where you mean to open it, lest it should slip away; and that
it may be the more swollen by forcing up the blood. Then with his nail he
shall mark or design the place to be opened, and shall anoint it being so
marked with butter or oil whereby the skin may be relaxed, and the lancet
enter more easily, and therefore the section may be the less painful. He
shall hold his lancet between his thumb and fore finger, neither too near, nor
too far from the point; he shall rest his other three fingers upon the patients
arm, that so his hand may be the more steady and less trembling. Then shall
he open the vein with an incision agreeable to the magnitude of the vessel,
and the indifferent thickness of the contained blood somewhataslant,
diligently avoiding the artery which lies under the basilica, and the nerve, or
tendon of the two-headed muscle, Why the basilica and median may not be opened
so safely as the cephalic.
which lies under the Median vein. But for the Cephalicke it may be opened
without danger. As much blood as is sufficient being drawn, according to the
mind of the Physician, he shall loose the ligature, and laying a little
boulster under, he shall with a ligature bind up the wounded part to stay the
bleeding; the ligation shall be The bindingup after blood-letting.
neither too strait, nor loose, but so that the patient may freely bend and
extend his arm; wherefore whilst that is in doing he must not hold his arm
straight out, but gently bended, otherwise he cannot freely bend it.

The figure of a Lancet to let blood withal.


CHAP. LXI. Of Cupping-glasses, or ventoses.
CUpping-glasses are applied especially when the matter conjunct and impact in
any part is to be evacuated, and then chiefly there is place for The use of
cupping-glasses.
sacrification after the cupping-glasses: yet they are also applied for
revulsion and divertion; for when an humor continually flows down into the
eyes, they may be applied to the shoulders with a great flame, for so they draw
more strongly and effectually. They are also applied under women's breasts, for
to stop the courses flowing too immoderately, but to their thighs for to
provoke them. They are also applied to such as are bit by venomous beasts, as
also to parts possessed by a pestiferous Bub^ or Carbuncle, so to draw the
poison from within outward. For (as Celsus says) a Cupping-glasse where it is
fastened on, if the skin be first scarified, draws forth blood, but if it be
whole, then it draws spirit. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
Also they are applied to the belly, when any gross or thick windiness, shut
up in the guts, or membraines of the muscles of the Epiga^trium, or lower belly
causing the Colic, is to be discussed. Also they are fastened to the
Hypocondry's, when as flatulency in the liver, or spleen swells up the entraile
lying thereunder, or in too great a bleeding at the nose. Also they are set
against the Reins in the bottom of the belly, whereas the ureters run down
to draw down the stone into the bladder, when as it stops in the middle or
entrance of the ureter. You shall make choice of greater and lesser
Cupping-glasses according to the condition of the part, and the contained
matter. But to those parts whereto these cannot by reason of their greatness
be applied, you may fit horns for the same purpose.

The figures of Cupping-glasses of different bigness, with little holes in
their bottomes, which shall be stopped with wax when you apply them to the
part; but opened when you would take them off, that so the air may enter in
with the more ease.


A Lancet.


Horns which without fire, by only sucking at the upper hole, draw from the
part lying under them.


CHAP. LXII. Of Leaches, and their use.
IN those parts of the body whereto Cupping-glasses and horns cannot be
applied, to those Leaches may for the most part be put, as to the fundament The
use of Leaches.
to open the coat of the haemorrhoide veins, to the mouth of the womb, the
gums, lips, nose, fingers. After the Leach being filled with blood shall fall
off, if the disease require a large evacuation of blood, and the part affected
may endure it, Cupping-glasses, or horns, or other Leaches shall be
substituted. If the Leaches be handled with the bare hand, they are angered,
and become so stomackfull as that they will not bite; wherefore you shall hold
them How to apply them.
in a white and clean linen cloth, and apply them to the skin, being first
lightly scarified, or besmeared with the blood of some other creature, for thus
they will take hold of the flesh, together with the skin more greedily and
fully. To cause them fall off you How to cause them to fall off.
shall put some powder of Aloes, salt or ashes upon their heads. If any desire
to know how much blood they have drawn, let him sprinkle them with salt made
into powder, as soon as they are come off, for thus they will vomit up what
blood soever they have sucked. If you desire they should suck more blood than
they are able to contain, cut off their tails as they suck, for thus they
will make no end of sucking, for that it runs out as they suck it. The Leaches
by sucking draw the blood not only from the affected part whereto they are
applied, but also from the adjacent and distant parts. Also sometimes the part
bleeds a good while after the Leaches be fallen away, which happens not by
scarification after the application of Cupping-glasses or horns. If you cannot
stop the bleeding after the falling away of the Leaches, then press the half
of a bean upon the wound, until it stick of it self, for thus it will stay;
also a burnt rag may be fitly applied with a little boulster and fit ligature.

The end of the seventeenth Book.
OF THE GOUT. THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. The description of the Gout.
THE Gout is a disease occupying and harming the substance of the Joints by
the falling down and collection of a virulent matter accompanied What it is.
by the four humors. This word Arthritus or Gout, is general for every joint
so affected; yet it enjoyes diverse particular names in sundry joints of the
body: as that which falls upon the joint of the Jaw, is termed Siagonagra,
Particular gouts.
for that the Greeks call the Jaw Siagon; that which affects the neck is
termed Trachelagra, for that the neck is in Greek termed Trachelos: that which
troubles the back bone is called Rhachisagra, for the spine is termed Rhachis:
that which molests the shoulders Omagra, for the joint of the shoulder is
styled Omos: that which affects the joints of the Collar-bones Cleisagra, for
that the Greeks call this bone Cleis: that in the Elbow, P^chyagra, for Pechis
signifies the elbow: the gout in the hand is called Chiragra, in the Hippe
Ischias, in the knee Gonagra, in the feet Podagra, for that the Hand, Hippe,
Knee, and Foot are in Greek termed Cheir, Ischion, Gony, and Pous. When as
there is great abundance of humors in a body, and the patient leads a
sedentary life, not some one, but all the joints of the body are at once
troubled with the Gout.

CHAP. II. Of the occult causes of the Gout.
THe humor causing the Gout is not of a more known, or easily expressed nature
than that which causes the plague, Lues venerea, or falling sickness. For it
is of a kind and nature clean different from that which causes Lib. 12. Cap.
12.
a Phlegmon, oedema, erysipelas, or Scirrbus; for, as Aetius says, it never
comes to suppuration like other humors, not for that, as I think, because
it happens in bloodles parts, but through the occasion of some occlut
malignity. Hereto may be added that the humors which cause the forementioned
tumors, when as they fall down upon any part, not then truly when they are
turned into pus or matter, do they cause so sharp pains as that which causes
the Gout, for the panic thereof is far more sharp, than of that humor
which breeds an ulcerated Cancer. Besides these humors, when they fall upon
the joints through any other occasion, never turn into knots, only that which
causes the Gout in the joints, after it has fallen thither, is at length
hardened into a certain knotty and as it were plaister-like substance to be
amended by no remedies. But seeing it offends not The resemblance of the Goat to
the Epilepsie.
the parts by which it flows down, (no more than the matter which creeping
upwards from the lower parts to the brain, causes the Epilepsie) as soon as
it falls into the spaces of the Joints it causes cruel pain, one while
with heat, another while with cold. For you may see some troubled with the
Gout, who complain that their pained Joints are burnt, there are others to
whom they seem colder than any ice, so that they cannot be sufficiently
heated to their hearts desire; verily you may sometimes see in the same body
troubled with the Gout, that the Joints of the right side will as it were
burn with heat, but on the left side will be stiff with cold; or which is
more, the knee in the same side to be tormented with a hot distemper, and the
ancle troubled with a cold. Lastly, there sometimes happens a succession of
pain in a succession of days, as the same joints will be this day troubled
with a hot, The strange variety of the Gout.
to morrow with a cold distemper, so that we need not marvel to see
Physicians prescribe one while hot, another while cold medicines against the
same disease of the same part and body. Also it sometimes happens that the
malignity of this humor does not only not yield to medicines, but is rather
made worse, so that the patients affirm that they are far better when they
have none, than when they have any remedies applied. For all things being
rightly done, and according to reason, yet the disease will come again at
certain seasons by fits: and hereupon it is said by Horace:

Qui cupit, aut metuit, juvat illum sic domus aut res,
Ut lippum pict ae tabulae, fomenta podagram.
Riches the covetous, and fearful so do please,
As pictures sore eyes, Bathes the Gout do ease.
Certainly such as have this disease hereditarily, can no more be helped and
thoroughly freed therefrom, than those in whom the matter of the disease is
become knotty, whereof Ovid thus speaks:

Tollere nodosam nescit medicina podagram.
Physic cannot the knotty Gout to heal.
These reasons have induced many to believe that the essence of this disease is
unknown, for there is a certain occult and inexplicable virulency, the author
of so great malignity and contumacy. Which Avicen seems to acknowledge, when
he writes that there is a certain kind of Gout whose matter is so acute and
malign, Lib. 3. sect. 22. tract. 2. cap. 3.
that if it at any time be augmented by the force of anger, it may suffice to
kill the party by sudden death. Therefore Galen himself writes that Treacle
must be used in all Arthriticall and gouty affects, and as I think, for no
other reason, than for Lib. de there. ad Pisonem c. 15.
that it dries, wastes and weakens the malignity thereof. Gordonius is of the
same opinion, but adds withal, that the body must be prepared and purged
before we use Treacle. Therefore the matter of the gout is a thin and virulent
humor, yet not contagious, offending in quality rather than quantity, causing
extreme pains, The matter of the gout partakes of occult malignity.
and therefore instigating the humors together with the caliginous and
flatulent spirits prepared or ready for defluxion upon the affected parts.
Therefore as the bitings of Aspes, and stingings of Waspes cause cruel pain
with sudden swelling and blistering, which is by the heat of the humors which
the poison has tainted, and not by the simple solution of continuity, seeing
that we daily see Shoo-makers and Tailors pricking their flesh with aules and
needles without having any such symptom. Thus the virulencie of the gout
causes intolerable tormenting pain, not by the abundance, because it happens
to many who have the gout, no sign of defluxion appearing in the joints, but
only by a malign and inexplicable quality, by reason whereof these pains do
not cease unless abated by the help of medicines, or nature, or both. The
recital of the following histories will give much light to that unexplicable
and virulent malignity of the matter causing the gout. Whilst King Charles A
history.
the ninth, of happy memory, was at Bordeaux, there was brought to Chappellaine
and Castellan the Kings Physicians, and Taste a Physician of Bordeaux, Nicholas
Lambert and my self Surgeons, a certain Gentle woman some forty years old,
exceedingly troubled for many years by reason of a tumor scarce equalling the
bigness of a pease, on the outside of the joint of the left Hippe: one of her
tormenting fits took her in my presence; she presently began to cry and
^oare, and A terrible fit.
rashly and violently to throw her body this way and that way, with motions and
gestures above a woman's, yea a man's nature. For she thrust her head between
her legs, laid her feet upon her shoulders, you would have said she had
been possessed of the Devil. This fit held her some quarter of an hour,;
during all which time I heedfully observed whether the grieved part swelled any
bigger than it was accustomed, whether there happened any new inflammation; but
there was no alteration as far as I could gather by sight or feeling, but
only that she cried out more loudly when as I touched it. The fit passed, a
great heat took her, all her body ran down with sweat, with so great
weariness and weakness of all her members, that she could not so much as
stir her little finger. There could be How an Epileptick fit differs from
the gout.
no suspicion of an Epileptick fit, for this woman all the time of her agony
did perfectly make use of all her senses, did speak, discourse, and had no
convulsion. Neither did she spare any cost or diligence, whereby she might
be cured of her disease by the help of Physicians, or famous Surgeons; she
consulted also witches, wizzards and charmers, so that she had left nothing
unattempted, but all art was exceeded by the greatness of the disease. When I
had showed all these things at our consultation, we all with one consent were
of this opinion, to apply a potentiall Cautery to the grieved part, or the
tumor. I my self applied it: after the fall or the Eschar very black and
virulent sanies flowed out, which freed the woman of her pain and disease for
ever after. Whence you may gather, that the cause of so great evil was a
certain venenate malignity, hurting rather by an unexplicable quality than
quantity; which being overcome and evacuated by the Cautery, all pain
absolutely ceased. Upon the like occasion, but on the right arm, the wife of
the Queens Coachman at Amboise consulted Chappellaine, Castella^ and me,
earnestly craving ease of her pain, for she was so grievously tormented by
fits, that through impatiency, being careless of her self, she endeavored
to cast her lelse headlong out of her chamber window, for fear whereof she
had a guard put upon her. We judged that the like monster was to be assaulted
with the like weapon, neither were we deceived, for using a potentiall cautery,
this had like success as the former. Wherefore the bitterness of the pain of
the gout is not occasioned by the only weakness of the joints; for thus the
pain should be continual, and always like it self; neither is it from the
distemper of a simple humor, for no such thing happens in other tumors of
what kind soever they be of; but it proceeds from a venenate, malign, occult
and inexplicable quality of the matter: wherefore this disease stands in need of
a diligent Physician and a painful Surgeon.

CHAP. III. Of the manifest causes of the Gout.
ALthough these things may be true which we have delivered of the occult The
first primitive cause of the gout.
cause of the gout, yet there be and are vulgarly assigned others, of which a
probable reason may be rendered, wherein this malignity whereof we have spoken
lies hid and is seated. Therefore as of many other diseases, so also of the
gout there are assigned three causes; that is, the primitive, antecedent and
conjunct; the primitive is two fold, one drawn from their first original and
their mothers womb, which happens to such as are generated of gouty parents,
chiefly if whilst they were conceived, this gouty matter did actually abound
and fall upon Lib. de aere, loc. and aqua. Lib. 1. cap. 17.
the joints. For the seed falls from all the parts of the body, as says
Hippocrates, and Aristole affirms lib. de gener. animal. Yet this causes not
an inevitable necessity of having the gout, for as many begot of sound and
healthful parents are taken by the gout by their proper and primary default;
so many live free from this disease, whose fathers notwithstanding were
troubled therewith. It is probable that they have this benefit and privilege
by the goodness of their mothers seed, and the laudible temper of the womb;
whereof the one by the mixture and the other by the gentle heat, may amend and
correct the faults of the paternall seed; for otherwise the disease would
become hereditary, and gouty persons would necessarily generate gouty; for the
seed follows the temper and complexion of the party generating, as it is
showed by Avicen. Another primitive cause is from unordinate diet, especially
in the Li. 3. feu. 22. tract. 2. cap. 5. Another primitive cause of the gout.
use of meat, drink, exercise and Venerie. Lastly by unprofitable humors which
are generated and heaped up in the body, which in process of time acquire a
virulent malignity; for these fill the head with vapors raised up from them,
whence the membranes, nerves and tendons, and consequently the joints become
more laxe and weak. They offend in feeding who eat much meat, and that of
sundry kinds at the same meal, who drink strong wine without any mixture, who
sleep presently after meat, and which use not moderate exercises; for hence a
plenitude, an obstruction of the vessels, crudities, and the increase of
excrements, especially serous. Which if they flow down unto the joints,
without doubt they cause this disease; for the joints are weak either by
nature or accident in comparison of the other parts of the body: by nature, as
if they be loose and soft from their first original; by accident, as by a
blow, fall, hard traveling, running in the sun by day, in the cold by night,
racking, too frequent venery, especially suddenly after meat; for thus the heat
is dissolved by reason of the dissipation of the spirits caused in the effusion
of seed, whence many crude humors, which by an unseasonable motion are sent
into the sinews and joints. Through this occasion old men, because their native
heat is the more weak, are commonly troubled with the gout. Besides also the
suppression of excrements accustomed to be avoided at certain times, as the
courses, haemorrhoides, vomit, scowring, causes this disease. Hence it is,
that in the opinion of Hippocrates, Aph. 29. Sect. 6.
A woman is not troubled with the gout, unless her courses fail her. They are
in the same case who have old and running ulcers suddenly healed, or va^ices
cut and healed, unless by a strict course of diet they hinder the generation
and increase of accustomed excrements. Also those which recover of great and
long diseases, unless they be fully and perfectly purged, either by nature or
art, these humors falling into the joints, which are the relics of the
disease, make them to become goutie; and thus much for the primitive cause. The
internal or antecedent cause is, the abundance The antecedent cause of the
gout.
of humors, the largeness of the vessels and passages which run to the
joints, the strength of the amandating bowels, the looseness, softness and
imbecility of the receiving joints. The conjunct cause is the humor it self
impact and shut up The conjunct.
in the capacities and cavities of the joints. Now the unprofitable humor, on
every side sent down by the strength of the expulsive faculty, sooner lingers
about the joints, for that they are of a cold nature and dense, so that once
impact in that place, it cannot be easily digested and resolved. This humor
then causes pain by reason of distension or solution of continnity,
distemper, and besides the virulency and Five causes of the pain of the gout.
malignity which it acquires. But it savours of the nature sometimes of one,
sometimes of more humors; whence the gout is either phlegmonous, or
^rysipilatous, oedematous, or mixed. The concourse of flatulencies, together
with the flowing down humors, and as it were tumult by the hinderance of
transpiration, increases the dolorificke distension in the membranes, tendons,
ligaments and other bodies wherein the joint consists.

CHAP. IV. Out of what part the matter of the Gout may flow down upon the
joints.
THE matter of the gout comes for the most part from the liver, What and how
the matter of the gout comes down from the brain.
or brain; that which descends from the brain is phlegmatic, serous, thin and
clear, such as usually drops out of the nose, endued with a malign and
venenate quality. Now it passes out by the musculous skin and pericranium, as
also through that large hole by which the spinall marrow, the brains
substitute, is propagated into the spine, by the coats and tendons of the
nerves into the spaces of the joints, and it is commonly cold. That which
proceeds from the liver is diffused by the great vein and arteries filled and
puffed up, and participates of the nature of the four humors, of which the
mass of the blood consists, more frequently accompanied with a hot distemper,
together with a gouty malignity. Besides this Gout by congestion.
manner of the gout which is caused by defluxion, there is another which is by
congestion; as when the too weak digestive faculty of the joints cannot
assimulate the juices sent to them.

CHAP. V. The signs of the arthritick humor flowing from the brain.
WHen the defluxion is at hand, there is a heaviness of the head, a desire to
rest, and a dullness with the pain of the outer parts, then chiefly
perceptible, when the hairs are turned up, or backwards; moreover, the
musculous skin of the head is puffed up as swollen with a certain oedematous
tumor; the patients, seem to be much different from themselves by reason of
the functions of the mind hurt by the malignity of the humor, from whence the
natural faculties are not free; as the crudities of the stomach, and the
frequent and acride belchings may testify.

CHAP. VI. The signs of a gouty humor proceeding from the liver.
THe right Hypocondrie is hot in such gouty persons, yea the inner parts When
the gout which proceeds from the default of the liver, assimulates the nature
of an oedema.
are much heated by the bowell; blood and choler carry the sway, the veins are
large and swollen, a defluxion suddenly falls down, especially if there be a
greater quantity of choler than of other humors in the mass of the blood. But
if, as it often falls out, the whole blood, by means of crudities degenerate
into phlegm and a wheyish humor; then will it come to pass, that the gout
also, which proceeds from the liver, may be pituitous or phlegmatic, and
participate of the nature of an oedema, like that which proceeds from the
brain. As if the same mass of blood decline toward melancholy, the gout
which thence arises Why the gout seldom proceeds from melancholy.
resembles the nature of a scirrhus; yet that can scarce happen, that
melancholy by reason of the thickness and slownesse to motion may fall upon
the joints. Yet notwithstanding, because we speak of that which may be of
these, it will not be unprofitable briefly to distinguish the signs of each
humor, and the differences of gouts to be deduced from thence.

CHAP. VII. By what signs we may understand this or that humor to accompany
the gouty malignity.
YOu may give a guess hereat by the patients age, temper, season of the year,
condition of the country where he lives, his diet and condition of life, the
increase of the pain in the morning, noone, evening or night, by the propriety
of the beating, pricking, sharp or dull pain; by numness, as in a melancholy
gout or itching; as in that which is caused by tough phlegm, by the sensible
appearance of the part in shape and color (as for example sake in a
phlegmatic gout, the color of the affected part is very little changed from
its self, and the neighboring well parts, in a sanguine gout it looks red,
in a choleric it is fiery or pale, in a melancholy livid or blackish) by the
heat and bigness which is greater in a sanguine and phlegmatic than in the
rest, by the change, and lastly by things helping and hurting. And there be
some, who for the knowledge of these differences wish us to view the patients
urine, and feel their pulse, and consider these excrements which in each
particular nature are accustomed to abound or flow, and are now suddenly and
unaccustomarily suppressed. For hence may be taken the signs of the dominion of
this or that humor. But a more ample knowledge of these things may be drawn
from the humors predominant in each person, and the signs of tumors formerly
delivered. Only this is to be noted by the way, that the gout which is caused
by melancholy is rare to be found.

CHAP. VIII. Prognostics in the Gout.
BY the writings of Physicians the pains of the gout are accounted amongst the
most grievous and acute; so that through vehemence of pain many are almost mad,
and wish themselves dead. They have certain periods and fits according to the
matter and condition of the humor wherein this malign and inexplicable gouty
virulency resides. Yet they more frequently invade in the Spring and Autumn;
such as have it hereditarie The gout frequent in the Spring and Fall. What gout
uncurable.
are scarce ever thoroughly free therefrom, as neither such as have it knotty:
for in the former it was borne with them, and implanted, and as it were fixed
in the original of life: but in the other the matter is become plaister-like,
so that it can neither be resolved nor ripened: that which proceeds from a cold
and pituitous matter, causes not such cruel tormenting pain, as that which is
of a hot, sanguine or choleric cause, neither is it so speedily healed, for
that the hot and thin matter is more readily dissolved; therefore commonly it
cease not until forty days be past: besides also, by how much the
substance of the affected part is more dense, and the expulsive faculty more
weak, by so much the pain is more tedious. Hence it is, that those gouty
pains which molest the knee, heel and huckle bone, are more contumacious. The
gout which proceeds of a hot matter, rests not before the fourteenth or
twentieth day. That which is occasioned by acride choler, by the bitterness of
Gal^und aphor. 49. Sect. (...).
the inflammation and pain causes a difficulty of breathing, raving, and
sundry times a gangrene of the affected part, and lastly death; and healed, it
often leaves a palsy behind it. Amongst all the gouty pains, the Sciatica
challenges the prime place, Why the Sciatica causes lamenesse.
by the greatness of the pain and multitude of symptoms; it brings
unquietness and watching, a fever, dislocation, perpetual lamenesse and the
decay of the whole leg, yea and often times of the whole body. Now lamenesse,
and leanness or decay of the part are thus occasioned, for that the decurrent
humor forces the head of the thigh bone out of the cavity of the huckle-bone;
this being forced out presses the muscles, veins, arteries, and that notable
and large nerve which runs along the thigh even to the furthest joints of the
toes, and by the way is diversely dispersed over the muscles of the whole leg.
Therefore because the head of the thigh is put out of its place, the patient is
forced to halt; because the vessels and nerves are oppressed, the nourishment
and spirits do not freely flow into the parts thereunder, whence proceeds
their decay. Yet it sundry times happens, that the head of the thigh being not
displaced, many halt because the viscide humor, which is naturally implanted
in that place and continually flows thither, both for the nutrition of these
parts, and the lubrication of the joint for quicker motion, is hardened by heat
and idleness, and the other unprofitable humors which flow down do there
concrete, and so intercept the liberty of motion. A gross and viscide humor
into what joint soever it falls and stays, does the same. For by concretion
it turns into a plaster like nature at or near the joint, possessing the
cavities thereof, and it depraveth the figure of the part, making it crooked
and knotted, which formerly was straight and smooth. Furthermore every
distemperature caused by the defluxion of humors, if it shall lie long upon
any part, depraves all the actions, and oft-times wholly abolisheth them; so
that there may be three causes of the leanenesse or decay Three causes of the
lamenesse or decay of the limoes.
of the joint by the gout, the obstruction or compression of the vessels,
idleness and a hectic distemper: but two of lamenesse, dislocation and the
concretion of an adventitious humor impact in the joint. If contrary to
custom and reason the pains of the gout do not go away or return at their
accustomed periods, most grievous and dangerous diseases thereon follow; for
the matter accustomed to flow down into the joints, if it seize upon the
substance of the liver, causes a Phlegmon; if it stay in the larger veins, a
continual fever; if it flow into the membrane investing the ribs, a
Pleurisy; if it betake it self to the guts and adhere to their coats, the
Colic or illiaca passio; and to conclude, it produces diverse other
symptoms, according to the diversity of the parts whereto it flows and
abides. For thus sundry How the gout turns into the palsy.
that have been troubled with the gout, become paralitick, because the matter
which formerly flowed down into the joints, stays in the substance and pores
of the nerves, and so hinders the spirit that it cannot freely in its whole
substance pass though them: hence therefore comes the resolution of the part,
whereinto the nerve is inserted. Old men can never be quite or absolutely cured
of the gout, for that the mass of their blood is so departed from its primary
and native goodness, that it can no more be restored, than dead or sowred
wine. The gout which proceeds from a cold cause, invadeth slowly and by little
and little, and is helped by the use of hot things; that which is from a hot
matter, quickly shows it self, and is helped by the use of cold things. Now,
although the gout more frequently returns in the spring Why the gout takes one
in winter and the midst of summer.
and fall, yet it comes in the midst of winter, the nerves being weakened by
the excess of cold, and the humors pressed out; otherwhiles in the midst of
summer, the same being diffused and dissipated. Lastly, it comes at any time or
season of the year, if those who are subject to this disease feed plenteously,
and do all things according to their own minds and desire. Those who are
troubled with the gout, feel and perceive change of weather, storms, raines,
snowes, winds and such like, before they come. A southerly constitution of the
air, for example, fills the body with humidities, and stirs up the humors that
lie quiet in the body, and therefore cause defluxions upon the weaker parts,
such as the joints, both by nature, as being without blood and flesh, as also
by accident, for that they a long time have been accustomed to be so
tormented; therefore their pains are increased in a wet season. Many of these
that are troubled with the gout, desire venery in the bitterness of their Why
such as have the gout upon them, do oft-times desire Venery.
pain, because the internal heat wherewith they then are inflamed does not
dissipate into spirits and air, as the feverish heat does, but dissolves, and
as it were melts down the seminall humor, which dissolved, flows to the
genitalls, fills and distends them. The same thing befalls carryage and
running horses, for in these by labor, much heat sends flatulencies to the
bottom of the belly. Yet venery is very Venery hurtful in the gout.
hurtful to such as are troubled with the gout, because it dissipates the
spirits and native heat, and increases the unnatural heat; whereby it
comes to pass that the nervous parts are weakened, and the pain
exa^perated. Rich men, that is, such as feed riotously on variety of dainties,
and in the mean space live idly and lazily are more frequently and cruelly
tormented with the gout than poor people, who live sparingly and hardly:
Wherefore there have been seen not a few of such rich and riotous persons, who
having spent their estates, have therewith changed their health, together with
their fortune and diet, and so have been wholly freed from the gout.

CHAP. IX. The general method of preventing and curing the Gout.
THose who desire to prevent the gout, must not glut themselves with meat, must
be quick to labor, and abstain from wine and Venery, or certainly must not
use them, unless for their healths sake, must vomit and purge at certain
times. Hippocrates writes, that boys are not troubled with the gout before the
use of venery. Yet at this day many Eunuchs are seen to have the Aph. 30.
Sect. 6.
gout, but especially those who abound with idleness and pleasure, yet these
we have heretofore mentioned are very effectual, not only for the prevention,
but also for the cure of the present disease. Yet we must diligently
distinguish the causes, what they be, and whence they may proceed, and oppose
thereto remedies contrary in quantity and quality. There are absolutely three
distinct causes of the gout; A tainture from the parents; a corruption of the
humors by diet and air; a native, or adventitious weakness of the joints.
Against these there is a twofold indication; the first Two general scopes of
cuting the gout.
is the evacuation and alteration of the peccant humors, the other the
strengthening of the weak joints. These two shall be performed by diet
conveniently appointed, purging, blood-letting, provocation of the
haemorrhoids, courses, vomit, sweat, urine, and fit application of local
medicines. Therefore, when the time shall come, wherein the gout accustometh to
return by course, the patient shall have a care of himself by a diligent
manner of diet, he shall lessen the matter of the disease by phlebotomie (if
that the gout shall arise from the blood) from the opposite part, Whence blood
must be let in the gout.
that by the same means revulsion and evacuation may be made; as if the upper
parts be inslamed, blood shall be drawn from the lower; if on the contrary
the lower, out of the upper, always observing the straightness of the fibers.
Thus the right arm being troubled with a gouty inflammation, the Sapheia of
the right leg shall be opened, and so on the contrary; but if this general
blood-letting being premised, the pain shall not cease, it will be requisite
to open the vein next to the pain, which I have often performed with happy
success.

Yet phlebotomi^ has not the like effect in all, for it is not availeable to
such as are continually and uncertainly troubled with gouty pains, or whose
bodies are What gouty persons find no benefit by phlebotomy.
weak and cold, wherein phlegm only is predominant. We may say the same of
purging, for though it be oft-times necessary, yet too frequently re-iterated,
it proves hurtful, futhermore, neither of these remedies is usually very
profitable to such as observe no order in meat and drink, which use Venery
too intemperately, who abound with crude and contumacious humors; whose joints
by long vexation of the disease, have contracted a hectic distemper and
weakness, so that they are departed from their natural constitution, and
suffered a great change of their proper substance. Wherefore as often as these
greater remedies shall be used, a Physician shall be called, who according to
his judgment may determine thereof. In what gout diet proves more effectual
than medicin^s.
For oft-times diet proves more availeable than medicines: therefore the
Patient (if the matter of the gout be hot) shall either drink no wine at all,
or else very much allayed, that is, as much as his custom and the constitution
of his stomach can endure. A fit time for purging and bleeding is the Spring
and Autumn, because, according to the opinion of Hyppocrates, gouts reign
chiefly in these seasons; Aphor. 55. Sect. 6.
in Autumn, for that the heat of the precedent Summer debilitareth the
digestive faculty, the native heat being dissipared; as also the eating of
Summer fruits has heaped up plenty of crude humors in the body, which easily
flow down into the passages of the joints opened and dilated by the Summers
heat: add hereunto that the inequality or variableness of Autumn weakeneth
all the nervous parts, and consequently the joints. But in the Spring, for that
the humors forced inwards by the coldness of the winter, are drawn forth from
the center to the circumference of the body, and being attenuated, fall into
the joints upon a very small occasion. Therefore there is great both necessity
and opportunity for evacuation, which if it shall not avert the accustomed fit,
yet it will make it more gentle and easy.

CHAP. X. Of Vomiting.
VOmiting is by all the Ancients exceedingly commended, not only for To what
gout vomiting is to be used.
the prevention, but also for the cure, especially when as the matter flows
from the brain and stomach; for the phlegmatic, serous and choleric
humors, which usually flow from the joints, are excluded and diverted by
vomit, and also there is attenuation of that phlegm, which being more thick
and viscide, adhereth to the roots of the stomach: yet you What time the
^ittest therefore.
must consider and see that the patient be not of too weak a stomach and
brain, for in this case vomiting is to be suspected. For the time, such as
have excrementitious humors flowing down to the stomach through any occasion,
as by exercise and motion, must vomit before they eat; on the contrary, such
as are overcharged with an old congestion of humors, must vomit after they
have eaten something. Certainly it is safer vomiting after meat, then it is
before. For the dry stomach cannot, unless with great contention and
straining, free it self from the viscide humors impact in the coats thereof;
and hence there is no small danger of breaking a vein or artery in the Chest
or Lungs, especially if the patient be strait chested, and long necked, the
season cold, and he unaccustomed to such evacuation. I remember that with this
kind of remedy I cured a certain Gentleman of Geneva, A history.
grievously molested with a cruel pain in his shoulder, and thereby impotent
to use his left arm; the Physicians and Surgeons of Lions seemed to omit
nothing else for his cure. For they had used purging, phlebotomie, hunger, a
Diet drink of Gudiacum and China (although his disease was not occasioned by
the Lues Venerea) and diverse other to pick medicines, neither yet did they any
thing avail. Now learning by him that he was not apt to vomit, but that it
was difficult to him, I wished him How to make one vomit easily.
to feed more plentifully, and that of many and sundry meats, as fat meat,
onions, leeks; with sundry drinks, as bear, ptisan, sweet and sharp wine, and
that he should as it were overcharge his stomach at this meal, and presently
after get him to his bed; for so it would happen, that nature not enduring so
great confusion and perturbation of meats and drinks, whereof some were
corrupted already in the stomach, and othersome scarce altered at all, nature
not enduring this confusion and perturbation, would easily and of its own
accord provoke the stomach to vomit; which that it might the better succeed, he
should help forward natures endeavor, by thrusting his finger or a feather
into his throat, that so the thick and tenacious phlegm might by the same
means be evacuated: and not content to do thus once, I wished him to do the
like the second and third day following, for so it verifieth that saying of
Hippocrates: The second and third day exclude the relics of the first:
afterward, that he Lib. de^rat. victis.
should vomit twice a month: chaw mastick fasting: rub his neck and the
pained part with aqu^ vitae, stengthened by infusing therein lavender,
rosemary, and cloves grossly beaten: confirm his arm by indifferent exercise:
he performed all this, and so became free from his pain, and recovered the
use of his arm. Those who do not like such plentiful feeding, shall drink a
great quantity of warm water wherein radish roots have been boiled, and they
shall have a care lest by using their stomachs to this excretion by vomit they
weaken the digestive and retentive faculty thereof. Wherefore such as can
naturally, shall think it sufficient to vomit twice a month.

CHAP. XI. The other general remedies for the Gout.
THe defluxion of serous humors is very ^itly diverted from the joints by How
Diuretics are good for the gout.
the urine by the use of diureticke medicines. Therefore the roots of Sorrel,
parsley, ruscus, asparagus, and grass, and the like, shall be boiled in broth,
and given to such as have the gout: for when the urine flows much and thick,
the pain is lessened. Many have found benefit by Issues or ^on^anels.
issues; for the Arthritick malignity flows forth of these, as by rivelets:
experience shows it in such as are troubled with the Lues Venere^, for in
those that you cannot overcome the malignity by the proper antidote, that is,
Quicksilver, they feel no greater ease of the pain, than by application of
Causticks, and making of issues. They shall be made in sundry places according
to the difference of the pained joints, Where to be made.
to wit, in the beginning of the neck, if the defluxion proceed from the
brain, and fall into the joints of the Collar-bones or shoulder; if into the
Elbow or hand, under the muscle Epomis; if into the hip, knees, and feet, some
three fingers breadth under the knee, on the inside: for thus there will follow
more plentiful evacuation, by reason that the Saphei^ runs down that way.
Yet if the patient be troubled with much business, and must travel much on
horseback, then shall they be made An actual cautery.
on the outside of the leg, between the two bones thereof, that so they may
trouble him the less in riding. If any had rather use an actual cautery, let
him take such an one as is triangular and sharp, that so he may with more
speed and less pain perform that which he intends, and let him thrust it
through a plate of iron which has a hole therein, and let the place be marked
lest he should ^rre; the ulcer shall be kept open by putting in a pill of
gold, silver, lint, of the root of orris, hermodactiles, gentian, wax,
wherewith some powder of vitrioll, mercury or alum shall be incorporated,
lest it should fill up with flesh sooner than the Physician shall think Pills.
fit. In the mean space, the head, oft-times the original of the evil, shall
be evacuated by taking in the winter the pills cochiae, and de Assa^ereth; but
in summer sine quibus, or Imperiales, before the Full of the Moon.. pull. hyer^
simp. i. agar. recent. troch. and rhei an. ii. myroball. chebul. ss. tamarind.
ii. cum infusione senae, fiat massa de qu^ formentur pill. vi. pro dram; let
the patient take two before supper every eighth day; the day after he shall
drink some broth of the decoction of Cicers and the Diureticke roots. Also
these following pills will be good to purge the phlegmatic and serous
humor.. pillular. foetid. and de hermodactil. an. ss. formentur cum succo vel
syrup. rosar. solut. Or else,. al^es. iii. agarici trochis. and rhei, an. i.
massae pilul. arthrit. and de hermodact. an. ii. diacrid. i. cum me^^e rosat^
fiat massa, capiat pondus, i. as the Physician shall think fit, by whose
advice these shall be used and changed as occasion shall offer it self, and the
nature of the humor causing the disease. The day after the purging, the
patient shall take three hours before meat half a dram of Treacle, to
strengthen the entrails: pills are preferred before liquid Common pills with
the addition of scamony.
medicines, for that by their long stay in the stomach they easily attract the
noxious humor from the brain, and the other more distant parts. I have known
some Physicians who mixing with ordinary pills a good quantity of scamony, as 7.
or 8. grains, with a little ginger, lest it should hurt the stomach, have
purged by stool a great quantity Treacle, how useful in the gout.
of serous humors; the day following they gave barley cream to correct the
harm which the scamonie may have done to the stomach. Others for the same
purpose give treacle, which does not only strengthen the entrails, but also
weakens the virulencie of the gouty malignity; the orifice of the ventricle
must be shut after meat, that so the vapors ascending to the brain may be
restrained: for this Cephalic fumigation.
purpose common Drige powder, Marmelate, or conserve of roses are good. In a
wet season use Cephalicke perfumes thus made.. thu^is, vernicis, and mastich.
an. i. granorum juniperi, baccarum lauri, an. ss. ligni aloes ii. ass^ odora^^
i. ss. Let them be grossly beaten; let the fume be received in row or carded
Cotton, and so applied to the head. Also the excrementitious humors shall be
dried up by the following powder strowed on the patients head for fifteen
days.. fol. ros. rub. senae, staechad. utriusque an. m. ss. milii, iiii.
furfuris loti in vino albo, iii. florum chamaem. melil. an. p 1. sem. anisi, i.
salis com. ii. fiat omnium pulvis. Let it be put into linen Cephalicke bags
bags, with which, being warmed at the fire in a drying pan, and kept with
stirring, the head shall be rubbed. Let the following medicine be chawed, and
kept in the mouth in the form of a masticatory, in the time of the falling
down of the defluxion.. cubelarum, nucis moschat. glycyrrhiz. anis. an. i.
pyrethri, ii. mastich. rad. A masticatory.
st^phisagr. eryngii, an. ii. Let them all be made into powder, and mixed
together, and tied up in a little taffaty to the bigness of a hasell nut, and
let them be rolled up and down the mouth with the tongue to cause spitting or
salivation. Working with the hands, and frictions of the arms, especially in
the morning after the evacuation of the excrements, are good for such as are
troubled with the Gout in the feet, for so, it not only causes revulsion from
the feet, but also the resolution of that which is unprofitable.

CHAP. XII. What Diet is convenient for such as have the Gout.
AFTER the body is once fed, they must not return to meat before that the
concoction be perfected in the stomach, lest the liver be forced to draw by
the mesaraicke veins that which is yet crude and ill digested, and as it were
forced thence. Whence the depravation of the nutriment of the whole body; for
the following decoctions do not amend The fault of the first concoction, is
not amended in the alter.
the default of the first. Let them make choice of meat of good juice and
easy digestion, roasted for such as are phlegmatic, but boiled for such as
are choleric: as they shall shun much variety at one meal, so must they
eschew the use of pulses, milk-meats, sallads, and sharp things, as verjuice,
vinegar, the juice of oranges, and citrons. They shall not eat unless they be
hungry, and shall desist therefrom before they be fully satisfied, if it be but
for this, that whilst the native heat is busied in the digestion of meat
plenteously eaten, it is diverted from the concoction of the noxious humors.
The flesh of great foul, as swans, cranes, peacockes are not of laudible
juice, and are with more difficulty digested in the stomach. Some of the
ancients have disallowed of the eating of Capons, and the like birds, because
they are subject Capons subject to the Gout.
to be troubled with the Gout in the feet. Fishes are to be shunned, for
that they heap up excrementitious humors, and are easily corrupted in the
stomach, yea and relaxe it by continual use. Of the flesh of beasts veale is
most to be commended, for that it breeds temperate blood, and laudible juice,
and is easily digested. Neither in the mean time is mutton to be found fault
withal. But the like hunger or abstinence must not be appointed to all men
troubled with the Gout, for such as are of a sanguine and choleric
complexion, because they are endued with much, and Choleric person cannot
away with long fasting.
much wasting heat, are to be refreshed with more plentiful nourishment; for
hunger sharpens choler, and so augments their pains; neither in the interim
must they be fed with too moist meats, for too much moisture, besides that it
is the author of putrefaction, will cause defluxions, and draw down the matter
to the joints. Therefore the Choleric humor must be incrassated and
refrigerated by taking things inwardly, and applying things outwardly, lest by
its tenuity it should fall down into the grieved parts. To this purpose
conduce brothes altered with lettuce, purslaine, sorrel, and the like herbs,
and barley creames made with a decoction of the four cold seeds. Phlegmatic
bodies, by reason that they have not so vigorous Phlegmatic bodies infasting
feed upon themselves.
heat, do as it were carry their provant about them, wherefore they must not
be fed, neither with many nor with moist meats. All that are troubled with the
Gout must shun those things which are hard of digestion, and which are soon
corrupted, for they all have a certain remiss fever which diminishes the
native heat, and makes the meats apt to putrefie. Too plentiful drinking not
only of wine, but also of any other liquor is to be avoided. For by too great
a quantity of moisture the meat floats in the stomach, and the native heat is
in some sort extinguished, whence proceed crudities. Some physicians comm^nd
the use of white wine, for that it provokes urine, which is not altogether to
be disallowed if so be that the body be free from excrements, otherwise by
this, as it were a vehicle, especially if the temperature White wine not good
for the gout.
of the body be somewhat more hot, they shall be carried down into the joints.
Therefore in such a case I should rather advise them to use clarer, which is
somewhat Claret may be the safelier drunk.
weak and astringent, for that it does not so much offend the head nor joints,
and it shuts and strengthens the orifices of the vessels. Yet it will be more
convenient wholly to abstain therefrom, and in stead thereof to drink a
Hydromel made after this manner.. aquae lb. iiii. mellis opt. q. i. bulliant ad
consumptionem lb. i. been despumando, Hydrom^ most safely.
add ad finem, salviae p. i. imo si ^ger sit pituitosus, cinamomi aut
caryophyllorum momentum. For cholerike persons make a sugared water thus.. aquae
fontis lb. iiii. sacchari b. ss. colentur per manicam sine ^bullitione, addendo
in fine cinamomi. ii. For thus the stomach shall also be strengthened; also he
may drink ptisan, wherein at A (...)(...).
the end of the decoction shall be boiled some dried roses, or else some
syrup of pomegranates added thereto, lest it should offend the stomach; as
soon as it comes from off the fire, let it stand and settle, and then strain
it through an Hippocras bag, or clean linen cloth.

CHAP. XIII. How to strengthen the Joints.
IT is a matter of much consequence for the prevention of this evil, to
strengten the joints, whereby they may be able to resist the humors
preternaturally falling down upon them. Wherefore it is good morning and
evening to rub them with Oleum O^phacinum, that is, oil made of olives not
come to their perfect maturitie; or with oil of roses mixed with common salt
finely poudered. It may also be mixed with common oil, adding thereto the
powder of hearts horn, as that which has an astringent and drying faculty.
Also it is good to bath them in this following Lie.. cort. granat. nucum
cupres. A^ ^tation to strengthen the joints.
gallarum, sumach. cortic. querni, an. ii. salis com. alumin. roch. an. i.
salviae, ^^rismar. lavendul. lauri, ivae arthretic. an. m. i. rosar. rub. m.
ss. bulliant omnia in sex lb. vini crassi and astringentis and lixivio parato
ex aquae chalibeatae and cinere querno. Then ^oment the part with sponges or
cotton clothes; after this fomentation shall be carefully wiped and dried with
hot linen clothes, taking heed of cold. The juice of unripe The juice of hawes
with oxycrate.
Hawes tempered with oxycrate is a singular thing for this purpose. But if you
desire to strengthen the joints weakened by a cold cause, then,. salviae,
r^rism. thymi, lavendul. laur. absinth. an. m. i. caryophyl. zinzib. piperis,
conquas^atorum an. i. infundantur in aquae vitae and vini rubri astringenti^,
an. lb. iiii. bulliant leniter in balneo mariae. With this liquor foment the
joints morning and evening. Some think it good to strengthen the joints, to
tread grapes in vintage time, which if they be not able to do, then let them
wash their feet in the Must or new pressed Wine. Also bags may be thus made
for the same purpose.. salis com. alum. roch. cort. granat. Bags.
sumach. berberis, nucum cupressi, an. iiii. fol. salviae, roris^ar. rosar.
rub. an. m. ss. Let them be all put in linen bags and boiled in Lie, and so
make a decoction for to foment the joints.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Palliative Cure of the Gout and the material causes
thereof.
HERE also must we consider the causes whence this disease proceeds, the The
scopes of curing
temper of the diseased body, the parts affected, and those from whence it
proceeds. For as these are not always alike, so neither can one and the like
remedy be useful in every Gout. For first those which proceed of a cold cause
require other remedies, than those which arise from a hot, and that which
proceeds from any one simple humor, than that which arises from diverse mixed
together. For Choler alone causes cruel pains, but tempered by the admixture
of Phlegm, it becomes more gentle. Furthermore some remedies are good in the
beginning, some in the increase, and some at other times. Neither may we use
repercussives in the Sciatica, as we may in the Gout of the feet and other
joints; unless peradventure the part be fearfully enflamed. Taking these
things to consideration we must observe that the Palliative cure of that Gout,
which Repercussives not to be used in the sci^atica. The palliative cure
performed by four scopes.
cannot absolutely be helped, as that which is hereditary and inveterate, is
performed by four scopes. The first is, by appointing a convenient diet in the
six things which are termed not natural. The second by evacuating and
diverting the antecedent matter, both by purging and phlebotomy. The third, by
applying topicke medicines according to the condition of the morbificke humor
and nature of the part. The fourth, by correcting the symptoms, but especially
the pain, whereof in these affects there is often times so great excess by
reason of the unexplicable and invincible malignity of the virulent quality
associating the humor, that it alone is often times sufficient to kill the
patient. And because the variety of morbificke causes, brings a variety of
remedies, fitted to these four intentions, therefore it behooves a physician to
be most attentive in the distinction of the causes. For he may be easily
deceived and mistake one for another; for arthritick pains proceeding from a
cold matter, if they be mitigated by the application of Narcoticke and cold
medicines, it An argument taken from that which helps, or gives ease, is not
always, certain. How cold diseases may be helped by cold, and hot by hot
medicines. The first thing that may deceive a Physician.
may induce us to believe that the material cause is hot, though really it be
not so; for Narcotickes assuage pain, not for that they are contrary to the
cause thereof, but because they take away the sense by inducing a numnesse; on
the contrary, the material cause may sometimes seem cold, which
notwithstanding is hot, for that it becoms better by application of hot
medicines, that is, by taking an argument from that which helps, because
contraries are cured by contraries, and the like preserved by the like. But
herein consists the error, for that hot medicines profit not by their
contrariety, but by the attenuation of the gross matter, by the rarefaction of
the skin and dissipating them into air. Whence you may gather that an argument
drawn from that which helps and hurts, is very deceitful: moreover it may
happen that a large quantity of cold matter flowing down from the brain, may
cause great pain by reason of the virulency, and a small quantity of choler
mixed therewith, which serves for a vehicle to carry down the tough and slow
phlegm into the joints, whence the patient becomes thirsty and feavourish by
reason of the heat and inflammation of these parts, whereby such as are less
cautelous and heedy will easily be induced to believe that some hot matter is
the occasion of this Gout. Now when as not some The second.
one simple humor, but different by reason of mixture, causes the Gout, the
yellowish color of the part may deceive one, as, if the evil matter should
proceed from choler only, which by the tenuity of its substance leaving the
center, easily possesses the circumference of the body or part: and
notwithstanding much phlegm being as it were enraged by the admixtion of a
little choler, may be the chief cause of the disease, and may peradventure be
discovered by the increase of pain in the night season. A fever arising by
means of pain and watching may increase the conceived opinion of choler,
which attenuating and diffusing the humors, drives The third.
them into the joints, and causes fiery urines, tinctured with much choler,
and a quick pulse. Yet notwithstanding the Physician shall be in error, if
deceived with The fourth.
these appearances, he attempt the cure of this Gout, as arising from a hot,
and not from a cold cause: yet I am not ignorant that the cure of the proper
disease must be neglected for the cure of the symptoms. Besides also it may
come to pass, that choler The third.
may be the cause of the Gout, and notwithstanding no signs thereof may appear
in the skin, and surface of the affected part, because the coldness of the
ambient air, and the force of applied Narcoticks may have destroyed the color
of the juices lying therunder, and as it were imprinted a certain blackness.
It also happens, that the body being overcharged with a great quantity of
gross and viscide humors, the The six^.
expulsive faculty may discharge some portion thereof unto the joints, but
leave the rest impact in the cavity of some entraile, where causing obstruction
and putrefaction may presently cause a fever, and that intermitting, if it be
small, and obstruct only the lesser veins, and these of the habit of the body.
Wherefore then it is not sufficient that the Physician employ himself in the
cure of the Gout, but it behooves him much more to attend the cure of the
fever, which if it be continual, it discredites the physician, and endangers
the patient; if it be intermitting, it easily becomes continual, unless it
be withstood with fit remedies, that is, unless you let blood, the belly being
first gently purged, and nature be presently freed by a stronger purge of the
troublesome burden of the humors. Now it is convenient the purge be somewhat
stronger than ordinary, for if it should be too weak, it will stir up the
humors, but Why strong purges must be given to such as have the gout.
not carry them away, and they thus agitated will fall into the pained and weak
joints, and cause the Gout to increase. By this it appears how deceitful that
conjecture is, which relyes and is grounded on one sign, as often as we must
pronounce judgment of morbificke causes. Wherefore to conclude we must think
that opinion most certain concerning the matter of the disease, which is
strengthened with multiplicity of signs, as those which are drawn from the
color of the part, the heat or That judgment most certain which rests upon
multiplicity of signs.
coldness manifest to the touch, those things that help and hurt, the
patients familiar and usual diet, temper, age, region, season of they year,
propriety of pain, the exacerbation or excess thereof, in what days, and in
what hours of the day, the length of these ^its, the urine and other
excrements coming from the patients body. But for that not a few are in that
heresy, that they think that we must neither purge nor let blood in the Gout,
we must here convince that opinion. For seeing that Physic Why we must use
purging and bleeding in the gout.
is the addition of that which wants, and the taking away of those things that
are superfluous, and the Gout is a disease which has its essence from the
plenty of abounding humors, certainly without the evacuation of them by
purging and bleeding, we cannot hope to cure, either it, or the pain which
accompanies it. Metrius, in his Treatise of the Gout writes, that it must be
cured by purging, used not only in the declination, but also in the height of
the disease, which we have found true by Lib. de affect. ubi de Arthri^.
loquitur. Ad^ph. 23. sect. 1. Lib. decur. per (...). missionem.
experience; and it is consonant to this saying of Hippocrates; in pains we
must purge by the stool. Besides also, Galen professes that in great
inflammations, fevers, and pains, he knew no greater nor surer remedy than to
let blood, even to the fainting of the patient. If those which are in this case
shall not become better by purging and phlebotomy conveniently prescribed, then
it happens by means of drunkenness, gluttony, and the like distemper. For
hence abundance of crude humors are heaped up, which by their contumacy yield
themselves less obedient to medicines. Therefore such gouty persons as are
intemperate and given to gluttony and venery, may hope for no health by use of
medicines.

CHAP. XV. Of local medicines which may be used to a cold Gout.
LIttle do to pick medicines avail, unless the body of the gouty patient
shall be purged from excrementitious humors; besides also there is danger lest
by the use of repelling medicines, the virulency It is not safe to use
repercussives in the gout before purging.
of the humors may be driven into the entrails, which thing has bin the
cause of sudden death to many. Now in the first place we will speak of local
medicines which are thought meet for a phlegmatic juice, because this is more
frequent, than that which is from a hot cause. At the beginning in every gout,
the sciatica excepted, we must use astringent things which have a faculty to
bind or strengthen the joints, and to dry and waste the excrementitious
humor. As,. fol. sabinae m. ss. nucum cupressi iii. An astringent Cataplasme.
aluminis roch. i. gum. tragacanthae. iiii. mucaginispsilii and cydon. quantum
sufficit, fiat cataplasma. Or,. ^^ercoris bubuli recentis lb. i. mellis ros.
iiii. olei ros. and aceti an. ii. bulliant simulparum, fiat cataplasma. Or
else,. olei rosar. and myrtill. an. ii. pulveris myrrhae and aloes an. i.
acaciae liss. incorporentur cum aqua gallarum coctarum, and fiat unguentum.
Some boil sage, camomile and melilote flowers, wormwood and A discussing
fomentation.
dane-wort, of each a handful in a sufficient quantity of vinegar, then they
put the grieved part into this decoction being warm; and by frequent using
this medicine, it has been found to repel and consume the noxious humor,
not only cold, but also choleric, and also to strengthen the part. The fresh
faeces of Olives laid to the part, assuage pain: dried Oranges boiled in
vinegar, beaten and applied doethe same. Or,. medii corticis ulmi lb. ss.
caudae equin. stoechad. consolid. majoris, One partly astringent and partly
discussing.
an. m. ss. aluminis roch. thuris an. iii. farin. hordei v. lixivii com.
quantum sufficit, fiat cataplasma ad formampultis satis liquidae. Commonly then
when as the part swells up, the pain is lessened, for that the expulsive
faculty drives the humor from the center into the circumference of the part,
that is, from within outward; for in like sort, such as have the tooth ach
have less pain when their cheeks begin to swell.

After repercussives, we must come to those which evacuate the contained
humor by evacuating or resolving it. For every defluxion of humors remaining
in any part requires evacuation. Neither must we marvel thereat, if the
digested humor does not vanish at the first time; for we must have regard to
the cold phlegm which is thick and viscide; as also of the part which is
ligamentous, membranous and nervous, and consequently more dense than fleshy
parts.. rad. Bryon. sigilli Why the gouty humor does not presently vanish upon
the use of repercussiv^s. Greater discussers.
beat. Mariae an. iv. bulliant in lixivio, postea terantur, and colentur per
setaceum, addendo farin. hordei and faburum an. i. olei chamaem. iii. fiat
cataplasma. Or,. farin. hordei and lupin. an. iii. sulphuris vivi and salis.
com. an. i. mellis com. v. pull. aloes and myrrhae an. ss. aq. vit. i. cum
lixivio fiat cataplasma. Or,. succi caulium rub. aceti boni, an. iiii. farin.
hordei iss. pull. Hermodactyl. ss. vitellos ovorum nu. iii. olei chamaem. iii.
croci ii. some burn the roots and stalks of colworts, and mix the ashes with
hogs grease and the powder of Orris, and so make a pultis. Or,. Lactis vaccini
lb. ii. micae panis albi quantum sufficit, bulliant simul; addendo pulveris
subtilis A Cataplasune good for any gout at any time.
florum^homaem. and meliloti an. m. ss. croci i. vitellos ovorum nu. iiii. ol.
rosar. iii. butyri recentis i. terebinth. ii. fiat cataplasma ad formam pultis
satis liquidae. This Cataplasme may be applied with good success, not only to
phlegmatic and cold, but also to any gout, at any time to mitigate the
extremity of the pain in men of any temper, and it must be changed twice or
thrice a day. Also Treacle dissolved in wine, and annoy* ted on the part, is
said to assuage this pain. You may for the same purpose make and apply
emplasters, unguents, cerats and liniments: This may be the form of an
emplaster.. gummi ammoniaci, bdelii, s^yracis, an. ii. cum aceto and Discussing
emplasters.
aqua vit. dissolve, and add farin. foenugr. ss. olei chamaem. and anethi, an.
ii. cerae quantum sufficit, fiat emplastrum molle. Or,. rad. bryon. sigill.
beat. Mariae, an. v. bulliant in lixivio complete, and colentur per setaceum,
addendo olei cham. iiii. sevi hircini iiii. cerae nov. quantum sufficit, fiat
emplastrum molle. Or,. gum. ammon. opopanacis galbani, an ii. dissolvantur in
aceto, post^a colentur, add olei li^iorum, ierebinth. venet. an i. picis
navalis, and cer. nov. quantum sufficit; fiat emplastrum molle. Or else,. succi
r^d. enul. camp. and ebuli an. iii. rad. alth. lb. ss. coquantur and colentur
per setaceum, addendo storum cham. melil. sambuci, rorismar. and hyperici an.
p. ii. nucum cupressi, nu. iiii. ol. cham. aneth. hyper. liliorum, de spica an.
ii. pi^guedinis anatis, gallin. anseris an. ss. ranas virides vivas nu. vi.
catellos duos nuper natos, bulliant omnia simul, in lb. ii. ss. vini oderiferi,
and una aquae vit. ad consumptionem succorum and vini, and ossium catellorum
dissolutionem, and fortiter exprimantur; expressioni add terebinth. iii. cer.
quantum sufficit. fiat emplastrum molle. Also, Emp. de vigo. Oxicroceum, de
mucilaginibus, de meliloto and the like mixed together, and softened with a
little oil or axungia, are of the like faculty, and good for the same purpose.

Let this be the form of an ointment.. anserem pinguem, and imple catellis
duobus, Ointments.
de quibus deem cutem, viscera, caput and pedes; item accipe ranas nu. x.
colubros detracta cute in frusta dissectos nu. iv. mithridat. and theriac. an.
ss. fol. salviae, rorismar. thymi, rutae, an. m. ss. baccarum lauri, and
juniperi conquassat. an. i. pulveris nuc. moschat. zinzib. caryophyl. and
piper. an. i. de co quod stillabat fiat unguentum vel linimentum cum cera and
terebinth. veneta, pauca aqua vitae addita; this marvelously asswageth the
pain of the gout arising from a cold cause. Another,. Gummi pini, and lodani,
an. iv gummi elemi and picis naval. an. ss. terebinth. venet. clarae vi.
chamaemel. and liliorum an. iv. vini rub. lb. i. ss. aq. vit. and salv. an, vi.
dissolvantur omnia simul lento igne, baculo semper agitando, deinde add pull.
ireos, flor. baccarum lauri, and hermodactyl. and iiss. mastiches, myrrhae and
olibani an. ii. farinae fabar. iv. incorporentur omnia simul, fiat unguentum
molle. Or else,. mucag. seminis foen^gr. in aceto extract. quantum volueris,
cui misce mellis quantum sufficit; let them be boiled together until they
acquire the consistence of an ointment. These things shall be changed, as often
as need shall seem to require. Also anodine and discussing fomentations are
good to Discussing fomentations.
resolve; as this,. fol. rutae, salv. rorismar. an. m. i. bulliant cum aceto
and vino; and so make a decoction for a fomentation, which you may use not only
in a cold gout, but also in a hot, because it resolves and strengthens the
part by astriction, and freeth it from the defluxion: you must have a care that
the medicines which are used Remedies must be often changed in the gout.
to pains of the gout be changed now and then. For in this kind of disease
that remedy which did good a little before, and now avails, will in a short
time become hurtful.

But if the contumacy and excess of the pain be so great, that it will not
yield to the described medicines, then it is fit, because the disease is
extreme, to use (according to Hypocrates counsel) extreme remedies, such as
are those which follow.. axungiae A great discusser.
gallinae, olei laurini mastic. and ^uphorb. an. i. pulver. euphorb. and
pyreth. an. i. fiat litus; herewith let the part be rubbed every day, for it
is a very effectual medicine. For euphorbium and pellitory by their heat
attenuate and resolve, the capons grease and oil of bays, relaxe, the oil of
mastich strengthens the part and hinders a new defluxion. Also there is
made a very anodine ointment of oil of foxes, wherein earth-wormes, the roots
of elecampane and bryoni^ have been boiled, with a little An anodine.
turpentine and wax; this softens, attenuates and resolves the cold humor
impact in the joints. Or else,. seminis sinapi pulverisati, and aceto acerrimo
dissoluti, iii. mellis anacardini ii. aquae vitae i. salis com. ii. Let them
be all mixed together, and applied to the pained part. Or,. picis nigrae, iii.
terebinth. venetae ii. sulphuris vivi subtiliter pulverisati iii. olei quant.
sufficit, liquefiant simul, fiat emplastrum; Let it be spread upon leather,
and laid upon the part for two or three days space, if the patient perceive
any ease thereby; if otherwise, let it be changed as we said before. Some for
the same purpose apply nettles thereto, and presently after wash the part in
sea or salt water. Others foment the part with vinegar wherein pigeons dung
has been boiled. A vesicatory made of very sower leaven, cantharides, and a
little aqua A vesicatory against the contumacy of the conjunct matter.
vitae, is very powerful to evacuate the conjunct matter. For thus the malign
and virulent serum, or whayish humor is let out, whence follows some ease of
the pain. Now there are some gouty pains, which cannot be lessened or
assuaged unless by remedies more powerful than the distemper, therefore
vesicatories ought not to be rejected, seeing that the Ancients in this affect
have also made use of actual cauteries, as we shall show hereafter.
Christopher Andreas in his book termed Oecoitarie [that is, Domestic
physicke] much commends Ox dung wrapped in cabbage or vine leaves, and roasted
in the embers, and so applied hot to the grieved part.

CHAP. XVI. Of local medicines to be applied to a hot or sanguine Gout.
HEre must we in the beginning make use of repercussives, such as are cold and
dry, that they may contend with the morbificke matter by both What
repercussives are here required.
their qualities; also let them be astrictive, so to add strength to the
part. But I would have you always to understand that you must first premise
general medicines.. albuminum ovorum nu. iv. succi lactuca and solani an. i.
aq. rosar. ii. incorporentur simul, and fiat linimentum saepius renovandum.
Others take the meal of barley, lentils, acatia, oil of roses, myrtles, and
with a little vinegar they make a cataplasme; Or,. sumach, myrtillorum, boli
arm. an. ss. acatiae, corticum granat. balust. an. i. aq. plantag. and rosar.
an. iii. ol. rosati iss. aceti i. farinae hordei and lentium quantum satis
erit, fiat cataplasma. This is very excellent and effectual to stay or hinder
phlegmonous and erysipelatous tumors. Also you may make a Cataplasme ex
mucagine Cydoniorum in aqua rosarum extracta, cassiae fistula, oleo rosato, and
aceto. Or,. pampinorum vitis viridum, m. ii. terantur and bulliant in oxycrato
ex aqua fabrorum, cui add sumach. conquassati i. olei rosat. ii. farinae
hordei quantum sufficit, fiat cataplasma. Or else,. succi sempervivi,
hyoscyami, and portulacae An excellent astringent cataplasme.
an. iv. corticum mali granati iss. farinae hordei v. vini austeri quantum
sufficit, fiat cataplasma; this is much commended, for it has entering
thereinto wine and the pomgranate pill, which both are very great astrictives;
and the juices are exceeding cooling, the meal also hinders and thickens the
sanguine humors that are ready to flow down, and make the medicine of a good
consistence. Another,. fol. hyoscyami and acetosae an. m. i. involvantur
papyro, and sub cineribus coquantur, mox cum unguento populeon. aut rosat. ii.
incorporentur; and then lay this Cataplasme thus made warm unto the part.
Another,. florum hyoscyami lb. ii. ponantur in phiala vitreata, and reconde in
fimo equino donec putruerint, accipe ex putredine ii. in quibus dissolve olei
de junipero ss. fiat linimentum adusum. Others beat the pulpe of a Gourd or
Citrull in a mortar, and so apply it. Another,. mucag. sem. psilii, and cyton.
extract. in aquae rosar. and solani an. iiii. olei rosati omphacini, iii. vini
granatorum i. vitellos ovorum cum albumine nu. iii. camphorae i. incorporentur
simul, fiat linimentum. Or else,. ol. rosat. omphacini iv. album. ovorum cum
vitellis nu. vi. succi plantag. and solani, an i. farinae hordei iii.
incorporentur simul, fiat cataplasma. Or,. farinae fabarum and hordei an. iii.
olei rosati, ii. oxycrati quantum sufficit, coquantur simul, fiat cataplasma.
Another,. mucag. sem. psilii iiii. ol. rosati ii. aceti i. vitellos ovorum, nu.
iii. croci i. misce. Pliny reports that Sextus Pomponius the Governor of the
hither Spain, as he Lib. 22. cap. 25.
overlooked the winowing of his corn, was taken by the pain of the gout in
his feet, wherefore he covered himself with the Wheat above his knees, and so
was eased, his feet being wonderfully dried; and he afterward used this kind
of remedy. It is note worthy, which often happens, that the pain cannot be
altogether eased by such like remedies, by reason of the abundance of blood
impact in the part; Phlebotomy to evacuate the conjunct matter, and assuage
pain.
wherefore it must be evacuated: which I have done in many with good success,
opening the vein which was most swelled and nigh to the affected part; for the
pain was presently assuaged. Neither must we too long make use of
repercussives; lest the matter become so hardened, that it can scarce be
afterward resolved, as when it shall be concrete into knots and plaisterlike
stones: resolving medicines are to be mixed with repercussives conveniently
applied, so to discuss the humor remaining as yet in the part, whereof shall
be spoken in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVII. Of local medicines for a choleric gout.
THe repercussives that must first be used in this kind of gout ought to be
cold and moiste, that so they may resist both the qualities of choler: such
What repercussives are here required.
are the leaves of nightshade, purslaine, house-leeke, henbane, sorrel,
plantaine, poppy, cold water, and the like, whereof may be made diverse
compositions. As,. succi hyosciami, sempervivi. lactuc. an. ii. farin. hordei
i. olei rosati, ii. agitando simul fiat medicamentum; let it be applied and
often changed, for so at length it will assuage the inflammation. Some think
the brain of a hog mixed with white starch, or barley meal and oil of
roses, an excellent medicine. The leaves of mallows boiled in water, and
beaten with a pestell, and applied, assuage pain.. mucag. sem. psilii extract.
in aq. solani, vel rosarum ii. farin. hordei i. a^eti q. s. fiat linimentum. Or
else,. unguent. rosat. mesuae, and populei. an. iii. succi melonum ii. alb.
ovorum, nu. iii. misceantur simul pro litu. Also a sponge dipped in oxycrate,
and pressed out again and applied thereto does the same. Or else,. fol. caulium
rub. m. ii. coquantur in oxycrato and terantur: add ovorum vitellos tres, olei
rosati iii. farinae hordei quantum sufficit, ^ingatur cataplasma: Also you may
take the crude juice of cole-worts, dane-weede, and roses beaten and pressed
out, and of these incorporated with oil of roses and barley meal make a
cataplasme. In winter time, when as these things cannot be had green, you may
use unguentum infrigedans Galeni and populeon. Or else,. cerae albae i. croci
i. opii iiii. olei rosati quantum A cerate with opium.
sufficit, marcerentur opium and crocus in aceto, deinde terantur and
incorporentur cum cera and oleo, fiat ceratum; spread it upon a cloth, and lay
it upon the part, and all about it, and let it be often renewed. Some cut
Frogs open and apply them to the grieved part. It is confirmed by sundry men's
experience, that the pain of the sciatica, when it would yield to no other
remedy, to have been assuaged by annoynting the part affected with the mucous
water or gelly of Snailes, being used for the space of seven or eight days;
the truth whereof was assured me by the worthy ^he water of Snailes.
Gentleman the Lord of Longemean, a man of great honesty and credit, who
himself was troubled for six months space with the sciatica. This water is
thus made, Take fifty or sixty red Snailes, put them in a copper pot or kettle,
and sprinkle them over with common salt, and keep them so for the space of a
day; then press them in a course or hair cloth; in the expressed liquor dip
linen rags, and apply them so dipped to the part affected, and renew them
often. But if there be great inflammation, the Snailes shall be boiled in
Vinegar and Rose Water. They say that Citrons or Oranges boiled in Vinegar, and
beaten in a mortar, and incorporated with a little barley or bean flower, are
good against these pains. Or else,. pomorum coctorum in lacte lib. i. butyri
i. vitellos ovorum, nu. ii. aceti i. fiat cataplasma. There are some who take
cheese crud newly made, and mix it in a mortar with oil of Roses and barley
meal, and so apply it; it represseth the inflammation and asswageth pain.
Others mix Cassia newly extracted forth of the Cane, with the juice of Gourds
or Melons. Others apply to the part the leaves of Cole-worts, and Dane-weede or
smallage, or all three mixed together and beaten with a little Vinegar. Others
macerate or steep an ounce of linseed in Wurt, and make the mucilage extracted
therefrom into Cataplasme with some oil of Roses and barley meal. Some put
oil of poppyes to the pulpe of Citrulls or Gourds being beaten, and so
incorporate them together, and apply it.

This following medicine has its credit from a certain Gascoine of Basas that
was A histori^.
thoroughly cured therewith, when as he had bin vexed long and much with gouty
pains, above the common custom of such as are troubled with that disease. Thus
it is; Take a great ridge tile thick and strong, and heat it red hot in the
fire, then put it into such another tile of the same bigness, but cold, lest
it should burn the bed-clothes, then A particular s^ove.
forthwith fill the hot one with so many Dane-wurt leaves, that the patient may
safely lay the affected part therein; without any danger of burning it. Then
let the patient endure the heat that comes therefrom, and by sweat receive
the fruit thereof, for the space of an hour, substituting fresh Dane-wurt
leaves, if the former become too dry, as also another hot tile, if the former
shall grow too cold before the hour be ended. This being done, let the part
be dried with warm and dry linen clothes. Use this particular stove for the
space of fifteen days, and that in the morning fasting; afterward annoint
the part with this following ointment.. succi ebuli lb i. ss. olei com. lb i.
misceantur simul, and let them be put into a strait mouthed glass, and well
luted up; then let it boil in balnco Mariae, being An ointment of the juice of
Dane-wurt.
first mixed with some wine, until the half thereof be consumed, for the
space of run or twelve hours, then let it cool, and so keep it for use,
adding thereto in the time of annoynting, some few drops of aquavitae. It may
be anointed twice or thrice in a day, long after meat. Moreover the roots
and leaves of Dane-wurt boiled in water, beaten and applied assuage pain; the
oil thereof chimically extracted performs the same.

But if the contumacious pain cannot be mitigated by the described remedies,
and becoming intolerably hot and raging, make the patient almost to swoune,
then must we fly to narcoticks. For although the temper of the part may be
weakened by these, the native heat diminished or rather exstinguished; yet
this is a far When to use narcoticks.
less inconvenience than to let the whole body be wasted by pain; These
things have a powerful refrigerating and drying faculty, taking away the sense
of the pain, and furthermore, incrassate, thin, acride and biting humors,
such as choleric humors are. Wherefore if the matter which causes the pain
be thick, we must abstain from narcoticks, or certainly use them with great
caution.. micae panis secalini parum cocti in lacte ii. vitellos ovorum, nu. ii
opii i. saccorum solani, hyosciami, A cataplasme with opium.
mandragorae, portulacae, sempervivi, an. i. Let them be mixed together and
applied, and often changed. Or else,. fol. hyosciami cicutae, acetos. an. m. i.
bulliant in oxycrato and contundantur, cumque vitellis ovorum crudorum nu. ii.
and olei rosat. ii. farin^ hordei quod sit satis, incorporentur, fiat
cataplasma; with the use thereof I am accustomed to assuage great pains. Or
else,. Opii iii. camphor. ss. olei nenuph. i. lactis ii. unguent. ros. Galeni
iv. incorporentur simul in mortario, applicentur. Moreover, cold water applied
and dropped upon the part drop by drop, is narcotick and stupefactive, as
Hippocrates affirms, Aphor. 29. Sect. 5. for a moderate numnesse mitigateth
pain; there is also another reason why it may be profitably used in all
pains of the Gout, for that by repelling the humors, it hinders their
defluxion into the part. Mandrage apples boiled in milk, and beaten, do the
samething; also the leaves of henbane, hemlock, lettuce, purslaine, being so
boiled, do the same. If any desire to use these more cold, he must apply them
crude, and not boiled.

But the excess of pain being mitigated, we must desist from the use of such
narcotickes, and they must rather be strengthened with hot and digerating
things; otherwise there will be danger lest it be too much weakened, the
temper thereof being destroyed, and so afterward it may be subject to every
kind of defluxion. How to amend the harm done by narcoticks.
Wherefore it shall be strengthened with the formerly described discussing
fomentations, and these ensuing remedies. As,. gum. ammoniaci and bdelii an. i.
dissolvantur in aceto, and passentur per setaceum, addendo styracis liquid. and
fari^. foenug. Dicussers.
an. ^ss. pull. ireos iiii. olei ch^maem. ii. pulveris pyrethri ii. cum cera
fiat emplastrum molle. Or else,. rad. emul^, ebuli altheae an lb. ss. sem.
lini, foenugr. an. ii. ficuum ping. nu. xx. coquantur complete and trajiciantur
per setaceum, addendo pull. euphorb. ii. olei chamaem. aneth. and rutacei, an.
iii. medullae cervi iv. fiat cataplasma. Yet you must use moderation in
discussing, lest the subtler part of the impact humor being A mean to be used
in discussing.
discussed, the grosser part may turn into a stony consistence, which also is
to be feared in using repercussives.

I also omitted, that, according to the opinion of the Ancients, bathes of
fresh water, wherein cooling herbs have been boiled, used three hours after
meat, conduce much to the asswaging of pain; for so used, they are more
convenient in choleric natures, and spare bodies, for that they humect the
more, and quickly digest Bathes assuage the pain of the gout.
the thin and choleric, and consequently acride vapors, the pores being
opened, and the humors dissipated by the gentle warmenesse of the bath. After
the bath, the body must be anointed with hydraeleum, or oil and water
tempered together, lest the native heat exhale, and the body become more
weak. Meats of more gross juice are more convenient, as beef, sheeps-feet,
and the like, if so be that How meats of gross juice are profitable.
the patient can digest them, for these inspissate the choleric blood, and
make it more unfit for defluxion.

CHAP. XVIII. What remedies must be used in pains of the joints proceeding of
a distemper only, without matter.
Pains also happen in the joints by distemper without any matter, which though
rare, yet because I happened once to feel them, I have thought A history.
good to show what remedies I used against them. I once earnestly busied in
study, and therefore not sensible of such external injuries as might befall
me; a little wind coming secretly in by the crannies of my study, fell upon
my left Hippe; at length wearied with study, as soon as I rose up to go my
way, I could not stand upon my feet, I felt such bitter pain without any
swelling or humor which might be discerned. Therefore I was forced to go to
bed, and calling to mind, that cold, which was absolutely hurtful to the
nerves, had bred me that pain, I attempted to drive it away by the frequent
(...) p^^p. 10. sect. 5.
application of very hot clothes; which, though they scorched and blistered the
Diverse r^^edies or pain arising from a cold distemper without matter.
sound parts adjoining thereto, yet did they scarce make any impression upon
the part where the pain was settled, the distemper was so great, and so
firmly fixed therein. And I laid thereto bags filled with fried oats and
millet, and dipped in hot red wine; as also ox bladders half filled with a
decoction of hot herbs. And lastly, a wooden dish almost filled with hot
ashes, covered over with sage, rosmarie, and rue lightly bruised, and so
covered with a cloth, which, sprinkled over with aqua vitae, sent forth a
vapor which assuaged the pain. Also brown bread newly drawn out of the
oven, and sprinkled over with Rose Water, and applied, did very much good. And
that I might more fully expel this hurtful cold, I put stone bottles filled
with hot water, to the soales of my feet, that the brain might be heated by
the straightness and continuity of the nerves. At length, by the help of
these remedies, I was very well freed from this contumacious distemper, when it
had held me for the space of four and twenty hours.

There is another kind of gouty pain sometimes caused by a certain
excrementitious matter, but so thin and subtle that it cannot be discerned by
the eyes. It A fuliginous vapor sometimes the cause of the gout.
is a certain fuliginous or sootie vapor, like to that which passes from
burning candles or lamps, which adhers and concreets to any thing that is
opposed thereto; which being infected by the mixture of a virulent serous
humor whithersoever it runs, causes extreme pain, somewhiles in these,
and otherwhiles in other joints, unless you make a way therefore, when as it
seeks passage forth, which must be done by horns, cupping-glasses,
vesicatories, cauteries, or other the like art.

CHAP. XIX. What is to be done after the fit of the gout is over.
IT is convenient when the pain is assuaged, that you strengthen the How to
strengthen the joints.
joints. Now, to strengthen them is not only to bind and dry, but wholly to
amend the weakness left in the part by the disease, that is, to discuss the
humor, if any superfluity thereof remain; but to humect the part, if the
moisture be exhausted and dried up. But Remedies for the weakness left in the
joints after the pain is gone.
such as are troubled with the gout, after they are freed from their pain,
have notwithstanding such impotency of their joints that they cannot go of a
long time after; for that the nerves and tendons which are in great number in
the feet, being moystened with much phlegm, are so relaxed, that they can no
more sustain or bear themselves upon their feet, than paper when it is wet
can be made to stand. Wherefore, that they may recover the use of their feet,
the impacted humor must by all means be discussed, and spent with
fomentations, cataplasmes, drying and astringent emplasters. You may use the
formerly described fomentation, increasing the quantity of alume and salt, and
adding thereto a like quantity of sulphur vivum: then the following emplaster
shall be applied thereto.. mas. emplast. contra rupturam iiii. tereb. ii.
pulv. ros. rub. nucum cupress. gallarum, gran, myrtil. and fol. ejusdem,
thuris, mastich. and caryophyl. an. i. malaxentur ominae simul, manibus
inunctis oleo myrtino and mastichino, fiat emplastrum. Let it be spread upon
leather to a just bigness, and applied to the top and sole of the foot. Draw
over the plaster, and the whole leg a stocking made of a tanned dogs
skin; this emplaster strengthens the nerves, draws forth the humor
impact therein, and intercepts the defluxion. But the dogge-skinne stocking
preserves The benefit of a dog-skinne stocking.
the native heat of the part, and for that it binds, hinders the defluxion
into the feet.

CHAP. XX. Of the Tophi, or knots which grow at the joints of such as are
troubled with the Gout.
SOme that are troubled with the gout, have knotty bunches growing in Whence
the tophi are generated.
their joints, which by the Ancients were called Tophi. These are generated by
the congestion of gross, viscide and crude phlegm, with a little admixtion of
an acride and choleric humor. These matters remain settled in the part, for
that it being too weak cannot digest and depresse them; wherefore being there
impact, they easily concrete into a certain plaster-like or chalke-like
substance, whilst by the adventitious and burning heat caused by pain, and
the gouty malignity, their more subtle part is The unfit application of
discussive and re percussive medicines cause the tophi.
dispersed, but the grosser subsides. Yet sometimes the unfit application of
repercussive or discussive medicines is a cause of the generation of these
Tophi. For by the former, the impact matter is incrassated and gathered
together; but by the latter, the subtle part being discussed, the remnant that
subsides concretes into Tophi. Those medicines which are made to mollify,
ought to have a moderately Mollifying medicines.
heating, and humecting faculty, that they may diffuse, and as it were dissolve
the impact matter; such is warm water, the decoction of emollient herbs, the
decoction of Calves or Sheep entrails, heads and feet: after these or the
like fomentations, you shall use the following medicine.. axungiae, human.
anseris and gallinae, medul, cervin. an. ii. tereb. ven. i. aq. vit. parum,
cerae quantum suficit, fiat unguentum molle. Then this which follows will be
good.. rad. alth. liliorum, bryon. lapath. acuti, an. iiii. coquantur complete
and trajiciantur per setaceum; add gum. ammon. bd^l. galb. opopanaci^ in aceto
dissolutorum i. medul. cervin. iss. incorporentur simal, and applicentur. Or
else,. olei liliorum, amygd. dull. medullae cruris cer. an. ii ss. mucag. sem.
lini, alth. foenugr. an. i. cerae quantum sufficit; fiat ceratum. Or else.
empl. de vigo cum mercurio, and cerat. de aesipo humidae descript. Philagrii,
an.. ii. malaxentur simul cum oleo lilior. fiat massa. Or else,. gum. ammon.
opopan. galb. bdel. dissolutorum in aceto, an. ii. panno lineo colatis, add
pulv. sulph. nitr. sinap^, pyrethri, an. ss. styracis, liq. and axung. hum. an.
i. res. pini, terab. ven. an.. ss. cerae quantum sufficit, fiat ceratum molle.
This which follows is thought most effectual in the opinion of Galen and
Avicen.. pedes porcel. benesalsos, nu. iiii. veterem Lib. 10. simp. c. 7 sc.
22. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21.
pernam, cum illis coque: addendo sub finem, radicis bryoniae, lapath. acut.
an. iii. axun^ tauri. and medul. cervin. an. i. cum caseo putrefacto fiat empl.
molle ad usum: This which follows is also most effectual.. casei acris and
putrefacti, iiii. pull. sulph. vivi cuphorb. and pyreth. an. iii. decoctionis
veter is pernae and porcellorum quod sufficit ad incorporandum, ducantur in
mortario, and fiat empl. adusum. Or else,. spumae nitri, vi. tereb. ii. olei
veteris, viii. lixivii, quo lanae pileorum lavantur, and cerae quantum
sufficit, fiat ceratum sat is molle. After the use of emollients, a fumigation
shall be made in this manner. Heat a cogle-stone, millstone or brick, red hot
in the fire, take it forth, and An effectual ^umigation.
cast upon it a sufficient quantity of very sharp vinegar, and aquavitae, the
rising vapor shall be diligently received by the affected member, for this
has a faculty to attenuate and cut gross, viscide, and plaster like matter,
yea also, and to break the skin, yet that is broken often time of its own accord,
without the help of either medicine or instrument. To conclude, these medicines
which are good to mollify scirrhous tumors, the same are also good to soften
the gouty knots and tophi. But we must note that these knotty bunches are
sometimes suppurated, not truly by the impact and plasterlike matter, but by a
new defluxion coming on a sudden, and then it is necessary to make way for the
contained matter, which being done, first there comes forth a humor like
milk, then a plaster-like matter, then it leaves behind it an ulcer to be
cured by applying thereto Empl. gratia dei, and others as the Surgeon shall
think fit.

CHAP. XXI. Of flatulencies contained in the joints, and counter feiting true
Gouts, and of the remedies to be used thereto.
OF^-times there is small quantity of humor, which moves the pain of the
gout; but much flatulencie mixed therewith, especially in great In what joints
flatulencies are chiesly generated. Signs of flatulencies.
joints, as in the huckle or hippe-bone, and the knees; they sometimes cause so
great distention, that they drive the heads of the bones forth of their places.
You may partly understand it is so, if a tensive pain afflict the patient with
any sense of heaviness; if when you press the tumor with your fingers, the
place retain no mark or impression thereof, as happens in an oedema, but on
the contrary, a flatulent spirit lifts it up as it were by renitency, as if one
should thrust a pair of bellows which are filled with wind, hence the part
cannot perform its duty, for that the spaces of the joints are possessed with
abundance of flatulencies, so that the liberty of motion is intercepted, and
the member is kept as it were bound up. Many no very skillfull Surgeons putting
their fingers to these kind How flatulencies may make you believe there is p^s
or matter.
of tumors, so that lifting up the one they press down the other, when as
they perceive the flatulency, as it were, rising between their fingers,
supposing it to be the motion of pus, or matter already generated and flowing
up and down, as is usual in impostumes, they have opened it by incision; but
when as nothing flowed forth it appeared how much they were deceived, yet in
the interim, by this their rashness they have caused many dangerous symptoms,
as increase of pain, defluxion of humors, by force whereof the bones have
been dislocated, and brought to the patient an uncurable lamenesse. But these
flatulent gouts are seldom without some phlegmatic matter, which is neither
too crude, nor viscide. Such like flatulencies are not easily Why hard to cure.
discussed, nor at the first endeavor, by reason of a cold distemper which
they bring to the part, and the density of the membranes and ligaments by which
the articulation is knit and fastened, so that scarce any part of that which is
there shut up can breath forth of such strait passages. Therefore the cure must
be undertaken with resolving, discussing, and drying fomentations, as for
example, with a decoction of fennel, aniseeds, rue, chamornill, melilote,
sage, rosemary, origanum, calamints, horehound, and the like, boiled in wine
with a little Lie, rose vinegar, and common salt. This following ointment shall
be used after the fomentation.. olei chamoem. aneth. rut. ^auri, an. ii. cum
cera alba, fiat linimentum addendo aq. vitae parum. After you have anointed it,
apply thereto this following cataplasme.. flor. cham. melil. aneth. ros. rub.
pulv. an. m i. fol. malv. and absinth. an. m ss. furfur, m i. bulliant omnia
simul cum lixivio, and vinorubre, deinde pistentur cum medulla panis, and
farina fabarum, quantum sufficit, fiat cataplasma, addendo ol. rosar. and
myrtin. an. ii. Some highly approve of this following medicine for the wasting
of flatulencies.. axun. suil. iv. calcis vivae, i ss. terantur diligenter in
mortario, and incorporata applicentur. Or else,. stercor. caprar. cocti cum
vino and aceto, an. lb. ss. tereb. venet. and mell. com. an. ii. aq. vitae, ss.
pull. rad. lreos florent. and sabin. an. iii. olei rut. and aneth. an. i. farin.
fabarum quantum sufficit. Make a cataplasme to the form of a pultis. Also
stoupes dipped in oxycrate, and wrung out, shall be applied: in this oxycrate
shall be boiled wormwood, origanum, chamomill, melilote, rue, common salt,
adding thereto some aqua vitae. Then the part shall be bound up as strait as
the patient can endure it; in conclusion, that the native strenght may by
little and little be restored to the part, it shall be fomented with Lie made
of the ashes of Oake-wood and the cuttings of vines, wherein shall be boiled,
salt, sulphur, choice alome, and wetting linen clothes, or stoups therein, and
applying them, it shall be straightly swathed up. Yet if great pain shall more
cruelly vex the part, then neglecting for a time the proper cure of the
disease, you shall withstand the symptom by rubbing the part, and anointing it
with some discussing oil, laying thereon some moist wool and other anodyne
things.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Ischias, Hip-gout, or Sciatica.
FOR that the hip-gout in the greatness of the causes, bitterness of pain,
and vehemence of other symptoms, easily exceeds the other kinds of Gout,
therefore I have thought good to treat thereof in particular. Why it has the
most grievous symptoms.
The pain of the Sciatica is therefore the most bitter, and the symptoms most
violent, for that the dearticulation of the huckle bone, with the head of the
Thigh bone, is more deep than the rest; because also the phlegmatic humor
which causes it, is commonly more plenteous, cold, gross, and viscid, that
flows down into this joint, and lastly because the Sciatica commonly succeeds
some other chronicall disease, by reason of the translation and falling down
thither of the matter, become malign and corrupt by the long continuance of
the former disease. But the pain not only troubles the hippe, but entering
deep, is extended to the muscles The cause of the large spreading of the pain.
of the buttockes, the groines, knees, and very ends of the toes, yea often
times it vexes the patient with a sense of pain in the very vertebrae of the
loins, so that it makes the patients, and also often times the very Physicians
and Surgeons to think it the wind or stone Collicke. The cause of such
wandering and dispersed pain is to be referred to the manifold distribution
of the nerves which come to that joint from the loins and holy-bone, for they
are sent into the muscles of the buttockes, and so dispersed over the whole
leg to the very ends of the toes, as it is showed in our Anatomy. Therefore
the pain is largely extended, that is, to what part soever a nerve runs which
comes from the affected Hippe. Often times there is no swelling, no redness,
nor distemper manifest to the eye, by reason that the veins are very few which
rise into the surface and skin of this part, and the humor lies, as it were,
sunk in; which is the cause that diverse times the excrementitious humors
mixed with statulencie, run so violently into the cavity of this joint, that
relaxing the ligaments, as well proper as common, the head of the thigh bone is
easily driven out from hence, so that it may never be restored again, if it
remain so for any space of The thighbone often dislocated by the Sciatica.
time; for that in this time the humor falling down into this cavity, by delay
concretes as it were into a stony body, and the head of the Thigh Bone wears
it self another cavity in the neighboring bone, but the lips of the true
cavity, which are gristly, become more streit and deprest, and lastly all the
ligamentous bodies moistened with this excrementitious humor become more loose
and weak, whence succeed many and most grievous symptoms, as lamenesse, and
the decay not only of the thigh and leg, but at length of the whole body, and
lastly a slow and hectic fever, which in continuance of time will consume the
patient for the causes formerly mentioned. Therefore let Physicians and Surgeons
have a care that they resist it at the first, and with such powerful remedies
as are mentioned in the following chapter, hinder the springing up and growth
of the formerly mentioned symptoms.

CHAP. XXIII. The cure of the Sciatica.
THough the Sciatica be commonly occasioned by tough phlegm, yet if the
patient be strong and abound with blood, and all things else consent, Why we
must open a vein in the Sciatica.
it shall be good to draw blood by opening a vein; for phlebotomy equally
evacuates all humors; therefore the falling down of the humors into the part
affected, is thereby hindered, or retarded. Verily I have known no speedier
remedy to assuage the pain of inflammation, than blood-letting, being first
made on the Basilica of the grieved side for revulsions sake; and then for
evacuation of the conjunct matter on the vena ischiadica, which is at the
outside of the ankle, if the pain of the Sciatica be more on the outside; or
else on the Sapheia, which is on When the vena ischiadica and sapheia must be
opened in the sciatica.
the inside of the ankle, if the inner parts be more pained. The quantity of
blood which is to be drawn must be left to the judgment of the physician,
without whose advise I would attempt nothing in this case. Also acride glysters
are good, if there be nothing which may hinder, as ulcers of the guts, or
haemorrhoids.. rad. acor. ii. centaur. rut. salv. rorism. calam. origan. puleg.
an. m ss. staechad. arabic. flo. cham. melil. aneth. an. p i. sem. anis. and
foenic. an. ss. fiat decoctio ad lb. i. in colatura dissolve hierae and
diaphen. an. ss. mellis anthos. sacch. rub. an. i. olei liliorum iii. fiat
clyster. Strong purgations are also here useful, as of pillul. foetid.
arthritic. Assai^reth. de Hermodactilis, and others used in phlegmatic
causes. Electuarium Diacar^hami Strong purgations in the scia^ica.
purges choler and phlegm. Often vomitings do not only evacuate the
humors, but also make revulsion, as we have formerly delivered. Bathes and
sweates profit no otherwise than a decoction of guajacum or sarsaparilla. If
heat molest the part, then foment it with oil of roses and vinegar, especially
if the pain be deep in, for vinegar by its tenuity pierces to the bottom,
and makes way for the oil, which of its own nature is anodyne. After the use
of general medicines you shall apply attractive and resolving things:
emplasters of pitch and sulphur, or of Ammoniacum, euphorbium, Terebinthina,
Propolis, Galbanum, Bdelium, Opopanax, draw the humor from within to the
surface or skin. As in like sort also the chymicall oil of sage, rosemary,
pellitory of Spain, and such other like do the same, which by reason of the
tenuity of their substance, and their separation from earthy impurity, have
far more powerful and expedite faculties to penetrate and discuss. Yet must
you use none of all these without very good judgment and deliberation,
other-wise there will be danger of inflammation.

There may also be made somentations of discussing and resolving herbs, as the
roots and leaves of dane-weeds, orris, Bay and Juniper berries, the seeds of
faenugreeke, anise, fennel, the leaves of sage, rosemary, chamomile, melilote,
elder, and the like, boiled in wine and oil: the following plaster is much
commended by the ancients to digest, or resolve and assuage the pain, with
this which draws forth thorns, splinters, and rotten bones.. sem. (...).
mundat. spumaborac* salis ^moniaci, rad. aristoloch. rotund. colocynth.
terebinth. venet. an. x. foenug. piperis longi, xylobalsam. thur. myrrhae,
adipis cap. gum. pini, an. v. cerae, lb. ss. lactis ficus sylv. ss. ex omnibus
secundum artem praeparatis cum olei liliorum, and vini generosi quantitat.
suff^ciente, fiat emplastrum. Let it be applied to the Hippe. Or,. sinapi
acerrimo aceto dissoluti, ii. fermenti acris, ss. pull. hermodact. ii. mellis
com. iii. tereb. iv. olei laur. and de spica, an. ii. far. foenug. i ss. terrae
formicarum cum ovis, lb i. fol. laur. salv. rut. rorismarin. an. m. ss. vermium
terrest. praepar. lb ss. The earth with the eggs and worms shall be boiled
apart with the white wine, and herbs cut in pieces, and these being strained
out, the rest of the things shall be added according to art, and then it shall
be applied to the Hippe. Or else,. rad. enul. camp. sigil. salom. bryon.
bismal. an. ii. coquantur complete and terantur, trajiciantur per setaceum,
addendo farin. foenug. and hordei, an. i. olei liliorum, and chamaem. an. iii.
tereb. iv. cerae quantum sufficit, fiat cataplasma. It resolves, asswageth
pain, and calls forth the humors to the skin. Or else,. rad. sigil. beatae
Mariae, vi. empl. diachyl. albi, iv. croci in aqua vitae dissoluti, ii.
terebinth. i. ol. de spica nardi quantum sufficit, fiat empl. Let it be spread
upon leather and applied warm. I have oftentimes suddenly assuaged the pain
of the sciatica by putting to the pained Hip the root of black Bryony cut into
slices, Black bryony discusseth.
and applied, when the matter was cold. Or else,. cerae citrin. and tereb.
abiet. an. ii. liquefiant simul in vase duplici, and ubi refrixerint, add
pulv. Hermodact. ss. flor. chamaem. irid. flor. an. iii. spicae nardi, flor.
thymi, an. ii. interioris cinamomi elect. and semin. nasturt. an. ii. croci,
iv. malaxantur simul manibus axungia porciveterenon salita unctis, and fiat
massa empl. But if the pain be not by this means assuaged, then must we come
to more powerful medicines, as to use great Cupping Glasses applied with much
flame, and to vesicatories. As,. cantharid. quibus detractae sunt alae, ii. A
strong vesicatory.
staphisagr. iii. sinapi, i ss fermenti acerrimi ss. incorporentur simul, and
fiat vesicatorium. Also blisters may be raised by applying the inner rind of
Travailers joy to The inner rind of Travellersjoy a vesicatory.
the wait of some two drammes, a little beneath the grieved part: you must have
a care that the ulcers that remain after the skin of the blisters is taken
off, do run, and be kept open for some time after, that so more of the humor
contained in the part may be drawn away. But if we cannot avail by these
means, we must according to Hippocrates his counsel, come to the last and
extremest temedy. Such (says he) Aph. ult. sect. 6.
as troubled with a long pain of the sciatica, have their Hippe fall out of
joint, their leg consumes, and they become lame unless they be burnt: we have
also read the same approved by Celsus. It is the last (says he) and most
effectual medicine in longer diseases, to cauterize with hot irons the skin
of the Hippe in three or four places; Lib. 4. cap. 22.
and then not to heal up these ulcers or fontenels as soon as may be, but to
keep them open by putting thereinto bullets of gold, or silver, or pills of
Gentian, or wax melted and wrought up with the powder of vitrioll, mercury,
and the like cathaeretickes until the affect against which we use this remedy
be helped, for by this means many have bin helped. Therefore three or four
actual cauteries, or hot irons shall be so thrust in about the joint of the
Hip, that they may enter into the flesh some fingers breadth, yet so that you
shun the nerves. Cauteryes here do good, for The use of cauteries in the
sciatica.
that by heating the part, they heat and dissolve the cold humors, they cut,
attenuate, and draw forth the gross and viscide, so that they flow out by the
ulcers, together with the quitture. Over and besides, the ligaments are
strengthened by their cicatrization, and their looseness helped; and by this
means the whole part is notably corroberated.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the flatulent convulsion, or convulsive contraction, which is
commonly called by the French, Gout Grampe, and by the English, the Crampe.
THat which the French call Gout grampe, we hear intend to treat of, induced
thereto rather by the affinity of the name, than of the thing, What the Cr^mp
is.
for if one speak truly, it is a certain kind of convulsion generated by a
flatulent matter, by the violence of whose running down or motion, oft-times
the neck, arms, and legs are either extended, or contracted into themselves
with great pain, but that for a short time. The cause thereof is a gross and
tough vapor, insinuating it self into the branches of the nerves, and the The
cause thereof.
membranes of the muscles. It takes one on the night, rather than on the day,
for that then the heat and spirits usually retire themselves into the entrails
and center of the body; whence it is that flatulencies may be generated, which
will fill up, distend and pull the part whereinto they run, just as we see
lute-strings are extended. This affect often takes such as swim in cold
water, and causes many to be drowned, though excellent swimmers, their members
by this means being so straightly Who subject thereto.
contracted, that they cannot by any means be extended. For the skin by the
coldness of the water is contracted and condensed, and the pores thereof shut,
so that the engendered flatulencies have no passage forth. Such as give
themselves to drunkenness and gluttony, or sloth and idleness, are usually
more frequently troubled with this disease, by reason of their heaping up of
crudities. Therefore it is cured by moderate diet, and ordering of the body,
and exercise of each part thereof, for thus they The cure.
gather strength, and the generation of the flatulent matter is hindered. In
the very time when it takes one, the patient shall be cured by long rubbing
with warm clothes, and aqua vitae, wherein the leaves of sage, rosemary, time,
savory, lavander, cloves, ginger, and the like discussing and resolving things,
have been infused. The extension and flexion of the members or joints, and
walking, are also good.

The End of the Eighteenth Book.
OF THE LUES VENEREA, AND THOSE SYMPTOMS WHICH HAPPEN BY MEANS THEREOF. THE
NINETEENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. A description of the Lues Venerea.
THe French call the Lues Venerea, the Neapolitane disease, the Italians What
the Lues venerea is.
and Germans [as also the English] term it the French disease, the Latins
call it Pudendagra, others name it otherwise. But it makes no great matter how
it be called, if the thing it self be understood. Therefore the Lues Venerea
is a disease gotten or taken by touch, but chiefly that which is in unclean
copulation; and it partakes of an occult quality, commonly taking its original
from ulcers of the privy parts, and then further manifesting its self by
pustles of the head, and other external parts; and lastly, infecting the
entrails and inner parts with cruel and nocturnall tormenting pain of the
head, shoulders, joints, and other parts. In process of time, it causes knots
and hard Tophi; and lastly corrupts What hurt it does to the body.
and fowls the bones, dissolving them, the flesh about them being oft-times
not hurt; but it corrupts and weakeneth the substance of other parts,
according to the condition of each of them, the distemper and evil habit of
the affected bodies, and the inveteration or continuance of the morbificke
cause. For some lose one of their eyes, others both, some lose a great portion
of the eyelids, othersome look very ghastly, and not like themselves, and
some become squint-eyed. Some lose their hearing, others have their noses fall
flat, the pallat of their mouths perforated with the loss of the bone
Ethmoides, so that in stead of free and perfect utterance, they faulter and
fumble in their speech. Some have their mouths drawn awry, others their yards
cut off, and women a great part of their privities tainted with corruption.
There be some who have the Urethra or passage of the yard obstructed by
budding caruncles, or inflamed pustles, so that they cannot make water without
the help of a Catheter, ready to die within a short time, either by the
suppression of the urine, or by a Gangrene arising in these parts, unless you
succor them by the amputation of their yards. Others become lame of their
arms, and othersome of their legs, and a third sort grow stiff by the
contraction of all their members, so that they have nothing left them sound but
their voice, which serves for no other purpose but to bewail their miseries,
for which it is scantly sufficient. Wherefore should I trouble you with mention
of those, that can scantly draw their breath by reason of an Asthma, or those
whose bodies waste with a hecticke fever and slow consumption? It fares far
worse with these, who have all their bodies deformed by a Leprosy arising
there hence, and have all their throttles and throats The Leprosy sometimes
the offspring of the Lues vene^ea.
eaten with putride and cancrous ulcers; their hair falling off from their
heads, their hands and feet cleft with tetters and scaly chinkes: neither is
their case much better, who, having their brains tainted with this disease,
have their whole bodies shaken by fits of the falling sickness; who troubled
with a filthy and cursed flux of the belly, do continually cast forth stinking
and bloody filth. Lastly, there are no kind of diseases, no sorts of
symptoms, wherewith this disease is not complicate, never to be taken away,
unless the virulencie of this murrain be wholly taken away, and impugned by
its proper Antidote, that is, argentum vivum.

CHAP. II. Of the causes of the Lues Venerea.
THere are two efficient causes of the Lues venerea; the first is, a certain
occult and specificke quality, which cannot be demonstrated; yet it may The
Lues venerea the scourge of whoremongers.
be referred to God, as by whose command this has assailed mankind, as a
scourge or punishment to restrain the too wanton and lascivious lusts of
unpure whoremongers. The other is an impure touch or contagion, and
principally, that which happens in copulation. Whether the man or woman have
their privities troubled with virulent ulcers, or be molested with a virulent
strangury (which disease crafty Whores color by the name of the whites) the
malignity catches hold of the other; thus a woman takes this disease by a man
casting it into her hot, open and moist womb; but a man takes it from a
woman, which, for example sake, has some small while before received the
virulent seed of a whore-master polluted with this disease, the mucous sanies
whereof remaining in the wrinckles of the woman's womb, may be drawn in by the
pores of the standing and open yard, whence succeed malign ulcers, and a
virulent strangury. This virulencie, like a torch or candle set on fire, will
by little and little be propagated and sent by the veins, arteries and nerves
to the noble parts; whose malignity a strong liver not enduring, by the
strength of the natural expulsive faculty, will send it into the groines,
whereon follow Abscesses, therefore called venereall Bubo's. These, if they
return in again, and cast not forth matter by being opened, they will, by
their falling back into the veins and arteries, infect the mass of the
Venereall Bubo's returning in again occasion the Lues venerea.
blood by the like tainture, and thence will ensue the Lues venerea. Yet this
disease may be got by a more occult manner of touch, as by breathing only. For
it is not altogether besides reason and experience, that a woman long troubled
with this disease, may by importunate and often kissing, transfuse malignity
into a child; for the tender and soft substance of a little child may be
altered, infected, and by little and The Lues venerea may be got by the only
communication of vapor.
little corrupted by receiving of filthy, and in their whole kind malign
vapors. For it is known, and now vulgarly believed, that mid-wives by
receiving the child of a woman infected with this disease, to have got this
affect, the malignity being taken and drawn into their bodies through the
pores of their hands by the passages of the veins and arteries. Neither does
it spare any condition, sex, nor age of men: for, not only whosoever use
copulation, but such as only lie with them, may be taken by this virulencie;
yea verily, if they only lie in the sheets or coverings which retain his
sweat, or the virulencie cast forth by an ulcer. The same danger may assail
those who shall drink in the same vessel after such as are troubled with this
disease. For by the impure touch of their lips, they leave a virulent sa^ies
and spittle upon the edges of the cup, which is no less contagious in its
kind than the virulencie of leprous persons, or the some of mad dogs.
Wherefore it is no How nurses may infect children, and they their nurses.
marvel if children nursed by an infected nurse, draw in the seeds of this
disease together with the milk, which is only blood whitened in the breasts; or
infected sucking children by their hot and ulcerated mouths, may trans-fuse
this malignity into the body of the nurse, by the rare, loose and porous
substance of the dugs which it frequently sucketh.

This following history is very memorable to this purpose. A certain very good
A history.
Citizen of this City of Paris granted to his wife being a very chaste woman,
that conditionally she should nurse her own child of which she was lately
delivered, she should have a nurse in the house to ease her of some part of
the labor: by ill hap, the nurse they took was troubled with this disease;
wherefore she presently infected the child, the child the mother, the mother
her husband, and he two of his children who frequently accompanied him at bed
and board, being ignorant of that malignity wherewith he was inwardly tainted.
In the mean while the mother when she observed that her nurse child came not
forward, but cried almost perpetually, she asked my counsel to tell her the
cause of the disease; which was not hard to be done, for the wholebody thereof
was replenished with venereall scabs and pustles, the hired nurses and the
mothers nipples were eaten in with virulent ulcers; also the fathers, and the
two other childrens bodies, whereof the one was three, the other four years
old, were troubled with the like pustles and scabs. I told them that they had
all the Lues venerea, which took its original and first offspring by malign
contagion from the hired nurse. I had them in cure, and by Gods help healed
them all; except the sucking child, which died in the cure. But the hired nurse
was soundly lashed in the prison, and should have been whipped through all the
streets of the City, but that the magistrate had a care to preserve the
credit of the unfortunate family.

CHAP. III. In what humor the malignity of the Lues venerea resides.
THough in the opinion of many the antecedent cause of this disease be the
mass of blood containing the four humors, yet I had rather place the matter,
and primary, and chief seat thereof in gross and viscide phlegm infected with
the malign quality of the venereous venom, and from this beginning and
foundation, I think by a certain contagious growth it sooner or later infects
the other humors, as each of them is disposed or apt to suffer. Of which my
opinion there are many arguments, but this chiefly, That by the evacuation of
a phlegmatic humor, whether by the mouth and salivation, or by stool,
urine, or sweat in men of what temper soever, whether choleric, sanguine or
melancholy, the disease is helped or cured. Secondly, for that the excess of
pain is Why the pain is worse upon the night than on the day.
more by night than by day, because then the phlegm bearing sway, severs the
perio^tium from the bone, or else offends it and the rest of the membranous and
nervous bodies by the acrimony of its malignity. Thirdly, because the patients
are hurt by the use of cold things, but usually find benefit by hot medicines,
whither they be ointments, plasters, fumigations, or whatsoever else, inwardly
taken, or out-wardly applied. Fourthly, for that in venereous pustles, there is
found a certain hardness at the root, though outwardly they make show of
choler or blood. For being opened, you shall find them stuffed with a certain
plaster-like and ^ophous matter, or else with tough phlegm, or viscous pus;
whence arise these hard tophi, or bony excressences upon the bones, if not from
phlegmatic humors there heaped up and concrete? Fifthly, for that the
spermaticke and cold parts do primarily and principally feel the harm of
this disease. Sixthly, for that the ulcers which overspread the body by means
of this disease, admit of no cure, unless you first cause sweats. Therefore if
the matter of the disease, and such ulcers as accompany it were hot and dry, it
would grow worse, and be rather increased by a decoction of This disease
sometimes lies long hid in the body before it show it self.
Guajacum, the roots of China, or sarsaparilla. Seventhly, because oft-times
this disease, the seed thereof being taken or drawn into the body, so lies
hid for the space of a year, that it shows no sign thereof, which happens
not in diseases proceeding from an hot matter, which causes quick and violent
motions. By this it appears that the basis and foundation of the Lues venerea
is placed or seated in a phlegmatic humor; yet may I not deny, but that other
humors confused therewith may be also in fault, and defiled with the like
contagion. For there are scarce any tumors which proceed from a simple humor,
and that of one kind; but as in tumors, so here the denomination is to be
taken from that humor which carries the chief sway.

CHAP. IIII. Of the signs of the Lues Venerea.
WHen the Lues venerea is lately taken, malign ulcers appear in the
privities, swellings in the groines, a virulent strangury runs oft-times
with filthy sanies, which proceeds either from the prostata, or the ulcers of
the urethra; the patient is troubled with pains in his joints, head, and
shoulders, and as it were breakings of his arms, legs and all his members,
they are weary without a cause, so that neither the foot nor hand can easily
perform his duty; their mouths are inflamed, a swelling troubles their
throats, which takes away their freedom of speaking and swallowing, yea of
their very spittle; pustles rise over all their bodies, but chiefly certain
garlands of them engirt their temples and heads; the shedding or loss of the
hair, disgraceth the head and chin; and leanenesse deformeth the rest of the
body; yet all of these use not to appear in all bodies, but some of them in
some. But the most certain signs of this disease The most certain signs of
the Lues venerea.
are, a callous ulcer in the privities, hard and ill conditioned, and this same
is judged to have the same force in a prognosticke, if after it be cicatrized,
it retain the same callous hardness; the Bubo's, or swellings in the groines
to return back into the body without coming to suppuration, or other
manifest cause: these two signs, if they concur in the same patient, you may
judge or foretell that the Lues venerea is either present, or at hand; yet this
disease happens to many without the concourse of these two signs, which also
bewrays it self by other manifest signs, as ulcers and pustles in the rest
of the body, rebellious against medicines though powerful, and discreetely
applied, unless the whole body be anointed with Argentum vivum. But when as
the disease becomes inveterate, many become impotent to venery, and the
malignity and number of the symptoms increase, their pains remain fixed and
stable, very hard and knotted tophi grow upon the bones; and oft-times they
become rotten and foul, as also the hands and feet by the corruption of salt
phlegm are troubled with chops or clefts, and their heads are seized upon by
an ophiasis and alopecia; whitish tumors with roots deep fastened in, arise in
sundry parts of the body, filled with a matter like the meat of a chestnut, or
like a tendon; if they be opened they degenerate into diverse ulcers, as
putride, eating, and other such, according to the nature and condition of the
affected bodies. But why the pains are more grievous on the night season: this
may be added Two other causes of the excess of pain in the night.
to the true reason we rendered in the precedent Chapter; first for that the
venereous virulencie lying as it were asleep is stirred up and enraged by the
warmenesse of the bed and coverings thereof; Secondly, by reason of the
patients thoughts which on the night season are wholly turned and fixed upon
the only object of pain.

CHAP. V. Of Prognostics.
IF the disease be lately taken, associated by a few symptoms, as with some
small number of pustles, and little and wandering pains, The signs of a
curable Lues Venerea.
and the body besides be young and in good case, and the constitution of the
season be good and favorable, as the spring, then the cure is easy, and may
be happily performed. But on the contrary, that which is inveterate and
enraged by the fellowship of many and malign symptoms, as a fixed pain of
the head, knots and rottenness of the bones, ill natured ulcers in a body very
much fallen away and weak, and whereof the cure has been already sundry
times undertaken by Empyricks, but in vain; or else by learned Physicians, but
to whose remedies, approved by reason and experience, the malignity of the
disease and the rebellious virulency has refused to yield, is to be thought
uncurable, especially, if to these so The signs of an uncurable one.
many evils, this be added, that the patient be almost wasted with a
consumption and hectic leanenesse, by reason of the decay of the native
moisture. Wherefore you must only attempt such by a palliative cure; yet be
wary here in making your prognosticke: for many have been accounted in a
desperate case, who have recovered; for by the benefit of God and nature,
wonders oft-times happen in diseases. Young men who are of a rare or laxe habit
of body are more subject to this disease, than such as are of a contrary habit
and complexion. For as not all who are conversant with such as have the Plague,
or live in a pestilent air, are alike affected; so neither all who lie or
accompany with such as have the Lues venerea, are alike infected or tainted.
The pains of such as have this disease, are How these pains differ from those
of the gout.
far different from the pains of the Gout. For those of the Gout return and
torment by certain periods and fits, but the other are continual and almost
always like themselves; Gouty pains possess the joints, and in these
condense a plaster-like matter into knots; but those of the Pocks are rather
fastened in the midst of the bones, and at length dissolve them by
rottenness and putrefaction. Venereous ulcers which are upon the yard are
hard to cure, but if being healed, they shall remain hard and callous, they
are signs of the disease lying hid in the body.

Generally, the Lues venerea which now reigns is far more mild and easy
The Lues venerea bcomes more gentle than formerly it was.
to be cured than that which was in former times, when as it first began
amongst us: besides, each day it seems to be milder than other. Astrologers
think the cause hereof to be this, for that the celestial influences which
first brought in this disease, in success of time by the contrary revolutions
of the Stars, lose their power and become weak; so that it may seem
somewhat likely, that at length aftersome few years it may wholly cease; no
otherwise than the disease termed Mentagra, which was very like this in many
symptoms, and troubled many of the Romans in the reign of Tiberius; and the
Lichen, which in the time of Claudius (who succeeded Tiberius) vexed not only
Italy, but all Europe besides. Yet Physicians had rather take to themselves the
glory of this less raging disease, and to refer it to the many and wholesome
means, which have been invented, used and opposed thereto by the most happy
labors of noble wits.

CHAP. VI. How many, and what means there are to oppugn this disease.
MAny sorts of remedies have been found out by many to oppugn and Why the
decoction of Guajacum is not sufficient to impugn the disease.
overcome this disease. Yet at this day there are only four which are
principally used. The first is by a decoction of Guajacum; the second by
unction; the third by emplasters, and the fourth by fumigation; all of them by
Hydrargyrum, the first excepted. Yet that is not sufficiently strong and
powerful; for experience has taught, that the decoction of Guajacum has not
sufficient strength to extinguish the venom of the venereous virulency, but
only to give it ease for a time; for because it heates, attenuates, provokes
sweat and urine, wastes the excrementitious humors by drying them, it seems
to cure the disease, for that thereupon, for some time, the pain and all other
symptoms seem more remiss; but these endeavors are weak and deceitful, as
whereby that only which is more subtle in the humors in fault, is exhausted
and dispersed by sweat. But Hydrargyrum, as a certain higher power, conteines
therein all the power of Guajacum, yet much more excellent and efficacious; for
besides that it heats, attenuates, Hydrargyrum, is sufficient to overcome the
disease.
cuts, resolves and dryes, it provokes sweat and urine, and besides it expels
noxious humors upwards and downwards, by the mouth and stool. By which
evacuations not only the more subtle, but also the more gross and foeculent
excrements, wherein the seat of this disease is properly fixed, are dispersed
and evacuated; by which the Physician may be bold to assure himself of
certain victory over the disease. But after the use of the decoction of
Guajacum, fresh pains and knots arise by the relics of the more gross and
viscous humors left in the cavities of the entrails; but Hydrargyrum leaves
no relics behind it.

CHAP. VII. How to make choice of the wood Guajacum.
THat is preferred before the rest, which is of a great logge, of a dusky
color, new, gummy, with a fresh strong smell, an acride and some what biting
taste, the bark cleaving very close to the wood. It has a faculty to The
faculty.
heat, rarifie, attenuate, attract, to cause sweat, and move urine, and besides
by a specific property to weaken the viculency of the Lues Venerea. There are
three substances taken notice of in this wood: the first is the bark, the
other is a whitish wood which is next to the bark, the third is the heart of
the wood, that is, the inner, The parts.
blackish, and more dusky part thereof. The bark is the more dry, wherefore
you shall use it when as you would dry more powerfully; the middle substance is
The hot and fiery faculty of the bark.
more moist, because it is more succulent and fat; that which lies between
both is of a mild temper. Wherefore the two last are more convenient for
delicate natures and rare bodies, which require less drying. Furthermore, the
bark must be given to dense and strong natures, that by the more fiery force
thereof, the humors may be made more fluide, and the passages of the body more
passable. But I would here be understood to mean such bark as is not putride
and rotten with age, to which fault it is very subject, for that long before it
be shipped by our people, the wood lies in heaps upon the shore in the open
air, until they can find chapmen for it; which, when it is brought aboard,
it is stowed in the hold or bottom of the ship, where beneath by the sea
through the chinkes of the bords, and above by the mariners, it usually
gathers much dirt. When it is brought hither to us, it is bought and sold by
weight, wherefore that it may keep the weight, the Druggists lay it up in vaults
and cellars under ground, where the surface thereof bedewed with much moisture
can scarce escape mouldinesse and rottenness. Wherefore I do not like to give
the decoction either of the bark or wood which is next thereto to sick people.

CHAP. VIII. Of the preparation of the decoction of Guajacum.
FIrst you must have your Guajacum shaved into small pieces, and to every pound
of the shavings, add of fair water eight, ten, or twelve pints, The
proportion of the Guajacum to the water.
more or less as the nature of the party, and condition of the disease shall
seem to require, according to the rule of the formerly mentioned indications.
Let the water be hot or warm, especially if it be in winter, that so it may
the more easily and thoroughly enter into the body of the wood, and draw into it
self the faculties thereof in the space of twenty four hours, wherein it is
Why the decoction ought to be performed with a dry heat.
macerated; then boil it in balneo, to avoid empyreuma, or taste of fire,
which it will contract by boiling it over a hot fire. Yet some nothing regard
this, but think the patient sufficiently served, if they make a decoction in
an earthen pot well glased, over a gentle fire, so that no part of the liquor
may run over the mouth of the vessel, for that thus so much of the strength
of the decoction might vanish away. Howsoever it be made, let it be boiled to
the consumption of half, a third, or fourth part, as the nature of the patient,
and disease shall seem to require. There be some who mix diverse simples
therewith, which have an occult and proper simpathy with that part of the body
which is principally hurt by the disease, which at the least may serve in stead
of a vehicle to carry the faculties of the decoction thither where the disease
most reigns. Others add thereto purging medicines, whose judgment I cannot
approve of, for that I think it is not for the patients good to attempt two
evacuations Whether it be fit to add purges to a decoction of Guajacum.
at once, that is, to expel the humors by sweat by the habit of the body, and
by purging by the belly; for that as much urine, so also much sweat shows
little evacuation by stool. For these two motions are contrary, which nature
cannot brook at once. For purging draws from the circumference to the Center,
but sweat runs Hip. aph. ult. sect. 6.
a quite contrary course, and this is the opinion of many and great physicians.
This first decoction being boiled out, and strained the like quantity of water
shall be put to the stuff, or mass, that so being boiled again without any
further infusion, and strained, with the addition of a little cinnamon for the
strengthening of the stomach, the patient may use it at his meals, and
between his meals, if he be dry, for his ordinary drink. The quantity of the
first decoction to be taken at once, ought to be some five or six ounces, and
it shall be drunk warm, that so it may be the sooner brought into action, and
lest the actual coldness should offend the stomach; and then the How, and in
what quantity this decoction must be taken.
patient being well covered, shall keep himself in bed, and there expect sweat,
which if it come slowly on, it shall be helped forwards with stone bottles
filled full of hot water, and put to the soles of the feet. If any parts in the
interim shall be much pained, they shall be comforted by applying of swines
bladders half filled with the How to dry the sweat of the body.
same decoction heated. Neither will it be unprofitable before the decoction
be drunk, to rub over all the body with warm linen clothes, that by this
means the humors may be attenuated, and the pores of the skin opened. When
he shall have sweat some two hours, the parts opposite to the grieved places,
shall first be wiped, then presently, but more gently, the grieved parts
themselves, lest a greater confluxe of humors flow thereto. These things being
done, he shall keep himself in bed, shunning the cold air until he be cooled
and come to himself again, some two hours after, he shall so dine, as the
disease and his former custom shall seem to require; six hours after,
betaking himself to his bed, he shall drink the like quantity of the
decoction, and order himself as before. But if he be either weak, or weary of
his bed, it shall be sufficient to keep the house without lying down; for
although he shall not sweat, yet there will be a great dissipation of the
vapors, and venenate spitits, by infensible transpiration; for the Lues
venerea by the only communication of these, often times catches hold, and
propagates it self in lying with a bedfellow tainted therewith. But as it is
requisite to have let blood, and purged the body by the advice of a physician,
before the taking of the decoction of Guajacum; so whilst he does take it, it
much conduces to keep the belly soluble (which is much bound by the heat and
dryness of such a drink) and to preserve the purity of the first veins by a
glyster, or laxative medicine taken every fifth, or sixth day. But for the use
of it, we must warily observe, taking indication not only from the malignity,
and contumacy of the disease, but also from the particular nature of the
patient; for such as have their body wasted by heat and leanenesse, and their
skin dry and scaily, (whence you may gather a great adustion of the humors,
and, as it were, a certain incineration of the habit of the body) must more
sparingly make use of these things, but rather temper the body by humecting
things taken inwardly, and applied outwardly, as bathes, ointments without
quicksilver, and other such like things. And then a very weak decoction of
Guajacum shall be used for a few days before your unction with Quicke-silver.
A more plentiful diet, as it draws forth the disease, which of its own
nature is long, so a more sparing and slender diet The manner of diet.
makes the ulcers more rebellious and contumacious, by a hecticke dryness.

Therefore a middle course must be kept, and meats made choice of which are
fit, and naturally engender good and laudible juice in the body. For it is not
only great ignorance, but much more cruelty, to go about to contain all
patients without any difference, within the strait allowance of four ounces of
Ship-bisket, and twelve damask prunes: for I judge it far better to diet the
patient with Lamb, Veale, Kid, Pullets, fat Larkes, and Blacke-birds, as those
which have a far greater familiarity with our bodies, than Prunes and the
like Junkets. Let his bread be made of white wheat, well leavened, neither too
new, or tough, neither too old or hard. Let his drink be made of the mass, or
strainings of the first decoction of Guajacum boiled with more water, as was
formerly mentioned; yet if there arise any great weakness of the faculties,
you may permit the use of some little wine, drinking especially before each
mealea cup of the last mentioned decoction. Let him avoid To whom, and what
manner of wine may be allowed.
sleep presently after meat, for so the head is filled with gross vapoures.
Passions or perturbations of the mind must also be avoided, for that by these
the spirits are inflamed and dissipated; all delights of honest pleasure are to
be desired, but venety wholly avoided, as that which weakens all the nervous
parts. Many in stead of a decoction of Guajacum, use a decoction of China. Now
this China is the root of a certain rush, knotty, rare, and heavy, when it is
fresh, but light when it is waxed old; it is The description of China.
also without smell, whence many judge it void of any effectual quality, it is
brought into use out of India, it is thus prepared, it is cut into thin round
slices, boyld in fountain or river water, and is given to patients to drink
morning and evening after this manner.. rad. chin. in taleol. sect. ii. aquoe
font. lb xii. infundantur per hor. xii. and coquantur The preparation.
ad consumption. tertiae partis. Let him take vi. in the morning, and so much
at night; let him expect a sweat in his bed: a second decoction may be made of
the mass remaining of the first, but with a less quantity of water put
thereto, which also by longer boiling may draw forth the strength remaining in
the mass, and be used at meals for ordinary drink. There are some who make a
third decoction thereof, buthat is wholly unprofitable and unusefull.
Sarsaparilla is prepared also just after the same manner. Of sarsaparilla.


CHAP. IX. Of the second manner of curing the Lues venerea, which is performed
by friction, or unction.
THe cure of the Lues venerea which is performed by unction and friction is
more certain, yet not in every kind, condition and season thereof. For if the
disease be inveterate from an humor, tough, gross, viscous, and When the
body must be, prepared with humecting things before unction.
more tenaciously fixed inthe solid parts, as you may gather by the knotty
tumors of the bones; for then we are so far from doing any good with a
friction used at the first, that on the contrary we bring the patient in
danger of his life, unless we shall have first prepared the humor to
expulsion, by emollient and digesting things first used. But if it be lately
taken with moveable pains, pustles, and ulcers in the jaws, throat, and
privy parts, then may it be easily cured without such preparatives, especially
if the humor be sufficiently obedient, and as it were prepared of it self,
and its own nature. Therefore first using general medicines, you may
afterward come to use the unction with Hydrargyrum.

CHAP. X. Of the choice, preparation and mixing of Hydrargyrum.
HYdrargum which is clear, thin, white and fluide, is the best: on the
contrary, that which is livid, and not so fluide, is thought to be adulterated
by the admixture of some lead. That it may be the purer, strain it through
some sheep leather, for by pressing it, when it is bound up, it passes
through by its subtlety, and leaves the filth and leaden dross behind it on
the inside. Then it may be boiled in vinegar with sage, rosemary, time,
chamomile, melilote, and strained again, that so many ways cleansed, it may
enter into ointments and plasters. To kill it more surely, it shall be long
wrought, and as it were ground in a mortar, that it may be broken and
separated into most small particles, How to kill argentum vivum.
thatby this means it may not be able to gather it self into the former
body: to which purpose you may also add some sulphur, or sublimate, as we
shall show hereafter. It is most usually mixed with hogs grease, adding thereto
some oil of turpentine, nutmegs, cloves, sage, and Galens treacle. If a
Leucophlegmatia together with the Lues venerea affect the body, then hot,
attenuating, cutting, and drying things shall be added to the medicine, which
shall be provided for unction; the same What to mix therewith.
shall be done when as we would have it to enter into the substance of the
bones. But if the patient be of a choleric temper, and his blood easy to be
inflamed, you shall make choice of less hot, attractive and discussing things.
As when the body shall be replenished with knotty and scirrhous tumors, or
squalide by excessive dryness, then shall emollient and humecting things be
mixed therewith. But that such ointments may have a better consistence, I use
to add to each pound thereof, four, five, or six yolks of hard eggs.
Therefore this shall be the form of the ointment called Vigoes.. axung. porci,
lb i. olei chamaem. anethi, mastich. and laurini, an i. styrac. An unction with
argentum vivum.
liquid. x. rad. enulae, camp. parum tritae, and ebult, an. iii. pull. euphorb.
ss. vini oderif. lb i. bulliant omnia simulusque ad consumpiionem vini, deinde
colentur; colaturae add lythargyrae auri, vi. thuris, mastich. an. vi. res.
pini, iss. tereb. venet. i. argenti vivi, iv. cerae albae, iss. liquefactis
oleis, cum ceraincorporentur omnia simul, fiat linimentum ad usum. Or else,.
argenti vivi praeparati, vi. sublimiti, ss. sulphuris vivi, ss. axung. porci;
salis expertis, lb i. vitellos ovorum sub cineribus coctorum, nu. iii. Another.
olei terebinth. and laurini, an. ii. theriac. vet. and methridat. ss. fiat
linimentum ut artis est. You shall compose it thus, first the sublimatum and
sulphur shall be finely poudered, How to make it
then some part of the Argentum vivum and hogs grease putto them, then
presently after, some of the hard yolks of eggs, continually and diligently
stirring and mixing them all together. All these being well incorporate, add
some more argentum vivum, hogs grease, and yolks of eggs, and incorporate
them with the former; at the last add the oiles, then Treacle, and Mithridate,
and so let them all be beaten together for a whole days space, and thus you
shall make an ointment of a good consistence, which I have often used with good
success. Yet the How to prepare the hog's grease before you mix the argentum
vivum therewith.
hogs grease shall be first boiled with the hot herbs good for the sinews,
as sage, rosemary, time, marjerome, lavander, and others which the season
affoords. For so the axungia acquires a more attenuating faculty, and
consolidating of those parts which the Lues venere^ afflicts. Besides, when
unguents are made for this purpose, that such virulency may be drawn from
within outward, by sweats and transpiration through the pores of the skin,
no man need doubt, but that they ought to be furnished with relaxing,
rarifying, and attractive faculties. But axungia, besides that it is very fit
to kill the argentum vivum, it also relaxeth and mollifieth. Now Oleum
lanrinum, de spica, rutaceum, rarifie, digest, and assuage pain. Turpentine
also extinguisheth, and bridleth the argentum vivum, moderately heates,
resolves and strengthens the nervous parts. But argentum vivum is the proper
antidote of the Lues venerea, as that which cures it howsoever used, drying by
the subtlety of the parts, and provoking sweat. Verily Treacle and Methridate
somewhat conduce to retund the virulency of this disease, but unless argentum
vivum assist as a ferret to hunt, and an alexiterium to impugn the disease,
they can do no great matter.

CHAP. XI. How to use the Unction.
THe body and humors apt to cause or nourish a plethora or inflammation, being
prepared by digestive syrupes, and evacuated by purging and bleeding as is
fitting, according to the direction of some Physi^ian, the patient shall be
shut up in a parlour or chamber, hot either by nature or art, and free from
cold blasts of wind. For cold is most pernicious in this disease, both for that
it hurts the nervous parts, already ill affected by reason of the disease, as
also for that it Cold most hurtful to such as are troubled with the Lues (...)
lessens the efficacy of medicines. Wherefore many do ill in this, who,
whether in winter or summer, anoint their patients in a large room, exposed on
every side to the winds. They deal somewhat more wisely, who put a cloth
fastened like half a tent presently behind the patient, though anointed by
the fire side, so to keep away the cold air from him. Yet it is safest to set,
and anoint the patient either in a little room, or else in some corner of a
large room, separated from the rest of the room by some hangings, and building
a stove, or making some fire therein, for so he may stand or sit as he best
likes, the longer, and with the less offense, and be equally heated on every
side, whereas such as are anointed in a chimney by a fires side cannot but be
heated unequally, being ready to burn on the one side, whilst the other is
cold, which motions are contrary and hurtful to that we require: besides, if
the patient shall be weak, he cannot stand and endure the heat of the fire.
Or if he be shamefac't, he will be unwilling to show all his body at once
naked to the Surgeon, but he may without any harm, and with modesty, lying on
a bed in a little room, wherein a stove is made, have all his limbs anointed
about the joints, and presently bound up, either with stoupes, or carded
cotton, or brown paper.

CHAP. XII. What cautions to be observed in rubbing or anointing the patient.
HE shall be anointed or rubbed over with the ointme^t in the morning, the
concoction and distribution of the meat being perfected, which functions
otherwise would not be well performed, the powers of nature being The patient,
if it may be conveniently done, must be anointed fasting.
distracted into several operations. Yet if the patient shall be weak, you may
some hour before the unction, give him some gelly, the yolk of an egg, or
some broth made of meat, boiled to pieces, but very sparingly, lest nature,
intent upon the concoction of solid meats, or in great quantity, should be
drawn away from that which we intend. At first let only the joints of the
limbs be anointed, as about the wrests, elbowes, knees, anckles, shoulders.
But afterward, In what places the body must be anointed.
if the patient shall be more strong, and a greater commotion of the humors
and body seem necessary, the emunctories of the principal parts may also be
anointed, and the whole spine of the back; yet having much care, and always
shunning the principal and noble parts, lest we should do as those butcherly
Emperickes do, who equally, and in like manner daube and rub over all the
body, from the soles of the feet, to the crown of the head: moreover,
diligent regard must be had of those parts, which are seized upon by the
symptoms of this disease, that they may be more anointed, and that it may be
more thoroughly rubbed in. Yet you must always begin your anointing or rubbing
at those parts which are less offended, lest the humors should be drawn in
greater measure to the grieved part. And as gentle Where to begin the unction.
frications do not sufficiently open the pores of the skin, so more strong and
hard ones shut them up, cause pain, and more plentifully attract the
morbificke matter. Wherefore it will be more convenient to use moderate
frictions, taking indication from the strength of the patient, as that whereto
we must still have the chief regard. There is also another thing whereto the
physician and Surgeon must diligently attend, as that, which if it be not
carefully prevented, will either hasten the death of the patient, or make him
subject to a relapse; that is, the quantity of the remedies and unctions, and
the number of the frictions. Which consideration, together with that which is
of the degrees of the temperaments of the whole body, and each part thereof,
much troubles and exercises the minds of good Physicians, and makes the art
conjecturall, it is so far from being attained to by Empericks. Yet we must
endeavor What it is that makes the art of Physic conjecturall.
by method and reason, that by the rule of indications so frequently mentioned,
we may attain to the knowledge thereof, as near as may be. For to have
perfect knowledge hereof, and to say that those need only four, others five,
and other some six, more or fewer frictions at the beginning, which Emperickes
commonly do, is a thing both impossible and vain. All these must be changed
and ordered according to the malignity and continuance of the disease, and the
condition of the affected bodies. Verily we must so long use frictions and
unctions, until the virulent humors be perfectly evacuated by spitting and
salivation, by stool, urine, sweat or insensible transpiration. Which you may
understand by the falling away and drying up of the pustles and ulcers, and the
ceasing of the pains and other symptoms proper to this disease. In many, by
reason of the more dense and compact habit Who must be rubbed over once, who
twice in a day, and who but every other day.
of the body, nature is more slow in excretion. Yet I have learnt by long
experience that it is best to anoint and chafe such twice in a day, to wit,
morning and evening, six hours after meat. For so you shall profit more in
one day, than by the single frictions of three days. But on the contrary, I
have often, and with good success, rubbed over but each other day more rare
and delicate bodies, giving them one or two days rest to recollect their
strength, which by the too much dissolution of their spirits becoming too
weak, were not sufficient to expel the relics of the morbifick matter. And
certainly about the end of the appointed friction, especially when as the
patients begin to flux at the mouth, the bodies, together with the noxious
humors are made so fluid by the means of the precedent frictions, that one
friction is then more efficacious, than two were at the beginning. Therefore as
Galen bids, Lib. de venae. sect.
when as the disease is great, and the strength of the patient infirm, that
we should part our blood-lettings, and draw a little and a little at once; so
also here when as we shall observe nature stirred up, and ready bent to any
kind of evacuation by the mouth, stool, or other like, you ought not to use
any unction or friction o^^ner than once in a day, yea certainly it will be
better to intermit for some few days. For thus Massa reports, that there was a
certain man who almost wasted with a consumption, being continually afflicted
with the most grievous pains of this disease, and reputed in a desperate case
by other physicians, was notwithstanding at length recovered by him, when as
he had anointed him thirty seven times, putting sometime between for the
recovery of his strength. I my self have observed others, who thus, by the
interposition of one or two days, being rubbed over some fifteen or
seventeene times, have perfectly recovered. Wherefore you must take this course
in resolved and weak bodies, yet in the interim must you have a care, that the
frictions be not too weak, and so few, that the morbifick cause may not be
touched to the quick: for in this kind of disease nature does not of it self
endeavor any Crisis, or excretion; Nature is not sufficiently able to expel
the virulent matter. Signs that the crisis is nigh.
it requires the auxiliary forces of medicines, by whose assistance it may
expel all the malignity. These are signs of such a Crisis, either at hand, or
already present, if the patient be so restless, so loath all things, that he
cannot remain in one place either standing or lying, he can neither eat nor
drink, if he be oppressed with a continual weariness, almost ready to
swoune, yet have a good and equal pulse, and gripings in his belly afflict him
with bloody and viscous dejections, until at length nature after one or two
days, portion of the morbifick matter being spent, be somewhat freed, and all
pains and symptoms so much abated, as the excretions have proceeded. But
whereas medicines are not sufficient in number or strength, there follows an
unperfect Crisis, which leaves behind it some relics of the morbifick matter,
which like leven do so by little and little infect the whole mass of the
humors, that oft-times after ten years space, the disease rises as out of an
ambush, or lurking hole, Inconveniences following upon immoderate unctions.
and becomes far worse than before. But we must in like manner have a care
lest these medicines, that are either given inwardly, or applied outwardly, be
not too strong: for by causing such colliquation of the radical moisture and
solid parts, many have been brought into an incurable consumption. In others
^ordid and putride ulcers have thence arisen in the mouth, which having eaten a
great part of the palate and tongue, have degenerated into a deadly Cancer. In
others hereupon the tongue has so swelled up, that it has filled the whole
capacity of the mouth, so that it could not be bended to any part of the mouth
for chawing, whereupon they have by little and little been famished. In other
some there has been caused so great colliquation of humors, that for a whole
month after, tough and filthy slaver has continually flowed out of their
mouths. Other some have the muscles of their jaws relaxed; others troubled
with a convulsion, so that during the rest of their lives they can scarce gape.
Others by losing a portion of their jaw, have lost some of their teeth. But you
must not always so long anoint and chafe the body, until a flux of the mouth
or belly appear. For you may find sundry persons, who, if you should anoint
or rub them to death, you cannot bring them to flux at the mouth; yet these
will recover notwithstanding, excretion being made either by insensible
transpiration, or evacuation of urine, or some gentle flux of the belly,
either procured by art, or coming of it self. In which case I have observed
that many have received much good by a purging decoction of Guajacum,
administered according to the quantity of the peccant humor, and given for some
days in the morning, adding thereto white For what persons a purging decoction
of Guajacum is good. The cure of a Dysentery occasioned by too strong friction.
wine, if the body abounded with tough and viscide humors. Dysenteryes, or
bloody-fluxes caused by unctions, may be helped by Glysters, wherein much
hog's grease is dissolved to rotund the acrimony caused by the medicine and
humor which nourishes the Dysentery. Also new Treacle dissolved in new milk,
is thought wonderfully to mitigate this symptom.

CHAP. XIII. Of the third manner of Cure, which is performed by cerates, and
emplasters, as the substitutes of unctions.
FOr that sundry by reason of the name, abhor the use of friction, which is
performed by the forementioned ointments, therefore there is found out another
manner of cure, by cerates and emplasters, as substitutes of Frictions, but
that usually is somewhat slower: for which purpose it is not needful only to
use the things which are described by Vigo, but The cure by emplasters more
slow.
you may also devise other, which are more or less anodyne, emollient,
attenuating, discussing, or drying, according to the condition of the present
disease, symptoms, humors and patient, never omitting Hydrargyrum, the only
antidote of this disease. Such emplasters mitigate pains and knots, and
resolve all hardness, and are absolutely very effectual, for continually
sticking to the body, they continually operate. In what case they are chiefly
useful.
Wherefore they are of prime use in relapses of this disease, or when the
humors are thick and viscous, or otherwise lie deep in the body, and very
difficult to root out. But for that they work more slowly often times, such as
use them are forced at length to use some frictions to stimulate nature, and
cause the speedier excretion. Yet in some whose bodies and humors have been
fluid, either by nature or art, the applied emplasters have in three days
space procured evacuation sufficient for the disease, so that if they had not
been taken away, they would have caused a colliquation, like that which we
lately mentioned in too violent friction. Wherefore you shall use the like
discretion in taking off these, as you use in your unctions and friction.
Instead of Emp. de Vigo, this following may be fitly used.. massae emp. de
melil. The description of an emplaster.
and oxycrocei, an. lb ss. argenti vivi extin. vi. ol^o laurino, and de spica,
reducantur ad formam emplastri. These plasters must be equally spread upon
leather, and laid upon the same places of the joints, as were formerly
mentioned in the cure by frictions. Yet some there be, who cover with the
plaster all the arm, from the hand even to the shoulder, and all the leg,
from the top of the knee, even to the ends of the toes, which thing I do not
disallow of, if so be that the places of the joints be covered over with a
thicker plaster. They must be left sticking there so long, until nature be
stirred up and provoked to cause excretion of the virulent humors. Yet if in
the interim great itching shall arise in the parts, you may take them off so
long until the parts shall be fomented with a decoction of the flowers of
chamomile, melilote, red roses, and the like, made in wine, to discuss that
which caused the itching, and then you may lay them on again. Some, to hinder
the rising of any itch, lay not the bare plaster to the part, but cover it over
with sarcene^, so to keep it from sticking, and thus intercept the
transpiration of the part, the cause of itching. They shall be stronger or
weaker, and lie to the part a longer or shorter space, as long as the
indications, so often formerly mentioned, shall seem to require. The effects of
emplasters are the same as of frictions, for they cause excretion, one while by
insensible transpiration, otherwhiles by a Diarrhae^, or flux of the belly,
sometimes by urines, but most frequently (which Crisis is also most certain)
by salivation. Sordide and virulent ulcers often breed in the mouth, tongue,
palate, and What excretion best in this disease.
gummes by salivation, by reason of the acrimony of the virulent humors
adhering to the sides of the mouth: to hinder the growth of these, many inject
glysters made of emollient things, especially at the beginning of the
salivation, so to draw downwards the humors forcibly flying up in greater
quantity than is fit, although the part it self may endure them.

There are also some, who to the same end give a purging medicine at the very
To avoid the ulcers of the mouth. To cure them.
time when as the humors are ready to move upwards, the which I think is not
a safe course. The cure of such ulcers is far different from the cure of
others. For they ought by no means to be repercussed or repelled, how
enflamed soever they be, but only to be mitigated by anodyne gargarismes, so
only to lessen the heat, and that by this frequent washing of the mouth, you
may hinder the sticking or furring of viscide humors to such like ulcers. A
decoction of barley, cowes milk warm, held and gargled in the mouth, the
mucilages of the seeds of mallows, marsh-malloxes, psilium, lettuce, line
extracted in the water of barley, mallows, and pellitory of the wall, are good
for this purpose; for thus the ulcers become more mild, and the tenacity of
the adherent humors is loosed. You must at the first beware of strong
detergent medicines, for almost all such have acrimony joined with them, which
will increase the pain, but chiefly in the state of the disease: for so, the
ulcers gently cleansed by frequent gargling, would become worse by the use of
acride things. Therefore it shall be sufficient to make use of the
forementioned medicines, so to hinder the increase of the filth, and
inflammation of the ulcers, if so be that such ulcers be not too exceeding
malign and burning. For if it shall happen either by the powerful efficacy of
the applied plasters, or by the violence of nature in its motion of the ill
humors upwards, that such store of viscous, and gross humors are carried to
the mouth, that it wants little, but that the part it self is overruled by
the morbificke matter, so that by the violence and continuance of the flux,
the mouth and jaws become so swelled, that a gangrene is to be feared, by
hindering the entrance of the spirits, and extinguishing of the native heat of
these parts. In this case we are forced to leave the proper cure for to
withstand the accidents, and for this purpose we use restrictive and repelling
things, such as are barley water, plantain, Reestrictive and repelling
gargarismes.
nightshade, knot-grasse, shepherds Purse, etc. with syrup of roses,
violets, quinces, berberies, pomegranates, etc. also such are the mucilages and
decoctions of the seeds of lettuce, psilium, quinces, plantaine, cucumbers,
melons, white poppy, hen-bane, in the waters of roses, plantaine, nightshade,
water lillies, wood bin^, etc. Also it is convenient to procure sweats by
stoves, or the application of any hot and dry things; for thus the humors
which run forth of the vessels into all the surface of the body, are diverted.
But when as the course of the humors running to the mouth, is beginning to
stop, and the tumors and ulcers begin to lessen, then nothing hinders, but
that we may use gently detergent things, as sir. rosarum siccarum, mel rosatum,
Diamoron, Dianucum, and the like. But when it is time to dry the ulcers, they
may be lightly touched with alome water, or with aqua fortis, such as
goldsmiths To dry the ulcers of the mouth.
have used for the separation of metals. They may also frequently use drying
gargarismes made with astriction of the waters of roses, plantaine,
nightshade, sheepheards purse, knot grass, and dogs tongue, boiling therein
balaustia, ros. rub. myr^il. sumach. alumen. acacia, berber. galla; malicor.
and the like. During the time of fluxing or salivation you must diet and ^eed
the patient with liquid meats, and those of good juice, and easy digestion,
for that then he can neither chaw, swallow, nor digest hard things. For nature
wholly intent upon the excretion of the noxious and peccant humors, as also
weakened by the bitterness of pain, watchings, and unquietness, and
consequently a great resolution of the spirits, cannot insist powerfully upon
the work of concoction. Therefore he shall be fed with rear new laid eggs,
caudles of the same, barley creames, culesses made of a decoction of knuckles
Manner of diet when the mouth is ulcerated.
of veale, and a capon, and gellyes, and with these in small quantity, but
frequently administered, always gargling his mouth before he eat. For his
drink he shall use a decoction of Guajacum aromatized with a little cinnamon,
but if any desire that the drink shall become nourishment, for that the
patients cannot feed on more solid To make their drink nourishing.
meats, you may give them old wine, claret and thin, mixed with some barley
water. Some there are who steep some crummes of pure manchet in the aforesaid
^ine, and then press it out, but yet so, that there may some part of the bread
remain therein, which may make it more nourishing, and less sharp or acride.
Others steep bread hot out of the oven, in wine, for the space of a night,
then they distill it all over in balneo Mariae; the liquor which first comes
over is more strong and hot, but that which flows out afterward, more mild,
and such as the patient may use to mix with his wine without any danger, for
his better nourishment, and the recovery of his strength.

For to refresh the spirits in fear of fainting, Muskedine, Hippocras, rose
vinegar, and the like, put to the nose to smell to, will be sufficient, unless
peradventure the patient should naturally abhor such things, for so they
would rather deject the powers and spirits. In the interim you must have care
of the belly, that you keep it open by gentle and emollient glysters.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the fourth manner of curing the Lues venerea.
SOme have devised a fourth manner of curing the Lues venerea, which is by
suffitus or fumigations. I do not much approve hereof, by reason of sundry
malign symptoms which thence arise, for they infect and corrupt by their
venomous contagion, the brain and lungs, by whom they are primarily and fully
received, whence the patients during the residue The hurt that follows upon
fumigations.
of their lives have stinking breaths. Yea many while they have been thus
handled, have been taken hold of by a convulsion, and a trembling of their
heads, hands, and legs, with a deafness, apoplexy, and lastly miserable
death, by reason of the malign vapors of sulphur and quicksilver, whereof
cinnabaris consists, drawn in by their mouth, nose, and all the rest of the
body. Wherefore I can never approve the use of such fumigations which are to
be received in ^umes by the mouth and nostrills for to work upon the whole
body; yet I do not dislike of that, which is undertaken for some one part
only, as to dry up ill conditioned ulcers, which so affect What fumigations
good.
it, that they cannot be overcome by any other means, or for to disperse or
digest knots, or to resolve fixed pains, otherwise unmovable. These
fumigations by reason of the admixture of Argentum vivum have an attenuating,
cutting, resolving, and colliquating faculty. Those who prepare these
fumigations for the cure of the whole disease and body, take this course. They
put the patient under a tent or canopy The common manner of using them.
made close on every side, lest any thing should expire, and they put in unto
him a vessel filled with hot coals, whereupon they plentifully throw
Cinnabaris, that so they may on every side enjoy the rising fume, just after
the same manner as Farriers use to smoke their horses for the glaunders: they
repeat this every day so long, until they begin to flux at the mouth. The
principal matter or basis of such fumigations, as we have already noted, is
cinnabaris consisting of sulphur and argentum vivum mixed together; there is
added also, radix ireos flor. thus, olibanum, myrrha, juncus The matter of them.
odoratus, assa odorata, mastiche, terebinthina, and theri^^^, all which have a
faculty to resolve and strengthen the spirits, and nature, and correct the
stench and evil quality of the argentum vivum. There are also other
fumigations made after another manner, but that also when as the argentum vivum
is extinct, and as it were fixed after this manner; let some lead be melted,
and let there be powered or put thereto some argentum vivum, then let it all be
poudred, adding thereto Antimony, Aloes, Mastich, coprose, orpiment, and
Benjamin made into powder, and framed into Trochisces Trochisces for
fumigations.
with some turpentine. Or else,. cinnabaris, i. styracus rub. and calamitae,
nu^is moschat. an. iii. benzoini, ss. excipe terebinthin. fiant trochisci
ponderis ii. for the foresaid use. The terebinthina is added to incorporate the
dry things, and the gums are added to yield matter to the fume. But virulent
ulcers of the Lues venerea shall not be fumigated before they be cleansed; also
this following fumigation is good.. ^baris, i. benzoini, myrrhae, styracis,
olibani, opopanacis, an. ss. mastiches, macis, thuris, is, an. ^^. excipiantur
terebinthina, and fiat suffumigium.

CHAP. XV. The cure of the symptoms, or symptomaticke affects of the Lues
venerea, and first of the Ulcers of the Yard.
CAllous and malign ulcers in this disease may grow all over the yard; but
these are far more malign which arise on the prepuce, than those that The
ulcers of the pr^puce more malign than those of the Glans
grow on the Glans, or nut of the yard. Now they are rebellious to the common
medicines of ulcers which happen other ways, and they are also subject to
turn into a gangrene, so that sundry, who have not in time provided for
themselves by the use of argentum vivum, are forced for their negligence to
suffer the loss of their Glans, and often times of their whole yard. Yet I am of
opinion that I think we must begin the cure of all ulcers of the yard with the
general remedies of ulcers. For all ulcers arising in these parts by reason of
copulation, are not virulent. But when as we shall find that we do no good by
this means, and that the disease notwithstanding grows worse and worse, then
must we come to make use of such things as receive argentum vivum, that by
these we may resist the virulency which is ready to disperse it self over all
the body, yet it is absolutely necessary that all these things be endued with
such faculties as may retund the malign acrimony of this venom, such an one
is this following collyrium of Lanfranck.. vini Lanfrancke. Collyrium.
albi, lb i. aq. ros. and. plantag. an. quart. i. auripig. ii. viridis ^ris, i.
aloes, myrrhae, an. ii. terantur subtilissime, and fiat collyrium. Also these
ulcers may be profitably touched with mercury water, or aqua fortis which the
Goldsmiths have used, or else mercury in powder, or our aegyptiacum: but the
falling away of the Eschar shall be procured with basilicon, or fresh butter.
Yet I think it not fit to use these acrid things without very great caution,
for fear of a gangrene, which easily happens to this part. But if such ulcers
are so stubborn, that they will not yield to these remedies, then must we come
to the friction or unction of the groines perinaum, and ulcers, with the
ointments formerly prescribed for the general friction. Also fumigations may
be made, as we mentioned in the former chapter. For thus at length the
malignity of the virulent humor will be overcome, and the callous hardness
mollified; and lastly the ulcers themselves cleansed, and being cleansed,
consolidated. Sometimes after the perfect cure of such ulcers, there will
appear manifest signs of the Lues venerea in many, which showed not
themselves before, for that the virulency flowed forth of the running ulcers,
and now this vent being stopped, it flows back into the body, and shows signs
thereof in other parts; and these men have need of a general unction.

CHAP. XVI. and by us vulgarly in English the running of the (...). How a
Gonnorhoea differs from a This which by our Author is here termed (...)
vi^ulent (...) and in Fr^ch chaude^^sse, is the same which by other Authors is
usually termed (...),
virulent strangury.
EVen, to this day very many have thought that the virulent strangury has some
affinity with the Gonnorhoea of the Ancients, but you shall understand by that
which follows, that they are much different. For a Gonnorhoea is an
unvoluntary effusion of seed running from the whole body to the genitals, by
reason of the resolution and palsy of the retentive faculty of these parts, as
it is delivered by Galen, lib. de loc. affect. This disease befalls others by
the collection of the blood and seminall matter by the vessels of the whole
body, which not turning into fat and good flesh, takes its course to the
genitals; but on the contrary, a virulent strangury is a running, or rather
dropping What a virulent strangury is.
out of the urenary passage, of a yellowish, livide, bloody, filthy sa^ies,
like to pus or matter not well concocted, oftentimes fretting and exulcerating
the passage with the acrimony, and causing a painful erection of the yard,
and distension of all the genitall parts. For in this erection there is caused
as it were a convulsive contraction of these parts. And hence it is that the
patients complain, that they feel as it were The cause of the convulsive
distension of the ^ard.
a string stretched stiff in that part, which draws the yard as it were
downwards. The cause hereof is a gross and flatulent spirit, filling and
distending by its plenty, the whole channel or hollow nerve; yea, verily, the
whole porous substance of the yard. If to these symptoms this be added, that
the urenary passage be exulcerated, a grievous pain afflicts the patient
whilst he makes water, for that the ulcers are irritated by the sharp urine
passing that way. Such a virulent strangury or running of the reins oft-times
continues for two or three years space: but the Gonnorhaea, or running of the
seed cannot endure so long, but that it will bring the body to an extreme and
deadly leanenesse, for that the matter of the seed is of the more benign and
laudible portion of the blood, as you may perceive by those who have too
immoderately used copulation but the space of one night. For such have their
faces more lean and lanke, and the rest of their bodies enervated, languisheth
and becomes (...) definit. (...) Galen.
dull. By this we have delivered, it may be perceived that the running of a
virulent strangury, is not the running of a seminall humor, fit for generation
of issue, What kind of matter flows forth in a virulent strangury.
but rather of a viscous and acride filth, which has acquired a venenate
malignity by the corruption of the whole substance.

CHAP. XVII. Of the causes and differences of the scalding, or sharpness of
the urine.
THe heat or scalding of the water, which is one kind of the virulent
strangury, arises from some one of these three causes, to wit, repletion,
inanition and contagion. That which proceeds from repletion, proceeds either
The cause of a particular repletion of the privy parts.
from too great abundance of blood, or by a painful and cedious journey in
the hot sun, or by feeding upon hot, acride, diureticke and ^larulent meats,
causing tension and heat in the urenary parts, whence proceeds the inflammation
of them and the genitall parts, whence it happens that not only a seminall,
but also much other moisture may flow unto these parts, but principally to the
prostatae, which are glandules situate at the roots, or beginning of the neck
of the bladder, in which place the spermaticke vessels end; also abstinence
from venery causes this plenitude in some who have usually had to do with
women, especially the expulsive faculty of the seminall and urenary parts being
weak, so that they are not of themselves able to free themselves from this
burden. For then the suppressed matter is corrupted, and by its acrimony
contracted, by an adventitious and putredinous heat, it causes heat and pain
in the passage forth. The prostata swelling with such inflamed matter, in
process of time become ulcerated, the abscesse being broken. The purulent
sanies dropping and flowing hence along the urinary passage causes ulcers by
the acrimonie, which the urine falling upon, exasperates, whence sharp pain,
which also continues for some short time after making of water, and together
there with by reason of the inflammation, the pains attraction, and the
vaporous spirits distension, the yard stands and is contracted with pain, as
we noted in the former chapter. But that which happens through inanition, is
acquired The causes of the inanition of the genitall parts.
by the immoderate and unfit use of venery, for hereby the oily and radical
moisture of the forementioned glandules is exhausted, which wasted and spent,
the urine cannot but be troublesome and sharp by the way to the whole urethra.
From which sense of sharp pain, the scalding of the urine has its
denomination. That which comes by contagion, is caused by impure copulation
with an unclean person, or with a woman, which some short while before has
received the tainted seed of a virulent person, or else has the whites, or her
privities troubled with hidden and secret ulcers, or carries a virulent spirit
shut up or hidden there, which heated and resuscitated by copul^tion, presently
infects the whole body with the like con^agion, no otherwise than the sting of
a Scorpion or Phalangium, by casting a little poison into the skin, presently
infects the whole body, the force of the poison spreading further than one
would believe, so that the party falls down dead in a short while after. Thus
therefore the seminall humor contained in the prostatae, is corrupted The
reason of a contagious strangury.
by the tainture of the ill drawn thence by the yard, and the contagion
infects the part it self; whence follows an abcesse, which casting forth the
virulency by the urenary passage, causes a virulent strangury; and the malign
vapor carried up with some portion of the humor unto the entrails and
principal parts, cause the Lues venerea.

CHAP. XVIII. Prognostics in a virulent strangury.
WE ought not to be negligent or careless in curing this affect, for A
virulent strangurie continues with some during their, lives.
of it proceed pernicious accidents, as we have formerly told you, and
neglected, it becomes uncurable, so that some have it run out of their urenary
passage during their lives; oft-times to their former misery is added a
suppression of the urine, the prostatae and neck of the bladder being inflamed
and unmeasurably swelled. Copulation, and the use of acride or flatulent meats
increase this inflammation, and also together therewith cause an Ischuria, or
stoppage of the urine; they are worse at the change of the moon* certain
death follows upon such a stoppage; as I observed A history.
in a certain man, who troubled for ten years space with a virulent
strangury, at length dyed by the stoppage of his water. He used to be taken
with a stopping of his urine, as often as he used any violent exercise, and
then he helped himself by putting up a silver Catheter, which for that purpose
he still carried about him; it happened on a certain time, that he could not
thrust it up into his bladder, wherefore he sent for me, that I might help him
to make water, for which purpose when I had used all my skill, it proved in
vain: when he was dead, and his body opened, his bladder was found full and
very much distended with urine, but the prostatae preternaturally From what
part the matter of a virulent strangury flows.
swelled, ulcerated, and full of matter resembling that, which formerly used to
run out of his yard, whereby you may gather, that this virulency flows from
the prostatae, which runs forth of the yard in a virulent strangury, and not
from the Reins, as many have imagined. Certainly, a virulent strangury, if it
be of any long continuance, is to be judged a certain particular Lues venerea,
so that it cannot be cured unless by frictions with Hydrargyrum. But the
ulcers which possess the neck of the bladder are easily discerned from these
which are in the body or capacity thereof. For in the latter the filth comes
away as the patient makes water, and is found mixed with the urine, with
certain strings or membranous bodies coming forth in the urine: to these may
be added, the far greater stinch of this filth which issues out of the
capacity of the bladder. Now must we treat of the cure of both these diseases,
that is, the Gonnorh^^ and virulent strangury, but first of the former.

CHAP. XIX. The chief heads of curing a Gonnorhoea.
LEt a Physician be called, who may give direction for purging, bleeding and
diet, if the affect proceed from a fullness and abundance of blood and seminall
matter; all things shall be shunned which breed more Diet.
blood in the body, which increase seed, and stir to venery. Wherefore he
must abstain from wine, unless it be weak and astringent, and he must not
only eschew familiarity with women, but their very pictures, and all things
which may call them into his remembrance, especially if he love them dearly;
For a strangury occasioned by repletion.
strong exercises do good, as the carrying of heavy burdens even until they
sweat, swimming in cold water, little sleep, refrigerations of the loins and
genitall parts by annoynting them with unguentum rosatum refrigerans Galeni and
nutritum, putting thereupon a double cloth steeped in oxycrate, and often
renewed. But if the resolution or weakness of the retentive faculty of these
parts be the cause of this disease, contracted by too much use of venery
before they arrive at an age fit to perform For the decay of the retentive
faculty.
such exercise; in this case strengthening and astringent things must both be
taken inwardly, and applied outwardly. But now I hasten to treat of the
virulent strangurie, which is more proper to my purpose.

CHAP. XX. The general cure both of the scalding of the water, and the
virulent strangury.
We must diversely order the cure of this disease, according to the variety of
the causes and accidents thereof. First, care must be had of the diet, and all
such things shunned as inflame the blood, or cause windiness; of which nature
are all diuretic and slatulent things, as also strong and Diet.
violent exercises. Purging and bleeding are convenient, especially, if
fullness cause the affect. Women's companies must be shunned and thoughts of
venereous matters; the patient ought not to lie upon a soft bed, but upon a
quilt or matterice, and never, if he can help it, upon his back; boiled meats
are better than roasted, especially boyld with sorrel, lettuce, purslain,
cleansed barley, and the four cold seeds beaten, for sauce, let him use none,
unless the juice of an orange, pomgranate, or verjuice; let him shun wine, and
in stead thereof use a decoction of barley and liquerice, a hydromel, or
hydrosaccharum with a little cinnamon, or that which is termed Potus divinus. In
the morning let him sup of a barley cream wherein has been boiled a nodulus
of the four cold seeds beaten together with the seeds of white poppy; for
thus it refrigerateth, mitigateth and cleanses; also the syrups of
marsh-mallowes and maiden-haire are good. Also purging the belly with half an
ounce of Cassia, sometimes alone, otherwhiles with a dram or half a dram of
Rubarbe in powder put thereto, is good. And these following pills are also
convenient.. massae pi^ul. sine quibus i. rhei electi ss. caphurae gr. iiii.
cum terebinthina formenntur pilul^; Pill^.
let them be taken after the first sleep. Venice turpentine alone, or adding
thereto some Rubarbe in powder, with oil of sweet almonds newly drawn without
fire, or some syrup of maidenhair is a singular medicine in this case, for it
has an excellent The force of Venice turpentine in this disease.
lenitive and cleansing faculty, as also to help forwards the expulsive
faculty, to cast forth the virulent matter contained in the prostatae. You may
by the bitterness perceive how it resists putrefaction and you may gather how
it performs its office in the reins and urenary parts, by the smell it leaves
in the urine after the use thereof. But if there be any who cannot take it in
form of a bole, you may easily How to be made potable.
make it potable, by dissolving it in a mortar with the yolk of an egg and
some white wine, as I learned of a certain Apothecary, who kept it as a great
secret. If the disease come by inanition or emptiness, it shall be helped by
fatty injections, oily and emollient potions, and inwardly taking and applying
these things which have the like faculty, and shunning these things which
caused the disease. How to cure that which happens by contagion, or unpure
copulation, it shall be abundantly showed in the ensuing chapter.

CHAP. XXI. The proper cure of a virulent strangury.
FIRST we must begin with the mitigation of pain, and staying the
inflammation, which shall be performed by making injection into the urethra
with this following decoction warm.. sem. psilii, An injection to stay
inflammation.
lactucae, papav. albi, plantag. cydon. lini, hyosciami albi, an. ii.
detrahantur mucores in aquis solani and rosar. ad quantitatem sufficientem,
add trochisc. alborum Rhasis camphoratorum in pollinem redactorum, i. misce
simul, and fiat injectio frequens. For this because it has a refrigerating
faculty, will help the inflammation, mitigate pain, and by the mucilaginous
faculty lenifie the roughness of the urethra, and defend it by covering it
with the slimy substance, against the acrimony of the urine and virulent
humors. In stead hereof you may use cowes milk newly milked, or warmed at the
fire. Milk does not only conduce hereto being thus injected, but also drunk,
for it has a refrigerating The faculties of milk against a virulent,
strangury.
and cleansing faculty and by the subtlety of the parts it quickly arrives at
the urenary passages. Furthermore it will be good to anoint with cerat.
refriger. Galeni addita camphora, or with ceratum santalinum, ung. comitissae,
or nutritum, upon the region of the kidneyes, loins and perinaeum, as also to
anoint the Cods and Yard. But before you use the foresaid ointments or the
like, let them be melted over the fire, but have a care that you make them not
too hot, lest they should lose their refrigerating quality, which is the thing
we chiefly desire in them. Having used the foresaid ointment, How to make water
without pain.
it will be convenient to apply thereupon some linen clothes moistened in
oxycrate composed ex aquis plantaginis, solani, sempervivi, rosarum, and the
like. If the patient be tormented with intolerable pain in making water, and
also some small time after, as it commonly comes to pass, I would wish him
that he should make water putting his yard into a chamber pot filled with milk
or water warmed. The pain by this means being assuaged, we must come to the
cleansing of the ulcers by this or the like injection.. hydromelitis symp. iv.
sir. de rosis siccis, and de absinth. Detergent injections.
an. ss. fiat injectio. But if there be need of more powerful detersion, you
may safely add, as I have frequently tried, a little aegyptiacum. I have also
found this following decoction to be very good for this purpose.. vini albi
oderiferi, lb ss. aquar. plantag. and ros. an. ii. auripigmenti, ss. viridis
aeris, i. aloes opt. ss. pulverisentur pulverisanda; and bulliant simul. Keep
the decoction for to make injection withal. You may increase or diminish the
quantity and force of the ingredients entering into this composition, as the
patient and disease shall seem to require. The ulcers being thus cleansed, we
must hasten to dry them, so that we may at length cicatrize How the cleansed
ulcers may be dried.
them. This may be done by drying up the superfluous moisture, and
strengthening the parts that are moistened and relaxed by the continual
defluxion, for which purpose this following decoction is very profitable.. aq.
fabrorum, lb i. psidiarum, balaust. nucum cupres. conquassatorum. an. i ss.
s^^in. sumach. and herber. an. ii. syrup. rosar. and de absinth. an. i. fiat
decoctio. You may keep it for an injection to be often injected into the
urethra with a syringe, so long as that there shall no matter or filth flow out
thereat, for then there is certain hope of the cure.

CHAP. XXII. Of Caruncles, or fleshy excresc^u^^s which sometimes happen to
grow in the Urethra, by the heat or sc^lding of the urine.
ASharpe humor which flows from the Glandules termed Prostatae, and
continually runs along the urenary passage, in some places by the way How
caruncles come to grow upon the ulcers of the genitall parts.
it frets, and exulcerates by the acrimony the urethra in men, but the neck of
the womb in women. In these, as also is usual in other ulcers, there
sometimes grows up a superfluous flesh, which often times hinders the casting or
coming forth of the seed and urine by their appropriate and common passage,
whence many mischieves arise; whence it is that such ulcers as have caruncles
growing upon them must be diligently cured. But first we must know whether they
be new or old. For the latter are more difficulty to be cured than the former,
Callous caruncle, hard to cure.
because the caruncles that grow upon them become callous and hard, being often
times cicatrized. We know that there are caruncles, if the Cath^ter cannot
freely pass along the passage of the urine, but finds so many stops in the
way, as it meets Signs.
with Caruncles that stop the passage; if the patient can hardly make water, or
if his water run in a very small stream, or two streams, or crookedly, or
only by drop and drop, with such tormenting pain that he is ready to let
go his excrements, yea and often times does so, after the same manner as such as
are troubled with the stone in the bladder. After making water, as also after
copulation, some portion of the urine and seed stays at the rough places of
the caruncles, so that the patient is forced to press his yard, to press
forth such relics. Sometimes the urine is wholly stopped, whence proceeds
such distention of the bladder, that it causes inflammation, The suppressed
urine comes forth whereas it can get vene.
and the urine flowing back into the body, hastens the death of the patient.
Yet sometimes the urine thus suppressed, sweats forth preternaturally in sundry
places, as at the fundament, perinaeum, cod, yard, groines. As soon as we, by
any of the forementioned signs, shall suspect that there is a Caruncle about
to grow, it is expedient forthwith to use means for the cure thereof; for a
caruncle from a very little beginning does in a short time grow so big, that
at the length it becomes incureable, verily you may easily guess at the
difficulty of the cure by that we have formerly delivered of the essence
hereof, besides, medicines can very hardly arrive thereat. The fittest season
for the undertaking thereof is the spring, and the next thereto is The fittest
time for the cure. Why venery must be eschewed.
winter; yet if it be very troublesome, you must delay no time. Whilst the
cure is in hand, the patient ought wholly to abstain from venery, for by the
use thereof, the kidneyes, spermaticke vessels, prostatae, and the whole yard,
swell up and wax hot, and consequently draw to them from the neighboring and
upper parts, whence abundance of excrements in the affected parts, much
hindering the cure. You must beware of acrid and corroding things in the use of
detergent injections, for that thus the urethra being endued with most
exquisite sense, may be easily offended, whence might ensue many and ill
accidents. Neither must we be frighted if at some times we see blood flow
forth of secret or hidden caruncles. For this helps to shorten the cure,
because the disease is hindered from growth, by taking away portion of the
conjunct matter, the part also it self is eased from the oppressing burden,
for the material cause of caruncles is superfluous blood. Wherefore unless
such bleeding happen of it self, it is not amiss to procure it by thrusting
in a Cathaeter somewhat hard, The particular cure.
yet with good advise. If the Caruncles be inveterate, and callous, then must
they be mollified by fomentations, ointments, cataplasmes, plasters, and
fumigations; you may thus a make fomentation.. rad, alth. and lilior al^. an.
iv. rad. bryani^, and foenicul. A fomentation.
an. iss. fol. malvar. violarum, parietar. and mercur. an. m ss. sem. lini,
faenugr. an. ss. caricas ping. nu. xii. florum chamaem. and melil. an. p i.
contundantur contu^denda, and incidenda incidantur, bulliant omnia in aqua
communi: make a fomentation, and apply it with soft sponges. Of the mass of
the strained-out things, you may make a cataplasme after this manner..
praedicta materialia, terantur, and trajiciantur, add A cataplasme.
^xungiae porci, unguenti basiliconis, an. ii. fiat cataplasma: let it be
applied presently after the fomentation. You may use this following liniment
whilst the cataplasme is providing.. unguenti alth. and agrippae an. iss.
oesipi humidae, and axung. A littiment.
human. an. i. butyri recentis, olei lilior. and chamaem. an. vi. liquefiant
simul, addendo aquae vitae i. fiat linimentum: let it be applied outwardly
upon the part wherein the Caruncles are. For the same purpose plasters shall
be applied, which may be diversified, and fitted as you shall think good;
yet Emplastrum de Vigo Vigoes emplaster effectual to soften a caruncle.
truly made, exceeds all the rest in a mollifying faculty, and in wasting
such callous hardness. The following fumigation is also good for the same
purpose, take some pieces of a mille-stone (for this we use in stead of the
pyrites mentioned by the Ancients) or else some Brickes of a large size, after
they are heated hot in the fire, let them be put into a pan, and set under a
close stool, then cause the patient to sit thereon, as if he were going to
stool, then pour upon the hot stones equal A suffumigium.
parts of very sharp vinegar, and very good Aqua vitae, and casting clothes
about him, that nothing may exhale in vain: let him receive the ascending
vapor at his Fundament, Perinaeum, Scrotum, and Urethra. Moreover, that this
medicine may work the better effect, you may put the Patient naked into the
Barrel noted with this letter A. so that he may sit upon a seat or board
perforated on that part, whereas his Genitalls are, then place the pan holding
the hot stones between his legs, then presently sprinkle the stones with the
forementioned liquor, by the door marked with the letter, B. Thus the Patient
shall easily receive the fume that exhales therefrom, and none thereof be
lost, he covering and vailing himself Ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 5.
on every side. Such a fumigation, in Galens opinion, has a faculty to
penetrate, cut, resolve, soften and digest scirrhous hardnesses.

A Barrel fitted to receive the Fume in.


CHAP. XXIII. What other remedies shall be used to Caruncles occasioned by the
Lues venerea.
BUT if you suspect that these Caruncles come or are occasioned by a virulent
humor, or the malignity of the Lues venerea, it is meet that the Particular
defaults of the Lues (...) not to be cured unless by the generallremedy of the
viruleney.
patient observe such a diet as usually is prescribed to such as are troubled
with the Lues venerea; let him use a decoction of Guajacum, and let the
perinaeum and the whole yard be anointed with ointment made for the Lues
venerea; otherwise the Surgion will lose his labor. In the interim whilst he
shall sweat in his bed, he shall be wished to hold between his legs a stone
bottle filled with hot water, or else a hot brick wrapped in linen clothes,
moistened in vinegar and aqua vitae; for thus the heat and vapor will ascend
to the genitalls, which, together with the help of the applied ointment, will
dissolve the matter of the Caruncles, and being thus softened, they must be
consumed with convenient Caruncles if callous, must first be softened.
medicines. Wherefore first if they become callous, or cicatrized (which you
may suspect if they cast forth no excrementitious humidity) they shall be
exasperated, excoriated and torn with a leaden Cathaeter having a rough button
at the end like a round file. He shall so long use the Cathaeter put into the
Urethra, thrusting it up and down the same way so long and often as he shall
think fit for the breaking and tearing the Caruncles, he shall permit them
thus torn to bleed freely, so to ease the affected part. You may also for the
same purpose put into the Urethra the Cathaeter marked with this letter B.
whereinto putting a silver wiar sharp at the upper end, that by often thrusting
it in and out, it may wear and make plain the resisting caruncles. Verily by
this means I have helped many much perplexed with the fearful danger of this
disease. Some better like of the Cathaeter marked with the letter A. being thus
used: it is thrust into the Urethra with the prominent cutting sides
downwards, and then pressing the yard on the outside close with your hand to
the Cathaeter in the place where the Caruncles are, it is drawn forth again.

Cathaeters fit to wear asunder, or tear Caruncles.
A. shows the Cathaeter with the inserted silver wiar, but not hanging forth
thereat.

B. shows the Cathaeter with the inserted silver wiar hanging forth at the
end.



The thus torn Caruncle shall be strawed over with the following powder,
being very effectual to waste and consume all Caruncles of the privities
without much pain.. herb. sabin. in umbra exsiccat. ii. ocrae, antimon. tuth.
praparat. an. ss. fiat A powder to waste caruncles.
pulv. subtilissimus, let it be applied in the following manner. Put the
powder into the pipe or Cathaeter having holes in the sides thereof, the which
is the lowermost of the last described. Then put the Cathater into the urenary
passage until the slit or opennesse of the side come to the Caruncle, then
into the hollownesse of the Cathaeter put a silver wiar, wrapped about the end
with a little linen ragge, which as it How to apply it.
is thrust up, will also thrust up the powder therewith, until it shall come to
the slit against the caruncle, then will it adhere to the caruncle, bloody by
reason of the late attrition. Then shall you draw forth the Cathater, first
twining it about, that so it may not scrape off the powder again. If
intolerable pain hereupon happen, it shall be assuaged, and the inflammation
restrained by the following injection.. succorum An injection to hinder
inflammation.
portulacae, plantag. solani, and sempervivi, an. ss. album ovorum, nu. vi.
agitentur diu in mortario plumbeo; let it be injected warm into the urethra
with a syringe. In stead hereof you may also make use of another injection,
which is formerly prescribed. Neither will it be unprofitable to apply
repercussives to the genitalls, to hinder pain and inflammation. You may also
use other medicines, having a faculty to consume An emplaster used by the
Surgeons of Monipelier for Caruncles.
the Caruncle, amongst which these following are excellent.. viridis aeris,
auripigmenti, vitriol. Romans aluminis roch. an. ii. infundantur omnia in acet.
acerrimo, atque inter duo marmora in pollinem redigantur: then let it be
exposed to the summer sun, and dried, again infused in sharp vinegar, and
then as before grownd upon a marble, so that you shall find nothing sharp
with your fingers; lastly let it be opposed to the sun until it may be made
into most subtle powder, and all the acrimony be vanished, which will be
commonly in eight days space. Then,. ol. rosat. iv. lythargyri ii coquantur ad
ignem, quousque coierint in emplast. solidae consistentiae, ab ignetum semotis,
add pulv. praedict. ii. let them be mixed with a spatula, and put upon the
fire until it come to so hard a consistence, that it will stick to a wax
candle, or lead wiar, so that it may not come off by handling with your hands.
The Surgeons of Mantpelier, use this medicine: This following is another,.
tuthiae praepar. Another emplaster.
vi. antimonii, iii. trochisc. alborum, Rhas. camphorat. i. corticis granati,
aluminis usti, an. i ss. spongia ustae, ii. let them all be made into powder:
then,. ung. diapo ^pholigos, and alb. Rhasis, an. ii. misceantur cum praedictis
pulveribus in mortario plumbeo, and diu agitentur: let a very fine ragge be
spread over with this ointment, How to apply it.
and wrapped about a wax candle, and so thrust into the Urethra, and then draw
forth the candle again by twining it a contrary way; so let the end of the
ragge hang out of the yard, so to pluck it forth again, when as you shall
think it has done what it can to the Caruncle, which is, when it has covered
it with the medicine with which it was spread. Some also make wax candles with
a slender, but stiff week, whose end, which is to be put to wear and consume
the Caruncle, is composed of the following medicine.. emplastri nigri, vel
diachylonis ireati ii. pull. sabinae, ocrae, vitriol. Romans calcin. pull. mer. an.
ss. omnia liquescant simul ad dictum usum. Whilst the cure shall be in hand
by these following medicines, let the patient be careful that he so shake his
yard after making water, that he may shake forth all the A caution (...) making
water.
relics of the urine which may chance to stop at the Caruncles; for if but
one drop should stay there, it would be sufficient to spoil the whole
operation of the applied medicines. After that the Caruncle shall be worn
away and wholly consumed by the described medicines, which you may know by the
urine flowing forth Signs that the Caruncle is worn away.
freely, and in a full stream, and by thrusting up a Cathaeter into the
bladder without any stoppage; then it remains that the ulcers be dried and
cicatrized; for which purpose the following injection is very powerful and
effectual, and without any acrimony.. aq. fabrorum lb ss. nuc. cupress.
gallar. cort. granat. an. i ss. alum. roch. ss. bulliant omnia simul secund.
art. so make a decoction for an injection, which you An epuloticke injection.
shall use so long, until no excrementitious humidity distill out of the yard.
The following powder dryes more powerfully, and consequently hastens forwards
cicatrization, and it is also without acrimony.. lapidem calamin. lotum, test
as over ^m ust as, corallum rubrum, corticom granat. comminue omnia in
pollinem; let this powder be used to the ulcers, with a wax candle joined to
some unguentum desiccativum rubrum, or some such like thing. Also strings or
rods of lead thrust into the urethra as thick as the passage will suffer, even
to the ulcers, being first be smeared with quicksilver, Quicksilver by drying
causes cicatrication.
and kept in day and night as long as the patient can endure, are good to be
used. For they dry by their touch and cicatrize, they dilate the urenary
passage without pain, and lastly hinder the sides of the ulcer from corrupting
one another.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of venereall Buboes, or swellings in the Groines.
THe virulency of the Lues venerea is sometimes communicated to the Liver,
which if it have a powerful expulsive faculty, it expells it into the groines,
as the proper emunctories thereof, whence proceed The efficient and material
causes of venereous Bubo's.
venereall Bubo's. The matter of these for the most part is abundance of cold,
tough, and viscous humors, as you may gather by the hardness and whiteness
of the tumor, the pravity of the pain, and contumacy of curing; which also is
another reason, besides these that we formerly mentioned, why the virulency of
this disease may be thought commonly to fasten it self in a phlegmatic
humor. Yet sometimes venereall Bubo's proceed from a hot, acride and
choleric humor, associated with great pain and heat, and which thereupon
often degenerate into virulent and corroding ulcers. Some venereous Bubo's are
such conjoined accidents of the Lues venerea, What Bubo's foretell the Lues
venerea.
that they foretell it; such are these which for a small while show a manifest
tumor, and suddenly without any manifest occasion hide themselves again, and
return back to the noble parts. Others are distinct from the Lues venerea
though they have a similitude of essence and matter therewith, and which
therefore may be healed, the Lues venerea yet remaining uncured. Such are these
which are usually seen, and which therefore compared with the former may be
termed simple and not implicit. For the cure, you must not use discussing
medicines, lest resolving the more subtle part, the grosser dregs become impact
and concrete there; but much less must we use repercussives, for that the
matter is virulent. Wherefore only attractive and suppurating medicines are
here to be used, agreeable to the humor predominant and causing the tumor,
as more hot things in aedematous and scirrhous tumors, than in those which
resemble the nature of a phlegmon or erysipelas: the indication taken from the
rarity and density of bodies insinuates the same variety. The applying of
cupping glasses is very effectual to draw it forth. But when as it is drawn
Cupping.
forth, you shall forthwith apply an emplasticke medicine, and then you shall
come to suppuratives. When the tumor is ripe it shall be opened with a
potentiall cautery, A potentiall Cautery.
if it proceed from a cold cause; for by the inducing of heat the residue of
the crude matter is more easily concocted, besides when as an ulcer of this
kind is opened, the matter will be more easily evacuated, neither shall it
be fit to use any tent, but only to apply pledgets. The residue of the cure
shall be performed by detergent medicines, and then if need require, the
patient shall be let blood, and the humors evacuated by a purging medicine,
but not before the perfect maturity thereof.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Exostosis, bunches or knots growing upon the bones by reason
of the Lues Venerea.
HArd Tumors, Exostoses and knots have their matter from thick and tough
phlegm, which cannot be dissolved, unless by hot medicines, The matter of
knots, and virulent Tophi.
which have a mollifying and dissolving faculty. For which purpose, besides
those medicines which usually are applied to seirrous tumors, you must also
make use of arg. viv. commonly after this manner. and. empl. filii Zach. and
Ceronei, an. iii. euphorb. ss. euplast. de vigo, ii iter at aesyp. descript.
Philagr. i. argent. vivi extinct. vi. fiat emplastrum. Spread it upon leather
for your An emplaster against the bunching out of the bones.
use. In the mean space let the patient observe a sparing diet; for thus he
shall be helped, if so be that the substance of the bones be yet unperished.
For if it be putrefyed and rotten, then the described medicines are of no use,
but you must of necessity lay bare the bone, either by incision, or else by an
actual or potentiall cautery; but I had rather do it with an actual, for
that it extracts the virulency impact in the bones, as also it hastens the
abscesse, or falling away of the corrupted bone. It shall be of a convenient
figure to cauterize the bone, as, round, square or long. I usually, before the
application of such a Caustic, first divide the flesh that lies over it with
an incision knife, that so the pain may be the less, because the flesh cannot
be burnt through but in a long time, by which the fire may come to the bone.
But it will not be amiss, before we treat of this art, first to consider the
nature of the rottenness of the bones.

CHAP. XXVI. Why the bones become rotten, and by what signs it may be
perceived.
THat solution of Continuity which is in the bones, is called by Galen,
Catagma. Gal. meth. 6.
This usually is the cause of rottenness; for, bones that are grated, bruised,
rent, perforated, broken, luxated, inflamed and dispoiled of the flesh and
skin, are easily corrupted; for dispoyled of their covering, they are altered
by the appulse of the air, which they formerly never felt, whence also their
blood and proper nourishment is dried up and exhausted. Besides also, the
sanies running down by reason of wounds and old ulcers, in process The
frequent cause of the rottenness of bones.
of time, fastens it self into their substance, and putrefies by little and
little; this putrefaction is increased and caused by the too much use of oily
and fatty medicines, as moist and suppurate things; for hence the ulcer
becomes more filthy and malign, the flesh of the neighboring parts grows
hot, is turned into pus, which presently falling upon the bone lying under it,
inflames it. Lastly, the bones are subject Hip. lib. de ulc. and fract. Gal.
lib. de tum. cont. not.
to the same diseases, as the flesh that lies under them is; besides also
according to Galen, the beginning of inflammation oft-times proceeds from the
bones; but they beat not, because, according to the opinion of the ancients,
pulsation is a dolorificke motion of the Arteries, but the bones want sense.
Which verily I cannot deny, but also we must confess that the membrane that
encompasseth them, and the arteries that enter into their body, are endued with
most exquisite sense. Wherefore the arteries compressed and waxing hot by
reason of the inflamed bone, cause a sense of pain in the periostium, so that
the patients complain of a dull and deep pain, as it were sunk into the
substance of the bones. The rottenness or corruption Signs of the rottenness.
is oft-times manifest to the eye, as when the bone is laid bare, for then it
varieth from the natural color, and becomes livide, yellowish or black.
Otherwise you may perceive it by touch, as by searching it with a probe, as
when you meet with any inequality or roughness, or when by but gently touching
it, your probe runs into the substance of the bone, as into rotten wood, for a
bone is naturally hard, but being rotten, becomes soft. Yet hardness is not an
infallible sign of a sound bone. Hardness is no infallible sign of sound
bones.
For I have seen rotten and bared bones, to have sometimes grown so hard, by
the appulse of the air, that a Trepan could not, without a strong endeavor,
enter them. Also the rottenness of the bone is known by the condition of the
filth which flows forth of the ulcer, for it is not only more thin and
liquid, but also more stinking. Furthermore, such ulcers have a soft, loose and
watery flesh; besides also, they are untoward and rebellious to sarcotick and
epuloticke medicines; to which if they chance to yield and be cicatrized, yet
within a short while after the scarre will relent of its own accord, for that
nature, destitute of the firm and sound foundation of the bones, cannot build
up a laudible and constant flesh. Neither is it sufficient that the Surgeon
know certainly that the bone is rotten and corrupt, it is furthermore fit he
know, whether this corruption be supersiciary, or pierce deep into the
substance of the bone, that he may know how much of the bone must be scailed.
For scailing is the The cure of a rotten bone.
only cure of that which is corrupted; now it is scailed by that which dryes
exceedingly, and draws forth all the humidity, as well the excrementitious, the
author of the rottenness, as the alimentary. For thus it remains without
blood and nourishment, and consequently life also; whence it must of necessity
scaile or fall off, being destitute of the glue or moisture which joined it to
the sound parts in vicinity and communion of life, like as leaves which fall
away from the trees, the humidity being exhausted, by which, as by glue, they
adhered to the boughs. For this purpose Catagmatick powders are prepared to
amend the corruption which is only superficiary.. pull. aloes, cretae
combustae, pompholygos, an. ii. ireos flor. aristoloch. A catagmatick powder.
rot. myrrh. cerussae, an. i. pull. osteor. combust. ss. terantur sublitiss.
fiat pulvis; let it be applied either alone by it self, or else with honey and
a little aqua vitae. Also the following emplaster being applied, stirs up
nature to the exclusion of the broken bones, and cleanses the ulcers from the
more gross and viscide sanies.. cer. nov. A desquamatory or scailing p^ai^er.
Dios. 3. cap 78.
res. pini, gum. ammon. and elemi, an. vi. tereb. iii. pull. mastich. myrrh. an.
ss. aristol. rot. ireos flor. aloes, opopan. euphorb. an. i. olei rosati
quantum sufficit, fiat emplast. secundum artem. Euphorbium, according to
Dioscorides, takes off the scailes of bones in one day. Hereto also conduces
Emp. de betonica. Or,. olei caryophyl. ss. camph. ii. misceantur simul in
mortario, and atere. But if that part of the bone which is corrupt cannot thus
be taken away, then must you use the scailing Trepans and Scrapers described
formerly in wounds of the head; especially if any more great or solid bone be
foul. Furthermore the here described Trepan will be good to perforate the
rotten bone in many places where it is corrupted, until, as it were, a
certain bloody moisture issue forth at the holes; for thus it more freely
enjoyes the air, and also the force of the medicines admitted by these holes
works more powerfully.

A Trepan with two triangular bits and a pin to hold them in the stock: as
also another Trepan having four. square and sixe-square bits convenient for to
be used in the rottenness of greater bones.


But if the rottenness be more deep, and the bone more hard, either by nature
or accident, as by the occasion of the too long admission of the air, then the
rotten scailes shall be cut off by the instruments described in wounds of the
head, driving them into the bone with leaden mallets, lest the part should be
too much offended or shaken with the blow. The scailes and fragments shall be
taken forth with mullets, Signs that the rottenness is taken away.
the signs that all the rottenness is taken away, are the solidnesse of the
bone thereunder, and the bloody moisture sweating out thereat.

CHAP. XXVII. Of actual and potentiall Cauteries.
BUT if the described remedies cannot take place, by reason of the malignity or
magnitude of the rottenness, then must we come to actual Actual Cauteries
to be preferred before potentiall.
and potentiall cauteries. But I should rather approve of actual, because by
strengthening the part, they consume the excrementitious humors wherewith it
is overcharged, to wit, the matter of the Caries; which is not so effectually
performed by potentiall cauteries. Yet are we oft-times forced to use these, to
please the patients which are terrified at and afraid of hot irons. Potentiall
Potentiall Cauteries.
Cauteries are aqua fortis, aqua vitrioli, scalding oil, melted sulphur and
boiling, and the like; in pouring on of which I would have the Surgeon to be
prudent and industrious, lest he should rashly violate the neighboring sound
parts by the burning touch of these things; which his temerity would cause
vehement pains, inflammations and other horride symptoms. For actual
cauteries, their variety in figure is so great, that it cannot be defined,
much less set down in writing; for they must be varied according to the
largeness of the rottenness, and the figure and conformation of the fouled
bones. Such as are more usual I have thought good here to delineate unto you,
content only to admonish you thus much, that some of these work by pricking,
some by cutting, some flatwise, and other some with their points made of the
form of an Olive leaf.

Sundry forms of actual Cauteries fit in all necessary cases of all parts.


Other Cauteries.


Other Cauteries for the same purpose.


The following figure of a Cautery is fit for virulent knots that arise in the
scull, when you desire to take away the flesh that covers the bone; for this
purpose it is made hollow and sharp in a triangular and quadrangular form,
divided as it were into three branches, that you may so make use of which you
please.

The figure of a hellow and cutting Cauterie.


The Cauteries whose forms are hereafter expressed take place in rotten bones
that lie deep in, wherein you cannot make use of the formerly described without
touching of the neighboring sound parts. To avoid which danger you shall put
your Cautery even to the bone through an iron pipe, which may keep the
neighboring and fleshy parts from burning.

Actual Cauteries with their pipes.


Great discommodities ensue upon too rash, that is, too frequently applied
Cauteries, or too long adhering to the bone; for by this immoderate and fiery
heat not only the excrementitious humidity of the rotten bone is consumed, but
also the radical and substantial moisture of the part is exhausted, wherein
alone nature, endeavoring to cast off the corrupt scailes, and sever the sound
from the rotten bone, and to substitute flesh, stands and consists. Whereof,
the measure of applying of Manner of applying of Cauteries.
Cauteries ought to be taken from the greatness of the rottenness, and the
excrementitious, or after a manner foaming humidity sweating through the pores
of the bone. But before you press your cautery into the rotten bone which lies
very deep in, as that which happens in the thigh bone, and upon other very
fleshy parts, you must diligently defend the neighboring, sound and fleshy
parts, as it were with a covering, for that the humor diffused by the touch of
the fire, burns the other places whereunto it diffuseth it self like scalding
oil. After the cauterization you must help forwards the falling away of the
scailes, by sometimes dropping in our oil of whelps, being made scalding hot.
This oil, though very fit for this Oil of whelps helps forwards the casting
off of scailes.
purpose, yet do I not judge it fit to use it too often, it may suffice to
have dropped it in some twice or thrice. For at length it may violate the found
bone, that lies under the rotten, by the oily, subtle and moist substance.
Furthermore, a bone is the most dry part of the body, therefore unctuous and
moist medicines are contrary to its temper and consistence. But it conduces
often and gently to move the scailes already beginning to separate themselves,
and it hastens the slackenesse of nature in casting them off. Yet may you not
use force, unless peradventure when as they hang as it were by a slender
thread; otherwise if the unwary Surgeon forcibly pluck A caution in moving the
scailes of burnt bones.
away the scailes before that nature has put a cover upon the sound bone, he
shall give way to a new alteration and foulness by the appulse of the air.
Furthermore, after the corrupt scaile is falling off by the force of nature
expelling it, you must have diligent heed that you put not eating or corroding
medicines upon the bone that is under it; for thus thou shall consume or waste
the flesh which nature has generared thereupon, which composed of newly
concreted blood, is like in softness to newly crudled milk, which otherwise
in time would grow into a more solid and hard consistence. This undergrowing
flesh by little and little thrusts the rotten bone above it, out of its place,
and is the cause of the scailing thereof; it is at the first gathered together
like the grains of a pomgranate, with a red, smooth and equal sanies, and not
stinking, and at length it casts forth a white matter. Therefore then we must
rather straw thereon Cephalic powder composed of such things as have a faculty
Cephalic pouders of what composed.
to dry without biting, such as are Orris roots, washed aloes, masticke,
myrrh, barley flower, and the like. Lastly, it must be cicatrized; it is
better that scailes of bones fall away of themselves by the only force of
nature, than to be plucked away by the force of medicines or instruments;
because, such as are too violently and forcibly plucked away, leave corners
like to fistulous ulcers. Neither ought the corrupted membranes when they are
turned into pus to be plucked away too violently, or to be touched by too
acride medicines; for pain hereupon arising, has diverse times caused
inflammation, convulsion and other pernicious symptoms. Therefore it is better
to commit this business to nature, which in success of time, by making use of
the expulsive faculty, will easily free it self from this rotten substance;
for that which is quick as far as it is able, will still put away that which
is dead from it.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of a vnluerary potion.
BUt if the contumacious rottenness of the bone and also a rebellious ulcer
shall not yield to the described remedies, it will be convenient to prescribe
a vulnerary potion to the patient. For nature helped by such a potion, has to
my knowledge sundry times done wondrous things, in the amendment of corrupt
bones, and consolidation of ulcers. For these potions though they do not purge
the noxious humors away by stool, yet are they wondrous The use of vulnerary
potions.
effectual to cleanse ulcers, and free them from the excess of
excrementitious humors, to cleanse the blood, and purge it from all impurity,
to agglutinate broken bones, and knit the sinews. I have here thought good to
speak of them, and chiefly, for that they were much commended by the Ancients,
but neglected by the modern Physicians and Surgeons. But if the cure of wounds
and old ulcers be performed by detersion, and the reposition of the lost
substance, what medicine can sooner or rather do it than that, which by its
admirable and almost divine force so purges the blood, that thereof, as from a
fit and laudible matter, the flesh or any other lost substance may be fitly
restored, and the part recover its former union? But if fistulous Ulcers,
Cancers, Gouts and the like diseases be offended by the use of salt, spiced,
acride meats and others which are of subtle parts, as mustard, onions and
garlike, or any other excess in meat, or drink; why may they not become mild
and gentle by medicated and contrary meats and drinks, or at least be reduced
to a more equal temper? Therefore that Surgeons may know of what things such
compositions may arise, I have here thought good to reckon them up, that you
may learn what they are.

Scabious. Sanicle. Bugle. Mous-eare. Burnet. Madder. Tansie. Tops of hemp.
Tops of Brambles. Sowes bread. Comfory the greater and lesser. Vervine.
Bistorte. Mugwurte. Periwincle. Centaury. Adders tongue. Betonie. Carduus
benedictus. The cordial flowers. Aristolochia, or Birth-wurts. Speedwell.
Agrimonie. The capillaryes. Herb Robert. Doves foot. Dogs tongue. Avenes.
Prunella. Osmund. Clarye. Gentian. Herniaria. Red Colewurt or Cabbage.
Scordium. Cattes minte. Cinque foil. River Crabs. Mace. Bole armenick. Petum
or Tobacco. Mead-sweet. Coltsfoot. Dandelion. Plantaine. St. John's wurte.
Of all these the Surgeon shall make choice according to the mind and judgment
of the Physician, such as he shall think fit and proper to every ulcer or
wound, or to each wounded and ulcerated part, according to the condition of the
time, the temper of the patient and kind or nature of the disease. You may
make drinks not only of the decoctions of these, but also of their juices in
white wine, or oenomel, which are good not only to purify the mass of the
blood, to cleanse sanious, virulent, filthy and dissenterious ulcers, but also
to drive away putrefaction, scail bones, dissolve clotted blood in bruises, to
draw, pluck out and exterminate all strange bodies, as I have often observed
to my great admiration. They are composed usually after this manner.. savic.
bugul. scabios. beton. scord. nepet. an. m. (...). uvar. mund. sem. hyper. The
form of a vulnerary potion.
and card. ben. an. i. trium flor. cord. an. p. ii. coquantur complete in aq.
communi; postea in fine add vini alb. mel. ros. and cinnam. quod sufficit,
fiat decoctio, coletur per manicam. Let him drink iii. in the morning 3. hours
before dinner. You may also with good success make injections with the same
liquor into fistulous and sinuous ulcers, as also to wash the sordid ulcers
therewith. You may also boil the same simples, as herbs, flowers and seeds in
the patients broths, that so they may acquire a medicinable and nourishing
faculty. For the time of the affect, wherein you may with good success make
use of these, we have read in Guido, that he used not to prescribe these
potions to his patients when as they were newly wounded, for that they commonly
are composed of things hot and opening, which heat and attenuate the blood,
whence there would In what time of the disease they are chiefly to be used.
be danger of a defluxion, upon the affected part. Wherefore when the matter is
come to suppuration, when as there nothing remains, but to cleanse the ulcer
and fill it with flesh, no inflammation as now remaining in the part, I judge
these potions may then be used with good success.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Tetters, Ring-wormes or Chops occasioned by the Lues venerea.
UPon the cure of the Lues venerea, usually Tetters and Chops happen thereupon,
which make furrows in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. They
acquire their matter from salt phlegm, or adust choler, or the relics of the
venereous virulency sent thither. The cure especially when as the disease is
grown old, is difficult, by reason that the humor has long accustomed to flow
that way, and for that it has corrupted the habit of the part by the
continual defluxion; but the cure is more easy if the disease be newly bred.
Now you may know it is newly bred by the redness, accompanied by a great
itching, and not only Signs of the new bred disease.
a dryness of the skin, but also a thickness and denseness thereof. That which
is old, besides these fore-recited signs, have scaily and branlike hardnesses
conjoined therewith, which by scratching and rubbing cast off scailes. For
general medicines, the distemper The cure of newly come Tetters.
of the liver and habit of the body must be corrected, which by the occasion of
the former disease and remedies apt to inflame the blood, cannot but much
swerve from their native temper. This may be done by diet conveniently
appointed, by purging and altering medicines, bleeding, bathing, applying of
cupping-glasses and horns. For topic or particular medicines, wash such as are
newly or lately bred with the following water which dries and is of subtle
parts.. aq. ros. and pariet. an i. aq. alum. ii. calc. ii. A water drying
virulent tetters.
alum. iii. pull. subl. iiii. fiat lent. et minim. ebul. in baln. mar. This
water shall be made more or less forcible according to the condition of the
disease. Or,. ol. tart. ii. s^p. com. iv. misc. fiat unguent. ad usum. If the
Physician shall think good, let the patient use a decoction of Guajacum, but
that very weak. But old Tetters and Chops must be The cure of old tetters.
softened with emollient, attenuating and inciding decoctions, as also with
liniments, ointments and plasters having the same effect. Then let the residue
of the cure be performed by fumigations, such as this which follows.. pull.
cinab. ii. lad. ass. odor. stirac. A Fumigation.
call. an. ss. olib. mastic. an iii. olei tart and theriac. q. s. fiant
trochisci; use at each time some ss. of them, and let only the affected parts
receive the smoke. Some commend the rubbing of the hands with the following
medicine. Take the ashes of wine lees, make thereof a lie, and strain it though
an hypocras bag, then put thereto some rennet, let them be well mixed together
in a mortar, and herewith let the hands be rubbed or washed. Or,. unguent.
enul. iii. fugit. ii. Or else,. res. pini, i. cerus. ss. argent. viv. A
Liniment.
iii. succi citri and lapath. acut. an. ss. Let them be incorporated and make a
liniment to be used to the part. If to this you add sublimate so washed and
prepared, as women use for their faces, you shall make it more effectual.
Others take burnt alume made into powder, and incorporated with the yolke of an
egg, the juice of Citrons, and a little aloes dissolved in exymel scilliticum.

CHAP. XXX. Of curing the Lues Venerea in infants and little children.
INfants oft-times conceive the seeds of this disease in the wombs of their
mothers, and are borne infected therewithal, pustles presently arising over
all the bodies, infecting with the like disease as many nurses as give them
suck; they scarce ever recover thereof, for that they contracted the disease
from their first conformation. But such as are somewhat bigger, if they chance
to catch the disease after they are born by sucking some infected nurse, or by
any other occasion or kind of contagion, often times receive cure. For first,
you shall cause the nurse to use the aqua theriacalis hereunder described, for
the space of 20 or more days, that so she may the better arm herself against
the contagion of this disease, The cure.
and yield milk which may have the faculty both of meat and medicine; she shall
be careful as often as she gives the child suck, to wash and dry her teat or
pap, lest the virulency that the child breathes out at his mouth, be impact in
the little holes of the teat through which the milk flows out. Now the
pustules of little children shall be anointed with some ointment that receives
argentum vivum in some small quantity, as unguentum enulatum cum mercurio, or
the like. Then shall it be swathed or bound up in swathes and clothes aired
with the formerly described fumigations. For the rest, it shall be kept as warm
as you can in some warm place. These and the like must be done not in one
continued course, but at several seasons, otherwise it is to be feared, that
it would cause ulcers to arise in the mouth, or else salivation. If any ulcers
arise in the mouth and spread therein, they shall be touched with the formerly
described waters, but made somewhat weaker, having regard to the tender age of
the patient; if the infant shall get this disease of its nurse, let the nurse
be presently changed, for it being otherwise nourished with tainted and
virulent blood, can never be healed. Many have by these means recovered; but
such as have perished, have not perished by the default of medicines, but by the
malignity and vehemence of the disease.

A description of the aqua Theriacalis, or treacle water formerly mentioned.
. rasur. interior. ligni sancti gummosi, lb ii. polypod. querni, iv. vini albi
dulcedinis expertis lb ii. aqua font an. puriss. lb viii. aquar. cichor. and
fumar. an. iv. sem. junip. A treacle water
heder. and baccar. lauri an. ii. caryophil. and macis, an. ss. cort. citri
saccharo condit. cons. ros. anthos, cichor. buglos. borag. an. ss. cons. anulae
camp. th^riac. vet. and mithrid. an. ii. distill them all in balneo Mariae
after the following manner. Let the Guajacum be infused in equal parts of
wine and the forementioned waters for the space The manner of making it.
of twelve hours, and the residue of the things in that which remains of the
same wine and waters for six hours space, beating such things as may require
it, then let them be mixed altogether, that so the liquor may be endued with
all their faculties. Which that it may be the more effectually performed, let
them be boiled, put up in glass bottles closely stopped for some three or four
hours space, in a large kettle filled with boiling water, then let them be put
into a glass alembicke, and so distilled. Give iv. of this distilled liquor at
once, being aromatized with i. of cinnamon, and i. of Diamargariton, and ss. of
sugar, to give it a pleasing taste. Such a drink does not only retunde the
virulency of the Lues venerea, but strengthens the noble parts. Rondeletius
makes an aqua theriacalis after this manner.. theriac. vet: lb i. acetos. m
iii. rad. gram. iii. puleg. card. ben. an. m ii. flor. chamaem. p ii.
temperentur Rondeletius his Treacle water.
omnia in vino albo, and distillentur in vase vitrio: reserve the water for
use; whereof let the patient take ii. with iii. of sorrel and buglosse water:
he wishes this to be done when he shall enter into bed or a stove; for so this
distilled liquor will cause sweat more easily, and mitigate pain, whether
given by it self, or with a decoction of Grommell, or of chyna, or burre-docke
roots; yet if the patient be of a phlegmatic constitution, he shall use a
decoction of Guajacum in stead of a decoction of chyna, for it penetrates more
speedily, by reason of its subtlety, of parts, and also expells the dolorificke
matter.

The End of the Nineteenth Book.
OF THE SMALL POCKS AND MEAZLES: AS ALSO OF WORMS AND THE LEPROSY. THE
TWENTIETH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the causes of the Small Pockes and Meazles.
FOR that the small Pocks and Meazles are diseases, which usually are
forerunners and foretellers of the plague, not only by the corruption of
humors, but often times by default of the air; moreover, for that worms are
often times generated in the plague, I have thought good to write of these
things, to the end that by this treatise the young Surgeon may be more amply
and perfectly instructed in that pestilent disease. Also I have thought good to
treat of the Leprosy as being the offspring of the highest corruption of
humors in the body. Now the small pocks are pustles, and the meazels spots
which arise in the top of the skin by reason of the impurity of the corrupt
blood sent thither by What the small pockes and Meazles are. Their matter.
the force of nature. Most of the Ancients have delivered that this impurity is
the relics of the menstruous blood remaining in the body of the infant, being
of that matter from whence it drew nourishment in the womb, which lying still
or quiet for some space of time, but stirred up at the first opportunity of a
hotter summer, or a foutherly or rainy season, or a hidden malignity in the
air, and boiling up, or working with the whole mass of the blood, spread or
show themselves upon the whole surface of the body. An argument hereof is,
there are few or none who have not been troubled with this disease, at least
once in their lives, which when it begins to show it self, not content to set
upon some one, it commonly seazeth upon more: now commonly there is as much
difference between the small pockes and meazles, as there is between a
Carbuncle and a pestilent Bubo. For the small pocks arise of a more gross and
viscous matter, to wit, of a phlegmatic humor. But the meazles of a more
subtle and hot, that is, a choleric matter, therefore this yields no marks
thereof, but certain small spots without any tumor, and these either red,
purple, or black. But the small pockes are extuberating pustles, white in the
midst, but red in the circumference, an argument of blood mixed with choler,
yet they are scarce known at the beginning, that is, on the first or second
day they appear; but on the third and fourth day they bunch out and rise up
into a tumor, becoming white before they turn into a scab; but the meazles
remain still the same. Furthermore the small pockes prick like needles by
reason of a certain acrimony, and cause an itching; the meazles do neither,
either because the Why the Meazles do not itch.
matter is not so acride and biting, or else for that it is more subtle, it
easily exhales, neither is it kept shut up under the skin. The patients often
sneese when as these matters seek passage out, by reason of the putride
vapoures ascending from the lower parts upwards to the brain. They are held
with a continual fever, with pains in their backs, itching of their nose,
headache, and a vertiginous heaviness, and with a kind of sowning or
fainting, a nauseous disposition, and vomiting, a hoarsenesse, difficult and
frequent breathing, an inclination to sleep a heaviness of all the members
their eyes are fiery and swollen, their urine reduce and troubled. For
prognostickes, we may ruley say thus much. That the matter whence this affect
takes its original, partakes of so malign, pestilent and contagious a quality,
that not Prognostickes.
content to mang^e and spoil the fleshy parts, it also eats and corrupts the
bones, like the Lues venerea, as I observed not only in Anno Dom. 1568. but
also in diverse other years, whereof I think it not amiss to set down this
notable example.

The daughter of Claude Pique bookseller, dwelling in S. James his street at
Paris, A history.
being some four or five years old, having been sick of the small pockes
for the space of a month, and nature could not overcome the malignity of the
disease, there rose abscesses upon the sternon and the joints of the shoulders,
whose eating and virulent matter, corroded the bones of the sternon, and
divided them insunder; also it consumed a great part of the top of the
shoulder bone, and the head of the blade-bone: of this thing I had witnesses
with me, Marcus Myron physician of Paris, and at this present the Kings chief
physician, John Doreau Surgeon to the Conte de Bryane, the body being dissected
in their presence. Also you may observe in many killed by the malignity of this
disease, and dissected, that it causes such impression of corruption in the
principal parts, as brings the dropsy, ptisick, a hoarsenesse, Asthma, bloody
flux ulcerating the guts, and at length bringing death, as the pustles have
raged or reigned over these or these entrails, as you see them to do over the
surface What grievous and pernicious symptoms may happen by the small pockes.
of the body; for they do not only molest the external parts, by leaving the
impressions and scarres of the pustles and ulcers, rooting themselves deep in
the flesh, but also often times they take away the faculty of motion, eating
asunder, and weakening the joints of the elbow, wrest, knee and ancle. Moreover
sundry have been deprived of their sight by them, as the Lord of Guymenay,
others have lost their hearing, and other some their smelling, a fleshy
excrescence growing in the passages of the nose and ears. But if any relics
of the disease remain, and that the whole matter thereof be not expelled by
the strength of nature, then symptoms afterward arise, which savor of the
malignity of the humor, yea and equal the harm of the symptoms of the Lues
venerea.

CHAP. II. Of the cure of the Small Pockes and Meazles.
THe cure of this disease uses to be diverse, according to the condition of
the humor free from, or partaker of the venenate quality. For if it partake
The cure.
of malignity, and the child be a sucking child, such things shall be given
to the Nurse as may infringe and overcome the strength of the malignity, as we
shall show more at large, when we come to treat of the cure of children which
are sick of the plague; howsoever it be, the child must be kept in a warm room
free from wind, and must be wrapped and covered with scarlet clothes, until
the pockes come forth. There shall be provided for the Nurse medicated brothes
with purslaine, lettuce, (...), succory, borage, and French barley bound up in a
cloth. She shall shun all salt, spiced and baked meats, and in stead of wine
drink a decoction of liquerice, raisons and sorrel roots. She shall also take
purging medicines, as if she were sick of the same disease, that so her milk
may become medicineable. Lastly, she shall observe the same diet as is usually
prescribed to such as have the plague. You shall give the child no pappe, or if
you give it any, let it be very little. But if the child be weaned, let him
abstain from flesh, until the fever The child must have no pappe.
have left him, and the pocks be fully come forth: in stead of flesh let him
feed on barley and almond creames, chicken brothes, wherein the forenamed
herbs have been boiled, ponadoes, gellies, culasses, prunes and raisons. Let
his drink be a ptisan made of French barley, grass and sorrel roots, or with
a nodula containing the four cold seeds, the pulpe of prunes and raisons, with
the shavings of Ivory and harrs-horne; Between meals the same decoction may
be mixed with some syrup of violets, but not of roses or any other astringent
syrup, lest we hinder the course and inclination of the humor outward. Let
his sleep be moderate, for too sound sleep draws back the matter to the
center, and increases the fever; you must neither How sound sleep does harm
in this disease. Of purging, bleeding, and sudorifickes..
purge, nor draw blood the disease increasing or being at the height, unless
peradventure there be a great plenitude, or else the disease complicate with
other, as with a pleurifie, inflammation of the eyes, or a squinancie which
require it, lest the motion of nature should be disturbed; but you shall think
it sufficient to loose the belly with a gentle glyster: but when the height of
the disease is over, and in the declension thereof. you may with Cassia or some
stronger medicine evacuate part of the humors and the relics of the disease.
But in the state and increase it is better to use sudorificks, which by
attenuating the humors and relaxing the pores of the skin may drive the cause
of the disease from the center to the circumference, which otherwise residing
in the body might be a cause of death; as I and Richard Hubert A history.
observed in two maids, whereof one was four, and the other seventeene years
old; for we dissecting them both being dead, found their entrails covered with
scabby or crusted pustles, like those that break forth upon the skin. We must
not think that ableeding at nose at the beginning of the disease, or in the
first four or five days should carry away the matter and original of the
disease, for nevertheless the pocks will come forth; but for that this is a
true and natural crissis of this disease, as that which is carried to the
surface and circumference of the body, such bleeding must not be stopped,
unless you fear it will cause downing. The matter shall be drawn out with a
decoction of figs, husked lentils, citron seeds, the seeds of fennel, parsley,
A sudorificke decoction.
smallage, roots of grass, raisons and dates. For such a decoction, certainly
if it have power to cause sweat, has also a faculty to send forth unto the
skin the morbificke humor; the seeds of fennel and the like opening things
relaxe and open the pores of the skin; figs lenifie the acrimonie of the
matter, and gently cleanse, the lentils keep the jaws and throat, and all
the inward parts from pustles, and hinder a flux by reason of their moderate
astriction, but having their husks on, they would bind more than is required
in the disease; dates are thought to comfort the stomach, and citron seeds to
defend the heart from malignity, liquerice to smooth the throat, and hinder
hoarsnesse and cause sweat. But these things shall be given long after meat,
for When it is best to procure sweat.
it is not fit to sweat presently after meat; some there be who would have the
child wrapped in linen clothes steeped in this decoction being hot, and
afterward hard wrung forth. Yet I had rather to use bladders or spunges, or
hot bricks for the same purpose; certainly a decoction of millet, figs and
raisons, with some sugar, causes sweat powerfully. Neither is it amiss
whilst the patient is covered in all other parts of his body, and sweats, to
fan his face, for thus the native heat is kept in and so strengthened, and
fainting hindered, and a greater excretion of excrementitious humors caused. To
which purpose you may also put now and then to the patients nose a nodulus made
with a little vinegar and water of roses, camphire, the powder of sanders, and
other odoriferous things which have cooling faculty, this also will keep the
nose from pustles.

CHAP. III. What parts must be armed against, and preserved from the Pocks.
THe eyes, nose, throat, lungs, and inward parts ought to be kept freer from
the eruption of pustles than the other parts; for that their nature and
consistence is more obnoxious to the malignity of this virulency, and they are
easilyer corrupted and blemished. Therefore lest the eyes should be How to
defend the eyes.
hurt, you must defend them when you first begin to suspect the disease, with
the eyelids, also moistening them with rose water, verjuice or vinegar, and a
little Camphire. There are some also who for this purpose make a decoction of
Sumach, berbery-seeds, pomgranate pills, aloe, sand a little faffron; the juice
of sour pomgranates, and the water of the whites of eggs dropped in with
rose water, are good for the same purpose; also woman's milk mixed with
rose water and often renewed, and lastly, all such things as have a
repercussive quality. Yet if the eyes When the eyes must^ be de fended by
repercussives only.
be much swollen and red, you shall not use repercussives alone, but mix
therewith discussers and cleansers, such as are fit by a familiarity of nature
to strengthen the sight; and let these be tempered with some fennel or
eyebright water. Then the patient shall not look upon the light or red things
for fear of pain and inflammation; wherefore in the state of the disease when
the pain and inflammation of the eyes are at their height, gently drying and
discussive things properly conducing to the eyes are most convenient, as washed
aloes, tuttye and Antimonie in the water of fennel, eye bright and roses. The
formerly mentioned nodulus will preserve the How to defend the nose.
nose, and linen clothes dipped in the foresaid astringent decoction, put
into the nosthrils and outwardly applied. We shall defend the jaws, throat
and throttle, How the mouth
and preserve the integrity of the voice by a gargle of oxycrate, or the juice
of sour pomgranates, holding also the grains of them in their mouths, and
often rouling them up and down therein, as also by nodula's of the seeds of
psilium, quinces and the like cold and astringent things. We must provide for
the lungs and respiration by syrupes of jujubes, How the lungs.
violets, roses, white poppyes, pomgranats, water lillies, and the like. Now
when as the pocks are thoroughly come forth, then may you permit the patient to
use somewhat a freer dier, and you must wholly busy your self in ripening and
evacuating the matter, drying and scailing them. But for the meazels, they are
cured by resolution only, and not by suppuration; the pocks may be ripened by
annoynting them with fresh butter, by fomenting them with a decoction of the
roots of mallows, lillies, figs, line-seeds and the like. After they are ripe,
they shall have their How to prevent pock-arres.
heads clipped off with a pair of sizzers, or else be opened with a golden or
silver needle, lest the matter contained in them, should corrode the flesh that
lies thereunder, and after the cure, leave the prints or pockholes behind it,
which would cause some deformity; the pus, or matter being evacuated, they
shall be dried up with unguent. rosat. adding thereto cerusse, litharge, aloes
and a little saffron in powder; for these have not only a faculty to dry, but
also to regenerate flesh; for the same purpose the flower of barley and lupines
are dissolved or mixed with rose water, and the affected parts anointed
therewith with a fine linen ragge; some anoint them with the swathe of bacon
boiled in water and wine, then presently strew upon them the flower of barley or
lupines, or both of them. Others mix crude honey newly taken from the comb,
with barley flower, and therewithal anoint the pustles so to dry them; being
dried up like a scurfe or scab, they anoint them with oil of roses, violets,
almonds, or else with some cream, that they may the sooner fall away, the
pustles being broken; tedious itchings solicit the patients to scratch,
whence happens excoriation and filthy ulcers, for scratching is the occasion of
greater attraction. Wherefore you shall bind the sick child's hands, and foment
the itching parts with a decoction of marsh mallows, barley and lupines, with
the addition of some salt. But if it be already excoriated, then shall you
heal it with unguent. albumcamphorat. adding thereto a little powder of Aloes
or Cinnabaris, or a little desiccativum rubrum. But if notwithstnding all your
application of repelling medicines, Remedies for excoriation.
pustles nevertheless break forth at the eyes, then must they be diligently
cured with all manner of Collyria, having a care that the inflammation of that
part grow not to that bigness, as to break the eyes, and that which sometimes
happens to drive them forth of their proper orbs. If any crusty ulcers arise
in the nosthrils, they may be dried and caused to fall away by putting up of
ointments. Such as arise in the mouth, palate For the ulcers of the mouth and
jaws.
and throat, with hoarsenesse and difficulty of swallowing, may be helped by
gargarismes made with barley water, the waters of plantaine and chervill, with
some syrup of red roses, or Diamoron dissolved therein; the patient shall hold
in his mouth sugar of roses or the tablets of Elect. diatragacanth. frigid. The
Pock-arres left in To help the unsighrly scars of the face.
the face, if they bunch out undecently, shall be clipped away with a pair of
sizzers, and then anointed. with fresh unguent. citrin. or else with this
liniment.. amyli triticei, and amygdalarum excorticatarum, an. iss. gum.
tragacanth. ss. seminis melonum, fabarum siccarum excorticat. farinae hordei,
an. iiii. Let them all be made into fine powder, and then incorporated with
rose water, and so make a liniment, wherewith anoint the face with a feather;
let it be wiped away in the morning, washing the face with some water and
wheat bran; hereto also conduces lac virginale; Goose, ducks and Capons grease
are good to smooth the roughness of the skin, as also oil of lillies; hares
blood of one newly killed and hot is good to fill and plain, as also whiten
the Pock-holes, if they be often rubbed therewith. In stead here of many use
the swathe of Bacon rubbed warm thereon; also the distilled waters of bean
flowers, lilly roots, reed-roots, egge-shels, and oil of eggs are thought very
prevalent to waste and smoothe the Pock-arres.

A Discourse of certain monstrous creatures which breed against nature in the
bodies of men, women, and little children, which may serve as an induction to
the ensuing discourse of worms.
As in the macrocosmos or bigger world, so in the microcosmos or lesser world
there A comparison between the bigger and lesser world. The generation of wind
in man's body.
are winds, thunders, earthquakes, showers, inundations of waters, sterilities,
fertilities, stones, mountains and sundry sorts of fruits and creatures thence
arise. For who can deny but that there is wind contained shut up in Flatulent
abscesses, and in the guts of those that are troubled with the cholicke?
Flatulencies make so great a noise in diverse women's bellies, if so be you stand
near them, that you would think you heard a great number of frogs croaking on
the night time: That water is contained Of water.
in watery abseesses, and the belly of such as have the dropsy, is manifested
by that cure which is performed by the letting forth of the water; in fits of
Agues the whole body is no otherwise shaken and trembles, than the earth when
it is heard to bellow, and felt to shake under our feet. He which shall see the
stones which are taken Of stones.
out of the bladder, and come from the kidneys and diverse other parts of the
body, cannot deny but that stones are generated in our bodies. Furthermore we
see both Of fruits from the first conformation.
men and women who in their face, or some other parts, show the impression, or
imprinted figure of a cherry, plumb, service, fig, mulberry and the like fruit;
the cause hereof is thought to be the power of the imagination concurring with
the formative faculty, and the tenderness of the yielding and waxe-like
embxyon, easy to be brought into any form or figure by reason of the proper
and native humidity. For you shall find that all their mothers whilst they
went with them have earnestly desired or longed for such things, which, whilst
they have too earnestly agitated in their minds, they have trans-ferred the
shape unto the child, whilst that they could not enjoy the things themselves.
Now who can deny but that bunches on the back, and large wens resemble
mountains? Who can gainsay, but that squalide sterility may be assimulated to
the hectic dryness of wasted and consumed persons? and fertility deciphered by
the body distended with much flesh and fat, so that the legs can scarce stand
under the burden of the belly? But that diverse creatures are generated in one
creature, that is, in man, and that in sundry parts of him; the following
histories shall make it evident.

Hollerius tells that a certain Italian by frequent smelling to the herb
Basil had a Lib. de morh. inter cap. I.
Scorpion bred in his brain, which caused long and vehement pain, and at
length death; therefore I have here expressed the figure of that Scorpion found
when as his brain was opened.

The figure of a Scorpion.


It makes Hollerius conjecture of the cause and original of this Scorpion,
probable for that Chrysippus, Dyophanes and Pliny write, that of basil beaten
between two stones, and laid in the sun, therewill come Scorpions.

Fernelius writes that in a certain soldier, who was flat nosed, upon the too
long restraint or stoppage of a certain filthy matter that flowed out of the
nose, that there Lib. 5. de part. morbis cap. 7.
were generated two hairy worms of the bigness of ones finger, which at
length made him mad, he had no manifest fever, and he died about the twentieth
day: this was their shape, by as much as we can gather by Fernelius his words.

The effigies of the worms mentioned by Fernelius.


Jews Duret a man of great learning and credit, told me that he had come
forth with his urine, after a long and difficult disease, a quick creature, of
color red, but otherwise A history.
like in shape a Millepes, that is, a Cheslope, or Hog-louce.

The shape of a Millepes cast forth by urine.


Count Charles of Mansfieldt, last summer troubled with a grievous and
continual fever, in the duke of Guises place cast forth a filthy matter at
his yard, in the shape A history.
of a live thing almost just in this form.

The shape of a thing cast forth by urine.


Monstrous creatures also of sundry forms are also generated in the wombes of
Nicolaus Flor. Gord. lib. 7. c. 18.
women; somewiles alone, otherwhiles with a mola, and sometimes with a child
naturally and well made, as frogs, toads, serpents, lizzards: which therefore
the Ancients have turmed the Lumbards brethren, for that it was usual with
their women, that together with their natural and perfect issue they brought
into the world worms, serpents, and monstrous creatures of that kind
generated in their wombes, for that they always more respected the deckling of
their bodies, than they did their diet. For it happened whilst they fed on
fruits, weeds and trash, and such things as were of ill juice, they generated a
putride matter, or certainly very subject to putrefaction and corruption, and
consequently opportune to generate such unperfect Lib. error popul.
creatures. Joubertus tells that there were two Italian women, that in one
month brought forth each of them a monstrous birth; the one that married a
Tailor, brought forth a thing so little, that is resembled a Rat without a
tail; but the other a Gentlewoman, brought forth a larger, for it was of the
bigness of a Cat; both of them were black, and as soon as they came out of
the womb, they ran up high on the wall, and held fast thereon with their
nails. Licosthenes writes that in Anno Dom. 1494. a woman at Cracovia, in the
street which takes name from the holy Ghost, was delivered of a dead child,
who had a serpen fastened upon his back, which fed upon this dead child, as you
perceive by this following figure.

The figure of a serpent fastened to a child.


Levinus Lemnius. tells a very strange history to this purpose. Some few years
agone Lib. de occuls. not. mir. cap. 8.
(says he) a certain woman of the Isle in Flanders, which being with child by
a Sailer, her belly swelled up so speedily, that it seemed she would not be
able to carry her burden to the term prescribed by nature; her ninth month
being ended, she calls a midwife, and presently after strong throws and
pains, she first brought forth a deformed lump of flesh, having as it were
two handles on the sides, stretched forth to the length and manner of arms,
and it moved and panted with a certain vital motion, after the manner of
spunges and sea-nettles; but afterward there came forth of her womb a monster
with a crooked nose, a long and round neck, terrible eyes, a sharp tail, and
wonderful quick of the feet, it was shaped much after this manner.

The shape of a monster that came forth of a woman's womb.


As soon as it came into the light it filled the whole room with a noise and
hissing, running to every side to find out a lurking hole wherein to hide its
head, but the women which were present, with a joint consent fell upon it, and
smothered it with cushions, at length the poor woman wearied with long
travel, was delivered of a boy, but so evilly entreated and handled by this
monster, that it died as soon as it was christened.

Cornelius Gemma a Physician of Lovaine, tells that there were many very
monstrous Lib. de divinis nature. charactcrismis.
and strange things cast forth both upwards and downwards out of the belly of
a certain maid of Lovaine, of the age of fifteen years. Amongst the rest,
she cast forth at her fundament, together with her excrements, a living
creature some foot and half long, thicker than ones thumb, very like an eele,
but that it had a very hairy tail; I have here given you the figure of the
monster as it was expressed by him.

The figure of a monster that came forth of a maids belly.


Master Peter Barque and Claude le Grand, Surgeons of Verdun, lately affirmed
to A history.
me that they cured the wife of a certain Citizen of Verdun, which out of an
Abscesse broken in the belly, cast forth a great number of worms, together
with the quitture, and these were of the thickness of ones finger, with sharp
heads, which so gnawed her guts, that the excrements for a long time came forth
at the ulcer, but now she is perfectly recovered.

Anthony Benenius a Physician of Florence tells that one John Menusierus ^an
A history.
of forty years of age, troubled with continual pains at his stomach, was
(...) at the point of death, neither found he any help by the counsels of many
Physicians which he used. At length coming to have his advice, he gave him a
vomit, by means whereof he cast up a great quantity of corrupt and putride
matter, yet was he not thereby eased of his pain. Therefore he gave him
another vomit, by force whereof he cast up much matter like to the former, and
together therewith a worm of four fingers long, having a red round head, of
the bigness of a great pease, covered over the body with a soft downinesse,
with a worked tail, in manner of an half moon, going upon four feet, two
before, and two behind.

The figure of a work cast forth by vomit.


Why should I mention the prodigious bodies which are found in Abscesses, as
The efficient and material auses of such things as are pretematurally
generated in our bodies.
stones, chalk, sand, coals, snaile-shels, strawes, hay, horns, hairs, and
many kinds of living and dead creatures? For there is nothing in the generation
of these things (caused by corruption, preceded by much alteration) which may
make us admire, or hold us in suspense, especially if we shall consider that
nature, the fruitful parent of all things, has put diverse portions and
particles of the universal matter whereof the greater world is composed into
this microcosmos, or little world, man; whereby he might the rather seem to be
made to the resemblance and form of the greater. Wherefore it so desports it
self here, that it may counterfeit and resemble all the actions and motions
which it uses to perform in the scene of the greater world, in this little
one, if so be that matter be not wanting.

CHAP. IIII. Of the worms which use to breed in the guts.
A Gross, viscide and crude humor is the material cause of worms, which How
worms are generated.
having got the beginning of corruption in the stomach, is quickly carried
into the guts,, and there it putrefies, having not acquired the form of
laudible Chylus in the first concoction. This, for that it is viscide,
tenaciously adheres to the guts, neither is it easily evacuated with the other
excrements; therefore by delay it further putrefies, and by the efficacy of
heat, it turns into the matter and nourishment for worms. This alimentary
humor being consumed, unless some fresh supply the want thereof, which may
ease their hunger, they move themselves The reason that they sometimes come
forth at the mouth.
in the guts with great violence, they cause grievous and great pains, yea,
and oft-times they creep up to the stomach, and so come forth by the mouth, and
sometimes they ascend into the holes of the palate, and come forth at the nose.
Worms are of three sorts; for some are round and long, others broad and long,
others short and slender. The first are called by the Ancients, Teretes, that
is, round; for that they are The differences of worms.
long and round. The second are named Teniae, for that their bodies are long
and broad like a rowler or swathe. The third are termed Ascarides, for that
they commonly wrap themselves up round. Other differences of worms are taken
from their colors, as red, white, black, ash-colored, yellowish. Some also
are hairy, with a great head like the little fish which the French call Chabot,
we, a Millers-thumbe; in some diseases many worms are generated and cast forth
by fundament, as small as hairs, and usually of color white, and these are
they which are called Ascarides. The diversity of colors in worms proceeds
not from the like distinct diversity of humors whereof they are generated. For
the melancholicke and choleric humor by their qualities are wholly unfit to
generate worms. But this manifold variety in color, is by reason of the
different corruption of the chylous or phlegmatic humor whereof they are
bred. The long and broad worms are oftentimes stretched along all the guts,
being like to a mucous or albuminous substance, and verily I A history.
saw one voided by a woman, which was like to a serpent, and some six foot
long; which ought not to seem strange, seeing it is noted by the Ancients,
that they have s^ worms so long, as the length of the whole guts, that is,
seven times the length of ones body. Wicrus writes that he saw a country man
who voided a worm eight foot and one inch long, in head and mouth resembling a
Ducke, which therefore A history.
I have thought good here to express.

The figure of a worm, generated in, and cast forth of the Guts.


Valeriola affirms that he saw a worm above nine foot long. Now as worms
differ in shape, so are their places of generation also different. For the
round and In observat.
long worms are commonly generated in the smaller guts, the rest in the
greater, but especially the Ascarides: none breed in the stomach, as that
which is the place of the first concoction. There truly the matter which
breeds these worms, gets the In what places of the belly worms are
generated.
first rudiment of corruption, but comes to perfection only in the guts; they
breed in some infants in their mothers bellies, by the pravity and corrupt
nature of the humor flowing from the mother for the nourishment of the child,
which for that then they do not expel it by siege, it by delay putrefieth the
more, and yeeldes fit matter for the breeding of worms, as some have observed
out of Hippocrates. Lastly, worms breed in people of any age that are
Belly-Gods and given to gluttony, Ad finem lib. 4. de morbis.
as also in such as feed upon meats of ill juice, and apt to corrupt, as crude
summer fruits, cheese, and milke-meates. But to know in what part of the Guts
the worms do lurk, you must note, that when they are in the small guts, the
patients complain Signs of worms in the small guts.
of a pain in their stomach, with a dogge-like appetite, whereby they require
many and several things without reason, a great part of the nourishment being
consumed by the worms lying there; they are also subject to often fainting, by
reason of the sympathy which the stomach, being a part of most exquisite
sense, has with the heart, the nose itches, the breath stinkes, by reason of
the exhalations sent up from the meat corrupting in the stomach; through which
occasion they are also given to sleep, but are now and then waked therefrom by
sudden startings and fears; they are held with a continued and slow fever,
a dry cough, a winking with their eielids, and often changing of the color of
their faces. But long and broad worms, being the innates of the greater guts,
show themselves by stools replenished with many Signs of worms in the great
guts. Signs of Ascarides.
sloughes, here and there resembling the seeds of a Musk-melon or cucumber.
Ascarides are known by the itching they cause in the fundament, causing a
sense as if it were Ants running up and down; causing also a tenesmus, and
falling down of the fundament. This is the cause of all these symptoms; their
sleep is turbulent and often clamorous, when as hot, acride and subtle vapors,
raised by the worms from the like humor and their food, are sent up to the
head; but sound sleep by the contrary, as when a misty vapor is sent up from a
gross and cold matter. They dream they eat in their sleep, for that while
the worms do more greedily consume the chylous matter in the guts, they
stir up the sense of the like action in the fantasy. They grate or gnash
their teeth by reason of a certain convulsisick repletion, the muscles of the
temples and jaws being distended by plenty of vapors. A dry cough comes by
the consent of the vital parts serving for respiration, which the natural, to
wit, the Diaphragma or midriffe, smit upon by acride vapoures, and irritated as
though there were some humor to be expelled by coughing. These same acride
fumes assailing the orifice of the ventricle, cause either a hicketting, or
else a fainting, according to the condition of their consistence, gross or
thin; these carried up to the parts of the face cause an itching of the nose, a
darkness of the fight, and a sudden changing of the color in the cheeks.
Great worms are worse than little ones, red than white, living than dead, many
than few, variegated than those of one color, Why worms of diverse colors
are more dangerous.
as those which are signs of a greater corruption. Such as are cast forth
bloody and sprinkled with blood, are deadly, for they show that the substance
of the guts is eaten asunder; for oft-times they corrode and perforate the body
of the gut wherein they are contained, and thence penetrare into diverse parts
of the belly, so that they have come forth sometimes at the Navell, having
eaten themselves a passage forth, as Hollerius affirms. When as children
troubled with the worms draw their breath with difficulty, and wake moist over
all their bodies, it is a sign that death is at hand. If at the beginning of
sharp fevers, round worms come forth alive, it is a sign of a pestilent
fever, the malignity of whose matter they could not endure, but were forced to
come forth. But if they be cast forth dead, they are signs of greater
corruption in the humors, and of a more venenate malignity.

CHAP. V. What cure to be used for the Worms.
IN this disease there is but one indication, that is, the exclusion or The
general indications of curing he worms.
casting out of the worms, either alive or dead, forth of the body, as being
such that in their whole kind are against nature; all things must be shunned
which are apt to heap up putrefaction in the body by their corruption, such as
are crude fruits, cheese, milke-meats, fishes, and lastly such things as are of
a difficult and hard digestion, but prone to corruption. Pappe is fit for
children, for that they require moist things, but these ought to answer in a
certain similitude to the consistence and thickness of milk, that so they
may the more easily be concocted and assimulated, and such only is that pap
which is made with wheat flower, not crude, but baked in an oven, that the
pappe made therewith may not be too viscide nor thick, if it should only be
boiled in a pan as much as the milk would require; or else the milk would
be too terrestrial, or too waterish, all the fatty portion thereof being
resolved, the cheesy and whayish portion remaining, if it should boil so much
as were necessary for the full boiling of the crude meat; they which use meal
otherwise in pappe yield matter for the generating of gross and viscide
humors in the stomach, whence happens obstruction in the first veins and
substance of the liver, by obstruction worms breed in the guts, and the stone
in the kidneyes and bladder. The patient must be fed often, and with meats of
good juice, lest the worms through want of nourishment, should gnaw the
substance of the guts. Now when as such things breed of a putride matter, the
patient shall be purged, and the putrefaction represt by medicines mentioned in
our treatise of the plague. For the quick killing and casting of them forth,
syrup of Succory, or of lemmons with Wherefore, and wherewith such as have the
worms must be purged.
rubarbe, a little Treacle, or Mithridate, is a singular medicine, if there be
no fever; you may also for the same purpose use this following medicine..
cornu cervi, pull. rasur. eboris, an. i ss. sem. tanacet. and contra verm. an.
i. fiat decoctio pro parva dofi, in colatur a infunde rhei optimi, i. cinam. i.
dissolve syrupi de absinthio ss. make a potion, give it in the morning three
hours before any broth. Oil of Olives drunk, kills worms, as also water of
knot-grasse drunk with milk, and in like manner all bitter things. Yet I
could first wish them to give a glyster made of milk, honey and sugar, without
oils and bitter things, lest shunning thereof, they leave the lower guts, and
come upwards, for this is natural to worms, to shun bitter things, and
follow sweet things. Whence you may learn, that to the bitter things which you
give by the mouth, you must always mix sweet things, that allured by the
sweetness, they may devour them more greedily, that so they may kill them.
Therefore I would with milk and Sugar, mix the seeds of centaury, rue,
wormwood, aloes, and the like: harts-horne is very effectual against worms,
wherefore you may infuse Harts-horne good against the worms.
the shavings thereof in the water or drink that the patient drinks, as also
to boil some thereof in his brothes. So also treacle drunk or taken in broth,
kills the worms; purslaine boiled in brothes, and destilled and drunk, is
also good against the worms, as also succory and mints, also a decoction of the
lesser house-leek and sebestens given with sugar before meat; it is no less
effectual to put wormeseeds in their pap, and in roasted apples, and so to
give them it. Also you may make suppositories after this manner, and put them
up into the fundament.. coralli subalbi, rasurae eboris, cornu cerviusti, ireos
an. ii. mellis albi ii ss. aquae centi^odiae q. s. Suppositories against the
Ascarides.
adomnia concorporanda, fiant Glandes: let one be put up every day, of the
weight of ii. for children; these suppositories are chiefly to be used for
Ascarides, as those which adhere to the right gut. To such children as can take
nothing by the mouth, you shall apply cataplasmes to their navells made of the
powder of cummin seeds, the flower of lupines, worme-wood, southern wood,
tansie, the leaves of Artichokes, rue, the powder of coloquintida, citron
seeds, aloes, arsemart, horse mint, peach leaves, Costus amarus, Zedoaria, soap
and oxegall. Such cataplasmes are often times spread over all the belly, mixing
therewith astringent things for the strengthening of the part, as oil of
myrtles, Quinces and mastich; you may also apply a great onion hollowed in the
midst, and filled with Aloes and Treacle, and so roasted in the embers, then
beaten with bitter almonds, and an ox gall. Also you may make emplasters of
bitter things, as this which follows.. fellis bubuli, and sucei absinthii,
an.. ii. colocyn. i. terantur and misceantur simul, incorporentur cum farina
lupinorum: make hereof an A plaster against the worms.
emplaster to be laid upon the Navell.

Liniments and ointments may be also made for the same purpose to anoint the
belly, you may also make plasters for the navell of Pillulae Ruff. anointing in
the mean time the fundament with honey and sugar, that they may be chafed from
above with bitter things, and allured downwards with sweet things. Or else
take worms that have been cast forth, dry them in an iron pan over the fire,
then powder them, and give them with wine or some other liquor to be drunk,
for so they are thought quickly to kill the rest of the worms. Hereto also
conduces the juice of citrons, drunk with the oil of bitter almonds, or
sallade oil. Also some make bathes against this affect of wormwood, galls,
peach leaves boiled in water, and then bathe the child therein.

But in curing the worms, you must observe that this disease is often times
entangled with another more grievous disease, as an acute and burning fever, a
flux or A caution.
scouring, and the like, in which (as for example sake) a fever being present
and conjoined therewith, if you shall give wormseeds, old Treacle, myrrh,
aloes, you shall increase the fever and flux, for that bitter things are very
contrary to the cure of these affects. But if, on the contrary, in a flux
whereby the worms are excluded, you shall give corrall, and the flower of
Lentiles, you shall augment the fever, making the matter more contumacious by
dry and astringent things. Therefore the Physician shall be careful in
considering whether the fever be a symptom of the A fever sometimes a
symptom and sometimes a disease.
worms, or on the contrary it be essential, and not symptomaticke, that this
being known, he may principally insist in the use of such medicines as resist
both affects, as purging and bitterish in a fever and worms, but bitter and
somewhat astrictive things in the worms and flux.

CHAP. VI. A short description of the Elephantiasis or Leprosy, and of the
causes thereof.
THis disease is termed Elephantiasis because the skin of such as are
troubled therewith, is rough, scabious, wrinckled and unequal, like the skin
of an Elephant. Yet this name may seem to be imposed thereon by reason of the
greatness of the disease. Some from the opinion of the Arabians have termed it
Lepra or Leprosy (but unproperly, for the Lepra is a kind of Scab and disease
of the skin, which is vulgarly called Malum sancti manis) which word for the
present we will use, as that which prevails by custom and antiquity. Now the
Leprosy (according to Paulus) is a Cancer of the whole body, the which (as
Avicen adds) corrupts the complexion, form and figure of the members. Galen
thinks the cause arises from the error of the sanguifying faculty, through
Lib. 4. cap. 1. Lib. 2. cap. 11.
whose default the assimulation in the flesh and habit of the body is
depraved, and much changed from it self, and the rule of nature. But ad
Glauconem, he defines this disease, An effusion of troubled or gross blood
into the veins and habit of the whole body. This disease is judged great, for
that it partakes of a certain venenate virulency, depraving the members and
comeliness of the whole body. Now it appears that the Leprosy partakes of a
certain venenate virulency by this, that such There is a certain hidden
virulency in the Leprosy.
as are melancholicke in the whole habit of their bodies, are not leprous. Now
this disease is composed of three differences of diseases. First it consists of
a distemper against nature, as that which at the beginning is hot and dry, and
at length the ebullition of the humors ceasing, and the heat dispersed, it
becomes cold and dry, which is the conjunct cause of this symptom. Also it
consists of an evil composition or conformation, for that it depraves the
figure and beauty of the parts. Also it consists of a solution of continuity,
when as the flesh and skin are cleft in diverse parts with ulcers and chops: the
leprosy has for the most part 3. general causes, that is, the primitive,
antecedent, and conjunct the primitive cause is either from the first
conformation, or comes to them after they are born. It is thought to be in him
from the first conformation, The primitive cause of a Leprosy. How they may be
leprous from their first conformation.
who was conceived of depraved and corrupt menstruous blood, and such as
inclined to melancholy; who was begot of the leprous seed of one or both his
parents, for leprous persons generate leprous, because the principal parts
being tainted and corrupted with a melancholy and venenate juice, it must
necessarily follow that the whole mass of blood and seed that falls from it,
and the whole body should also be vitiated. This cause happens to those that
are already born, by long staying and inhabiting in maritime countries, whereas
the gross and misty air, in success of time, induces the like fault into
the humors of the body; for that, according to Hippocrates, such as the air
is, such is the spirit, and such the humors. Also long abiding in very hot
places, because the blood is torrified by heat, but in cold places, for that
they incrassate, and congealing the spirits, do after a manner stupefie, may
be thought the primitive causes of this disease. Thus in some places of
Germany there are diverse leprous persons, but they are more frequent in Spain
and overall Africa, then in all the world beside, and in Languedoc, Provence
and Guyenne, are more than in whole France besides. Familiarity, copulation,
and cohabitation with leprous persons, may be reckoned amongst the causes
thereof, because they transfer this disease to their familiars by their
breath, sweat and spittle left on the edges of the pots or cups. This disease
is also caused by the too frequent use of salt, spiced, acride and gross
meats, as the flesh of Swine, Asses, Bears, Pulse, milke-meats; so also
gross and strong wines, drunkenness, gluttony, a laborious life, full of
sorrow and cares, for that they incraslate, and as it were burn the blood. But
the retention of melancholy excrements, as the suppression of the haemorrhoids,
courses, small pockes and meazells, as also a quartashe fever acoustomed to
come at set times; the drying up of old ulcers, for that they defile the mass
of the blood with a melancholy dross and filth. Now you must understand that
the cause of the leprofic by the retention of the superfluities, happens
because the corrupt blood is not evacuated, but regurgitates over the whole
body, and corrupts the blood that should nourish all the members; wherefore the
assimulative faculty cannot well assimulate by reason of the corruption and
default of the juice, and thus in conclusion the Leprosy is caused. The
antecedent causes are the humors disposed to adustion and corruption into
melancholy by the torride heat; for in bodies possessed with such heat, The
antecedent cause of a Leprosy.
the humors by adustion easily turn into melancholy, which in time acquiring
the malignity and corruption of a virulent and venenate quality, yields a
beginning and essence to the leprosy. The conjunct causes are the melancholy
humors which are now partakers of a venenate and malign quality, and spread
over the whole The conjunct cause. How it comes to be deadly.
habit of the body, corrupting and destroying it first by a hot and dry
distemper, and then by a cold and dry, contrary to the beginnings of life. For
hence inevitable death must ensue, because our life consists in the moderation
of heat and moisture.

CHAP. VII. The signs of a Leprosy, breeding, present, and already confirmed.
THe disposition of the body and humors to a Leprosy is showed by the change
of the native and fresh color of the face, by that affect of the face, which
is commonly called Gutta rosacea, red and blackish suffusions and pustles, the
falling away of the hairs, a great thirst, and a dryness of the mouth both by
night and day, a stinking breath, little ulcers in the mouth, the change of the
voice to hoarsenesse, a desire of venery above nature and custom. Now there
are four times of this disease, the beginning, increase, state and declension.
The beginning is when as the malignity has not yet gone further than the inner
parts and bowels, The beginning of a Leprosy.
whereupon the strength must needs be more languid. The increase is when as the
virulency comes forth, and the signs and symptoms are every day increased in
number and The increase.
strength. The state is when as the members are exulcerated. The declension is,
when as the aspect of the face is horride, the extreme parts fall away by the
profundity The state. The declension.
and malignity of the ulcers, so that none, no not of the common sort of
people, can doubt of the disease. According to the doctrine of the Ancients,
we must in searching out of the signs of this disease being present, have
chief regard to the head. For the signs of diseases more properly and truly
show themselves in the face, by reason of the softness and rarity of the
substance thereof, and the tenuity of the skin that covers it; wherefore a
black and adust humor diffused thereunder, easily shows it self, and that
not only by the mutation of the color, but also of the Caracter and bulk,
and often times by manifest hunting it. Wherefore you must observe in the head
whether it have scaules, and whether in the place of those hairs that are
fallen away, others more tender, short and rare grow up, which is likely to
happen through defect of fit nourishment to preserve and generate hairs,
through corruption of the hairy scalpe that should be stored with such
nourishment, and of the habit it self, and through the unfitness thereof to
contain hairs; lastly by the acrimony of the vapoures sent up from the adust
humors and entrails, fretting asunder the roots of the hairs. But if not
only the hair, but also some portion of the skin The first sign of the
Leprosy.
and flesh about the roots of the hair, come away by pulling, it is an
argument of perfect corruption: let this therefore be the first sign of a
leprosy. A second and very certain sign is, a numerous and manifest
circumscription of round and hard pushes II.
or pustles under the eie-browes, and behind the ears and in several places
of the face, resembling round and hard kernells, occasioned by the default of
the assimulating faculty. The cause of this default is the grossness of the
flowing nourishment, by which means it being impact, and stopping in the
straitness of the way, it grows round at it were compassed about in the place
whereas it sticks, and by the means of the crudity, for that it is not
assimulated, and by delay, it is further hardened. The third sign is, the more
contract and exact roundnesse of the ears, their grossness, and as it were
grainy spissitude or densenesse, the cause of their roundness is the
consumption of the flaps and fleshy part through want of nourishment, and
excess of heat; but the occasion of their grainy spissitude is the grosnesse of
the earthy nourishment flowing thither. The fourth sign is a lion-like
wrinkling of the forehead, which is the IIII. Why it is called morbus leoninus.
reason that some term this disease morbus leoninus; the cause hereof is the
great dryness of the habit of the body, which also is the reason that the
bark of an old oak is rough and wrinkled. The fifth is, the exact roundnesse
of the eyes, and their fixed and V.
immovable steadiness; verily the eyes are naturally almost round, yet they
appear obtuse and somewhat broad on the foreside, but end in a Conus on the
hind part, by reason of the concourse and figure of the muscles and fat
investing them. Therefore these being consumed either through defect of
laudible nourishment, or else by the acrimonie of the flowing humor, they are
restored to their proper figure and roundness. Now the muscles which moved the
eyes being consumed, and the fat which facilitated their motion wasted, it
comes to pass that they stand stiff and unmovable, being destitute of the
parts yielding motion, and the facility thereof. The sixth sign VI.
is, the nostrils flat outwardly, but inwardly strait and contracted, that is,
an earthy and gross humor forced from within outward, which swells the sides
or edges of the nostrils; whence it is, that the passages of the nose appear as
it were obstructed by the thickness of this humor; but they are depressed and
flatted by reason of the rest of the face and all the neighboring parts swollen
more than their wont; add hereto that the partition is consumed by the
acrimony of the corroding and ulcerating humor sent thither, which makes them
necessarily to be deprest, and send forth bloody scabs. The seventh, is the
lifting up, thickness and swelling of the lips, the filthiness, stink VII.
and corrosion of the gums by acride vapors rising to the mouth; but the lips
of Leprous persons are more swollen by the internal heat burning and
incrassating the humors, as the outward heat of the Sun does in the Moors.
The eighth sign is the VIII.
swelling and blackness of the tongue, and as it were varicous veins lying
under it; because the tongue, being by nature spongious and rare, is easily
stored with excrementitious humors, sent from the inner parts unto the habit
of the body: which same is the cause why the grandules placed about the tongue
above and below, are swollen hard and round, no otherwise than scrophulous or
meazled swine. Lastly, all their face rises in red bunches or pushes, and is
overspread with a duskie and obscure redness; the eyes are fiery, fierce and
fixed, by a melancholic chachectick disposition of the whole body, manifest
signs whereof appear in the face by reason of the forementioned causes; yet
some leprous persons have their faces tinctured with a yellowish, others with a
whitish color, according to the condition of the humor, which serves for a
Basis to the leprous malignity. For hence Physicians affirm that there are
three sorts of Leprosies, one of a redish black color, consisting in a
melancholic humor; another of a yellowish green, in a choleric humor;
another in a whitish yellow, grounded upon adust phlegm. The ninth sign is a
stinking of the breath, as also of IX.
all the excrements proceeding from leprous bodies, by reason of the malignity
conceived in the humors. The tenth is, a hoarsnesse, a shaking, harsh and
obscure voice X.
coming as it were out of the nose, by reason of the lungs, recurrent nerves,
and muscles of the throttle tainted with the grossness of a virulent and
adust humor; the forementioned constriction and obstruction of the inner
passage of the nose; and lastly, the asperity and inequality of the weazon by
immoderate dryness, as it happens to such as have drunk plentifully of strong
wines without any mixture. This immoderate dryness of the muscles serving for
respiration makes them to be trouled with a difficulty of breathing. The
eleventh sign is very observable, which is a XI.
Morphew or defaedation of all the skin, with a dry roughness and grainy
inequality, such as appears in the skins of plucked geese, with many tetters on
every side, a filthy scab, and ulcers not casting off only a branlike scurfe,
but also scailes and crusts. The cause of this dry scab, is the heat of the
burning bowels and humors, unequally contracting and wrinkling the skin, no
otherwise than as leather is wrinkled by the heat of the Sun or fire. The cause
of the filthy scab and serpiginous ulcers, is the eating and corroding
condition of the melancholy humor, and the venenate corruption, it also being
the author of corruption, so that it may be no marvel if the digestive faculty
of the liver being spoiled, the assimulative of a malign and unfit matter sent
into the habit of the body cannot well nor fitly perform that which may be for
the bodies good. The twelfth is, the sense of a certain pricking, as it were of
goads or needles XII.
over all the skin, caused by an acride vapor hindered from passing forth, and
intercepted by the thickness of the skin. The thirteenth is a consumption and
emaciation XIII.
of the muscles which are between the thumb and forefinger, not only by
reason that the nourishing and assimulating faculties want fit matter wherewith
they may repair the loss of these parts, for that is common to these with the
rest of the body, but because these muscles naturally rise up unto a certain
mountanous tumor, therefore their depression is the more manifest. And this is
the cause that the shoulders of leprous persons stand out like wings; to wit,
the emaciation of the inner part of the muscle Trapezites. The fourteenth sign
is the diminution of sense, or a numnesse XIIII.
over all the body by reason that the nerves are obstructed by the thickness
of the melancholic humor hindering the free passage of the animal spirit, that
it cannot come to the parts that should receive sense, these in the interim
remaining free which are sent into the muscles for motions sake, and by this
note I chiefly make trial of leprous persons, thrusting a somewhat long and
thick needle somewhat deep into the great tendon endued with most exquisite
sense, which runs to the heel, which, if they do not well feel, I conclude,
that they are certainly leprous. Now, for that they thus lose their sense,
their motion remaining entire, the cause hereof is that the nerves which are
disseminated to the skin are more affected, and those that run into the muscles
are not so much; and therefore when as you prick them somewhat deep, they feel
the prick, which they do not in the surface of the skin. The fifteenth is the
corruption XV.
of the extreme parts possessed by putrefaction and a gangrene, by reason of
the corruption of the humors sent thither by the strength of the bowels,
infecting with the like tainture the parts wherein they remain: add hereto
that the animal sensitive faculty is there decayed, and as often as any faculty
has forsaken any part, the rest presently after a manner neglect it. The
sixteenth is, they are troubled with terrible XVI.
dreams, for they seem in their sleep to see devils, serpents, dungeons,
graves, dead bodies, and the like, by reason of the black vapors of the
melancholy humor troubling the fantasy with black and dismal visions, by
which reason also such as are bitten of a mad dog fear the water. The
seventeenth is, that at the beginning and XVII.
in the increase of the disease they are subtle, crafty and furious by reason
of the heat of the humors and blood; but at length in the state and declension
they become crafty and suspicious, the heat and burning of the blood and
entrails decaying by little and little; therefore then fearing all things
whereof there is no cause, and distrusting of their own strength they
endeavor by craft, maliciously to circumvent those with whom they deal, for
that they perceive their powers to fail them. The eighteenth is, XVIII.
a desire of venery above their nature, both for that they are inwardly burned
with a strange heat, as also by the mixture of flatulencies therewith (for
whose generation the melancholic humor is most fit) which are agitated, and
violently carried through the veins and genitall parts by the preternaturall
heat; but at length when this heat is cooled, and that they are fallen into a
hot and dry distemper, they mightily abhor venery, which then would be very
hurtful to them, as it also is at the beginning of the disease, because they
have small store of spirits and native heat, both which are dissipated by
venery. The nineteenth is, the so great thickness of their gross and livide
XIX.
blood, that if you wash it, you may find a sandy matter therein, as some have
found by experience, by reason of the great adustion and assation thereof. The
twentieth is, the languidnesse and weakness of the pulse (by reason of the
oppression of the XX.
vital and pulsifick faculty by a cloud of gross vapors). Herewith also
their urine sometimes is thick and troubled, like the urine of carriage beasts,
if the urenary vessels be permeable and free; otherwise it is thin, if there be
obstruction, which only suffers that which is thin to flow forth by the urenary
passages; now the urine is oftentimes of a pale ash color, and oft-times it
smells like as the other excrements do in this disease. Verily there are many
other signs of the Leprosy, as the slownesse of the belly by reason of the
heat of the liver, often belchings by reason that the stomach is troubled by
the refluxe of a melancholy humor, frequent sneesing by reason of the fullness
of the brain; to these, this may be added most frequently, that the face and
all the skin is unctuous or greasy, so that water powered thereon, will not in
any place adhere Why their faces seem to be greasy.
thereto: I conceive it is by the internal heat dissolving the fat that lies
under the skin, which therefore always looks as if it were greased or anointed
therewith in leprous persons. Now of these forementioned signs, some are
univocall, that is, which truly and necessarily show the Leprosy: othersome
are equivocall or common, that is, which conduce as well to the knowledge of
other diseases as this. To conclude, that assuredly is a Leprosy which is
accompanied with all, or certainly the most part of these forementioned signs.

CHAP. VIII. Of Prognostics in the Leprosy; and how to provide for such as
stand in fear thereof.
THe Leprosy is a disease which passes to the issue, as contagious almost as
Why the Leprosy is uncurable.
the plague, scarce curable at the beginning, uncurable when as it is
confirmed, because it is a Cancer of the whole body; now if some one Cancer of
some one part shall take deep root therein, it is judged uncurable.
Furthermore the remedies which to this day have bin found out against this
disease, are judged inferior and unequal in strength thereto. Besides, the
signs of this disease do not outwardly show themselves before that the bowels
be seized upon, possessed and corrupted by the malignity of the humor,
especially in such as have the white Leprosy, sundry of which you may see
about Bordeaux, and in little Britain, who notwithstanding inwardly burn with
so great heat, that it will suddenly wrinkle and wither an apple held a short
while in their hand, as if it had laid for many days in the Sun. There is
another thing that increases the difficulty of this disease, which is an
equal pravity of the three principal faculties whereby life is preserved. The
deceitful and terrible visions in the sleep, and numnesse in feeling, argue
the depravation of the animal faculty; now the weakness of the vital faculty
is showed by the weakness of the pulse, the obscurity of the hoarse and
jarring voice, the difficulty of breathing, and stinking breath; the decay of
the natural is manifested by the depravation of the work of the liver in
sanguification, whence the first and principal The cure.
cause of this harm arises. Now because we cannot promise cure to such as
have a confirmed Leprosy; and that we dare not do it to such as have been
troubled therewith but for a short space, it remains that we briefly show how
to free such as are ready to fall into so fearful a disease. Such therefore
must first of all shun all things in diet and course of life whereby the blood
and humors may be too vehemently heated, Their diet.
whereof we have formerly made some mention. Let them make choice of meats of
good or indifferent juice, such as we shall describe in treating of the diet of
such as are sick of the plague; purging, bleeding, bathing, cupping, to
evacuate the impurity of the blood, and mitigate the heat of the liver, shall
be prescribed by some learned Gelding good against the Leprosy.
Physician Valesius de Tarenta much commends gelding in this case, neither do I
think it can be disliked. For men subject to this disease may be effeminated by
the amputation of their testicles, and so degenerate into a womanish nature,
and the heat of the liver boiling the blood, being extinguished, they become
cold and moist, which temper is directly contrary to the hot and dry distemper
of Leprous persons; besides the Leprous being thus deprived of the faculty of
generation, that contagion of this disease is taken away which spreads and is
diffused amongst mankind by the propagation of their issue.

The End of the Twentieth Book.
OF POISONS, AND OF THE BITING OF A MAD DOG, AND THE BITINGS AND STINGINGS OF
OTHER VENOMOUS CREATURES. THE ONE AND TWENTIETH BOOK.
CHAP. I. The cause of writing this Treatise of Poisons.
FIVE reasons have principally moved me to undertake to write this Treatise of
poisons, according to the opinion of the Ancients. The first is, that I might
instruct the Surgeon what remedies must presently be used to such as are hurt
by poisons, in the interim whilst greater means may be expected from a
Physician. The second is, that he may know by certain signs and notes such
as are poisoned or hurt by poisonous means, and so make report thereof to the
Judges, or to such as it may concern. The third is, that those Gentlemen and
others who live in the Country, and far from Cities and store of greater
means, may learn something by my labors by which they may help their
friends bitten by an Adder, mad Dog, or other poisonous creature, in so
dangerous, sudden and usual a case. The fourth is, that every one may beware
of poisons, and know their symptoms when present, that being known, they may
speedily seek for a remedy. The fifth is, that by this my labor all men may
know what my good will is, and how well minded I am toward the common wealth
in general, and each man in particular, to the glory of God. I do not here so
much arm malicious and wicked persons to hurt, as Surgeons to provide to help
and defend each man's life against poison; which they did not understand, or at
least seemed not so to do, which taking this my labor in evil part, have
maliciously interpreted my meaning.

But now at length, that we may come to the matter; I will begin at the
general division of poisons, and then handle each species thereof severally:
but first let us What is to be accounted poison.
give this rule; That, Poison is that which either outwardly applied or struck
in, or inwardly taken into the body, has power to kill it, no otherwise, than
meat well dressed is apt to nourish it. For Conciliator writes, that the
properties of poison are contrary to nourishments in their whole substance, for
as nourishment is turned into blood, and in each part of the body whereto it is
applied to nourish, by perfect assimulation is substituted in the place of that
portion which flows away each moment. Thus on the contrary poison turns our
bodies into a nature like it self and venenate, for as every agent imprints
the force and qualities thereof in the subject patient, thus poison by the
immoderation of faculties in their whole nature contrary to us, changes our
substance into its nature, no otherwise than fire turns chafe in a moment
into its own nature, and so consumes it. Therefore it is truly delivered by
the Ancients, who have diligently pryed into the faculties of natural things,
that it is Poison that may kill men by destroying and corrupting their temper,
and the composure and conformation of the body. Now all poisons are said to
proceed either The differences of poisons.
from the coruptaire, or from living creatures, plants and mineralls, or by an
artificial malignity in distilling, subliming and diversely mixing of poisonous
and fuming things. Hence ^risesundry differences of poisons; neither do they
all work after the same manner; for some corrupt our nature by the
unmeasurablenesse of the manifest and elementary qualities whereof they
consist, others from a specific and occult property. Hence it is that some
kill sooner than othersome; neither is it true, that all of them presently
assail the heart, but others are naturally at deadly strife All poisons have
not a peculiar Antipathy with the heart.
with other parts of the body, as Cantharides with the bladder, the sea Hare
with the lungs, the Torpedo with the hands, which it stupefieth, though the
fishers rod be betwixt them. Thus of medicines, there are some which are apt
presently to comfort and strengthen the heart; others the brain, as staechas;
others the stomach, as Cinnamon; Also there are some poisons which work both
ways, that is, by manifest and occult qualities, as Euphorbium; for that both
by the excessive heat and the whole substance, or the discord of the whole
substance with ours, corrupts our nature. An argument hereof is, that Treacle,
which by its quality is manifestly hot, infringeth the force thereof, as also
of all others of an occult property. Poisons which work by an occult and
specific property, do not therefore do it, because they are too immoderately
hot, cold, dry, moist; but for that they are absolutely such, and have that
essence from the stars and celestial influence, which is apt to dissolve and
destroy the strength of man's body, because being taken, but even in a small
quantity, yet are they of so pernicious a quality, that they kill almost in a
moment. Now poisons do not only kill being taken into the body, but some being
put or applied outwardly; neither do venomous creatures only harm by their
stinging and biting, but also by their excrements, as spittle, blood, the touch
and breath.

CHAP. II. How poisons being small in quantity, may by their only touch cause
so great alterations.
IT seems strange to many, how it may come to pass, that poison, taken or
admitted in a small quantity, may almost in a moment produce so pernicious
effects over all the body, and all the parts, faculties, and actions, so that
being admitted but in a little quantity, it swells up the body into a great
bigness. Neither ought it to seem less strange, how Anridotes and
Counter-poysons, which are opposed to poison, can so suddenly break and weaken
the great and pernicious effects thereof, being it is not likely that so small
a particle of poison or Antidote can divide it self into so many, and so far
severed particles of our body. There are some (says Galen) who think that
Cap. 5. lib 6. de locis affect.
somethings by touch only, by the power of their quality, may alter those
things which are next to them, and that this appears plainly in the sea
Torpedo, as that which has so powerful a quality, that it can send it along
the fishers rod to the hand, and so make it become torpide or numbe. But on the
contrary, Philosophers teach, that accidents, such as qualities are, cannot
without their subjects remove and diffuse themselves into other subjects.
Therefore Galens other answer is more agreeable to reason, that so many and
great affects of poisons and remedies arise either from a certain spirit or
^le huminity; not truly, for that this spirit and subtle humidity may be
dispersed over the whole body and all the parts thereof which it affects, but
that little, which is entered the body, as cast in by the stroke of a Spider,
The true reason of the wondrous effects of poisons.
or the sting of a Scorpion, infects and corrupts all the next parts by
contagion with the like quality, these others that are next to them, until
from an exceeding small portion of the blood, if the stroke shall light into
the veins, it shall spread over the whole mass of blood; or of phlegm, if
the poison shall chance to come to the stomach, and so the force thereof shall
be propagated and diffused over all the humors and bowels. The doubt of
Antidotes is less, for these being taken in greater quantity, when they shall
come into the stomach, warmed by the heat of the place, they become hot, and
send forth vapors, which suddenly diffused over the body by the subtlety of
their substance, do by their contrary forces dull and weaken the malignity of
the poison. Wherefore you may often see when as Antidotes are given in less
quantity than is fit, that they are less prevalent, neither do they answer to
our expectation in overcomming the malignity of the poison; so that it must
necessarily follow that these must not only in qualities, but also in quantity
be superior to poisons.

CHAP. III. Whether there be any such poisons as will kill at a set time?
TO the propounded question; whether there may be poisons which within No
poisons kill in a set time.
a certain and definite time (put case a month or year) may kill men,
Theophrastus thus answers; of poisons, some more speedily perform their parts,
others more slowly, yet may you find no such as will kill in set limits of
time, according to the will and desire of men. For that some kill sooner or
later than others; they do not this of their own or proper nature, as
Physicians rightly judge, but because the subject upon which they light, does
more or less resist or yield to their efficacy. Experience shows the truth
hereof; for the same How poisons come to kill sooner or later.
sort of poison in the same weight and measure given to sundry men of different
tempers and complexions, will kill one in an hour, another in six hours, or
in a day, and on the contrary will not so much as hurt some third man. You may
also observe the same in purging medicines. For the same purge given to diverse
men in the same proportion, will purge some sooner, some later, some more
sparingly, others more plentifully, and othersome not at all; also with some it
will work gently, with othersome with pain and gripings. Of which diversity
there can no other cause be assigned, than men's different natures in complexion
and temper, which no man can so exactly know and comprehend, as to have certain
knowledge thereof, as how much and how long the native heat can resist and
labor against the strength of the poison, or how pervious or open the passages
of the body may be whereby the poison may arrive at the heart and principal
parts. For in such (for example sake) as have the passages of their arteries
more large, the poison may more readily and speedily enter into the heart
together with the air that is continually drawn into the body.

CHAP. IIII. Whether such creatures as feed upon poisonous things be also
poisonous, and whether they may be eaten safely and without harm?
DUcks, Storkes, Hernes, Peacocks, Turkies, and other birds, feed upon Toads,
Vipers, Aspes, Snakes, Scorpions, Spiders, Caterpillars, and other venomous
things. Wherefore it is worthy the questioning, whether such like creatures
nourished with such food, can kill or poison such persons as shall afterward
eat them? Matthiolus writes that all late Authors, Such things as feed upon
poison may be eaten without danger.
who have treated of poisons, to be absolutely of this opinion, That men may
safely and without any danger feed upon such creatures, for that they convert
the beasts into their nature after they have eaten them, and on the contrary,
are not changed by them. This reason though very probable, yet does it not make
these beasts to be wholly harmless, especially if they be often eaten or fed
upon. Dioscorides and Galen seem to maintain this opinion, whereas they
write, that the milk, which is nothing else than the relented blood, of such
beasts as feed upon scammonie, hellebore, and spurge, purges violently.
Therefore Physicians, desirous to purge a sucking child, give purges to the
nurses, whence their milk becoming purging, becomes both meat and medicine to
the child. The flesh of Thrushes, which feed upon Juniper berries, favors of
Juniper. Birds that are fed with worme-wood or Garlike, either taste bitter, or
have the strong sent of Garlike. Whitings taken with garlike, so smell thereof,
that they will not forgo that smell or taste by any salting, frying or
boiling, for which sole reason, many who hate garlike, are forced to abstain
from these fishes. The flesh of Rabbits that feed upon Pennyroyall and Juniper,
favor of them; Phisicians wish that Goats, Cows, and Asses, whose milk they
would use for Consumptions or other diseases, should be fed some space before,
and every day with these or these herbs which they deem fit for the curing of
this or that disease. For Galen affirms that he doubts not, but that in
success of time the flesh of creatures Lib de simp. facult.
will be changed by the meats where on they feed, and at length favor thereof.
Therefore I do noe allow that the flesh of such things as feed upon venomous
things should be eaten for food, unless it be some long space after they have
disused such repast, and that all the venom be digested and overcome by the
efficacy of their proper heat, so that nothing thereof may remain in taste,
smell or substance, but be all vanished away. For many dye suddenly, the cause
of whose deaths are unknown, The occasion of sudden death in many.
which peradventure was from nothing else, but the sympathy and antipathy of
bodies, for that these things cause death and disease to some, that nourish
othersome [according to our vulgar English proverb; That which is one man's
meat is another man's Poison.]

CHAP. V. The general signs of such as are poisoned.
WE will first declare what the general signs of poison are, and then will
we descend to particulars, whereby we may pronounce that one is poisoned with
this or that poison. We certainly know Common signs of such as are poisoned.
that a man is poisoned, when as he complains of a great heaviness of his
whole body, so that he is weary of himself; when as some horrid and loathsome
taste sweats out from the orifice of the stomach to the mouth and tongue,
wholly different from that taste that meat, howsoever corrupted, can send up:
when as the color of the face changes suddenly, somewhiles to black,
sometimes to yellow, or any other color, much differing from the common
custom of man; when nauseousnesse with frequent vomiting, troubles the
patient, and that he is molested with so great unquietness, that all things
may seem to be turned upside down. We know that the poison works by the
proper, and from the whole substance, when as without any manifest sense of
great heat or coldness, the patient sownes often with cold sweats, for
usually such poisons have no certain and distinct part wherewith they are at
enmity, as cantharides have with the bladder. But as they work by their whole
substance, and an occult propriety of form; so do they presently and directly
assail the heart, our essence and life, and the fortress and beginning of the
vital faculty. Now will we show the signs whereby poisons, that work by
manifest and elementary qualities, may be known. Those who exceed in heat,
burn or make an impression of heat in Signs of hot poisons.
the tongue, the mouth, throat, stomach, guts, and all the inner parts, with
great thirst, unquietness, and perpetual sweats. But if to their excess of
heat they be accompanied with a corroding and putrefying quality, as
Arsenicke, Sublimate, Rose-ager or Rats-bane, Verdegreace, Orpiment, and the
like, they then cause in the stomach and guts intolerable pricking pains,
rumblings in the belly, and continual and intolerable thirst. These are
succeeded by vomitings, with sweats some-whiles hot, somewhiles cold, with
swounings, whence sudden death ensues. Poisons that kill by too great
coldness, induce a dull or heavy sleep, or drowzinesse, Signs of cold
poisons.
from which you cannot easily rouse or waken them; sometimes they so trouble
the brain, that the patients perform many undecent gestures and anticke
tricks with their mouths and eyes, arms and legs, like as such as are
frantic; they are troubled with cold sweats, their faces become blackish or
yellowish, always ghastly, all their bodies are benumbed, and they dye in a
short time unless they be helped; poisons of this kind are Hemlock, Poppie,
Nightshade, Henbane, Mandrage. Dry poisons are usually accompanied by heat
with moisture, for although sulphur be Signs of dry poisons.
hot and dry, yet has it moisture, to hold the parts together, as all things
which have a consistence have, yet are they called dry, by reason that dryness
is predominant in them: such things make the tongue and throat dry and rough,
with unquenchable thirst; the belly is so bound, that so much as the urine
cannot have free passage forth; all the members grow squallide by dryness, the
patients cannot sleep; poisons of this kind are Lytharge, Cerusse, Lime,
Scailes of Brass, Filings of Lead, prepared antimony. On the contrary, moist
poisons induce a perpetual sleep, a flux or scouring, the resolution of all
the nerves and joints, so that not so much as the Signs of moist poisons.
eyes may be faithfully contained in their orbs, but will hang as ready to fall
out; the extreme parts, as the hands, feet, nose and ears corrupt and putrefie,
at which time they are also troubled with thirst by reason of their strong
heat, always the companion of putrefaction, and often times the author thereof:
now when this comes to pass, death is at hand. Very many deny that there can
be any moist poisons found, that is, such as may kill by the efficacy of their
humidity, because there are no such things to be found, as may come to the
fourth degree of moisture. Yet there is an example that averres the contrary,
which was of one, who sleeping on the night, was bitten by a Serpent, as
Gilbertus Anglicus affirms; for dying thereof, when as his servant, desirous
to awaken his Master out of his sleep, took him by the arm, all the flesh
being A history.
putrefied, fell off, and presently the bones also fell asunder, being deprived
of their flesh, which could not happen, unless by excess of the venomous
humidity which lay hid in the teeth and spittle of the serpent. Also we have
found it noted by Hippocrates, that in a rayny, humide, and southerly
constitution of the year, it happened by the malign violence of the venenate
and putrefying humidity, that Sect. 3. lib. 3. epid.
the flesh of the arms and legs becoming rotten, fell away by peecemeale,
and the bones remained bare; yea also and the bones themselves in some,
putrefyed and fell away: neither certainly does the Lues venerea kill by any
other means, than The Lues venenerea kills by excess of moisture.
by a fretting and putrefying force of humidity, by whose efficacy the solidity
of the bones is dissolved; then much more the flesh may be tainted and
consumed by putrefaction.

To these and such poisons which work by a manifest and elementary faculty,
when as they shall be received into the body after what manner soever, you
shall forthwith oppose their contraries, and if by chance it be not manifest,
what, and of what distinct kind of poison that is, you must know that such
poisons as work by occult properties, it is not by reason as yet found out how
they will affect the body, but only by experience. Therefore to these you must
oppose their like antidotes, which may by their whole substance strengthen the
heart and vital faculty, and withstand the strength of the poison. But to this
our distinction of poisons, working All poisons are not cold.
by a manifest and elementary quality, their opinion is contrary, who affirm
that the venom of all poisonous beasts are therefore cold, for that such as
are bitten or stung with them, are forthwith felt to be colder than a stone.
And that serpents for fear of cold, when as winter is at hand, keep themselves
in holes and dens under ground, or else as vipers use to do, lie under stones,
under which, you may often find them stiff and numbe, and so unapt for
motion, that you may easily take them up in your hand. But the coldness that
is perceived or felt in such as are bitten or stung, is not occasioned by the
coldness of the poison, but by the absence of the natural heat, withdrawing
it self in the very instant of the stroke, from the surface into the center
of the body, both for the defense of the heart, as the principal part, as also
for that there is nothing, which so much dissipates, or so much oppugnes Why
such as are poisoned or stu^g, are cold.
the vital heat, as poison (of what kind soever it be) does.

CHAP. VI. How, or by what means to shun, or eschew Poisons.
IT is a matter of much difficulty to avoid poisons, because such as at this
time temper them, are so thoroughly prepared for deceit and mischief, that they
will deceive even the most wary and quicksighted; for they so qualify their
ingrate taste and smell, by the admixture of sweet and well smelling things,
that they cannot easily be perceived even by the skillfull. Therefore such as
fear poisoning, ought to take heed of meats cooked with much art, very
sweet, salt, What such as fear poisoning must observe in their diet.
sour, or notably endued with any other taste. And when they are oppressed with
hunger or thirst, they must not eat nor drink too greedily, but have a
diligent regard to the taste of such things as they eat or drink; besides,
before meat let them take such things as may weaken the strength of the
poisons; such as is the fat broth of good nourishing flesh meats; in the
morning let them arm themselves with treacle or mithridate, and conserve of
roses, or the leaves of rue, a wallnut and dry figs; besides, let him presently
drink a little draught of Muskedine or some other good wine; when one suspects
he has taken any poison in meat or drink, let him forbear sleeping. For
besides that the force of poison is often times so rapid, that it consumes our
life in a short space, as fire does stubble, as also for that it is drawn more
Why sleep i^ hurtful.
in wardly into the secret passages of the body by sleep. Wherefore in such a
case it is better to procure vomit by drinking Hydraeleum warm, or butter
dissolved in Why and how vomit must be procured.
warm oil, or a decoction of line, or fenugreeke seeds, or fat broth, for
thus the received poison is also cast forth therewith, or else the acrimony
thereof retunded, and the belly loosed.

You may see this by daily experience, for caustickes, vesicatories, and the
like acrid things being applied to an anointed part, will not blister nor
exulcerate the part. Neither does the vomit conduce only in this, that it
excludes the poison, but it shows either by the taste, smell, or color, the
kind of the taken poison; so that then by using the proper Antidote, it may
be the more easily and speedily resisted, yet not withstanding if you conceive
that the poison have descended deeper into the Guts, you may with a glyster
draw away the rest thereof which adheres to the coats of the Guts. But if the
patient cannot vomit, then shall some purging medicine be given him forthwith,
and such as are thought more particularly to resist poison, When and where with
they shall be purged.
such as are Agaricke, Aloes, the lesser Centaury, Rubarbe and other things,
according to the direction of the learned Physician. Then shall you administer
glysters made with Cassia, fatty decoctions, sheeps suet, or butter or Cowes
milk, with the mucilages of Line seed, psilium seeds, quince seeds, and other
such things as are usually given in a Dysentery, or bloody flux, that such
things may hinder the adhesion of the poison to the coats of the guts, and by
their unctuousnesse retunde the acrimony of the poison, and mitigate if any
thing shall already be ulcerated, and absolutely defend the sound parts from
the malign effects of the poison. But let this be a perpetual rule, That the
poison be speedily drawn back by the same way it entered into the body; as,
if it entered by smelling in at the nostrills, let it be drawn The cure of
poisoned wounds.
back by sneesing; if by the mouth into the stomach, let it be excluded by
vomit; if by the fundament into the belly, then by glister; if by the privities
into the womb, then by metrenchites or injections made therinto; if by a bite,
sting or wound, let revulsion be made by such things as have a powerful
attractive faculty; for thus we make diversions, that by these we may not only
hinder the poison from assailing the heart, but also that by this means we may
draw it from within outward. Wherefore strong ligatures cast about the arms,
thighs and legs, are good in this case. Also large cupping glasses applied
with much flame to sundry parts of the body, are good. Also bathes of warm
water, with a decoction of such things as resist poison, as southern wood,
calaminte, rue, betony, horehound, penny royal, bays, scordium, smallage,
scabious, mints, valerian, and the like, are good in this case. Also sweates
are good, being provoked so much as the strength of the patient can endure. But
if he be very wealthy, whom we suspect poisoned, it will be safer to put him
into the belly of an ox, horse or mule, and then presently into another
as soon as the former is cold, that so the poison may be drawn forth by the
gentle and vaporous heat, of the new killed beast; yet do none of these
things without the advice of a Physician, if it may conveniently be had.

CHAP. VII. How the corrupt or venomous Air may kill a Man.
THE air is infected and corrupted by the admixture of malign vapors, either
arising from the unburied bodies of such as are slain in great conflicts, By
how many, and what means the air may be infected
or exhaling out of the earth after earthquakes, for the air, long pent up in
the cavities and bowels of the earth, and deprived of the freedom and
commerce of the open air, is corrupted, and acquires a malign quality, which
it presently transferreth unto such as meet therewith. Also there is a certain
How thunders and lightnings may infect the air.
malignity of the air which accompanies thunders, and lightnings, which
favoures of a sulphurous virulency, so that whatsoever wild beasts shall
devour the creatures killed therewith, they become mad, and dye immediately;
for the fire of lightning has a far more rapid, subtle, and greater force
than other fires, so that it may rightly be termed a Fire of Fires.

An argument hereof is, that it melts the head of a spear, not harming the
wood, and silver and gold, not hurting the purse wherein it is contained. Also
the air is infected by fumigations, which presently admitted into the body and
bowels by the mouth and nose in respiration, by the skin and arteries in
perspiration, does easily kill the spirits and humors being first infected,
and then within a short space after, the solid substance of the principal
parts, and chiefly of the heart being turned into their nature, unless the man
be first provided for by sneesing, vomiting, sweating, purging by the belly, or
some other excretion. For that poison which is carried into Whether the vapor
that arises from a burnt thing may poison one.
the body by smell is the most rapid and effectual, by so much as a vapor or
exhalation is of more subtle and quicklier piercing essence than an humor. Yet
not withstanding, will thou say, it is not credible, that any can be killed by
any vapor raised by the force of fire, as of a Torch, or a Warming-pan, for
that the venenate quality of the thing that is burnt, is dissipated and
consumed by the force of the fire, purging and cleansing all things. This
reason is falsely feigned to the destruction of the lives of careless people;
for sulphurous brands kindled at a clear fire, do notwithstanding cast forth
a sulphurous vapor. Whether do not Lignum aloes and Juniper, when they are
burnt in a flame, smell less sweetly?

Pope Clement, the seventh of that name, the Uncle of our Kings Mother, was
poisoned by the fume of a poisonous Torch that was carried lighted before him,
A history.
and dyed thereof. Mathiolus tells, that there were two Mountebanks in the
market place of Sicnna, the one of which, but smelling to a poisoned
gilly-flower given him by the other, fell down dead presently.

A certain man not long ago, when he had put to his nose, and smelled a little
unto a pomander, which was secretly poisoned, was presently taken with a
Vertigo, and all his face swelled, and unless that he had gotten speedy help
by sternutatories and other means, he had died shortly after of the same
kind of death that Pope Clement did.

The safest preservative against such poisons, is not to smell to them:
moreover, some affirm, that there are prepared some poisons of such force,
that being anointed but on the saddle, they will kill the rider, and others,
that if you but anoint the stirrops therewith, they will send so deadly
poisonous a quality into the rider, through his boots, that he shall die
thereof within a short time after: which things, though they be scarce credible,
because such poisons touch not the naked skin, yet have they an example in
nature, whereby they may defend themselves. For the Torpedo sends a narcoticke,
and certainly deadly force, into the arm, and so into the body of the
Fisher, the cords of the net being between them.

CHAP. VIII. That every kind of Poison has its proper and peculiar Signs and
Effects.
AS poisons are distinct in species, so each species differs in their signs
and effects; neither is it possible to find any one kind of poison, which may
be accompanied or produce all the signs and effects of all poisons, other-wise
Physicians should in vain have written of the signs and effects of each of
them, as also of their proper remedies and antidotes. For what kind of poison
shall that be, which shall cause a burning heat in the stomach, belly, liver,
bladder and kidneies, which shall cause a hicketting, which shall cause the
whole body to tremble and shake, which shall take away the voice and speech,
which shall cause convulsions, shall weaken the pulsificke faculty, which
shall intercept the freedom of breathing, which shall stupesie and cast into a
dead sleep, which shall together, and at once cause a Vertigo in the head,
dimnesse in the sight, a strangling, or stoppage of the breath, thirst,
bleeding, fever, stoppage of the urine, perpetual vomiting, redness,
lividnesse, and paleness of the face, resolution of the powers, and many other
things, all which are caused by all sorts of poison. Lastly, no body will
deny, but that hot poisons may kill more speedily than cold, for that they are
more speedily actuated Hot poisons kill sooner than cold.
by the native heat.

CHAP. IX. The Effects of Poisons from particular venomous things, and what
Prognostics may thence be made.
IT is the opinion of Cornelius Celsus, and almost of all the ancients, That
the bite of every beast had some virulencie, but yet some more than othersome.
They are most virulent that are inflicted by venomous beasts, as Aspes, Vipers,
Water-snakes, and all kinds Lib. 2. cap. 27. The bites of all wild beasts are
virulent.
of Serpents, Basiliskes, Dragons, Toads, Mad dogs, Scorpions, Spiders, Bees,
Waspes, and the like. They are less malign, which are of creatures wanting
venom, as of Horses, Apes, Cats, Dogs not mad, and many other things, which
though of their own nature they are without poison, yet in their bites there
is something more dolorisicke and ill natured, than in common wounds inflicted
by other occasions: I believe that in their slaver or sanies, there is
something, I know not how to term it, contrary to our nature, which imprints
a malign quality in the ulcer, which also you may observe in the tearings or
scratchings of such creatures as have sharp claws, as Lions and Cats.
Moreover many affirm that they have found by experience, that the bites of
men are not altogether without virulencie, especially of such as are red haired
and freckled, cheiflie when as they are angered; it is probable that the bites
of other persons want this malignitie, The bites of a red haired man virulent.
seeing that their spittle will cure small ulcerations. Wherefore if there
shall happen difficulty of cure in a wound, caused by a man's biting, which is
neither red haired nor freckled, neither angry; this happens not by means of
the spittle, nor by any malign quality, but by reason of the contusion,
caused by the bluntness of the teeth, not cutting, but bruising the part, for
being not sharp, they cannot so easily enter the flesh, unless by bruising and
tearing, after the manner of heavy and blunt strokes and weapons, wounds being
occasioned by such are more hard to be cured, Contused wounds harder to heal
than such as are cut.
than such as are made by cutting and sharp weapons. But of the foresaid
bitings of venomous creatures, there are few which do not kill in a short
space, and almost in a moment, but principally if the poison be sent into the
body by a live creature, for in such poison there is much heat; also there is
therein a greater tenuity, which serves as vehicles thereto into what place or
part soever of the body they tend, the which the poisons taken from dead
creatures are detective of. Wherefore some of these kill a man in the space of
an hour, as the poison of Aspes, Basiliskes and Toads; others not unless in
two or three days space, as of water Snakes; a Spider, and Scorpion require
more time to kill, yet all of them admitted but in the least quantity, do in a
short space cause great and deadly mutations in the body, as if they had
breathed in a pestiferous air, and with the like violence, taint and change
into their own nature all the members and bowels, by which these same members
do in the time of perfect health change laudible meats into their nature and
substance. The place whereas these poisonous creatures live, and the time,
conduce to the perniciousnesse of the poison, for such as live in dry,
mountanous and sunburned places kill more speedily than such as be in moist and
marish grounds; also they are more hurtful in winter than in summer; and the
poison is more deadly which proceeds from hungry, angry and fasting creatures,
than that which comes from such as are full and quiet; as also that which
proceeds from young things, chiefly when as they are stimulated to venery, is
more powerful than that which comes from old and decrepite; from females worse
than from males; from such as have fed upon other venomous things, rather than
from such as have abstained from them, as from snakes which have devoured
toads, vipers which have fed upon scorpions, spiders and Caterpillars. Yet the
reason of the efficacy of poisons depends from their proper, that is, their
subtle or gross consistence, and the greater or less aptness of the affected
body to suffer. For hot men that have larger and more open veins and arteries,
yield the poison freer passage to the heart. Therefore those which have more
cold and straight vessels, are longer ere they die of the like poison; such as
are full, are not so soon harmed as those that are fasting: for meats, besides
that by filling the vessels, they give not the poison so free passage, they
also strengthen the heart by the multiplication of spirits, so that it more
powerfully resists pernicious venom. If the poison work by an occult and
specific property, it causes the cure and prognostic to be difficult, and
then must we have recourse to Antidotes, as these which in their whole
substance resist poisons, but principally to treacle, because there enter into
the composition thereof medicines which are hot, Why treacle retunds the force
of all simple poisons.
cold, moist and dry: whence it is, that it retunds and withstands all
poisons, chiefly such as consist of a simple nature, such as these which come
from venomous creatures, plants and mineralls; and which are not prepared by
the detestable art of empoisoners.

CHAP. X. What cure must be used to the bitings and stingings of venomous
beasts.
CUre must speedily be used without any delay to the bites and stingings of
venomous beasts, which may by all means disperse the poison, and keep it from
entering into the body; for when the principal parts are possessed, it boots
nothing to use medicines afterward. Therefore the A double indication in the
cure of venomous bites
Ancients have propounded a double indication to lead us to the finding out of
medicines in such a case, to wit, the evacuation of the virulent and venenate
humor, and the change or alteration of the same and the affected body. But
seeing evacuation is of two sorts, to wit, universal, which is by the inner
parts, and particular, which is by the outward parts. We must begin at the
particular, by such to pick medicines as are fit to draw out, and retund the
venom; for we must not always begin a cure with general things, as some
think, especially in external diseases, as wounds, fractures, dislocations,
venomous bites and punctures. Wherefore hereto as speedily as you may, you
shall apply remedies fit for the bites and punctures of venomous beasts, as for
example, the wounds shall be presently washed with urine, Lotions fit for
venomous bites.
with seawater, aquavitae, or wine, or vinegar wherein old treacle or mustard
shall be dissolved. Let such washing be performed very hot, and strongly chafed
in, ^^d then leave upon the wound and round about it, linen rags, or lint
steeped in the same liquor. There be some who think it not fit to lay treacle
thereto, because, as they say, it drives the poison in. But the authority of
Galen convinces that opinion, Lib. de theriaca.
for he writes that if treacle be applied to this kind of wounds before that
the venom shall arrive at the noble parts, it much conduces. Also reason
confutes it; for vipers flesh enters the composition of treacle which attracts
the venom by the similitude of substance, as the Lodestone draws iron, or
Amber strawes. Moreover, the other simple medicines which enter this
composition, resolve and consume the virulencie and venom, and being inwardly
taken, it defends the heart and other noble parts, and corroboratheth the
spirits. Experience teaches that mithridate fifthly given in the stead of
treacle works the like effect. The medicines that are taken Treacle
out-wardl^ applied and inwardly taken good against v^nemous bit^s.
inwardly and applied outwardly for evacuation, must be of subtle parts, that
they may quickly insinuate themselves into every part to retund the malignity
of the poison; wherefore garlike, onions, leeks, are very good in this case,
for that they are vaporous; also scordium, tue, dictamnus, the lesser Centaury,
horehound, rocket, the milkie juice of unripe figs, and the like, are good;
there is a kind of wild buglosse amongst all other plants, which has a
singular force against venomous bites, whence it is termed Echium and
viperinum, and that for two causes; the first is, because in the The force of
E. (...).
purple flowers that grow amongst the leaves, there is a resemblance to the
head of a viper or adder. Another reason is, because it heales the biting of a
viper not only applied outwardly, but also helps such as are bitten, being
drunk in wine, yea, and will not suffer those that have lately drunk thereof
to be bitten at all. Wild time has the like effect; though these oft-times
agree with the poison in quality as in heat, yet do they help in discussing
and resolving it: yet, as much as we may, we must labor to have evacuation
and alteration together. It is most convenient, if the part affected will
permit, to apply large cupping-glasles with much flame and horns; also sucking
is good, the mouth being first washed in wine wherein some treacle is
dissolved, and with oil, lest any thing should adhere thereto, for it will
hinder it, if so be the mouth be no where ulcerated. It is good also to apply
horse-leaches; some wish to apply to the wound, the fundaments of hens or
turkies that lay eggs, for that such are opener behind, first putting salt
upon them that they may gape the wider, shutting their beaks and opening them
now and then lest they should be stifled, and ever and anon to substitute
others in stead of such as die or are suffocated; for thus it is thought the
poison is drawn forth, and passes into the bird by the fundament. There be
others which had rather apply to the wound live birds cut asunder in the midst,
and so laid to hot, for that they guess these resist poison by a natural
discord. But certainly it is by their heat whereby they do not only digest
toads, aspes, vipers, scorpions and other venomous things, but also wear
asunder and soften sand, stones, and most dry and stony seeds in their
gizzards; wherefore we must think them very good to draw out the poison and
dissipate it. But nothing is so forcible to disperse and retund the venom, as
the impression of cauteries, especially The eff^e of Cauteries against venomous
bites.
actual, for a hot iron works more effectually and speedily, and causes an
ulcer which will remain open a longer time. Wherefore to cause the speedier
falling away of the eschar, you shall scarifie it to the quick, and then
plentifully anoint the place. For thus the poison will the sooner pass forth.
But this must be done before the poison enters far into the body, for
otherwise Cauteries will not only do no good, but further torment the patient,
and weaken him to no purpose. Let drawing plasters be laid to the wound and
neighboring parts, made of Galbanum, turpentine, black pitch, and other gummy
and resinous things. After the falling away of the Eschar, basilicon shall be
applied, quickened with a little Precipitate, for it is The ^orce of Precipitate
against venomous wounds.
very effectual in these cases, for that it draws forth the virulent sanies
out of the bottom of the wound, neither does it suffer the wound to be closed
speedily. To which purpose they put in a piece of of a sponge, or a root of
Gentian or Hermondactyll, or some acride medicine, as agyptiacum or Precipitate
mixed with the powder of Al^me, or a caustic beaten to powder. But you must
always observe this, that with your ointments you must always mix some
Treacle or Mithridate, or the juice of hypericon, or the like, which have power
to attract and disperse the poison, and cleanse the ulcer; yet if too vehement
heat shall cause such pain as is likely to bring When hot things are not
convenient for poisoned wounds.
a gangrene by the dissipation of the spirits, then neglecting the cure of the
proper disease for a time, we must labor to correct the symptom. But in this
case you must observe this rule, that you let no blood, give no purging
medicine, nor glyster, nor vomit, nor use no bath, nor other thing that may
procure sweat, until three days be past after the bite or sting. In the mean
space, let the patient shun all manner of labor, but chiefly venery, lest by
causing an agitation of the humors, the poison get sooner to the heart.
Therefore then it is time to use universal evacuations, when as you shall
suspect that the poison is diffused over the veins and whole inner part of the
body besides. Before you shall give nothing, unless medicines of Treacle or
Mithridate and the like things, which have a faculty to resist poison, and
strengthen the whole body by their benign and vital vapor, although their
substance go no further than the stomach. Thus pills when they are swallowed,
though they go no further than the stomach, yet do they draw matter out of
the joints and head; and strong glysters, though they pass no further than the
guts, yet by their quality diffused Antidotes must be given in great quantities.
further with the vapor, they draw from the most distant parts; yet you must
give an Antidote, not only more powerful than the poison in quality, but also
greater in quantity, that so it may the more easily overcome and expel the
poison. Wherefore you must give it twice in a day, and continue it so long
until you shall know that the strength of the poison is weakened and overcome
by the remission and decay of the malign symptoms. Yet in the mean while,
you must not neglect distemper caused in the part by the poison, but must
rather correct it by the application of remedies contrary to the distemper, as
by cold things, if great heat afflict the affected part and whole body; by hot
things on the contrary, if it seem as cold as a stone, which oft-times
happens. And let thus much suffice for the general cure of poisons: now will
we come to their particular cure.

CHAP. XI. Why dogs sooner become mad than other creatures, and what be the
signs thereof.
Dogs become mad sooner than other creatures, because naturally Dogs
naturally subject to madness.
they enjoy that temper and condition of humors which has an easy
inclination to that kind of disease, and as it were a certain disposition,
because they feed upon carrion and corrupt, putride and stinking things, and
lap water of the like condition; besides the trouble and vexation of losing
their masters, makes them to run every way, painfully searching and smelling
to every thing, and neglecting their meat. A heating of the blood ensues upon
this pains, and by this heat it is turned into a melancholy, whence they
become mad. But yet dogs do not always become mad by means of heat, but
also by occasion of cold, that is, by contrary causes, for they fall into this
disease not only in the dog-daies, but also in the depth of winter. For dogs
abound with melancholic humouts, to wit, cold and dry. But such humors as in
the summer through excess of heat, so in the depth of Dogs become mad, not
only in the heat of summer, but also in the depth of winter.
winter by constipation and the suppression of fuliginous excrements, they
easily turn into melancholy. Hence follows a very burning and continual
fever, which causes or brings with it a madness. Add hereto, that in the
depth of winter the heat which is contained within is redoubled, and in like
manner as the scorching heat in summer, it breeds and turns the humors into
melancholy. Also dogs become mad by contagion, as such as are bitten by
another mad dog. A mad dog has sparkling and fiery eyes, with a fixed
look, cruel and a squint, he carries his head heavily, hanging down toward
the ground, and somewhat on one side, he gapes, and thrusts forth his tongue,
which is livide and blackish; and being short breathed, casts forth much filth
at his nose, and much foaming matter at his mouth; in his gate, as if he
suspected and feared all things, he keeps no one or certain path, but runs
one while to this side, another while to that, and stumbling like one that is
drunk, he oft-times falls down on the ground; he violently assailes
whatsoever he meets withal, whether it be man, tree, wall, dog, or any thing
else; other dogs shun him, and presently sent him a far off. But if another
unawares chance to fall foul on him, he yields himself to his mercy, fawnes
upon him, and privily labors to get from him, though he be the stronger and
greater. He is unmindfull of eating and drinking, he barks not, yet he bites
all he meets without any difference, not sparing his master, as who at this
time he knows not from a stranger or enemy. For it is the property of
melancholy to disturb the understanding, so that such persons as are
melancholic, do not only rage against, and use violence to their friends and
Why melancholic persons hurt themselves.
parents, but also upon themselves. But when as he sees water, he trembles and
shakes, and his hairs stands up on end.

CHAP. XII. By what signs we may know a man is bitten of a mad dog.
IT is not so easy at the first to know a man that is bitten with a mad dog;
and principally for this reason, because the wound made by his teeth causes no
more pain than other wounds usually The bite of a mad dog not very painful at
the first.
do; contrary to the wounds made by the sting or bite of other poisonous
creatures, as those which presently after they are inflicted, cause sharp
pain, great heat, swelling and abundance of other malign accidents, according
to the nature of the poison; but the malignity of the bite of a mad dog
appears not before that the venom shall invade the noble parts. Yet when you
are suspicious of such a wound, you may acquire a certain knowledge and
experience thereof by putting a piece of bread into the quitture that comes
from the wound. For if a hungry dog neglect, yea more fly from it, and dare not
so much as smell thereto, it is thought to be a certain sign that the wound
was inflicted by a mad dog. Others add, That if any give this piece of
bread to hens, that they will die the same day they have eaten it; yet this
Signs of the bite of a mad dog.
latter, I making experiment thereof, failed, for devouring this virulent
bread, they became not a jot the worse. Wherefore I think the former sign to
be the more certain, for dogs have a wonderful and sure smelling faculty,
whereby they easily sent and perceive the malignitie of the like creature. But
when as the raging virulencie has invaded the noble parts, then the patients,
becoming silent and sorrowful, think of many things, and at the beginning
make a noise with their teeth; they Signs by which you may gather that the
noble parts are tainted.
make no answer to the purpose, they are more testie than ordinary, and in
their sleeps they are troubled with dreams, and strange fantasies, and
fearful visions, and lastly, they become afraid of the water. But after that
the poison has fixed it self into the substance of the noble parts, then all
their faculties are disturbed, all the light of their memory, senses, reason
and judgment is extinguished. Wherefore becoming stark mad, they know not
such as stand by them, not their friends, no nor themselves, falling upon such
as they meet withal, and themselves with their teeth, and nails and feet.
Often twitchings like convulsions do suddenly rise in their limbs; I judge them
occasioned by extraordinary dryness, which has as it were wholly drunk up all
the humiditie of the nervous parts; there is a great dryness of the mouth with
intolerable thirst, yet without any desire of drink, because the mind being
troubled, they become unmindful and negligent of such things as concern them,
and are needful for them; the eyes look fiery and red, and all the face is of
the same color; they still think of dogs, and seem to see them, yea and desire
to bark and bite just after the manner of dogs; I conjecture that the virulent
humor has changed all the humors and Why men becoming mad bark like dog^.
the whole body into the like nature, so that they think themselves also dogs;
whence their voice becomes hoarse by much endeavoring to bark, having forgot
all decency, like impudent dogs, to the great horror of the beholders. For
their voice grows hoarse by reason of the great dryness of the aspera
arteria; they shun the light, as that Why they (...) the light.
which is enemy to melancholy, wherewith the whole substance of the brain is
replenished; on the contrary, they desire darkness, as that which is like and
friendly to them. But they are afraid of the water (though good to mitigate
their great distemper Why they are afraid of the water.
of heat and dryness) and they fly from looking-glasses, because they imagine
they see dogs in them, whereof they are much affraide, by reason whereof they
shun the water and all polite and clear bodies which may supply the use of a
looking-glass; so that they throw themselves on the ground, as if they would
hide themselves therein, lest they should be bitten again: for they affirm
that he which is bitten by a mad dog, always has a dog in his mind, and so
remains fixed in that sad cogitation. Wherefore thinking that he sees him in
the water, he trembles for fear, and therefore shuns the water. Others write
that the body by madness becomes wondrous dry, wherefore they hate the
water, as that which is contrary thereto, being absolutely the moistest
element, and so they say that this is the reason of their fearing the water.
Ruffus writes that madness is a kind of melancholy, and that fear is the
proper symptom thereof, according to Hippocrates; wherefore Aphor. 25. sect. 6.
this or that kind of melancholy begets a fear of these or these things, but
chiefly of bright things, such as looking-glasses and water, by reason that
melancholy persons seek darkness and solitariness, by reason of the black
corruption of the humor wherewith they abound. They fall into cold sweats, a
fomie, stinking and greenish matter flows from the ulcer, by reason of the
heat of the antecedent cause and ulcerated part. The urine most commonly
appears watrish, by reason that the strainers, as it were, of the kidneys, are
straightened by the heat and dryness of the venom. Yet sometimes also it appears
more thick and black, as when nature powerfully using the expulsive faculty,
attempts to drive forth by urine the melancholy humor, the seat of the venom.
Also sometimes it is wholly suppressed, being either incrassated by hot dryness,
or else the mind being carried other ways, and forgetful of its own duty,
The bite of a mad dog taken in hand in time, is for the most part curable.
until at length the patients, vexed by the cruelty of so many symptoms, and
overcome by the bitterness of pain, die frantic, by reason that medicines
have not been speedily and firly applied. For few of those who have used
remedies in time, have perished of this disease.

CHAP. XIII. Prognostics.
WE cannot so easily shun the danger we are incident to by mad dogs, as that
The venom of a mad dog applied outwardly only, may cause madness.
of other beasts, by reason he is a domestic creature, and housed under the
same roof with us. The virulency that resides in his foame or slaver is hot
and dry, malign, venenate and contagious, so that it causes a distemper like
it self, in the body whereto it shall apply it self, and spread it self over
the whole body by the arteries; for it does not only hurt when as it is taken
in by a bite or puncture, but even applied to the skin, unless it be forthwith
washed away with salt water or urine. Neither does this venom hurt equally or
at all times alike, for it harms more or less, according to the inclination of
the air to heat or cold, the depth of the wound, the strength of the patients
body, and the ill humors thereof, and their disposition to putrefaction, the
freedom and largeness of the passages. Now malign symptoms happen sonner
^later, as in some about the fourtieth day, in others about six months, and
in others a year after. There Whether the Hydrophobia or fear of water
beincurable.
be some who thereupon are troubled with the falling sickness, and at length
grow mad: such as fall into a fear of the water, never recover. Yet Avicen
thinks their case is not desperate, if as yet they can know their face in a
glass; for hence you may gather, that all the animal faculties are not yet
overthrown, but that they stand in need of strong purgations, as we shall show
hereafter. Aetius tells that there was a certain A history.
Philosopher, who taken with this disease and a fear of water, when as he
descended with a great courage unto the bath, and in the water beholding the
shape of the dog that bit him, he made a stand, but ashamed thereof, he
forthwith cried out, Quid cani cum Balbeo? (i) What has a dog to do with a
Bath? which words being uttered, he threw himself forcibly into the Bath, and
fearelesly drank of the water thereof, and so was freed from his disease
together with his erroneous opinion. It is a deadly sign to tumble themselves
on the ground, to have a hoarse voice, for that is an argument that the weazon
is become rough by reason of too excessive dryness. Finally, the principal
parts being possessed, there is no recovery or life to be hoped for. Men may
fall mad, though they be not bit by a mad dog. For as the humors are often
inflamed of themselves, and cause a Cancer or Leprosy, so do they also
madness in melancholy persons. The bites of vipers and other venomous
creatures cause not like symptoms to these that come by the biting of a mad
dog, because they die before such can come forth or show themselves. Great
wounds made by mad dogs are not equally so dangerous as little, for from the
former, great plenty of venomous matter flows out, but in the latter it is
almost all kept in.

CHAP. XIIII. What cure must be used to such as are bitten by a mad dog.
THis case also requires speedy remedies, for such things are in vain which
come long after the hurt. The Lawyer Baldus experienced this to his great A
history.
harm; for being by chance lightly bit in the lip by a little dog wherewith he
was delighted, not knowing that he was mad, and neglecting the wound, by reason
of the smallness thereof, after some four months space, he died mad, having
then in vain assayed all manner of medicines. Wherefore observing these things
both for evacuation, as also for alteration, which we have formerly mentioned
in the general cure of wounds inflicted by the bite or sting of venomous
creatures, and by all the means there specified, we must draw forth the
venom; and if the wound be large, then suffer it to bleed long and much, for
so some part of the poison will be exhausted; if it be not great, it shall be
enlarged by scarification, or an occult cauterie, neither shall it be healed or
closed up at the soonest, till forty days be passed. Sorrel The force of
Sorrel.
beaten and applied to the wound, and the decoction thereof taken inwardly, is
very effectual in this case, as Aetius affirms. To the same purpose you may
with good success make a lotion and friction with mustard dissolved in urine
or vinegar, leaving upon the wound a double cloth moistened in the same
decoction: lastly, all acride, biting and very attractive medicines are
convenient in this case. Wherefore some apply Rocket boiled and beaten with
butter and salt; others take the flower of Orobus, and temper it with honey,
salt and vinegar, and apply it hot. Horse-dung boiled in sharp vinegar, or
brimstone beaten to powder and tempered with ones spittle, is good. Also black
pitch melted with some salt, and a little Euphorbium mixed therewith and so
applied, is good. Some write, that the hairs of the dog whose bite caused
the madness, applied by themselves, by their sympathy or similitude of
substance draw the venom from within outward; for so a Scorpion beaten and
applied to the place whereas it stung, by drawing out the poison that it sent
in, restores the patient to health, both these by often experience are affirmed
to have certain event. Others chaw unground wheat, and lay it upon the wound,
others roast beans under hot embers, then husk them and cleave them, and so
apply them. Also the wound may be wholesomely washed and fomented with a
decoction The force of Docks.
of Docks, and then the herb beaten may be applied thereto; also the patient
may drink the decoction; and by this one remedy Aetius affirms that he has
recovered diverse; for thus it moves urine plentifully, which is thought much to
conduce to the cure of this disease. There be some who apply the leaves of
betony and nettles beaten with common salt; others make a medicine to the same
purpose and after the same manner of an Onion, the leaves of Rue and salt. Yet
the rest are exceeded by Treacle dissolved in aqua vitae or strong wine, and
rubbed hard upon the part, so that the blood may follow, laying upon the wound
when you have wiped it, clothes dipped in the same medicine, then presently
apply garlike or onions beaten with common A history.
salt and turpentine: by this only remedy I freed one of the daughters of
Mademoiselle A history.
de Gron from the symptoms of madness, and healed the wound, when as a mad
dog had bit her grievously in the calfe of the right leg. Also it is good
presently to eat garlic with bread, and then to drink after it a draught of
good wine, for garlic by its spirituous heat will defend the noble parts
from poison. There be some who wish to eat the roasted liver of the dog that
hurt them, or else the liver of a goat, of which remedies as yet I have had no
experience. Others prescribe a dram of the seeds of Agnus castus to be drunk
with wine and butter. Others the powder of river-crabs, burnt and drunk in
wine. Or,. rad. gentianae ii. astacorum flaviatilium in fumo combust. and in
pollinem redact. iii. terrae sigill. ss. misce. give i. of this same powder in
the decoction of river crabs, and let them drink thereof often at sundry times.
Many have cast themselves into the sea, neither have they thence had any help
against madness, as Ferrand Pozet the Cardinal testifies in his book of
poisons; Leaping into the sea n^ce^taine r^me^y against madness.
wherefore you must not rely upon that remedy, but rather you must have
recourse to such things as are set down in the books of Physicians, and
approved by certain and manifold experience. But seeing that no poison can
kill, unless it be taken or admitted into the body, we must not fear any harm
by sprinkling our bodies with the sanies of a mad dog, viper, toad, or any
other such like venomous creature, if so be that it be presently wiped or
washed clean away.

CHAP. XV. What cure must be used to such as fear the water, but yet are able
to know themselves in a glass.
SUch as have not their animal faculty as yet overcome by the malignity of The
force of Antimonie against madness.
the raging venom, must have strong purgations given them. Wherefore, if in
any case Antimonie be useful, then is it in this, as that which causes
sweats, loses the belly, and procures vomiting. For it is a part of extreme
and dangerous madness to hope to overcome the cruel malignity of this poison
already admitted into the bowels, by gentle purging medicines. Assuredly, such
and so great danger is never overcome without danger. Bathes also conduce,
which may disperse and draw forth the poison by causing sweats. Also many and
frequent treacle potions are good, to retund the venom, and strengthen the
bowels; also it will be fitting to give them water and all other liquid things,
which they so much abhor, in a cup with a cover. Always let such as are
poisoned, or bitten or stung, by a mad dog or other venomous beast, keep
themselves in some warm and light place, that the poison which by coldness is
forced in, may be the readilier drawn out by the means of heat, and the
spirits be recreated by the brightness of the air, and therefore move from
the center to the circumference of the body, and let the room be perfumed with
sweet things. To eat very hot and salt things presently at the beginning, as
onions, leeks, all spiced meats, and strong wine not all^ied, seems not to be
besides reason; because such things by their spirituous heat hinder the
diffusion of the poison over the body, and strengthen the filled entrails.
There be some also that would have them to feed upon gross and viscous meats,
which by obstructing the vessels, may hinder the passage of the poison to the
heart and other parts; and by the same reason it will be better to fill
themselves with meat to satietie, than otherwise, because the malignity of
humors is increased by hunger, than which, nothing can be more harmfull to
venomous wounds. Yet within a short while after, as within five or six days,
they must return to a mediocritie, and use all things temperate, boiled meats
rather than roasted, and that in a decoction of opening things, so to move
urine. Lastly, they must keep such a diet as melancholic persons ought to do;
neither shall they let blood, lest so the poison should be further drawn into
the veins; but it is good that the patients body be soluble from the very
first. Let their drink be wine indifferently allayed with water, oxymel
simplex, or the syrup of the juice of Citron with boiled water; or else this
following Julep.. succilimonum, and malorum citri, an. ss. suc. gran. acid. ii.
aquae acetosae, min. and ros. an. i. aq. font. coct. quantum sufficit, fiat
Julep, ut artis est. Sleep is to be Why sleep is hurtful to such as are
bitten by a mad dog, and all such as are poisoned.
avoided until the force of the poison is abated, for by sleep the humors
flow back into the bowels. All things that resist poison must be given any
way whatsoever, as lemons, oranges, angelica roots, gentian, tormentill,
burnet, vervine, carduus benedictus, borage, buglosse, and the like. Let all
things that are afterward set before the patient be meats of good juice, such
as are veale, kid, mutton, partridge, pullets, capons, and the like.

CHAP. XVI. Of the biting of a Viper or Adder, and the symptoms and cure
thereof.
THe remedies that were formerly mentioned against the bitings of mad dogs,
the same may be used against all venomous bites and stings, yet nevertheless
each poison has his peculiar antidote. Vipers or Adders (as we vulgarly term
them) have in their The bites of vipers how virulent.
gummes, or the spaces between their teeth, little bladders filled with a
virulent sanies, which is pressed out into the part that they bite with their
teeth. There forthwith arises a pricking pain, the part at the first The
symptoms.
is much swollen, and then the whole body, unless it be hindered: gross and
bloody filth sweats out of the wound, little blisters rise round about it, as
if it were burnt, the wound gnawes, and as it were feeds upon the flesh, great
inflammation possesses the liver and the gummes, and the whole body becomes
very dry, becoming of a yellowish or pale color, with thirst unquenchable;
the belly is griped by fits, a choleric vomiting molesteth them, the
stomach is troubled with a hicketting, the patients are taken with often
sownings, with cold sweat, the forerunner of death, unless you provide by fit
medicines for the noble parts, before the poison shall invade them. Mathiolus
tells that he saw a countrie-man, who, as he was mowing a meadow, by chance cut
an Adder in two with his sith, which when he thought it A history.
was dead, he took the one half whereon the head remained, without any fear
in his hand, but the enraged creature, turning about her head, cruelly bit him
by one of his fingers, which finger as men usually do (especially when as they
think of no such thing) he put into his mouth, and sucked out the blood and
poison, and presently fell down dead.

When as Charles the ninth was at Montpelier, I went into the shop of one
Farges an Apothecary, who then made a solemn dispensation of Treacle, where
not satisfying A history.
my self with the looking upon the vipers which were there in a glass, ready
for the composition, I thought to take one of them in my hands, but whilst
that I too curiously and securely handled her teeth which were in her upper
jaw, covered with a skin, as it were a case to keep the poison in, the beast
catched hold of the very end of my forefinger, and bit me in the space which
is between the nail and the flesh; whence presently there arose great pain,
both by reason of the part endued with most exquisite sense, as also by the
malignity of the poison: forthwith I exceeding straightly bound my finger above
the wound, that so I might press forth the blood and poison, lest they should
diffuse themselves further over the body. I dissolved old treacle in aqua
vitae, wherein I dipped and moistened cotton, and so put it to the wound, and
within a few days I thoroughly recovered by this only medicine. Remedies for
the bite of a viper.
You may use in stead of Treacle, Mithridate and sundry other things, which by
reason of their heat are powerful drawers, as a squill roasted in hot embers,
garlic and leeks beaten and applied, barley flower tempered with vinegar,
honey, and goats dung, and so applied like a pultis. Some think it sufficient
forthwith to wash and foment the wound with vinegar, salt, and a little honey.
Galen writes that the poison inflicted by the bite of a viper, may be drawn
forth by applying to the ^
wound the head of a viper, but othersome apply the whole viper beaten to mash.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Serpent called Haemorrhous.
THE Serpent Haemorrhous is so called, because by his biting he causes blood
to drop out of all the passages of the wounded body; he is of a The
Haemorrhous why so called.
small body, of the bigness of a viper, with else burning with a certain
fiery brightness, and a most beautiful skin. The back of him (as Avicen
writes) is spotted with many black and white spots, his neck little and his
tail very small: the part which he bites, forthwith grows blackish, by
reason of the extinction of the native heat, which is extinguished by such
poison which is contrary thereto in its whole substance. Then follows a pain
of the stomach and heart, these parts being touched with the pestiferous
quality of the poison. These pains are seconded by vomiting, the orifice of
the ventricle being relaxed by a Diarrhaea, the retentive faculty of all the
parts of the belly being weakened, and the veins which are spread through the
guts, not being able to retain the blood contained in them. For the blood is
seen to flow out, as in streams, from the nose, mouth, ears, fundament,
privities, corners of the eyes, roots of the nail, and gums, which Wonderful
bleedings.
putrefie, the teeth falling out of them. Moreover there happens a difficulty
of breathing, and stoppage of the urine, with a deadly convulsion.

The cure is forthwith to scarifie, and burn the bitten part, or else to cut
it quite off, if that it may be done without danger of life, and then to use
powerfullie drawing Antidores.

The figure of the serpent Haemorrhous.


CHAP. XVIII. Of the Serpent called Seps.
THe Serpent Seps is so called, because it causes the part which it bites, The
reason of the name, and description of the Seps.
forthwith to putrefie, by reason of the cruel malignitie of its poison. It is
not much unlike the Haemorrhous, but that it curles or twines up the tail in
diverse circles. Pausanias writes that this serpent is of an ash color, a broad
head, small neck, big belly, writhen tail, and as he goes, he runs aside
like a crabbe. But his skin is variegated and spotted with several colors,
like to Tapistrie. By the cruelty of his causticke and putrefying venom, he
burns the The symptoms.
part which he has bit, with most bitter pain; he causes the shedding of the
hairs, and as Aetius adds, the wound at the first casts forth manifest
blood, but within a little while after, stinking filth. The putrefyed affected
parts wax white, and the body all over becomes of the color of that scurfe,
which is termed Alphos, so that by the wickedness of this putrefactive poison,
not only the spirits are resolved, but also the whole body consumed, as by
fire, a pestilent carbuncle, and other putride tumors, arising from a hot and
humide or suffocating constitution of the air. Now for the remedies, they must
be such as are formerly prescribed against the bitings of a viper.

The Figure of the Serpent Seps.


CHAP. XIX. Of the Basiliske or Cockatrice.
THe Basiliske far exceeds all kinds of Serpents in the curstness of its
poison. Therefore it is affirmed by Nicander, that into what place soever he
comes, other venomous creatures do forthwith fly thence, for that The efficacy
of (...) the poison (...) the Basilisk.
none of them can so much as endure his hissing; for he is thought to kill all
things even with this, and not with his biting and touch only; besides, if any
of them hasten to get any meat or drink, and perceive that the Basiliske is
not far from thence, he flies back, and neglects the getting of nourishment
necessary for life. Galen writes, that the Basilisk is a yellowish serpent,
with a sharp head, and three risings distinguished with white spots, and
rising up in form of a crown, Lib. de theriac.
by reason whereof he is styled the King of Serpents. Certainly the violence
of his poison in killing men is so great, that he is therefore thought to kill
men, and other Wh^ the Basiliske is thought to kill by his (...) sight.
creatures by his sight only. Solinus affirms, that the body of a dead
Basiliske has wondrous faculties. Wherefore the inhabitants of Pergamum, in
ancient times, gave a mighty price for one, to hang upon the joistes of the
temple of Apollo, so to drive away the Spiders and Birds, lest they should
there weave their webs, or the other build their nests in that sacred place.
Verily no ravenous creature will touch their carcass; but if constrained by
hunger they do touch it, then they forthwith fall down dead in the same
place: and this happens not only by eating their body, but also by devouring
the bodies of such beasts as are killed by their bitings. They kill (...). lib.
8. ca^. 21.
the trees and shrubs by which they pass, not only by their touch, but even
with their breath. Amongst the western Aethiopians is the fountain Nigris,
near which there is a serpent called Catablepas, small in body, and slow,
having a great head; which it scarce can carry, but that it lies always upon
the ground, otherwise it The (...). (...).
would kill abundance of people, for it forthwith kills all that see the eyes
thereof, the Basiliske has the same force; he is bred in the province of
Cyrene, of the length of some twelve fingers, with a white spot in his head,
resembling a crown; he chaseth away all serpents with his hiss: Weasels are
the destruction of such monsters: thus it pleased nature, that nothing should
be without its equal; they assail them in their dens, being easily known
by the barrenness or consumption of the soil. These kill them also by their
sent, and they die, and the fight of nature is ended: thus Nothing in nature
without its equal.
nature to the magnanimous Lion, lest there should be nothing which he might
fear, has opposed the weak creature the Cock, by whose crowing only he is
terrefied and put to flight. Erasistratus writes, that a golden yellowness
affects the bitten part of such as are hurt by a Basiliske, but a blackness
and tumor possesses the rest Sy^.
of the body, all the flesh of the muscles within a while after falling away
piece-meale. An antidote against this must be made of a dram of Castoreum
dissolved (...).
in wine and drunken, or else in the juice of poppie. But Aetius thinks it
superfluous to write remedies against the Basiliske, when as the sight and
hearing only kills such as either see or hear her.

The figure of a Basiliske.


CHAP. XX. Of the Salamander.
THe Salamander kills not only such as it bites by making a venomous
impression, The malignity of a Salamander.
but it also infects the fruits and herbs over which it creeps, with a spittle
or gross moisture which sweats out of all the body, to the great danger of
the health and life of such as eat these things at unawares: wherefore it need
not seem strange, which is received by some late writers, that some families
have all died by drinking water out of pits, whereinto a Salamander by accident
was fallen. For if it shall creep upon a tree, it infects all the fruit with
the The temper of her.
qualities of cold and moist poison, wherein it yields not to Aconite.

Aetius writes that such as are infected with the poison of a Salamander,
certain parts of their body grow livide, so that they fall away often, being
putrefyed. At Symptoms.
the first there appear white spots over the body, then red, afterward black
with putrefaction, and the falling away of the hairs. The cure is, to procure
vomit, to The cure.
loose the belly with a glyster, and to give them Treacle and Mithridate in
potions. Avicen prescribes the same things against this kind of poison as
against opium, by reason of the cold nature of them both; the proper antidote
is turpentine, styrax, nettle seeds, and cypress leaves. Dioscorides writes
that the Salamander is a kind of Lizard Lib. 2. cap. 54.
dull, variegated, and which is falsely reputed not to be burnt by fire. But
Pliny says she is so cold, that she extinguisheth the fire by her touch only,
being laid upon hot coals. On the contrary, Mathiolus says that cast into a
great flame, they are quickly consumed. It is easy out of Aetius to reconcile
these disagreeing opinions; How a Salamander may be said to live in the fire.
This creature, says he, passes through a burning flame, and is not hurt,
the flame dividing it self and giving her way, but if she continue any time
in the fire, the cold humor being consumed in her, she is burnt. Now the
Salamander is black, variegated, with yellow spots, starre-fashion.

The figure of a Salamander.


CHAP. XXI. Of the Torpedo.
THe Torpedo has his name from the effect, by reason that by his touch and
power the members become torpid and numb; in muddy shoars it lives upon fish,
which she catches by craft. For lying in the mud, she so stupefyes those that
are nigh her, that she easily preyes upon them; The craft of the Torpedo.
she has the same power over men, for she sends a numnesse not only into the
arm of the fisherman, but also over all his body, although his fishers pole His
stupefying force.
be between them.

The effigies of a Torpedo.


CHAP. XXII. Of the Bitings of Aspes.
THE wound which is made by an Aspe is very small, as if a needle were thrust
into the part, and without any swelling. These symptoms follow upon her bite,
sudden darkness clouds their Symptoms.
eyes, much agitation in all their bodies, but gentle notwithstanding; a
moderate pain of the stomach troubles them, their foreheads are continually
troubled with convulsive twitchings, their cheeks tremble, and their eyelids
fall gently to rest and sleep; the blood which flows from the wound is little,
but black; death no longer deferred than the third part of a day, will take
them away by convulsions, unless you make resistance with fitting remedies.
The male Asp makes two wounds, the female four, as it also happens in the
bitings of vipers. Now for that the poison of Asps congeals the blood in the
veins and arteries, therefore you must use against it such things as Cure.
are hot and subtle of parts, as mithridate or treacle dissolved in aqua vitae,
and the same powered into the wound; the patient must be warmed by bathes,
frictions, walking, and the like. When as the hurt part becomes purple, black
or green, it is a sign that the native heat is extinct and suffocated by the
malignity of the venom. Therefore then it is best to amputate the member, if
the party be able to endure it, and there be nothing which may hinder. Vigo
writes, that he saw a Mountebank at Florence, A history.
who, that he might sell the more of his Antidotes, and at the better rate, let
an Aspe to bite him by the finger, but he died thereof some four hours after.
To the same purpose you may read Mathiolus, whereas he writes that those
Impostors or By what means Aspes may be made less hurtful. Gal. lib. de
There. ad pisonem.
Mountebanks to cozen the better, and deceive the people, use to hunt and take
vipers and aspes long after the spring, that is, then whenas they have cast
forth their most deadly poison; then they feed them with meats formerly
unusual to them, so that by long keeping and care, at the length they bring it
to pass, that they put off a great part of their venomous nature; neither
being thus satisfied, they make them oftentimes to bite upon pieces of flesh,
that so they may cast forth into them the venom which is contained in the
membraine between their teeth and gums. Lastly, they force them to bite, lick
and swallow down an astringent medicine, which they compose and carry about
for the same purpose, that so they may obstruct the passages by which the
venom used to flow out, for thus at length their bites will be harmless, or
without great danger. This therefore is their art, that so they may sell their
counterfeit treacle to the people at a high rate, as that which is a most safe
remedy against all poisonous bites. Christopher Andrew in his book called
^^coiatria, writes, Against the bites of what serpents treacle does no good.
that the Islands of Spain are everywhere full and stored with serpents,
aspes, and all sorts of venomous beasts, against whose bites they never
observed or found any benefit in treacle. But the efficacy of the following
Antidote is so certain and excellent, and approved by so manifold experience,
that in the confidence thereof, they will not be afraid to let themselves be
bitten by an Aspe. Now this medicine is A certain remedy against the bitings of
Aspes.
composed of the leaves of Mullet, Avenes and red stock Gilly flowers in like
quantity, which they boil in sharp vinegar and the urine of a sound man, and
there with foment the wounded part. Yet if he have not taken nor used any thing
of a good while after the wound, it will be better and more certain, if the
patient drink three ounces of this decoction fasting two hours before meat.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the biting of a Snake.
I Have thought good in a true history to deliver the virulent malignity A
historic.
of the bite of a snake, and the remedies thereof. When as King Charles the
ninth was at Moulins, Mousier Le Feure, the Kings Physician, and I were called
to cure the Cook of the Lady of Castelpers. Who gathering hoppes in a hedge to
make a salad, was bit on the hand by a snake that there lay hid, he putting
his had to his mouth, sucked the wound to ease the pain by sucking forth the
venom. But his tongue forthwith swelled so big, that he could not speak his
mind: besides his whole arm, even to his shoulder, was in like sort much
swelled, his pain was so vehement, that it made him swoune twice in my
presence, his face was wan and livid like to a dead body, and though I
despaired of his recovery, yet not suffering him to be quite forsaken, I
washed his mouth The cure.
with treacle dissolved in white wine, and gave him some thereof to drink,
adding thereto some aqua vitae. I opened his swollen arm with many and deep
scarifications, especially in the place where he was hurt, I suffered the blood
which was wholly serous and sanious, to flow more plentifully, I washed the
wounds with treacle and mithridate dissolved in aqua vitae, and then I put him
exceeding warm in bed, procuring sweat, and making him to lie awake, lest
sleep should draw the poison inwards to the entrails. I by these means so
far prevailed, that on the day after he was freed from all his malign
symptoms. Therefore I judged it only remained for a perfect cure, that the
wound should be long kept open and washed with treacle, neither was I deceived,
for within a few days he was perfectly recovered.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the bitings of Toads.
THough Toads want teeth, yet with their hard and rough gums they so straightly
press or pinch the part which they shall take hold on, that they will The
bites of toads how harmfull.
force their poison thereinto, and so over the whole body by the pores of the
pressed part. Moreover, they cast forth their venom by urine, spittle and
vomit upon herbs, but chiefly upon Strawberries, the which they are reported
greatly to affect. Hence many suddenly and ignorantly catch their deaths.

I heard from a man of very good credit, that there were two merchants not
far A history.
from the City Toulouse, who whilst dinner was providing, walked into the
garden that belonged to the Inn, where they gathered some sage leaves, and
unwashed as they were, put them into their wine. They had not as yet dined,
when being taken with a sudden Vertigo, the whole Inn seemed to run round,
then losing their sight, The symptoms occasioned by the poison of toads.
they fell into a sown, intermixed now and then with convulsions. But they
stammered with their lips and tongues becoming black; a froward and horrid
look with continual vomiting, and a cold sweat, the forerunner of death, which
presently seized upon them, their bodies becoming exceedingly much swollen. But
the Justices of the place suspecting that they were poisoned, made the
Inne-keeper and the Guests to be apprehended, being examined, they all
constantly and with one voice answered, that the dead parties ate of the same
meat and drink which the rest did, but only that they put sage into their
wine. A Physician was asked the question whether sage might be poisoned; he
answered, it might: but to come to the purpose, that it must appear whether
any venomous creature had poisoned the plant with her spittle or venomous
sanies. This which was lightly pronounced, and only by conjecture, was by the
eye found to be true. For at the root thereof there was found a hole in the
ground full of Toads, who got out by putting in of warm water, made it
credible that the plant was poisoned by their spittle and urine, whereby you
may understand how unwisely they do, who devour herbs and fruits newly
gathered without washing. Also we must take heed lest falling asleep in the
fields, we lie not near the holes which toads or other venomous beasts of the
like nature have made their habitation. For thence a venomous or deadly air
may be drawn into the lungs. For the same cause we must abstain from eating
of frogs in the month of May, because May frogs.
then they engender with toads. Oxen in feeding sometimes lick up small toads
together with the grass, which presently will breed their great harm, for
thereupon the oxen swell so big, that they often burst withal. Neither is the
venom of toads deadly only being taken inwardly, but even sprinkled upon the
skin, unless they forthwith wipe the place, and wash it with urine, water and
salt. Such as are poisoned by a toad turn yellow, swell over all their bodies,
are taken with an Asthmaticke difficulty of breathing, a Vertigo, convulsion,
sowning, and lastly by death it self. These so horrid symptoms are judged
inherent in the poison of toads, not only by reason of the elementary qualities
thereof, coldness and moisture, which are chiefly predominant therein; but much
rather by the occult property which is apt to putrefie the humors of that body
whereto it shall happen. Therefore it will be convenient to procure vomit,
especially The cure.
if the poison be taken by the mouth, to give gly sters, and to weaken the
strength of the poison by hot and attenuating Antidotes, as treacle and
mithridate dissolved in good wine; but in conclusion to digest it by bathes,
stoves, and much and great exercise. Rondeletius in his book de Piscibus,
affirms the same ^ings of the cursed venom of toads, as we have formerly
delivered: yet that they seldom bite, but that they cast forth either their
urine, the which they gather in a great quantity in a large bladder, or else
their venomous spittle or breath against such as they meet withal, or
assail; besides, the herbs which are tainted by their poisonous breath, but
much more such as are sprinkled with their spittle or urine, are sufficient to
kill such as eat them. The Antidotes are juice of betonie, plantaine, mugwurt,
as also the blood of Antidotes against the poison of toads.
Tortoises made with flower into pills, and forthwith dissolved in wine, and
drunken. Pliny writes that the hearts and spleens of toads resist poison. The
vulgar opinion is false, who think that the toad-stone is found in their
heads, which is good against poison.

CHAP. XXV. Of the stinging of a Scorpion.
AScorpion is a small creature with a round body in form of an egg, The
description of a Scorpion. His tail.
with many feet, and a long tail consisting of many joints, the last whereof is
thicker and a little longer than the rest, at the very end thereof is a sting,
in some two, hollow and replete with cold poison, the which by the sting it
casts into the obvious body; it has five legs on each side forked with strong
claws, not unlike to a Crab or Lobster, but the two foremost are bigger than
the rest; they are of a blackish or sootie color, they go aside, aside; and
oft-times fasten themselves with their mouths and feet so fast to men, that
they can scarce be plucked therehence. There be some who have wings like the
wings of Winged Scorpions.
Locusts, wasting the corn and all green things with their biting and burning.
Such are unknown in France. These flee over diverse Countries like winged Ants.
This is likely to be true by that which Mathiolus writes, that the husbandmen
in Castile in Spain, in digging the earth oft-times find a swarm of Scorpions,
which betake themselves thither against winter. Pliny writes, that Scorpions
laid waste a certain part of Aethiopia, by chasing away the inhabitants. The
Ancients made diverse kinds of Scorpions, according to their variety or
difference of colors, some being yellow, others brown, redish, ash-colored,
green, whitish, black, duskie; some have wings, and some are without. They
are more or less deadly according to the countries they inhabit. In Tuscanie
and Scythia they are absolutely deadly, but at Trent and in the Island Pharos
their stinging is harmless. The place stung by a Scorpion presently begins
Symptoms,
to be inflamed, it waxes red, grows hard and swells, and the patient is
again pained, he is one while hot, another while cold, labor presently
wearies him, and his pain is somewhiles more and somewhiles less, he sweats
and shakes as if he had an Ague, his hair stands upright, palenesse discolours
his members, and he feels a pain, as if he were pricked with needles over all
his skin, wind flies out backwards, he strives to vomit and go to stool, but
does nothing, he is molested with a continual fever and sowning, which at
length proves deadly, unless it be remedied. Dioscorides writes, that a
Scorpion beaten and laid to the place where he stung, is a remedy Lib. 2. cap.
10. and lib. 1. cap. 44.
thereto, as also eaten roasted to the same purpose. It is an usual, but
certain remedy to anoint the stung place with the oil of Scorpions. There be
some who drop into the wound the milkie juice of figs, others apply thereto
Calamint beaten, othersome use barley meale-mixed with a decoction of Rue.
Snailes beaten together with their shells, and laid thereon presently assuage
pain. Sulphur vivum mixed with turpentine, and applied plaster-wise, is good;
as also the leaves of ^ue beaten and laid thereto. In like sort also the herb
Scorpioides, which thence took its name, is convenient, as also a bryony root
boiled and mixed with a little sulphur and old oil. Discorides affirms Lib.
3. cap. 1.
Agarick in powder or taken in wine to be an Antidote against poisons, verily
it is exceeding good against the stingings or bitings of serpents. Yet the
continual use of a bath stands in stead of all these, as also sweat and
drinking wine somewhat alaid. Now Scorpions may be chased away by a fumigation
of Sulphur and Galbanum; Scorpions chased away with the juice of garlic or
Radishes.
also oil of Scorpions dropped into their holes, hinders their coming forth.
Juice of radish does the same. For they will never touch one that is besmeared
with the juice of radish or garlike, yea verily, they will not dare to come
near him.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the stinging of Bees, Waspes, etc.
BEes, Waspes, Hornets and such like, cause great pain in the skin wounded by
their stinging, by reason of the curstness of the venom which they send into
the body by the wound, yet are they seldom deadly, but yet if they set upon a
man by multitudes, they may come to kill him. For thus they have sometimes been
the death of horses. Wherefore because such as are stung by these, by reason of
the cruelty of pain, may think they are wounded by a more virulent and deadly
creature, I think it not amiss to set down what signs follow upon their
stingings. Great pain presently arises, which continues The symptoms.
until the sting left in the part is taken forth, the part becomes red and
swollen, and there rises a push or little blister. The cure is, forthwith to
suck the wound very The cute.
hard, and thereby to draw forth the stings, which if they cannot thus be
gotten out, the place, if nothing hinder, is to be cut, or else temper ashes
with leven or oil, and so apply them: the part also may be very conveniently
put into hot water, and there fomented for an hours space, and at length
washed in seawater. Cresses beaten and applied, assuage the pain and discuss
the humor causing the tumor. Ox dung macerated in oil and vinegar, and
applied hot, does the same. There are some who apply to the part the same
creatures beaten, as we formerly said of Scorpions; beans chawed and laid to
the part assuage pain. Vinegar, honey and salt applied exceeding hot, are good,
if besides, you dip a cloth therein, and lay it upon the place; sulphur vivum
tempered with spittle has the same effect. The milkie juice of unripe figs
incorporated with honey, is judged very effectual, but it is much the better,
mixed with treacle. Waspes will not sting nor bite such as anoint their bodies
with the juice of mallows mixed with oil. They may be quickly chased away
with the fume of brimstone and such like things. A waspe is said, if she find
a viper dead, to dip her sting in the others poison, and thence men learned to
empoison the heads of their arrows. The rough and hairy worms, which are
commonly called Bear-wormes, The bites of Bear-wormes.
especially those which breed about a Pine tree, cause great itching, redness
and swelling in the part which they bite, touch or grate upon very hard. A
remedy hereof is onions beaten with vinegar, and the rest of the things
formerly mentioned.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the bite of a Spider.
SPiders weave webs with various art, yet in these they always make a lurking
hole, so to lie in wait to catch the intrapped flies, and so to prey upon
them. There are many sorts of Spiders, one is Differences of Spiders.
termed Rhagium, round and like a black berry, whence it takes the name; it
has a very small mouth under the midst of the belly, and most short feet, as
if they were imperfect, her bite is as painful as the sting of a Scorpion.
Another is called Lupus or the Wolfe-spider, because she does not only lie in
wait to catch flies, but also bees and waspes, and all such things as may flee
into her web. The third is named Myrmecion, it is larger than an Ant, but
headed like one, the body thereof is black, and has white spots or streakes
running toward the back. The fourth kind may be called Vesparium, in other
things resembling a Waspe, but that it wants the wings; of a redish color, and
living only on herbs. The Ancients have thought their bitings to be
venomous. Now their poison is therefore thought to be cold, because the
symptoms thence arising are wind in the belly, refrigerations of the extreme
parts of the body, numnesse in the bitten part, with sense of cold and shaking.
The wound must forthwith be washed with very hot vinegar; then must you lay
thereto onions, and such like things beaten, then procure sweat by art, as by
bathes and stoves, yet nothing is more effectual than treacle and mithridate.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cantharides and Buprestes.
CAntharides shine as it were with a golden color, acceptable to the eye, by
The description of Cantharides.
reason of the commixture of a bluish or greenish color therewith, yet their
smell is ungrateful. They are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and so
causticke, corrosive and venomous, not only by reason of their caustic
quality, but because of a secret antipathy which they naturally have against
the Enemies to the Bladder.
urenary parts; which effects they produce not only if they be taken by the
mouth into the body, but even applied outwardly to raise blisters. Such as have
taken them Symptoms.
inwardly, have the taste of pitch or some thing like cedria, or the rosen of
Cedars, in their mouths, it is likely that this taste proceeds from the humors
dissolved by the putredinous heat in the stomach, guts and liver, and the
vapors that therehence arise; fortaken inwardly, they gnaw, exulcerate and
burn all parts from the mouth even to the belly, whence ensues a bloody
flux, excrements flowing out, which resemble the washings of new killed flesh.
Then follows a burning fever, vertigo, madness, restlesnesse, the brain
being disturbed by the plenty of vapors lifted up from the corroded and burnt
parts and humors, which therefore when as they appear, you may know the
affect is uncurable. In the parts appointed for the receiving and conveyance of
the urine they cause a burning inflammation, excoriation, strong and continual
erection of the yard, whence ensues a bloody and painful strangury, in stead
of which there oft-times happens or succeeds an Ischary or stoppage of the
water, whence a gangrene and mortification of the part, and so in conclusion of
the whole body besides. When as Cantharides are taken inwardly, the remedy is
vomiting, drinking of Cowes mike to correct the heat and dryness, good also to
mitigate the ulcers and stay the dysentery; it is good also to inject it into
the guts by glyster. In stead thereof sallade oil, or oil of sweet almonds is
convenient to retunde the acrimonie of the poison fastened to the sides of the
stomach. The rest and whole cure of this poison you may learn by the following
history. A certain whore, the better A history,
to enjoy the company of a young Abbot who loved her, entertained him with a
banquet, and sprinkled diverse of their cates with the powder of Cantharides, to
incite him the more to venery. The next day, when as the Abbot cast forth pure
blood at his fundament and yard which stood very stiff, he called some
Physicians, The cure,
who presently by the forementioned symptoms, which were all very apparent in
him, understood that he had Cantharides given him: wherefore they purged him
upwards with vomits, and downwards by glysters made with French barley, Rice, a
decoction of mallows, seeds of line and foenugreek, oil of lillies, goats
suet: then presently after they gave him a little treacle with a good quantity
of conserve of violets, which might draw the poison outward, they gave him
milk to drink, and caused him to use injections into the urenary passage and
guts made of refrigerating things, as the juice of lettuce, purslaine,
cucumbers, gourds, melons; of tough and viscide things, that so they might
stick the more easily and long to the ulcerated parts, as the mucilages of
psilium, mallows, quince-seeds, syrup of water lillies, popies and violets,
fresh butter, and oil of sweet almonds, and they made him drink only barley
water, or the common ptisan; they let him feed on veale, ^id, and porke boiled
with lettuce, purslaine, barley and violet leaves, the which by their humidity
might relaxe the belly, and by their toughness lenifie the roughness or
asperitie; they applied also refrigerating things to the loins, share and
perinaeum to assuage the heat of the urine. At length they put him into a
warm bath, and to conclude, they left nothing unattempted to draw forth or
weaken the poison. But all their endeavors were in vain, for the Abbot dyed,
not being destitute of remedies conveniently prescribed, but overcome by the
contumacious malignity of the poison. The Physicians pains had sar better
success in a certain Gentlewoman against this kind of affect; her whole face
was deformed with red, A history.
fiery and filthy pustles, so that all shunned her company as if she had
been troubled with a Leprosy, and were ready to forbid her the society of
men; she came to Paris, and calling Hollerius and Grealmus Physicians, me and
Caballus being Surgeons, she made agrievous complaint, and besought us
earnestly for some remedy against so great a deformity of her face; having
diligently considered her case, we pronounced her free from a Leprosy; but we
judged it fit to apply to her whole face a vesicatorie of Cantharides, three or
four hours after the application whereof, Cantharides applied to the head,
ulcerate the bladder.
the medicine being come to work its effect, her bladder began to burn
exceedingly, and the neck of her womb to swell, with gripings, continual
vomiting, making of water and scowring, a trouble some agitation of the body
and members, a burning and absolutely fiery fever. I forthwith called the
Physicians, it was decreed that she should drink wine plentifully, and that it
should be injected by the fundament into the guts, and by the urenary passage
into the bladder and the neck of the womb, and that she should keep her self,
until the pain were mitigated, in a warm bath made of the decoction of
Line-seeds, the roots and leaves of mallows, marsh-mallowes, violets, henbane,
purslaine and lettuce; and her loins and genitals should be anointed with
unguentum rosatum and populeon stirred and incorporated with oxycrate. By these
means, all the symptoms were mitigated. Her face in the interim rose all in a
A remedy against Leprous (...).
blister, and much purulent matter came out thereof, and so the deformity,
wherewith she was formerly troubled, vanished away for ever, so that within a
while after she was married, and had many children, and is yet living in
perfect health.

Buprestes also are of the kind of Cantharides, being like unto them in shape
and The reason of the name.
faculty. If an Ox or Sheep or any other creature shall in feeding devour
one of them, he will presently swell up like a Tun; whence also they take
their name: if a man take them inwardly, he shall endure the like symptoms as
in taking Cantharides, and over and besides both his stomach and his whole
belly shall be wonderfully puffed up, as if he had a Dropsy. It is probable
that this inflation like a tympany happenneth by humors diffused and resolved
into vapors by the fiery acrimony of the venom: They are to be cured after
the same manner as such as have drunk Cantharides. Lastly, as in all other
poisons which are taken into the body, so also here, if the poison taken by the
mouth be thought as yet to be in the stomach, you must then procure vomit.
If it be gotten into the guts, then must it be drawn away by glysters; if
diffused over all the body, then must you make use of such things as may drive
the poison forth from the center to the circumference, such as are bathes and
stoves.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Horse-Leaches.
HOrse-Leaches are also venomous, especially such as live in muddy stinking
ditches, for these are less hurtful which reside in clear and pure waters.
What horsel^es most virulent.
Wherefore, before they are to be used in cas^s of Physic, they must be kept
for some days space in clean water, that so they may purge themselves;
otherwise they may chance to leave ulcers hard to cure in the places whereto
they shall be applied, and the rather, if they be violently plucked off,
because they by that means leave their teeth fastened in the part. Now he
which by chance has swallowed a Horse-leach, must be asked in what (...)
reme^ ^g (...) diversity of the parts.
part be feels her, that is, the sense of her sucking. For if she stick in
the top of the Throat or Gullet, or in the midst thereof, the part shall be
often washed with mustard dissolved in vinegar. If she be near the orifice
of the ventricle, it is fit that the patient by little and little swallow down
oil with a little vinegar. But if she fasten to the stomach, or the bottom
of the ventricle, the patient by the plucking of the part shall perceive a
certain sense of sucking, the patient will spit blood, and will for fear
become melancholicke. To force her thence, he shall drink warm water with
oil; but if she cannot so be loosed, then shall you mix Aloes therewith, or
some thing endued with the like bitterness, for she will by that means leave
her hold, and so be cast forth by vomit. You may perceive this by such as are
applied to the skin, on the external parts, for by the aspersion of bitter
things, whether they be full or empty, they will forsake their hold. Then
shall the patient take astringent things, which may stop the blood flowing
forth of the bitten part, such is conserve of Roses, with terra sigillata, bole
armenicke, and other more astringent things, if need so require. For if they
shall adhereto some greater branch of some vein or artery, it will be more
difficult to stop the flowing blood.

But for that not the earth only, but the sea also produces venomous
creatures, we will in like sort treat of them, as we have already done of the
other, beginning with the Lampron.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Lampron.
THE Lampron, called in Latin Muraena, is a sea fish something in shape The
description of the Lampron
resembling a Lamprey, but she is bigger and thicker, and has a larger mouth,
with teeth long, sharp and bending inwards, she is of a duskie color,
distinguished with whitish spots, and of some two cubits length; the Ancients
had them in great esteem, because they yield good nourishment, and may be kept
long alive, in pooles or ponds, and so taken as the owners please to serve
their table, as it is sufficiently known by the history of the Roman Crassus.
She by her biting induces the same symptoms as the viper, and it may be
helped by the same means. Verily the Lampron has such familiarity with The
natural friendship of the Lampron and Viper.
the Viper, that leaving her natural element, the sea, she leapeth a shore,
and seeks out the Viper in her den to join with her in copulation, as it is
written by AElian and Nicander.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Draco-marinus or sea-Dragon.
THE sea-Dragon called by the French Viva, for his vivacity (and by the English
a Viver, or as some say a Qua-viver) because being taken in fishing and drawn
out of the sea, she is said long to survive. Her pricks are poisonous, but
chiefly those that are at the edges of her gils. Which is the reason that
Cooks cut off their heads before they serve them up to the table; and at Roven
the fishermen lay them not upon their stalles to sell before they have cut off
their heads. The wounded part of such as are hurt, pains them much, Symptoms.
with inflammation, a fever, sowning, gangrene and deadly mortification,
unless it be quickly withstood. Not very long ago the wife of Monsieur
Fromaget, Secretary of the requests, was wounded with a prick of this fish in
her middle finger, there followed a swelling and redness of the part, without
much pain; but perceiving the swelling to increase, being made more wary by
the mischance of her neighbor the wife of Monsieur Bargelonne Lieutenant
particulier in the Chastelet of Paris, who died not long before by the like
accident being neglected, sent for me; I A history.
understanding the cause of her disease, laid to her pained finger and her
whole hand, besides a pultis made of a great Onion roasted under the coals,
leaven and a little treacle. The next day I wished her to dip her whole hand
into warm water, so to draw forth the poison, then I divided the skin about it
with much scarification, but only superficiarily; to the gashes I applied
Leaches, which by sucking drawing a sufficient quantity of blood, I put thereto
treacle dissolved in aqua vitae. The next Cure.
day the swelling was assuaged, and the pain eased, and within a few days
she was perfectly well. Dioscorides writes that this fish divided in the midst
and applied to the wound, will cure it.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Pastinaca marina, or Sting-Ray, which some call the
Fierce-claw.
SUch as are stung by a Sting-Ray (as Aetius has written) the place of the
wound does manifestly appear; there ensues thereon lasting pain and The
symptoms.
the numnesse of the whole body. And seeing that it has a sharp and firm
sting, whereby the nerves by the deepnesse of the stroke may be wounded, it so
happens that some die forthwith, their whole bodies suffering convulsions.
Moreover it will kill even the very trees into whose roots it is fastened. Yet
Pliny affirms that it is good against the pain of the teeth, if the gums be
Lib. 9 cap. 48.
scarified therewith, yea, and it being made into powder with white hellebore,
or of it self, will cause teeth to fall out without any pain, or any violence
offered to them. This fish is good meat, the head and tail excepted; some of
them have two stings, othersome but one; these stings are sharp like a Saw
with the teeth turned toward their heads. Oppianus writes, that their stings
are more poisonous than the Persians The virulency o^ her sting.
arrows, for the force of the poison remains, the fish being dead, which
will kill not only living creatures, but plants also. Fishermen, when they
catch this fish, presently spoil him of his sting, lest they should be hurt
therewith. But if by chance they be hurt therewith, then take they forth his
Liver and lay it to the wound; furthermore the fish being burnt and made into
powder, is the true Antidote of his wound. The Sting-Ray lives in muddy places
near the shore, upon the fishes that he hunteth and catches with his sting,
having the teeth thereof turned toward his head for the same purpose. He is
not unlike a Ray, and I have here given you his figure.

The figure of a Sting-Ray.


CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Lepus marinus, or Sea-hare.
PLINY calls the Sea-hare, a mass or deformed piece of flesh. Galen says that
it is like a Snaile taken forth of the shell. It is exceeding poisonous The
description of the Sea-hare.
in the judgment of the Ancients; wherefore it is not amiss to set down the
description of it, left we might eat it at unawares, too earnestly view it,
or smell thereto, as also that we may use it against the poison thereof; it is
an inhabitant not only of the Sea, but also of Lakes of Seawater, especially
such as are muddy; it is of the same color as the hair of the land-hare is, it
has a hole in the head, out of which he puts a certain piece of flesh,
and pluckes it back again when as he is seen. Paulus, Aetius, Pliny, Galen
and Nicander, The earnest beholding of a Sea-hare will cause abortion.
are of one opinion, and agree in this, that if a woman big with child do too
earnestly look upon one, she will vomit and presently after abort. They which
have drunk this poison, says Dioscorides, are troubled with pain in the
belly, and their urine is stopped. If they do make water, then is it bloody;
they run down with stinking sweat, which smells of fish; a choleric vomiting
sometimes mixed with blood ensues thereon.

Aetius writes that all their bodies turn yellow, their faces swell, and their
feet, The symptoms.
but chiefly their genitall member, which is the cause they cannot make water
freely. Galen writes that it is the property of the Sea-hare to exulcerate the
Lungs. Their The Antidote.
Antidote is Asses milk, Muskedine, or honyed Wine continually drunken, or a
decoction of the roots and leaves of Mallows. It is good for the falling away
of the hair. I have here given you the figure thereof out of Rondeletius his
book of fishes.

The figure of a Sea-Hare.


CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Poison of Cats.
NOt only the brain of a Cat, being eaten, is poisonous and deadly to man,
but also their hair, their breath, yea and their very presence to some prove
deadly. For although any hair devoured unawares, may be A Cats hair most
subject to choke.
enough to choke one, by stopping the instruments of respiration, yet the
hairs of cat by a certain occult property, are judged most dangerous in this
case: besides also, their breath is infected with a certain hurtful
malignitie. For Mathiolus says that he knew some, who being so delighted with
Cats, that they could never go to bed without them, have by so often drawing in
the air with The breath of a Cat most hurtful to the lungs
their breath, fallen into a consumption of the Lungs, which occasioned their
death. Moreover, it is manifest that the very sight of their eyes is hurtful,
which appears by this, that some but seeing or hearing them, presently fall
down in a sown; yet I would not judge that to happen by the malicious
virulency of the Cat, but also by the peculiar nature of the party, and a
quality generated with him, and sent from heaven. When as, says Mathiolus, a
certain German in winter time, came with us into a stove to supper, where as
were diverse of our acquaintance; a certain woman, A history.
knowing this man's nature, lest that he should see her kitling which she
kept, and so should go away in a chafe, she shut her up in a cupboard in the
same chamber. But for all that he did not see her, neither heard her cry, yet
within a little space, when he had drawn in the air, infected with the
breath of the Cat, that quality A wonderful antipathy between a man and a Cat.
of temperament, contrary, or enemy to Cats, being provoked, he began to sweat,
to look pale, and to cry out (all of us admiring it) Here lies a Cat in some
corner or other; neither could he be quiet until the Cat was taken away. But
such as have eaten the brains of a Cat are taken with often Vertigoes, and now
and then become foolish The Antidote against the brains of a Cat.
and mad: they are helped by procuring vomit, and taking the Antidote against
this poison, that is, half a Scruple of Musk, dissolved and drunk in wine.
There be some who prescribe the confection Diamosch^m to be taken every
morning, four hours before meat. By this you may gather that it is not so
fabulous that the common sort report, that Cats will kill or harm children;
for lying to their mouths Cats dangerous for children.
with the weight of their whole bodies, they hinder the passage forth of the
fuliginous vapors, and the motion of the Chest, and infect and stifle the
spirits of tender infants, by the pestiferous air and exhalation which they
send forth.

CHAP. XXXV. Of certain poisonous Plants.
HAving described the poisons that come from living creatures, I come to speak
of such as are from Plants, beginning with the Sardonian herb, which is also
called Apium risus: this is a kind of Ranunculus or Crow-foote: Apium risus.
(and, as it is thought, the round leaved water Crow-foote, called
Marsh-crow-foote or speare-wort) it takes away the understanding of such as
eat thereof, and by a certain distention of the nerves, contracts the
cheeks, so that it makes them look as if they laughed; from this affect came
that proverbiall speech of the Sardonian laughter, taken in evil part. His
Bezoar, as one may term it, is the His Antidote.
juice of Balm.

The juice, fruit, and substance of Napellus, taken inwardly, kills a man the
Napellus, or Monks-hood.
same day, or at the furthest in three days: yea and such as escape the deadly
force thereof by the speedy and convenient use of Antidotes, fall into a
hecticke fever, or consumption, or become subject to the falling sickness, as
Avicen affirms. And hence it is that barbarous people poison their arrows
therewith. For the lips are forthwith inflamed, and the tongue so swells,
that by reason thereof it cannot be contained in the mouth, but hangs out with
great horror; their eyes are enflamed, and stand forth of their head, and they
are troubled with a Vertigo and sowning, they become so weak that they cannot
stir their legs, they are swollen and puffed in their bodies, the violence
of the poison is so great. The Antidote thereof is a certain little creature
like a Our Author is deceived by the Arabians, who (it may be) mistook the
greek word, (...), and instead thereof read, (...); for a Fly, a Mouse; for
there is no Mouse to be found, but whole swarms of Flies, which feed
thereon: you may find the description of an Antidote made with them in Labels
Stirp. Advers. page 302.
Mouse, which is bred, and lives on the root of Napellus, being dried and
drunk in powder, to the weight of two drammes. In want hereof, you may use the
seed of Raddish or Turnips to drink, and anoint the body also with the oil of
Scorpions.

Dorycinum and Solanum Manicum, or deadly nightshade, are not much different
Dorycinum and Solanum manicum, or deadly Nightshade.
in their mortal symptoms or effects. Dorycinum being drunk, resembles milk
in taste, it causes continual hicketting, it troubles the tongue with the
weight of the humor, it causes blood to be cast forth of the mouth, and
certain mucous matter out of the belly, like that which comes away in the
bloody flux. A remedy hereto are all shell Fishes, as well crude as roasted,
also sea-lobsters and crabbes, and the broth or liquor wherein they are boiled,
being drunk. Now the root of The symptoms.
Solanum manicum drunk in the weight of one dram in wine, causes vain and
not unpleasing imaginations, but double this quantity causes a distraction or
alienation of the mind for three days; but four times so much, kills. The
remedies are the same as these prescribed against Dorycinum.

Henbane drunken, or otherwise taken inwardly by the mouth, causes an
alienation Henbane.
of the mind like drunkenness; this also is accompanied with an agitation of
the body, and exolution of the spirits like sowning. But amongst others, this
is a notable symptom, that the patients so dote, that they think themselves
to be whipped: whence their voice becomes so various, that sometimes they bray
like an ass or mule, neigh like a horse, as Avicen writes. The Antidote is
pistick nuts eaten in great plenty, The Antidote.
treacle also and mithridate dissolved in sack, also wormwood, rue and milk.

Of Mushromes, some are deadly and hurtful of their own kind and nature, as
Mushromes.
those, which broken, presently become of diverse colors, and forth with
putrefie: (such as Avicen says those are which be found of a grayish or
bluish color) others though not hurtful in quality, yet eaten in greater
measure than is fitting, become deadly; for seeing by nature they are very cold
and moist, and consequently abound with no small viscosity, as the
excrementitious phlegm of the earth or trees whereon they grow, they suffocate
and extinguish the heat of the body, as overcome by their quantity, and
strangle as if one were hanged, and lastly kill. Verily I cannot choose, but
pitying Gourmondizers, who though they know that Mushromes are the seminary
and gate of death, yet do they with a great deal of do, most greedily
devour them; I say, pitying them, I will show them, and teach them the art,
how they may feed upon this so much desired dish, without the endangering of
their health. Know therefore that Mushromes may be eaten without danger, if that
they be first boiled with wild pears: but if you have no wild pears, you may
supply that Their Antidote
defect with others which are the most harsh, either newly gathered, or dried
in the sun. The leaves, as also the bark of the same Tree, are good, especially
of the wild, for pears are their Antidote: yet Conciliator gives another, to
wit, Garlic eaten crude, whereto in like sort vinegar may be fitly added, so
to cut and attenuate the tough, viscous and gross humors, heaped up, and in
danger to strangle one by the too plentiful eating of Mushromes, as it is
delivered by Galen. In 5. epidemi.


Ephemerum, which some call Colchicum or Bulbus sylvestris, that is, meadow
saffron, Colchicum or me^dow-saffron
being taken inwardly, causes an itching over all the body, no otherwise than
those that are netled, or rubbed with the juice of a Squill. Inwardly they
feelegnawings, their stomach is troubled with a great heaviness, and the
disease increasing, there are streakes of blood mixed with the excrements. The
Antidote thereof is woman's milk, Asses or Cowes milk drunken warm, and in a
large quantity. The Antidote


Mandrage taken in great quantity, either the root or fruit causes great
sleepiness, sadness, resolution and languishing of the body, so that after
many scritches and Mandrage.
gripings, the patient falls asleep in the same posture as he was in, just as
if he were in a Lethargy. Wherefore in times past they gave Mandrage to such
as were to be dismembered. The apples, when as they are ripe, and their seeds
taken forth, may be safely eaten, for being green and with their seeds in them,
are deadly. For there arises an intolerable heat, which burns the whole
surface of the body, the tongue and mouth wax dry, by reason whereof they
gape continually, so to take in the cold air; in which case unless they be
presently helped, they die with convulsions. But they may be easily helped, if
they shall presently drink such things as are convenient The cure.
therefore. Amongst which, in Conciliators opinion, excel radish seeds eaten
with salt and bread for the space of three days. Sneesing shall be procured,
if the former remedy do not quickly refresh them, and a decoction of Coriander
or Penny-royall in fair water shall be given them to drink warm.

The ungrateful taste of the juice of black poppy, which is termed Opium, as
also of Mandrage, easily hinders them from being put into meat or drink, but
that Opium. Why not used in poysonings.
they may be discerned, and chiefly for that neither of them can kill, unless
they be taken in a good quantity. But because there is danger, lest they be
given in greater quantity than is fitting by the ignorance of Physicians, or
Apothecaries, you may by these signs find the error.

There ensues heavy sleep, with a vehement itching, so that the patient often
times is forced thereby to cast off his dull sleep wherein he lay, yet keeps
his eyelids The symptoms.
shur, being unable to open them. But by this agitation there flows out sweat,
which smells of Opium, the body waxes pale, the lips burn, the Jaw Bone is
relaxed, they breath little and seldom. When as their eyes wax livid, unless
they be drawn aside, and that they are depressed in their orb, we must know
that death is at hand. The remedy against this is two drammes of the powder of
Castoreum given in wine.

Hemlocke drunken, causes Vertigo's, troubles the mind, so that the patients
may be taken for mad men; it darkeneth the sight, causes hicketting, and
benums Hemlocke.
the extreme parts, and lastly strangles with convulsions, by supressing or
stopping the The symptoms.
breath of the Artery. Wherefore at the first, as in other poisons, you must
endeavor to expel it by vomit; then inject glysters, to expel that is got
into the guts; then use wine without mixture, which is very powerful in this
case. Peter Aponensis thinks the Bezoar or Antidote thereof to be a potion of
two drams of Treacle, with a decoction The Antidote.
of Dictamnus or Gentian in wine. He which further desires to enform himself
of the effects of Hemlock, let him read Mathiolus his commentary upon
Dioscorides, where as he treats of the same subject. In lib. 6. diosc.


Aconitum called so of Aconis a town of the Periendines, where as it
plentifully grows. According to Mathiolus, it kills Wolves, Foxes, Dogs,
Cats, Swine, Panthers, Aconitum.
Leopards, and all wild beasts, mixed with flesh, and so devoured by them, but
it kills mice by only smelling thereto. Scorpions, if touched by the root of
Aconite, grow numme and torpid, and so die thereof; arrows or darts dipped
therein, make uncurable wounds. Those who have drunk Aconite, their tongue
forthwith waxes sweet with a certain astriction, which within a while after
turns to bitterness; it causes a Vertigo, and shedding of tears, and a
heaviness or straitness of the chest and parts about the heart; it makes them
break wind downwards, and makes all the body to tremble. Pliny attributes so
great celerity and violence to this Lib. 27. cap. 2.
poison, that if the genitalls of female creatures be touched therewith, it
will kill them the same day; there is no presenter remedy than speedy vomiting
after the poison is taken. But Conciliator thinks Aristolochia to be the
Antidote thereof. Yet some have made it useful for man by experimenting it
against the stinging of Scorpions, Aconite good against the poison of Scorpions.
being given warm in wine. For it is of such a nature, that it kills the
party unless it find something in him to kill, for then it strives therewith
as if it had found an adversary. But this fight is only when as it finds
poison in the body; and this is mavelous, that both the poisons being of
their own nature deadly, should dye together, that man may by that means live.
There are diverse sorts thereof, one whereof has a flower like an helmet, as if
it were armed to man's destruction; but the other The differences
here delineated has leaves like to sowes-bread, or a cucumber, and a root
like the tail of a scorpion.

The figure of a certain kind of Aconite.


Trees also are not without poison, as the Yew and Walnut tree may witness:
The Yew.
Cattle, if they feed on the leaves of Yew, are killed therewith. This is
true in some countries, as in Provence. Italy, Greece, etc. but it is not so
here with us in Eng^ as both ^obell and daily exerienc^ cantestifie,
But men, if they sleep under it or sit under the shadow thereof, are hurt
therewith, and oft-times dye thereof. But if they eat it, they are taken with a
bloody flux, and a coldness over all their bodies, and a kind of strangling
or stoppage of their breath. All which things the Yew causes not so much by an
elementary and cold quality, as by a certain occult malignity, whereby it
corrupts the humors, and shaveth the guts. The same things are good against
this, as we have set down against Hemlock; The Antidote.
Nicander affirms, that good wine being drunken is a remedy thereto. There is
also malignity in a Wall-nut-tree, which Grevinus affirms that he found by
experience, The Wall-nut-tree.
whilst he unawares sat under one and slept there in the midst of Summer.
For waking, he had a sense of cold over all his body, a heaviness of his head,
and pain that lasted six days. The remedies are the same as against the Yew.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Bezoar, and Bezoarticke medicines.
FOR that we have made mention of Bezoar, in treating of the remedies of
poisons, I judge I shall not do amiss, if I shall explain, what the What is
poison.
word means, and the reason thereof. Poison absolutely taken is that which
kills by a certain specific antipathy contrary to our nature. So an Antidote
or Counter-poyson is by the Arabians in their mother tongue termed Bedezahar,
as the preservers of life. This word is unknown to the Greeks and Latins,
and in use only with the Arabians and Persians, because the thing it self
first came from them, as it is plainly showed by Garcias ab horto, Physician
to the Viceroy of the Indies, in his history of the Spices and Simples of the
East Indies. In Persia (says he) and a certain part of India is a certain
kind of Goat called Pazain (wherefore in proper speaking, the stone should
be termed Pazar, of the word Pazain, that signifies a Goat; but we corruptly
term it Bezar or Bezoar) the color of this beast is commonly reddish, the
height thereof indifferent, in whose stomach concretes the stone called Bezoar;
it grows by little and little about a straw or some such like substance in
scailes like to the scailes of an onion, A sign of true Bezoar.
so that when as the first scaile is taken off, the next appears more smooth
and shining as you still take them away, the which amongst others is the sign
of good Bezoar and not adulterate. This stone is found in sundry shapes, but
commonly it resembles an Acorne or Date-stone; it is sometimes of a sanguine
color, and other-whiles of a hony-like or yellowish color, but most
frequently of a blackish or dark green, resembling the color of mad Apples,
or else of a Civet Cat. This stone has no heart nor kernel in the midst, but
powder in the cavity thereof, which is also of the same faculty. Now this stone
is light, and not very hard, but so that it may easily be scraped, or rasped
like alabaster, so that it will dissolve, being long macerated in water; at
first it was common amongst us, and of no very great price, because our people
who trafficked in Persia, bought it at an easy rate. But after that the
faculties thereof were found out, it began to be more rare and dear, and it
was prohibited The use of Bezoar.
by an Edict from the King of the country, that no body should sell a Goat to
the stranger Merchants, unless he first killed him, and took forth the stone,
and brought it to the King. Of the notes by which this stone is tried, (for
there are many counterfeits brought hither) the first is already declared; the
other is, it may be blown up by the breath, like an oxes hide; for if the
wind break through, and do not stay in the density thereof, it is accounted
counterfeit. They use it, induced thereto by our example, not only against
poisons, but also against the bites of venomous beasts. The richer sort of the
Country purge twice a year, to wit, in March and September; and then, five
days together they take the powder of this stone macerated in Rose Water, the
weight of ten grains at a time: for by this remedy they think their youth is
preserved, as also the strength of their members. There be some who take the
weight of thirty grains; yet the more wary exceed not twelve grains. The same
author adds that he uses it with very good success in inveterate melancholy
diseases as the itch, scab, tetters and leprosy; therefore by the same reason
it may well be given against a quartaine fever. Besides, he affirms for
certain that the powder contained in the midst of the stone, put upon the
bites of venomous beasts, presently freeth the patient from the danger of the
poison, as also applied to pestilent Carbuncles when they are opened, it draws
forth the venom. But because the small pocks and meazles are familiar in the
Indies, and oft-times dangerous, it is there given with good success, two
grains each day in Rose Water. Mathiolus subscribeth Lib. 5. in Dios. cap. 73.
to this opinion of Garcias, witnessing that he has found it by frequent
experience, that this stone by much exceeds not only other simple medicines of
this kind, but also such as are termed theriacalia, and what other Antidotes
soever. Hereto also consents Abdalanarach; We (says he) have seen the stone
which they call Bezahar, with the sons of Almirama the observer of the Law of
God; with which stone he bought a stately and almost princely house at Corduba.

Some years ago a certain Gentleman, who had one of these stones which he A
history.
brought out of Spain, bragged before King Charles then being at Clermont in
Auverne, of the most certain efficacy of this stone against all manner of
poisons. Then the King asked of me, whether there were any Antidote which was
equally and in like manner prevalent against all poisons? I answered, that
nature could No one thing can be an Antid^te again^ all poison.
not admit it; for neither have all poisons the like effects, neither do they
arise from one cause; for some work from an occult and specific property of
their whole nature, others from some elementary quality which is predominant.
Wherefore each must be withstood with its proper and contrary Antidote, as to
the hot, that which is cold, and to that which assailes by an occult propriety
of form, another which by the same force may oppugn it, and that it was an
easy matter to make trial hereof on such as were condemned to be hanged. The
motion pleased the King; there was a Cook brought by the Jailor who was to
have been hanged within a while after for stealing two silver dishes out of his
masters house. Yet the King desired first to know of him, whether he would
take the poison on this condition, that if the Antidote which was predicated to
have singular power against all manner of poisons, which should be presently
given him after the poison, should free him from death, that then he should
have his life saved. The Cook answered cheerfully, that he was willing to
undergo the hazard, yea, and greater matters, not only for to save his life,
but to shun the infamy of the death he was like to be adjudged to. Therefore he
then had poison given him by the Apothecarie that then waited, and presently
after the poison, some of the Bezahar brought from Spain, which being taken
down, within a while after he began to vomit, and to avoid much by stool with
grievous torments, and to cry out that his inward parts were burnt with fire.
Wherefore, being thirsty, and desiring water, they gave it him; an hour after,
with the good leave of the Jailer, I was admitted to him; I find him on the
ground going like a beast upon hands and feet, with his tongue thrust forth of
his mouth, his eyes fiery, vomiting, with store of cold sweats, and lastly,
the blood flowing forth by his ears, nose, mouth, fundament and yard. I gave
him eight ounces of oil to drink, but it did him no good, for it came too
late. Wherefore at length he died with great torment and exclamation, the
seventh hour from the time that he took the poison being scarcely passed. I
opened his body in the presence of the Jailor and four others, and I found the
botome of his stomach black and dry, as if it had been burnt with a The
caustic force of sublimate.
Cautery; whereby I understood he had sublimate given him; whose force the
Spanish Bezahar could not repress, wherefore the King commanded to burn it.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Mineral Poisons.
MInerals or metals are either so taken forth of the bowels of the earth, or
else from fornaces. Of these many are poisonous, as arsenicke, sublimate,
plaster, cerusse, lytharge, verdegreace, orpiment, filings of Iron, brass,
the lodestone, lime, and the like. Such as have taken sublimate, The symptoms
of such as have taken sublimate.
the tongue and jaws become straightned and rough, as if they drunk the juice
of unripe services: you cannot amend this asperity with lenitive gargarismes
but with much labor and time; for as soon as it descends into the stomach, it
sticks to it. Therefore presently after it frets and exulcerates; it causes
unquenchable thirst, and unexplicable torments; the tongue is swollen, the heart
faints, the urine is suppressed, the chest can scarce perform the office of
breathing, the belly is griped, and so great pains happen to the other extreme
parts, that unless they be helped, the patient will die; for presently will
grow upon them, unless it be speedily hindered, the devouring and fiery fury
of the poison, rending or eating into the guts and stomach, as if they were
seared with an hot iron, and blood sloweth forth of the ears, nose, mouth,
urenarie passage and fundament, and then their case is desperate. These and who
else soever shall take any corroding poison, shall be cured with the same
remedies, as those that have taken Cantharides.

Verdegreace so stops the instruments of respiration, that it strangles such as
have Verdegreace.
taken it. The cure is performed by the same remedies as help those that have
taken Arsenick.

Litharge causes a heaviness in the stomach, suppresseth the urine, makes the
body Litharge.
swelled and livide. We remedy this, by giving a vomit presently, then after
it pigeons dung mixed in strong wine, and so drunken. Peter Aponensis wishes
to give oil of sweet almonds and figs. Also it is good to give relaxing and
humecting glysters, and to anoint the belly with fresh butter, or oil of
lillies.

The scailes of brass drunk by troubling the stomach, cause a casting and
scouring. The scailes of brass.
The remedy is, if the patient forth with vomit, if he enter into a bath made
of the decoction of snailes, if he anoint his belly and breast with butter and
oil of lillies, and inject laxative and humecting glysters.

The Lodestone makes them mad that take it inwardly. The Antidote thereof is
The Loadstone.
the powder of gold and an emerald drunk in strong wine, and glysters of milk
and oil of sweet almonds.

The filings of lead, and the scailes or refuse of iron, cause great torment to
such as Filings of Lead and (...) of Iron.
take them down. The which we help with much milk and fresh butter dissolved
therein, or with oil of sweet almonds drawn without fire, with relaxing and
hu^cting glysters used until the pain be perfectly assuaged.

Risagallum, Roseaker or Rats-bane, because it is of a most hot and dry nature,
induces thirst and heat over all the body, and so great colliquation of all the
humors, Arsnick, Roseaker or Rats-bane.
that although the patients by medicines speedily given escape death, yet can
they not during the residue of their lives, use their members as they formerly
did, being destitute of their strength, by reason of the great dryness and
contraction of the joints. The Antidote thereof is oil of pine kernels
speedily given, and that to the quantity of half a pint; then procure vomit,
then give much milk to drink, and glysters of the same, and let them sup up
fat broths.

Unquencht Lime and Auripigmentum, or Orpiment drunk, gnaw the stomach
Unquenched Lim^ and Orpiment.
and guts with great tormenting pain, and cause unquenchable thirst, an
asperity of the jaws and throat, difficulty of breathing, stoppage of the
urine, and a bloody flux. They may be helped by all fat, humecting, and
relaxing things which retund the acrimonie, by lenitive potions, and such
things as lubricate the belly; as also by creames, and the mucilages of some
seeds, as with a decoction of the seeds of Line, mallows, marsh-mallowes and
other such things set down at large in the cure of Cantharides.

These exceeding acride and strong waters wherewith Gold-smithes and Chemists
Aquasortis.
separate gold from silver, being taken into the body, are hard to cure,
because they are forthwith diffused over all the body, first burning the throat
and stomach. Yet it may be helped by the means prescribed against unquenched
Lime and Orpiment.

Cerusse causes hicketting and a cough, makes the tongue dry, and the extreme
parts of the body numbe with cold, the eyes heavy to sleep. The patients very
often in Cerusse.
the midst of the day see some vain fantasy or apparition, which in deed is
nothing; they make a black and oft-times bloody water, they die strangled
unless they be helped. The Antidote, in the opinion of Aetius and Avicen, is
scammonie drunk in new wine, or honey and wine, and other diuretic things, and
such things as procure vomit, and purge by stool.

Plaster, because it concreteth and becomes stony in the stomach, causes
Plaster.
strangulation by straitening and stopping the instruments that serve for
breathing. The patients receive cure by the same remedies, as those who have
eaten mushroms, or drunk Cerusse: you must add Goose-grease in the glysters,
and anoint the belly with oil of lillies and butter.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Quicksilver.
Quicksilver is so called because it resembles silver in the color, and is
in The reason why it is so called.
perpetual motion, as if it had a spirit or living soul. There is a great
controversy amongst authors concerning it. For most of them affirm it Lib. 4.
simpl. in (...). practic. cap. 148. 3. ad Almaa. 4. Meteor.
hot, amongst whom is Galen, Halyabas, Rhases, Aristotle, Constantine, Isack,
Platearius, Nicholas Massa: they maintain their opinion by an argument drawn
from things helping and hurting; besides from this, that it is of such subtle
parts, that it penetrates, dissolves, and performs all the actions of heat
upon dense and hard metals; to wit, it attenuateth, incideth, dries, causes
salivation by the mouth, purges by the stool, moves urine and sweat over all
the body, neither does it stir up the thinner humors only, but in like sort
the gross, tough and viscous, as those which have the Lues Venerea find by
experience, using it either in ointments or plasters.

Others affirm it very cold and moist, for that put into emplasters and so
applied, it asswageth pain by stupefaction, hindering the acrimony of pustles
and choleric inflammations. But by its humidity it softeneth scirrhous
tumors, dissolveth and dissipateth knots and tophous knobs; besides, it
causes the breath of such as are anointed therewith to stink, by no other
reason, than that it putrefies the obvious humors by its great humidity.
Avicens experiment confirms this opinion, who affirms, that the blood of an
Ape that drunk Quicksilver, was found concrete about the heart, the carcass
being opened. Mathiolus, moved by these reasons, writes In l. 6. Dios. c. ^8.
that Quicksilver kills men by the excessive cold and humide quality, if
taken in any large quantity, because it congeales the blood and vital spirits,
and at length the very substance of the heart, as may be understood by the
history of a cetaine Apothecary, A history.
set down by Conciliator; who, for to quench his feverish heat, in stead of
water, drunk off a glass of Quicksilver, for that came first to his hands:
he dyed within a few hours after, but first he evacuated a good quantity of
the Quicksilver by stool, the residue was found in his stomach being opened,
and that to the weight of one pound; besides, the blood was found concrete
about his heart. Others use another argument to prove it cold, and that is
drawn from the composition thereof, because it consists of lead and other cold
metals. But this argument is very weak. For unquencht Lime is made of flints
and stony matter, which is cold, yet nevertheless it exceeds in heat.
Paracelsus affirms that quicksilver is hot in the interior substance, Lib 4.
de not. rerum.
but cold in the exterior, that is, cold as it comes forth of the mine. But
that coldness to be lost as it is prepared by art, and heat only to appear
and be left therein, so that it may serve in stead of a tincture in the
transmutation of metals. And verily it is taken for a rule amongst Chemists,
that all metals are outwardly cold, by reason of the watery substance that is
predominant in them, but that inwardly they are very hot, which then appears
when as the coldness together with the moisture is segregated, for by
calcination they become caustic. Moreover many account quicksilver poison, yet
experience denies it. For Marianus Sanctus Baralitanus Tract de (...) and offen.
tells that he saw a woman, who for certain causes and affects, would at
several times drink one pound and an half of quicksilver, which came from her
again by stool without any harm. Moreover he affirms that he has known
sundry who in a desperate Cholick (which they commonly call miserere mei) have
been freed from imminent death, by drinking three pounds of quicksilver with
water only. For by the weight it opens and unfolds the twined or bound up gut,
and thrusts forth the hard and stopping excrements; he adds that others have
found this medicine effectual against the cholick, drunk in the quantity of
three ounces. Antonius Musa writes, that he usually gives quicksilver to
children ready to dye of the worms. Avicen confirms this, averring that many
have drunk quicksilver without any harm, wherefore he mixeth it in his
ointments against scaules and scabs in children; whence came that common
medicine amongst the country people to kill lice by anointing the head with
quicksilver mixed with butter or axungia. Mathiolus affirms that many think
it the last and chiefest remedy to give to women in Quicksilver good* or women
in travail.
travail that cannot be delivered. I protest, to satisfy my self concerning
this matter, I gave to a whelpe a pound of quicksilver, which being drunk
down, it voyded without any harm by the belly. Whereby you may understand
that it is wholly without any venomous quality. Verily it is the only and true
Antidote of the Lues Venerea, and also a very fit medicine for malign ulcers,
as that which more powerfully impugnes their malignity than any other medicines
that work only by their first qualities. Besides, against that contumacious
scabbe, which is vulgarly called Malum sancti manis, there is not any more
speedy or certain remedy. Moreover Guido writes, that if a plate of lead be
besmeared or rubbed therewith, and then for For the disease called Maum sancti
manis.
some space laid upon an ulcer, and conveniently fastened, that it will soften
the callous hardness of the lips thereof, and bring it to cicatrization, which
thing I my self have oftimes found true by experience.

Certainly before Guido, Galen much commended quicksilver against malign
ulcers Lib 7. de comp. m^* secund loc. Against malign ulcers.
and cancers. Neither does Galen affirm that lead is poisonous (which many
affirm poisonous, because it consists of much quicksilver) but he only says
thus much, that water too long kept in leaden pipes and cisternes, by reason of
the drossinesse that it uses to gather in lead, causes bloody fluxes, which
also is familiar to brass and copper. Otherwise many could not without danger
bear in their bodies leaden bullets during the space of so many years, as
usually they do. It is declared by Theodoricke Herey in the following
histories, how powerful quicksilver is to resolve and assuage pains and
inflammations. Not long since, (says he) a certain Doctor of Physic his boy
was troubled with parotides, with great swelling, heat, pain and Against the
Parotides.
beating; to him, by the common consent of the Physicians there present, I
applied an anodine medicine, whose force was so great, that the tumor
manifestly subsided at the first dressing, and the pain was much assuaged. At
the second dressing all the symptoms were more mitigated. At the third
dressing, I wondering at the so great effects of an Anodine Cataplasme, observed
that there was quicksilver mixed therewith, and this happened through the
negligence of the Apothecarie, who mixed the simple Anodine medicine prescribed
by us, in a mortar wherein but a while before he had mixed an ointment
whereinto quicksilver entered, whose relics, and some part thereof yet
remained therein. This which once by chance succeeded well, I afterward
wittingly and willingly used to a certain Gentlewoman troubled with the like
disease, possessing all the region behind the ears, much of the throat, and a
great part of the cheek, when as nature helped by common remedies, could not
evacuate neither by resolution nor suppuration, the contained matter greatly
vexing her with pain and pulsation. I to the medicine formerly used, by the
consent of the Physicians, put some quicksilver, so within a few days, the
tumor was digested and resolved. But some will say, it resolves the strength
of the nerves and limbs, as you may see by such as have been anointed
therewith for the Lues venerea, who tremble in all their limbs during the rest
of their lives. This is true, if any use it too intemperately without measure,
and a disease that may require so great a remedy; for thus we see that Gilders,
Plumbers and such as dig in mines, by the continual ascent of the vapors of
quicksilver to the brain, the fountain of the nerves, by resolving the
spirits, and dissipating the radical and substantificke moisture, makes them
subject to the trembling of their joints. Verily if it be killed and
incorporate with hogs grease, and a list besmeared therewith, which may
encompasse the body like a girdle, it will drive away lice, fleas and cimices;
and anointed about the navell, Against lice and fleas etc. The kinds thereof.
it kills the worms in the guts. There are two sorts of quicksilver, the one
natural, the other artificial. The natural is found running or flowing in
the veins and bowels of the earth, and amongst metals, and in the fornaces of
silver mines. The Artificial is made of minium (as it is in Vitruvius) and of
the powder of Ivory. Also it is probable that by art it may be extracted out
of all metals, but chiefly out of Lead and Cinnabaris. You may easily
distinguish these kinds by the dull and blackish color, tough and gross
substance, which as it runs, leaves an impression like melted grease, being as
it were the excrement of lead. The best quicksilver of all is pure, clear,
thin and very white: it may be cleansed with the dross of Lead, and How to
purify it.
becomes more thin, being boiled in sharp vinegar, with sage, rosemary, time,
lavander. Or else give it by a pound at a time to a whelpe, to drink down,
and being cast forth by it, boil it again in vinegar, for thus it has
wondrous faculties, and fitly given produces mavelous effects; nothing is
more contrary thereto than fire. For quicksilver, though of its own nature
ponderous, flies upwards by the force of the fire, and forsakes gold by that
means, than which nothing is more friendly to it.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Unicornes Horn.
THere are very many at this day who think themselves excellently well armed
against poison and all contagion, if they be provided with some powder of
Unicornes horn, or some infusion made therewith. Therefore I have thought it
good to examine more diligently how much truth this inveterate, and grounded
opinion has. The better to perform this task, I will propound three heads,
whereto I will direct my whole discourse. The first shall be of the
signification of this word Unicorn. The second, whether there be any such thing
really and truly so called, or whether it be not rather imaginary; like as
the Chymera and Tragelaphus? The third, whether that which is said to be the
horn of such a beast, has any force or faculty against poisons? For the
first, that is, the name, it is somewhat more obscure what the word (being
Licorne) in French may What the name imports.
signify, than what the Latin or Greek word is. For the French name is
further from the word and signification; but it is so clear and manifest, that
this word Unicornis amongst the Latins signifies a beast having but one horn,
as it is vulgarly known, the same thing is meant by the Greek word Monoceros.
But now for the second, I think That there is no such beast as an Unicorne.
that beast that is vulgarly called and taken for an Unicorn, is rather a thing
imaginary than really in the world. I am chiefly enduced to believe thus, by
these conjectures. Because of those who have traveled over the world, there is
not one that professes that ever he did see that creature. Certainly the
Romans conquering the world, and being most diligent searchers after all things
which were rare and so excellent, if any where in any corner of the world, this
beast could have been found, they would have found it out, and engraven it upon
their coins, or Arms, as they did Crocodiles, Elephants, Eagles, Panthers,
Lions, Tigers, and other creatures unknown to these countries. For these that
have written of the Unicorn, either that they have heard, or that has been
delivered by tradition, or what they in their own minds and fancies have
conceived, you shall scarce find two that agree together, either in the
description of the body, or in the nature and condition of her. Pliny writes,
that Unicornes Lib. 8. cap. ^1.
are for the fashion of their bodies like to an horse; that is, as Cardane
interprets it, of the bigness of a horse, with the head of an Heart, the feet
of an Elephant, the tail of a Boar, with one black horn in the midst of his
forehead, of the length of two cubits. Munster, who (as Mathiolus jests) never
saw Unicornes besides painted Munsters opinion concerning Unicornes.
ones, does on the contrary affirm them not to be of the bigness of an horse,
but of an hind calfe of three months old, not with feet like an Elephant, but
cleft like those of goats, with an horn not only of two, but often times of
three cubits long, of a weazell color, with a neck not very long, nor very
hairy, but having few and short hairs hanging to the one side of the neck,
the legs are lean and small, the buttocks high, but very hairy. Cardane
diss^nting from both these, writes, that he has an horn in the midst of his
forehead, but that it is only the length of three fingers. Andrew I hevet
mentions an Unicorne seen by a certain Turkish Sangjach, which was of the
bigness of a Bull of five or six months old, and had one Tom. 1. lib. 5.
Cap. 5. cosmogr.
horn, but that not in the midst of the forehead, but upon the top of the
crown of the head; he was legged and footed like an Ass, but longer haired,
and had ears not much unlike the Rangifer, a beast not unknown in the
subpolare or northern countries.

Thus various therefore is the report concerning the shape of this Beast.
Neither is there less difference concerning her nature and conditions. For
Pliny writes that the Unicorne is a most fierce beast, and has a great
bellowing voice, and that she cannot therefore be taken alive. Cardane renders
a reason of this fierceness, Because (says he) it inhabits the deserts of
Aethiopia, a region squalide, and filthy, abounding with toads and such like
venomous creatures. Others on the contrary affirm her to be of a most mild,
amiable, and gentle nature of all others, unless one purposely offend her, or
use her too harshly; for seeing she feeds not by stooping her head to the
ground, because she is hindered therefrom by the length of her horn, she must
necessarily feed upon the fruit that hangs upon trees; out of cratches or
man's hand she fearlesly and harmelesly takes all manner of fruits, herbs,
sheaves of corn, apples, pears, oranges and pulse. And herein they have
proceeded so far, that they feign they will love Virgins, entised by their
beauty, so that stayed in the contemplation of them, and allured by their
entisements, they by this means are often taken by hunters. In this opinion is
Jews Vartoman, who denies that Unicornes are wild vartomans ^p^n^on of the
nature of the Unicorne.
or fierce; for he says that he saw two, which were sent out of Aethiopia to
the Sultan, who kept them shut up in Pens, in Mecha, a city of Arabia foelix,
renowned by the Sepulcher of Mahomet. Thevet travailing thither, tells that he
diligently enquired of the inhabitants, what their opinion was of such a beast,
yet could he never hear any tidings thereof. Whence it is easy to discern,
that such beasts have neither been in our, nor in Vartomans times. The so
great variety of dissenting opinions, easily induces me to believe that this
word, Unicorne, is not the proper name of any beast in the world, and that it
is a thing only feigned by Painters, and Writers of natural things, to
delight the readers and beholders. For as there is but one right way, but many
by-waies and windings, so the speech of truth is but one, and that always
simple and like it self; but that of a lie is diverse, and which may easily
refell it self, by the repugnancie and incongruity of opinions, if one should
say nothing. What therefore (will some say) of what creatures are these horns,
which we see wholly different from others, if they be not of Unicorns? Thevet
thinks them nothing What the ordinary Unicorns horns are.
else than Elephants bones turned and made into the fashion that we see them;
for thus in the Eastern countreies, some crafty merchants and cunning
companions turn, hollow, and being softened, draw to what length they please
the teeth of the fish Roharde, which lives in the ^ed and Ethiopian Sea, and
being so handled, they sell them for Unicornes horn. Verily that which is
termed Unicornes horn being burnt, sends forth a smell like to Ivory. Now
Cardanus affirms that the teeth and bones of Elephants made soft by art, may
be drawn forth, and brought into what form you please, like as Ox bones
are. For what is there in the world which the thirsting desire of gold will not
make men to adulterate and counterfeit? But it The Unicornes horn is not
effectual against poison.
is time that we come to the third scope. Grant there be Unicornes, must it
therefore follow that their horns must be of such efficacy against poisons? If
we judge by events, and the experience of things, I can protest thus much, that
I have often made trial thereof, yet could I never find any good success in
the use thereof against poisons, in such as I have had in cure. If the matter
must be tried by witnesses and authorities, a great part of the Physicians of
better note have long since bid it adieu, and have detracted from the divine
and admirable virtues for which it formerly was so much desired. And this they
have done, moved thereto by many just, but two especial reasons. The first is
of Rondeletius, who in this case affirms that horns are endued Lib. depo^der.
cap. 19 Horns and bones not effectual unless to dry.
with no taste nor smell; and therefore have no effect in physic, unless it
be to dry. Neither (says he) am I ignorant that such as have them, much
predicate their worth, so to make the greater benefit and gain by them, as of
the shavings or scrapings of Unicornes horn, which they sell for the weight in
gold, as that which is singular good against poisons and worms, which things I
think Harts-horne and Ivory do no less effectually perform; which is the
cause why for the same disease, and with the like success, I prescribe Ivory
to such as are poor, and Unicornes horn to the rich, as that they so much
desire. This is the opinion of Rondeletius, who without any difference was wont
for Unicornes horn to prescribe not only Hartshorn or Ivory, but also the
bones of Horses and Dogs, and the stones of Myrabalanes. Another reason is,
that whatsoever resists poison is cordial, that is, fit to strengthen the
heart, which is chiefly assailed by poisons; but nothing is convenient to
strengthen the heart, unless it be by laudible blood or spirit, which two are
only familiar to the heart, as being the workhouse of the arterious blood and
vital spirits. For all things are preserved by their like, as they are
destroyed by their contraries; for all things that generate, generate things
like themselves. But Unicornes horn, as it conteines no smell, so neither has
it any aerie parts, but is wholly earthy and dry; neither can it be converted
into blood by the digestive faculty, for as it is without juice, so is it
without flesh. For as it cannot be turned into Chylus, so neither is it fit to
become Chymus (that is) juice or blood. Therefore it is joined to the heart by
no similitude nor familiarity. Furthermore, there is not a word in Hippocrates
and Galen concerning the Unicornes horn, who notwithstanding have in so many
places commended Harts-horne. Therefore D. Chapelaine, the chief Physician of
King Charles the ninth, often used to say, that he would very willingly take
away that custom of dipping a piece of Unicorns horn in the Kings cup, but
that he knew that opinion to be so deeply ingrafted in the minds of men, that
he feared, that it would scarce be impugned by reason. Besides (he said) if
such a superstitious medicine do no good, so certainly it does no harm,
unless it be to their estates that buy it with gold, or else by accident,
because Princes, whilst they rely more than is fitting upon the magnified
virtues of this horn, neglect to arm themselves against poys^^s by other more
convenient means, so that Death oft-times takes them at unawares. When as upon
a time I enquired of Jews Duret the Kings Physician and Professor (by reason
of the great opinion that all learned men justly had of his learning and
judgment) what he thought of this horn. He answered, that he attributed no
faculties thereto: for the confirmation whereof he rendered the second reason I
have formerly given, but more largely and elegantly; neither feared he to
affirm it aloud, and in plain words to his auditory of learned men, coming
from all parts to hear him. But if at any time (overcome by the fault of the
times and place) he prescribed this horn, that he did it for no other intent,
than to help faintings or sownings that happen by In what cases good.
the abundance of serous humors, floating in the orifice of the ventricle,
which makes men ill disposed, because this mixed with other things endued with
the like faculty, has power to drink up the waterish humidity by its earthy
dryness. But some will reply, that neither the Lemnian, nor Armenian earth,
have any juice in them, neither any smell, nor aerie spirit. It is granted,
neither truly are such things truly and properly called cordial, but only
by event and accident, for that by the excellent astrictive faculty they have,
and stopping the passages of the vessels, they hinder the poison from entering
into the heart. This is my opinion of Unicornes horn, which if any do not
approve of, he shall do me a favor, if for the public good, he shall
freely oppose his; but in the interim take this in good part which I have done.

The End of the One and Twentieth Book.
OF THE PLAGUE. THE TWENTY SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1. The description of the Plague.
THE Plague is a cruel and contagious disease, which every What the plague is.
where, like a common disease, invading Man and Beast, kills very many; being
attended, and as it were associated with a continual Fever, Botches,
Carbuncles, Spots, Nauseousnesse, Vomitings, and other such malign accidents.
This disease is not so pernicious or hurtful, by any elementary quality, as
from a certain poisonous and venenate malignity, the force whereof exceeds the
condition of common putrefaction. Yet I will not deny but that it is more
hurtful in certain bodies, times and regions, as also many other diseases, of
which Hippocrates makes mention. But from hence we Sect. 3. aphor.
can only collect, that the force and malignity of the plague, may be
increased, or diminished, according to the condition of the Elementary
qualities concurring with it, but not the whole nature and essence thereof to
depend thereon.

This pestiferous poison principally assailes the Vital spirit, the
Storehouse and original whereof is the Heart, so that if the Vital Spirit
prove stronger, it drives it far from the Heart; but if weaker, it being
overcome and weakened by the hostile assault, flies back into the fortress of
the Heart, by the like contagion infecting the How it comes to kill.
heart, and so the whole Body, being spread into it by the passages of the
Arteries.

Hence it is, pestilent Fevers are sometime simple and solitary, other-whiles
associated with a troop of other affects, as Botches, Carbuncles, Blaines, and
Spots, of one or more colors.

It is probable such affects have their original from the expulsive Faculty,
whether The original Bubo's, Carbuncles, etc. in the plague.
strong or weak, provoked by the malignity of the raging matter: yet assuredly
diverse symptoms and changes arise, according to the constitution of the body
of the Patient, and condition of the humor in which the virulency of the plague
is chiefly inherent, and lastly, in the nature of the efficient cause.

I thought good, by this description, to express the nature of the plague, at
this my first entrance into this matter, for we can scarce comprehend it in a
proper definition. For although the force thereof be definite and certain in
nature, yet it is not altogether certain and manifest in men's minds, because
it never happens after one sort: so that in so great variety, it is very
difficult to set down any thing general and certain.

CHAP. II. Of the Divine causes of an extraordinary Plague.
IT is a confirmed, constant, and received opinion in all Ages amongst
Christians, that the plague and other diseases, which violently assail the
life of man, are often sent by the just anger of God punishing our offenses.
The Prophet Amos has long since taught it, saying, Shall there be affliction,
shall there be evil in a City, Amos 3. Acts 17
and the Lord has not done it? On which truly we ought daily to meditate, and
that for two causes: The first is, that we always bear this in mind, that
we enjoy health, live, move, and have our beings from God, and that it
descends from that Father of Light: and for this cause we are always bound to
give him great and exceeding thanks. The other is, that knowing the calamities,
by sending whereof the Divine anger proceeds to revenge, we may at length
repent, and leaving the way of wickedness, walk in the paths of godliness.
For thus we shall learn to see in God, our selves, the Heaven and Earth, the
true knowledge of the causes of the plague, and by a certain Divine Philosophy
teach, God to be the beginning and cause of the second causes, which cannot
well without the first cause go about nor attempt, much less perform any
thing. For from hence they borrow their force, order, and constancy of order;
so that they The second causes have their power from God as the first cause.
serve as Instruments for God, who rules and governes us, and the whole World,
to perform all his works, by that constant course of order, which he has
appointed unchangeable from the beginning. Wherefore all the cause of a plague
is not to be attributed to these near and inferior causes or beginnings, as
the Epicures and Lucianists commonly do, who attributing too much, yea all
things to nature, have left nothing to Gods providence. On the contrary, we
ought to think, and believe in all our things, That even as God by his
omnipotent Power has created all things of nothing, so he by his eternal
Wisdom preserves and governes the same, leads and enclines them as he
pleases, yea verily at his pleasure changes their order, and the whole course
of Nature.

This cause of an extraordinary Plague, as we confess and acknowledge, so
here we will not prosecute it any further, but think fit to leave it to
Divines, because it exceeds the bounds of Nature, in which I will now contain
my self. Wherefore let us come to the natural causes of the plague.

CHAP. III. Of the Natural Causes of the Plague, and chiefly of the Seminary
of the Plague by the corruption of the Air.
THE general and natural causes of the Plague are absolutely two, that is,
the infection of corrupt Air, and a preparation and fitness of corrupt The
general causes of the plague.
humors to take that infection; for it is noted before out of the doctrine of
Galen, that our humors may be corrupted, and degenerate into such Lib. 6 de
loc. affectis.
an alienation which may equal the malignity of Poison.

The Air is corrupted, when the four seasons of the year have not their
seasonablenesse, or degenerate from themselves, either by alteration, or by
alienation: as if the constitution of the whole year be moist and rainy by
reason of gross and black Clouds; if the Winter be gentle and warm without
any Northerly How the seasons of the year may be said to want their
seasonablenesse.
wind, which is cold and dry, and by that means contrary to putrefaction; if
the spring which should be temperate, shall be faulty in any excess of
distemper; if the Autumn shall be ominous by Fires in the Air, with stars
shooting, and as it were falling down, or terrible comets, never seen without
some disaster; if the summer be hot, cloudy and moist, and without winds, and
the clouds fly from the South into the North. These and such like unnatural
constitutions of the seasons of the year, were never better, or more
excellently handled by any, than by Hippocrates in his books Epidemion.
Therefore the Air from hence draws the seeds of corruption and the
Pestilence, which at the length, the like excess of qualities being brought
in, it sends into the humors of our bodies, chiefly such as are thin and
serous. Although the pestilence does not always necessarily arise from hence,
but somewhiles some other kind of cruel and infectious disease.

But neither is the air only corrupted by these superior causes, but also by
putride How the air may be corrupted.
and filthy stinking vapors spread abroad through the Air encompassing us,
from the Bodies and Carcasses of things not buried, gapings and hollownesses of
the earth, or sinkes and such like places being opened: for the sea often
overflowing the land in some places, and leaving in the mud or hollownesses of
the earth (caused by earthquakes) the huge bodies of monstrous Fishes, which
it hides in its waters, has given both the occasion and matter of a plague.
For thus in our time, a Whale cast upon the Tuscan shore, presently caused a
plague over all that country.

But as fishes infect and breed a plague in the air, so the air being
corrupted often causes a pestilence in the sea among fishes, especially when
they either swim on the top of the Water, or are infected by the pestilent
vapors of the Earth lying under them, and rising into the air through the
body of the water, the latter whereof Aristotle says, happens but seldom. But
it often chances, that the plague raging in any country, Lib. 8. hist. a^i^.
many fishes are cast upon all the coast, and may be seen lying on great
heaps. But sulphurous vapors, or such as partake of any other malign
quality, sent forth from places under the ground, by gapings and gulfs opened
by earthquakes, not only corrupt the air, but also infect and taint the Seeds,
Plants, and all the fruits which we eat, and so transfer the pestilent
corruption into us, and those beasts on which we feed, together with our
nourishment. The truth whereof Empedocles made manifest, who by shutting up a
great Gulf of the earth, opened in a valley between two mountains, freed all
Sicily from a plague caused from thence.

If winds rising suddenly shall drive such filthy exhalations from those
regions in which they were pestiferous, into other places, they also will
carry the Plague with them thither.

If it be thus, some will say, it should seem that wheresoever stinking and
putride exhalations arise, as about standing Pooles, Sinkes and Shambles, there
should the Plague reign, and straight suffocate with its noisome poison the
people which work in such places: but experience finds this false.

We do answer, that the putrefaction of the plague is far different, and of
another kind than this common, as that which partakes of a certain secret
malignity, Pestiferous putrefaction is ^ar different from ordinary putrefaction.
and wholly contrary to our lives, and of which we cannot easily give a plain
and manifest reason. Yet that vulgar putrefaction wheresoever it be, does
easily and quickly entertain and welcome the pestiferous contagion, as often
as, and whenever it comes, as joined to it by a certain familiarity, and at
length, it self degenerating into a pestiferous malignity, certainly no
otherwise than those diseases which arise in the plague time, the putride
diseases in our bodies, which at the first wanted virulency and contagion, as
Ulcers, putride Fevers, and other such diseases, raised by the peculiar
default of the humors, easily degenerate into pestilence; presently In a
pestilent constitution of the air, all diseases become pestilent.
receiving the tainture of the plague, to which they had before a certain
preparation. Wherefore in time of the plague, I would advise all Men to shun
such exceeding stinking places, as they would the plague it self: that there
may be no preparation in our bodies, or humors to catch that infection
(without which, as Galen teaches, Lib. 1. de differ feb.
the Agent has no power over the Subject, for otherwise in a plague time, the
sickness would equally seize upon all) so that the impression of the
pestiferous quality may presently follow that disposition.

But when we say the air is pestilent, we do not understand that sincere,
elementary, How the air may be said to putrefie.
and simple as it is of its own nature, for such is not subject to
putrefaction, but that which is polluted with ill vapoures rising from the
earth, standing waters, vaults, or sea, and degenerates, and is changed from
its native purity and simplicity. But certainly amongst all the constitutions
of the Air, fit to receive a pestilent corruption, there is none more fit than
a hot, moist and still season: For the excess of such qualities easily causes
putrefaction. Wherefore the South wind reigning, which is hot and A Southerly
constitution of the air is the fuel of the Plague.
moist, and principally in places near the Sea, there flesh cannot long be
kept, but it presently is tainted and corrupted.

Further, we must know, that the pestilent malignity which rises from the
carcasses or bodies of men, is more easily communicated to men; that which
rises from oxen, to oxen; and that which comes from sheep, to sheep, by a
certain sympathy and familiarity of Nature: no otherwise than the Plague which
shall seize upon some one in a Family, does presently spread more quickly
amongst the rest of that Family, by reason of the similitude of temper, than
amongst others of another Family, disagreeing in their whole temper. Therefore
the Air thus altered and estranged from its goodness of nature, necessarily
drawn in by inspiration and transpiration, brings in the seeds of the Plague,
and so consequently the Plague it self, into bodies prepared and made ready to
receive it.

CHAP. IIII. Of the preparation of humors to putrefaction, and admission of
pestiferous impressions.
HAving showed the causes from which the Air does putrefie, become corrupt,
and is made partaker of a pestilent and poisonous constitution, we must now
declare what things may cause the humors to putrefie, and make them so apt to
receive and retain the pestilent Air and venenate quality.

Humors putrefie either from fullness, which breeds obstruction, or by
distemperate Three causes of the putref^ction of humors.
excess, or lastly, by admixture of corrupt matter and evil juice, which ill
feeding does specially cause to abound in the body: For the Plague often
follows the drinking of dead and mustie Wines, muddy and standing waters,
which receive the sinks and filth of a City; and fruits and pulse eaten without
discretion in scarcity of other Corn, as Pease, Beans, Lentils, Vetches,
Acorns, the roots of Fern, and Grass made into Bread. For such meats obstruct,
heap up ill humors in the body, and weaken the strength of the faculties, from
whence proceeds a putrefaction of humors, and in that putrefaction a
preparation and disposition to receive, conceive and bring forth the Seeds of
the Plague: which the filthy scabs, malign sores, rebellious ulcers, and
putrid fevers, being all forerunners of greater putrefaction and corruption,
do testify. Vehement passions of the mind, as anger, sorrow, grief,
vexation and fear, Passions of the mind help forward the putrefaction of the
humors.
help forward this corruption of humors, all which hinder natures diligence
and care of concoction: For as in the dog-dayes, the Lees of wine subsiding to
the bottom, are by the strength and efficacy of heat drawn up to the top, and
mixed with the whole substance of the wine, as it were by a certain
ebullition, or working: So melancholy humors, being the Dregs or Lees of the
blood, stirred up by the passions of the mind, defile or taint all the blood
with their feculent impurity.

We found that some years agone by experience, at the battle of St. Dennis.
For all wounds, by what weapon soever they were made, degenerated into great
and filthy putrefactions and corruptions, with fevers of the like nature, and
were commonly determined by death, what medicines, and how diligently soever
they were applied; which caused many to have a false suspicion that the weapons
on both sides were poisoned. But there were manifest signs of corruption and
putrefaction in the blood let the same day that any were hurt, and in the
principal parts dissected afterward, that it was from no other cause, than an
evil constitution of the Air, and the minds of the Soldiers perverted by
hate, anger and fear.

CHAP. V. What signs in the Air and Earth prognosticate a Plague.
WE may know a Plague to be at hand and hang over us, if at any time the
Air, and seasons of the year swarve from their natural constitution, after
those ways I have mentioned before; if frequent and long continuing Meteors or
sulphurous Thunders infect the Air; if fruits, seeds and pulse be
worme-eaten; If Birds forsake their nests, eggs or Young, without any manifest
cause; if we perceive women commonly to abort, by continual breathing in the
vaporous Air, being corrupted and hurtful both to the Why Abortion^ are
frequent in a pestilent season.
Embrion and original of life, and by which it being suffocated, is presently
cast forth and expelled. Yet notwithstanding, those airy impressions do not
solely corrupt the Air, but there may be also others raised by the Sun from
the filthy exhalations, and poisonous vapors of the earth and waters, or of
dead carcasses, which by their unnatural mixture, easily corrupt the Air,
subject to alteration, as which is thin and moist, from whence diverse
Epidemiall diseases, and such as everywhere seize upon the common sort,
according to the sev^l kinds of corruptions, such as that famous Catarrhe with
difficulty of breathing, which in the year 1510. went A Catarrhe with
difficulty of breathing killing many.
almost over the World, and raged over all the Cities and Towns of France,
with great heaviness of the head (whereupon the French named it Cuculla) with
a straitness of the heart and lungs, and a Cough, a continual Fever, and
sometimes raving.

This, although it seized upon many more than it killed, yet because they
commonly dyed who were either let blood, or purged, it showed it self
pestilent by that violent and peculiar and unheard of kind of malignity.

Such also was the English Sweating-sicknesse, or Sweating-feaver, which
unusual, The english sweating sickness.
with a great deal of terror invaded all the lower parts of Germany, and the
Low Countries from the year 1525. unto the year 1530. and that chiefly in
Autumn.

As soon as this pestilent disease entered into any City, suddenly two or three
hundred fell sick on one day, then it departing thence to some other place. The
people stricken with it languishing, fell down in a swoune, and lying in their
beds, sweat continually, having a fever, a frequent, quick, and unequal
pulse; neither did they leave sweating till the disease left them, which was in
one or two days at the most: yet freed of it, they languished long after, they
all had a beating, or palpitation of the heart, which held some for two or
three years, and others all their life after.

At the first beginning it killed many, before the force of it was known: but
afterward very few, when it was found out by practice and use, that those who
furthered and continued their sweats, and strengthened themselves with
Cordials, were all restored. But at certain times many other popular diseases,
sprung up, as putrid fevers, fluxes, bloudy-fluxes, catarrhes, coughes,
phrenzies, squinances, pleurisies, inflammations of the lungs, inflammations of
the eyes, apoplexies, lithargies, small pocks and meazels, scabs, carbuncles,
and malign pustles. Wherefore the plague is The Plague is not the definite
name of one disease.
not always, nor everywhere of one and the same kind, but of diverse; which is
the cause that diverse names are imposed upon it, according to the variety of
the effects it brings, and symptoms which accompany it, and kinds of
putrefaction, and hidden qualities of the Air.

They affirm, when the Plague is at hand, that Mushromes grow in greater
abundance What signs in the earth for^tell a Plague.
out of the earth, and upon the surface thereof many kinds of poisonous
insecta creep in great numbers, as Spiders, Caterpillars, Butter-flyes,
Grasse-hoppers, Beetles, Hornets, Waspes, Flies, Scorpions, Snailes, Locusts,
Toads, Worms, and such things as are the offspring of putrefaction. And also
wild beasts tired with the vaporous malignity of their Dens and Caves in the
earth, forsake them; and Moles, Toads, Vipers, Snakes, Lizzards, Aspes and
Crocodiles are seen to flee away, and remove their habitations in great
troops. For these, as also some other creatures, have a manifest power by the
gift of God, and the instinct of Nature, to presage changes of weather, as
raines, showers, and fair weather; and seasons of the year, as the Spring,
Summer, Autumn, Winter, which they testify by their singing, chirping,
crying, flying, playing, and beating their wings, and such like signs: so also
they have a perception of a Plague at hand. And moreover, the carcasses of some
of them which took less heed of themselves, suffocated by the pestiferous
poison of the ill Air contained in the earth, may be every where found, not
only in their dens, but also in the plain fields.

These vapors corrupted not by a simple putrefaction, but an occult malignity,
are drawn out of the bowels of the earth into the Air, by the force of the
Sun and How pestilent vapors may kill plants and trees.
Stars, and thence condensed into clouds, which by their falling upon corn,
trees and grass, infect and corrupt all things which the earth produces, and
also kills those creatures which feed upon them; yet brute beasts sooner than
men, as which stoop and hold their heads down toward the ground (the
maintainer and breeder of this poison) that they may get their food from
thence. Therefore at such times, skillful husbandmen, taught by long
experience, never drive their Cattle or Sheep to pasture, before that the Sun,
by the force of his beams, has wasted and diffipated into Air this
pestiferous dew hanging and abiding upon boughs and leaves of trees, herbs,
corn and fruits.

But on the contrary, that pestilence which proceeds from some malign quality
from above, by reason of evil and certain conjunction of the Stars, is more
hurtful to men and birds, as those who are nearer to heaven.

CHAP. VI. By using what cautions in Air and Diet, one may prevent the Plague.
HAving declared the signs fore-shewing a Pestilence: now we must show by
what means we may shun the imminent danger thereof, and Change of places the
surest prevention of the Plague.
defend our selves from it. No prevention seemed more certain to the Ancients,
than most speedily to remove into places far distant from the infected place,
and to be most slow in their return thither again. But those, who by reason
of their business or employments, cannot change their habitation, must
principally have care of two things: The first is, that they Two things of
chief account for prevention.
strengthen their bodies, and the principal parts thereof against the daily
imminent invasions of the poison, or the pestiferous and venenate Air. The
other, that they abate the force of it, that it may not imprint its virulency
in the body; which may be done by correcting the excess of the quality
inclining toward it, by the opposition of its contrary. For if it be hotter
than is meet, it must be tempered with cooling things; if too cold, with
heating things: yet this will not suffice. For we ought besides, to amend and
purge the corruptions of the venenate malignity diffused through it, by smells
and perfumes resisting the poison thereof. The body will be strengthened and
more powerfully resist the infected Air, if it want excrementitious humors,
which may be procured by purging and bleeding, and for the rest a convenient
diet appointed, as shunning much variety of meats, and hot and moist things,
and Diet for prevention of the Plague.
all such which are easily corrupted in the stomach; and cause obstructions,
such as those things which be made by Comfit-makers; we must shun satiety and
drunkenness, for both of them weaken the powers, which are preserved by the
moderate use of meats of good juice.

Let moderate exercises in a clear Air, and free from any venomous tainture,
precede your meals.

Let the belly have due evacuation either by Nature or Art.

Let the heart, the seat of life, and the rest of the bowels be strengthened
with Cordials and Antidotes applied and taken (as we shall hereafter show) in
the form of epithemes, ointments, emplasters, waters, pills, powders, tablets,
opiates, fumigations, and such like.

Make choice of a pure Air and free from all pollution, and far remote from
stinking places, for such is most fit to preserve life, to recreate and repair
the spirits; where Discommodities of a cloudy or toggy air.
as on the contrary, a cloudy or mistie Air, and such as is infected with
gross and stinking vapors, duls the spirits, dejects the appetite, makes the
body faint and ill colored, oppresses the heart, and is the breeder of many
diseases.

The Northern wind is healthful, because it is cold and dry. But on the
contrary, the Southern wind, because it is hot and moist, weakens the body by
sloth or dullness, Why the South wind is pestilent.
opens the pores, and makes them pervious to the pestiferous malignity. The
Western wind is also unwholesome, because it comes near to the nature of the
Southern: wherefore the windows must be shut up on that side of the house on
which they blow, but opened on the North and East side, unless it happen the
Plague come from thence.

Kindle a clear fire in all the lodging Chambers of the house, and perfume the
The efficacy of fire against the Plague.
whole house with Aromatic things, as Frankincense, Myrthe, Benzoine, Ladanum,
Styrax, Roses, Myrtle-leaves, Lavender, Rosemary, Sage, Savory, wild Time.
Marjerome, Broom, Pine-apples, pieces of Fur, Juniper berries, Cloves,
Perfumes: and let your clothes be aired in the same.

There be some, who think it a great preservative against the pestilent Air,
to keep a Goat in their houses, because the capacity of the houses, filled with
the strong sent which the Goat sends forth, prohibits the entrance of the
venomous Air: which same reason has place also in sweet smells; and besides,
it argues, that such as are hungry Moderate reple^ion good for prevention.
are apter to take the Plague, than those who have eaten moderately: for the
body is not only strengthened with meat, but all the passages thereof are
filled by the vapors diffused from thence, by which otherwise the infected
Air would find a more easy entrance to the heart.

Yet the common sort of People yield another reason for the Goat, which is,
that one ill sent drives away another, as one wedge drives forth another; which
calls to my mind that which is recorded by Alexander Benedictus, that there
was a Scythian A strange art to drive away the Plague.
Physician, which caused a Plague, arising from the infection of the Air, to
cease, by causing all the dogs, cats, and such like beasts which were in the
City, to be killed, and cast their carcasses up and down the streets, that so
by the coming of this new putride vapor as a stranger, the former pestiferous
infection, as an old guest, was put out of its Lodging, and so the Plague
ceased. For poisons have not only an antipathy with The antipathy of poisons
with poisons.
their Antidotes, but also with some other poisons.

Whilst the Plague is hot, it is not good to stir out of door before the
rising of the Sun: wherefore we must have patience, until he have cleansed
the Air with the comfortable light of his Beams, and dispersed all the foggy
and nocturnall pollutions, which commonly hang in the Air in dirty, and
especially in low places and Valleys.

All public and great meetings and assemblies must be shunned.

If the Plague begin in Summer, and seem principally to rage, being helped
forward Whether in the plague time one must travel by night or by day.
by the summers heat, it is the best to perform a journey begun, or undertaken
for performance of necessary affairs, rather upon the night time, than on the
day, because the infection takes force, strength and subtlety of substance, by
which it may more easily permeate and enter in, by the heat of the Sun; but by
night men's bodies are more strong, and all things are more gross and dense.
But you must observe a clean contrary course if the malignity seem to borrow
strength, and celerity from coldness. But you must always eschew the beams
of the Moon, but especially Why the Moon is to be shunned.
at the full: For then our bodies are more languid and weak, and fuller of
excrementitious humors. Even as trees which for that cause must be cut down in
their season of the Moon, that is, in the decrease thereof.

After a little gentle walking in your Chamber, you must presently use some
means that the principal parts may be strengthened by suscitating the heat and
spirits, and that the passages to them may be filled, that so the way may be
shut up from the infection coming from without. Such as by the use of garlic
have not their heads troubled, Garlic good against the Plague.
nor their inward parts inflamed, as Country people, and such as are used to
it, to such there can can be no more certain preservative and antidote
against the pestiferous fogs or mists, and the nocturnall obscurity, than to
take it in the morning with a draught of good wine; for it being abundantly
diffused presently over all the body, fills up the passages thereof, and
strengthens it in a moment.

For water, if the Plague proceed from the tainture of the Air, we must
wholly What water to be made choice o^ in the Plague time.
shun and avoid raine-water, because it cannot but be infected by the
contagion of the Air. Wherefore the water of Springs, and of the deepest Wells
are thought best. But if the malignity proceed from the vapors contained in
the earth, you must make choice of Raine-water. Yet it is more safe to digest
every sort of water by boiling it, and to prefer that water before other,
which is pure and clear to the sight, and without either taste or smell, and
which besides suddenly takes the extremest mutation of heat and cold.

CHAP. VII. Of the Cordial Remedies by which we may preserve our bodies in
fear of the Plague, and cure those already infected therewith.
SUch as cannot eat without much labor, exercise and hunger, and who are no
lovers of Break-fasts, having evacuated their excrements, before they go from
home must strengthen the heart with some Antidote against the virulency of the
infection. Amongst which Aqua Theriacalis, or Treacle-water, two ounces, with
the like quantity of Sack, is much Aqua theriacalis good against the Plague
both inwardly taken and outwardly applied.
commended being drunk, and rubbing the nostrils, mouth and ears with the
same; for the Treacle-water strengthens the heart, expels poison, and is not
only good for a preservative, but also to cure the disease it self: For by
sweat it drives forth the poison contained within. It should be made in June,
at which time all simple medicines, by the vital heat of the Sun, are in their
greatest efficacy.

The composition whereof is thus: Take the roots of Gentian, Cyperus,
Tormentill, Diptam, or Fraxinella, Elecampaine, of each one ounce; the leaves
of Mullet, Card^us The composition thereof.
Benedictus, Divels-bit, Burnet, Scabious, Sheep Sorrel, of each half a
handful; of the tops of Rue a little quantity; Myrtle Berries one ounce; of
red Rose leaves, the flowers of Buglosse, Borage, and St. John's wurt, of each
one ounce: let them be all cleansed, dried and macerated for the space of
twenty four hours in one pound of white wine or Malmesey, and of Rose Water or
Sorrel water; then let them be put in a vessel of glass, and add thereto
of Treacle and Mithridate, of each four ounces: then distill them in Balneo
Mariae, and let the distilled water be received in a glass Vial, and let
there be added thereto of Saffron two drams, of bole Armenick, Terra Sigillata,
yellow Sanders, shavings of Ivory and Harts-horne, of each half an ounce, then
let the glass be well stopped, and set in the Sun for the space of eight or
ten days. Let the prescribed quantity be taken every morning so often as shall
be needful. It may be given without hurt to sucking children, and to women
great with child. But that it may be the more pleasant, it must be strained
through an Hippocras bag, adding thereto some sugar and cinnamon.

Some think themselves sufficiently defended with a root of Elecampaine,
Zedoarie, or Angelica, rolled in their mouth, or chawed between their teeth.

Others drink every morning one dram of the root of Gentian bruised, being
macerated for the space of one night in two ounces of white wind.

Others take Worme-wood wine.

Others sup up in a rere egg one dram of Terra Sigillata, or of Harts-horne,
with'a little Saffron, and drink two ounces of wine after it.

There be some that do infuse bole Armenicke, the roots of Gentian,
Tormentill, Diptam, the Berries of Juniper, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Saffron, and
such like, in aqua vitae and strong white wine, and so distill it in Balneo
Mariae.

This Cordial water that follows is of great virtue. Take of the roots of
the A Cordial water.
long and round Aristolochia, Tormentill, Diptam, of each three drams, of
Zedoarie two drams, Lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders, of each one dram, of the
leaves of Scordium, St. John's wurt, Sorrel, Rue, Sage, of each half an ounce,
of Bay and Juniper berries, of each three drams, Citron seeds one dram, Cloves,
Mace, Nutmegs, of each two drams, of Mastick, Olibanum, bole Armenick, Terra
Sigillata, shavings of Harts-horne and Ivory, of each one ounce, of Saffron on
scruple, of the conserves of Roses, Buglosse flowers, water lillies, and old
Treacle, of each one ounce, of Camphire half a dram, of aqua vitae half a
pint, of white wine two pints and a half, make thereof a distillation in Balneo
Mariae. The use of this distilled water is even as Treacle water is.

The Electuary following is very effectual. Take of the best Treacle three
ounces, A Cordial clectuary.
Juniper berries and Carduus seeds of each one dram and a half, of bole
Armenicke prepared half an ounce, of the powder of the Electuarie de Gemmis
and Diamargariton frigidum, the powder of Harts-horne, and red Coral, of each
one dram: mix them with the syrup of the rindes and juice of Pome-citrons as
much as shall suffice, and make thereof a liquid Electuary in the form of an
Opiate, let them take every morning the quantity of a Filberd, drinking after
it two drams of the water of Scabious, Cherryes, Carduus Benedictus, and of
some such like cordial things, or of strong wine.

The following Opiate is also very profitable, which also may be made into
Tablets. An^.
Take of the roots of Angelica, Gentian, Zedoarie, Elecampaine, of each two
drams; of Cytron and Sorrel seeds, of each half a dram; of the dried rindes
of Cytrons, Cinnamon, Bay and Juniper berries, and Saffron, of each one
scruple; of conferve of Roses and Buglosse, of each one ounce; and fine hard
Sugar as much as is sufficient: make thereof Tablets of the weight of half a
dram, let him take one of them two hours before meat: or make thereof an
Opiate with equal parts of conserves of Buglosse and Mel Anthosatum, and so
adding all the rest dry and in powder. Or take of the roots of Valerian,
Tormentill, Diptam, of the leaves of Rue, Another.
of each half an ounce; of Saffron, Mace, Nutmegs, of each half a dram; of
bole Armenick prepared half an ounce; of conserve of Roses and syrup of
Lemons as much as will be sufficient to make thereof an Opiate liquid enough.
Or take of the Another.
roots of both the Aristolochia's, of Gentian, Tormentill, Diptam, of each one
dram and an half; of Ginger three drams; of the leaves of Rue, Sage, Mints and
Penny-royall, of each two drams; of Bay and Juniper berries, Cytron seeds, of
each four scruples; of Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each two drams; of
Lignum aloes, and yellow Saunders, of each one dram; of Male Frankincense, i.
Olibanum, Masticke, shavings of Harts-horne and Ivory, of each two scruples; of
Saffron half a dram; of bole Armenicke, Terra Sigillata, red Coral, Pearl,
of each one dram; of conserves of Roses, Buglosse flowers, water-lillyes and
old Treacle, of each one ounce; of loaf sugar one pound and a quarter: a
little before the end of the making it up, add two drams of Confectio
Alkermes, and of Camphire dissolved in Rose Water one scruple: make thereof an
Opiate according to Art, the dose thereof is from half a dram to half a
scruple.

Treacle and Mithridate faithfully compounded, excel all Cordial medicines,
adding for every half ounce of each of them, one ounce and a half of
conserves of Roses, or of Buglosse, or of Violets, and three drams of bole
Armenicke prepared: Of these being mixed with stirring, and incorporated
together, make a conserve: It must be taken in the morning the quantity of a
Filberd: You must choose that Treacle that is not less than four years old,
nor above twelve: that which is somewhat new, is judged to be most meet for
choleric persons, but that which is old for phlegmatic and old men. For at the
beginning the strength of the Opium that enters into the composition thereof,
remains in its full virtue for a year: but afterward the more years old it
waxes, the strength thereof is more abolished, so that at length the whole
composition becomes very hot.

The confection of Alkermes is very effectual both for a preservative against
this disease, and also for the cure.

The quantity of a Filberd of Rubarbe, with one Clove chawed or rolled in the
mouth, is supposed to repel the coming of the pestilent Air: as also this
composition following.

Take of preserved Citron and Orange pills, of each one dram; of conserve of
Roses, and of the roots of Buglosse, of each three drammes; of Citron seeds
half an A consection to be taken in the morning against the pestilent Air.
ounce; of Annise seeds and Fennel seeds, of each one dram; of Angelica roots
four scruples; sugar of Roses as much as suffices: Make a Confection, and
cover it with leaves of Gold, and take a little of it out of a spoone before
you go abroad every morning.

Or take of Pineapple kernels, and Fistick nuts, infused for the space of six
hours in the water of Scabious and Roses, of each two ounces; of Almonds
blanched in A March-pane.
the forenamed waters half a pound: of preserved Citron and Orange pills, of
each one dram and a half: of Angelica roots four scruples: make them
according to art, unto the form of March-pane, or of any other such like
confection: and hold a little piece thereof often in your mouth.

The Tablets following are most effectual in such a ease. Take of the roots of
Diptam, Tormentill, Valerian, Elecampaine, Eringoes, of each half a dram; of
bole Armenick, Terra Sigillata, of each one scruple; of Camphire, Cinnamon,
Sorrel seeds, and Zedoarie, of each one scruple; of the Species of the
Electuarie Diamargariton Frigidum, two scruples; of conserve of Roses,
Buglosse, preserved Citron pills, Mithridate, Treacle, of each one dram; of fine
sugar dissolved in Scabious and Carduus water, as much as shall suffice: Make
thereof Tablets of the weight of a dram or half a dram: take them in the
morning before you eat.

The pills of Ruffus are accounted most effectual preservatives, so that Ruffus
himself Pills of Ruffus.
says, that he never knew any to be infected that used them: the composition
of them is thus.

Take of the best Aloes half a dram; of Gum Ammoniacum two drammes; of
Myrrh two drams and an half; of Masticke two drams; of Saffron seven grains:
Put them all together, and incorporate them with the juice of Citrons, or the
syrup of Lemons, and make thereof a mass, and let it be kept in leather: Let
the patient take the weight of half a dram every morning two or three hours
before meat, and let him drink the water of Sorrel after it, which through
its tartness, and the thinness of its parts, does infringe the force and
power of the malignity or putrefaction: For experience has taught us, that
Sorrel being eaten or chawed in the mouth, does make the pricking of Scorpions
unhurtfull. And for those ingredients which do enter into the composition of
those pills, Aloes does cleanse and purge, Myrrh resists putrefaction, Mastick
strengthens, Saffron exhilerates and makes lively the spirits that govern the
body, especially the vital and animal.

Those pills that follow are also much approved. Take of Aloes one ounce; of
Other pills.
Myrrh half an ounce, of Saffron one scruple, of Agarick in Trochisces, two
drams, of Rubarbe in powder one dram, of Cinnamon two scruples, of Masticke one
dram and a half, of Citron seeds twelve grains: Powder them all as is
requisite; and make thereof a mass with the syrup of Maiden-haire: Let it be
used as aforesaid.

If the mass begin to wax hard, the pills that must presently be taken, must
be mollified with the syrup of Lemons.

Take of washed Aloes two ounces, of Saffron one dram, of Myrrh half an ounce,
Other pills
of Ammoniacum dissolved in white wine, one ounce, of honey of Roses, Zedoarie,
red Saunders, of each one dram, of bole Armenick prepared two drams, of red
Coral half an ounce, of Camphire half a scruple: make thereof pills according
to Art. But those that are subject or apt to the haemorrhoids ought not at all,
or very seldom to use those kinds of pills that do receive much Aloes.

They say that King Mithridates affirmed by his own writing, that whosoever
took the quantity of an hasell Nut of the preservative following, and drank a
little wine after it, should be free from poison that day. Take two Wall-nuts,
those that be very dry, two figs, twenty leaves of Rue, and three grains of
salt: beat them, and incorporate them together, and let them be used as is
aforesaid.

This remedy is also said to be profitable for those that are bitten or st^ng
by some venomous beast, and for this only, because it has Rue, in the
composition thereof. But you must forbid women that are with child the use of
this medicine, for Rue is hot and dry in the third degree, and therefore it is
said to purge the womb, and provoke the flowers, whereby the nourishment is
drawn away from the child. Of such variety of medicines, every one may make
choice of that that is most agreeable to his taste, and as much thereof as
shall be sufficient.

CHAP. VIII. Of local medicines to be applied outwardly.
THose medicines that have proper and excellent virtues against the pestilence,
are not to be neglected to be applied outwardly, or carried in the hand. And
such are all aromaticall, astringent, or spirituous things, which therefore are
endued with virtue to repel the venomous and pestiferous air from coming and
entering into the body, and to strengthen the heart and Of what n^e the
medicines outwardly used ought to be.
the brain. Of this kind are Rue, Balm, Rosemary, Scordium, Sage, Worme-wood,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Saffron; the roots of Angelica, and Lovage, and such like,
which must be macerated one night in sharp Vinegar and Aquavitae, and then
tied in a knot as big as an egg: or rather let it be carried in a sponge,
made wet or soaked in the said infusion. For there is nothing that does sooner
and better hold the spirituous virtue and strength of aromaticke things, than a
sponge. Wherefore it is of principal use either to keep or hold sweet things
to the nose, or to apply Epithemes and Fomentations to the heart.

Those sweet things ought to be hot or cold, as the season of the year, and
kind of the pestilence is. As for example, in the Summer you ought to infuse
and macerate Cinnamon and Cloves beaten together, with a little Saffron in
equal parts, of Vinegar of Roses, and Rose water, into which you must dippe a
sponge, which rolled in a fair linen cloth, you may carry in your hand, and
often smell to.

Take of Wormwood half a handful, ten Cloves, of the roots of Gentian and
Angelica, of each two drammes, of Vinegar and Rose water, of each two ounces,
of Treacle and Mithridate, of each one dram, beat and mix them all well
together, and let a sponge be dipped therein, and used as abovesaid. They may
also be enclosed in boxes made of sweet wood, as of Juniper, Cedar, or
Cypress, and so carried for the same purpose.

But there is nothing more easy to be carried than Pomanders: the form of
which is thus. Take of yellow Saunders, Mace, Citron pills, Rose and Myrtle
leaves, of each two drammes, of Benzoin, Ladanum, Storax, of each half a
dram, of Cinnamon, and Saffron, of each two Scruples, of Camphire and Amber
Greece, of each one scruple, of Musk, three grains. Make thereof a Pomander,
with Rose water, with Pomanders.
the infusion of Tragacanth. Or take red Rose leaves, the flowers of
Water Lillies, and Violets, of each one ounce, of the three Saunders, Coriander
seeds, Citron pills, of each half an ounce, of Camphire, one dram, let them
all be made into powder, and with Water of Roses and Tragacanth make a
pomander.

In the winter it is to be made thus: take of Storax, Benzoin, of each one dram
and a half; of Musk, half a Scruple; of Cloves, Lavander, and Cyperus, of each
two drams; of the root of Orris, i. Flower-de-Luce, and Calamus aromaticus, of
each two drams and a half; of Amber Greece, three drams; of gum Tragacanth
dissolved in Rose water and Aquavitae, as much as shall suffice: make thereof a
Pomander. Sweet poude^


And for the same purpose you may also use to carry about with you sweet
pouders, made of Amber Greece, Storax, Orris, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Mace, Cloves,
Saffron, Benzoine, Musk, Camphire, Roses, Violets, Juncus odoratus, Marjoram,
and such like, of which being mixed together, Pouders may be compounded and
made.

Take of the roots of Orris two drams, of Cyperus, Calamus Aromaticus, red
Roses, of each half an ounce, of Cloves half a dram, of Storax one dram,
of Musk eight grains: mix them, and make a powder for a bag: or take the
roots of Orris two ounces, red Rose leaves, white Saunders, Storax, of each
one ounce, of Cyperus one dram, of Calamus Aromaticus, one ounce, of Marjoram,
half an ounce, of Cloves, three drammes, of Lavander, half a dram, of
Coriander seeds two drammes, of good Musk, half a scruple, of Ladanum and
Benzoin, of each a dram, of Nutmegs and Cinnamon, of each two drammes: Make
thereof a fine powder, and few it in a bag.

It will be very convenient also to apply to the region of the heart, a bag
filled with yellow Saunders, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron, and Treacle
shaken together, Bags.
and incorporated, and sprinkled over with strong vinegar and Rose water in
Summer, and with strong wine and Muskedine in the Winter.

These sweet Aromaticke things that are so full of spirits, smelling sweetly
and strongly, have admirable virtues to strengthen the principal parts of the
body, and to stir up the expulsive faculty to expel the poison.

Contrarie-wise, those that are stinking and unsavory, procure a desire to
vomit, and dissolution of the powers, by which it is manifest how foolish and
absurd their persuasion is, that counsel such as are in a pestilent
constitution of the air, to receive Unsavory things to be eschewed.
and take in the stinking and unsavory vapors of sinkes and privies, and that
especially in the morning.

But it will not suffice to carry those preservatives alone, without the use of
any other thing, but it will be also very profitable to wash all the whole body
in Vinegar of the decoction of Juniper and Bay berries, the roots of Gentian,
Marigolds, S. John's Wort, and such like, with Treacle or Mithridate also
dissolved in it. For vinegar is an enemy to all poisons in general, whether
they be hot or cold: for it resists and hinders putrefaction, because it is
cold and dry: therefore in this, inanimate bodies, as flesh, Herbs, fruits, and
many other such like things, may be kept a long time without putrefaction.
Neither is it to be feared, that it should obstruct the pores, by reason of its
coldness, if the body be bathed in it: for it is of subtle parts, and the
spices boiled in it, have virtue to open.

Whosoever accounts it hurtful to wash his whole body therewith, let him
wash only his arme-holes, the region of his heart, his temples, groines, parts
of generation, as having great and mavelous sympathy with the principal and
noble parts.

If any mislike bathing, let him anoint himself with the following unguent.
Take oil of Roses, four ounces; oil of Spike, two ounces; of the powder of
Cinnamon An unguent.
and Cloves, of each one ounce and a half; of Benzoin, half an ounce; of
Musk, six grains; of Treacle, half a dram; of Venice Turpentine, one
dram and a half; of Wax, as much as shall suffice: make thereof a soft
unguent.

You may also drop a few drops of oil of Mastick, of Sage, or of Cloves, and
such like, into the ears, with a little Civet or Musk.

CHAP. IX. Of other things to be observed for prevention, in fear of the
Plague.
VENERY is chiefly to be eschewed, for by it the powers are debilitated, the
spirits dissipated, and the breathing places of the body diminished, Why venery
is to be shunned.
and lastly, all the strength of nature weakened. A sedentary life is to be
shunned, as also excess in diet, for hence proceeds obstruction, the
corruption of the juices, and preparation of the body to putrefaction and the
pestilence.

Women must be very careful that they have their courses duly, for stopping
besides the custom, they easily acquire corruption, and draw by contagion the
rest of the humors into their society. Such as have fistulous, or otherwise
old ulcers, must not heal them up in a pestilent season, for it is then more
convenient rather to make Running ulcers good in time of pestilence.
new ones, and these in convenient and declining places; that as by these
channels, the sink of the humors of the body may be emptied.

The Haemorrhoids, bleedings, and other the like accustomed evacuations, must
not be stopped, unless they exceed measure. Moreover, they must at such times
take heed that they touch or handle not any of these things wherein the seeds
or fuel of the pestilence may lie hid, such as are, hemp, flax, quilts and
coverings wherein such as have had the plague, have laid; skins and all
leathern things, hangings and clothes. You must dwell far from churchyards,
especially from those wherein the corpse of such as have died of the plague, are
not buried deep in the ground, as in the church Places to be shunned in time of
plague.
of the Innocents in Paris, in which place by the same reason it sundry times
happens that the buried bodies are plucked up, rent and torn by dogs. Also let
them dwell far from places of execution, shambles of flesh and fish, from
tanne-houses, diers, tallow-chandlers, cloth-dressers, farriers, skinners, and
from the places wherein metals are cast or wrought. The filth and dung,
especially of Swine, Privies, standing and muddy waters, and lastly all things
of the like evil smell, must be far remote from your habitation; the belly
must not be emptied into those places, into which the excrements of such as
have the plague are cast. The company of such as What company to be avoided.
usually visit those sick of the plague, must be eschewed, as of Physicians,
Apothecaries, Surgeons, Nurse-Keepers, Grave-makers and Bearers. For though
they have not the plague, yet coming forth of a pestilent place, they may
carry with them lying hid in their garments, the seeds thereof. You may gather
this by such as have for a little while stayed in a perfumers shop, for the
perfume diffused in the air, bestows the smell upon the garments of such
persons, so that gone from thence, such as meet them, will judge them to carry
perfumes with them. They shall also shun You must do nothing in a pestilent
season whereby you may grow too hot.
long watchings, sound sleeping, all passions of the mind, especially anger,
hunger, thirst, journying in the sun, for that has oft-times occasioned a
diary fever, which has not seldom been seen to turn into a pestilent one,
for by dilating the pores of the skin, they have given entrance to the
pestilent air, which by that means has easily taken hold of the humor
disposed to putrefaction.

CHAP. X. Of the office of Magistrates in the time of the Plague.
MAgistrates ought to have a special care that no filth be heaped up, either
in private or public places: let all things be kept neat in every house, and
let all the streets be kept clean, the dung and filth be carried forth of the
city, as also the dead carcasses of killed dogs and cats, for because Why dogs
and cats must be killed in a plague time.
they oft-times lick and devour the excrements of such as have the Sickness,
therefore they may by their familiar entry into sound houses, there propagate
the plague. Wherefore they must either be driven forth of the city, or killed,
and so be carried forth and buried deep in the ground. Wells, springs, and
rivers themselves, must be freed and cleansed from all impurity. Care must be
had that musty corn, tainted flesh, nor stinking fish be not set to sale.
Public bathes and hot-houses Why Bathes and hot-houses are not then to be
allowed.
must be prohibited, for that in these, men's bodies are weakened, and made
more yielding and pervious to the pestiferous air. They shall commit the cure
of such as have the plague, to learned, skillful and honest Physicians,
Apothecaries, and Surgeons.

Such as are known to have the plague, shall be separated from such as are
free therefrom, and be sent to such fit places as shall be provided for them;
for this is better and more humanely done, than to shut up every man in his
own house. They shall provide and foresee that the household stuff of such as
have the plague be not set to sale. They shall set signs and noted marks
upon the houses seized upon by this disease, lest they should unawares run into
danger. Wherefore to the same purpose they shall procure that the Surgeons and
others that visit the sick of the plague may be known by some conspicuous
mark, that such as pass by them may be admonished of the danger; they shall
also take care that the bodies of the dead be buried as speedily as may be. For
they sooner and more grievously putrefie in a short time, Such as dye of the
plague do quickly putrefi^
than the bodies of others of what death soever they die. Wherefore, neither
birds nor ravenous beasts dare once touch their bodies, though unburied, for by
tasting them they should quickly come to their deaths. The keepers of the gates
of the city shall be admonished, that they take special care that such as are
infected, or come from a visited place, do not enter into the city, for from
one, the evil may come to spread it self further, for one spark may set a
whole city on fire, and one scabby sheep infect a whole flock. And because
there is nothing which may more perfectly purge the air, and cleanse it from
all manner of noysomnesse and infection, than fire, they shall command that
there be kindled, and perpetually kept burning fires, made with odoriferous and
strong smelling things, as Juniper, Turpentine, Broom, and the like.

In stead hereof Levinus tells that the soldiers of the Garrison of Torney
used in a Plague time to discharge their Cannons laded only with Powder,
turning their Lib. 2. de occult ^at. mirac.
mouths upon the city, and that morning and evening, that by the vehemence of
the moved air, the pestiferous fogges might be chased away, and by the heat
of the burned powder, the venenate and noisome quality of the air might be
amended. Lastly, I judge it fit to admonish Magistrates that they have their
eics and minds The villainy of some ba^e people.
attentive upon a murderous and impious kind of bearers and nurse-keepers,
which allured with a desire of gain (which whilst the plague reigns, they get
abundantly) anoint the walls, doors, thresholds, knockers of gates and locks
with the filth and ointments taken from such as have the plague, that the
plague within a while after seazing upon these also, the masters of them flying
away, and the family dispersed, they may there reign alone, and freely and
without punishment carry thence what they please, oft-times strangling such as
lie ready to die, lest recovering, they might be their accusers. This I remember
happened at Lions, Anno Dom. 1565.

CHAP. XI. What caution must beeused in choosing Physicians, Apothecaries and
Surgeons, who may have care of such as are taken with the Plague.
IT is the part of Magistrates in the so great necessity of the afflicted
commonwealth, to appoint learned, skillful, and honest Physicians, Surgeons,
and Apothecaries, and such as have more regard to the law of God than to gain,
to have the care and cure of such as are visited. But principally let them not
take Surgeons and Apothecaries called by proclamation with sound of trumpet,
that if they will take this charge, they shall become free without examination
or reward. But let them rather be allured by gifts and honest rewards, not only
then when as necessity urges, but also after the plague is over. For such
servant Surgeons and Apothecaries as are called by proclamation, so to gain
freedom, are most commonly unskilful and unexperienced Dunces, who, conscious
of their own ignorance, and fearing to undergo the examination of the Masters
of their Companies, refuse no hazard, however dangerous, with desire to
obtain their freedom.

It is far worse and more dangerous to fall into the hands of such, than into
the hands of thieves and murderers, for these, by providence or strength, we
may chance to escape; but we seek for and embrace the other, and having found
them, lay our throats bare unto them, so by their unskilfulnesse to be
burchered. Certainly by the fault of the times, and the neglect of Magistrates,
it is almost come to this pass, that if any honest and learned Physicians and
Surgeons shall undertake this cure, they are commonly forced thereto by the
Magistrate for fear of banishment or fining. Therefore because they do it
against their wills, they show themselves less vigilant, cheerful and
painful about the sick. They come unwillingly and compelled hereto, because
by the memory of the forepast time, they sufficiently know, how sordide and
basely Magistrates, when the plague has been overpast, have bin in paying the
promised reward to men of their condition, who have sloutly run into danger;
for thence it happens that during the rest of their lives they may sit idle at
home, for that they are infamous and feared by the people only for this, that
a while agone they visited such as had the plague. Therefore I would have
Magistrates prudent, faithful, and free in choosing honest, learned and
skillful men, who may undergo this so difficult and dangerous a charge.

CHAP. XII. How such as undertake the cure of the Plague ought to arm
themselves.
FIrst they must think and hold for certain, that they are not called Our
lots are in the hands of the Lord.
to this office by men, but by God, so directing the counsels and actions of
men as he thinks fit. Therefore they shall confidently enter into the cure
thereof, for that our lot, life and death are in the hands of the Lord: but
notwithstanding they ought not to neglect remedies, which are given to men for
prevention, lest by neglecting the gifts of God, they may seem to neglect him
also that is the giver of so many good and excellent benefits. Therefore first
let them by purging and bleeding evacuate the humors subject to putrefaction,
and to conceive the seeds of the pestilence. Let them make two fontanella's by
application of Cauteries Where to make issues in the time of the Plague.
to be as rivelets to evacuate the excrementitious humors which are daily by
little and little heaped up in us; let one of them be in the right arm a
little below the muscle Epomis, the other the space of three fingers under the
knee on the inside of the left leg. This is found by experience a very
certain means of prevention. Let them wash their whole bodies with the
following lotion.. aquae ros. aceti rosati, aut sambucini, vini albi aut,
malvatici, an. lb. vi. rad. enulae camp. angelicae, gentian. bistortae, Zedoar.
an. iii. baccar. juniperi, and hederae, an. ii. salviae, rorismar. absinth.
rutae, an. m. i. corticis citri, ss. theriacae and mithridat. an i.
conquassanda conquassent. bulliant lento igni, and serventur ad usum ante
commemoratum. The Epithemes, unguents Cap 8.
and bags formerly described shall be applied to the region of the heart. I
have read it noted by John Baptist Theodosius, that amongst other things,
Arsenick may be profitably Epist. 2.
applied to the region of the heart, that so it may by little and little
accustom it self to poisons, that afterward it may be less harmed by their
incursion, first making their assault upon it.

Let their garments be made of Chamelet, Dutch sarge, Satin, Taffaty, or the
like. What to wear.
Or else if they cannot of these, let them be of some other handsome stuff,
but not of cloth, frieze or the like, that may take the venenate Air, and
carry it with them to the infection of the sound. They shall oft-times change
their clothes, shirts and other How to visit your patients.
linen, and perfume them with aromaticke things; let them warily approach to
the sick, more warily speak unto him, with their faces looking away from him,
rather than toward him, so that thy may not receive the breath of his mouth,
neither the vapor nor smell of any of his excrements.

When as I upon a time being called to visit one that lay sick of the plague,
came A history.
too near and heedlesly to him, and presently by sudden casting off the
clothes, laid him bare, that so I might the better view a Bubo that he had in
his right groine, and two Carbuncles that were on his belly, then presently a
thick, filthy and putride vapor arising from the broken abscesse of the
Carbuncle, as out of a raked puddle, ascended by my nostrils to my brain,
whereupon I fainted and fell down senseless upon the ground; raised up a
little after, all things seemed to me to run round; and I was ready to fall
again, but that I stayed my self by taking hold of the bed post. But one
thing comforted me, that there appeared no signs that my heart was affected,
either by pain or panting, or the strong and contumaciou failing of my powers.
An argument that the animal spirits were only dissipated by a venenate vapor,
and that the substance of the heart was no way wronged, was a sneesing which
took me so violently, that I sneesed ten times, and then fell a bleding at the
nose; which excretion, I believe freed me from all the impression of the
malignity. Let others warned by this mine example, learn to be wiser and more
wary in this case, lest they come to a worse mishap than befell me.

CHAP. XIII. Of the signs of such as are infected with the Plague.
WE must not stay so long before we pronounce one to have the Plague, until
there be pain and a tumor under his arm holes, or Whence certain signs of
the Plague may be taken.
in his groine, or spots (vulgarly called Tokens) appear over all the body, or
carbuncles arise: for many dye through the venenate malignity, before these
signs appear. Wherefore the chiefest and truest signs of this disease are to
be taken from the heart, being the mansion of life, which chiefly and first of
all is wont to be assailed by the force of the poison. Therefore they that are
infected with the Pestilence, are vexed with often swounings and fainting;
their pulse is feebler and flower than others, but sometimes more frequent, but
that is specially in the night season; they feel prickings over all their
body, as if it were the pricking of needles; but their nostrils do itch
especially by occasion of the malign vapors rising upwards from the lower and
inner, into the upper parts, their breast burns, their heart beats with
pain under the left dug, difficulty of taking breath, Ptissicke, Cough, pain
of the heart, and such an elation or puffing up of the Hypocondria or sides of
the Belly, distended with the abundance of vapors raised by the force of the
feverish heat, that the Patient will in a manner seem to have the Timpany.
They are molested with a desire to vomit, The cause of ^ such as have the
Plague.
and oftentimes with much and painful vomiting, wherein green and black matter
is seen, and always of diverse colors, answering in proportion to the
excrements of the lower parts, the stomach being drawn into a consent with the
heart, by reason of the vicinity and communion of the vessels; oftentimes blood
alone, and that pure, is excluded and cast up in vomiting; and it is not only
cast up by vomiting out of the stomach, but also very often out of the
nostrils, fundament, and in women out of the womb; the inward parts are often
burned, and the outward parts are stiff with cold, the whole heat of the
Patient being drawn violently inward, after the manner of a Cupping-glasse, by
the strong burning of the inner parts; then the eyelids waxeblew, ^ suddenly
changed.
as it were through some contusion, all the whole face has a horrid aspect,
and as it were the color of lead, the eyes are burning red, and as it were,
swollen or puffed up with Blood, or any other humor, shed tears; and to
conclude, the whole habit of the body is somewhat changed and turned yellow.

Many have a burning fever, which does show it self by the Patients ulcerated
jaws, unquenchable thirst, dryness and blackness of the tongue, and it causes
such a frenzy by inflaming the brain, that the patients running naked out of
their beds, seek to throw themselves out of windows into the pits and rivers
that are at hand. In some the joints of the body are so weakened, that they
cannot go nor stand, from the beginning they are as it were buried in a long
swoune and deep sleep, by reason Why some that ^e taken with the plague are
^eepy.
that the fever sends up to the brain the gross vapors from the crude and
cold humors, as it were from green Wood newly kindled to make a fire.

Such sleeping does hold him especially while the matter of the sore or
Carbuncle is drawn together, and begins to come to suppuration. Oftentimes
when they are awaked out of sleep, there do spots and marks appear
dispersed over the skin, with a stinking sweat. But if those vapors be sharp
that are stirred up unto the head, in stead of sleep they cause great waking,
and always there is much diversity of accidents in the urine of those that
are infected with the Plague, by reason of the diverse temperature and condition
of bodies: neither is the urine at all times, and in all men of the same
consistence and color: For sometimes they are like unto the urine of those
that are sound and in health, that is to say, laudable in color and substance,
because that when the heart is affected by the venomous Air, that enters in
unto it, Why their urine are like those that are ^^und.
the spirits are more greatly grieved and molested than the humors: but those,
i. the spirits, are infected and corrupted when these do begin to corrupt.

But Urines only show the dispositions of the humors or parts in which they
are made, collected together, and through which they pass.

This reason seems truer to me than theirs which say, that nature terrefied
with the malignity of the poison avoyds contention, and does not resist or
labor to digest the matter that causes the disease.

Many have their appetites so overthrown, that they can abstain from meat for
the space of three days together.

And to conclude, the variety of accidents is almost infinite, which appear and
spring up in this kind of disease, by reason of the diversity of the poison,
and condition of the bodies and grieved parts: but they do not all appear in
each man, but some in one, and some in another.

CHAP. XIIII. What signs in the Plague are mortal.
IT is a most deadly sign in the Pestilence, to have a continual and burning
Fever, to have the tongue dry, rough, and black, to breathe with difficulty,
and to draw in a great quantity of breath, but breathe out little; to talk
idely; to have frenzy and madness together, with unquenchable thirst and
great watching; to have Covulsions, the Hicket, heart-beating, and to swoune
very often and vehemently; further, tossing and turning in the bed, with a
loathing of meats, and daily vomits of a green, black and bloody color; and
the face pale, black, of a horrid and cruel aspect, bedewed with a cold
sweat, are very mortal signs.

There are some which at the very beginning have ulcerous and painful
weariness, An ulcerous and painful weariness from the beginning shows the
Plague to be deadly.
pricking under the skin, with great torment of pain; the eyes look cruelly
and staringly, the voice waxes hoarse, the tongue rough and stutting, and the
understanding decaying, the Patient utters and talks of frivolous things.
Truly those are very dangerously sick, no otherwise than those whose urine is
pale, black, and troubled like unto the urine of carriage beasts, or Lie, with
diverse colored clouds or contents, as blew, green, black, fatty and oily, as
also resembling in show a Spiders Web, with a round body swimming on the top.

If the flesh of the carbuncle be dry and black, as it were feared with a
hotiron, if the flesh about it be black and blew, if the matter do flow back,
and turn in, if they have a laske with greatly stinking, liquid, thin, clammy,
black, green or bluish ordure; if they avoid worms by reason of the great
corruption of the humors, and yet for all this the patient is never the
better; if the eyes wax often dim, if the nostrils be contracted or drawn
together, if they have a grievous crampe, the mouth be drawn aside, the
muscles of the face being drawn or contracted equally or unequally; if the
nails be black; if they be often troubled with the Hicket, or have a
Convulsion and resolution over all the body, then you may certainly
prognosticate that death is at hand, and you may use Cordial medicines only,
but it is too late to purge or let blood.

CHAP. XV. Signs of the Plague coming by contagion of the Air without any
fault of the humors.
YOU shall understand that the Pestilence proceeds from the corruption of the
air, if it be very contagious, and disperse it self into sundry places in a
moment. If it kill quickly and many, so that whilst sundry persons go about
their usual business, walk in the places of common resort and through the
streets, they suddenly fall down and dye, no sign of the disease or harm
appearing, nor any pain oppressing them; for the malignity of the corrupt Air
is quick and very speedy in infecting our spirits, overthrowing the strength of
the heart and killing the patient. The patients are not troubled with great
agitation, because the spirits dissipated by the rapid malignity of the poison,
Why they have no sores.
cannot endure that labor; besides they are taken with frequent swouning, few
of them have Bubo's, few have Blains come forth; and by the same reason their
urines are like to those of sound men.

CHAP. XVI. Signs of the Plague drawn into the body by the fault and
putrefaction of humors.
FOrmerly we have reckoned up the causes of the corruption of humors from
plenitude, obstruction, distemper, and the ill juice of meats. Now must we
deliver the signs of each corrupt humor which reigns in us, that it may be
reduced to soundness and perfection of nature by the opposition of its
contrary, or else be evacuated by physic. Therefore if the body be more
yellow than usual, it is a sign of choler offending in quantity and S^gnes of
choler.
quality. If more black, then of melancholy; if more pale, then of phlegm; if
more red, with the veins swollen up and full, then of blood. Also the color of
the rising blaines, tumors and spots, express the color of the predominant
humor, as also the excrements cast forth by vomit, stool and otherwise; the
heaviness and cheerfulness of the affected body; the manner of the present
fever; the time of the year, age, region, diet. Such things as have a cutting,
penetrating, attenuating, and cleansing faculty, take away obstruction. By
means of obstruction fevers oft-times accompany the Plague, and these not
only continual, but also intermitting, like tertians or quartaines. Therefore
that Plague that is fixed in the infection or corruption of a choleric
humor, shows it self by the forementioned signs of predominating choler, to
wit, the heat of the skin, blaines and excrements, as also in the quickness
of killing, and vehemence of the symptoms, bitterness of the mouth, a
painful and continual endeavor of going to stool, by reason of the acrimony
of choler stimulating and raking the guts in the passage forth. That which
resides in the corrupt substance of gross humors, as of blood, shows it
self by many and plentiful sweats, by a scowring, by which are avoided many
and various humors; and oft-times also bloody matter that proceeds from
corrupt phlegm, it invades with more sound sleep, and a causeless weariness of
all the members; when they are awakened out of their sleep, they are not
seldom troubled with a trembling over all their joints, the entrance and way
of the spirits into the members being obstructed by the grossness of the
humors. That which is seated in the corruption of a melancholy humor, is
accompanied with heaviness and pain of the head, much pensiveness, a deep
and small pulse. But the most certain sign of the Plague residing in the
corruption of the humors, is to be taken from the urine. For the signs of
the vitiated When the urine is to be looked upon.
humors cannot but show themselves in the urines: therefore troubled urines,
and such as are like those of carriage beasts, as also black and green, give
certain notice thereof. But some are much troubled with thirst, others not at
all, because choler or Phlegm sometimes only putrefie in the stomach or
orifice of the ventricle, Why some are much troubled with thirst, others not at
all.
sometimes besides they will weaken the government of the natural faculties
of the part, as of the appetite. But if the fever happen by the default and
infection both of the Air and Humors, then will there be a great confusion
of the forementioned signs and symptoms.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Prognostication that is to be instituted in the Plague.
YOU may well foretell the future motions and events of diseases, when you
thoroughly know the nature of the disease, and accidents thereof, and the
condition, function, and excellency of the body and grieved parts: Although
that this may be spoken in general, That there is no certain No certain
prediction in t^ Pla^*
prediction in pistilent diseases, either to health or death, for they have
very unconstant motions, sometimes swift and quick, sometimes slow, and
sometimes choking or suffocating in a moment, while one breathes in the
venomous Air, as he is going about any of his necessary affairs, having
pustles rising in the skin with sharp pain, and as though the whole body were
pricked all over with needles, or the stings of Bees. Which I have seen with
mine eyes in the Plague that was at Lions when Charles the French King lay
there. It many times comes to pass that the accidents that were very vehement
and raging a little before, are suddenly assuaged, and the patients do think
themselves better, or almost perfectly sound. Which happened A history.
to Mary one of the Queene-Mother her Mayds, in that notable pestilent
constitution of the Air, that year when Charles the French King lay at the
Castle of Rossilion: For when she was infected, a great tumor or Bubo arose in
her groine, and suddenly it went in again, so that the third day of her
sickness, she said she was without any grief or disease at all, but that she
was somewhat troubled with a difficulty of making water; and I think it was
because the bladder was enflamed by the refluxe of the matter; but she was
sound in mind and body, and walked up and down the Chamber on the same day
that she died. The strangeness of which thing made the King so fearful, that
he hasted to depart thence.

Although this disease does spare no man, of what age, temperature, complexion,
Why young men sooner take the Plague than old.
diet and condition soever, yet it assaulteth young men that are choleric and
sanguine, more often than old men that are cold and dry, in whom the moisture
that is the nourisher of putrefaction by reason of their age is consumed, and
the ways, passages and pores of the skin, whereby the venomous Air should
enter and pierce in, are more strait and narrow. And moreover, because old men
do always stay at home, but young men for their necessary business, and also
for their delight and pleasure, are always abroad in the day time, in the
Air, where-hence the pollution of the pestilence comes more often.

That pestilence that comes by the corruption of the humors, is not so
contagious What Plague most contagious.
as that which comes by the default of the Air. But those that are
phlegmatic and melancholy, are most commonly grieved with that kind of
pestilence, because in them the humors are more clammy and gross, and their
bodies more cold and less perspirable, for which causes the humors sooner and
more speedily putrefie.

Men that are of an ill juice are also most apt to this kind of pestilence,
for in the naughty quality of the juice there is a great preparation of the
humors unto putrefaction: You may know it by this, that when the pestilence
reigns, there are no other diseases among the common people, which have their
original of any ill juice, but they all degenerate into the Plague. Therefore
when they begin to appear and wander up and down, it is a token that the
pestilence will shortly cease, or is almost at an end.

But here also I would have you to understand those to be of an ill juice,
which have no pores in their skin, by which, as it were by rivers, the evil
juice which is contrary to nature, may be evacuated and purged. And I have
noted and observed, Who least subject to take the Plague,
that those are less in danger of the Pestilence which have cancerous ulcers
and stinking sores in their noses, and such as infected with the French Pocks,
have by reason thereof, tumors and rotten ulcers, or have the Kings evil
running upon them, the Leprosy or the Scab: and to conclude, all those that
have fistulous and running ulcers in their bodies.

I think those that have quartaine Fevers are the better privileged for the
same, because that by the Fit causing sweat, that comes every fourth day,
they avoid much of the evil juice that was engendered.

This is more like to be true, than to think that the poison that comes
from without, may be driven away by that which lurketh within.

Contrariwise, women that are great with child, as I have noted, because they
have much ill juice, being prohibited from their accustomed evacuations, are
very apt to Who subject thereto.
take this disease, and do seldom recover after they are infected.

Black or blew impostumes, and spots and pustles of the same color, dispersed
Signs that the disease is incurable. A good sign.
over the skin, argue that the disease is altogether incurable and mortal.

When the swelling or sore goes or comes before the fever, it is a good
sign, for it declares that the malignity is very weak and feeble, and that
nature has overcome it, which of it self is able to drive so great portion
thereof from the inner pars. But if the sore or tumor come after the fever,
it is a mortal and deadly sign, for it A deadly sign.
is certain that it comes of the venomous matter not translated, but
dispersed, not by the victory of nature, but through the multitude of the
matter, with the weight whereof nature is overcome.

When the Moon decreaseth, those that are infected with the Pestilence are in
great doubt and danger of death, because then the humors that were collected
and gathered together before the full of the Moon, through delay and
abundance, do swell the more, and the faculties by which the body is governed,
become more weak and feeble, because of the imbecility of the native heat,
which before was nourished and augmented by the light, and so consequently by
the heat of the full Moon: For as it is noted by Aristotle, the wainings of the
Moon are more cold and weak: and thence it is that women have their menstruall
fluxes chiefly or most commonly at that time.

In a gross and cloudy Air the pestilent infection is less vehement and
contagious than in a thin and subtle Air; whether that thinness of the Air
proceed from the In wh^t air most contagious.
heat of the Sun, or from the North wind and cold. Therefore at Paris, where
naturally, and also through the abundance of filth that is about the City, the
Air is dark and gross, the pestilent infection is less fierce and
contagious than it is in Province, for the subtlety of the Air stimulates or
helps forward the Plague.

But this disease is mortal and pernicious wheresoever it be, because it
suddenly assaulteth the heart, which is the Mansion, or as it were the
fortress or castle of life: but commonly not befo^ signs and tokens of it
appear on the body: and yet you shall scarce find any man that thinks of
calling the Physician to help to preserve him from so great danger before the
signs thereof be evident to be seen and felt: but then the heart is
assaulted. And when the heart is so assaulted, what hope of life is there, or
health to be looked for? Therefore because medicines come oft-times too late,
and this malady is as it were a sudden and winged messenger of our What effects
fear and confidence produce in the Plague.
death, it comes to pass that so many dye thereof. And moreover, because at
the first suspicion of this so dire and cruel a disease, the imagination and
mind (whose force in the diversely stirring up of the humors is great and
almost incredible) is so troubled with fear of imminent death, and despair of
health, that together with the perturbed humors, all the strength and power of
nature falls and sinketh down.

This you may perceive and know, by reason that the keepers of such as are
sick, and the bearers which are not fearful, but very confident, although
they do all the basest offices which may be for the sick, are commonly not
infected, and seldom dye thereof if infected.

CHAP. XVIII. How a pestilent fever comes to be bred in us.
THe Plague oft-times finds fuel in our bodies, and oft-times allurements, to
wit, the putrefaction of humors, or aptness to putrefie: but it never thence
has its first original, for that comes always from the defiled air; The
original of the Plague always from the Air.
therefore a pestilent fever is thus bred in us: The pestilent Air drawn by
inspiration into the lungs, and by transpiration into the utmost mouths of the
veins and arteries spread over the skin, the blood or else the humors already
putrefying or apt to putrefie therein, are infected and turned into a certain
kind of malignity resembling the nature of the agent. These humors, like
unquencht lime when it is first sprinkled with water, send forth a putride
vapor, which carried to the principal parts and heart especially, infecteth
the spirituous blood boiling in the ventricles thereof, and therewith also the
vital spirits; and hence proceeds a certain feverish heat. This heat
diffused over the body by the arteries, together with a malign quality, taints
all, even the solid parts of the bones with the pestiferous venom, and
besides, causes diverse symptoms, according to the nature thereof, and the
condition of the body and humors wherein it is. Then is the conflict of the
malignity assailing, and nature defending, manifest, in which if nature
prevail, it, using the help of the expulsive faculty, will send and drive it
far from the noble parts, either by sweats, vomits, bleeding, evacuation by
stool or urine, buboes, carbuncles, pustles, spots, and other such kinds of
breakings out over the skin. But on the contrary, if the Signs that natuee is
o^^come.
malignity prevail, and nature be too weak, and yield, and that first he be
troubled with often panting or palpitation of the heart, then presently after
with frequent faintings, the patient then at length will dye. For this is a
great sign of the Plague or a pestilent Fever, if presently at the first,
with no labor, nor any evacuation worth the speaking of, their strength fail
them, and they become exceeding faint. You may find the other signs mentioned
in our preceding discourse.

CHAP. XIX. Into what place the Patient ought to betake himself so soon as he
finds himself infected.
WE have said that the perpetual and first original of the pestilence Change
of the Air ^ondu^^^h to the cure of the Plague.
comes of the Air, therefore so soon as one is blasted with the pestiferous
Air, after he has taken some preservative against the malignity thereof, he
must withdraw himself into some wholesome Air, that is, clean and pure from
any venomous iufection or contagion, for there is great hope of health by the
alteration of the Air; for we do most frequently and abundantly draw in the
Air of all things, so that we cannot want it for a minute of time: therefore
of the Air that is drawn in, depends the correction, amendment, or increase
of the Poison or malignity that is received, as the Air is pure, sincere or
corrupted.

There be some that do think it good to shut the patient in a close Chamber,
shutting the windows to prohibit the entrance of the Air as much as they are
able: But I think it more convenient that those windows should be open from
whence that wind blows that is directly contrary unto that which brought in
the venomous Air: For although there be no other cause, yet if the Air be
not moved, or Air pen^ up is apt to putre^.
agitated, but shut up in a close place, it will soon be corrupted. Therefore
in a close and quiet place that is not subject to the entrance of the Air, I
would wish the patient to make wind, or to procure Air with a thick and great
cloth dipped or macerated in water and vinegar mixed together, and tied to a
long Staff, that by tossing it up and down the close chamber, the wind or
air thereof may cool and recreate the patient. The patient must every day be
carried into a fresh chamber, and the beds and the linen clothes must be
changed: there must always be a clear and bright fire in the patients
chamber, and especially in the night, whereby the air may be made more pure,
clean, and void of nightly vapors, and of the filthy and pestilent breath
proceeding from the patient, or his excrements. In the mean time, lest (if it
be in hot weather) the patient should be weakened or made more faint by reason
that the heat of the fire does disperse and wast his spirits, the Floor or
ground of the chamber must be sprinkled or watered with vinegar and water, or
strowed with the branches of vines made moist in cold water, with the leaves
and flowers of Water-lillyes, or Poplar, or such like. In the fervent heat of
summer he must abstain from Fumigations that do smell too strongly, because
that by assaulting the head, they increase the pain.

If the patient could go to that cost, it were good to hang all the chamber
where he lies, and also the Bed, with thick or course linen clothes
moistened in vinegar and water of Roses. Those linen clothes ought not to be
very white, but somewhat brown, because much and great whiteness does
disperse the sight, and by wasting the spirits, does increase the pain of the
head: for which cause also the Chamber ought not to be very lightsome.

Contrariwise, on the night season there ought to be fires and perfumes made,
which by their moderate light, may moderately call forth the spirits.

Sweet fires may be made of little pieces of the wood of Juniper, Broom, Ash,
Tamarisk, of the rind of Oranges, Lemmons, Cloves, Benzoin, gum Arabic, Orris
The materials for sweet fires.
roots, Mirrhe, grossly beaten together, and laid on the burning coals put
into a chafing dish. Truly the breath or smoke of the wood or berries of
Juniper, is thought to drive serpents a great way from the place where it is
burnt. The virtue of the Ash-tree against venom is so great, as Pliny
testifies, that a serpent will not come under the shadow thereof, no not in
the morning nor evening, when the shadow of any Lib 16. cap 13.
thing is most great and long, but she will run from it. I my self have
proved that if a circle or compass be made with the boughs of an Ash-tree,
and a fire made in the midst thereof, and a serpent put within the compass of
the boughs, that the serpent will rather run into the fire than through the
Ash boughs.

There is also another means to correct the Air. You may sprinkle vinegar of
the decoction of Rue, Sage, Rosemary, Bay berries, Juniper berries, Cyperus
nuts, and such like, on stones or bricks made red hot, and put in a pot or pan,
that all the whole chamber where the patient lies may be perfumed with the
vapor thereof.

Also fumigations may be made of some matter that is more gross and clammy,
that by the force of the fire the fume may continue the longer, as of Ladanum,
Perfumes.
Myrrh, Masticke, Rosine, Turpentine, Storax, Olibanum, Benzoin, Bay berries,
Juniper berries, Cloves, Sage, Rosemary, and Marjoram, stamped together, and
such like.

Those that are rich and wealthy may have Candles and Fumes made of wax, or
Tallow mixed with some sweet things. Sweet candles.


A sponge macerated in Vinegar of Roses, and Water of the same, and a little of
the decoction of Cloves, and of Camphire added thereto, ought always to be
ready at the patients hand, that by often smelling unto it, the animal spirits
may be recreated and strengthened.

The water following is very effectual for this matter. Take of Orris, four
ounces; of Zedoarie, Spikenard, of each six drammes; of Storax, Benzoin,
Cinnamon, A sweet water to smell to.
Nutmegs, Cloves, of each one ounce and a half; of old Treacle, half an
ounce: bruise them into a gross powder, and macerate them for the space of
twelve hours in four pound of white and strong wine, then distill them in a
Limbeck of glass on hot ashes, and in the distilled liquor wet a sponge, and
then let it be tied in a linen cloth, or closed in a box, and so often put
unto the nostrills. Or take of the vinegar and water of roses, of each four
ounces; of Camphire, six grains; of Treacle, half a dram: let them be
dissolved together, and put into a vial of glass, which the patient may often
put unto his nose.

This Nodula following is more meet for this matter. Take of Rose leaves, two A
Nodula to smell to.
pugils; of Orris half an ounce; of Calamus Aromaticus, Cynamon, Cloves, of
each two drammes; of Storax and Benzoin, of each one dram and a half; of
Cyperus, half a dram: beat them into a gross powder, make thereof a Nodula
between two pieces of Cambricke or Lawne of the bigness of an hand-ball, then
let it be moistened in eight ounces of Rose water, and two ounces of Rose
vinegar, and let the patient smell unto it often. These things must be varied
according to the time: For in the Summer you must use neither Musk nor Civet,
nor such like hot things: and moreover women that are subject to fits of the
Mother, and those that have Fevers or the headache, ought not to use those
things that are so strong smelling and hot, but you must make choice of things
more gentle: Therefore things that are made with a little Camphire and Cloves
bruised and macerated together in Rose water and vinegar of Roses, shall be
sufficient.

CHAP. XX. What Diet ought to be observed, and first of the choice of Meat.
THe order of diet in a pestilent disease ought to be cooling and drying; not
slender, but somewhat full. Because by this kind of disease there comes
wasting of the spirits, and exolution of the faculties, which infers often
swouning, therefore that loss must be repaired as soon Why such as have the
plague may feed more fully.
as may be with more quantity of meats that are of easy concoction and
digestion. Therefore I never saw any being infected with the pestilence that
kept a slender diet, that recovered his health, but died; and few that had a
good stomach, and fed well, dyed.

Sweet, gross, moist and clammy meats, and those which are altogether, and
exquisitely of subtle parts, are to be avoided; for the sweet do easily take
fire, and are soon enflamed; the moist will putrefie; the gross and clammy
obstruct, and therefore engender putrefaction; those meats that are of subtle
parts, overmuch attenuate the humors, and inflame them, and do stir up hot
and sharp vapors into the brain, whereof comes a Fever. Therefore we must
eschew Garlike, Onions, Mustard, salted and spiced Meats, and all kind of Pulse
must also be avoided, because Pulse must be shunned.
they engender gross winds, which are the authors of obstruction: but the
decoction of them is not always to be refused, because it is a provoker of
urine. Therefore The manner of diet.
let this be their order of diet: let their bread be of Wheat or Barley, well
wrought, well leavened and salted, neither too new nor too stale: let them be
fed with such meat as may be easily concocted and digested, and may engender
much laudable juice, and very little excrementall, as are the flesh of
Wether-lambs, Kids, Leverets, Pullets, Pattridges, Pigeons, Thrushes, Larkes,
Quails, Blacke-Birds, Turtle-Doves, Moor-Hennes, Pheasants, and such like,
avoiding water-Fowles. Let the Flesh be moistened in Ver-juice of unripe
Grapes, Vinegar, or the juice of Lemmons, Oranges, Cytrons, tart Pomegranates,
Barberries, Goose-berries, or red Currance, or of garden, and wild sorrel: for
all these sour things are very wholesome in this kind of disease, for they
do stirreup the appetite, resist the venomous quality and putrefaction of the
humors, restrain the heat of the Fever, and prohibit the corruption of the
meats in the stomach. Although that those that have a more weak stomach,
and are endued with a more exact sense, and are subject to the Cough and
diseases of the Lungs, must not use these, unless they be mixed with Sugar and
Cynamon.

If the patient at any time be fed with sodden meats, let the brothes be made
with Lettuce, Purslaine, Succory, Borage, Sorrel, Hops, Buglosse, Cresses,
Burnet, Marigolds, Chervill, the cooling Seeds, french Barley and Oatmeale, with
a little Saffron, for Saffron does engender many spirits, and resists poison.
To these opening roots may be added for to avoid obstruction; yet much broth
must be refused by reason of moisture. The fruit of Capers eaten in the
beginning of the Meal provoke the appetite, and prohibit obstructions, but
they ought not to be seasoned with overmuch Oil and Salt, they may also with
good success be put into Broaths.

Fishes are altogether to be avoided, because they soon corrupt in the Stomach:
but if the patient be delighted with them, those that live in stony places must
be chosen, that is to say, those that live in pure and sandy water, and about
rocks and stones, as are Trouts, Pikes, Pearches, Gudgions, and Cravises boiled
in milk, Wilks, and such like. And concerning Seafish, he may be fed with
Giltheads, Gurnarts, with all the kinds of Cod-fish, Whitings not seasoned with
salt, and Turbuts.

Eggs potched and eaten with the juice of Sorrel, are very good. Likewise
Barley water seasoned with the grains of a tart Pomegranate, and if the Fever
be vehement, with the seeds of white Poppy. Such Barley water is easy to be
concocted and digested, it cleanses greatly, and moistens and mollifieth the
belly. But in some it procures an appetite to vomit, and pain of the head, and
those must abstain from it. But instead of barley water they may use pap, and
bread crummed in the decoction of a Capon.

For the second course, let him have raisons of the Sun newly sodden in Rose
water with Sugar, sour Damask Prunes, tart Cherries, Pippins, and Katharine
For the second course.
Pears.

And in the latter end of the Meal, Quinces roasted in the Embers, Marmelate
of Quinces, and conserves of Buglosse or of Roses, and such like, may be taken:
or else In the end of the meal*
this powder following.

Take of Coriander seeds prepared, two drams; of Pearl, Rose leaves, shavings
of Hatts-horne and Ivory, of each half a dram; of Amber two scruples; of
Cinnamon one scruple; of Unicornes horn, and the bone in a Stagges heart, of
each half a scruple; of Sugar of Roses, four ounces: Make thereof a powder,
and use it after meats.

If the patient be somewhat weak, he must be fed with Gelly made of the flesh
of a Capon, and Veale sodden together in the water of Sorrel, Carduus
benedictus, with a little quantity of Rose vinegar, Cynamon, Sugar, and other
such like, as the present necessity shall seem to require.

In the night season for all events and mischances, the patient must have ready
prepared broth of meats of good digestion, with a little of the juice of
Citrons or Pomegranates.

This restaurative that follows may serve for all. Take of the conserve of
Buglosse, Borage, Violets, Water Lillies, and Succory, of each two ounces; of
the powder A restaurative drink.
of the Electuary Diamargaritum Frigidum, of the Trochisces of Camphire, of
each three drams: of Citron seeds, Carduus seeds, Sorrel seeds, the roots of
Diptamnus, Tormentill, of each two drammes; of the broth of a young Capon,
made with Lettuce, Purslaine, Buglosse and Borage boiled in it, six pints,;
put them in a Lembecke of glass with the flesh of two Pullets, of so many
Partridges, and with fifteen leaves of pure gold: make thereof a destillation
over a soft fire. Then take of the distilled liquor, half a pint, strain it
through a woollen bag, with two ounces of white Sugar, and half a dram of
Cynamon: let the patient use this when he is thirsty. Or else put the flesh of
one old Capon, and of a leg of Veale, two minced Partridges, and two drammes
of whole Cinnamon without any liquor, in a lemb^^ke of glass, well luted and
covered, and so let them boil in Balneo Mariae unto the perfect concoction.
For so the fleshes will be boiled in their own juice, without any hurt of the
fire; then let the juice be pressed out therehence with a press: give the
patient for every dose, one ounce of the juice with some cordial waters, some
Trisantalum, and Diamargaritum frigidum.

The preserves of sweet fruits are to be avoided, because that sweet things
turn into choler; but the confection of tart prunes, Cherries, and such like
may be fitly used. But because there is no kind of sickness that so weakens
the strength, as the plague; it is always necessary, but yet sparingly and
often, to feed the patient, still having respect unto his custom, age, the
region, and the time: for through emptiness there is great danger, lest that
the venomous matter that is driven out to the superficial parts of the body,
should be called back into the inward parts, by an hungry stomach, and the
stomach it self should beefilled with choleric, hot, thin, and sharp
excrementall humors, whereof comes biting of the stomach, and gripings in
the guts.

CHAP. XXI. What drink the Patient infected ought to use.
IF the fever be great and burning, the patient must abstain from wine,
unless that he be subject to swouning: and he may drink the Oxymel following
in stread thereof.

Take of fair water, three quarts, wherein boil four ounces An Oxymel*
of honey until the third part be consumed, scumming it continually; then
strain it, and put it into a clean vessel, and add thereto four ounces of
vinegar, and as much cinnamon as will suffice to give it a taste. Or else a
sugared water, as follows. Take two quarts of fair water, of hard sugar, six
ounces, of cinnamon, two ounces, strain it through a woollen bag or cloth
without any boiling; and when the patient will use it, put thereto a little of
the juice of Citrons. The syrup of the juice of Citrons excels amongst all
others that are used against the pestilence.

The use of the Julep following is also very wholesome. Take of the juice of
Sorrel A Julep.
well clarified, half a pint, of the juice of Lettuce so clarified, four
ounces, of the best hard sugar, one pound, boil them together to a perfection,
let them be strained and clarified, adding a little before the end a little
vinegar, let it be used between meals with boiled water, or with equal
portions of the water of Sorrel, Lettuce, Scabious and Buglosse: or take of
this former described Julep strained and clarified four ounces, let it be
mixed with one pound of the forenamed cordial waters, and boil them together
a little. And when they are taken from the fire, put thereto of yellow Sanders
one dram, of beaten Cinnamon half a dram, strain it through a cloth: when it is
cold let it be given the patient to drink with the juice of Citrons.

Those that have accustomed to drink Sider, Perry, Beer or Ale, ought to use
that drink still, so that it be clear, transparent, and thin, and made of those
fruits that are somewhat tart; for troubled and dreggish drink does not only
engender gross humors, but also crudities, windiness, and obstructions of the
first region of the body, whereof comes a fever.

Oxycrate being given in manner following, does assuage the heat of the fever,
The commodities of oxycrate.
and repress the putrefaction of the humors, and the fierceness of the
venom, and also expels the water through the veins, if so be that the
patients are not troubled To whom hurtful,
with spitting of blood, cough, yexing, and altogether weak of stomach: for
such must avoid all tart things.

Take of fair water, one quart; of white or red vinegar three ounces; of fine
Sugar, four ounces; of syrup of Roses, two ounces: boil them a little, and
then give the patient there of to drink. Or take of the juice of Lemmons and
Citrons, of each half an ounce; of juice of sour Pomegranates, two ounces; of
the water of Sorrel and Roses, of each one ounce; of fair water boiled, as
much as shall suffice: make thereof a Julep, and use it between meals. Or
take of Sirupe of Lemmons and of red Currance, of each one ounce; of the water
of lillies, four ounces; of fair water boiled, half a pint; make thereof a
Julep. Ortake of the syrups of water Lillies, and vinegar, of each half an
ounce, dissolve it in five ounces of the water of Sorrel; of fair water one
pint: make thereof a Julep.

But if the patient be young, and have a strong and good stomach, and
choleric The drinking of cold water, to whom and when profitable.
by nature, I think it not unmeet for him to drink a full and large draught
of fountain water cold; for that is effectual to restrain and quench the
heat of the Fever, and contrariwise, they that drink cold water often, and a
very small quantity at a time, as the Smith does sprinkle water on the fire at
his Forge, do increase the heat and burning, and thereby make it endure the
longer. Therefore by the judgment of Celsus, when the disease is in the chief
increase, and the patient has endured thirst for Lib. 3. cap. 7.
the space of three or four days, cold water must be given unto him in great
quantity, so that he may drink past his satiety, that when his belly and
stomach are filled beyond measure, and sufficiently cooled, he may vomit.

Some do not drink so much thereof as may cause them to vomit, but do drink
even unto satiety, and so use it for a cooling medicine; but when either of
these is done, the patient must be covered with many clothes, and so placed
that he may sleep; and for the most part, after long thirst and watching, and
after long fullness, and long and great heat, sound sleep comes, by which
great sweat is sent out, and that is a present help.

But thirst must sometimes be quenched with little pieces of Melons, Gourds,
Cucumbers, with the leaves of Lettuce, Sorrel, and Purslaine, made moist or
soked in cold water, or with a little square piece of a Citron, Lemmon, or
Orange macerated in Rose water, and sprinkled with Sugar, and so held in the
mouth, and then changed.

But if the patient be aged, his strength weak, phlegmatic by nature, and given
to wine, when the state of the Fever is somewhat past, and the chief heat
beginning to assuage, he may drink wine very much allayed at his meat, for to
restore his strength, and to supply the want of the wasted spirits. The patient
ought not by any means to suffer great thirst, but must mitigate it by
drinking, or else allay it by washing his mouth with oxycrate and such like,
and he may therein also wash his hands and his face, for that does recreate the
strength. If the flux or lask trouble him, he may very well use to drink
steeled water, and also boiled milk, wherein many stones coming red hot out
of the fire have been many times quenched. For the dryness and For dryness
or roughness of the mouth.
roughness of the mouth, it is very good to have a cooling, moistening and
lenifying lotion of the mucilaginous water of the infusion of the leeds of
Quinces, psilium, id est, Flea-wort, adding thereto a little Camphire, with the
Water of Plantain and Roses; then cleanse and wipe out the filth, and then
moisten the mouth, by holding therein a little oil of sweet Almonds mixed
with a little syrup of Violets. If the roughness breed or degenerate into
Ulcers, they must be touched with the water of For the Ulcers thereof.
the infusion of sublimate, or Aqua fortis.

But because we have formerly made frequent mention of drinking of water, I
have here thought good to speak somewhat of the choice and goodness of
waters. The choice of waters is not to be neglected, because a great part of
our diet depends thereon, for besides that we use it either alone, or mixed
with wine for drink, we also The choice of waters.
knead bread, boil meat, and make broaths therewith. Many think that rain
water which falls in summer, and is kept in a cisterne well placed and made, is
the wholesomest of all. Then next thereto they judge that spring water which
runs out of the tops of mountains, through rocks, cliffes and stones: in the
third place they put Well water, or that which rises from the foots of hills.
Also the river water is good that is taken out of the midst or stream. Lake or
pond water is the worst, especially if it stand still; for such is fruitful of
and stored with many venomous creatures, as Snakes, Toads, and the like. That
which comes by the melting of Snow and Ice is very ill, by reason of the too
refrigerating faculty and earthy nature. But of spring and well waters these
are to be judged the best, which are insipide, without smell, and color; such
as are clear, warmish in winter, and cold in summer, which are quickly hot and
quickly cold, that is, which are most light, in which all manner pulse,
turnips, and the like, are easily and quickly boiled. Lastly, when as such as
usually drink Hip. sect. 5. aphor. 26.
thereof, have clear voices and shrill, their chests sound, and a lively and
fresh color in their faces.

CHAP. XXII. Of Antidotes to be used in the Plague.
NOw we must treat of the proper cure of this disease, which must be used as
soon as may be possible, because this kind of poison in swiftness exceeds
the celerity of the medicine. Therefore it is better to err in this, that you
should think every disease to be pestilent in a pestilent season, and to cure
it as the Pestilence: because that so long as the Air is polluted with the
seeds of the Pestilence, the humors in the body are soon infected with the
vicinity of such an air, so that then there happens no disease void of the
Pestilence, that is to say, which is not pestilent from the beginning by his
own nature, or which is not made pestilent.

Many begin the cure with bloodletting, some with purging, and some with
Antidotes. The beginning of the cu^ must be by antidotes.
We, taking a consideration of the substance of that part that is assaulted,
first of all begin the cure with an Antidote, because that by its specificke
property, it defends the heart from poison, as much as it is offended
therewith. Although there are also other Antidotes which preserve and keep the
heart and the patient from the danger of Poison and the Pestilence, not only
because they do infringe the power of the poison in their whole substance, but
also because they drive and expel it out of all the body by sweat, vomiting,
scowring, and such other kinds of evacuations.

The Antidote must be given in such a quantity as may be sufficient to
overcome In what quantity they must be taken.
the poison; but because it is not good to use it in greater quantity than
needs, lest it should overthow our nature, for whose preservation only it is
used, therefore that which cannot be taken together and at once, must be
taken at several times, that some portion thereof may daily be used so long,
until all the accidents, effects and impressions of the poison be past, and
that there be nothing to be feared. Some of Why poisonous things are put into
Antidotes.
those Antidotes consist of portions of venomous things, being tempered
together, and mixed in an apt proportion with other medicines, whose power is
contrary to the venom: as Treacle, which has for an ingredient the flesh of
Vipers, that it being thereto mixed may serve as a guide to bring all the
antidote unto the place where the venenate malignity has made the chief
impression; because by the similitude of nature and sympathy, one poison is
suddenly snatched and carried unto another. There are other absolute poisonous,
which nevertheless are Antidotes one unto another: Some poisons Antidotes to
othersome.
as a Scorpion himself cures the prick of a Scorpion. But Treacle and
Mithridate excel all other Antidotes: for by strengthening the noblest part,
and the mansion of life, they repair and recreate the wasted Spirits, and
overcome the poison, not only being taken inwardly, but also applied outwardly
to the region of the heart, Botches and Carbuncles: for by an hidden property
they draw the poisons unto them, as Amber does Chafe, and digest it when it is
drawn, and spoil and rob it of all its deadly force; as it is declared at
large by Galen, in his book de Theriaca ad Pisonem, by most true reasons and
experiments. But you will say that these things are hot, and that the Plague is
often accompanied with a burning Fever. But thereto I answer, there is not so
great danger in the Fever as in the Pestilence, although in the giving of
Treacle, I would not altogether seem to neglect the Fever, but think it good
to minister or apply it mixed with cordial cooling medicines, as with the
Trochisces of Camphire, syrup of Lemons, of water Lillies, the water of
Sorrel, and such like. And for the same cause we ought not to choose old
Treacle, but that which is of a middle age, as of one or two years old: to
those that are stong, you may give half a dram, and to those that are more
weak, a dram.

The patient ought to walk presently after that he has taken Treacle,
Mithridate, How to walk after the taking of an Antidote.
or any other Antidote; but yet as moderately as he can: not like unto many,
which when they perceive themselves to be infected, do not cease to course
and run up and down, until they have no strength to sustain their bodies,
for so they dissolve nature, so that it cannot suffice to overcome the
contagion. After moderate walking, the patient must be put warm to bed, and
covered with many clothes, and warm brick-bats or tiles applied to the soles of
his feet; or in stead thereof you may use swines bladders filled with hot
water, and apply them to the groines and arme-holes, to provoke sweat: for
sweating in this disease is a most excellent remedy, both for to evacuate the
humors in the Fever, and also to drive forth the malignity in the Pestilence,
although every sweat brings not forth the fruit of health. For George Agricola
says, that he saw a woman at Misnia in Germany, that did sweat so for the
space of three days, that the blood came forth at her head and breast, and yet
nevertheless she died.

This potion following will provoke sweat. Take the roots of China shaved in
thin pieces one ounce and half; of Guajacum two ounces; of the bark of
Tamariske A sudo^ifick potion.
one ounce; of Angelica roots two drams; of the shaving of Hats-horne one
ounce; of Juniper berries three drams; put them into a vial of glass that will
contain six quarts, put thereto four quarts of running or river water that is
pure and clear, macerate them for the space of one whole night on the hot
ashes: and in the morning boil them all in Balneo Mariae, until the half be
consumed, which will be done in the space of six hours; then let them be
strained through a bag, and then strained again, but let that be with six
ounces of sugar of Roses, and a little Treacle: let the patient take eight
ounces or fewer of that liquor, and it will provoke sweat. The powder following
is also very profitable. Take of the leaves of Dictamnus, A sudorifick powder.
the roots of Tormentill, Betony, of each half an ounce, of bole Armenicke
prepared one ounce, of Terra Sigillata three drams, of Aloes and Myrrh, of
each half a dram, of Saffron one dram, of Masticke two drams: powder them all
according to art, and give one dram thereof dissolved in Rose Water, or the
water of wild sorrel, and let the patient walk so soon as he has taken that
powder; then let him be laid in his bed to sweat as I have showed before.

The water following is greatly commended against poison. Take the roots of A
distilled water against the Plague.
Gentian and Cyperus, of each three drams; of Carduus benedictus, Burnet, of
each one handful; of Sorrel seeds and Divels-bit, of each two pugils; of Ivy
and Juniper berries, of each half an ounce; of the flowers of Buglosse,
Violets and red Roses, of each two pugils: powder them somewhat grossly, then
soake or steep them for a night in white wine and Rose water: then add
thereto of bole Armenick one ounce, of Treacle half an ounce, distill them all
in Balneo Mariae, and keep the distilled liquor in a vial of glass well
covered or close stopped for your use: let the patient take six ounces thereof
with Sugar and a little Cinnamon and Saffron: then let him walk, and then sweat
as is aforesaid: the Treacle and cordial water formerly prescribed are very
profitable for this purpose. Also the water following is greatly commended.
Take of Sorrel six handfuls, of Rue one handful: dry them and macerate them
in vinegar for the space of four and twenty hours, adding thereto four
ounces of Another.
Treacle: make thereof a distillation in Balneo Mariae, and let the distilled
water be kept for your use; and so soon as the patient does think himself
to be infected, let him take four ounces of that liquor, then let him walk
and sweat. He must leave sweating when he begins to wax faint and weak,
or when the humor that What mean to be used in sweating
runs down his body begins to wax cold, then his body must be wiped with
warm clothes, and dried. The patient ought not to sweat with a full stomach,
for so the heat is called away from performing the office of concoction: also
he must not sleep when he is in his sweat, lest the malignity go in wardly
with the heat and spirits unto the principal parts; but if the patient be
much inclined to sleep, he must be kept from it with hard rubbing, and bands
tied about the extreme parts of his body, and with much noise of those that are
about him, and let his friends comfort him with the good hope that they have of
his recovery; but if all this will not keep him from sleep, dissolve
Castoreum in tart Vinegar, and Aqua vitae, and let it be injected into his
nostrils: and let him be kept continually waking the first day, and on the
second and third, even unto the fourth; that is to say, unto the perfect
expulsion of the venom; and let him not sleep above three or four hours on a
day and night. In the mean time let the Physician that shall be present
consider all things by his strength: for it is to be feared, that great
watchings will dissolve the strength, and make the patient weak: you must not
let him eat within three hours after his sweating; in the mean season, as
his strength shall require, let him take the rind of a preserved Citron,
conserve of Roses, bread toasted and steeped in wine, the meat of a preserved
Myrabolane, or some such like thing.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Epithemes to be used for the strengthening of the principal
parts.
THere are also some topic medicines to be reckoned amongst Antidotes,
Whereof they must be made.
which must be outwardly applied as speedily as may be, as cordial and
hepaticke Epithemes for the safety of the noble parts, and strengthening of the
faculties, as those that drive the venenate air far from the bowels: they
may be made of cordial things not only hot, but also cold, that they may
temper the heat, and more powerfully repercusse. They must be applied warm
with Repercussives not fit to be applied to Carbuncles.
a scarlet, or a double linen cloth, or a soft sponge dipped in them, if so be
that a Carbuncle do not possess the regions of the noble parts, for it is not
fit to use repercussives to a Carbuncle. You may make Epithemes after the
following forms;. aquar. ros. plantag. and solan. an iv. aquae acetos. vini
granat. and aceti, an. iii. santal. rub. and coral. rub. pulveris. an. iii.
theriac. vet. ss. camph. ii. croci i. carioph. ss. misce, fiat epithema. Or
else, R. aqu. ros. and plantag. an. x. aceti ros. iv. carioph. sant. rub.
coral. rub. pulveris. pull. diamargarit. frigid. an. iss. caphurae and moschi
an. i. fiat epithemae. Or,. aquar. rosar. and melissae, an. iv. aceti ros. iii.
sant. rub. i. caryophyl. ss. croci. ii. caphurae i. boli arm. terraesigil. and
zedoar. an. i. fiat epithema. Or else,. aceti rosat. and aquae rosat. an lb.
ss. caphurae ss. theriac. and mithridat. an. i. fiat epithema. Or else, aqu.
rosar. nenuph. buglos. acetosae, aceti rosar. an. lb. ss. sant. rub. ros. rub.
an. iii. flor. nenuph. violar. caphur. an. ss. mithrid. and theriac. an. ii.
terantur and misceantur simul omnia. When you intend to use them, take some
portion of them in a vessel by its self, wherewith let the affected bowell be
fomented warm.

CHAP. XXIIII. Whether purging and bloodletting be necessary in the beginning
of pestilent diseases.
SO soon as the heart is strengthened and corroberated with cordials and
antidotes, Reasons for and against bloodletting in the Plague.
we must come to phlebotomy and purging. As concerning bloodletting in this
case, there is a great controversy among Physicians. Those that wish it to be
used, say or affirm that the pestilent Fever does infixe it self in the
blood, and therein also the pestilent malignity takes its seat; and therefore
it will soon infect the other humors; unless that the blood be evacuated,
and the infection that remains in the blood be thereby taken away.
Contrariwise, those that do not allow phlebotomy in this case, allege, that it
often comes to pass that the blood is void of malignity when the other
humors are infected with the venomous contagion. If any man require my
judgment in this doubtful question, I say, that the pestilence sometimes does
depend on the default of the air: This default being drawn through the
passages of the body, does at length The composing of this controversy.
pierce unto the entrals, as we may understand by the abscesses which break
out one while behind the ears, sometimes in the arme-holes, and sometimes in
the groines, as the brain, heart or liver are infected. And hereof also come
Carbuncles, and other collections of matter, and eruptions, which are seen in
all parts of the body, by reason that nature using the strength of the
expulsive faculty, does drive forth whatsoever is noisome or hurtful.
Therefore if the Physician will follow this motion of nature, he must neither
purge nor let blood, lest that by a contrary motion, that is, by drawing in
from without, the motion of nature which proceeds outwardly from within, should
be troubled. So we often see in those who are purged or let blood for such
Buboes as come through unlawful copulation, that the matter is thereby made
contumacious, and by drawing it inwardly, it speedily causes the French Pocks.

Wherefore, when Buboes, Carbuncles and other pestilent eruptions appear,
which come through the default of the Air, we ought to abstain from purging
and phlebotomie; but it is sufficient to fore-arme the heart inwardly and
outwardly with Antidotes that are endued with a proper virtue of resisting the
poison. For it is not to be doubted, but that when nature is debilitated with
both kinds of evacuation, and when the spirits together with the blood are
exhausted, the venomous Air will soon pierce, and be received into the empty
body, where it exercises its tyranny to the utter destruction thereof.

In the year of our Lord God 1565. in which year there was great mortality A
history.
throughout all France, by reason of the pestilence and pestilent diseases, I
earnestly and diligently enquired of all the Physicians and Chirurgians of all
the Cities (through which King Charles the ninth passed in his progress unto
Bayon) what success their patients had after they were letten blood and
purged, whereunto they all answered alike, that they had diligently observed,
that all that were infected with the Pestilence, and were letten bleed some
good quantity of blood, or had their bodies somewhat strongly purged, thence
forwards waxed weaker and weaker, and so at length dyed; but others which were
not let blood nor purged, but took cordial Antidotes inwardly, and applied
them outwardly, for the most part escaped and recovered their health: for that
kind of Pestilence took its original of the primitive and solitary default of
the Air, and not of the corruption of the humors.

The like event was noted in the hoarsenesse that we spoke of before: that is
to say, When purging and bleeding may be used.
that the patients waxed worse and worse by purging and phlebotomie; but yet I
do not disallow either of those remedies, if there be great fullness in the
body, especially in the beginning, and if the matter have a cruel violence,
whereof may be feared the breaking in unto some noble part. For we know that
it is confirmed by Hypocrates, that what disease soever is caused by repletion,
must be cured by evacuation; Aph. 22 sect 2. Aph. 10. sect. 4.
and that in diseases that are very sharp, if the matter do swell, it ought to
be remedied the same day, for delay in such diseases is dangerous; but such
diseases are not caused orinflicted upon man's body by reason or occasion of the
pestilence, but of the diseased bodies, and diseases themselves commixed
together with the Pestilence; therefore then peradventure it is lawful to
purge strongly, and to let a good quantity of blood, l^st that the pestilent
venom should take hold of the matter that is prepared, and so infect it with a
contagion, whereby the Pestilence takes new and farregreater strength;
especially as Celsus admonishes us, where he says; that, By Cap. 7. lib 3.
how much the sooner those sudden invasions do happen, by so much the sooner
remedies must be used, yea or rather rashly applied; therefore if the veins
swell, the face wax fiery red, if the arteries of the temples beat strongly,
if the patient can very hardly breathe by reason of a weight in his stomach,
if his spittle be bloody, then ought he to be let blood without delay, for the
causes before mentioned. It seems best to open the liver veino on the left
arm, whereby the heart and the spleen may Why blood must (...) let on th ^me
in the Plague.
be better discharged of their abundant matter; yet bloodletting is not good
at all times, for it is not expedient when the body begins to wax stiff by
reason of the coming of a Fever; for then by drawing back the heat and
spirits inwardly, the outward parts being destitute of blood, wax stiff and
cold; therefore blood cannot be letten then without great loss of the
strength, and perturbation of the humors. And it is to be noted, that when
those plethoricke causes are present, there is one Indication of bloodletting
in a simple pestilent Fever, and another in that which has a Bubo, idest, a
Botch or a Carbuncle joined there with. For in one or both of these, being
joined with a vehement and strong burning Fever, blood must be letten by
opening the vein that is nearest into the tumor or swelling against nature,
keeping the straightness of the fibers, that this being open, the blood might
be drawn more directly from the part affected; for all and every retraction of
putrefied blood unto the noble parts, is to be avoided, because it is noisome
and hurful to nature, and to the patient. Therefore, for example sake, admit
the patient be plethoricke by repletion, which is called Advasa, idest, unto
the vessels, and Advires, idest, unto the strength: and there withal he has a
tumor that is pestilent in the parts belonging unto his head or neck, the
blood must be let out of the cephalic or median vein, or out of one of their
branches dispersed in the arm on the grieved side. But if through occasion of
fat, or any other such like cause, those veins do not appear in the arm,
there be some that give counsel in such a case to open the vein that is
between the forefinger and the thumb, the hand being put into warm water,
whereby that vein may swell and be filled with blood, gathered thither by
means of the heat.

If the tumor be under the arme-hole, or about those places, the liver vein,
or the median must be opened which runs along the hand: if it be in the
groine, the vein of the hamme, or Saphena, or any other vein above the foot
that appears well, but always on the grieved side. And phlebotomie must be
performed before the third day: for this disease is of the kind or nature of
sharp diseases; because that within four and twenty hours it runs past
help. In letting of blood you must have consideration of the strength. You may
perceive that the patient is ready to swoune, when that his forehead waxes
moist, with a small sweat suddenly arising, by the aching or pain at the
stomach, with an appetite to vomit, and desire to go to stool, gaping,
blackness of the lips, and sudden alteration of the face unto palenesse: and
lastly most certaincly by a small and slow pulse: and then you must lay your
finger on the vein, and stop it until the patient come to himself again,
either by nature, or else restored by art; that is to say, by giving unto him
bread dipped in wine, or any other such like thing: then, if you have not taken
blood enough, you must let it go again, and bleed so much as the greatness
of the disease, or the strength of the patient will permit or require: which
being done, some one of the Antidotes that are prescribed before will be very
profitable to be drunk, which may repair the strength, and infringe the force
of the malignity.

CHAP. XXV. Of purging medicines in a pestilent disease.
IFyou call to mind the proper indications, purging shall seem necessary in
this kind of disease, and that must be prescribed as the present What purges
fit in thel lague.
case and necessity requires; rightly considering that the disease is sudden,
and does require medicines that may with all speed drive out of the body the
hurtful humor wherein the noy some quality does lurk and is hidden; which
medicines are diverse by reason of the diversity of the kind of the humor,
and the condition or temperature of the patient. For this purpose six grains
of Scammonie beaten into powder, or else ten grains are commonly ministered
to the patient with one dram of Treacle. Also pills may be made in Pills.
this form: Take of Treacle and Mithridate, of each one dram; of Sulphur vivum
finely powdered half a dram; of Diagridium four grains: make thereof Pills.
Or, Take three drams of Aloes; of Myrrh and Saffron, of each one dram; of
white Hellebore and Asarabacca, of each four scruples: make thereof a mass
with old Treacle, and let the patient take four scruples thereof for a dose,
three hours before meat. Ruffus his pills may be profitably given to those
that are weak. The ancient Physicians have greatly commended Agarick for this
disease, because it does draw the noisome humors out of all the members: and
the virtues thereof are like unto those of Treacle; for it is thought to
strengthen the heart, and to draw out the malignity by purging. To those that
are strong the weight of two drams may be given, and to those that are more
weak, half a dram. It is better to give the infusion in a decoction, than in
substance; for being elected and prepared truly into Trochises, it may be
called a most divine kind of medicine.

Antimonium is highly praised by the experience of many; but because I know the
use thereof is condemned by the council and decree of the School of Physicians
at Paris, I will here cease to speak of it.

Those medicines that cause sweats are thought to excel all others, when the
Pestilence comes of the venomous Air: among whom the efficacy of that which
follows has been proved, to the great good of many in that Pestilence which
was lately throughout all Germany, as Matthias Rodler Chancellor to Duke George
the Count Palatine signified unto me by letters.

They do take a bundle of Mugwort, and of the ashes thereof after it is burnt,
they An effectual sudorifick and also purging medicine.
make a lie with four pints of water; then they do set it over the fire, and
boil it in a vessel of earth well leaded, until the liquor be consumed, the
earthy dregs falling unto the bottom like unto salt, whereof they make
Trochisces of the weight of a crown of gold: then they dissolve one or two of
those Trochisces, according to the strength of the patient, in good Muskadine,
and give it the patient to drink, and let him walk after that he has drunk
it for the space of half an hour; then lay him in his bed, and there sweat
him two or three hours, and then he will vomit, and his belly will be loosed
as if he had taken Antimony; and so they were all for the most part cured,
especially all those that took that remedy betimes, and before the disease
went unto their heart, as I my self have proved in some that were sick at
Paris, with most happy success: Truly Mugwort is highly commended by the The
virtues of Mugwort.
ancient Physicians, being taken and applied inwardly or outwardly against the
bitings of venomous creatures, so that it is not to be doubted but that it has
great virtue against the Pestilence.

I have heard it most certainly reported by Gilbertus Heroaldus Physician of
Mompilier, that eight ounces of the pickle of Anchoves, drunk at one draught,
is a most Vide Rondelet. Lib. 7. de p^s. c. 3.
certain and approved remedy against the Pestilence, as he and many other
have often found by experience. For the plague is no other thing but a very
great putrefaction; for the correction and amendment whereof, there is nothing
more apt or fit than this pickle or substance of the Anchoves, being melted by
the sun and force of the salt that is strawed thereon. There be some which
infuse one dram of Walewort seed in white wine, and affirm that it drunken
will perform the like effect as Antimony. Others dissolve a little weight of
the seed of Rue being bruised in Muskadine, with the quantity of a Bean of
Treacle, and so drink it. Others beat or bruise an handful of the leaves or
tops of Broom in half a pint of white wine, and so give it to the patient to
drink, to cause him to vomit, loose his belly, and make him to sweat. Truly
those that are wounded or bitte with venomous beasts, if they bind broom above
the wound, it will prohibit or hinder the venom from dispersing it self, or
going any further: therefore a drink made thereof will prohibit the venom from
going any nearer the heart. Some take of the root of Elecampaine, Gentian,
Tormentill, Kermes berries and broom; of the powder of Ivory and Harts-horne,
of each half a dram: they do bruise and beat all these, and infuse them for
the space of four and twenty hours in white wine and Aqua vitae on the warm
embers, and then strain it, and give the patient three or four ounces thereof
to drink; this provokes sweat, and infringeth the power of the poison: and the
potion following has the same virtue.

Take good Mustard half an ounce, of Treacle or Mithridate the weight of a
Bean, dissolve them in white wine, and a little Aqua vitae, and let the patient
drink it, and (...) Potion.
sweat thereon with walking. You may also roast a great Onion made hollow, and
filled with half a dram of Treacle and Vinegar under the embers; and then
strain it, and mix the juice that is pressed out of it with the water of
Sorrel, Carduus Benedictus, or any other cordial thing, and with strong wine,
and give the patient to drink thereof to provoke sweat, and to repel the
malignity. Or else take as much Garlic as the quantity of a big Nut; of Rue
and Celandine, of each twenty leaves, bruise them all in white wine and a
little Aqua vitae; then strain it, and give the patient thereof to drink.
There be some that do drink the juice that is pressed out of Celandine and
Mallows, with three ounces of Vinegar, and half an ounce of the oil of
Wall-nuts, and then by much walking do unburthen their stomach and belly
upwards and downwards, and so are helped. When the venomous air has already
crept into and infected the humors, one dram of the dried leaves of the Bay
tree macerated for the space of two days in Vinegar and drunk, is thought to
be a most sovereign medicine to provoke sweat, looseness of the belly, and
vomiting.

Mathiolus in his Treatise de Morbo Gallico writes, that the powder of Mercury
The effects of mercury and copperose against the Plague.
ministered unto the patient with the juice of Carduus Benedictus, or with the
electuary de Gommis, will drive away the Pestilence before it be confirmed in
the body, by provoking vomit, looseness of the belly and sweat: one dram of
Calchanthum or white Copperose dissolved in Rose Water, performs the like
effect in the same disease. Some do give the patient a little quantity of the
oil of Scorpions with white wine to expel the poison by vomit, and
therewithal they anoint the region of the heart, the breast and the wrests of
the hands. I think these very meet to be used often in bodies that are strong
and well exercised, because weaker medicines do evacuate little or nothing at
all, but only move the humors, whereby comes a Fever. When a sufficient
quantity of the malignity is evacuated, then you must minister things that may
strengthen the belly and stomach, and withhold the agitation or working of the
humors: and such is the confection of Alkermes.

CHAP. XXVI. Of many Symptoms which happen together with the Plague: and first
of the pain of the head.
IF the malignity be carried into the brain, and nature be not able to expel
The cause of frenzy in the Plague.
it, it inflames not only it, but also the membranes that cover it: which
inflammation does one while hurt, trouble, or abolish the imagination, another
while the judgment, and sometimes-the memory, according to the situation of
the inflammation, whether it be in the former, hinder or middle part of the
head; but hereof comes always a Frenzy, with fiery redness of the eyes
and face, and heaviness and burning of the whole head. If this will not be
amended with Clisters, and with opening the Cephalicke vein in the arm, the
arteries of the temples must be opened, taking so much blood out of them, as
the greatness of the Symptoms and the strength of the patient shall require
and permit. Truly the incision that is made in opening of an artery will close
and join together as readily, and with as little difficulty, as the incision
of a vein. And of such an incision of an artery, comes present help, by
reason that the tensive The benefit of opening an artery.
and sharp vapors do plentifully breath out together with the arterious
blood. It were also very good to provoke a flux of blood at the nose, if
nature be apt to exone^ate herself that way. For, as Hippocrates says, when
the head is grieved, or generally Aph. 10. sect. 6.
aketh, if matter, water, or blood flow out at the nostrils, mouth or ears, it
presently cures the disease. Such bleeding is to be provoked by strong blowing,
or striving to cleanse the nose, by scratching or picking of the inner sides of
the nostrils, by pricking with an horse hair, and long holding down of the
head.

The Lord of Fontains, a Knight of the Order, when we were at Bayon, had a
bleeding A history.
at the nose, which came naturally for the space of two days, and thereby he
was freed of a pestilent Fever which he had before, a great sweat rising
therewithal, and shortly after his Carbuncles came to suppuration, and by Gods
grace he recovered his health being under my cure. If the blood do flow out
and cannot be stopped To stay bleeding.
when it ought, the hands, arms, and legs must be tied with bands, and
sponges wet in Oxycrate must be put under the arme-holes, cupping-glasses must
be applied unto the dugges, the region of the liver and spleen; and you must
put into the nostrils, the down of the willow tree, or any other astringent
medicine, incorporated with the hairs plucked from the flank, belly or throat
of a Hare, bole Armenicke, Terra Sigillata, the juice of Plantain and
Knot-grasse mixed together; and furthermore the patient must be placed or laid
in a cool place. But if the pain be nothing mitigated not withstanding all
these fluxes of blood, we must come to medicines that procure sleep, whose
forms are these.

Take of green Lettuce one handful, flowers of water Lillies and Violets, of
each two pugils, one head of white Poppy bruised, of the four cold seeds, of
each two Medicines to ^^ocuresleep.
drams, of Liquorice and Raisons, of each one dram: make thereof a decoction,
and in the straining dissolve one ounce and an half of Diacodion: make thereof
a large potion to be given when they go to rest. Also a Barly-creame may be
prepared in the water of Water Lillies and of Sorrel, of each two ounces,
adding thereto six or eight grains of Opium: of the four cold seeds, and of
white Poppy seeds, of each half an ounce, and let the same be boiled in broths
with Lettuce and Purslaine; also the Pills de Cynoglosso, id est, Hounds tongue
may be given. Clisters that provoke sleep must be used, which may be thus
prepared:

Take of Barly-water, half a pint; oil of Violets and Water Lillies, of each
two ounces; of the water of Plantaine and Purslaine, or rather of their juices,
three ounces; of Camphire seven grains, and the whites of three eggs: make
thereof a Clister. The head must be fomented with Rose-vinegar, the hair being
first shaven away, leaving a double cloth wet therein on the same, and often
renewed. Sheep lungs taken warm out of the bodies, may be applied to the
head, as long as they are warm. Cupping-glasses with and without
scarification, may be applied to the neck and shoulder-blades. The arms and
legs must be strongly bound, being first well rubbed to divert the sharp
vapors and humors from the head. Frontals may also be made on this manner.
Take of the oil of Roses and Water Lillies, of each two ounces, of the oil of
Poppy half an ounce, of Opium one dram, of Rose-vinegar one ounce, of Camphire
half a dram; mix them together. Also Nodules may be made of the flowers of
Poppies, Henbane, Water Lillies, Mandrakes beaten in Rose Water with a little
Vinegar, and a little Camphire, and let them be often applied to the nostrils:
for this purpose Cataplasmes also may be laid to the forehead. As, Take of the
mucilage of the seeds of Psilium, id est, Flea-wort, and Quince seeds extracted
in Rose Water, three ounces; of Barly-meale four ounces; of the powder of
Rose-leaves, the flowers of Water Lillies and Violets, of each half an ounce;
of the seeds of Poppies and Purslaine of each two ounces; of the water and
vinegar of Roses, of each three ounces: make thereof a Cataplasme, and apply it
warm unto the head. Or take of the juice of Lettuce, Water Lillies, Henbane,
Purslaine, of each half a pint; A Cataplasme.
of Rose-leaves in powder, the seeds of Poppy, of each half an ounce; oil of
Roses three ounces; of Vinegar two ounces; of Barly-meale as much as shall
suffice: make thereof a Cataplasme in the form of a liquid Pultis. When the
heat of the head is mitigated by these medicines, and the inflammation of the
brain assuaged, we must come unto digesting and resolving fomentations, which
may disperse the matter of the vapors. But commonly in pain of the head, they
do use to bind the forehead and hinder part of the head very strongly, which
in this case must be avoided.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the heat of the Kidneys.
THe heat of the kidneys is tempered by anointing with unguent. refrigerans
Galen. newly made, adding thereto the whites of eggs well beaten, that so the
ointment may keep moist the longer; let this liniment be renewed every quarter
of an hour, wiping away the relics of the old. Or,. aq. ros. lb. ss. sucti
plant. iv. alb. ovorum iv. olei An ointment for the reins.
rosacei, and nenuph. an. ii. aceti ros. iii. misce ad usum. When you have
anointed the part, lay thereon the leaves of Water Lillies or the like cold
herbs, and then presently thereupon a double linen cloth dipped in oxycrate
and wrung out again, and often changed; the patient shall not lie upon a
feather bed, but on a quilt stuffed with the chafe of oats, or upon a matte
with many doubled clothes or Chamelet spread thereon. To the region of the
heart may in the mean time be applied a refrigerating and alexiteriall
medicine, as this which follows.. ung. rosat. iii. olei nenupharini, ii.
aceti ros. and aquaerosar. an. i. theriacae, i. An ointment for the heart.
croci, ss. Of these melted and mixed together make a soft ointment, which
spread upon a scarlet cloth may be applied to the region of the heart. Or,.
theriacae opt. i ss. succi citri acidi, and limonis, an. ss. coral. rub. and
sem. rosar. rub. an. ss. caphurae, and croci, an. gra. iiii. let them be all
mixed together, and make an ointment or liniment.

At the head of the patient as he lies in his bed, shall be set an Ewre or
cock with a basin under it to receive the water, which by dropping may
resemble rain. Let the The noise of dropping water draws on sleep.
soles of the feet and palms of the hands be gently scratched, and the patient
lie far from noise, and so at length he may fall to some rest.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Eruptions and Spots, which commonly are called by the
name of Purples and Tokens.
THE skin, in pestilent fevers, is marked and variegated in diverse places
with spots, like unto the bitings of Fleas or Gnats, which are not always The
differences of the spots in the plague.
simple, but many times arise in form like unto a grain of millet. The more
spots appear, the better it is for the patient: they are of diverse colors
according to the virulency of the malignity, and condition of the matter, as
red, yellow, brown, violet, or purple, blew and black. And because for the
most part they are of a purple color, therefore we call them Purples. Others
call Their several names, and the reasons of them.
them Lenticulae, because they have the color and form of Lentiles. They are
also called Papiliones (i) Butterflies, because they do suddenly seize or fall
upon diverse regions of the body, like unto winged Butterflyes, sometimes the
face, sometimes the arms and legs, and sometimes all the whole body; often
times they do not only affect the upper part of the skin, but go deeper into
the flesh, specially when they proceed of matter that is gross and adust. They
do sometimes appear great and broad, affecting the whole arm, leg or face,
like unto an Erysipelas: to conclude, they are diverse according to the variety
of the humor that offends in quality or quantity.

If they are of a purple or black color, with often swouning, and sink in
suddenly without any manifest cause, they foreshew death. When signs of death.


The cause of the breaking out of those spots, is the working or heat of the
blood, by reason of the cruelty of the venom received, or admitted. They often
arise at the beginning of a pestilent fever: many times before the breaking
out of the Sore, or Botch, or Carbuncle, and many times after: but then they
show so great a corruption of the humors in the body, that neither the Sores,
nor Carbuncles will suffice to receive them, and therefore they appear as
forerunners of death. Sometimes they break out alone, without a Botch or
Carbuncle; which if they be red, and have no evil symptoms joined with them,
they are not wont to prove deadly: they appear, for the most part, on the
third or fourth day of the disease, and sometimes later, and sometimes they
appear not before the patient be dead, because the working or heat of the
humors being the offspring of putrefaction, is not as yet restrained and
ceased.

Wherefore then principally the putride heat, which is greatest a little before
the Why they sometimes appear after the death of the patient.
death of the patient, drives the excremental humors, which are the matter of
the spots unto the skin; or else because nature in the last conflict has
contended with some greater endeavor than before (which is common to all
things that are ready to dye) a little before the instant time of death, the
pestilent humor being presently driven unto the skin; and nature thus
weakened by this extreme conflict, falls down prostrate, and is quite
overthrown by the remnant of the matter.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Cure of Eruptions and Spots.
YOU must first of all take heed lest you drive in the humor that is coming
outward with repercussives: therefore beware of cold, all purging things,
Phlebotomy, and drowsy or sound sleeping. For all such things They are to be
cured by driving ^orth.
do draw the humors inwardly, and work contrary to nature. But it is better
to provoke the motion of nature outwardly, by applying of drawing medicines
outwardly and ministering medicines to provoke sweat inwardly, for otherwise by
repelling and stopping the matter of the eruptions, there will be great danger
lest the heart be oppressed with the abundance of the venom flowing back; or
else by turning into the belly, it inferres a mortal bloody flux: which
discommodities that they may be avoided, I have thought good to set down this
remedy, whose efficacy I have known and proved many times, and on diverse
persons, when by reason of the weakness of the expulsive faculty, and the
thickness of the skin, the matter of the spots cannot break forth, but is
constrained to lurk under the skin, lifting it up into bunches and knobs.

I was brought unto the invention of this remedy, by comparison of the like.
For when I understood that the essence of the French pockes (and likewise of
the pestilence) The indication of curing taken (...) the like.
consisted in a certain hidden virulency, and venomous quality, I soon
descended unto that opinion, that even as by the anointing of the body with the
unguent compounded of Quicksilver, the gross and clammy humors which are
fixed in the bones, and unmovable, are dissolved, relaxed, and drawn from the
center into the superficial parts of the body, by strengthening and stirring
up the expulsive faculty, and evacuated by sweating and fluxing at the mouth;
that so it should come to pass in pestilent Fevers, that nature being
strengthened with the same kind of unction, might unloade her self of some
portion of the venomous and pestilent humor, by opening the pores and
passages, and letting it break forth into spots and pustles, and into all kind
of eruptions. Therefore I have anointed many in whom nature seemed to make
passage for the venomous matter very slowly, first loosing their belly with a
Clister, and then giving them Treacle water to drink, which might defend the
vital faculty of the heart, but yet not distend the stomach, as though they
had had the French pockes, and I obtained my expected purpose: in stead of the
Treacle water you may use the decoction of Guajacum, which does heat, dry,
provoke sweat, and repel putrefaction, adding thereto also vinegar, that by
the subtlety thereof, it may pierce the better, and withstand the putrefaction.
This is the description of the unguent.

Take of Hogs-greace, one pound, boil it a little with the leaves of Sage,
Time, An ointment to draw them forth when as they appear too slowly.
Rosemary, of each half an handful, strain it, and in the straining
extinguish five ounces of Quicksilver, which has bin first boiled in vinegar
with the forementioned herbs; of Sal Nitrum, three drammes; the yelks of three
eggs boiled until they be hard; of Treacle and Mithridate, of each half an
ounce; of Venice Turpentine, oil of Scorpions and Bays, of each three ounces;
incorporate them altogether in a mortar, and make thereof an unguent, wherewith
anoint the patients arme-holes and groines, avoiding the parts that belong to
the head, breast and backbone: then let him be laid in his bed and covered
warm, and let him sweat there for the space of two hours, and then let his
body be wiped and cleansed, and if it may be let him be laid in another bed,
and there let him be refreshed with the broth of the decoction of a Capon, rear
eggs, and with such like meats of good juice that are easy to be concocted
and digested; let him be anointed the second and third day, unless the spots
appear before.

If the patient flux at the mouth, it must not be stopped: when the spots and
pustles do all appear, and the patient has made an end of sweating, it shall
be convenient to use diureticke medicines, for by these the remnant of the
matter of the spots, which happily could not all breath forth, may easily be
purged and avoided by urine.

If any noble or gentlemen refuse to be anointed with this unguent, let them be
enclosed in the body of a Mule or Horse that is newly killed, and when that is
cold, let them be laid in another, until the pustles and eruptions do
break forth, being drawn by that natural heat. For so Mathiolus writes that
Valentinus, the son of Pope Alexander the sixth, was delivered from the danger
of most deadly poison In pro^. (...) Di^s^.
which he had drunk.

CHAP. XXX. Of a pestilent Bubo, or Plague Sore.
APestilent Bubo is a tumor at the beginning long and moveable, and in the What
a pes^^lent Bubo is.
state, and full perfection copped, and with a sharp head, unmovable and fixed
deeply in the glandules, or kernells; by which the brain exonerates it self
of the venomous and pestiferous matter into the kernells that are behind the
ears, and in the neck: the heart, into those that are in the arm-holes; and
the liver, into those that are in the groine; that is, when all the matter is
gross and clammy, so that it cannot be drawn out by spots and pustles breaking
out on the skin; and so the matter of a Carbuncle is sharp, and so fervent,
that it makes an Eschar on the place where it is fixed. In the beginning,
while the Bubo is breeding, it makes the patient to feel, as it were, a cord
or rope stretched in the place, or a hardened nerve with pricking pain: and
shortly after the matter is raised up as it were into a knob, and by little and
little it grows bigger, and is enflamed, these accidents before mentioned
accompanying it. If the tumor be red, and increase by little and little, it is
a good and salutary sign: but if it be livid or black, and come very slowly
The sign of Bubo's salutary and deadly.
unto his just bigness, it is a deadly sign: It is also a deadly sign if it
increase suddenly, and come unto his just bigness as it were with a swift
violence, and as in a moment, have all the symptoms in the highest excess, as
pain, swelling and burning. Buboes or Sores appear sometimes of a natural
color, like unto the skin, and in all other things like unto an oedematous
tumor, which notwithstanding will suddenly bring the patient to destruction,
like those that are livide and black, wherefore it is not good to trust too
much to those kinds of tumors.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the cure of Buboes, or Plague-sores.
SO soon as the Bubo appears, apply a Cupping-glasse with a great The use of
cupping glasses in curing a Bubo.
flame unto it, unless it be that kind of Bubo which will suddenly have all
the accidents of burning and swelling in the highest nature; but first the
skin must be anointed with the oil of lillies, that so it being made more
loose, the Cupping-glasse may draw the stronger and more powerfully; it ought
to stick to the part for the space of a quarter of an hour, and be renewed
and applied again every three quarters of an hour, for so at length the venom
shall be the better drawn forth from any noble part that is weak, and the work
of suppuration or resolution, whichsoever nature has assaied, will the better
and sooner be absolved and perfected: which may be also done by the
application of the following ointment.

Take of Uuguentum Dialthaea one ounce and a half; oil of Scorpions half an
A liniment
ounce; of Mithridate dissolved in Aquavitae, half a dram; this liniment
will very well relaxe and loosen the skin, open the pores thereof, and spend
forth portion of that matter which the Cupping-glasse has drawn thither: in
stead thereof mollifying fomentations may be made, and other drawing and
suppurating medicines, which shall be described hereafter.

A Vesicatory applied in a meet place below the Bubo profits them very much but
not above; as for example. If the Bubo be in the throat, the Vesicatory must be
applied unto the shoulder blade on the same side; if it be in the arme-holes,
it must be applied in the midst of the arm, or of the shoulder bone, on the
inner side: if in the groin, in the midst of the thigh on the inner side, that
by the double passage that is open for to draw out the matter, the part wherein
the venom is gathered together, may be the better exonerated.

Spurge, Crow-foot, Arsemart, Beare-foot, Bridny, the middle bark of
Travellers-joy, the rindes of Mullet, Flammula or upright Virgins-bower, are
fit for raising blisters. If you cannot come by those simple medicines, you may
apply this which follows, which may be prepared at all times.

Take Cantharides, Pepper, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, of each half a
dram; of sour leaven, two drammes; of Mustard one dram, and a little
Vinegar; the A compound (...).
vinegar is added thereto to withhold or restrain the vehemence of the
Cantharides; but in want of this medicine it shall suffice to drop scalding
oil or water, or a burning candle, or to lay a burning coal on the place: for
so you may raise blisters, which must ptesently be cut away, and you must see
that you keep the ulcers open and flowing as long as you can, by applying the
leaves of red coleworts, Beetes, or Ivy dipped in warm water, and anointed
with oil or fresh butter. Some apply Cauteties, Why vesicatories are better
than cau^ in a pestilent (...).
but Vesicatories work with more speed: for before the Eschar of the Cauteries
will fall away, the patient may dye: therefore the ulcers that are made with
Vesicatories will suffice to evacuate the pestilent venom, because that does
work rather by its quality than its quantity. Let the abscesse be fomented as
is showed before: and then let the medicine following, which has virtue to
draw, be applied.

Fill a great onion, being hollowed, with Treacle and the leaves of Rue, then
roast it under the hot Embers, beat it with a little Leaven, and a little
Swines grease, and Strong drawing (...).
so apply it warm unto the abscesse or sore; let it be changed every six
hours. Or Take the roots of Marsh-mallowes and Lillies, of each half a pound;
of Line, Foenugreek, and Mustard seeds, of each half an ounce; of Treacle one
dram; ten Figs, and as much H^gges grease as shall suffice: make thereof a
cataplasme according to Art. Or, take of Onions and Garlic roasted in the
embers, of each three ounces: bruise them with one ounce of sower leaven,
adding thereto Unguentum Basilicon, one ounce; Treacle one dram; Mithridate
half a dram; of old Hogs grease one ounce; of Cantharides in powder one
scruple; of Pigeons dung two drams: beat them and mix them together into the
form of a cataplasme. Hereunto old Rennet is very profitable, for it is hot,
and therefore attractive, being mixed with old Leaven and Basilicon: you ought
to use these until the abscesse be grown unto its full ripeness and
bigness; but if presently after the beginning there be great inflammation,
with sharp pain, as it often happens, especially when the abscesses be of
the kind of Carbuncles, we must abstain from those remedies that are hot and
attractive, and also from those that are very emplasticke and clammy; because
they do altogether close the pores of the skin, or because they resolve the
thinner part of the collected matter, which if it might remain, would bring the
other sooner to suppuration: or else because they may perchance draw more
quantity of the hot matter than the part can bear, whereof comes rather
corruption than maturation: and last of all because they increase the fever
and pain, which infers danger of a convulsion or mortal Gangrene. Therefore
in such a case it is best to use cold and temperate local medicines, as the
leaves of Henbane and Sorrel roasted under the coals, Galens pultis, and such
like.

There are many that for fear of death, have with their own hands pulled away
the Bubo with a pair of Smithes Pincers: others have dug the flesh round
about Against such as cut away plague (...).
it, and so gotten it wholly out. And to conclude others have become so mad,
that they have thrust an hot iron into it with their own hand, that the venom
might have a passage forth: of all which I do not allow one; for such
abscesses do not come from without, as the bitings of virulent beasts, but
from within, and moreover because pain is by these means increased, and the
humor is made more malign and fierce. Therefore I think it sufficient to use
medicines that relaxe, open the pores of the skin, and digest portion of the
venom by transpiration, as are these that follow. Take the roots of
Marsh-mallowes and Lillies, of each six ounces; of Chamomill A digestive
fomentation.
and Melilote flowers, of each half a handful; of Linseeds half an ounce; of
the leaves of Rue half a handful: boil them and strain them, dip sponges in
the straining, and therewith let the tumor be fomented a long time. Or, Take
the crum of hot bread, and sprinkle it with Treacle-water, or with aqua vitae,
and Cowes An anodine Cataplasme.
milk or Goats milk, and the yolks of three eggs, put them all one stupes or
flax, and apply them warm unto the place. Or, Take of sour Rye leaven four
ounces; of Basilicon two ounces; three yolks of eggs; oil of Lillies two
ounces; Treacle one dram: let it be received on stupes, and applied in like
manner. Or, Take of Diachylon and Basilicon, of each two ounces; oil of
Lillies one ounce and an half: let them be melted and mixed together, and let
it be applied as is abovesaid. When you see, feel and know, according to
reason, that the Bubo is come to perfect suppuration, it must be opened with an
incision knife, or an actual or potentiall Cautery, but Why it is best to open
a Plague Sore with a potentiall cautery.
it is best to be done with a potentiall Cautery, unless that happily there be
great inflammation, because it does draw the venom from beneath unto the
superficial parts, and makes a larger orifice for the matter that is
contained therein: neither must it be looked for, that nature should open it of
her self, for then it were danger that lest while nature does work slowly, a
venomous vapor should be stirred up, which striking the heart by the
arteries, the brain by the nerves, and the liver by the veins, should cause a
new increase of the venomous infection. For fear whereof there be some that
will not expect the perfect maturation and suppuration, but as it were in the
midst of the crudity and maturity will make an orifice for it to pass forth
at: yet if it be done before the tumor be at his perfect maturity, pain, a
Fever, and all accidents are stirred up and enraged, whereof comes a malign
ulcer that often degenerats into a Gangrene. For the most part about the tenth
or eleventh day the work of suppuration seems perfected and finished; but it
may be sooner or later by reason of the application of medicines, the condition
of the matter, and state of the part: when the matter comes forth, you must
yet use suppurative and mollifying medicines, to maturate the remains thereof;
in the mean while cleansing the ulcer by putting mundificatives into it, as we
shall declare in the cure of Carbuncles. But if the tumor seem to sink in or
hide it self again, it must be revoked and procured How to draw forth a sore
that seems to go in again.
to come forth again, by applying of Cupping-glasses with scarification, and
with sharp medicines, yea, and with Cauteries both actual and potentiall.

When the Cauteries are applied, it shall be very good to apply a vesicatory a
little below it, that there may be some passage open for the venom while the
Eschar is in falling away. For so they that are troubled with the French Pocks,
so long as they have open and flowing ulcers; so long are they void of any
pain that is worth the speaking of; which ulcers being closed and cicatrized,
they do presently complain of great pain. If you suspect that the Bubo is
more malign by reason that it is of a green, or black and inflamed color,
as are those that come of a melancholy humor by adustion, turned into a gross
and rebellious melancholy humor, so that by the more copious influxe thereof
into the part, there is danger of a gangrene and mortification; then the places
about the abscesse must be armed When repercussives may be applied.
with repercussives, but not the abscesse it self: and this may be the form
of the repercussives: Take of the juice of house-leeke, Purslaine, Sorrel,
Nightshade, of each two ounces, of Vinegar one ounce, the whites of three
eggs, of oil of Roses and Water Lillies, of each two ounces and a half:
stir them together, and apply it about the Bubo, and renew it often: or boil
a Pomgranate in vinegar, beat it with Unguentum Rosatum, or Populeon newly
made, and apply it as is aforesaid. If these things do not stop the influxe of
other humors, the abscesse it self and the places about it must be scarified
round about, if the part will permit it; that the part exonerated of portion of
the venom may not stand in danger of the extinction of the proper and natural
heat, by the greater quantity and malignity of the humors that flow unto it.
In scarrifying you must have care of the great vessels, for fear of an
irrepugnable Why too much bleeding is to be feared.
flux of blood, which in this case is very hard to be stayed or resisted;
both because the part it self is greatly inflamed, and the humor very fierce;
for the expulsion whereof, nature, careful for the preservation of the part
and all the body besides, seems to labor and work. But yet you must suffer
so much of the blood and humor to flow out as the patient is able to abide
without the loss of his strength. Moreover, you may spend forth the
superfluous portion of the malignity, with relaxing, mollifying and resolving
fomentations: as, Take the roots of Marsh-Mallowes, Lillies and Elicampaine, of
each one pound, of Linseeds and Faenugreek, of each one ounce, of Fennell-seeds
and Anise-seeds, of each half an ounce, of the leaves of Rue, Sage, Rosemary,
of each one handful, of Chamomill and Melilote flowers, of each three
handfuls; boil them all together, and make thereof a decoction for a
fomentation; use it with a sponge according to Art. Also after the aforesaid
scarification, we may put Hens, or Turkies that lay eggs (which therefore have
their fundaments more wide and open, and for the same purpose put a little salt
into their fundaments) upon the sharp top of the Bubo, that by shutting their
bills at several times they may draw and suck the venom into their bodies,
far more strongly and better than cupping-glasses, because they are endued
with a natural property against poison, for they eat and concoct Toads, Efts,
and such like virulent beasts: when one hen is killed with the poison that she
has drawn into her body, you must apply another, and then the third, fourth,
fifth and sixth within the space of half an hour. There be some that will rather
cut them, or else use whelps cut asunder in the midst, and applied warm unto
the place, that by the heat of the creature that is yet scarce dead, portion
of the venom may be dissipated and exhaled. But if nevertheless there be any
fear of a Gangrene at hand, you must cut the flesh with a deeper
scarification, not only avoiding the greater vessels, but also the nerves, for
fear of convulsion: and after the scarification and a sufficient flux of
blood, you must wash it with Aegyptiacum, Treacle and Mithridate dissolved in
seawater, Aquavitae and Vinegar. For such a lotion has virtue to stay
putrefaction, repel the venom, and prohibit the blood from concretion: but
if the Gangrene cannot be avoided so, cauteries may be applied to the part:
especially actual, because they do more effectually repel the force of the
poison, and strengthen the part. Presently after the impression of the hot
iron, the eschar must be cut away even unto the quick flesh, that the
venomous vapors and the humors may have a free passage forth, for it is not
to be looked for that they L^^iments to hasten the falling way of the Eschar.
will come forth of themselves. With these inunctions they are wont to hasten
the falling away of the Eschar. Take of the mucilage of Marsh-mallowes and
Linseeds, of each two ounces, fresh butter or Hog's Grease one ounce, the yolks
of three eggs, incorporate them together, and make thereof an ointment:
butter, Swines grease, oil of Roses, with the yolks of eggs, perform the
self same thing. When the Eschar is fallen away, we must use digestives. As
take of the juice of Plantaine, water-Bettony, and Smallage, of each three
ounces, honey of Roses four ounces, Venice Turpentine five ounces, Barly-slower
three drams, Aloes two drams, oil of Roses four ounces, Treacle half a dram,
make a mundificative according to Art. Or, Take Venice Turpentine four ounces,
Syrup of dried Roses and Wormwood, of each one ounce, of the powder of Aloes,
Mastick, Myrthe, Barly-flower, of each one dram, of Mithridate half an ounce,
incorporate them together. This unguent that follows Against ^ating ulcers.
is very meet for putrefied and corroding ulcers: Takered Orpiment one ounce,
of unquenched Lime, burnt Alome, Pomgranate pills, of each six drams, of
Olibanum, Galls, of each two drams, of Wax and Oil as much as shall suffice,
make thereof an unguent. This does mundifie strongly, consume putrefied flesh,
and dry up virulent The praise of Aegyptiacum.
humidities that engender Gangrenes. But there is not a more excellent unguent
than Aegyptiacum increased in strength, for besides many other virtues that it
has, it does consume and waste the proud flesh, for there is neither oil nor
wax that goes into the composition thereof, with which things the virtue of
sharp medicines convenient for such ulcers, is delayed, and as it were dulled
and hindered from their perfect operation so long as the ulcer is kept open.
There have bin many that being diseased with this disease, have had much matter
and venomous filth come out at their abscesses, so that it seemed sufficient,
and they have bin thought well recovered, yet have they dyed suddenly. In the
mean while when these things are in doing, cordial medicines are not to be
omitted to strengthen the heart. And purgations must be renewed at certain
seasons, that nature may be every way unloaded of the burden of the venenate
humors.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Nature, Causes and Signs of a pestilent Carbuncle.
APestilent Carbuncle is a small tumor, or rather a malign pustle, hot What a
Carbuncle is.
and raging, consisting of blood vitiated by the corruption of the proper
substance. It often comes to pass through the occasion of this untameable
malignity, that the Carbuncle cannot be governed or contained The signs of a
Carbuncle.
within the dominion of nature. In the beginning it is scarce so big as a seed
or grain of Millet or a Pease, sticking firmly unto the part and immovable, so
that the skin cannot be pulled from the flesh; but shortly after it
increases like unto a Bubo unto a round and sharp head, with great heat,
pricking pain, as if it were with needles, burning and intolerable, especially
a little before night, and while the meat is in concocting; more than when it
is perfectly concocted. In the midst thereof appears a bladder puffed up and
filled with sanious matter. If you cut this bladder, you shall find the flesh
under it parched, burned and black, as if there had bin a burning cole laid
there, whereby it seems that it took the name of Carbuncle; When so called,
but the flesh that is about the place is like a Rainebow, of diverse colors,
as red, dark, green, purple, livid, and black; but yet always with a shining
blackness, like unto stone pitch, or like unto the true precious stone which
they call a Carbuncle, whereof some also say it took the name. Some call it a
Nail, because it infers like pain as a nail driven into the flesh. There
are many Carbuncles which take their beginning with a crusty ulcer without a
pustle, like to the burning of a hot iron: and these are of a black color,
they increase quickly, according to the condition of the matter whereof they
are made. All pestilent Carbuncles have a Fever Symptoms of Carbuncles.
joined with them, and the grieved part seems to be so heavy, as if it were
covered or pressed with lead tied hard with a ligature: there comes mortal
swounings, faintings, tossing, turning, idle-talking, raging, gangrenes and
mortifications, not only to the part, but also to the whole body, by reason
(as I think) of the oppression of the spirits of the part, and the suffocation
of the natural heat, as we see also in many that have a pestilent Bubo. For a
Bubo and Carbuncle are tumors of a near affinity, so that the one does scarce
come without the other, consisting of one kind How the matter of a Bubo and
Carbuncle differ.
of matter, unless that which makes the Bubo is more gross and clammy, and
that which causes the Carbuncle more sharp, burning and raging, by reason of
its greater subtlety, so that it makes an Eschar on the place where it is, as
we noted before.

CHAP. XXXIII. What Prognostics may be made in pestilent Buboes and
Carbuncles.
SOme having the Pestilence have but one Carbuncle, and some more in diverse
parts of their body, and in many it happens that they have the Bubo and
Carbuncle before they have any Fever; which gives better hope of health, if
there be no other malign accident therewith: for it is a sign that nature is
the victor, and has gotten the upper hand, which excluded the pestilent venom
before it could come to assault the heart. But if a Carbuncle and Bubo come
after the Fever, it is mortal; for it is a token that the Why it is deadly to
have a sore come after the Fever.
heart is affected, moved and incensed with the furious rage of the venom;
whereof presently comes a feverish heat or burning, and corruption of the
humors, sent as it were from the center unto the superficies of the body. It
is a good sign when the patients mind is not troubled from the beginning
until the seventh day; but when the Bubo or Carbuncle sinketh down again
shortly after that it is risen, it is a mortal sign, especially if ill
accidents follow it. If after they are brought to suppuration they presently
wax dry without any reason thereof, it is an ill sign: Those Carbuncles that
are generated of blood have a greater Eschar than those that are (...) choler,
because that blood is of a more gross consistence, and therefore oc^ (...)
^^eater room in the flesh: contrariwise, a choleric humor is more small
(...) and thin, and it takes little room in the upper part of the flesh
only, as you may see in an Erysipelas. And I have seen Carbuncles whose
Eschars were as broad and as large as half the back: also I have seen
others, which going up by the shoulders to the throat, did so eat away the
flesh that was under them, that the rough artery or windpipe might be seen
bare, when the Eschar was fallen away: I had once a Carbuncle which was in the
midst of my belly, so that when the Eschar was fallen away, I might very
plainly see the Piritonaeum or Rim: and the cicatrice that remains is as
broad as my hand: but they do not spread themselves so far without the great
danger or death of the patient. There are also some Carbuncles which beginning
at the parts under the chin, disperse themselves by little and little unto the
pattell bones, and so strangle the patient. So in many, the Buboes in the groin
arise above a great part of the muscles of the Epigastrium. Truly of those
abscesses that are Huge postilent Abscesses commonly deadly.
so large and great in quantity, and so terrible to be seen, there is great
danger of death to the patient, or at least to the grieved part. For after the
consolidation, the part remains as if it were leprous, which abolisheth the
action of the part, as I have seen in many. Oftentimes also the corruption of
the matter is so great, that the flesh leaves the bones bare: but Carbuncles
often leave the joints and ligaments quite resolved through the occasion of the
moisture that is soaked and sunk in unto them; for they often cast out
putrefied and virulent sanious matter: whereby eating and creeping ulcers are
bred, many blisters and pustles arising up in the parts round about it; which
shortly breaking into one, make a great ulcer. These come very seldom and
slowly unto suppuration, or at least to cast out laudible matter, especially if
thy have their original of choler, because the matter is sooner burned with
heat, than suppurated. Therefore then, if they can be brought to suppuration
by no medicines, if the tumor still remain black, if when they are opened
nothing at all, or else a very little sharp moisture Deadly Carbuncles.
does come forth, they are altogether mortal: and there is scarce one of a
thousand who has these accidents that recovereth health: dispersed small
blisters, coming of vapors stirred up by the matter that is under the skin,
and are there stayed and kept from passage forth, do not necessarily fore-shew
death in Carbuncles. But if the part be swollen or puffed up, if it be of a
green or black color, and if it feel neither pricking nor burning, it is a
sign of a mortal Gangrene. Buboes or Carbuncles seldom or never come without
a Fever: but the Fever is more vehement when they are in the emunctories, or
nervous parts, than when they are in the fleshy parts, yet it is less, and all
Symptoms are less, and more tolerable in a man that is strong and of a good
temperature: Carbuncles not only affect the outward, but also the inward
parts, and oftentimes both together. If the heart be vexed in such sort with a
Carbuncle that nothing thereof appears forth on the superficial parts, all
hope of life is past, and those dye suddenly, eating, drinking or walking, and
not thinking any thing of death. If the Carbuncle be in the mid driffe or
lungs, they are soon suffocated: If it be in the brain, the patient becomes
frantic, and so dies. If it be in the parts appointed for the passage of the
urine, they dye of the suppression of their water, as it happened in the Queen
mothers waiting maid at the Castle of Rossilion, of whom I spoke before. If it
be in the stomach, it infers the accidents that are showed in this history
following.

While I was Surgeon in the Hospital of Paris, a young and strong Monk of the
A history.
order of St. Victor, being overseer of the women that kept the sick people of
that place, fell into a continual Fever very suddenly with his tongue black,
dry, rough, (by reason of the putrefied and corrupted humors, and the vapors
rising from the whole body unto that place) and hanging out like unto an
hounds, with unquenchable thirst, often swouning and desire to vomit. He had
convulsions over all his body through the vehemence and malignity of the
disease, and so he dyed the third day: wherefore those that kept the sick
people in the Hospital, thought that he had been poisoned, for the certain
knowledge whereof the Governors of the Hospital commanded his body to be
opened.

I therefore calling to me a Physician and Surgeon, we found in the bottom
of his stomach a print or impression, as if it had been made with an hot Iron
or potentiall Cauterie, with an Eschar or crust as broad as ones nail, all the
rest of his stomach was greatly contracted and shrunk up together, and as it
were horny; which we considering, and especially the Eschar which was deep in
the substance of the stomach, we all said with one voice that he was poisoned
with Sublimate or Arsenick. But behold while I was sowing up his belly, I
perceived many black spots dispersed diversely throughout the skin: then I
asked my company what they thought of those spots; truly (said I) it seems
unto me that they are like unto the purple spots or marks that are in the
pestilence. The Physician and the Surgeon denied it, and said that they were
the bitings of fleas. But I persuaded them to consider How to distinguish
purple spots from fleabitings.
the number of them over all the whole body, and also their great depth and
depression into the flesh; for when we had thrust needles deep into the flesh
in the midst of them, and so cut away the flesh about the needle, we found
the flesh about the needle to be black: moreover his nostrils, nails and
ears were livid, and all the constitution of his body was contrary, and far
unlike to the bodies of those that died of other sicknesses or diseases. Also
it was credibly reported unto us by those that kept him, that his face was so
altered a little before he died, that his familiar friends could hardly know
him. We persuaded by these proofs, revoked our former opinion and sentence,
and made a certificate to be sent unto the Governors and Masters of the
Hospital, setting our hands and seals unto it, to certify them that he died
of a pestilent Carbuncle.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the cure of a pestilent Carbuncle.
BY the forenamed signs of a pestilent Carbuncle, and especially by the Why
Emplastick, very hot, and great drawers are not good for a carbuncle.
bitterness of the pain, malignity of the venomous matter, and by the burning
Fever that is therewithal annexed, I think it manifest, that very hot,
emplastick, and drawing medicines should not be applied to this kind of
tumor; because they prohibit or hinder the exhalation, or wasting forth of
the venenate malignity; because that by stopping the pores of the skin, they
increase and cause a greater heat in the part than there was before. Therefore
it is better to use resolving medicines, which may assuage heat, and resolve
the pores of the skin. Therefore first the place must be fomented with water
and oil mixed together, wherein a little Treacle has been dissolved, leaving
thereon stupes wet therein: you may also use the decoction of Mallows, the
roots of Lillies, Linseeds, Figs, with oil of Hypericon, for to make the
skin thin, and to draw forth the matter; and the day following you must apply
the Cataplasme following.

Take the leaves of Sorrel and Henbane, roast them under the hot ashes;
afterward A Cataplasme for a pestilent Carbuncle.
beat them with four yolks of eggs, two drams of Treacle, oil of Lillies,
three ounces, Barly-meale as much as shall suffice: make thereof a Cataplasme
in the form of a liquid pultis; this asswageth heat, and furthereth
suppuration. Or, Take the roots Another.
of Marsh-mallowes and Lillies, of each four ounces, Linseeds half an ounce,
boil them, beat them, and then strain them through a searse, adding thereto
of fresh butter one ounce and an half, of Mithridate one dram, of
Barly-meale as much as shall suffice: make thereof a Cataplasme according to
Art: those Cataplasmes that follow are most effectual to draw the venomous
matter forth, and to make a perfect suppuration, especially when the flux of
the matter is not so great, but that the part may bear it. Take the roots of
white Lillies, Onions, Leaven, of each half an ounce; Other Cataplasmes.
Mustard-seeds, Pigeons dung, Soap, of each one dram; six snailes in their
shells; of fine Sugar, Treacle and Mithridate, of each half a dram; beat them
all together, and incorporate them with the yolks of eggs, make thereof a
Cataplasme, and apply it warm. Or, Take the yolks of six eggs; of salt
poudered one ounce; of oil of Lillies and Treacle, of each half a dram;
Barly-meale as much as shall suffice: make thereof a Cataplasme. Take of
ordinary Diachylon four ounces; of Unguentum Basilicon two ounces; oil of
Violets half an ounce: make thereof a medicine. Many ancient The effect of
Scabious against a pestilen. Carbuncle.
Professors greatly commend Scabious ground or brayed between two stones, and
mixed with old hogs grease, the yolks of eggs, and a little salt; for it will
cause suppuration in Carbuncles: also an egg mixed with Barly-meale, and oil
of Violets does mitigate pain and suppurate. A Radish root cut in slices, and
so the slices A Radish root draws out the venom powerfully.
laid one after one unto a Carbuncle or pestilent tumor, does mightily draw
out the poison. The juice of Colts foot does extinguish the heat of
Carbuncles: the herb called Divels-bit being bruised, works the like effect:
I have often used the medicine following unto the heat of Carbuncles, with very
good success; it does also assuage pain and cause suppuration. Take of the
soot scraped from a chimny four ounces, of common salt two ounces, beat them
into small powder, adding thereto the yolks of two eggs, and stir them well
together until it come to have the consistence of a pultis, and let it be
applied warm unto the Carbuncle. In the The top of a Carbuncle when, why and
with what to be ^urne^.
beginning the point or head of the Carbuncle must be burned, if it be
black, by dropping thereinto scalding hot oil, or Aquafortis: for by such a
burning the venom is suffocated as touched by lightening, and the pain is
much lessened, as I have proved oftentimes: neither is it to be feared lest
that this burning should be too painful, for it touches nothing but the
point of the Carbuncle, which by reason of the Eschar that is there, is void of
sense. After this burning, you must go forward with the former described
medicines, until the Eschar seems to separate The falling of the Eschar
promi^eth health.
it self from the flesh round about it, which is a token of the patients
recovery, for it signifies that nature is strong and able to resist the
poison. After the fall of the Eschar you must use gentle mundificatives, as
those which we have prescribed in a pestilent Bubo, not omitting sometimes the
use of suppurative and mollifying medicines, that while the gross matter is
cleansed, that which is as yet crude may be brought to suppuration; for then
the indication is twofold, the one to suppurate that which remains as yet
crude and raw in the part, and the other to cleanse that which A twofold
indication.
remains concocted and perfectly digested in the ulcer.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the itching and inflammation happening in pestilent ulcers, and
how to cicatrize them.
THE parts adjoining to a pestilent ulcer oft-times are superficiarily Why the
adjacent parts are troubled with (...).
excoriated by reason of ulcerous pustles, which here and there with burning
and great itching prick and vellicate the part. The cause may happen either
externally or internally; internally by a thin and biting sanies, which
sweating from the ulcer, moystens the neighboring parts. But externally by the
constipation of the pores of the skin induced by the continual application
of medicines. To remedy this, the place must be fomented with discussing and
relaxing A fomentation for this itch.
things, as aquafortis, which the Gold-smithes have used for separating of
metalls, alome water, the water of Lime, Brine and the like. But ulcers left by
Carbuncles Why these ulcer^ate hard to be^ica^^i^ed.
and pestilent Buboes, are difficulty cicatrized by reason of the corroding
sanies, proceeding from the choleric, or phlegmatic and salt blood, which
being in fault by the corruption of the whole substance causes the abscesse.
Besides, such ulcers are commonly round, and therefore more hard to be
cicatrized, for that the quitture has no free passage forth; so the sanies, of
its own nature acride and corroding, does by delay acquire greater acrimony
and intrositie, so that by its burning touch dissolving the adjacent flesh, it
hinders the conjunction and unition of the lips of the ulcer; but in the
interim the lips of the ulcer become callous, which, unless they be helped by
cutting, or eating medicines, the ulcer cannot be healed, for that by their
density they hinder the sweating out of a sufficient quantity of the dewy glue
to heal up the ulcer. Now the ulcer being plained and brought equal to the
other Two sorts of Epuloticks.
flesh, we must use Epuloticks, that is, such things as have a faculty to
cicatrize ulcers by condensing and hardening the surface of the flesh, of these
there are two kinds; for some without much biting bind and dry, such are
pomgranate pills, oak bark, Tutia, litharge, burnt bones, scailes of brass,
galls, cypress nuts, Minium, antimony, bolearmenicke, the burnt and washed
shells of oisters, Lime nine times washed, and many metalline things. Others are
next to these, by which proud flesh is consumed, but such must be sparingly
used: of this kind is washed Vitrioll, burnt Alome, which excels other
Epuloticks, by reason of the excellent drying and astringent faculty
consolidating the flesh, which by being moistened by an excrementitious humor,
grows lanke. For that the scarre which is made, is commonly unsightly in
Remedies against the deformity of scarres.
this kind of ulcers, as red, livide, black, swollen, rough, by reason of the
great adustion imprinted in the part, as by a burning coal, therefore I have
thought good here to set down some means by which this deformity may be
corrected or amended. If the scarre be too big or high, it shall be plained by
making convenient ligation and strait binding to the part a plate of lead
rubbed over with quicksilver; but you may whiten it by anointing it with Lime
nine times washed (that so it may be more gentle and lose the acrimony) and
incorporated with oil of Roses. Some take two pound of Tartar or Argole, burn
it, and then powder it, put it in a cloth, and so let it hang in a moist vault
or cellar, and set a vessel under it to receive the dropping liquor, which is
good to be rubbed for a good space, upon the scarre. The same faculty is
thought to be in that moisture of eggs which sweats through the shel, whilst
they are roasted at the coals; as also unguent. citrinum, and Emplast. de
cerussa newly made: The three following compositions are much approved..
Axungiae suillae nonies lotae in Ointments to attenuate and take away scars.
aceto acerrimo iv. cinab. succi titri, and alum. usti, an. ss. sulphur. vivi
ignem haud experti, ii. caph. ii. fiat pulvis; then let them all be
incorporated together, and make an ointment; it attenuates the skin and
cleanses spots.. olei hyos. olei semin. cucurb. an. i. olei tartar. ss. cerae
alb. iii. liquefiant simul lento igne, deinde add spermat. ceti vi.
removeantur predicta ab igne aonec infrigid. postea add troch. alb. Rhasis
pull. iii. caph. i. tandem cum mali cirei succo omnia diligenter commisce, fiat
linmentum. Or else,. rad. serpent. i. bulliat in aq. com lb i. ad dimid. deinde
add sulph. vivi ignem non experti, and alum. crudi, pulveris. an. iss. colent.
predict. and addatur caph. i. succi hyoscyami iss. Let this medicine be kept in
a lead or glass vessel, and when you would use it, dip linen clothes therein,
and lay them to the part. You may also use these medicines against the redness
of the face, and you may fetch them off in the morning by washing the face with
warm water and bran.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of sundry kinds of Evacuations, and first of sweating and
vomiting.
THe pestilent malignity is not only evacuated and sent forth by the eruption
Why the pestilent malignity is not car^ied away by one way, but by many.
of pustles and spots, but also by sweat, vomit, bleeding at nose, at the
haemorrhoids, by the courses, a flux of the belly, and other ways, so that
nature by every kind of excretion may be freed from the deadly poison,
especially that which is not as yet arrived at the heart. But chief regard
must be had We must have chief regard to the motion of nature.
to the inclination of nature, and we must attend what way it chiefly aims
at, and what kind of excretion it affects. Yet such evacuations are not always
critical, but usually symptomaticall, for that oft-times nature is so
irritated by the untameable malignity of the matter, that it can no way digest
it, but is forced by any means to send it away crude as it is. Wherefore if
nature may seem by the moystnesse of the Signs of future sweat.
skin, the suppression of urine, and other signs to affect a crisis and
excretion by sweat, you then shall procure it by the formerly mentioned means.
It is delivered by the Ancients that all sweats in acute diseases are salutary,
which happen upon a Critical day, which are universal and hot, and signified
before the critical day. But in this A Crises must not be expected in the
Plague,
rapid and deadly disease of the Plague, we must not expect a Crisis, but as
soon as we can, and by what means we may to free nature from so dire and
potent an enemy.

But often times the tough and gross excrementitious humors may be purged by
vomit, which could not be evacuated by strong purges. Therefore also by this
manner of excretion may we hope for the exclusion of the pestilent venom, if
there be nothing which may hinder; and nature by frequent nauseousnesse may
seem to affect this way: the endeavor thereof shall be helped by giving some
half a pint of warm water to be drunk with four ounces of common oil, an
ounce of vinegar, and a How to procure vomit.
little juice of raddish, after the taking of the potion it is fit to thrust
into the throat a goose quill dipped in the same oil, or else a branch of
Rosemary, or else by thrusting in the fingers so to procure vomit, also a
potion of eight ounces of the mucilaginous water of the decoction of Line seeds
will procure vomit. Or else,. rad. raph. in taleol. sect. vel sem. ejus, and
sem. antriplicit, an. iii. bulliant in aquae com. quod sufficit pro dosi, in
colatura dissolve oxym. and sir. acet. an. ss. exhibeatur potio larga and
tepida. Or clse,. oxym. Gal. vi. ol. com. ii. paretur potio tepid. But nature
must not be forced, unless of its own accord it undertake this motion; for
forced and violent vomiting, Why vomit must not be forced.
distends the nervous fibers of the ventricle, dejects the strength, breaks the
vessels of the Lungs, whence proceeds a deadly spitting of blood. Wherefore if
the stomach shall trouble it self with a vain and hurtful desire to vomit; it
shall rather be strengthened with bags of roses, wormwood and Saunders,
using inwardly the juice of Quinces and Berberies, and brothes made for the
same purpose.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of spitting, Salivation, Sneesing, Belching, Hicketting, and
making of Water.
THat long evacuations may be made by spitting and salivation, you may learn
by the example of such as have a plurisie, for the matter of the The effect of
spitting in pestilent diseases.
plurisie being turned into pus, the purulent matter sucked up by the rare and
spongeous substance of the lungs, and thence drawn into the Aspera Arteria, is
lastly cast out by the mouth.

There is none ignorant, how much such as have the Lues venerea are helped by
salivation and spitting. But these shall be procured by Masticatories of the
roots of Ireos, The force of salivation.
Pellitory of Spain, Mastick, and the like, the mucilage of Line seeds held in
the mouth will work the same effect.

That such as have a moist brain may expel their superfluous humors by
sneesing and blowing their noses, the brain by the strength of the expulsive
faculty, being The force of sneesing.
stirred up to the exclusion of that which is harmefull, may be known by the
example of old people and children which are daily purged by their noses; the
brain is stirred up to both kinds of excretion from causes either internal
or external: from the internal, as by a phlegmatic and vaporous matter,
which contained in the brain, offends it; externally, as by receiving the
beams of the sun in the nostri's, or by tickling them with a feather, or
blowing into them the powder of Hellebore, Euphorbium, Pyrethrum, Mustard seed,
and the like sternutamentories. For then the brain is straitened by its own
expulsive faculty, to the excretion of that which is troublous unto it.
Sneesing breaks forth with noise, for that the matter passes through
straits, to wit, by the straining passages of the Os cribrosum, which is seated
at the roots of the nostrills. It is not fit to cause sneesing in a body very
plethorick, unless you have first premised general medicines, lest the
humors should be more powerfully drawn into the brain, and so cause an
Apoplexy, Vertigo, or the like symptoms.

By belching the flatulencies contained in the ventricle, being the offspring
of The commodities of belching.
crudity, or flatulent meats, are expelled, these by their taste and smell,
pleasing, stinking, sweet, bitter or tart, show the condition and kind of
crudity of the humors from whence they are raised: now vomiting freeth the
stomach of crudities, but the distemper must be corrected by contraries, as
altering things to be prescribed by the Physician.

Hicketting is a contraction and extension of the nervous fibers of the
stomach, to cast forth such things as are too contumaciously impact in the
coats thereof; yet repletion only is not the cause thereof, but sometimes
inanition also; so often times a putride vapor, from some other place, breaking
into the stomach, as from a pestilent Bubo, or Carbuncle; also all acide and
acride things, because they prick, vellicate and provoke the tunicles of the
ventricle, as vinegar, spiced things, and the like; often and contumacious
hicketting after purging, a wound or vomiting, is ill; but if a convulsion
presently happen thereon, it is deadly.

Several remedies must be used according to the variety of the causes: for
repletion helps that hicketing that proceeds from inanition, and evacuation
that which happens by repletion: that which proceeds from a putrid and venomous
vapor, is helped by Treacle and Antidotes; that which is occasioned by acide
and acrid things, is cured by the use of gross, fatty, and cold things.

Now the whole body is often times purged by urine, and by this way the
feavourish The whole body purged by urine.
matter is chiefly and properly accustomed to be evacuated: not a few, being
troubled with the Lues venerea, when as they could not be brought to salivation
by unction, have bin cured by the large evacuation of urine caused by diuretic
medicines. Diuretics wherewithal you may move urine, are formerly described
in treating of the stone. But we must abstain from more acride diuretics,
especially when as inflammation is in the bladder; for otherwise the noxious
humors are sent to the affected When we ought to abstain from diuretics.
part, whence there is danger of a deadly Gangrene. Therefore then it is better
to use diversion by sweat.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Menstruall and Haemorrhoidall purgation.
NOt only reason, but also manifold experience induces us to believe that
women, by the benefit of their menstruall purgation, escape and are freed from
great, pestilent, and absolutely deadly diseases; wherefore it must be
procured by remedies, both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied: these may be
taken inwardly How to provoke the courses.
with good success, Cassia lignea, Cinnamon, the bark of the root of a
Mulberry, Saffron, Agricke, Nutmeg, Savine, Diagridium, and diverse others. But
if the affect require more vehement medicines, the roots of Tithymel,
Antimony, Cantharides (taken in small quantity) move the courses most
powerfully; frictions and ligatures made upon the thighs and legs conduce
hereto, as also cupping in the inner and middle part of the thighs, the opening
of the vein Saphena, leaches applied to the orifice of the neck of the womb,
pessaries, nodula's, glysters, baths, fomentations made of oderiferous things,
which by the fragrancy of their odor, How atomatick things provoke the courses.
or rather by their heat, may attenuate and cut gross humors, open the
obstructed orifices of the veins, such are the roots of Marsh-mallowes, Orris,
Parsley, Fennel, Kneholne, the leaves and flowers of St. John's Wort, Asparagus,
Rocket, Balm, Chervile, Mugwort, Mints, Penny-royall, Savory, Rosemary, Rue,
Time, Sage, Bay berries, Broom, Ginger, Cloves, Pepper, Nutmegs, and the like;
the vapor of the boiling whereof, let the woman, sitting upon a perforated
seat, receive by a funnell into the neck of her womb, covering herself warm
on all sides, that so nothing may otherwise breath forth. Of the samethings may
be made bathes, as well general as particular. Also pessaries are good made
after this manner.. theriac. Pessaries to provoke the retms.
mithrid. an. ss. castor. gum. ammoniac. an. i. misce cum bombace in succo
mercurialis tincto, fiat pessarium. Or else,. rad. petroselin. and foenug. sub
cineribus coctas, deinde contusas cum pull. staphysag. pyreth. croco and oleo
liliorum, so make a pessary in the form of a suppository or nodula. Or,. pulv.
myrrh. and aloes, an. i. fol. sabin. nigel. arthemis. an. ii. rad. Helleb.
nigr. i. croci, i. cumsucco mercur. and melle communi: make a pessary in
Cotton. This which follows is more effectual.. succirut. absinth. an. ii.
myrrh. euphorb. castor. sabin. diacrid. terebinth. galban. theriac. an. i. make
a pessary according to art; let a thread hang out of the one end of the
pessaries, that so you may easily draw them forth as you please.

But if this menstruous flux once provoked, flow too immoderately, it must be
stopped by using meats of grosser and more viscide juice, by opening a vein in
the arm, How to stop the courses flowing too immoderately.
application of cupping glasses under the dugs, frictions and ligations of the
upper parts, as the arms, putting up of pessaries, application of
refrigerating and astringent plasters, to the lower belly, share and loins,
laying the woman in a convenient place, and not upon a feather-bed.

This following injection stops the blood flowing out of the womb,. aquae
plant. and fabror. an. lb i. nucum cupres. gallar. immatur. an. ii. berber.
sumach. balaust. vitriol. romans alum. roch. an. ii. bulliant omnia simul, and
fiat decoctio: of this make injection into the womb. In the performance of all
these things, I would have the Surgeon depend upon the advice of a Physician,
as the occasion and place shall permit.

But if nature endeavor to free it self of the pestilent matter by the
hoemorrhoides, you may provoke them by frictions and strong ligatures in the
lower parts, as How to provoke the haemorrhoides.
if the thighs or legs were broken, by ventoses applied with great flame to
the inner side of the thigh, by application of hot and attractive things to the
fundament, such as are fomentations, emplasters, unguents, such as is usually
made of an onion roasted under the embers, and incorporated with Treacle, and a
little oil of Rue: after the hoemorrhoid veins, by these means, come to show
themselves, they shall be rubbed with rough linen cloths, or fig leaves, or a
raw onion, or an ox gall mixed with some powder of Coloquintida: lastly you may
apply horse-leaches, or you may open them with a Lancet, if they hang much
forth of the fundament, and be swollen with much blood. But if they flow too
immoderately, they may be stayed by the same means as the courses.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of procuring evacuation by stool, or a flux of the belly.
NAture often times, both by it self, of its own accord, as also helped by
laxative and purging medicines, casts into the belly and guts, as into the
sink of the body, the whole matter of a pestilent disease, whence are caused
Diarrhaea's, Lienteries, and Dysenteries; you may distinguish these kinds of
fluxes of the belly, by the evacuated excrements. For if they be thin and
sincere, that is, retain the nature of one, and that a simple humor, as of
choler, melancholy or phlegm, and if they be cast forth in a great quantity,
without the ulceration or excoriation of the guts, vehement or fretting pain,
then it is a Diarrhaea, which some also call fluxus humoralis. It is called a
Lienteria, when as by the resolved retentive faculty of the stomach and guts
caused What a Diarrhaea is.
by ill humors, either there collected, or flowing from some other place, or
by a cold and moist distemper, the meat is cast forth crude, and almost as it
was taken. A Dysenteria What a Dysenteria is.
is when as many and different things, and often times mixed with blood, are cast
forth with pain, gripings, and an ulcer of the guts, caused by acride choler,
fretting insunder the coats of the vessels.

But if in any kind of disease, certainly in a pestilent one, fluxes of the
belly happen immoderate in quantity, and horrible in the quality of their
contents, as liquid, viscous, frothy as from melted grease, yellow, red,
purple, green, ash-colored, black, and exceeding stinking. The cause is
various, and many sorts of ill humors, The cause of various, and stinking
excrements in the plague.
which taken hold of by the pestilent malignity, turn into diverse species,
differing in their whole kind both from their particular, as also from nature
in general, by reason of the corruption of their proper substance, whose
inseparable sign is stinch, which is often times accompanied by worms.

In the camp at Amiens a pestilent Dysentery was overall the Camp, in this
the strongest Soldiers purged forth mere blood: I dissecting some of their
dead bodies, A history.
observed the mouths of the Mesaraike Veins and Arteries, opened and much
swollen, and whereas they entered into the guts, were just like little
Catyledones, out of which, as I pressed them, there flowed blood. For both by
the excessive heat of the summers sun, and the minds of the enraged
soldiers, great quantity of acride and choleric humor was generated, and so
flowed into the belly: but you shall know whether the greater or the lesser
guts be ulcerated, better by the mixture of the blood with the excrements, than
by the site of the pain, therefore in the one you must rather work by
Glysters, but in the other, by Medicines taken by the mouth.

Therefore if by gripings, a tenesmus, the murmuring and working of the guts,
you suspect in a pestilent disease, that nature endeavors to disburden it self
by the lower parts, neither in the mean while do it succeed to your desire,
then must it be helped forward by art, as by taking a potion of ss. of hiera
simplex, and a dram of Diaphaenicon A potion.
dissolved in worme-wood water.

Also Glysters are good in this case, not only for that they assuage the
gripings and pains, and draw by continuation or succession from the whole
body, but also because they free the mesaraike veins and guts from obstruction
and stuffing, so that by opening and as it were unlocking of the passages,
nature may afterward more freely free it self from the noxious humors. In
such glysters they also sometimes mix two or three drammes of Treacle, that by
one and the same labor they may retunde the venenate malignity of the matter.

There may also be made for the same purpose suppositories of boiled honey i. of
hier a picra and common salt, of each ss. or that they may be the stronger, of
honey Suppositories.
iii. of ox gall i. of Scammony, euphorbium and coloquintida poudred, of each
ss. The want of these may be supplied by nodula's made in this form.. vitell.
ovor. nu. iii. fellis bubuli, and mellis, an. ss. salis com. ss. let them be
stirred together, and well incorporated, and so parted into linen rags, and
then bound up into nodula's, of the bigness of a filberd, and so put up into
the fundament, you may make them more acride by adding some powder of
Euphorbium or Coloquintida.

CHAP. XL. Of stopping the flux of the belly.
VIolent and immoderate scourings, for that they resolve the faculty, and lead
the patient into a consumption and death, therefore if they shall appear to be
such, they must be stayed in time by things taken and injected by the mouth and
fundament. To this purpose may a pudding be made of wheat flower boiled in the
water of the decoction of one pomegranate, A hasty pudding to stay the lack.
berberies, bole armenick, terra figillata, and white poppie seeds, of each i.
The following Almond milk strengthens the stomach, and mitigates the acrimony
of the choleric humor, provoking the guts to excretion. Take sweet Almonds
boiled in the water of barley, wherein steel or Iron has been quenched, beat
them in a marble motter, and so with some of the same water make them into an
Almond milk, whereto adding i. of Diarhodon Abbat is you may give it to the
patient to drink.

This following medicine I learnt of Dr. Chappelaine the Kings chief
physician, who received it of his father, and held it as a great secret, and
was wont to prescribe it with happy success to his patients: It is thus,. boli
armen. terrae sigil. lapid. haemat. D. Chappelaines medicine to stay a scouring.
an. i. picis navalis, iss. coral rub. marg. elect. corn. cervi ust. and loti
in aq. plant. an. i. sacchar. ros. ii. fiat pulvisc. of this let the patient
take a spoonefull before meat, or with the yolke of an egg.

Christopher Andrew in his oecoiatria much commends dogs dung, when as the
dog has for three days before bin fed only with bones.

Quinces roasted in embers, or boiled in a pot, the conserve of cornelian
cherries, preserved berberies and myrabalans, roasted nutmeg taken before meat,
strengthen the stomach and stay the laske; the patient must feed upon good
meats, and these rather reasted than boiled. His drink shall be chalibeate
water of the docoction of a some pomegranate beaten, or of the decoction of a
quince, medlars, cervices, mulberies, (...).
bremble berries, and the like things, endued with a faculty to bind and waste
the excrementitious humidities of the body: these waters shall be mixed with
syrup of red currance, Julep of roses, and the like.

Let the region of the stomach and belly be anointed with oil of masticke,
Moschatelinum, myrtles and quinces. Also a crust of bread newly drawn forth of
the oven Ointments.
and steeped in vinegar and rose water, may be profitably applied; or else a
cataplasme of red roses, sumach, berberies, myrtles, the pulpe of quinces,
mastick, bean flower, and honey of roses made up with calibeate water.

Anodyne, abstergent, astringent, consolidating and nourishing glysters shall
be injected. These following retund the acrimony of humors, and assuage
pain.. fol. lactuc. hyosc. acetos. portul. an. m. i. flor. violar. and nenuph.
an. p i. fiat decoctio ad Glysters to stay ^.
lb i. in colatura dissolve cassiae fistul. vi. olei rosat. and nenuph. an.
iss. fiat clyster. Or else,. ros. rub. hord. mund. sem. plant, an. p i. fiat
decoctio, in colatura add olei ros. ii. vitel. ovor. ii. fiat clyster. Or,.
decoctionis Capi, crur. vitellin. and capit. vervicin. una cum pelle, lb ii. in
qua coquantur fol. violar. malv. mercur. plantag. an. m i. hord. mund. i.
quatuor sem. frigid. major. an. ss. in colaturae lb ss. dissolve cass. recenter
extract. i. ol. viol. iv. vitellor. ovor. ii. sach. rub. i. fiat clyster. Or,.
flor. chamaem. melil. aneth. an. p i. rad. bismal. i. fiat decoctio in lacte;
colaturae add mucag. sem. lin. foenugr. extract. in aqua malv. ii. sacchar.
rub. i. olei cham. and aneth. an. iss. vitellor. ovor. ii. fiat clyster.

Such glysters must be long kept that they may more readily mitigate pain.
When shavings of the guts appear in the stools, it is an argument that there
is an ulcer in the guts; therefore then we must use detergent and
consolidating glysters, as this which follows.

. hordei integr. p ii. ros. rub. flor. chamoem. plantag. apii, an. p i. fiat
decoctio, in colatura dissolve mellis rosat. and sir. de absinth. an. iss.
vitel. ovor. ii. This following A glyster for ulcerated guts.
glyster consolidateth.. succi plantag. centinod. and portulac. nu ii. bol.
armen. sang. dracon. amyl. an. i. sebi hircini dissoluti, iii. fiat clyster.
Also cowes milk boiled with plantaine and mixed with syrup of roses is an
excellent medicine for the ulcerated guts.

This following glyster binds.. caud. equin. plant. polygon. an. m i. fiat
decoctio in lacte ustulato ad quart. iii. and in colatura add boli arm. terrae
sigil. sang. dracon. an. ii. A very astringent glystar.
albumina duor. ovor. fiat clyster. Or else,. suc. plant. arnoglos. centinod.
portulac. residentia facta depuratorum quantum sufficit pro clystere, addendo
pull. boli armeni, terrae sigil. sang. dracon. an. i. ol. myrthin. and rosat.
an. ii. fiat clyster.

If pure blood flow forth of the guts, I could wish you to use stronger
astrictives. To which purpose I much commend a decoction of pomegranate pills,
of cypress nuts, red rose leaves, sumach, alome, and vitrioll made with
smithes water, and so made into glysters, without any oil. It will be good
with the same decoction to foment the fundament, perinaeum, and the whole belly.

Astringent glysters ought not to be used before that the noxious humors be
drawn away and purged by purging medicines, otherwise by the stoppage hereof,
the body may chance to be oppressed.

If the patient be so weak that he cannot take or swallow any thing by
mouth, nutritive glysters shall be given him.. decoctionis capi pinguis, and
cruris vitulini, A nourishing glyster.
coct. cum acetosa, buglosso, boragine, pimpinella, lactuca, x. vel xii. in
quibus dissolve vitellos ovorum, number iii. sacchari rosati, and aquae vitae, an.
i. butyri recentis non saliti, ii. fiat clyster.

CHAP. XLI. Of evacuation by insensible transpiration.
THe pestilent malignity as it is often times drawn by the pores, by
transpiration into the body, so often times it is sent forth invisibly the same
way again. For our native heat that is never idle in us, disperseth the
noxious humors attenuated into vapors and air through the unperceivable
breathing places of the skin. An argument hereof is, we see that the tumors
and abscesses Tumors are oft-times discussed by the force of nature after they
are suppurated.
against nature, even when they are come to suppuration, are often times resolved
and discussed by the only efficacy of nature, and heat, without any help of
art. Therefore there is no doubt, but that nature being prevalent, may free it
self from the pestilent malignity by Transpiration, some Abscesse, Bubo or
Carbuncle being come forth, and some matter collected in some certain part of
the body. For when as nature and the native heat are powerful and strong,
nothing is impossible to it, especially when as the passages are also in like
manner free and open.

CHAP. XLII. How to cure Infants and Children taken with the Plague.
IF that it happen that sucking or weaned children be infected with the
pestilence, they must be cured after another order than is yet described. The
Nurse of the sucking child must govern her self so in diet and The nurse
must be dicted when as the child is sick.
the use of medicines, as if she were infected with the pestilence her self:
Her diet consists in the use of the six things not natural. Therefore let it
be moderate, for the fruit or profit of that moderation in diet cannot choose
but come unto the Nurses milk, and so unto the infant who lives only by the
milk. And the infant it self must keep the same diet as near as he can in
sleep, waking, and expulsion, or avoiding of superfluous humors and excrements
of the body. Let the Nurse be fed with those things that mitigate the violence
of the feverish heat: as cooling brothes, cooling herbs, and meats of a
moderate temperature: she must wholly abstain from wine, and anoint her
nipples, as often as she gives the infant suck, with water, or juice of
sorrel tempered with sugar of roses. But the infants heart must be fortified
against the violence of the increasing venom, by giving it one scruple of
treacle in the Nurses milk, the broth of a pullet, or some other cordial
water. It is also very necessary to anoint the region of the heart, the
emunctories, and both the wrests with the same medicine: neither were it
unprofitable to smell often unto Treacle dissolved in rose water, vinegar of
roses and a little aqua vitae, that so nature may be strengthened against the
malignity of the venom. When the Medicines may be given to such as are weaned.
children are weaned, and somewhat well grown, they may take medicines by the
mouth, for when they are able to concoct and turn into blood meats that are
more gross and firm than milk, they may easily actuate a gentle medicine.
Therefore a potion must be prepared for them of twelve grains of treacle,
dissolved with a little of the syrup of succory in some cordial water, or the
broth of a capon: unless that any had rather give it with conserve of roses,
in form of a bole: but treacle must be given to children in very small
quantity, for if it be taken in any large quantity, there is great danger lest
that by inflaming the humors, it infer a fever. Furthermore, broth may be
prepared to be taken often, made of a capon seasoned with sorrel, lettuce,
purslaine and cooling seeds, adding thereto bole armenick and terra sigillata,
of each one ounce, being tied in a rag, and sometimes pressed out from the
decoction. For bole armenicke, whether it be by its mavelous faculty of
drying, or by some hidden property, has this virtue, that being drunken
(according as Galen witnesses) Lib. 9. simp. cap. 7.
it cures those that are infected with the pestilence, if so be that they may
be cured by physic: so that those that cannot be cured with bole armenick,
cannot be preserved by any other medicines. But because the bodies of children
are warm, moist and vaporous, they are easily delivered of some portion of the
venenate matter The benefit sweat.
through the pores of the skin by provoking sweat, with a decoction of parsley
seeds, prunes, figs, and the roots of sorrel, with a little of the powder of
Hearts horn, or Ivory. But that the sweat may be more abundant and copious,
apply spunges dipped and pressed out in the hot decoction of sage, rosemary,
lavender, bays, chamomil, melilote and mallows, or else swines bladders half
filled with the same decoction, to the arme-holes, and to the groines. In the
time that they sweat, let their faces be fanned to cool them. Also let a
nodule of Treacle, dissolved in vinegar and water of Roses, be appled to the
nostrils; but always use a moderation in sweating, because that children are
of a substance that is easy to be dissipated and resolved: so that oftentimes
although they do not sweat, yet they feel the commodities of sweating, the
matter of the venom being dissipated by the force of the heat through the
pores of the skin. But in the sweating while the face is fanned, and sweet and
cordial things applied to the nostrils, nature must be recreated and
strengthened, which otherwise would be debilitated through sweating, that it
may be better able to expel the venom. After that the sweat is wiped away,
it is very profitable to take a potion of conserve of Roses, with the powder of
Hearts horn or of Ivorie dissolved in the waters of Buglosse and Sorrel, the
better to cool and defend the heart. If there appear any tumor under the
arme-holes or in the groine, let it be brought to maturation with a
mollifying, relaxing, drawing, and then with a suppurative fomentation, or
Cataplasme; always using and handling it as gently as you may, considering the
tender age of the infant. If you have need to purge the patient, the purgation
following may be prescribed with great profit. Take of Rubarbe in powder one
dram, infuse it in the water of Carduus Benedictus, with one scruple of
Cinnamon, in the straining The form of a purge to be given to a child.
dissolve two drams of Diacatholicon, of syrup of Roses laxative three drams;
make thereof a small potion. This is the cure of the Pestilence and of the
pestilent Fever, as far as I could learn from the most learned Physicians, and
have observed my self by manifold experience by the grace and permission of
God: of whom alone, as the Author of all good things that mortal men enjoy,
the true and certain preservatives against the pestilence are to be desired
and hoped for.

The End of the Twenty second Book.
OF THE MEANS AND MANNER TO REPAIR OR SUPPLY THE NATURAL or accidental
defects or wants in man's body. THE TWENTY THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. How the loss of the natural or true eye may be covered, hidden or
shadowed.
HAving at large treated in the former Books of tumors, wounds, ulcers,
fractures and luxations, by what means things dissolved and dislocated might
be united, things united separated, and superfluities consumed or abated: Now
it remains that we speak The fourth duty of a Surgeon.
of the fourth office or duty of the Chirurgian, which is to supply or repair
those things that are wanting by nature, through the default of the first
conformation, or afterward by some mischance. Therefore, if that through any
mischance, as by an inflammation, any man's eye happen to be broken or put out,
and the humors spilt or wasted, or if it be stricken out of his place or cavity
wherein it was naturally placed, by any violent stroke, or if it waste or
consume by reason of a consumption of the proper substance, then there is no
hope to restore the sight or function of the eye, yet you may cover the
deformity of the eye so lost (which is all you can do in such a case) by this
means: If that when you have perfectly cured and healed the ulcer, you may put
another eye artificially made of gold or silver, counterfeited and enamelled,
so that it may seem to have the brightness, or gemmie decency of the natural
eye, into the place of the eye that is so lost.

The forms of eyes artificially made of gold or silver, polished and enameled,
showing both the inner and outer side.


But if the patient be unwilling, or by reason of some other means cannot
wear this eye so prepared, in his head, you may make another on this wise. You
must have a string or wiar, of iron bowed or crooked, like unto women's
eare-wiars, made to bind the head harder or looser as it pleases the patient,
from the lower part of the head behind above the ear, unto the greater corner
of the eye, this rod or wiar must be covered with silk, and it must also be
somewhat broad at both the ends, lest that the sharpness thereof should
pierce or prick any part that it comes unto. But that end wherewith the
empty hollownesse must be covered, ought to be broader than the other, and
covered with a thin piece of leather, that thereon the colors of the eye that
is lost may be shadowed or counterfeited. Here follows the figure or
portraiture of such a string or wiar.

The form of an iron wiar wherewith the deformity of an eye that is lost may
be shadowed or covered.


CHAP. II. By what means a part of the nose that is cut off, may be restored;
or how in stead of the nose that is cut off, another counterfeit nose may be
fastened or placed in the stead.
WHen the whole nose is cut off from the face, or portion of the nostrils from
the nose, it cannot be restored or joined again: for it is not in men as it
is in plants. For plants have a weak and feeble Why the parts of plants being
cut off, may grow again, but those of man cannot.
heat, and furthermore it is equally dispersed into all the substance of the
plant or tree, neither is it easy to be consumed or wasted, for when the
boughs or branches of trees are broken, torn, or cut away, they live
nevertheless, and will grow again when they are set or grafted; neither is
there any seat for the heart rightly prepared in them from whence the heat
must necessarily run, and disperse it self continually into all the parts
thereof. But contrariwise, the separated parts of more perfect living
creatures, as of men, are incontinently deprived of life, because they have
their nourishment, life, sense, and whole sustentation not of themselves, by
faculties flowing or coming unto them from some other parts, neither are they
governed by their own heat as plants, but by a borrowed heat, so that above or
beside the natural faculty of the liver, another vital faculty comes unto
it from the heart.

Wherefore in stead of the nose cut away or consumed, it is requisite to
substitute another made by Art, because that nature cannot supply that defect:
this nose so artificially made, must be of gold, silver, paper or linen
clothes glewed together, it must be so colored, counterfeited and made both
of fashion, figure and bigness, that it may as aptly as is possible, resemble
the natural nose: it must be bound or stayed with little threeds or laces unto
the hinder part of the head or the hatte. Also if there be any portion of the
upper lip cut off with the nose, you may shadow it with annexing some such
thing that is wanting unto the nose, and cover it with the hair on his upper
lip, that he may not want any thing that may adorn or beautify the face.
Therefore I have thought it necessary to set down the figure or form of both
these kinds.

The form of a nose artificially made, both alone by it self, and also with
the upper lip, covered at it were with the hair of the beard.


There was a Surgeon of Italy of late years which would restore or repair the
A strange cure for a cut off nose
portion of the nose that was cut away after this manner. He first scarified
the callous edges of the maimed nose round about, as is usually done in the
cure of hare-lips: then he made a gash or cavity in the muscle of the arm,
which is called Biceps, as large as the greatness of the portion of the nose
which was cut away did require: And into that gash or cavity so made, he would
put that part of the nose so wounded, and bind the patients head to his arm as
if it were to a poast, so fast that it might remain firm, stable and
immovable, and not lean or bow any way, and about forty days after, or at
that time when he judged the flesh of the nose was perfectly agglutinated with
the flesh of the arm, he cut out as much of the flesh of the arm, cleaving
fast unto the nose, as was sufficient to supply the defect of that which was
lost, and then he would make it even, and bring it, as by licking, to the
fashion and form of a nose, as near as art would permit, and in the mean while
he did feed his patient with ponadoes, gellies, and all such things as were
easy to be swallowed and digested. And he did this work of curing the place
where the flesh was so cut out, only with certain balmes and agglutinative
liquors. A younger brother of the family of St. Thoan, being weary of a silver
A history.
nose, which being artificially made, he had worn in the place of his nose that
was cut off, went to this Chirurgian into Italy, and by the means of the
forenamed practice he recovered a nose of flesh again, to the great
admiration of all those that knew him before. This thing truly is possible to
be done, but it is very difficult both to the patient suffering, and also to
the Chirurgian working. For that the flesh that is taken out of the arm, is
not of the like temperature as the flesh of the nose is, also the holes of the
restored nose cannot be made as they were before.

CHAP. III. Of the Placing of teeth artificially made in stead of those that
are lost or wanting.
IT often times happens that the fore teeth are moved, broken or stricken out
of their places by some violent blow, which causes deformity of the mouth, and
hinders plain pronunciation. Therefore when the jaw is restored (if it were
luxated or fractured) and the gums brought unto their former hardness, other
teeth artificially made of bone or Ivory may be put in the place of those that
are wanting, and they must be joined one fast unto another, and also so
fastened unto the natural teeth adjoining, that are whole; and this must
chiefly be done with a thread of gold or silver, or for want of either, with a
common thread of silk or flax, as it is declared at large by Hippocrates, and
also described in this figure following. Sect. (...). lib. de art. sent. ^5.


The figure of teeth bound or fastened together.


CHAP. IIII. Of filling the hollownesse of the Pallat.
MAny times it happens that a portion or part of the bone of the pallat, The
causes and hurt that ensues of the lost pallat.
being broken with the shot of a gun, or corroded by the virulency of the Lues
venerea, falls away, which makes the patients to whom this happens, that they
cannot pronounce their words distinctly, but obscurely and snuffling: therefore
I have thought it a thing worthy the labor to show the means how it may be
helped by art. It must be done by filling the cavity of the pallat with a plate
of gold or silver a little bigger than the cavity its self is. But it must be
as thick as a French Crown, and made like unto a dish in figure, and on the
upper side, which shall be toward the brain, a little sponge must be
fastened, which, when it is moistened with the moisture distilling from the
brain, will become more swollen and puffed up, so that it will fill the
concavity of the pallat, that the artificial pallat cannot fall down, but
stand fast and firm, as if it stood of it self. This is the true figure of
those instruments, whose certain use I have observed not by once or twice, but
by manifold trial in the battles fought beyond the Alps.

The figure of plates to fill or supply the defects of the Pallat.


The figure of another plate for the Pallat, on whose upper side there is a
button which may be turned when it is put into the place, with a small Ravens
bill, like this whose figure is here expressed.


CHAP. V. How to help such as cannot speak by reason of the loss of some
part of the tongue.
CHance gave place and authority to this remedy, as to many other in our art. A
remedy found out by accident. A history.
A certain man dwelling in a village named Yvoy le Chastean, being some twenty
four miles from Bourges, had a great piece of his tongue cut off, by which
occasion he remained dumb some three years. It happened on a time that as
he was in the fields with reapers, he drinking in a wooden dish, was tickled
by some of the standers by, not enduring the tickling, he suddenly broke out
into articulate and intelligible words. He himself wondering thereat, and
delighted with the novelty of the thing, as a miracle, put the same dish to his
mouth just in the same manner as before, and then he spoke so plainly and
articulately, that he might be understood by them all. Wherefore a long time
following he always carried this dish in his bosom, to utter his mind, until
at length necessity, the mistress of arts and giver of wit, inducing him, he
caused a wooden instrument to be neatly cut and made for him, like this which
is here delineated, which he always carried hanging at his neck, as the only
interpreter of his mind, and the key of his speech.

An instrument made to supply the defect of the speech when the tongue is cut
off.
The use of the Instrument is this.

A. shows the upper part of it which was of the thickness of a nine-pence,
which he did so hold between his cutting teeth, that it could not come out of
his mouth, nor be seen. B. shows the lower part, as thick as a sixe-pence,
which he did put hard to the rest of his tongue, close to the membranous
ligament which is under the tongue. That place which is deprest and somewhat
hollowed, marked with the letter C. is the inner part of the instrument. D.
shows the outside of the same. He hanged it about his neck with the string
that is tied thereto.



Textor the Physician of Bourges showed me this instrument: and I my self made
trial thereof on a young man whose tongne was cut off, and it succeeded well,
and took very good effect. And I think other Surgeons in such cases may do the
like.

CHAP. VI. Of covering or repairing certain defects or defaults in the face.
IT oftentimes happens, that the face is deformed by the sudden flashing of
Gunpowder, or by a pestilent Carbuncle, so that one cannot behold it without
great horror. Such persons must be so trimmed and ordered, that they may come
in seemly manner into the company of others. The lips if they be either cut
off with a sword, or deformed with the erosion or eating of a pestilent
Carbuncle or ulcerated Cancer, so that the teeth may be seen to lie bare with
great deformity. If the loss or consumption of the lip be not very great, it
may be repaired by that way which we have prescribed in the cure of hare, lips,
or of an ulcerated Cancer. But if it be great, then must there be a lip of gold
made for it, so shadowed and counterfeited, that it may not be much unlike in
color to the natural lip, and it must be fastened and tied to the hat or cap
that the patient wears on his head, that so it may remain stable and firm.

CHAP. VII. Of the defects of the ears.
SUch as want their ears, either naturally or by misfortune, as through a
wound, carbuncle, cancer, or the biting of wild beasts: if so be that the ear
be not wholly wanting, wasted, consumed, or torn away, but that some portion
thereof does yet remain, then must it not be neglected, but must have many
holes made therein with a bodkin, and after that the holes are cicatrized, let
some convenient thing, made like unto the piece of the ear that is lost, be
tied or fastened unto it by these holes.

But if the ear be wholly wanting, another must be made of paper
artificially glewed together, or else of leather, and so fastened with laces,
from the top or hinder part of the head, that it may stand in the appointed
place, and so the hair must be permitted to grow long, or else some cap worn
under the hat which may hide or cover the deformity, unless you had rather
have it to be shadowed and counterfeited by some Painter, that thereby it may
resemble the color of a natural ear, and so retein it in the place where it
ought to stand, with a rod or wiar coming from the top or hinder part of the
head, as we have spoken before in the loss of the eye; and the form thereof
is this.



CHAP. VIII. Of amending the deformity of such as are crooke-backt.
THe bodies of many, especially young maids or girls (by reason that they are
more moist and tender than the bodies of boys) are made crooked in process of
time, especially by the wrenching aside and crookedness of the backe-bone. It
has many causes, that is to say, in the first conformation Causes of
crookedness.
in the womb, and afterward by misfortune, as a fall, bruise, or any such
like accident, but especially by the unhandsome and undecent situation of their
bodies, when they are young and tender, either in carrying, sitting or standing
(and especially when they are taught to go too soon) saluting, sewing,
writing, or in doing any such like thing.

In the mean while, that I may not omit the occasion of crookedness, that
happens seldom to the country people, but is much incident to the inhabitants
of great towns and cities, which is by reason of the straitness and
narrowness of the garments that are worn by them, which is occasioned by the
folly of mothers, who while they covet to have their young daughters bodies so
small in the middle as may be possible, pluck and draw their bones awry, and
make them crooked. For the ligaments of the backbone being very tender, soft
and moist at that age, cannot stay it strait, and strongly, but being pliant,
easily permits the spondels to slip awry inwards, outward, or sidewise, as
they are thrust or forced.

The remedy for this deformity is to have breast-plates of iron, full of holes
all over them, whereby they may be lighter to wear; and they must be so lined
with bombast, that they may hurt no place of the body. Every three months new
plates must be made for those that are not yet arrived at their full growth,
for otherwise by the daily afflux of more matter, they would become worse. But
these plates will do them small good that are already at their full growth.

The form of an iron Breast Plate, to amend the crookedness of the Body.


CHAP. IX. How to relieve such as have their urine flow from them against their
wills, and such as want their yards.
IN those that have the strangury, of what cause soever that malady comes,
the urine passes from them by drops, against their wills and consent. This
accident is very grievous and troublesome, especially to men that travail: and
for their sakes only I have invented the instrument here beneath described. It
is made like unto An instrument for such as cannot hold their water.
a close breech or hose, it must be of latin, and to contein some four ounces;
it must be put into the patients hose, between his thighs, unto which it must
be tied with a point by the ring. Into the open and hollow mouth of this
instrument, which is noted with the letter C. the patient must put his yard,
and into this concavity or hollownesse goes a stay somewhat deep, it is marked
with the letter B. and made or placed there, both to hold or bear the end of
the yard, and also by his close joint that it must have unto the vessel, to
stay the urine from going back again, when it is once in. But the letters A.
and D. do signify all the instrument; that the former part, and this the
hinder part thereof. Now this is the shape thereof.

The figure of an instrument, which you may call A Basin, or receptacle for the
Urine.


Those that have their yards cut off close to their bellies, are greatly
troubled in making of urine, so that they are constrained to sit down like
women, for their ease. I have devised this pipe or conduit, having an hole
through it as big as ones finger, which may be made of wood, or rather of latin.

A. and C. do show the bigness and length of the pipe. B. shows the brink
on the broader end. D. shows the outside of the brinke. This instrument must
be applied to the lower part of ospectinis: on the upper end it is compassed
with a brink for the passage of the urine, for thereby it will receive the
urine the better, and carry it from the patient, as he stands upright.

The description of a pipe, or conduit, serving instead of the yard in making
of water, which therefore we may call an artificial Yard.


CHAP. X. By what means the perished function or action of a thumb or finger
may be corrected and amended.
WHen a synew or tendon is cut clean asunder, the action in that part, whereof
it was the author, is altogether abolished, so that the member cannot bend or
stretch out it self, unless it be helped by art: which thing I performed in
a certain gentleman belonging to Annas of Montmorency, A history.
general of the French Horsemen, who in the battle of Dreux received so great
a wound with a back-sword, upon the outside of the wrest of the right hand,
that the tendons that did erect or draw up the thumb were cut clean insunder,
and also when the wound was thoroughly whole and consolidated, the thumb was
bowed inwards, and fell into the palm of the hand, so that he could not extend
or lift it up, unless it were by the help of the other hand, and then it
would presently fall down again; by reason whereof he could hold neither
sword, spear, nor Javeline in his hand, so that he was altogether unprofitable
for war, without which he supposed there was no life. Wherefore he consulted
with me about the cutting away of his thumb, which did hinder his griping,
which I refused to do, and told him that I conceived a means how it might be
remedied without cutting away. Therefore I caused a case to be made for it of
Latin, whereinto I put the thumb: this case was so artificially fastened by
two strings that were put into two Rings, made in it above the joint of the
hand, that the thumb stood upright, and straight out, by reason whereof he was
able afterward to handle any kind of weapon.

The form of a thumb or finger-stall of iron or latin, to lift up or erect
the thumb, or any other finger that cannot be erected of it self.


If that in any man the finewes or tendons which hold the hand upright, be cut
asunder with a wound, so that he is not able to lift up his hand, it may
easily be erected or lifted up with this instrument that follows, being made
of an equal, straight, thin, but yet strong plate of latin, lined on the
inner side with silk, or any such like soft thing, and so placed in the wrest
of the hand, that it may come unto the palm, or the first joints of the
fingers, and it must be tied above with convenient stays, and so the
discommodity of the depression, or hanging of the hand, may be avoided;
therefore this instrument may be called the Erector of the hand.

The Erector of the Hand.


CHAP. XI. Of helping those that are Vari or Valgi, that is, crooke-legged or
crooke-footed, inwards or outward.
THose are said to be Varous, whose feet or legs are bowed or crooked inwards.
What varus is.
This default is either from the first conformation in the womb, through the
default in the mother, who has her legs in like manner crooked; or because
that in the time when she is great with child, she commonly sits with her legs
a cross: or else after the child is born, and that, either because his legs be
not well swathed, when he is laid into the cradle, or else because they be not
well placed in carrying the infant, or if he be not well looked unto by the
nurse when he learneth to go, for the bones of infants are very tender, and
almost as flexible as Wax.

But contrariwise, those are called valgi, whose legs are crooked or bowed
out-wards. What valgus is.
This may come through the default of the first conformation, as well as the
other, for by both, the feet and also the knees may be made crooked; which
thing, whosoever will amend, must restore the bones into their proper and
natural place, so that in those that are varous he must thrust the bones
outward, as though he would make them valgous, and in those that are valgous,
he must thrust the bones inwards, as though he would make them varous:
neither is it sufficient to thrust them so, but they ought also to be retained
there in their places after they are so thrust, for otherwise they being not
well established, would slip back again.

They must be stayed in their places by applying of collers and bolsters on
that side whereunto the bones do lean and incline themselves; for the same
purpose boots may be made of leather, of the thickness of a testone, having a
slit in the former part all along the bone of the leg, and also under the sole
of the foot, that being drawn together on both sides, they may be the better
fitted, and sit the closer to the leg. And let this medicine following be
applied all about the leg.. thuris, mastich. A plaster to hold fast rest. red
bones.
aloes, boli armeni, an. i. aluminis roch. resinae pini siccae, subtilissime
pulveris. an. iii. farinae volat. iss. album. ovor. q. s. make thereof a
medicine. You may also add a little turpentine, lest it should dry sooner, or
more vehemently than is necessary. But you must beware, and take great heed
lest that such as were of late varous or valgous should attempt or strain
themselves to go before that their joints be confirmed, for so the bones that
were lately set in their places, may slip aside again. And moreover, until
they are able to go without danger, let them wear high shoes tied close to
their feet, that the bones may be stayed the better and more firmly in their
places, but let that side of the soale of the shoe be underlayed whither the
foot did incline before it was restored.

The form of little boots, whereof the one is open and the other shut.


CHAP. XII. By what means arms, legs, and hands may be made by art, and
placed in stead of the natural arms, legs, or hands that are cut off and lost.
NEcessity oftentimes constraines us to find out the means whereby we may help
and imitate nature, and supply the defect of members that are perished and
lost. And hereof it comes that we may perform the functions of going,
standing and handling with arms and hands made by art, and undergo our
necessary flexions and extensions with both of them. I have gotten the forms
of all those members made so by art, and the proper names of all the engines
and instruments whereby those artificially made are called, to my great cost and
charges, of a most ingenious and excellent Smith dwelling at Paris, who is
called of those that know him, and also of strangers, by no other name than the
little Loraine, and here I have caused them to be portrayed or set down, that
those that stand in need of such things, after the example of them, may cause
some Smith, or such like workman to serve them in the like case. They are not
only profitable for the necessity of the body, but also for the decency and
comeliness thereof. And here follows their forms.

The form of an hand made artificially of iron.


This figure following shows the backside of an hand artificially made, and
so that it may be tied to the arm or sleeve.


The form of an arm made of iron very artificially.


The description of legs made artificially of iron.


The form of a wooden Leg made for poor men.
A. Shows the stump or stock of the wooden leg. BB. Shows the two stays
which must be on both sides of the leg, the shorter of them must be on the
inner side. CC. Shows the pillow or bolster whereon the knee must rest in the
bottom between the two stays, that so it may rest the softer. DD. Shows the
thongs or girths with their round buckles, put through the two stays on either
side to stay the knee in his place firm and immovable, that it slip not aside.
E. Shows the thigh it self, that you may know after what fashion it must
stand.



It happens also many times, that the patient, that has had the nerves or
tendons of his leg wounded, long after the wound is whole and consolidated,
cannot go but with very great pain and torment, by reason that the foot
cannot follow the muscle, that should draw it up. That this malady, may be
remedied you ought to fasten a linen band made very strong, unto the shoe
that the patient wears on that his pained foot, and at the knee it must have
a slit where the knee may come forth in bowing of the leg, and it must be
trussed up fast unto the patients middle, that it may the better lift up and
erect the foot in going. This band is marked in the figure following with the
letters AA.



CHAP. XIII. Of amending or helping lamenesse or halting.
HAlting is not only a great deformity, but also very troublesome and
grievous. Therefore if that any man be grieved therewith by reason that one of
his legs is shorter than the other, it may be helped by putting under his short
foot this sitting crutch, which we are now about to describe. For by the help
of this, he shall not only go upright, but also more easily and with little
labor or no pain at all. It was taught me by Nicholas Picard Chirurgian to
the Duke of Loraine. The form thereof is this.

A. Shows the staff or stilt of this crutch, which must be made of wood. B.
Shows the seat of iron whereon the thigh rests, just under the buttocke. C.
Shows a prop which stays up the seat whereon all the weight of the patients
body rests. D. Shows the stirrup, being made of iron, and bowing crooked
upwards, that the foot may stand firm, and not slip off it when the patient
goes. E. Shows the prop that stays or holds up the stirrup to strengthen
it. F. Shows the foot of the stilt or crutch made of iron with many pikes,
and compassed with a ring or ferule, so to keep it from slipping. G. The
cross or head of the crutch which the patient must put under his arme-hole to
lean upon, as it is to be seen in the figure.



The End of the Twenty third Book.
OF THE GENERATION OF MAN. THE TWENTY FOURTH BOOK.
THE PREFACE.
GOD, the Creator and maker of all things, immediately after The distinction of
male and female.
the Creation of the world, of his unspeakable counsel and inestimable
wisdom not only distinguished mankind, but all other living creatures also,
into a double sex, to wit, of male and female; that so they being moved and
enticed by the allurements of lust, might desire copulation, thence to have
procreation. For this bountiful Lord has appointed it as a solace unto every
living The cause of this distinction.
creature against the most certain and fatal necessity of death: that for as
much as each particular living creature cannot continue for ever, yet they may
endure by their species or kind by propagation and succession of creatures,
which is by procreation, so long as the world endures. In this conjunction or
copulation, replenished with such delectable pleasure, which God has chiefly
established by the law of Matrimony, the male and female yield forth their
seeds, which presently mixed and conjoined, are received and kept in the
females womb. For, What seed is.
the seed is a certain spumous or foamie humor replenished with vital
spirit, by the benefit whereof, as it were by a certain ebullition or
fermentation, it is puffed up and swollen bigger, and both the seeds being
separated from the more pure blood of both the parents, are the material and
formal beginning of the issue, for the seed of the male being cast and
received into the womb, is accounted the principal and efficient cause, but
the seed of the female is reputed the subjacent matter, or the matter whereon
it works. Good and laudable seed ought The conditions of good seed.
to be white, shining, clammy, knotty, smelling like unto the elder or palm,
delectable to bees, and sinking down to the bottom of water being put into
it, for that which swimmeth on the water is esteemed unfruitful; for a great
portion comes from the brain, yet some thereof falls from the whole body,
and from all the parts both firm and (...) thereof. For unless it come from
the whole body, and Seed fallea^ from all the parts of the body.
every part thereof, all and every part of the issue cannot be formed thereby:
because like things are engendered of their like: and therefore it comes that
the child resembles the parents, not only in stature and favor, but also in
the conformation and proportion of his lims and members, and complexion and
temperature of his inward parts, so that diseases are often times hereditary, the
weakeness of this or that entrall being translated from the parent to the
child. There are Wherefore many diseases are hereditary.
some which suppose this falling of the seed from the whole body not to be
understood according to the weight and matter, as if it were a certain portion
of all How feed is to be understood to fall from the whole body.
the blood separated from the rest; but according to the power and form, that
is to say the animal, natural, and vital spirits, being the framers of
formation and life, and also the formative faculty to fall down from all the
parts into the seed, that is wrought or perfected by the Testicles, for proof
and confirmation whereof, they allege that many perfect, sound, absolute, and
well proportioned children, are borne of lame and decrepit parents.

CHAP. I. Why the generative parts are endued with great pleasure.
A Certain great pleasure accompanies the function of the parts appointed for
generation, and before it, in living creatures that are of a lusty age, when
matter abounds in those parts, there goes a certain fervent or furious
desire: the causes thereof are many, of which the chiefest is, That the kind
may be preserved and kept for ever, by the propagation and substitution of
other living creatures of the same kind. For brute beasts which want reason,
and therefore cannot be solicitous for the preservation of their kind, never
come to carnal copulation, unless they be moved thereunto by a certain
vehement provocation of unbridled lust, and as it were by the stimulation of
venery. But man, that What moves a man to copulation.
is endued with reason, being a divine and most noble creature, would never
yield nor make his mind subject to a thing so abject and filthy as is carnal
copulation, but that the venerous ticklings, raised in those parts, relaxe the
severity of his mind, or reason admonish him that the memory of his name ought
not to end with his life, but to be preserved unto all generations, as far as
may be possible, by the propagation of his seed or issue. Therefore by reason
of this profit or commodity, nature has endued the genitall parts with a far
more exact or exquisite sense than the Why the genitall, are endued with a
whayish moisture.
other parts, by sending the great sinews unto them, and moreover she has
caused them to be bedewed or moistened with a certain whayish humor, not much
unlike the seed sent from the glandules or kernells called prostatae, situated
in men at the beginning of the neck of the bladder, but in women at the
bottom of the womb: this moisture has a certain sharpness or biting, for
that kind of humor of all others can chiefly provoke those parts to their
function or office, and yield them a delectable pleasure, while they are in the
execution of the same. For even so whayish and sharp humors, when they are
gathered together under the skin, if they wax warm, tickle with a certain
pleasant itching, and by their motion infer delight: but the nature of the
genitall parts or members is not stirred up or provoked to the expulsion of the
seed with these provocations of the humors, abounding either in quantity or
quality only, but a certain great and hot spirit or breath contained in those
parts, does begin to dilate it self more and more, which causes a certain
incredible excess of pleasure or voluptuousness, ^erewith the genitalls being
replete, are spread forth or distended every way unto their full greatness. T^
yard is given to men whereby they may cast out their seed directly or
straightly into the woman's womb, and the neck of the womb to women, whereby
they may receive that seed so cast forth, by the open or wide mouth of the same
neck, and also that they may cast forth their own seed, sent through the
spermaticke vessels unto their testicles; these spermaticke vessels, that is to
say, the vein lying above, and The cause of the foldings of the sper maticke
vessels.
the artery lying below, do make many flexions or windings, yet one as many as
the other, like unto the tendrills of vines diversely platted or foided
together, and in these folds or bendings the blood and spirit which are carried
unto the testicles, are concocted a longer time, and so converted into a white
seminall substance. The lower of these flexions or bowings do end in the
stones or testicles. But the testicles, for as much as they are loose, thin,
and spongeous or hollow, receiving the humor which was begun to be concocted
in the forenamed vessels, concoct it again themselves: but the testicles of men
concoct the more perfectly for the procreation of the issue; and the testicles
of women more imperfectly, because they are more cold, less, weak and Women's
testcles more imperfect.
feeble, but the seed becomes white by the contact or touch of the testicles,
because the substance of them is white. The male is such as engendereth in
another, and the female in her self, by the spermaticke vessels which are
implanted in the inner capacity of the womb. But out of all doubt unless
nature had prepared so many allurements, Why many men and women abhor
renercous copulation.
baits, and provocations of pleasure, there is scarce any man so hot or
delighted in venereous acts, which considering and marking the place appointed
for humane conception, the loathsomeness of the filth which daily falls down
unto it, and wherewithal it is humected and moistened, and the vicinity and
neerenesse of the great gut under it, and of the bladder above it, but would
shun the embraces of women. Nor would any woman desire the company of man,
which once premeditates or forethinkes with her self on the labor that she
shall sustain in bearing the burden of her child nine months, and of the
almost deadly pains that she shall suffer in her delivery.

Men that use too frequent copulation, oftentimes in stead of seed cast forth a
crude Why the strangury ensues immoderate copulation.
and bloody humor, and sometimes also mere blood it self; and often times they
can hardly make water but with great pain, by reason that the clammy and oily
moisture, which nature has placed in the glandules called prostatae, to make
the passage of the urine slippery, and to defend it against the sharpness of
the urine that passes through it, is wasted, so that afterward they shall stand
in need of the help of a Surgion to cause them to make water with ease and
without pain, by injecting a little oil out of a siringe into the conduit of
the yard. For generation it is fit the man cast forth his seed What things
necessary unto generation.
into the womb with a certain impetuosity, his yard being stiff and
distended, and the woman to receive the same without delay into her womb,
being wide open, lest that through delay the seed wax cold, and so become
unfruitful by reason that the spirits are dissipated and consumed. The yard is
distended or made stiff, when the nervous, spongeous, and hollow substance
thereof is replete and puffed up with a flatulent spirit. The womb allures or
draws the masculine seed into it self by the mouth thereof, and it receives
the woman's seed by the horns from the spermatick vessels, which come from the
woman's testicles into the hollownesse or concavity of the womb, that so it may
be tempered by conjunction, commistion and confusion with the man's seed, and so
reduced or brought unto a certain equality: for generation or conception
cannot follow without the concourse of two feeds, well and perfectly wrought in
the very same moment of time, nor without a laudible dispo^ the womb both in
temperature and complexion: if in this mixture of ^ man's seed in quality and
quantity exceed the woman's, it will be a man chil^, a woman child, although
that in either of the kinds there is both the man's and woman's Why a male, and
why a female is engendered.
seed, as you may see by the daily experience of those men who by their first
wives have had boys only and by their second wives had girls only: the like
you may see in certain women, who by their first husbands have had males
only, and by their second husbands females only. Moreover, one and the same
(...) is not always like affected to get a man or a woman child, for by
reason of his age, temperature and diet, he does sometimes yield forth seed
endued with a masculine virtue, and sometimes with a feminine or weak virtue,
so that it is no marvel if men get sometimes men, and sometimes women
children.

CHAP. II. Of what quality the seed is, whereof the male, and whereof the
female is engendered.
MAle children are engendered of a more hot and dry seed, and women of a more
cold and moist: for there is much less strength in cold than in heat, and
likewise in moisture than in dryness; and that is the cause why it will be
longer before a girl is formed in the womb than a boy. Why men children are
sooner formed in the womb than women. The seed is that in power from whence
each ^ing comes (...) flows.
In the seed lies both the procreative and the formative power: as for
example; In the power of the Melon seed are situate the stalks, branches,
leaves, flowers, fruit, the form, color, smell, taste, seed and all. The
like reason is of other seeds; so Apple grafts engrafted in the stock of a
Pearetree, bear Apples; and we do always find and see by experience, that
the tree (by virtue of grafting) that is grafted, does convert it self into
the nature of the Sions wherewith it is grafted. But although the child that
is borne does resemble or is very like unto the father or the mother, as his or
her seed exceeds in the mixture, yet for the most part it happens Why the
children are most commonly like unto their fathers.
that the children are more like unto the father than the mother, because that
in the time of copulation, the mind of the woman is more fixed on her husband,
than the mind of the husband on, or toward his wife: for in the time of
copulation or conception, the forms, or the likenesses of those things that
are conceived or kept in mind, are transported and impressed in the child or
issue; for so they affirm that there was a certain Queen of the Aethiopians
who brought forth a white child, the reason was (as she confessed) that at the
time of copulation with her King, she thought on a mavelous white thing, with
a very strong imagination. Therefore Hesiod advertiseth all married people not
to give them selves to carnal copulation when they return from burialls, but
when they come from feasts and plays, lest that When children should be
begotten.
their sad, heavy, and pensive cogitations, should be so transfused and
engrafted in the issue, that they should contaminate or infect the pleasant
joyfulnesse of his life, with sad, pensive and passionate thoughts. Sometimes
it happens, although very seldom, the child is neither like the father nor
the mother, but in favor resembles Why often times the child resembles the
Grandfather.
his Grandfather, or any other of his kindred, by reason that in the inward
parts of the parents, the engrafted power and nature of the grandfather lies
hidden: which when it has lurked there long, not working any effect, at length
breaks forth by means of some hidden occasion: wherein nature resembles the
Painter, making the lively portraiture of a thing, which as far as the subject
matter will permit, does form the issue like unto the parents in every habit;
so that often times the diseases of the parents are transferred or participated
unto the children, as it were by a certain hereditary title: for those that
are crooke-backt get crooke-backt children, those that are lame, lame; those
that are leprous, leprous; those that have the stone, children having the
stone; those that have the ptisicke, children having the ptisick; and those
that have the gout, children having the gout: for the seed follows the power,
nature, temperature, and comnlexion of him that engendereth it. Therefore of
those Why sometime those that are ^ased do get ^d children.
that are in health and sound, ^thy and sound; and of those that are weak and
diseased, weak and diseased children are begotten, unless happily the seed of
one of ^ents that is sound does correct or amend the diseased impression of the
o^t is diseased, or else the temperate and sound womb as it were by the gen^
pleasant breath thereof.

CHAP. III. What is the cause why the Females of all brute beasts, being great
with young, do neither desire, nor admit the males, until they have brought
forth their Young.
THe cause hereof is, that, forasmuch as they are moved by sense only, Why the
sense of venereous acts is given to brute beasts.
they apply themselves unto the thing that is present, very little, or nothing
at all perceiving things that are past, and to come. Therefore after they have
conceived, they are unmindfull of the pleasure that is past, and do abhor
copulation: for the sense or feeling of lust is given unto them by nature,
only for the preservation of their kind, and not for voluptuousness, or
delectation. But the males Why of brute beasts, the males raging with lust,
follow after the females.
raging, swelling, and as it were stimulated by the provocations of the heat,
or fervency of their lust, do then run unto them, follow and desire
copulation, because a certain strong odor or smell comes into the air from
their secret or genitall parts, which pierces into their nostrills, and unto
their brain, and so infers an imagination, desire, and heat. Contrariwise,
the sense and feeling of venereous actions seems to be given by nature to
women, not only for the propagation of issue Wherefore a woman when she is
with child, desires copulation.
and for the conservation of mankind, but also to mitigate and assuage the
miseries of man's life, as it were by the entisements of that pleasure: also the
great store of hot blood that is about the heart, wherewith men abound, makes
greatly to this purpose, which by impulsion of imagination, which rules the
humors, being driven by the proper passages, down from the heart and entralls
into the genitall parts, does stir up in them a new lust.

The males of brute beasts, being provoked or moved by the stimulations of
lust, rage, and are almost burst with a Tentigo or extension of the genitall
parts, and sometimes wax mad, but after that they have satisfied their lust
with the female of their kind, they presently become gentle, and leave off
such fierceness.

CHAP. IIII. What things are to be observed, as necessary unto generation in
the time of copulation.
WHen the husband comes into his wives chamber he must entertain her with
all kind of dalliance, wanton behavior, and allurements How women may be
moved to venery and conception.
to venery: but if he perceive her to be slow, and more cold, he must cherish,
embrace, and tickle her, and shall not abruptly, the nerves being suddenly
distended, break into the field of nature, but rather shall creep in by
little and little, intermixing more wanton kisses with wanton words and
speeches, handling her secret parts and dugs, that she may take fire and be
enflamed to venery, for so at length the womb will strive and wax fervent
with a desire of casting forth its own seed, and receiving the man's seed to
be mixed together therewith. But if all these things will not suffice to
inflame the woman, for women for the most part are more slow and slack unto the
expulsion or yielding forth of their seed, it shall be necessary first to
foment her secret parts with the decoction of hot herbs made with Muscadine,
or boiled in any other good wine, and to put a little musk or civet into the
neck or mouth of the womb: and when she shall perceive the efflux of her seed
to approach, by reason The meeting of the seeds most necessary for generation.
of the tickling pleasure, she must advertise her husband thereof, that at the
very instant time or moment, he may also yield forth his seed, that by the
concourse or meeting of the seeds, conception may be made, and so at length a
child formed and borne. And that it may have the better success, the husband
must not presently separate himself from his wives embraces, lest the air
strike into the open womb, and so corrupt the seeds before they are perfectly
mixed together. When the man departs, let the woman lie still in quiet, lying
her legs or her thighs acrosse, one upon another, and raising them up a
little, lest that by motion or downward situation, the seed should be shed or
spilt: which is the cause why she ought at that time not to talk, especially
chiding, nor to cough, nor sneese, but give herself to rest and quietness, if
it be possible.

CHAP. V. By what signs it may be known whether the woman have conceived or
not.
IF the seed in the time of copulation, or presently after be not spilt, if in
the meeting of the seeds the whole body do somewhat shake, that is to say,
the womb drawing it self together for the compression and entertainment
thereof, if a little feeling of pain does run up and down the lower belly and
about the navell, if she be sleepy, if she loath the embracings of a man, and
if her face be pale, it is a token that she has conceived.

In some, after conception spots or freckles arise in their face, their eyes
are depressed and sunk in, the white of their eyes waxes pale, they wax
giddy in the head, Spots or speeks in the faces of those that are with child.
by reason that the vapors are raised up from the menstruall blood that is
stopped, sadness and heaviness grieve their minds, with loathing and way
wardnesse, by reason that the spirits are covered with the smoaky darkness of
the vapoures: pains in the teeth and gummes, and swouning often times comes,
the appetite is depraved or overthrown, with aptness to vomit, and longing,
whereby it happens that they loath meats of good juice, and long for and
desire illaudable meats, and those that are contrary to nature, as coals,
dirt, ashes, stinking salt-fish, sour, austere and Why many women being great
with child refuse laudable meats, and desire those that are illaudable and
contrary to nature.
ta^t fruits, pepper, vinegar, and such like acride things, and other,
altogether contrary to nature and use, by reason of the condition of the
suppressed humor abounding and falling into the orifice of the stomach. This
appetite so depraved or overthrown, endures in some until the time of
childe-birth; in others it comes in the third month after their conception,
when hairs do grow on the child, and lastly it leaves them a little before
the fourth month, because that the child, being now greater and stronger,
consumes a great part of the excrementall and superfluous humor. The
suppressed or stopped terms in women that are great with child, are divided
into three parts: the more pure portion makes the nutriment for the child,
the second The suppressed terms divided into three parts.
ascends by little and little into the dugs, and the impurest of all
remains in the womb about the infant, and makes the secundine or
afterbirth, wherein the in fant lies as in a s^ed. Those women are great with
child whose urine is more sharp, fervent, and somewhat bloody, the bladder not
only waxing warm by the compression of the womb, servent by reason of the
blood contained in it, but also the thinner portion of the same blood being
expressed, and sweating out into the bladder. A swelling and hardness of the
dugs, and veins that are under the dugs in Hip. 1. de morb. mul.
the breasts and about them, and milk coming out when they are pressed, with
a certain stirring motion in the belly, are certain infallible signs of
greatness with child. Neither in this greatness of child bearing, the
veins of the dugges only, but of all the whole body, appear full and swelled
up, especially the veins of the thighs and legs, so that by their manifold
folding and knitting together, they do Aph. 41. sect. 5.
appear varicous, whereof comes fluggishnesse of the whole body, heaviness
and impotency or difficulty of going; especially when the time of deliverance
is at hand. Lastly, if you would know whether the woman have concerved or not,
give unto her when she goes to sleep, some meed or honyed water to drink, and
if she have agriping in her guts or belly, she has conceived, if not, she has
not conceived.

CHAP. VI. That the womb, so soon as it has received the seed, is presently
contracted or drawn together.
AFter that the seeds of the male and female have both met, and are mixed
together in the capacity of the womb, then the orifice thereof does draw it
self close together, lest the seeds should fall out. There the females seed
goes and turns into nutriment Why the female seed is nutriment for the male
seed.
and the increase of the males seed, because all things are nourished and do
increase by those things that are most familiar and like unto them. But the
similitude and familiarity of seed with seed is far greater than with
blood, so that when they are perfectly mixed and eoagulated, and so wax warm
by the straight and narrow enclosure of the womb, a certain thin skin
does grow about it, like unto that that will be over unscimmed milk.

Moreover, this concretion or congealing of the seed, is like unto an egg
laid before the time that it should: that is to say, whose membrane or tunicle
that compasses it about, has not as yet increased or grown into a shelly
hardness about it; in folding-wise are seen many small threads dividing
themselves, overspread with a certain clammy, whitish or red substance, as it
were with black blood. In the midst under it appears the navell, from
whence that small skin is produced. But a man may understand many things that
appertain unto the conception A compendious way to understand humane
conception.
of mankind by the observation of twenty eggs, setting them to be hatched
under an Hen, and taking one every day and breaking it, and diligently
considering it; for in so doing, on the twentieth day you shall find the
Chicke perfectly formed with the navell. That little skin that so compasses
the infant in the womb is called the secundine or Chorion. but commonly the
afterbirth.

This little skin is perfectly made within six days, according to the
judgment of Hippocrates, as profitable and necessary not only to contain the
seeds so mixed Lib. de not. puer.
together, but also to suck nutriment through the orifices of the vessels
ending in the womb. Those orifices the Greeks do call Cotyledones, and the
Latins Acetabula, What the Cotylidones are.
for they are as it were hollowed eminences, like unto those, which may be
seen in the feet or snout of a Cuttle fish many times in a double order, both
for the working and holding of their meat. Those eminences called Acetabula
do not so greatly appear in women as in many brute beasts. Therefore by these
the secundine cleaves on every side unto the womb, for the conservation,
nutrition, and increase of the conceived seed.

CHAP. VII. Of the generation of the navell.
AFter the woman has conceived, to every one of the aforesaid eminencies
grows presently another vessel, that is to say, a vein to the vein, and an
artery to the artery: these soft and yet thin vessels, are framed with a little
thin membrane, which being spread under, sticks to them, for to them it is in
stead of a membrane, and a ligament and a tunicle or a defense, and it is
doubled with the others, and made of the vein and artery of the navell, to
compass the navell. These new small vessels of the infant, with their
orifices, do answer directly one to one to the cotyledones or eminences of the
womb, they are very swall and little, as it were the hairy fibers that grow
upon roots that are in the earth, and when they have continued so a longer
time, they are combined together, that of two they are made one vessel, until
that by continual connection, all those vessels go and degenerate into two
other great vessels, called the umbilicall vessels, or the vessels of the
navell, because they do make the navell, and do enter into the child's body by
the hole of the navell. Here Galen does admire the singular providence of God
and Nature, because that in such a multitude of vessels, and The vein never
joyneth it self with the artery.
in so long a passage or length that they go or are produced, the vein does
never confound it self nor stick to the artery, nor the artery to the vein,
but every vessel joyneth it self to the vessel of its own kind. But the
umbilicall vein or navell vein, entering into the body of the child, does
join it self presently to the hollow part of the liver, but the artery is
divided into two, which join themselves to the two iliack arteries along the
sides of the bladder, and are presently covered with the peritonaum, and by the
benefit thereof are annexed unto the parts which it goes unto. Those small
veins and arteries are as it were the roots of the child, but the vein and
artery of the navell are as it were the body of the tree, to bring down the
nutriment to nourish the child. For first we live in the womb the life of a
plant, and then next the life of a sensitive creature; and as the first tunicle
of the child is called Chorion or Allantoides, so the other is called Amnios or
Agnina, which does compass the seed or child about on every side. These
membranes are most thin, yea for their thinness like unto the spiders web,
woven one upon another, and also connexed in many places by the extremities of
certain small and hairy substances, which at length by the adjunction of
Hippocrates calls all the membranes that compass the infant in the womb,
according to the judgment of (...) in his book de usu partium, by the name of
the secundines.
their like do get strength; whereby you may understand, what is the cause why
by diverse and violent motions of the mother in going and dancing or leaping,
and also of the infant in the womb, those membranes are not almost broken. For
they are so conjoined by the knots of those hairie substances, that between
them nothing, neither the urine nor the sweat can come, as you may plainly
and evidently perceive in the dissection of a woman's body that is great with
child, not depending on any other man's opinion, be it never so old or
inveterate: yet the strength of those membranes is not so great but that they
may be soon broken in the birth by the kicking of the child.

CHAP. VIII. Of the umbilicall vessels, or the vessels belonging to the navell.
MAny of the ancient Writers have written that there are five vessels found in
the navell. But yet in many, nay all the bodies I sought An old opinion
confuted.
in for them, I could never find but three, that is to say, one vein, which
is very large, so that in the passage thereof it will receive the tagge of a
point, and two arteries, but not so large, but much narrower, because the
child wants or stands in need of much more blood for his conformation and
the nutriment or increase of his parts, than of vital spirit.

These vessels making the body of the navell, which, as it is thought, is
formed within nine or ten days, by their doubling and folding, make knots
like unto the To what use the knots of the child's navell in the womb serves.
knots of a Franciscan Friars girdle, that staying the running blood in those
their knotty windings, they might more perfectly concoct the same: as may be
seen in the ejaculatory spermatick vessels, for which use also the length of
the navell is half an ell, so that in many infants that are somewhat grown,
is is found three or four times doubled about their neck or thigh.

As long as the child is in his mothers womb, he takes his nutriment only
by the navell, and not by his mouth, neither does he enjoy the use of eyes,
ears, nostrils The child in the womb takes his nutriment by his navell, not
by his mouth.
or fundament, neither needs he the functions of the heart. For spirituous
blood goes unto it by the arteries of the navell, and into the iliack
arteries, and from the iliack arteries unto all the other arteries of the whole
body, for by the motion of these only the infant does breathe. Therefore it is
not to be supposed that air is carried or drawn in by the lungs unto the
heart, in the body of the child, but contrariwise How the child breaths.
from the heart to the lungs. For neither the heart does perform the
generation or working of blood, or of the vital spirits. For the issue or
infant is contented with them as they are made and wrought by his mother.
Which, until it has obtained a full, perfect and whole description of his
parts and members, cannot be called a child, but rather an embrion, or an
imperfect substance.

CHAP. IX. Of the ebullition or swelling of the seed in the womb, and of the
concretion of the bubbles or bladders, or the three principal entralls.
IN the six first days of conception the new vessels are thought to be made
and brought forth of the eminences or cotylidons of the mothers vessels, and
dispersed into all the whole seed, as they were fibers or hairy strings. Those
as they pierce the womb, so do they equally and in like manner penetrate the
tunicle Chorion. And it is carried this way, being a passage not only necessary
for the nutriment and conformation of the parts, but also into the veins
diversely woven and dispersed into the skin Chorion. For thereby it comes to
pass that the seed it self boileth, and as it were fermenteth or swells,
not only through occasion of the place, but also of the blood and vital
spirits that flow unto it, and then it rises into the bubbles or bladders,
like unto the bubbles which are occasioned by the rain falling into a river or
channel full of water. These three bubbles or bladders, are certain rude or
new forms or concretions of The three bladders.
the three principal entrals, that is to say, of the liver, heart and brain.
All this former time it is called seed, and by no other name; but when those
bubbles arise, it is When the seed is called an embrion.
called an embrion, or the rude form of a body until the perfect conformation
of all the members: on the fourth day after that the vein of the navell is
formed, it sucketh grosser blood, that is, of a more fuller nutriment out of
the Cotylidons. And this blood, because it is more gross, easily congeales and
curdles in that place, where it ought to prepare the liver fully and absolutely
made. For then it is of a notable great Why the live called Parenchyma.
bigness above all the other parts, and therefore it is called parenchyma,
because it is but only a certain congealing or concretion of blood brought
together thither or in that place. From the gibbous part thereof springs the
greater part or trunk of the hollow vein, called commonly vena cava, which
does disperse his small branches, which are like unto hairs, into also the
substance thereof: and then it is divided into two branches, whereof the one
goes upwards, the other downwards unto all the particular parts of the body.

In the mean season the Arteries of the navell suck spirituous blood out of
the eminences or Cotylidons of the mothers arteries, whereof, that is to say,
of the more servent and spirituous blood, the heart is formed in the second
bladder or bubble, being endued with a more fleshy, sound and thick substance,
as it behooveth that vessel to be, which is the fountain from whence the
heat flows, and has a continual motion.

In this the virtue formative has made two hollow places, one on the right
side, another on the left. In the right, the root of the hollow vein is
infixed or ingraffed, carrying thither necessary nutriment for the heart; in
the left is formed the stamp or root of an artery, which presently does divide
it self into two branches, the greater whereof goes upwards to the upper
parts, and the wider unto the lower parts, carrying unto all the parts of the
body life and vital heat.

CHAP. X. Of the third bubble or bladder, wherein the head and the brain is
formed.
THe far greater portion of the seed goes into this third bubble, that is
to say, yielding matter for the conformation of the brain and all the head.
For a greater quantity of seed ought to go unto the conformation of the head
and brain, because these parts are not sanguine Why the greater portion of
goes into generation of the head and brain.
or bloody as the heart and liver, but in a manner without blood; bonie,
marrow, cartilaginous, nervous and membranous, whose parts, as the veins,
arteries, nerves, ligaments, panicles, and skin, are called spermaticke
parts, because they obtain their first conformation almost of seed only:
although that afterward they are nourished with blood, as the other fleshy and
musculous parts are. But yet the blood when it is come unto those parts,
degenerateth and turns into a thing somewhat spermatick, by virtue of the
assimulative faculty of those parts. All the other parts of the head, form and
fashion themselves unto the form of the brain when it is formed, and those
parts which are situated and placed about it for defense especially, are
hardened into bones.

The head as the seat of the senses, and mansion of the mind and reason, is
situated Why the head is placed on the top of the body.
in the highest place, that from thence, as it were from a lofty tower or
turret, it might rule and govern all the other members and their functions and
actions, that are under it, for there the soul or life which is the rectresse
or governesse is situated; and from thence it flows and is dispersed into all
the whole body. Nature has framed these three principal entrals as proppes
and sustentations for the weight of all the rest of the body: for which matter
also she has framed the bones.

The first bones that appear to be formed, or are supposed to be conformed,
are the bones called ossa Illium, connexed or united by spondils that are
between them: then all the other members are framed and proportioned by their
concavities and hollownesses, which generally are seven, that is to say, two
of the ears, two of the nose, one of the mouth, and in the parts beneath the
head, one of the fundament, and another of the yard or conduit of the bladder;
and furthermore in women, one of the neck of the womb, without the which they
can never be made mothers or bear children.

When all these are finished, nature, that she might polish her excellent
work in all sorts, has covered all the body and every member thereof with
skin. Into this excellent work or Microcosmos so perfected, God, the author
of nature and all things, infuseth or ingrafteth a soul or life: which St.
Augustine proves by this sentence Exodus 20. qu. 52.
of Moses: If any man smite a woman with child, so that there by she be
delivered before her natural time, and the child be dead, being first formed
in the womb, let him die the death: but if the child has not as yet obtained
the full proportion and conformation of his body and members, let him
recompense it with money. Therefore it is not to be thought that the life is
derived, propagated or taken from Adam or our parents, as it were an
haereditary thing distributed unto all mankind by their parents; but we must
believe it to be immediately created of God, even at the very instant time when
the child is absolutely perfected in the lineaments of his body, and so given
unto it by him.

So therefore the rude lumpes of flesh called molae that engender in women's The
molae in the womb lives not as the child.
wombes, and monsters of the like breeding and confused bigness, although by
reason of a certain quaking and shivering motion, they seem to have life, yet
they cannot be supposed to be endued with a life or a reasonable soul: but
they have their motion, nutriment and increase wholly of the natural and
infixed faculty of the womb, and of the generative or procreative spirit that
is engraffed naturally in the seed.

But even as the infant in the womb obtains not perfect conformation before
the thirtieth day, so likewise it does not move before the sixtieth day: at
which time it is most commonly not perceived by women, by reason of the
smallness of the motion. But now let us speak briefly of the life or soul,
wherein consists the principal original of every function in the body, and
likewise of generation.

CHAP. XI. Of the life or soul.
THE soul enters into the body, so soon as it has obtained a perfect The
life goes not into the mass of seed that does engender the child, before the
body of the child and each part thereof has his perfect proportion and form.
Why the life or soul does not presently execute all his offices.
and absolute distinction and conformation of the members in the womb: which
in male children, by reason of the more strong and forming heat which is
engraffed in them, is about the fortieth day, and in females about the forty
fifth day, in some sooner, and in some later, by reason of the efficacy of the
matter working, and plyantnesse or obedience of the matter whereon it works.
Neither does the life or soul being thus inspired into the body presently
execute or perform all his functions, because the instuments that are placed
about it cannot obtain a firm and hard consistence necessary for the lively,
but especially for the more divine ministeries of the life or soul, but in a
long process of age or time.

Those instruments of the soul are vitiated either in the first conformation,
as when the form or fashion of the head is sharp upwards or piramydall, as
was the head of Thersites, that lived in the time of the Trojan war, and of
Triboulet and Tonin, that lived in later years; or also by some casualty, as
by the violent handling of the mydwife, who by compression, by reason that the
scull is then tender and soft, has caused the capacity of the ventricles that
be under the brain to be too narrow for them: or by a fall, stroke, disorder
in diet, as by drunkenness, or a fever, which infers a lithargie,
excessive sleepiness, or a frenzy.

Presently after the soul is entered the body, God endueth it with diverse and
sundry 1 Cor. c. 12.
gifts: hereof it comes that some are endued with wisdom by the spirit;
others with knowledge by the same spirit; others with the gift of healing by
the same spirit; others with power, dominion and rule; others with prophecy;
others with diversities of tongues; and to others other endowments, as it has
pleased the divine providence and bounty of God to bestow upon them, against
which no man ought to contend or speak. For it is not meet that the thing
formed should say unto him that formed it, why have thou made me on this
fashion? has not the Potter power to make of the same lump of clay one
vessel to honor and another to dishonor? it is not my purpose, neither
belongs it unto me or any other humane creature to search out the reason of
those things, but only to admire them with all humility: But yet I dare
affirm this one thing, that a noble and excellent soul neglects elementary
and transitory things, and is ravished and moved with the contemplation of
celestial, which it cannot freely enjoy before it be separated from this
earthly enclosure or prison of the body, and be restored unto its original.

Therefore the soul is the inward Entelechia or perfection, or the primative
cause What the soul or life is.
of all motions and functions both natural and animal, and the true form of
man. The Ancients have endeavored to express the obscure sense thereof by
many descriptions. For they have called it a celestial spirit, and a
superior, incorporeall, invisible, an immortal essence, which is to be
comprehended of its self alone, that is, of the mind or understanding. Others
have not doubted but that we have our souls inspired by the universal divine
mind, which as they are alive, so they do bestow life on the bodies unto whom
they are annexed or united. And The life is in all the whole bodies and in every
portion thereof. The life or soul is simple and indivisible.
although this life be dispersed into all the whole body, and into every
portion of the same, yet is it void of all corporal weight or mixtion, and it
is wholly and a lone in every several part, being simple and indivisible,
without all composition or mixture, yet endued with many virtues and faculties,
which it does utter in diverse parts of the body: For it feels, imagines,
judges, remembers, understands, and rules all our desires, pleasures and
animal motions; it sees, hears, smells, tastes, touches: and it has
diverse names of these so many and so great functions which it performs in
diverse parts of the body. It is called the soul or life, because it makes the
body live, which of it self is dead. It is called the spirit or breath,
because it inspireth our bodies. It is called reason, because it discerns
truth from falsehood, as it were by a certain divine rule. It is termed the
mind, because Diverse names, and the reason of diverse names that are given to
humane forms.
it is mindful of things past, in recalling and remembering them: and it is
called the vigor or courage, because it gives vigor and courage to the
sluggish weight or mass of the body. And lastly it is called the sense and
understanding, because it comprehends things that are sensible and
intelligible. Because it is incorporeall it cannot occupy a place by
corporeal extension, although notwithstanding it fills the whole body. It is
simple, because it is but one in essence, not increased nor diminished: for it
is no less in a Dwarf than in a Giant, and it is like perfect and great in an
infant as in a man, according to its own nature.

But there are three kinds of bodies informed by a soul whereby they live:
the Three kinds of living bodies.
first being the most imperfect, is of plants, the second of brute beasts, and
the third of men. The plants live by a vegitative, beasts by a sensitive, and
men by an intellective The superior soul contains in it self all the
powers of the inferior.
soul. And as the sensitive soul of brute beasts is endued with all the
virtues of the vegetative, so the humane intellective comprehends the virtues
of all the inferior, not separated by any division, but by being indivisibly
united with reason and understanding, into one humane form and soul whereon
they depend. But because we have said a little before, that diverse functions of
the life are resident, and appear in diverse parts of the body, here in this
place, omitting all others, we will prosecute those only which are accounted
the principal.

The principal functions of a humane soul, according to the opinion of many,
are four in number, proceeding from so many faculties, and consequently from
one soul; they are these: The common Sense, Imagination, Reasoning, and
Memory. And they think that the common or interior sense does receive the
forms What the common sense is.
and images of sensible things, being carried by the spirit through the passage
of the The function of the common sense is double.
nerves, as an instrument of the external senses, as it were a messenger to
go between them; and it serves not only to receive them, but also to know,
perceive and discern them. For the eye, wherein the external sense of seeing
consists, does not know white or black. Therefore it cannot discern the
differences of colors, as neither the tongue tastes, nor the nose savours, nor
the ears sounds, nor lastly, the hands their touching quality: yea, the eye
does not of it self perceive that it sees, nor the nose that it smells, nor
the ears that they hear, nor the tongue that it tastes, nor the hands that
they touch. For all these things are the offices and functions of the common
sense; for this sense knows that the eye has seen some thing, either white,
black, red, a man, horse, sheep, or some such like material thing, yea, even
when the sight is gone and past; and so likewise the nose to have smelled this
or that savor, the ear to have heard this or that sound, the tongue to have
tasted this or that taste, and the hand to have touched this or that thing, be
they never so diverse. For all the external senses, and all the functions
thereof do end and are referred to the common sense, as it were the lines of a
circle from the circumference into the center, as it is expressed in this
figure.



For which cause it is called the common or principll sense, for that therein
the For what cause the internal sense is called the common sense.
primitive power of feeling or perceiving is situated, for it uses the
ministry or service of the external senses to know many and diverse things,
whose differences it does discern and judge, but simple things, that are of
themselves, and without any The common sense understands or knows those
things that are simple only.
composition and connection, which may constitute any thing true or false, or
any argumentation, belongs only to the mind, understanding or reason. For
this was the counsel of nature, that the external senses should receive the
forms of things superficially, lightly and gently only, like as a glass, not
to any other end but that they should presently send them unto the common
sense, as it were unto their center and prince, which he (that is to say the
common sense) at length delivers to be collected unto the understanding or
reasoning faculty of the soul, which Avicen and Averrois have supposed to be
situated in the former part of the brain.

Next unto the common sense follows the fantasy or imagination, so called,
What Imagination is.
because of it arise the forms and Ideas that are conceived in the mind,
called of the Geekes Phantasmata. This does never rest but in those that
sleep: neither always in them, for oft-times in them it causes dreams, and
causes them to suppose they see and perceive such things as were never
perceived by the senses, nor which the nature of things, nor the order of the
world will permit. The power of this faculty of the mind is so great in us,
that often it brings the whole body in subjection unto it.

For it is recorded in history, that Alexander the Great sitting at Table, and
hearing Timotheus the Musician fing a martial Sonnet unto his Citherne, that
he presently leaped from the table, and called for arms; but when again the
Musician mollifyed his tune, he returned to the Table and sat down as
before. The power of Imagination caused by musical harmony, was so great, that
it subjected to it the courage of the Worlds conqueror, by whose various
motion, it would now as it were cause him to run headlong to arms, and then
pacify and quiet him, and so cause him to return to his chair and
banqueting again. And there was one whosoever it was, who some few years
agone, seeing the Turk dance on a rope on high, with both his feet fastened in
a basin, turned his eyes from so dangerous a sight or spectacle, although he
came to the place of purpose to see it, and was stricken with such fear, that
his body shook and heart quaked, for fear lest that by sudden falling down
headlong he should break his neck. Many looking down from an high and lofty
place, are so stricken with fear, that suddenly they fall down headlong,
being so overcome and bound with the imagination of the danger, that their own
strength is not able to sustain them. Therefore it manifestly appears that
God has dealt most graciously and lovingly with us, who unto this power of
imagination, has joined another, that is, the faculty or power of reason and
understanding; which discerning false dangers and perils from true, does
sustain and hold up a man that he may not be overthrown by them.

After this appears and approaches to perform his function, the faculty of
What Reason is.
Reason, being the Prince of all the principal faculties of the soul; which
brings together, composeth, joyneth and reduces all the simple and divided
forms or images of things into one heap, that by dividing, collecting and
reasoning it might discern and try truth from falsehood.

This faculty of Understanding or Reason is subject to no faculty or instrument
The functions of Reason.
of the body, but is free, and penetrateth into every secret, intricate and
hidden thing, with an incredible celerity: by which a man sees what will
follow, perceives the originalls and causes of things, is not ignorant of the
proceedings of things, he compares things that are past with those that are
present and to come, decreeing what to follow, and what to avoyde. This
bridleth and withholds the furious motions of the mind, bridleth the
overhasty motions of the tongue, and admonishes the speaker that before the
words pass out of his mouth, he ought with diligence and discretion to ponder
and consider the thing whereof he is about to speak.

After Reason and Judgment follows Memory, which keeping and conserving What
Memory is.
all forms and images that it receives of the senses, and which Reason shall
appoint, and as a faithful keeper and conserver, receives all things, and
imprinteth and seals them as well by their own virtue and power, as by the
impulsion and adherence of those things in the body of the brain, without any
impression of the matter; that when occasion serves, we may bring them forth
therehence as out of a treasury or storehouse. For otherwise, to what purpose
were it to read, hear and note so many things, unless we were able to keep
and retain them in mind by the care and custody of the Memory or Brain?
Therefore assuredly God has given us this one only remedy and preservative
against the oblivion and ignorance of things, which although of it self and of
its own nature it be of greater efficacy, yet by daily and often meditation
it is trimmed and made more exquifite and perfect. And hence it was that the
Ancients termed wisdom the daughter of memory Wisdom the daughter of memory
and experience.
and experience. Many have supposed that the mansion or seat of the Memory, is
in the hinder part, or in the ventricle of the Cerebellum; by reason that it is
apt to receive the forms of things, because of the engrafted dryness and
hardness thereof.

CHAP. XII. Of the natural excrements in general, and especially of those
that the child or infant being in the womb excludes.
BEfore I declare what excrements the infant excludes in the womb and by what
passages, I think it good to speak of the excrements which What an excrement
is.
all men do naturally void. All that is called an excrement which nature is
accustomed to separate and cast out from the laudible and nourishing juice.
There are many kinds of those excrements.

The first is of the first concoction, which is performed in the stomach,
which The excrement of the fist concoction. The excrement of the second
concoction is triple.
being driven down into the intestines or guts, is voyded by the fundament.

The second comes from the liver, and it usually is threefold, or of three
kinds; one choleric, whereof a great portion is sent into the bladder of the
gall, that by sweating out there hence, it might stir up the expulsive
faculty of the guts to expel and exclude the excrements. The other is like
unto whay, which goes with the blood into the veins, and is as it were a
vehicle thereto to bring it unto all the parts of the body, and into every
Capillar vein for to nourish the whole body; and after it has performed that
function, it is partly expelled by sweat, and partly sent into the bladder,
and so excluded with the urine. The third is the melancholicke excrement, which
being drawn by the milt, the purer and thinner part thereof goes into the
nourishment of the milt, and after the remnant is partly purged out downe-wards
by the haemorrhoidall veins, and partly sent to the orifice of the stomach,
to instimulate and provoke the appetite. The last comes of the last
concoction, which is absolved in the habit of the body, and breaths out,
partly by insensible The excrement of the third concoction is triple.
transpiration, is partly consumed by sweating, and partly flows out by the
evident and manifest passages that are proper to every part: as it happens in
the brain before all other parts; for it does unloade it self of this kind
of excrement by the passages of the nose, mouth, ears, eyes, pallat bone and
sutures of the scull.

Therefore if any of those excrements be stayed altogether, or any longer than
it is meet they should, the default is to be amended by diet and medicine.
Furthermore, there are other sorts of excrements not natural, of whom we have
entreated at large in our book of the pestilence.

When the infant is in the mothers womb, until he is fully and absolutely
formed The use of the navellstring.
in all the liniments of his body, he sends forth his urine by the passage of
the navell or urachus. But a little before the time of childe-birth, the
urachus is closed, and then the man child voydeth his urine by the conduit of
the yard, and the woman child by the neck of the womb. This urine is
gathered together and contained in the coat Chorion or Allantoides, together
with the other excrements, that is to say, sweat, and such whayish
superfluities of the menstruall matter, for the more easy bearing up of the
floting or swimming child. But in the time of childbirth, when The signs of
speedy and easy deliverance.
the infant by kicking breaks the membranes, those humous run out, which
when the mydwifes perceive, they take it as a certain sign that the child is
at hand. For if the infant come forth together with those waters, the birth is
like to be more easy, and with the better success; for the neck of the womb
and all the genitalls are so by their moisture relaxed and made slippery, that
by the endeavor and stirring of the infant the birth will be the more easy,
and with the better success: contratiwise, if the infant be not excluded
before all these humors be wholly flowed out and gone, but remains as it
were in a dry place, presently through dryness the neck of the womb and all
the genitalls will be contracted and drawn together, so that the birth of the
child will be very difficult and hard, unless the neck of the womb, to
amend that default, be anointed with oil, or some other relaxing liquor.
Moreover, when the child is in the womb, he voideth no excrements by the
fundament, unless it be when at the time of the birth, the proper membranes
and receptacles are burst by the striving of the infant, for he does not take
his meat at the mouth, wherefore the stomach is idle then, and does not
execute the office of turning the meats into Chylus, nor of any other
concoction; wherefore nothing can go down from it into the guts. Neither have
I seldom seen infants borne without Children born without a passage in their
fundament.
any hole in their fundament, so that I have been constrained with a knife to
cut in sunder the membrane or tunicle that grew over and stopped it. And how
can such excrements be engendered, when the child being in the womb, is
nourished with the more laudable portion of the menstruall blood? therefore the
issue or child is wont to yield or avoid two kinds or sorts of excrements, so
long as he is in the womb, that is to say, sweat and urine, in both which he
swimmes; but they are separated by themselves, by a certain tunicle called
Allantoides, as it may be seen in kids, dogs, sheep, and other brute
beasts; for as much as in mankind the tunicle Chorion and Allantoides or
Farciminalis be all one membrane. If the woman be great of a Aph. 42. sect. 5.
man child, she is more merry, strong, and better colored, all the time of
her child bearing, but if of a woman child, she is ill colored because that
women are not so hot as men.

The males begin to stir within three months and an half, but females
after: if a woman conceive a male child, she has all her right parts stronger
to every work: wherefore they do begin to set forwards their right foot first
in going, and when they Aph. 47. sect. 3.
arise they lean on the right arm, the right dug will sooner swell and wax
hard; the male children stir more in the right side than in the left, and the
female children rather in the left than in the right side.

CHAP. XIII. With what travel the Child is brought into the world, and of the
cause of this labor and travel.
WHen the natural prefixed and prescribed time of childbirth is come, the
child being then grown greater, requires a greater quantity of food: which
when he cannot receive in sufficient measure by his navell, with great labor
and striving he endeavors to get forth: therefore then free is moved with a
stronger violence, and does break the membranes wherein he is contained. Then
the womb, because it is not able to endure such violent motions, nor to
sustain or hold up the child any longer, by reason that the conceptacles of
the membranes are broken asunder, is relaxed. And then the child Why the
infant is borne sometimes with his head forwards.
pursuing the air which he feels to enter in at the mouth of the womb,
which then is very wide and gaping, is carried with his head downwards, and so
comes into the world, with great pain both unto it self, and also unto his
mother, by reason of the tenderness of his body, and also by reason of the
extension of the nervous neck o^ mothers womb, and separation of the bone
called Os Ilium from the bone cal^ Os sacrum. For unless those bones were
drawn in sunder, how could In the time of child birth the bones of Ilium and
Os sacrum are drawn and extended one from another.
not only twins that cleave fast together, but also one child alone, come
forth at so narrow a passage as the neck of the womb is? Not only reason,
but also experience confirms it; for I have opened the bodies of women
presently after they have died of travel in childe-birth, in whom I have found
the bones of Ilium to be drawn the breadth of ones finger from Os sacrum: and
moreover, in many unto whom I have been called being in great extremity of
difficult and hard travel, I have not only heard, but also felt the bones to
crackle and make a noise, when I laid my hand upon the coccyx or rumpe, by the
violence of the distention. Also honest matrons have declared unto me that they
themselves, a few days before the birth, have felt and heard the noise of
those bones separating themselves one from another with great pain. Also a
long time after the birth, many do feel great pain and ache about the region
of the coccix and Os sacrum, so that when nature is not able to repair the
dissolved continuity of the bones of Ilium, they are constrained to halt all
the days of their life after. But the bones of the share called Ossa pubis, I
have never seen to be separated, as many do also affirm. It is reported that
in Italy they break An Italian fable.
the coccyx or rumpe in all maidens, that when they come to be married they
may bear children with the lesser travail in childe-birth; but this is a
forged tale, for that bone being broken, is naturally and of its own accord
repaired, and joined together again with a Callus, whereby the birth of the
child will be more difficult and hard.

CHAP. XIV. Of the situation of the infant in the womb.
REASON cannot show the certain situation of the infant in the womb, for I
have found it altogether uncertain, variable and diverse both in living The
situation of the infant in the womb is diverse.
and dead women: in the dead by opening their bodies presently after they were
dead, and in the living by helping them by the industry of my hand, when they
have been in danger of perishing by travel of childbirth: for by putting my
hand into the womb, I have felt the infant coming forth, sometimes with his
feet forwards, sometimes with his hands, and sometimes with his hands and feet
turned backwards, and sometimes forwards, as the figure following plainly
describes.



I have often found them coming forth with their knees forwards, and sometimes
with one of the feet, and sometimes with their belly forwards, their hands and
feet being lifted upwards, as the former figure shows at large.

Sometimes I have found the infant coming with his feet down-wards striding
awide, and sometimes headlong, stretching one of his arms downward out at
length, and that was an Hermaphrodite, as the figure following plainly
declares.


One time I observed in the birth of twins, that the one came with his head
forwards, and the other with his feet, according as here I have thought good to
describe them.


In the bodies of women that died in travail of child I have sometimes found
children no bigger than if they had been but four months in the womb,
situated in a round compass like a hoope, with their head bowed down to the
knees, with both their hands under the knees, and their heels close to their
buttockes. And moreover, I protest before God that I found a child being yet
alive in the body of his mother (whom I opened so soon as she was dead) lying
all along stretched out, with his face upwards, and the palms of his hands
joined together, as if he were at prayer.

CHAP. XV. Which is the legitimate and natural, and which the illegitimate or
unnatural time of child birth.
TO all living creatures, except man, the time of conception and bringing
Mankind has no certain time of bringing forth young.
forth their young is certain and definite; but the issue of man comes into
the world, sometimes in the seventh, sometimes in the eighth, and sometimes,
which is most frequent, in the ninth month, sometimes in the tenth month, yea
sometimes in the beginning of the eleventh month. Massurius reports that
Lucius Papyrius the Praetor, the second heir commencing a suit, gave the
possession of the goods away from him, seeing the mother of the child affirmed
that she went thirteen months therewith, being there is no certain definite
time of childbirth. The child that is borne in the sixth month cannot be long
lived, because that at that time all his body or members are not perfectly
finished or absolutely formed. In the seventh month it is proved by reason and
experience that the infant Why the child is scarce alive in the eight month.
may be long lived. But in the eight month it is seldom or never long lived:
the reason thereof is, as the Astronomers suppose, because that at that time
Saturn rules, those coldness and dryness is contrary to the original of
life: but yet the physical reason is more true; for the physicians say that
the child in the womb does often times in the seventh month strive to be
set at liberty from the enclosure of the womb, and therefore it contendeth and
labors greatly, and so with laboring and striving it becomes weak, that
all the time of the eight month it cannot recover his strength again, whereby
it may renew his accustomed use of striving, and that some by such laboring
and striving, hurt themselves, and so dye. Yet some strong and lusty women are
thought to bring forth their children, being lively and strong, on the eight
month, as Aristotle testifies of the Egyptians, the Poets of the inhabitants
of the Isle of Naxus, and many of the Spaniards. Furthermore, I cannot Lib. 4.
de hist. anim. cap. 7.
sufficiently marvel, that the womb, which all the time of childe-bearing is
so closed together, that one can scarce put a probe into it, unless it be
happily by reason of superfoetation, or when it is open for a short time to
purge it self, that presently before the time of childe-birth, it should gape
and wax so wide, that the infant may pass through it, and presently after it
to close again as if it had never been opened. But because that the travel of
the first time of childe-birth, is wont to be very difficult and grievous, I
think it not unmeet that all women, a little before the time of their first
travel, anoint and relaxe their privy parts with the unguent here described..
sper. ceti, ii. ol. amygd. dull. iv. cerae alb. and medul. cervin. iii. axung.
ans. and gallin. an. i. tereb. venet. ii. make thereof an ointment to anoint
the thighs, share, privy parts and genitalls. Furthermore, it shall not be
unprofitable; to make a trusse or girdle of most thin and gentle dog-skinne,
which being also anointed with the same unguent, may serve very necessarily for
the better carrying of the infant in the womb. Also bathes that are made of
the decoction of mollifying herbs, are also very profitable to relaxe the
privy parts a little before the time of the birth. That is supposed to be a
natural and easy birth, when the infant comes forth The natural and easy
child birth
with his head forwards, presently following the flux of the water; and that is
more difficult, when the infant comes with his feet forwards: all the other
ways are most difficult. Therefore Mid-wives are to be admonished that as
often as they shall perceive the infant to be coming forth none of those
ways, but either with his belly or his back forwards, as it were double, or
else with his hands and feet together, or with his head forwards, and one of
his hands stretched out, that they should turn it, and draw it out by the
feet; for the doing whereof, if they be not sufficient, let them crave the
assistance and help of some expert Chirurgian.

CHAP. XVI. Signs of the birth at hand.
THere will be great pain under the navell, and at the groines, and spreading
therehence toward the Vertebrae of the loins, and then especially when they
are drawn back from the Os sacrum, the bones Ilia and the Coccix are thrust
outward, the genitalls swell with pain, and a certain feaver-like shaking
invades the body, the face waxes red by reason of the endeavor of nature,
armed unto the expulsion of the infant. And when these signs appear let all
things be prepared ready to the childe-birth. Therefore first of all let How
the woman that travelleth in childbirth must be placed in her bed.
the woman that is in travel be placed in her bed conveniently, neither with
her face upwards, nor sitting, but with her back upwards and somewhat high,
that she may breath at more liberty, and have the more power or strength to
labor. Therefore she ought to have her legs wide one from another, and
crooked, or her heels somewhat bowed uptowards her buttocks, so that she may
lean on a staff that must be placed overthwart the bed. There are some that do
travel in a stool or chair made for the purpose: others standing upright on
their feet, and leaning on the poast or pillar of the bed. But you must take
diligent heed that you do not exhort or persuade the woman in travel to
strive or labor to expel the birth before the forenamed signs thereof do
manifestly show that it is at hand. For by such labor or pains she might be
wearied or so weakened, that when she should strive or labor, she shall have
no power or strength so to do. If all these things do fall out well in the
childe-birth, the business is to be committed to nature and to the Midwife.
And the woman with child must only be admonished that when she feels very
strong pain, that she presently therewith strive with most strong expression,
shutting her mouth and nose if she please, and at the same time let the
mydwife with her hands force the infant from above downwards. But if the birth
be more difficult and painful, by reason An unction to supply the defect of
the waters that are flowed out too long before the birth.
that the waters wherein the infant lay are flowed out long before, and the
womb be dry, this ointment following is to be prepared.. butyri recentis sine
sale in aqua artemesiae loti ii. mucaginis ficuum, semin. lini and altheae cum
aqua sabinae extractae, an. ss. olei liliorum i. Make thereof an ointment,
wherewith let the mydwife often annoint the secret parts. Also this powder
following may be prepared.. Cinamom. cort. cassiae fistul. dictamni an. iss.
sacch. albi ad pondus omnium: make thereof a most subtle and fine powder. Let
the woman that is in extremity by reason of difficult A powder to cause speedy
deliverance in childbirth.
and painful travel in childbirth, take half an ounce thereof at a time,
with the decoction of linseede, or in white wine, for it will cause more speedy
and easy deliverance of the child.

Moreover, let the mydwife anoint her hands with this ointment following as
often as she puts them into the neck of the womb, and therewith also
anoint the parts about it.. olei ex seminibus lint i. ss. olei de castoreo ss.
galliae moschatae iii. Aph. 35. and 45. sect. 5.
ladani i. make thereof a liniment. Moreover, you may provoke sneesing, by
putting a little pepper or white hellebore in powder into the nostrils. Linseed
beaten, and given in a potion, with the water of Mugwort and Savine, is
supposed to cause speedy deliverance. Also the medicine following is commended
for the same purpose. A potion causing speedy deliverance.
. corticis cassiae fistul. conquassatae ii. cicer. rub. m. ss. bulliant cum
vino albo and aqua sufficienti, sub finem addendo sabinae, ii. in colatura pro
dosi add cinamomi ss. crocigr. vi. make thereof a potion, which being taken,
let sneesing be provoked, as it is abovesaid, and let her shut or close her
mouth and nostrils.

Many times it happens that the infant comes into the world ou^ of the
womb, having his head covered or wrapped about with portion of the ^dine or
tunicle wherein it is enclosed, especially when by the much, strong, and happy
striving of the mother, he comes forth together with the water wherein it
lies in the womb, and then the mydwives prophecy or foretell that the child
shall be happy, because he is borne as it were with a hood on his head. But I
suppose that it does betoken health of body both to the infant and also to his
mother; for it is a token of easy deliverance. For when the birth is difficult
and painful, the child never brings that membrane out with him, but it
remains behind in the passage of the genitals or secret parts, because they
are narrow. For even so the Snake or Adder when she would cast her skin
thereby to renew her age, creeps through some narrow or straight passage.
Presently after the birth, the woman so delivered must What a woman in travel
must take presently after her deliverance.
take two or three spoonefuls of the oil of sweet almonds extracted without
fire, and tempered with sugar. Some will rather use the yolks of eggs with
sugar, some the wine called Ipocras, others cullises or gelly: but always
diverse things are to be used, according as the patient or the woman in
childbed shall be grieved, and as the Physician shall give counsel, both to
cease and assuage the furious torments and pain of the throws, to recover her
strength and nourish her.

Throws come presently after the birth of the child, because that then the
veins The cause of the afterthrowes.
(nature being wholly converted to expulsion) cast out the relics of the
menstruall matter that has been suppressed for the space of nine months,
into the womb with great violence, which because they are gross, slimie and
dreggish, cannot come forth without great pain both to the veins from whence
they come, and also unto the womb whereinto they go: also then by the
conversion of that portion thereof that remains into wind, and by the
undiscreete admission of the air in the time of the childbirth, the womb and
all the secret parts will swell, unless it be prevented with some digesting,
repelling or mollifying oil, or by artificial rolling of the parts about the
belly.

CHAP. XVII. What is to be done presently after the child is borne.
PResently after the child is borne, the mydwife must draw away the secundine
or after birth, as gently as she can: but if she cannot, let her Why the
secundine or afterbirth must be taken away presently after the birth of the
child.
put her hands into the womb, and so draw it out, separating it from the other
parts; for otherwise if it should continue longer, it would be more difficult
to be gotten out, because that presently after the birth, the orifice of the
womb is drawn together and closed, and then all the secundine must be taken
from the child. Therefore the navell string must be tied with a The binding of
the child's navel-string after the birth.
double thread an inch from the belly. Let not the knot be too hard, lest that
part of the navell string which is without the knot should fall away sooner
than it ought, neither too slack or loose, lest that an exceeding and mortal
flux of blood should follow after it is cut off, and lest that through it
(that is to say, the navell string) the cold air should enter into the child's
body. When the knot is so made, the navellstring must be cut in sunder the
breadth of two fingers beneath it with a sharp knife. Upon the section you
must apply a double linen cloth dipped in oil of Roses, or of sweet almonds,
to mitigate the pain; for so within a few days after, that which is beneath
the knot will fall away, being destitute of life and nourishment, by reason
that the vein and artery are tied so close, that no life nor nourishment can
come unto it: commonly all mydwives do let it lie unto the bare belly of the
infant, whereof comes grievous pain and griping, by reason of the coldness
thereof, which dies by little and little, as destitute of vital heat. But it
were far better to roll it in soft cotton or lint, until it be mortified,
and so fall away.

Those mydwives do unadvisedly, who so soon as the infant is borne, do
presently tie the navell string and cut it off, not looking first for the
voyding of the secundine. When all these things are done, the infant must be
wiped, cleansed and rubbed from all filth and excrement with oil of Roses or
Myrtles. For thereby the pores of the skin will be better shut, and the
habit of the body the more strengthened.

There be some that wash infants at that time in warm water and red wine, and
afterward annoint them with the forenamed oils. Others wash them not with
wine alone, but boil therein red Roses and the leaves of Myrtles, adding
thereto a little salt; and then using this lotion for the space of five or six
days, they not only wash away the filth, but also resolve and digest, if
there be any hard or contused place in the infants tender body, by reason of
the hard travel and labor in childbirth. Their toes and fingers must be
handled, drawn asunder and The defaults that are commonly in children newly
borne.
bowed, and the joints of the arms and legs must be extended and bowed for
many days and often; that thereby that portion of the excrementall humor that
remains in the joints, by motion may be heated and resolved. If there be
any default in the members, either in conformation, construction or society
with those that are adjoining to them, it must be corrected or amended with
speed. Moreover, you must look whether any of the natural passages be
stopped, or covered with a membrane, as it often happens. For if any such
cover or stop the orifices The defaults of conformation must be speedily
amended.
of the ears, nostrils, mouth, yard or womb, it must be cut in sunder by the
Chynurgion, and the passage must be kept open by putting in of tents,
pessaries or desels, lest otherwise they should join together again after
they are cut. If he have one finger more than he should naturally, if his
fingers do cleave close together, like unto the feet of a Goose or Ducke, if
the ligamentall membrane their is under the tongue be more short and stiffer
than it ought, that the infant cannot suck, nor in time to come, speak, by
reason thereof; and if there be any other thing contrary to nature, it must be
all amended by the industry of some expert Chyrurgion.

Many times in children newly borne, there sticks on the inner side of their
mouth and on their tongue, a certain chalkie substance, both in color and
consistence; this affect proceeding from the distemperature of the mouth, the
Frenchmen call it the white Cancer. It will not permit the infant to suck, and
will shortly breed and degenerate Remedies for the cancer in a child's mouth.
into ulcers that will creep into the jaws, and even unto the throat, and
unless it be cleansed speedily, will be their death. For remedy whereof, it
must be cleansed by detersives, as with a linen cloth bound to a little
stick, and dipped in a medicine of an indifferent consistence made with oil
of sweet almonds, honey and sugar. For by rubbing this gently on it, the filth
may be mollified, and so cleansed or washed away.

Moreover it will be very meet and convenient to give the infant one
spoonefull of oil of almonds, to make his belly loose and slippery, to assuage
the roughness of the weason and gullet, and to dissolve the tough phlegm,
which causes a cough, and sometimes difficulty of breathing. If the eye lids
cleave together, or if they be joined together, or agglutinated to the coats
cornea or adnata; if the watery tumor called hydrocephalos affect the head,
then must they be cured by the proper remedies formerly prescribed, against
each disease.

Many from their birth have spots or marks, which the common people of France
call Signs, that is, marks or signs. Some of these are plain and equal
with the skin, others are raised up into little tumors, and like unto warts,
some have hairs upon them, many times they are smoothe, black or pale, yet
for the most part red. When they arise in the face, they spread abroad thereon
many times with great deformity. Many think the cause thereof to be a
certain portion of the menstruall matter cleaving to the sides of the womb,
coming of a fresh flux, if happily the man do yet use copulation with the
woman, or else distilling out of the veins into the womb, mixed and
concorporated with the seeds at that time when they are congealed, infecting
this or that part of the issue, being drawn out of the seminall body, with
their own color. Women refer the cause thereof unto their longing when they
are with child; which may imprint the image of the thing they long for or
desire, in the child or issue that is not as yet formed (as the force or power
of imagination in humane bodies is very great:) but when the child is formed,
no imagination is able to leave the impression of any thing in it, no more than
it could cause horns to grow on the head of King Chypus as he slept An old
fable of King Chypus.
presently after he was returned from attentively beholding Bulls fighting
together. Some of those spots be curable, others not; as those that are great,
and those that are on the lips, nostrils, and eye lids. But those that are like
unto warts, because Which uncurable.
they are partakers of a certain malign quality and melancholicke matter,
which may be irritated by endeavoring to cure them, are not to be meddled
with at all, for being troubled and angered, they soon turn into a Cancer
(which they call Noli me tangere). Those that are curable are small, and in
such parts as they Which and how they are curable.
may be dealt withal without danger. Therefore they must be pierced through
by the roots with a needle and a thread, and so being lifted up by the ends of
the thread, they must be cut away, and the wound that remains must be cured
according to the general method of wounds.

There are some that suppose the red spots that are raised up into little
knobbes and bunches, may be washed away and consumed by rubbing and annoynting
them often with menstruall blood, or the blood of the secundine or afterbirth.
Those that are hairie and somewhat raised up like unto a Want or Mouse, must
be pierced through the roots in three or four places, and straightly bound,
so that at length being destitute of life and nutriment, they may fall away:
after they are fallen away, the ulcer that remains must be cured as other
ulcers are. If there be any superfluous flesh remaining, it must be taken
away by applying Aegyptiacum, or the powder of mercury, and such like: but if
it be doubted that it comes from the root of the tumor that may happily
remain, it must be burned away by the root with oil of vitrioll or aqua
fortis.

There is also an other kind or sort of spots, of a livide or violet color,
coming especially in the face about the lips, with a soft, slack, laxe,
thin, and unpainefull tumor, and the veins as if they were varicous round
about it. This kind of tumor grows greater when it arises on children that
are wayward and crying, and in men of riper years that are choleric and
angry, and then it will be of a diverse color, like unto a lappet or flap of
flesh that hangs over the Turkie-cocks bill. When they have done crying, or
ceased their anger, the tumor will return to his own natural color again.
But you must not attempt to cure it in people that are of these conditions.

CHAP. XVIII. How to pull away the secundine or afterbirth.
I Suppose that they are called secundines, because they do grieve the woman
that is with child the second time, as it were a second birth: Why it is called
the secundines.
for if there be several children in the womb at once, and of different
sexes, they then have every one their several secundines, which thing is very
necessary to be known by all mydwives. For they do many times remain
behind in the womb when the child is borne, either by reason The causes of
the staying of the secundines.
of the weakness of the woman in travel, which by contending and laboring
for the birth of her child, has spent all her strength: or else by a tumor
rising suddenly in the neck of the womb, by reason of the long and difficult
birth, and the cold air unadvisedly permitted to strike into the orifice of
the womb. For so the liberties of the ways or passages are stopped and made
more narrow, so that nothing can come forth: or else because they are doubled
and foulded in the womb, and the waters gone out from them with the infant, so
that they remain as it were in a dry place: or else because they yet stick in
the womb by the knots of the veins and arteries, which commonly happens in
those that are delivered before their time. For even as apples which are not
ripe, cannot be pulled from the tree but by violence; but when they are ripe,
they will fall off of their own accord: so the secundine before the natural
time of the birth can hardly be pulled away but by violence; but at the
prefixed natural time of the birth, it may easily be drawn away.

Many and grievous accidents follow the staying of the secundine; as
suffocation Accidents that follow the staying of the secandines.
of the womb, often swouning, by reason that gross vapors arise from the
putrefaction unto the mydriffe, heart and brain: therefore they must be
pulled away with speed from the womb, gently handling the navell, if it may
be so possibly done. But if it cannot be done so, the woman must be placed
as she was wont The manner of drawing out the (...) that (...) after the birth.
when that the child will not come forth naturally, but must be drawn forth
by art. Therefore the mydwife having her hand anointed with oil, must put it
gently into the womb, and finding out the navell string, must follow it until
it come unto the secundine, and if it do as yet cleave to the womb by the
cotylidons, she must shake and move it gently up and down, that so when it is
shaked and loosed, she may draw it out gently; but if it should be drawn
with violence, it were to be feared lest that the womb should also follow: for
by violent attraction some of the vessels, and also some of the nervous
ligaments, whereby the womb is fastened on each side, may be rent, whereof
follows corruption of blood shed out of the vessels, and thence comes
inflammation, an abscesse or a mortal gangrene. Neither is there less danger
of a convulsion by reason of the breaking of the nervous The cause of the
falling down of the womb.
bodies, neither is there any less danger of the falling down of the womb.
If that there be any knots or clods of blood remaining together with the
secundine, the mydwife must draw them out one by one, so that not any may be
left behind.

Some women have veyded their secundine, when it could not be drawn forth by
any means, long after the birth of the child, by the neck of their womb,
piece-meale, Thr accidents that come of the (...) pulling (...) the womb,
together (...) secundine.
rotten and corrupted, with many grievous and painful accidents. Also it
shall be very requisite to provoke the endeavor of the expulsive faculty by
sternutatories, aromaticke fomentations of the neck of the womb, by
mollifying injections: and contrariwise, by applying such things to the
nostrils as yield a rank savor or smell, with a potion made of mugwurt and
bay berries taken in honey and wine mixed together, or with half a dram of
the powder of savine, or with the hair of a woman's head, burnt and beaten to
powder, and given to drink; and to conclude, with all things that provoke the
terms or courses.

CHAP. XIX. What things must be given to the infant by the mouth, before he
be permitted to suck the Teat or Dugge.
IT will be very profitable to rub all the inner side of the childs To draw
fleame from the child's mouth.
mouth and pallat gently with treacle and honey, or the oil of sweet almonds
extracted without fire, and if you can, to cause it to swallow some of those
things: for thereby much phlegmatic moisture will be drawn from the mouth,
and also will be moved or provoked to be vomited up from the stomach; for if
these excrementall humors should be mixed with the milk that is sucked, they
would corrupt it, and then the vapors that arise from the corrupted milk unto
the brain would infer most pernicious accidents. And you may know that there
are many excrementall things in the stomach and guts of children by this,
because that so soon as they come into the world, and often before they suck
milk or take any other thing, they void downwards many excrements diversely
colored, as yellow, green, and black. Therefore many, that they may speedily
evacuate the matter that causes the fretting of the guts, do not only
minister Milk soon corrupted in a phlegmatic stomach.
those things forenamed, but also some laxative syrup, as that that is made
of damask Roses. But before the infant be put to suck the mother, it is
fitting to press some milk out of her breast into its mouth, that so the
fibers of the stomach may by little and little accustom themselves to draw in
the milk.

CHAP. XX. That mothers ought to nurse or give suck unto their own children.
THat all mothers would nurse their own children were greatly The mothers
milk is most similiar for the child.
to be wished: for the mothers milk is far more familiar nourishment for
the infant than that of any other nurse: for it is nothing else but the same
blood made white in the dugges, wherewith before it was nourished in the womb.
For the mother ought not to give the child suck for the space of a few days
after the birth, but first to expect the perfect expurgation and avoiding of
the excrementall humors. And in the mean time let her cause her breasts to
be sucked of another, or many other children, or of some wholesome or sober
maid, whereby the milk may be drawn by little and little unto her breasts,
and also by little and little purified.

For a certain space after the birth, the milk will be troubled, and the
humors of the body moved: so that by long staying in the dugges, it will seem
to degenerate from its natural goodness, as the grossness of it is somewhat
congealed, the manifest heat in touching, and the yellow color thereof
testifies evidently. Therefore it is necessary that others should come in
place thereof when it is sucked The disease of the nurse is participated unto
the child.
out, wherewith the infant may be nourished. But if the mother or the nurse
chance to take any disease, as a Fever, Scouring, or any such like, let her
give the child to another, to give it suck, lest that the child chance to take
the nurses diseases. And moreover, mothers ought to nurse their own children,
because for the most part they are far more vigilant and careful in bringing
up and attending their children, than hired and mercenary nurses, which do not
so much regard the infant, as the gain they shall have by the keeping of it,
for the most part. Those that do not nurse their own children, cannot rightly
be termed mothers: for they do not absolutely perform the duty of a mother
unto their child, as Marcus Aurelius Gel. lib. 12. ca. 1.
the Roman Emperor was wont to say. For this is a certain unnatural,
imperfect and half kind of a mothers duty, to bear a child, and presently
to abandon or put it away as if it were forsaken: to nourish and feed a thing
in their womb (which they neither know nor see) with their own blood, and
then not to nourish it when they see it in the world alive, a creature or
reasonable soul, now requiring the help and sustentation of the mother.

CHAP. XXI. Of the choice of Nurses.
MAny husbands take such pity on their tender wives, that they provide nurses
for their children, that unto the pains that they have sustained in bearing
them, they may not also add the trouble of nursing them: wherefore such a
nurse must be chosen which has had two or three children. For the dugges
which have been already sucked and accustomed to be filled, have the veins
and arteries more large and capable to receive the more milk. In the choice of
a nurse there are ten things to be considered very diligently: as, her age,
the habit of her body, her behavior, the condition of her milk, the form,
not only of her dugges or breasts, but also of her teats or nipples, the time
from her childbirth, the sex of her last infant or child, that she be not
with child, that she be sound and in perfect health. As concerning her age,
she ought not to be under twenty five years, nor above thirty five: the The
best age of a nurse.
time that is between is the time of strength, more temperate, and more
wholesome and healthy, and less abounding with excrementall humors. And
because her body does not then grow or increase, she must of necessity have
the more abundance of blood. After thirty five years in many the menstruall
fluxes do cease, and therefore it is to be supposed that they have the less
nutriment for children.

The nurse must also be of a good habit, or square or well set body, her breast
broad, her color lively, not fat, nor lean, but well made, her flesh not soft
and tender, but The best habit of body in a autse.
thick, and hard or strong, whereby she may be the more able to endure watching
and taking of pains about the child; she must not have a red or freckled face,
but brown or somewhat shadowed or mixed with redness: for truly such women
are more hot than those that are red in the face, by reason whereof they must
needs concoct and turn their meat the better into blood. For according to the
judgment of Sextus Cheronensis, as blackish or brown ground is more fertile
than the white; even so a Lib. de inf. nutr.
brown woman has more store of milk. You must look well on her head, lest
she should have the scurfe or running sores; see that her teeth be not foul
or rotten, nor her breath stinking, nor no ulcer nor sore about her body, and
that she be not borne of gouty or leprous Parents.

She ought to be quick and diligent in keeping the child neat and clean,
Of what behavior the nurse must be.
chaste, sober, merry, always laughing and smiling on her infant, often
singing unto it, and speaking distinctly and plainly, for she is the only
mistrisse to teach the child to speak. Let her be well mannered, because the
manners of the nurse are participated unto the infant together with the milk.
For the welpes of dogs, if they do suck Wolves or Lionesses, will become
more fierce and cruel than other-wise they would. Contrariwise, the Lions
whelps will leave their savagenesse and fierceness, if that they be brought
up and nourished with the milk of any Bitch, or other tame beast. If a Coat
give a Lamb suck, the same Lambs wool will be more hard than others:
contrariwise, if a Sheep give a Kyd suck, the same Kyds hair will be more soft
than another Kyds hair. She ought to be sober, and the rather for this cause,
because many nurses being overloaden with wine and banqueting, often set their
children unto their breasts to suck, and then fall asleep, and so suddenly
strangle or choke them.

She must abstain from copulation: for copulation troubles and moves the
Why the nurse must abstain from copulation.
humors and the blood, and therefore the milk it self; and it diminishes
the quantity of milk, because it provokes the menstruall flux, and causes
the milk to have a certain strong and virous quality, such as we may perceive
to breathe from them that are incensed with the fervent lust and desire of
venery. And moreover, because that thereby they may happen to be with child,
whereof ensues discommodity both to her own child that is within her body,
and also to the nurse child: to the nurse child, because that the milk that
it sucketh will be worse and more depraved than otherwise it would be, by
reason that the more laudable blood after the conception remains about the
womb, for the nutriment and increasing of the infant in the womb; and the
more impure blood goes into the dugges, which breeds impure or unclean
milk: but to the conceived child, because it will cause it to have scarcity
of food; for, so much as the sucking child sucketh, so much the child
conceived in the womb, wants.

Also she ought to have a broad breast, and her dugges indifferently big,
not What dugs a nurse ought to have.
slack or hanging; but of a middle consistence, between soft and hard; for
such dugges will concoct the blood into milk the better, because that in firm
flesh the heat is more strong and compact. You may by touching try whether the
flesh be solid and firm, as also by the dispersing of the veins, easily to
be seen by reason of their swelling and blewnesse, through the dugges, as it
were into many streams or little rivelers; for in flesh that is loose and
slack, they lie hidden. Those dugges that are of a competent bigness, receive
or contain no more milk than is sufficient to nourish the infant. In those
dugges that are great and hard, the milk is as it were suffocated, stopped or
bound in, so that the child in sucking can scarce draw it out: and moreover,
if the dugges be hard, the child putting his mouth to the breast, may strike
his nose against it, and so hurt it, whereby he may either refuse to suck, or
if he does proceed to suck, by continual sucking, and placing of his nose
on the hard breast, it may become flat, and the nostrils turned upwards, to his
great deformity, when he shall come to age. If the teates or nipples of the
dugges do stand somewhat low or depressed inwards on the tops of the dugges,
the child can hardly take them between its lips, therefore his sucking will
be very laborious. If the nipples or teats be very big, they will so fill
all his mouth, that he cannot well use his tongue in sucking or in swallowing
the milk.

We may judge of or know the nature and condition of the milk, by the
quantity, What is to be observed in the milk.
quality, color, savor and taste: when the quantity of the milk is so
little, that it will not suffice to nourish the infant, it cannot be good and
laudable; for it argues some distemperature either of the whole body, or at
least of the dugges, especially a hot and dry distemperature. But when it
super-aboundeth, and is more than the infant can spend, it exhausteth the juice
of the nurses body; and when it cannot all be drawn out by the infant, it
cluttereth, and congealeth or corrupts in the dugges. Yet I would rather wish
it to abound, than to be defective, for the super-abounding quantity may be
pressed out before the child be set to the breast.

That milk that is of a mean consistence between thick and thin, is
esteemed The laudable consistence of milk.
to be the best. For it betokens the strength and vigor of the faculty that
ingendereth it in the breasts. Therefore if one drop of the milk be laid on
the nail of ones thumb, being first made very clean and fair, if the thumb
be not moved, and it run off the nail, it signifies that it is watery
milk: but if it stick to the nail, although the end of the thumb be bowed
downwards, it shows that it is too gross and thick: but if it remain on
the nail so long as you hold it upright, and fall from it when you hold it a
little aside or downwards by little and little, it shows it is very good
milk. And that which is exquisitely white, is best of all. For the milk is no
other thing than blood made white.

Therefore, if it be of any other color, it argues a default in the blood:
so that Why the milk ought to be very white.
if it be brown, it betokens melancholy blood; if it be yellow, it
signifies choleric blood; if it be wanne and pale, it betokens
phlegmatic blood; if it be somewhat hat red, it argues the weakness of
the faculty that engenders the milk. It ought to be sweet, fragrant, and
pleasant in smell; for if it strike into the nostrills with a certain
sharpness, as for the most part the milk of women that have red Why a woman
that has red hair, or freckles on her face cannot be a good nurse.
hair and little freckles on their faces does, it prognosticates a hot and
choleric nature: if with a certain sowernesse, it portendeth a cold and
melancholy nature. In taste it ought to be sweet, and as it were sugared, for
the bitter, saltish, sharp, and stipticke, is naught. And here I cannot but
admire the providence of nature, which has caused the blood wherewith the
child should be nourished to be turned into milk: which unless it were so,
who is he that would not turn his face from, and abhor so grievous and
terrible a spectacle of the childs mouth so imbrued and besmeared with blood?
What mother or nurse would not be astonished or amazed at every moment with the
fear of the blood so often shed out, or sucked by the infant for his
nourishment? Moreover, we should want two helps of sustentation, that is to
say, butter and cheese.

Neither ought the child to be permitted to suck within five or six days
after it is borne, both for the reason before alleged, and also because he
has need of so much time to rest quiet, and ease himself after the pains he
has sustained in his birth: in the mean season the mother must have her
breasts drawn by some maid that drinks no wine, or else she may suck or
draw them her self with an artificial instrument which I will describe
hereafter.

That nurse that has borne a man child is to be preferred before another,
because Why that nurse that has borne a man child is to be preferted before
another.
her milk is the better concocted, the heat of the male child doubling the
mothers heat. And moreover, the women that are great with child of a male
child, are better colored, and in better strength, and better able to do any
thing all the time of their greatness, which proves the same: and moreover
the blood is more laudable, and the milk better. Furthermore, it behooves the
Nurse to be brought on bed, or to travel at her just and prefixed or natural
time: for when the Why she cannot be a good nurse whose child was born before
the time.
child is born before his time of some inward cause, it argues that there is
some default lurking and hidden in the body and humors thereof.

CHAP. XXII. What diet the Nurse ought to use, and in what situation she ought
to place the infant in the cradle.
BOth in eating, drinking, sleeping, watching, exercising and resting, the
nurses diet must be diverse, according as the nature of the child both in habit
and temperature shall be: as for example, if the child be altogether of a
more hot blood, the nurse both in feeding and ordering her self ought to
follow a cooling diet. In general, let her eat meats of good juice, moderate
in quantity and quality, let her live in a pure and clear air, let her
abstain from all spices, and all salted and spiced meats, and all sharp
things, wine, especially that which is not allayed or mixed with water, and
carnal copulation with a man, let her avoid all perturbations of the mind,
but anger especially, Anger greatly hurts the nurse. The exercise of the arms
is best for the nurse. How the child should be placed in the cradle.
let her use moderate exercise, unless it be the exercise of her arms and
upper parts, rather than the legs and lower parts, whereby the greater
attraction of the blood, that must be turned into milk, may be made toward
the dugges. Let her place her child so in the cradle that his head may be
higher than all the body, that so the excrementall humors may be the better
sent from the brain unto the passages that are beneath it. Let her swathe it
so as the neck and all the backbone may be straight and equal. As long as the
child sucketh, and is not fed with stronger meat, it is better to lay him
always on his back, than any other way, for the back is, as it were the Keele
in a ship, the groundwork and foundation of all the whole body, whereon the
infant may safely and easily rest. But if he lie on the side, it were danger
lest that the bones of the ribs being soft and tender, not strong enough, and
united with slack bands, should bow under the weight of the rest, and so wax
crooked, whereby the infant might become crooke-backed. But when he begins
to breed teeth, and to be fed with more strong meat, and also the bones and
connexions of them begin to wax more firm and hard, he must be laid one
while on this side, another while on that, and now and then also on his back.
And the more he grows, the more let him be accustomed to lie on his sides;
and as he lies in the cradle, let him be turned unto that place whereat the
light comes in, lest that otherwise he might become poore-blind, for the eye
of its own nature is bright and light-some, and therefore always desires the
light, and abhors darkness, for all things are most delighted with their
like, and shun their contraries. Therefore unless the light come directly
into the childs face, he turns himself every way being very sorrowful, and
striveth to turn his head and eyes that he may have the light; and that often
turning and rolling of his eyes at length grows into a custom that cannot
be left: and so it comes to pass that the infant does either become
poore-blind, if he set his eyes steadfastly on one thing, or else his eyes do
become trembling, always turning and unstable, if he cast his eyes on many
things that are round about him: which is the reason that nurses, being taught
by experience, Why an arch of wickers must be made over the childs head lying
in the cradle. Why a squint-eyed nurse causes the child to be squint-eyed.
cause over the head of the child lying in the cradle, an arch or vault of
wickers covered with cloth to be made, thereby to restrain, direct, and
establish the uncertain and wandering motions of the childs eyes.

If the nurse be squint-eyed, she cannot look upon the child but side-waies,
whereof it comes to pass that the child being moist, tender, flexible and
prone to any thing with his body, and so likewise with his eye, by a long and
daily custom unto his nurses sight, does soon take the like custom to look
after that sort also, which afterward he cannot leave or alter. For those
evil things that we learn in our youth, do stick firmly by us, but the good
qualities are easily changed into worse. In the eyes of those that are
squint-eyed, those two muscles which do draw the eyes to the greater or lesser
corner, are chiefly or more frequently moved. Therefore either of these being
confirmed in their turning aside by long use, as the exercise of their proper
office increases the strength, soon overcomes the contrary or withstanding
muscles, called the Antagonists, and brings them into their subjection, so that
will they nill they, they bring the eye unto this or that corner as they list.
So children become lefthanded, How children become lefthanded.
when they permit their right hand to languish with idleness and
sluggishnesse, and strengthen their left hand with continual use and motion to
do every action therewithal, and so bring by the exercise thereof, more
nutriment unto that part. But if men (as some affirm) being of ripe years and
in their full growth, by daily society and company of those that are lame and
halt do also halt, not minding so to do, but it comes against their wills
and when they think nothing thereof, why should not the like happen in
children, whose soft and tender substance is as flexible and pliant as wax
unto every impression? Moreover, children, as they become lame and crook-backt,
so do they also become squint-eyed by the hereditary default of their parents.

CHAP. XXIII. How to make pappe for children.
PAppe is a most meet food or meat for children, because they require moist
nourishment, and it must be answerable in thickenesse to the Three laudable
conditions of pappe How the meal must be prepared to make the pap withal. Why
the meal wherewith the pap must be made, must first be boiled or baked.
milk, that so it may not be difficult to be concocted or digested. For pap
has these three conditions, so that it be made with wheaten flower, and that
not crude but boiled: let it be put into a new earthen pot or pipkin, and so
set into an oven at the time when bread is set thereinto to be baked, and let
it remain there until the bread be baked and drawn out; for when it is so
baked it is less clammy and crude. Those that mix the meal crude with the
milk, are constrained to abide one of these discommodities or other, either to
give the meal gross and clammy unto the child, if that the pap be only first
boiled over the fire in a pipkin or skillet so long as shall be necessary for
the milk; hence come obstructions in the mesaraike veins, and in the small
veins of the liver, fretting and worms in the guts, and the stone in the
reins. Or else they give the child the milk, despoiled of its butterish and
whayish portion, and the terrestrial and cheeselike or curdlike remaining, if
the pap be boiled so long as is necessary for the meal: for the milk
requires not so great, neither can it suffer so long boiling as the meal.
Those that do use crude meal, and have no hurt by it, are greatly bound to
nature for so great a benefit. But Galen wills children to be nourished
only with the nurses milk, so long as the nurse has enough to nourish 1. de
sanit. (...).
and feed it. And truly there are many children that are contented with milk
only, and will receive no pappe until they are three months old. If the child
at any time be costive, and cannot void the excrements, let him have a
cataplasme made with one dram of Aloes, of white and black Hellebore, of
each fifteen grains, being A cataplasme to relaxe the child's belly.
all incorporated in as much of an ox gall as is sufficient, and extended or
spread on cotton like unto a pultis, as broad as the palm of ones hand, and so
apply it upon the navell warm: moreover, this cataplasme has also virtue to
kill the worms in the belly. Many times children have fretting of the guts,
that makes them to cry, For the fretting of the guts in children.
which comes of crudity. This must be cured by applying unto the belly
sweaty or moist woole, macerated in oil of chamomile.

If when the childs teeth begin to grow, he chance to bite the nipple of the
nurses breast, there will be an ulcer very contumacious and hard to be cured,
because that the sucking of the child, and the rubbing of the clothes do keep
it always raw; it For the ulcers of the nipples or teats.
must be cured with fomenting it with allome water, and then presently after
the fomentation putting thereupon a cover of lead, made like unto a hat, as
they are here described, with many holes in the top, whereat both the milk,
and also the sanious matter that comes from the ulcers may go out, for lead
it self will cure ulcers.

The figure of leaden Nipples to be put upon the Nipple or Teat of the Nurse
when it is ulcerated.


Children may be caused to cease their crying four manner of ways, that is to
say, by giving them the teat, by rocking them in a cradle, by singing unto
them, and by changing the clothes and swathes wherein they are wrapped. They
must not be rocked too violently in the cradle, lest that the milk that is
sucked should be corrupted by the too violent motion, by reason whereof they
must not be handled violently any other way, and not altogether prohibited or
not suffered to cry. For by crying the breast and lungs are dilated and made
bigger and wider, the natural parts What moderate crying works in the infant.
the stronger, and the brain, nostrills, the eyes and mouth are purged, by the
tears and filth that come from the eyes and nostrills. But they must not be
permitted What immoderate crying causes.
to cry long or fiercely, for fear of breaking the production of the
Peritonaum, and thereby causing the falling down of the guts into the cod,
which rupture is called of the Greeks Enterocele, or of the caul, which the
Greeks call Epiplocele.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the weaning of children.
MAny are weaned in the eighteenth month, some in the twentieth, but all, or
the most part, in the second year, for then their teeth appear, When children
must be weaned
by whose presence nature seems to require some harder meat than milk or
pappe, wherewith children are delighted, and will feed more earnestly thereon.
But there is no certain time of weaning of children. For the teeth of some
will appear sooner, and some later; for they are prepared of nature for no
other purpose than to chaw the meat. If children be weaned before Why children
must not be weaned before their (...)* appear.
their teeth appear, and be fed with meat that is somewhat hard and solid,
according to the judgment of Avicen, they are incident to many diseases
coming through crudity, because the stomach is yet but weak, and wants
that preparation of the meats which is made in the mouth by chawing; which men
of ripe years cannot want without offense: when the child is two years old,
and the teeth appear, How children must be weaned.
if the child more vehemently desire harder meats, and does feed on them with
pleasure and good success, he may be safely weaned, for it cannot be supposed
that he has this appetite of hard meats in vain, by the instinct of nature.
Yet he may not be weaned without such an appetite, if all other things be
correspondent, that is to say, his teeth and age, for those things that are
eaten without an appetite, cannot profit. But if the child be weak, sickly,
or feeble, he ought not to be weaned. And when the meet time of weaning
comes, the nurse must now and then use him to the teat, whereby he may leave
it by little and little, and then let the teate be anointed or rubbed with
bitter things, as with Aloes, water of the infusion of Colocynthus, or
worme-wood, or with mustard, or soote steeped in water, or such like. Children
What children are strong and found of body.
that are scabby in their heads, and over all their bodies and which void much
phlegm at their mouth and nostrills, and many excrements downwards, are like to
be strong and sound of body; for so they are purged of excrementall humors:
contrariwise, those that are clean and fair of body, gather the matter of
many diseases in their bodies, which in process of time will break forth and
appear. Certainly by the An often cause of sudden crookedness.
sudden falling of such matters into the backe-bone, many become crookebackt.

CHAP. XXV. By what signs it may be known whether the child in the womb
be dead or alive.
IF neither the Chirurgians hand, nor the mother can perceive the A most
certain sign of the child dead in the womb.
infant to move, if the waters be flowed out, and secundine come forth, you
may certainly affirm that the infant is dead in the womb, for this is the
most infallible sign of all others: for because the child in the womb does
breathe but by the artery of the navell, and the breath is received by the
Cotyledon of the arteries of the womb, it must of necessity come to pass that
when the secundine is separated from the infant, no air or breath can come
unto it. Wherefore so often as the secundine is excluded before the child, you
may take it for a certain token of the death thereof: when the child is dead,
it will be more heavy to the mother than it was before when it was alive,
because it is now no more sustained by the spirits and When the child is dead
in the womb he is more heavy than he was before being alive.
faculties wherewith before it was governed and ruled, for so we see dead men
to be heavier than those that are alive, and men that are weak through hunger
and famine to be heavier than when they are well refreshed, and also when the
mother enclines her body any way, the infant falls that way also even as it
were a stone. The mother is also vexed with sharp pain from the privities
even to the navell, with a perpetual desire of making water, and going to
stool, because that nature is wholly busied in the expolsion or avoidance of
that which is dead: for that which is alive will expel That which is alive
will not suffer that which is dead.
the dead so far as it can from it self, because the one is altogether
different from the other; but likeness, if any thing, conjoynes and unites
things together: the genitalls are cold in touching, and the mother complains
that she feels a coldness in her womb, by reason that the heat of the infant
is extinguished, wherewith before her heat was doubled: many filthy excrements
come from her, and also the mothers breath stinketh, she swouneth often, all
which for the most part happen within three days after the death of the
child: for the infants body will sooner corrupt in the mothers womb than it
would in the open air, because that, according to the judgment of Galen, all
hot and moist things, being in like manner enclosed in a hot Lib. de tumorib.
and moist place, especially if by reason of the thickenesse or straitenesse of
the place they cannot receive the air, will speedily corrupt. Now by the
rising up of such vapors from the dead unto the brain and heart, such
accidents may soon follow, her face will be clean altered, seeming livid and
ghastly, her dugs fall and hang loose and lanke, and her belly will be more
hard and swollen than it was before. In all bolies so putrefying, the natural
heat vanishes away, and in place thereof succeeds Why the belly of a woman
will be more big when the child is dead within her, than it was before, when
it was alive.
a preternaturall, by the working whereof the putrefyed and dissolved humors
are stirred up into vapors, and converted into wind, and those vapors,
because they possess and fill more space and room (for naturalists say that
of one part of water ten parts of air are made) do so puff up the putrefyed
body into a greater bigness. You may note the same thing in bodies that are
gangrenate, for they cast forth many sharp vapors, yet nevertheless they are
swollen and pufted up.

Now so soon as the Chirurgian shall know that the child is dead by all these
forenamed signs, he shall with all diligence endeavor to save the mother so
speedily as he can, and if the Physicians cannot prevail with potions,
bathes, fumigations, sternutatories, vomits, and liniments appointed to expel
the infant, let him prepare himself to the work following; but first let him
consider the strength of the woman, for if he perceive that she be weak and
feeble by the smalnesse of her The signs of a woman that is weak.
pulse, by her small, seldom and cold breathing, and by the altered and
death-like color in her face, by her cold sweats, and by the coldness of the
extreme parts, let him abstain from the work, and only affirm that she
will dye shortly; contrariwise, if her strength be yet good, let him with all
confidence and industry deliver her on this wise from the danger of death.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Chyrurgicall extraction of the child from the womb either
dead or alive.
THerefore first of all the air of the chamber must be made temperate, and
reduced unto a certain mediocrity, so that it may neither After what sort the
woman in travel must be placed when the child, being dead in her womb, must
be drawn out.
be too hot nor too cold. Then she must be aptly placed, that is to say,
overthwart the bed side, with her buttockes somewhat high, having a hard
stuffed pillow or boulster underthem, so that she may be in a mean figure of
situation, neither sitting altogether upright, nor altogether lying along on
her back; for so she may rest quietly, and draw her breath with ease, neither
shall the ligaments of the womb be extended so as they would if she lay
upright on her back, her heels must be drawn up close to her buttocks, and
there bound with broad and soft linen rowlers. The rowler must first come
about her neck, and then crosse-wise over her shoulders, How she must be bound.
and so to the feet, and there it must cross again, and so be rolled about the
legs and thighs, and then it must be brought up to the neck again, and there
made fast, so that she may not be able to move her self, even as one should be
tied when he is to be cut of the stone. But that she may not be wearied, or
lest that her body should yield or sink down as the Chirurgian draws the
body of the infant from her, and so hinder the work, let him cause her feet to
be set against the side of the bed, and then let some of the strong standers
by hold her fast by the legs and shoulders. How the Surgeon ought to prepare
himself and his patient to the drawing out of the child from the womb.
Then that the air may not enter into the womb, and that the work may be
done with the more decency, her privy parts and thighs must be covered with a
warm double linen cloth. Then must the Surgeon, having his nails closely
pared, and his rings (if he wear any) drawn off his fingers, and his arms
naked, bare, and well anointed with oil, gently draw the flappes of the neck
of the womb asunder, and then let him put his hand gently into the mouth of
the womb, having first made it gentle and slippery with much oil; and when
his hand is in, let him find out the form and situation of the child,
whether it be one or two, or whether it be a Mole or not. And when he finds
that he comes naturally, with his head toward the How the infant that is dead
in the womb must be turned, bound and drawn out.
mouth or orifice of the womb, he must lift him up gently, and so turn him
that his feet may come forwards, and when he has brought his feet forwards, he
must draw one of them gently out at the neck of the womb, and then he must
bind it with some broad and soft or silken band a little above the heel with
an indifferent slack knot, and when he has so bound it, he must put it up
again into the womb, then he must put his hand in again, and find out the
other foot, and draw it also out of the womb, and when it is out of the
womb, let him draw out the other again whereunto he had before tied the one
end of the band, and when he has them both out, let him join them both close
together, and so by them by little and little let him draw all the whole body
from the womb. Also other women or Midwives may help the endeavor of the
Surgeon, by pressing the patients belly with their hands downe-wards as the
infant goes out: and the woman her self by holding her breath, and closing
her mouth and nostrills, and by driving her breath downwards with great
violence, may very much help the expulsion. I wish him to put back the foot
into the womb again after he has tied it, because if that he should permit
it to remain in the neck of the womb, it would hinder the entrance of his hand
when he puts it in to draw out the other. But if there be two children in
the womb at once, let the Chirurgian take heed lest that he take not of either
of them a leg, for by drawing them so, he shall profit nothing at all, and
yet exceedingly hurt the woman. Therefore that he may not be so deceived, when
he has drawn out one foot and tied it, and put it up again, let him with his
hand follow the band wherewithal the foot is tied, and so go unto the foot,
and then to the groine of the child, and then from thence he may soon find
out the other foot of the same child: for if it should happen otherwise, he
might draw the legs and the thighs out, but it would come no further,
neither is it meet that he should come out with his arms along by his sides,
or be drawn out on that sort, but one of his arms must be stretched out
above his head, and the other down by his side, for otherwise the orifice of
the womb when it were delivered of such a gross trunk, as it would be when
his body should A caution to avoid strangling of the infant in drawing out the
body.
be drawn out with his arms along by his sides, would so shrink and draw it
self when the body should come unto the neck, only by the accord of nature
requiring union, that it would strangle and kill the infant, so that he cannot
be drawn there-hence unless it be with a hook put under, or fastened under
his chinne, in his mouth, or in the hollownesse of his eye. But if the infant
lies as if he would come with his hands forwards, or if his hands be forth
already, so that it Why the child must not be drawn out with his hands
forwards. A history.
may seem he may be drawn forth easily that way, yet it must not be so
done; for so his head would double backwards over his shoulders, to the great
danger of his mother. Once I was called unto the birth of an infant, whom the
midwives had assayed to draw out by the arm, so that the arm had been so long
forth that it was gangrenate, whereby the child dyed; I told them presently
that his arm must be put in again, and he must be turned otherwise. But
when it could not be put back by reason of the great swelling thereof, and
also of the mothers genitals, I determined to cut it off with an incision
knife, cutting the muscles as near as I could to the shoulder, yet drawing the
flesh upwards, that when I had taken off the bone with a pair of cutting
pincers, it might come down again to cover the shivered end of the bone, lest
otherwise when it were thrust in again into the womb, it might hurt the
mother. Which being done, I turned him with his feet forwards, and drew him
out as is before said. But if the tumor either naturally or by some accident,
that is to say, by putrefaction, which may perchance come, be so great that
he cannot be turned according to the Chirurgions intention, nor be drawn out
according as he lies, the tumor must be diminished, and then he must be
drawn out as is aforesaid, and that must be done at once. As for example, To
diminish the wind wherewith the infant being dead in the womb, swolleth and is
pufted up that he cannot be gotten out of the womb.
if the dead infant appear at the orifice of the womb, which our mydwives
call the Garland, when it gapeth, is open and dilated, but yet his head being
more great and puffed up with wind so that it cannot come forth, as caused to
be so through that disease which the Greeks call Mucrophisocephalos, the
Surgeon must fasten a hook under his chinne, or in his mouth, or else in
the hole of his eye, or else, which is better and more expedient, in the hinder
part of his head. For when the scull is so opened, there will be a passage
whereat the wind may pass out, and so when the tumor falls and decreaseth,
let him draw the infant out by little and little, but not rashly, lest he
should break that whereon he has taken hold: the figure of those hooks is
thus.

The form of hooks for drawing out the infant that is dead in the womb.


But if the breast be troubled with the like fault, the hooks must be
fastened about the channel bone: if there be a Dropsy or a Tympany in the
belly, the hooks must be fastened either in the short ribs, that is to say, in
the muscles that are between the ribs, or especially, if the disease do
also descend into the feet, about the bones that are above the groine; or else
putting the crooked knife here pictured i^he womb with his left hand, let him
make incision in the child's belly, and so get out all his entrals by the
incision, for when he is so bowelled, all the water that caused the dropsy
will out. But the Surgeon must do none of all these things but when the
child is dead, and the woman that travelleth in such danger that she cannot
otherwise be helped.

But if by any means it happens that all the infants members be cut away by
How the head of the infant, if it remain in the womb separated from the body,
may be drawn out.
little and little, and that the head only remains behind in the womb,
which I have sometimes against my will, and with great sorrow seen, then the
left hand being anointed, with oil of Lillies or fresh butter must be put
into the womb, wherewith the Surgeon must find out the mouth, putting his
fingers into it; then with his right hand he must put up the hook, according
to the direction of the left hand, gently, and by little and little, and so
fasten it in the mouth, eye, or under the chin, and when he has firmly fixed
or fastened it, he must therewith draw out the head by little and little, for
fear of loosening or breaking the part whereon he has hold. In stead of this
hook you may use the instruments that are here described, which therefore I
have taken out of the Surgery of Francis Dalechamps, for they are so made,
that they may easily take hold of a sphaericall and round body with the
branches, as with fingers.

Gryphons Talons, that is to say, instruments made to draw out the head of a
dead infant that is separated in the womb from the rest of the body.


But it is not very easy to take hold on the head when it remains alone in
the Why the head being alone in the womb, is more difficult to be drawn out.
womb, by reason of the roundnesse thereof, for it will slip and slide up and
down, unless the belly be pressed down, and on both sides, thereby to hold
it unto the instrument, that it may with more facility take hold thereon.

CHAP. XXVII. What must be done unto the woman in travel presently after her
deliverance.
THere is nothing so great an enemy to a woman in travel, especially to Cold
an enemy to women in travel.
her whose child is drawn away by violence, as cold: wherefore with all care
and diligence she must be kept and defended from cold. For after the birth,
her body being void and empty, does easily receive the air that will enter
into every thing that is empty, and hence she waxes cold, her womb is
distended and puffed up, and the orifices of the vessels thereof are shut and
closed, whereof comes suppression of the afterbirth, or other after
purgations. And thereof comes many grievous accidents, as hystericall
suffocation, What accidents follow the taking of cold in a woman that is
delivered of child.
painful fretting of the guts, fevers, and other mortal diseases.

What woman soever will avoyde that discommodity, let her hold her legs or
thighs acrosse, for in so doing, those parts that were separated will be
joined and close together again. Let her belly be also bound or rolled with a
ligature of an indifferent breadth and length, which may keep the cold air
from the womb, and also press the blood out that is contained in all the
substance thereof. Then give her some Capon broth or Caudle, with Saffron, or
with the powder called Secundines must be laid to the region of the womb
whilst they be warm.
Pulvis ducis, or else bread toasted and dipped in wine wherein spice is
brewed, for to restore her strength, and to keep away the fretting of the
guts. When the secundine is drawn out, and is yet hot from the womb, it must
be laid warm unto the region of the womb, especially in the winter, but in
the summer, the hot skin of a Weather newly killed must be laid unto all the
whole belly, and unto the region of the loins. But then the curtains of the
bed must be kept drawn, and all the windows and doors of the chamber must
be kept shut with all diligence, that no cold air may come unto the woman
that travelleth, but that she may lie and take her rest quietly. The Weathers
skin must be taken away after that it has lain five or six hours, and
then all the region of her belly must be anointed with the ointment following.

. spermatis Ceti, ii. olei amygdal. dulcium and hypericon. an. iss.
sevihircini. i. Uugaents for the woman in travel that the region of the belly
may not be wtiakled.
olei myrtillor. i. cer ae novae quantum sufficit; make thereof an ointment,
wherewith let her be anointed twice in the day: let a plaster of Galbanum be
applied to the navell, in the midst whereof put some few grains of Civet or
Musk, so that the smell of the plaster may not strike up into her nostrils.
Then let this medicine following be applied, commonly called Tela Gualterina..
cer ae novae iiii. spermatis Ceti. iss. terebinth. venetaein aqua rosacea lotae
ii. olei amygdal. dulcium and The medicine called Tela Gualterina.
hypericonis an. i. olei mastich. and myrtini, an. ss. axungiae cervi iss. melt
them all together, and when they are melted, take it from the fire, and then
dippe a linen cloth therein, as big as may serve to fit the region of the
belly, whereunto it is to be applied. These remedies will keep the external
region of the belly from wrinkling.

But of all other, the medicine following excels.. limacum rub. lb i. florum
anthos quart. iii. let them be cut all in small pieces, and put into an
earthen pot well nealed with lead, and close stopped, then let it be set in
the dung of horses for the space of forty days, and then be pressed or
strained, and let the liquor that is strayned out be kept in a glass well
covered, and set in the sun for the space of three or four days, and
therewith annoint the belly of the woman that lies in childbed. If she be
greatly tormented with throws, let the powder following be given unto her..
anisi conditi ii. nucis moschat. cornu cervi ust. an. A powder for the fretting
of the guts.
i.ss. nuclcorum dactyllor. iii. ligni aloes and cinamomi an. ii. make thereof
a most subtle powder, let her take i. thereof at once with white wine warm.
Or,. rad. confolidae major. iss. nucleorum persicorum, nucis moschat. an. ii.
carab. ss. ambrae graezoe gra. iiii. make thereof a powder, let her take one
dram thereof at a time with white wine, or, if she have a fever, with the
broth of a Capon. Let there be hot bags applied to the genitalls, belly and
raynes; these bags must be made of millet and oats fried in a frying pan
with a little white wine.

But if through the violence of the excraction the genitall parts be torn, as
ancient writers affirm it has come to pass, so that the two holes, as the two
holes of the What must be done when the groine is torn in childbirth.
privy parts and of the fundament have been torn into one, then that which
is rent must be stitched up, and the wound cured according to art. Which is a
most unfortunate chance for the mother afterward, for when she shall travel
again, she cannot have her genitall parts to extend and draw themselves in
again by reason of the scarre. So that then it will be needful that the
Surgeon shall again open the place that was cicatrized, for otherwise she
shall never be delivered, although she strive and contend never so much. I
have done the like cure in two women that dwelt in Paris.

CHAP. XXVIII. What cure must be used to the Dugges and Teates of those that
are brought to bed.
IF great store and abundance of milk be in the breasts, and the woman be
not willing to nurse her own child, they must be anointed with the unguent
following, to repel the milk, and cause it to To drive the milk downe-wards.
be expelled through the womb.. olei ros. myrtini an. iii. aceti rosat. i.
incorporate them together, and therewith annoint the dugges four times a day,
and presently after the annoynting besprinkle them with the powder of myrtils,
and then apply the plaster following.. pulv. mastichini, nucis moschat. an. ii.
nucis cupressi iii. balaust. myrtill. an. iss. Ireos, florent. ss. olei myrtini
iii. terebinth. veneta ii. cerae novae quantum sufficit, make thereof a soft
plaster.

The leaves of brooke-lime, cresses and box boiled together in urine and
vinegar, are thought a present remedy for this purpose, that is to say, to draw
the milk from the breasts. And others take the clay that falls down into
the bottom of the trough wherein the grindstone, whereon swords are grownd,
turns, and mix it with oil of roses, and apply it warm unto the dugges,
which in short space, as it is thought, will assuage the pain, stay the
inflammation, and drive the milk out of the dugges. The decoction of ground
Ivy, Peruwincle, Sage, red Roses and roach Alome being prepared in oxycrate,
and used in the form of a fomentation, is thought to perform the like effect:
the like virtue have the lees of red wine, applied to the dugges with vinegar,
or the distilled water of unripe Pine-apples applied to the breasts with linen
clothes wet therein, or hemlocke beaten and applied with the young and tender
leaves of a gourd.

This medicine following is approved by use: Take the leaves of Sage, Smallage,
By what reason, and which way cupping-glasses, being fastened on the groine or
above the navell, do draw the milk out of the breasts.
Rue, and Chervill, and cut or chop them very small, and incorporate them in
vinegar and oil of Roses, and so apply it warm to the breast, and renew it
thrice a day. In the mean time let Cupping-glasses be applied to the inner
side of the thigh and groine, and also above the navell. For this is very
effectual to draw the milk out of the breasts into the womb by the veins,
whereby the womb communicates with the breasts. Moreover, they may let
children or little welpes suck their breasts, whereby they may draw out the
milk that is fixed fast in their dugges, in steed whereof we have invented
this instrument of glass, wherewith, when the broader orifice is fastened or
placed on the breast or dugge, and the pipe turned upwards toward her mouth,
she may suck her own breasts her self.

The form of a little glass, which being put on the nipple, the woman may
suck her own breasts.


In steed of this instrument, a violl of glass being first made warm, and
the mouth thereof applied to the nipple or teat, by reason of the heat and
wideness thereof will draw the milk forth into the bottom thereof, as it
were by a certain sucking. The after purgations being first evacuated, which
is done for the most part within twenty days after the birth, if the woman be
not in danger of a fever, nor have any other accident, let her enter into a
bath, made of marjerome, mints, sage, rosemary, mugwurt, agrimonie,
pennyroyall, the flowers of chamomile, melilote, dill, being boiled in most
pure and clear running water. All the day following let another such like bath
be prepared, whereunto let these things following be added.. farini fabarum
and aven. an. lb. iii. farin. orobi, lupinor. and gland. an. lb. i. aluminis
roch. iiii. salis com. lb. ii. gallarum, nucum cupressi, an. iii. rosar. rub.
m. vi. chariophyl. nucum moschat. an. iii. boil them all in common water, then
sew them all in a clean linen cloth, as it were in a bag, and cast them
therein into the bath wherein Iron red hot has been extinguished, and let the
woman that has lately traveled sit down therein so long as she pleases,
and when she comes out, let her be laid warm in bed, and let her take
some preserved Orange pill, or bread toasted and dipped in Ipocras, or in wine
brewed with spices, and then let her sweat, if the sweat will come forth of
its own accord.

On the next day let astringent fomentations be applied to the genitals on
this Astringent fomentations for the privy parts.
wise prepared.. gallar. nucum Cupressi, corticum granat. an. i. rosar. rub.
mi. thymi, majoran. an. m. ss. aluminis rochae, salis com. an. ii. boil them
all together in red wine, and make thereof a decoction for a fomentation, for
the forenamed use. The distilled liquor following is very excellent and
effectual to confirm and to A distilled liquor for to draw together the dug
that are loose and slack.
draw in the dugges, or any other loose parts.. charyophyl. nucis moschat.
nucum cupressi. an. i ss. mastich. ii. alumin. roch. i ss. glandium and
corticis querni, an. lb ss. rosar. rubr. m. i. cort. granat. ii. terrae
sigillat. i. cornu cervi usti ss. myrtillor. sanguinis dracon. an. i. boli
armeni. ii. ireos florent. i. sumach. berber. Hyppuris, an. m. ss.
conquassentur omnia, and macerentur spatio duorum dierum. in lb i ss. aquae
rosarum lb ii. prunorum syvestr. mespilorum, pomorum quernorum, and lb ss.
aquae fabrorum, aceti denique fortiss. iv. afterward distill it over a gentle
fire, and keep the distilled liquor for your use, wherewith let the parts be
fomented twice in a day. And after the fomentation, let woollen clothes or
stupes of linen cloth be dipped in the liquor, and then pressed out and laid
to the place. When all these things are done and past, the woman may again
keep company with her husband.

CHAP. XXIX. What the causes of difficult and painful travel in childbirth
are.
THe fault depends sometimes on the mother, and sometimes on the infant The
causes of the difficult childbirth that are in the women that travelleth.
or child within the womb. On the mother, if she be more fat, if she be
given to gurmundize or great eating, if she be too lean or young, as Savanarola
thinks her to be, that is great with child at nine years of age, or
unexpert, or more old, or weaker than she should be, either by nature or by
some accident: as by diseases that she has had a little before the time of
childbirth, or with a great flux of blood. But those that fall in travel
before the full and prefixed time, are very difficult to deliver, because the
fruit is yet unripe, and not ready or easy to be delivered. If the neck or
orifice of the womb be narrow, either from the first conformation, or
afterward by some chance, as by an ulcer cicatrized: or more hard and callous,
by reason that it has been torn before at the birth of some other child,
and so cicatrized again, so that if the cicatrizeed place be not cut even in
the moment of the deliverance, both the child and the mother will be in
danger of death; also the rude handling of the mydwife may hinder the free
deliverance of the child. Oftentimes women are The pas^ions of ^hin^^r the ^^th.
let in travel by shamefac'tnesse, by reason of the presence of some man,
or hate to some woman there present.

If the secundine be pulled away sooner than it is necessary, it may cause a
great flux of blood to fill the womb, so that then it cannot perform his
exclusive faculty, no otherwise than the bladder when it is distended by reason
of overabundance of water that is therein, cannot cast it forth, so that there
is a stoppage of the urine. But the womb is much rather hindered, or the
faculty of child-bith is stopped or delayed, if together with the stopping of
the secundine, there be either a mole or some other body contrary to nature in
the womb. In the secundines of two women whom I delivered of two children that
were dead in their bodies, I found a great quantity of sand like unto that that
is found about the banks of rivers, so that the gravel or sand that was in
each secundine was a full pound in weight.

Also the infant may be the occasion of difficult childbirth, as, if too
big, if it The causes of difficult childbirth that are in the infant.
come overthwart, if it come with its face upwards, and its buttocks forwards,
if it come with its feet and hands both forwards at once, if it be dead and
swollen by reason of corruption, if it be monstrous, if it have two bodies or
two heads, if it be manifold or sevenfold, as Albucrasis affirms he has
seen, if there be a mole annexed thereto, if it be very weak, if when the
waters are flowed out, it does not move or stir, or offer its self to come
forth. Yet notwithstanding, it happens The external causes of difficult
childbirth.
sometimes that the fault is neither in the mother nor the child, but in the
air, which being cold, does so bind, congeale and make stiff the genitall
parts, that they cannot be relaxed: or, being contrariwise too hot, it
weakeneth the woman that is in travel, by reason that it wastes the spirits,
wherein all the strength consists: or in the ignorant and unexpert mydwife,
who cannot artificially rule and govern the endeavors of the woman in travel.

The birth is wont to be easy, if it be in the due and prefixed natural
time, if the Which is an easy birth.
child offer himself lustily to come forth with his head forwards, presently
after the waters are come forth, and the mother in like manner lusty and
strong: those What causes easiness of childbirth.
which are wont to be troubled with very difficult childbirth, ought a little
before the time of the birth, to go into an half tub filled with the
decoction of mollifying roots and seeds, to have their genitals, womb, and
neck thereof to be anointed with much oil, and the intestines that are full
and loaded must be unburthened of the excrements, and then the expulsive
faculty provoked with a sharp glyster, that the tumors and swelling of the
birth concurring therewith, the more easy exclusion may be made. But I like it
rather better, that the woman in travel should be placed in a chair that has
the back thereof leaning backwards, than in her bed, but the chair must have a
hole in the bottom, whereby the bones that must be dilated in the birth, may
have more freedom to close themselves again.

CHAP. XXX. The causes of Abortion or untimely birth.
ABortion or untimely birth is one thing, and effluxion another. They What
Abortion is.
call abortion the sudden exclusion of the child already formed and alive,
before the perfect maturity thereof. But that is called effluxion, What
Effluxion is.
which is the falling down of seeds mixed together and coagulated but for the
space of a few days, only in the forms of membranes or tunicles, congealed
blood, and of an unshapen or deformed piece of flesh; the mydwives of our
country call it a false branch or budde. This effluxion is the cause Women are
in more pain by reason of the effluxion than at the true birth. The causes of
Abortion.
of great pain and most bitter and cruel torment to the woman: leaving
behind it weakness of body far greater than if the child were borne at the
due time. The causes of abortion or untimely birth, whereof the the child is
called an abortive, are many, as a great scouring, a strangury joined with
heat and inflammation, sharp fretting of the guts, a great and continual
cough, exceeding vomiting, vehement labor in running, leaping, and dancing,
and by a great fall from on high, carrying of a great burden, riding on a
trotting horse, or in a Coach, by vehement, often and ardent copulation with
men, or by a great blow or stroke on the belly. For all these and such like
vehement and inordinate motions dissolve the ligaments of the womb, and so
cause abortion or untimely birth.

Also whatsoever presses or girdeth in the mothers belly, and therewith also
the Girding of the belly may cause untimely birth.
womb that is within it, as are those Ivory or Whale-bone buskes, which women
wear on their bodies, thereby to keep down their bellies; by these and such
like things the child is let or hindered from growing to his full strength,
so that by expression, or as it were by compulsion, he is often forced to come
forth before the legitimate and lawful time. Thundering, the noise of the
shooting of great Ordnance, the sound, and vehement noise of the ringing of
Bells constrain women to fall in travel before their time, especially women
that are young, whose bodies are soft, slack and tenderer than those that be
of riper years. Long and great fasting, a great flux of blood, especially
when the infant is grown some what great: but if it be but two months old,
the danger is not so great, because then he needs not so great quantity of
nourishment, also a long disease of the mother, which consumes the blood,
causes the child to come forth being destitute of store of nourishment before
the fit time. Moreover, fullness, by reason of the eating great store of
meats, often makes or causes untimely birth; because it depraveth the
strength, and presses down the child: as likewise the use of meats that are of
an evil juice, which they lust or long for. But bathes, because they relaxe
the ligaments How bathes and hot houses cause untimely birth.
of the womb, and hot houses, for that the fervent and choking air is
received into the body, provoke the infant to strive to go forth to take the
cold air, and so cause abortion.

What women soever, being indifferently well in their bodies, travel in the
second Hip.. 53. and 37 sect 5. Hipaph 45. se 5.
or third month without any manifest cause, those have the Cotylidones of
their womb full of filth and matter, and cannot hold up the infant, by reason
of the weight thereof, but are broken: Moreover, sudden or continual
perturbations of the mind, whether they be through anger or fear, may cause
women to travel before their time, and are accounted as the causes of
abortions, for that they cause great and vehement trouble in the body. Those
women that are like to travel before their time, their dugs will wax little:
therefore when a woman is great with child, if her dugs suddenly wax small or
slender, it is a sign that she will travel before her time; the cause of
such shrinking of the dugs is, that the matter of the milk is drawn back into
the womb, by reason that the infant wants nourishment to nourish and succor
it withal. Which scarcity the infant not long abiding, striveth to go forth
to seek that abroad which he cannot have within, for among the causes which do
make the infant to come out of the womb, those are most usually named with
Hippocrates, Hip. aph. (...) se. 5.
the necessity of a more large nutriment and air.

Therefore if a woman that is with child have one of her dugs small, if she have
two children, she is like to travel of one of them before the full and perfect
time: so that if the right dug be small, it is a man child, but if it be the
left dug it is a female. Women are in far more pain when they bring forth
their children before the time Women are in more pain at the untimely birth
than at the due time of birth.
than if it were at the full and due time, because that whatsoever is contrary
to nature, is troublesome, painful, and also oftentimes dangerous. If there
be any error committed at the first time of childe-birth, it is commonly seen
that it happens always after at each time of childbirth. Therefore, to find
out the causes of that error, The error of the first childbirth continues
afterward.
you must take the counsel of some Physician, and after his counsel endeavor
to amend the same. Truly this plaster following being applied to the reins
does confirm the womb, and stay the infant therein.. ladani ii. galang. i.
nucis moschat. nucis cupressi, boli armeni, terrae sigill. sanguin. dracon.
balaust. an. ss. acatiae, A plaster staying the infant in the womb.
psidiorum, hypocistid. an. i. mastich. myrrhae, an. ii. gummi arabic. i.
terebinth. venet. ii. picis naval. i. ss. ceraequantum sufficit, fiat emplast.
secundem artem; spread it for your use upon leather. if the part begin to itch,
let the plaster be taken away, and in stead thereof use unguent. rosat. or
refrig. Galen. or this that follows.. olei myrtini, mastich. cydonior. an. i.
hypocist. boli armen. sang. dracon. acatiae, an. i. sant. citrini ss. cerae
quant. suf. make thereof an ointment according unto art. There are women that
bear the child in their womb ten or eleven whole months, and such What
children are ten or eleven months in the womb.
children have their conformation of much and large quantity of seed:
wherefore they will be more big, great and strong, and therefore they
require more time to come to their perfection and maturity; for those fruits
that are great will not be so soon ripe as those that are small. But children
that are small and little of body do often come to their perfection and
maturity in seven or nine months: if all other things are correspondent in
greatness and bigness of body, it happens for the most part that the woman
with child is not delivered before the ninth month be done, or at the least
wise in the same month. But a male child will be commonly borne at the
beginning, or a little before the beginning of the same month, by reason of
his engrafted A male will be borne sooner than a female.
heat which causes maturity and ripeness. Furthermore, the infant is sooner
come to maturity and perfection in a hot woman than in a cold, for it is the
property of heat to ripen.

CHAP. XXXI. How to preserve the infant being in the womb, when the mother is
dead.
IF all the signs of death appear in the woman that lies in travel, and
cannot be delivered, there must then be a Chirurgian ready and at hand, which
may open her body so soon as she is dead, whereby the infant may be preserved
in safety; neither can it be Why it is not sufficient to preserve life in the
child to hold open the mouth and privy parts of the mother so soon as the is
dead and the child alive in her body.
supposed sufficient if the mothers mouth and privy parts be held open; for
the infant being enclosed in his mothers womb, and compassed with the
membranes, cannot take his breath, but by the contractions and dilatations of
the artery of the navell. But when the mother is dead, the lungs do not
execute their office and function: therefore they cannot gather in the air
that compasses the body by the mouth or aspera arteria into their own
substance, or into the arteries that are dispersed throughout the body thereof,
by reason whereof it cannot send it unto the heart by the veiny artery which is
called arteria venalis: for if the heart want air, there cannot be any in the
great artery which is called arteria aorta, whose function it is to draw it
from the heart; also by reason thereof it is wanting in the arteries of the
womb, which are as it were the little conduits of that great artery, whereinto
the air that is brought from the heart is derived, and flows in unto these
little ones of all the body, and likewise of the womb. Wherefore it must of
necessity follow that the air is wanting to the cotyledons of the secundines,
to the artery of the infants navell, the iliacke arteries also, and therefore
unto his heart, and so unto all his body: for the air being drawn by the
mothers lungs, is accustomed to come to the infant by this continuation of
passages. Therefore because death makes all the motions of the mothers body to
cease, How the body of the woman that death in travel must be cut open to save
the child.
it is far better to open her body so soon as she is dead, beginning the
incision at the cartelage, Xiphoides, or breast-blade, and making it in a form
semicircular, cutting the skin, muscles and peritonaeum, not touching the
guts: then the womb being lifted up, must first be cut, lest that otherwise
the infant might perchance be touched or hurt with the knife.

You shall oftentimes find the child unmovable, as though he were dead; but
not because he is dead indeed, but by reason that he, being destitute of the
access of the spirits by the death of the mother, has contracted a great
weakness: yet you How it may be known whether the infant be ^live of not.
may know whether he be dead indeed or not, by handling the artery of the
navell, for it will beat and pant if he be alive, otherwise not; but if there
be any life yet remaining in him, shortly after he has taken in the air, and
is recreated with the access thereof, he will move all his members, and also
all his whole body. In so great a weakness or debility of the strength of the
child, the secundine must not be separated as yet from the child, by cutting
the navell string, but it must rather be laid close to the region of the belly
thereof, that thereby the heat (if there be any jor remaining) may be stirred
up again. But I cannot sufficiently marvel at the insolency of those that
affirm that they have seen women whose bellies and womb have bin more than
once cut, and the infant taken out, when it could no otherwise be gotten forth,
and yet notwithstanding alive; which thing there is no man can persuade me can
be done, without the death of the mother, by reason of the necessary greatness
of the wound that must be made in the muscles of the belly, and substance of
the womb, for the womb of a woman that is great with child, by reason that
it swells, and is distended with much blood, must needs yield a great flux of
blood, which of necessity must be mortal. And to conclude, when that the wound
or incision of the womb is cicatrized, it will not permit or suffer the womb
to be dilated or extended to receive or bear a new birth. For these and such
like other causes, this kind of cure, as desperate and dangerous, is not (in
mine opinion) to be used.

CHAP. XXXII. Of superfoetation.
SUperfoetation is when a woman does bear two or more children at one time in
her womb, and they be enclosed each in his several What superfoetation is.
secundine: but those that are included in the same secundine, are supposed to
be conceived at one and the same time of copulation, by reason of the great
and copious abundance of seed, and these have no number of days between their
conception and birth, but all at once. For as presently after meat the stomach
which is naturally of a good temper, is contracted or drawn together about the
meat, to comprehend it on every side, though small in quantity, as it were by
both hands, so that it cannot roll neither unto this or that side; so the
womb is drawn together unto the conception about both the seeds, as soon as
they are brought into the capacity thereof, and is so drawn in unto it on
every side, that it may come together into one body, not permitting any portion
thereof to go into any other region or side, so that by one time of copulation
the seed that is mixed together, cannot engender more children than one, which
are divided by their secundines. And moreover, because there are no such cells
in the wombes of women, as are supposed, or rather known to be in the A
woman's womb is not (...) into diverse cells.
wombs of beasts, which therefore bring forth many at one conception or birth.
But now if any part of the woman's womb does not apply and adjoine it self
closely to the conception of the seed already received, lest any thing should
be given by nature for no purpose, it must of necessity follow that it must be
filled with air, which will alter and corrupt the seeds. Therefore the
generation of more than one infant at a time, having every one his several
secundine, is on this wise. If a woman conceave The reason of superfoetation
by copulation with a man as this day, and if that for a few days after the
conception, the orifice of the womb be not exactly shut, but rather gape a
little, and if she do then use copulation again, so that at both these times
of copulation there may be an effusion or perfect mixture of the fertile seed
in the womb, there will follow a new conception, or superfoetation. For
superfoetation is no other thing than a certain second conception, when the
woman already with child, again uses copulation with a man, and so
conceives again, according to the judgment of Hippocrates. Lib. de
superfoetation^. (...) the womb (...) the conception of the seed. does ma(...)
^imes afterward open.
But there may be many causes alleged why the womb which did join and close
does open and unlose it self again. For there be some that suppose the womb
to be open at certain times after the conception, that there may be an issue
out for certain excrementall matters that are contained therein, and therefore
that the woman that has so conceived already, and shall then use copulation
with a man again, shall also conceive again.

Others say that the womb of it self, and of its own nature is very desirous
of seed or copulation, or else being heated or enflamed with the pleasant
motion of the man moving her thereto, does at length unclose it self to
receive the man's seed: for like-wise it happens many times that the orifice
of the stomach being shut after eating, is presently unloosed again, when other
delicate meats are offered to be eaten: even so may the womb unclose it self
again at certain seasons, whereof come manifold issues, whose time of birth
and also of conception are different. For as Pliny writes, Lib. 7. cap. 11.
when there has bin a little space between two conceptions, they are both
hastened, as it appeared in Hercules and his brother Iphicles; and in her,
which having two children at a birth, brought forth one like unto her husband,
and another like unto the adulterer. And also in the Procomesian slave or
bondwoman, who by copulation on the same day brought forth one like unto her
master, and another like unto his steward: and in another who brought forth one
at the due time of childe-birth, and another at five months end. And again in
another, who bringing forth her burden on the seventh month, brought forth
two more in the months following. But this is a most manifest argument of
superfoetation, that as many children as are in the womb (unless they be
twins of the same sex) so many secundines are there, as I have often seen
my self. And it is very likely that if they were conceived in the same moment
of time, that they should all be included in one secundine. But when a woman
has more children than two at one burden, it seems to be a monstrous thing,
because that nature has given her but two breasts. Although we shall
hereafter rehearse many examples of more numerous births.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the tumor called Mola, or a Mole growing in the womb of
Women.
OF the greek word Mile, which signifies a Millstone, this tumor The reason
of the name.
called Mola has its name: for it is like unto a Millstone both in the round
or circular figure, and also in hard consistence, for the which self same
reason the whirle-bone of the knee is called of the Latins mola, and of the
Greeks Mile. But the tumor called Mola, whereof we here entreat, is nothing
else but a certain false conception of deformed flesh, round What a mola is.
and hard, conceived in the womb as it were rude and unperfect, and not
distinguished into members, coming by corrupt, weak, and diseased seed, and
of the immoderate flux of the terms, as it is defined by Hippocrates. This is
enclosed in no secundine, but as it were in its own skin. Lib. de steril.


There are some that think the Mola to be engendered of the concourse or
mixture of the woman's seed and menstruall blood, without the communication of
the man's seed. But the opinion of Galen is, that never any man saw a woman
conceive either a Mola, or any other such thing, without copulation of man, as
an hen lays Cap. 7. lib. 4. de usu part.
eggs without a cock: for the only cause and original of that motion is in
the man's seed, and the man's seed does only minister matter for the generation
thereof. Of the same opinion is Avicen, who thinks the Mola to be made by the
confluxion of How the mola is engendered.
the man's seed that is unfertile, with the woman's; when as it, because
unfruitful, only puffes up or makes the woman's seed to swell as leaven into a
greater bigness, but not into any perfect shape or form. Which is also the
opinion of Fernelius, by the decrees of Hippocrates and Avicen: for the
immoderate fluxes of the courses are conducing to the generation of the mola,
which overwhelming the man's seed, being now unfruitful and weak, does
constrain it to desist from its enterprise of conformation already begun, as
vanquished or wholly overcome: for the generation of the mola comes not of a
simple heat working upon a clammy and gross humor, as worms are generated;
but of both the seeds, by the efficacy of a certain spirit, after a sort
prolificall, as may be understood by the membranes wherein the mola is
enclosed, by the ligaments whereby many times it is fastened or bound to the
true conception or child, engendered or begotten by superfoetation; and
finally, by the increase, and great and sluggish weight. If all men were not
persuaded that the conflux of a man's seed must of necessity concur to the
generation of the mola, it would be no small cloak or cover to women to
avoid the shame and reproach of their light behavior.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How to discern a true conception from a false conception or
Mola.
WHen the mola is enclosed in the womb, the same things appear as in the The
signs of a mola enclosed in the womb.
true and lawful conception. But the more proper signs of the mola are these:
there is a certain pricking pain, which at the beginning troubles the belly
as if it were the cholicke, the belly will swell sooner than it would if it
were the true issue, and will be distended with greater hardness, and is more
difficult and troublesome to carry, because it is contrary to nature, and void
of soul or life. Presently after the conception the dugges swell and puff up,
but shortly they fall and become lanke and laxe; for nature sends milk
thither in vain, because there is no issue in the womb that may spend the
same. The mola will move before the third month, although it be obscurely, but
the true conception will not: but this motion of the mola is not of the
intellectual soul, but of the faculty By what faculty the womb moves.
of the womb, and of the spirit of the seed dispersed through the substance of
the mola; for it is nourished and increases after the manner of plants, but
not by reason of a soul or spirit sent from above, as the infant does.
Moreover, that motion that the infant has in its due and appointed time,
differs much from the motion of the mola; How the motion of the mola
differs from the motion of the infant in the womb.
for the child is moved to the right side, to the left side, and to every side
gently, but the mola, by reason of its heaviness, is fixed, and rowleth in
manner of a stone, carried by the weight thereof unto what side soever the
woman declineth her self. The woman that has a mola in her womb does daily
wax leaner and leaner in all her members, but especially in her legs,
although notwithstanding toward night The mola does turn to each side of the
womb, as the situation of the body is.
they will swell, so that she will be very slow or heavy in going, the
natural heat forsaking the parts remote from the heart by little and little;
and moreover, her belly swells, by reason that the menstruall matter rests
about those places, and is not consumed in the nourishment of the mola: she is
swollen as if she had the dropsy, but that it is harder, and does not rise
again when it is pressed with the fingers. The navell does not stand out as it
will do when the true issue is contained in the womb, neither do the courses
flow as they sometimes do in the true conception; but sometimes great fluxes
happen, which ease the weight of the belly. In many when the mola does cleave
not very fast, it falls away within three or four months, being not as yet
come unto its just bigness; and many times it cleaves to the sides of the
womb and Cotyledons very firmly, so that some women carry it in their wombs
five or six years, and some as long as they live.

The wife of Guiliam Roger Pewterer, dwelling in S. Victors street, bore a mola
in her womb seventeen years, who being of the age of fifty years, died; and I
having A history.
opened her, found the body of her womb to be almost loosed, and not tied or
bound by its accustomed ligatures, but as it were hanging only by the neck,
and furthermore cleaving to the Kall adjoining to it, having but only one
testicle, and that on the right side, and that somewhat broader and looser than
usual: the horns were not to be seen except it were on that side, the
vessels were on the neck only, and there very manifest and puffed up, it was
as big as a man's head. When I had taken it out of her body, I brought it home
unto my house, that at my leisure I might find out what was contained in it so
long, therefore on a certain day, calling together the chief Physicians of
Paris, as Massilaeus, Alexis, Vigor, de S. Pont. Feure, Brovet, Violais,
Grealmus, Ravin, Marescotius, Milotus, Hautin, Riolan, Lusson; and Chirurgians,
as Brun, Cointerell, Guillemean: all these being present, I opened the womb,
and I found it in all the body thereof and in the proper tunicle, so
schirrhous, and so hard, The description of a mola carried seventeene years in
the womb.
that I could hardly cut or make a knife to enter into it: the body thereof was
three fingers thick. In the midst of the capacity thereof I found a Iumpe of
flesh as big as both my fists, like unto a Cowes udder, cleaving to the sides
of the womb but in certain places, of a very thick, unequal and cloddish
substance, with many bodies therein, even as are commonly found in wennes and
gristles, dispersed through it as if it were bones. The judgment of all that
were present was, that this great tumor at the first was a mola, which in
process of time degenerated into a schirrous body, together with the proper
substance of the womb. Moreover, in the middle of the neck of the womb, we
found a tumor as big as a Turkies egg, of substance hard, cartilaginous and
bonie, filling all the whole neck, but especially the inward orifice of the
womb, which the common people of France do call the Garland, so that by that
passage nothing could go out, or enter into the womb: all that tumor weighed
nine pounds and two ounces, which I, by reason of the novelty of the thing,
keep in my closet, and here I have described it.

The external form and description of the forenamed womb.
A. Shows the body of the womb.

B. The testicle.

C. The neck of the womb, wherein that little tumor was contained.

D. Shows the end of the neck of the womb that was plucked in sunder, and
also the vessels whereby it drew the nutriment unto it.

E. Shows the band.

FFF. The vessels dispersed through the womb.



The description of the womb being open, and showing the Mola contained therein.
AA. Show the external and superficial part of the womb.

BSBB. Show the thickness of the body or proper substance of the womb.

C. Shows the Mola.

DD. Show that concavity wherein the mola was contained or enclosed in the womb.



As long as the woman carried this Mola in her womb, she felt most sharp
pain in her belly, the region of her belly was mavelous hard, distended and
large, as if it were a woman that had many children at once in her womb, so
that many Physicians when the time of childbirth was past, supposed that
swelling of the belly to come of the dropsy, and assayed to cure it as they
would the dropsy, but for all the medicines they could use, the belly became
never the lesser. Oftentimes the urine was stopped for the space of three
days, and then the making of urine was very painful unto her, and many times
also her excrements were stopped for the space of a week, by reason that the
guts were pressed by the weight of the Mola. At certain seasons, as every
third month, there came exceeding great fluxes, the matter thereof could not
be carried through the capacity of the womb, as we said before, because it
was exactly shut and stopped, but through the vessels by which virgins, and
also certain other women great with child evacuate their menstruall matter.
If the Mola be expelled or cast out in the first or second month, as many
times it so happens, it is called of women an unprofitable or false
conception. Sometimes there A vain or unprofitable conception.
are found in one womb two or three moles separated one from another, and
sometimes bound or tied to the sound and perfect infant. As it happened in the
wife of Vallcriola the Physician, which was delivered of a Mola which she had
carried in her womb twelve months, annexed with a child of four months old,
which had deprived the infant both of its room and nutriment. For it is
always to be certainly The mola (...) the infant in the (...) it is fastened
unto it.
supposed, that the Mola, as a cruel beast, by its society, and keeping it
from its nutriment and place, kills the infant that is joined unto it.

I remember once I opened the body of a dead woman, which had a Mola in her
womb as big as a goose egg, which when nature had assayed by many vain
endeavors to cast out, remained notwithstanding, and at length putrefied, and
therewith infected the whole womb, whereof she dyed. There be some which
judging themselves great with child, do about the ninth or tenth month
expel no other thing but sounding blasts of wind; whereby the womb suddenly
falling down and waxing more slender, they are said in a mockery to have been
delivered of a fart. To conclude, whatsoever resembles being with child, if it
be not excluded at the due and lawful time of childbirth by its own accord
or by the strength of nature, then must it be expelled by art.

CHAP. XXXV. What cure must be used to the Mola.
ALL things that provoke the flowers and secundines, and exclude the infant
being dead, are to be prescribed, given inwardly, put up, and applied There
things that provoke the flowers forcibly due also (...) or wast the mola.
outwardly, as the trochisces of myrrha, hermodactils, and such like, first
having fomentations that are relaxing and mollifying always applied to the
places. You must use these medicines and phlebotomy, diet and bathes then and
so long as it shall seem necessary to the Physician that is present. But if it
happens that the mola is separated or loosed from the womb, and nature cannot
expel it when it is so loosed, let the Surgeon place the woman in that
situation that we The Surgeon all (...) of the mola.
said she was to be put in, when the child was to be drawn from her. Then
opening her genitall parts, let him take hold on it by putting an instrument
into it, which by reason of the likeness thereof, is called a Gryphons Talon,
for it cannot be taken hold on otherwise, by reason of the roundnesse thereof,
for it has no place whereon it may be taken hold of: therefore, when one takes
hold on it with his hand, it cannot be holden fast by reason of the
slipperinesse thereof, but will run and slip back into the hollownesse of the
womb, like unto a bowl or great ball; but it may be more easily taken hold
on with the Gryphons Talon, if the belly be pressed on both sides that it may
remain still while the Gryphons Talon takes hold on it, for when it has taken
good hold on it, it may be easily drawn out. When the mola is drawn out, the
same cure must be used to the woman, as is used to a woman after that she is
delivered of child.

The figure of an instrument called a Gryphons Talon, to draw out the Mola when
it is loose in the womb.


CHAP. XXXVI. Of Tumors or swellings happening to the Pancreas or sweetbread,
and the whole Mesentery.
THe tumors of other places and parts in the belly ought diligently to be
distinguished from the mola, and other tumors of the womb. For when tumors
arise in the glandula called Pancreas, and in all the whole Mesenterium, many
unskilful Chirurgions take them for mola's or scirrhous tumors of the womb,
and so go erroneously about to cure them, as shall appear by those histories
following.

Isabel Rolant the wife of John Bony dwelling in Paris in the street Moncey
near A history.
to St. Gervise his Church, being threescore years of age, departed this life
in the year of our Lord God 1578. on the twenty second day of October: and her
body being opened in the presence of Doctor Milot the Physician, he when the
Mesentery was taken out of the body, caused it to be carried home to his house,
that at his leisure he might find out the cause of this mortal disease, which
was always suspected to be in the Mesentery. Therefore on a time calling
Varadeus, Brove, Chapel, Marescotius, Arragonius, Baillutius, Reburtius and
Riolan, all Doctors of Physic, and me and Pineus Chirurgions, to his house to
see the same. Where we found all the Mesentery and the Pancreas in the
Mesentery swollen and puffed up with a mavelous and almost incredible tumor,
so that it wayed ten pound and an half, altogether scirrhous on the out side,
cleaving on the hinder part only to the vertebres of the loins: but on the
fore part to the Peritonaeum, being also scirrhous and wholly cartilaginous.
Moreover, there were infinite other abscesses in the same Mesentery, Apostumes
of diverse kinds in the Mesenterium.
every one closed in his several cyst, some filled with a hony-like, some with
a tallow-like, some with an albugineous, and some with a waterish liquor or
humor, whereof some also were like unto pap, and to conclude, look how many
abscesses there were, so many kinds or differences of matters there were. It
was then eight The accidents that come when the Mesentertum is separated from
the bodies adjoining.
years since that tumor began to grow by little and little without feeling
and pain unto such a greatness, because that the Mesentery it self was
without pain in a manner. For the woman her self could do all the faculties of
nature almost as well as if she had bin sound and whole, except that two
months before she died, she was constrained to keep her bed, because she had
a continual fever, which endured so long as she lived, and also because that
the Mesentery, being as it were separated or torn from its roots or seat, did
roll up and down in the belly, not without the feeling of grievous pain:
for, as we said before, it did stick but only to the vertebres of the loins
and Peritonaeum, and nothing at all to the guts and other parts whereunto it is
as it were naturally knit or joined.

Therefore because the weight and heaviness thereof depressed the bladder, it
caused a great difficulty in her making of water, and also because it rested on
the guts, it made it very painful for her to go to stool, so that the
excrements would not come down except she took a sharp glyster to cause
them: and as concerning glysters, they could not be put up high enough, by
reason of the greatness of the tumor which enclosed and shut the way; and
suppositories did no good at all. It was also very difficult for her to take
breath, by reason that the midriffe or diaphragma was compressed with the
tumor. There were some that did suspect it to be a mola, others thought that
it came by reason of the dropsy. Assuredly this disease The dropsy coming of
a tumor of the Mesenterium.
caused the dropsy to ensue; neither was the cause thereof obscure, for the
function of the liver was quite frustrated by reason that the concoction or
alteration of the Chylus was intercepted by occasion of the tumor: and
moreover, the liver it self had a proper disease, for it was hard and
scirrhous, and had many abscesses both within and without it, and all over it.
The milt was scarce free from putrefaction, the guts and Kall were somewhat
blew and spotted, and to be brief, there was nothing sound in the lower belly.

There is the like history to be read, written by Philip Ingrassias, in his
book of Tom. 1. (...) 1. c. 1.
tumors, of a certain Moore that was hanged for theft, for (says he) when
his body was publicly dissected, in the Mesenterium were found seventy
scrophulous tumors, and so many abscesses were contained or enclosed in their
several cysts or skins, and sticking to the external tunicle, especially of
the greater guts: the matter contained in them was diverse, for it was hard,
knotty, clammy, glutinous, liquid and waterish, but the entrals, especially the
liver and the milt, were sound and free from all manner of tainture, because
(as the same Author alleges) nature being strong, had sent all the evil
juice, and the corruption of the entrals into the Mesentery: and verily this
Moore, so long as he lived, was in good and perfect health. Without doubt the
corruption of superfluous humors for the most part is so great (as it is noted
by Fernelius) Lib 6. part. morb. cap. 7.
that it cannot be received in the receptacles that nature has appointed for
it; therefore then no small portion thereof falls down into the parts
adjoining, and especially into the Mesentery and pancreas, which are as it were
the sink of the whole body. In those bodies which through continual and daily
gluttony abound with The Mesenterium is the sink of the body.
choler, melancholy and phlegm, if it be not purged in time, nature being
strong and lusty, does depell and drive it down into the pancreas and the
Mesentery, which are as places of no great repute, and that especially out of
the liver and milt by those veins or branches of the vena porta which end or
go not into the guts, but are terminated in the Mesentery and pancreas. In
these places diverse humors are heaped together, which in process of time
turn into a loose and soft tumor, and then if they grow bigger, into a
stiff, hard and very scirrhous tumor. Whereof Fernelius affirms that in
those places he has found the causes of choler, melancholy, fluxes,
dysenteries, cachexia's, atrophia's, consumptions, tedious and uncertain
fevers, and lastly of many hidden diseases, by the taking away whereof some
have received their health, that have been though past cure. Moreover
Ingrassias affirms out of Julius The Scrophulaes in the Mesenterium.
Pollux that Scrophulaes may be engendered in the Mesentery, which nothing
differs from the mind and opinion of Galen, who says that Scrophulaes are
nothing else but indurate and scirrhous kernels. But the Mesenterium with his
glandules being great and many, making the Pancreas, does establish, strengthen
and confirm the divisions of the vessels. Also the scirrhus of the proper
substance of the womb is to be distinguished A scirrhus of the womb.
from the mola: for in the bodies of some women that I have opened, I have
found the womb annoyed with a scirrhous tumor as big as a man's head, in the
curing whereof Physicians nothing prevailed, because they supposed it to be a
mola contained in the capacity of the womb, and not a scirrhous tumor in the
body thereof.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the cause of barrenness in men.
THere are many causes of barrenness in men, that is to say, the too hot, cold,
dry or moist distemper of the seed, the more liquid and flexible consistence
thereof, so that it cannot stay in the womb, but will presently flow out again:
for such is the seed of old men and striplings, and of such as use the act of
generation too often and immoderately: for thereby the seed becomes How the
seed is unfertile.
crude and waterish, because that it does not remain his due and lawful time
in the testicles, wherein it should be perfectly wrought and concocted, but is
evacuated by wanton copulation. Furthermore, that the seed may be fertile, it
must of necessity be copious in quantity, but in quality well concocted,
moderately thick, clammy, and puffed up with the abundance of spirits; both
these conditions are wanting in the seed of them that use copulation too often:
and moreover, because the wives of those men never gather a just quantity of
seed laudible both in quality and consistence in their testicles, whereby it
comes to pass that they are the less provoked or delighted with venereous
actions, and perform the act with less alacrity, so that they yield
themselves less prone to conception. Therefore let those that would be parents
of many children use a mediocrity in the use of venery.

The woman may perceive that the man's seed has some distemperature in it, if
How the cutting of the veins behind the ears makes men barren.
when she has received it into her womb, she feels it sharp, hot or
cold, if the man be more quick or slow in the act. Many become barren after
they have been cut for the stone, and likewise when they have had a wound
behind the ears, whereby certain branches of the jugular veins and arteries
have been cut, that are there, so that after those vessels have been
cicatrized, there followed an interception of the seminall matter downwards,
and also of the community which ought of necessity to be between the brain
and the testicles, so that when the conduits or passages are stopped, the
stones or testicles cannot any more receive, neither matter nor lively spirits
from the brain in so great quantity as it was wont, whereof it must of
necessity follow, that the seed must be lesser in quantity, and weaker in
quality.

Those that have their testicles cut off, or else compressed or contused by
violence, cannot beget children, because that either they want the help that
the testicles should minister in the act of generation, or else because the
passage of the seminall matter is intercepted or stopped with a Callus: by
reason whereof they cannot yield forth seed, but a certain clammy humor
contained in the glandules called prostatae (yet with some feeling of delight).

Moreover the defects or imperfections of the yard may cause barrenness: as,
if it The defaults of the yard.
be too short, on if it be so unreasonable great, that it renteth the privy
parts of the woman, and so causes a flux of blood, for then it is so
painful to the woman, that she cannot void her seed, for that cannot be
excluded without pleasure and delight, also if the shortness of the ligament
that is under the yard does make it to be crooked, and violate the stiff
straightness thereof, so that it cannot be put directly or straightly in the
woman's privy parts. There be some that have not the orifice of the conduit of
the yard rightly in the end thereof, but a little higher, so that they cannot
ejaculate or cast out their seed directly into the womb.

Also the particular palsy of the yard is numbered among the causes of
barrenness; The sign of the palsy in the yard.
and you may prove whether the palsy be in the yard by dipping the genitals in
cold water: for except they do draw themselves together or shrink up after it,
it is a token of the palsy, for members that have the palsy, by the touching
of cold water, do not shrink up, but remain in their accustomed laxity and
looseness: but in this case the genitals are endued with small sense; the seed
comes out without pleasure or stiffenesse of the yard; the stones in touching
are cold; and to conclude, those that have their bodies daily waxing lean
through a consumption, or that are vexed with an evil habit or disposition, or
with the obstruction of some of the entrals, are barren and unfertile, and
likewise those in whom some noble part necessary to life and generation
exceeds the bounds of nature with some great distemperature, and lastly those
who by any means have their genitall parts deformed.

Here I omit those that are witholden from the act of generation by
enchantment, Magic bands and enchanted knots.
magic, witching, and enchanted knots, bands and ligatures, for those causes
belong not to physic, neither may they be taken away by the remedies of our
art. The Doctors of the Cannons laws have made mention of those magic bands
which may have power in them, in the particular title De frigidis,
maleficiatis, impotentibus and incantatis: also St. August. has made mention
of them, Tract. 7. in Joan.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the barrenness or unfruitfulnesse of women.
A Woman may become barren or unfruitful through the obstruction of the
passage of the seed, or through straightness or narrowness of the The cause
why the neck of the womb is narrow.
neck of the womb, coming either through the default of the formative
faculty, or else afterward by some mischance, as by an abscesse, scirrhus,
warts, chaps, or by an ulcer, which being cicatrized, does make the way more
narrow, so that the yard cannot have free passage thereinto: Moreover, the
membrane called Hymen, when it grows in the midst or in the bottom The
membrane called Hymen.
of the neck of the womb, hinders the receiving of the man's seed. Also if the
womb be over slippery, or moreloose, or slack, or over wide, it makes the
woman to be barren, so does the suppression of the menstruall fluxes, or the
too immoderate flowing of the courses or whites: which comes by the default
of the womb or some entrall, or of the whole body, which consumes the
menstruall matter, and carries the seed away with it.

The cold and moist distemperature of the womb, extinguishes and suffocates
the The cause of the flux of women.
man's seed, and makes it that it will not stay or cleave unto the womb, and
stay till it be conconcted: but the more hot and dry does corrupt for want of
nourishment, for the seeds that are sown either in a marish or sandy ground
cannot prosper well: also a mola contained in the womb, the falling down of
the womb, the leanness of the woman's body, ill humors bred by eating crude
and raw fruits, or great or overmuch drinking of water, whereof obstructions
and crudities follow, which hinder her fruitfulness. Furthermore, by the use
of stupefactive things, the seminall matter is congealed and restrained, and
though it flow and be cast out, yet it is deprived of the prolificke power, and
of the lively heat and spirits, the orifices or cotylidones of the veins and
arteries are stopped, and so the passage for the menstruall matter into the
womb, is stopped. When the Kall is so fat that it girdeth in the womb
narrowly, it hinders the fruitfulness of the woman, because it will not
permit the man's seed to enter into the womb. Moreover the fat and fleshy habit
of the man or woman hinder generation. For it hinders them that they cannot
join their genitall parts together: and by how much the more blood goes into
fat, by so much the Apb 36. sect. 5. Gal. lib. 14. de usu par cap. 9. Arist. in
prob. sect. de ster. quae. 3. and 4.
less is remaining to be turned into seed and menstruall blood, which two are
the originals and principals of generation. Those women that are speckled in
the face, some what lean, and pale, because they have their genitals moystned
with a saltish, sharp and tickling humor, are more given to venery than those
that are red and fat. Finally, Hippocrates sets down four causes only why
women are barren and unfruitful. The first is, because they cannot receive the
man's seed, by reason of the default of the neck of the womb; the second,
because when it is received into the womb, they cannot conceive it; the third
is, because they cannot nourish it; the fourth, because they are not able to
carry or bear it until the due and lawful time of birth. These things are
necessary to generation, the object, will, faculty, concourse of the seeds, and
the remaining or abiding thereof in the womb, until the due and appointed
natural time.

CHAP. XXXIX. The signs of a distempered womb.
THat woman is thought to have her womb too hot, whose courses The signs of a
hot womb.
come forth sparingly and with pain, and exulcerate by reason of their heat,
the superfluous matter of the blood being dissolved or turned into wind by the
power of the heat: whereupon that menstruall blood that flows forth is more
gross and black. For it is the property of heat, by digesting the thinner
substance, to thicken the rest, and by adustion to make it more black.
Furthermore, she that has her genitals itching with the desire of copulation,
will soon exclude the seed in copulation, and she shall feel it more sharp
as it goes through the passages. That woman has too cold a womb whose
flowers are either stopped, or The signs of a cold womb.
flow sparingly, and those pale and not well colored.

Those that have less desire of copulation, have less delight therein, and
their seed is more liquid and waterish, and not stayning a linen cloth by
sticking thereunto, and it is sparingly and slowly cast forth. That womb is
too moist that flows continually The signs of a moist womb.
with many liquid excrements, which therefore will not hold the seed, but
presently after copulation suffers it to fall out, which will easily cause
abortion. The signs of too dry a womb appear in the little quantity of the
courses, in the The signs of a dry womb.
profusion of a small quantity of seed, by the desire of copulation, whereby it
may be made slippery by the moisture of the seed, by the fissures in the neck
thereof, by the chaps and itching, for all things for want of moisture will
soon chap, even like unto the ground, which in the summer by reason of a great
drought or dryness, will chap and chinke this way and that way, and on the
contrary, with moisture it will close and join together again as it were with
glue.

A woman is thought to have all opportunities unto conception when her courses
A meet time for conception.
or flowers do cease, for then the womb is void of excrementall filth, and
because it is yet open, it will the more easily receive the man's seed, and
when it has received it, it will better retain it in the wrinkles of the
cotylidones yet gaping as it were in rough and unequal places. Yet a woman
will easily conceave a little before the time that the flowers ought to flow:
because that the menstruall matter falling at first like dew into the womb, is
very meet and fit to nourish the seed, and not to drive it out again, or to
suffocate it.

Those which use copulation when their courses fall down abundantly, will very
hardly or seldom conceive, and if they do conceive, the child will be weak
and diseased, and especially if the woman's blood that flows out be unfound;
but if the blood be good and laudable, the child will be subject to all
plethoricke diseases. There are some women in whom presently after the flux of
the terms, the orifice of the womb will be closed, so that they must of
necessity use copulation with a man when their menstruall flux flows, if at
lest they would conceive at all. A woman may bear children from the age of
fourteen until forty or fifty: which time whosoever does exceed, will bear
until threescore years, because the menstruall fluxes are kept, the
prolificall faculty is also preserved: therefore many women have brought forth
children at that age, but after that time no woman can bear, as Aristotle
Arist. l. 7. de hist. anim. c. 2. and. c. 5.
writes.

Yet Pliny says that Cornelia (who was of the house of the Scipioes) being in
the Lib. 7. cap. 14.
sixty second year of her age, bare Volusius Saturnius, who was Consul;
Valescus Lib. 6. cap. 12.
de Tarenta also affirms, that he saw a woman that bare a child on the sixty
second year of her age, having borne before on the sixtieth and sixty first
year. Therefore it is to be supposed that by reason of the variety of the
air, region, diet and temperament, the menstruall flux and procreative
faculty cease in some sooner, in some later; which variety takes place also
in men. For in them although the seed Lib. 7. de hist. c. nim. c. 1. and. c. 6.
be genitable for the most part in the second seventh year, yet truly it is
unfruitful until the third seventh year. And whereas most men beget children
until they be threescore years old, which time if they pass, they beget till
seventy: yet there are some known that have begot children until the
eightieth year. Moreover, Pliny writes that Masinissa the King begot a son
when he was fourscore and six lib. 7. cap. 14.
years of age, and also Cato the Censor after that he was fourscore.

CHAP. XL. Of the falling down, or perversion, or turning of the womb.
THe womb is said to fall down and be perverted, when it is moved out of its
proper and natural place; as when the bands and ligatures thereof What is the
falling down of the womb.
being loosed and relaxed, it falls down unto one side or other, or into its
own neck, or else passes further, so that it comes out at the neck, and a
great portion thereof appears without the privy parts. Therefore what things
soever resolve, relaxe, or burst the ligaments or bands whereby the The causes.
womb is tied, are supposed to be the causes of this accident. It sometimes
happens by vehement labor or travel in childe-birth, when the womb with
violence excluding the issue and the secundines, also follows and falls down,
turning the inner side thereof outward. And sometimes the foolish rashness of
the midwife, when she draws away the womb with the infant, or with the
secundine cleaving fast thereunto, and so drawing it down and turning the
inner side outward. Furthermore, a heavy bearing of the womb, the bearing or
the carriage of a great burden, holding or stretching of the hands or body
upwards in the time of greatness with child, a fall, contusion, shaking, or
jogling by riding, either in a wagon or a coach, or on horse back, or by
leaping or dancing, the falling down of a more large and abundant humor, great
griping, a strong and continual cough, a Tenesmus, or often desire to go to
stool, yet not voiding any thing, neesing, a manifold and great birth,
difficult bearing of the womb, an astmaticall and orthopnoicall difficulty of
breathing, whatsoever does waightily press down the Diaphragma or Midriffe,
or the muscles of the Epigastrium, the taking of cold air in the time of
travel with child, or in the flowing of the menstruall flux, sitting on a
cold marble stone, or any other such like cold thing, are thought often times
to be the occasion of these accidents, because they may bring the womb out of
its place.

It falls down in many (says Aristotle) by reason of the desire of copulation
that (...) lib. 7. de histor. (...) cap. (...).
they have, either by reason of the lustiness of their youth, or else because
they have abstained a long time from it.

You may know that the womb is fallen down by the pain of those parts
where-hence The signs.
it is fallen, that is to say by the entrals, loins, os sacrum, and by a
tractable tumor at the neck of the womb, and often with a visible hanging
out, of a diverse greatness, according to the quantity that is fallen down.
It is seen sometimes like unto a piece of red flesh, hanging out at the neck
of the womb, of the The prognostications.
bigness and form of a Goose egg; if the woman stand upright, she feels
the weight to ly on her privy parts, but if she sit or ly, then she perceives
it on her back, or go to the stool, the straight gut called intestinum rectum
will be pressed or laden as it were with a burden, if she lie on her belly,
then her urine will be stopped, so that she shall fear to use copulation
with a man.

When the womb is newly relaxed in a young woman, it may be soon cured, but
if it has been long down in an old woman, it is not to be helped. If the
palsy of the ligaments thereof have occasioned the falling, it scarce admits
of cure, but if it fall down by means of putrefaction, it cannot possibly be
cured. If a great quantity thereof hang out between the thighs, it can hardly
be cured; but it is corrupted by taking the air, and by the falling down of
the urine and filth, and by the motions of the thighs in going it is ulcerated,
and so putrefies.

I remember that once I cured a young woman who had her womb hanging out (...)
history.
at her privy parts as big as an egg, and I did so well perform and perfect
the cure thereof, that afterward she conceived, and bare children many times,
and her womb never fell down.

CHAP. XLI. The cure of the falling down of the Womb.
BY this word, falling down of the womb, we understand every motion Remedies
for the ascension of the womb.
of the womb out of its place or seat: therefore if the womb ascend upwards,
we must use the same medicines as in the strangulation of the womb. If it be
turned toward either side, it must be restored and drawn back to its right
place, by applying and using cupping glasses. But if it descend and fall down
into its own neck, but yet not in great quantity, the woman must be placed so
that her buttockes may be very high, and her legs acrosse; then cupping glasses
must be applied to her navell and Hypogastrium, and when the womb is so
brought into its place, injections that bind and dry strongly must be
injected into the neck of the womb, stinking fumigations must be used unto
the privy parts, and sweetthings used to the mouth and nose. But if the womb
hang For the falling down of the womb, properly so called.
down in great quantity between the thighs, it must be cured by placing the
woman after another sort, and by using other kind of medicines. First of all
she must be so laid on her back, her buttockes and thighs so lifted up,
and her legs so drawn back as when the child or secundine are to be taken
or drawn from her; then the neck of the womb, and whatsoever hangs out
thereat, must be anointed with oil of lillies, fresh butter, capons grease,
and such like, then it must be thrust gently with the fingers up into its
place, the sick or pained woman in the mean time helping or furthering the
endeavor by drawing in of her breath as if she did suppe, drawing up as it
were that which is fallen down.

After that the womb is restored unto its place, whatsoever is filled with the
ointment must be wiped with a soft and clean cloth, lest that by the
slipperinesse thereof the womb should fall down again; the genitalls must
be fomented with an astringent decoction, made with pomegranate pills,
cypress nuts, galls, roach allome, horse-taile, sumach, berberies, boiled in
the water wherein Smithes quench their irons; of these materials make a
powder, wherewith let those places be sprinkled: let a pessary of a competent
bigness be put in at the neck of the womb, but let it be eight or nine
fingers in length, according to the proportion of the grieved patients body.
Let them be made either with latin, or of cork covered with wax, of an ovall
form, having a thread at one end, whereby they may be drawn back again as
need requires.

The forms of ovall pessaries.
A. shows the body of the Pessary.

B. shows the thread wherewith it must be tied to the thigh.



When all this is done, let the sick woman keep her self quiet in her bed,
with her buttocks lying very high, and her legs acrosse, for the space of eight
or ten days: in the mean while the application of cupping glasses will stay
the womb in the right place and seat after it is restored thereunto: but if
she has taken any hurt by cold air, let the privy parts be fomented with a
discussing and heating fomentation, on this wise.. fol. alih. sal^v. lavend.
rorismar. artemis. flor. chamoem. melilot^. A discussing and hearing
fomentation.
m ss. sem. anis. foenugr. an. i. let them be all well boiled in water and
wine, and make thereof a decoction for your use. Give her also glysters, that
when the guts are emptied of the excrements, the womb may the better be
received into the void and empty capacity of the belly: for this reason the
bladder is also to be emptied, for otherwise it were dangerous lest that the
womb lying between them both being full, should be kept down and cannot be
put up into its own proper place by reason thereof. Also vomiting is supposed
to be a singular remedy to draw up the womb that is fallen down: furthermore
also it purges out the phlegm which did moisten and How vomiting is
profitable to the falling down of the womb.
relaxe the ligaments of the womb; for as the womb in the time of copulation
at the beginning of the conception is moved downwards to meet the seed, so the
stomach, even of its own accord, is sifted upwards when it is provoked by the
injury of anything that is contrary unto it, to cast it out with greater
violence, but when it is so raised up, it draws up together therewith the
peritonaeum, the womb, and also the body or parts annexed unto it. If it
cannot be cured or restored unto its place by these prescribed remedies, and
that it be ulcerated and so putrefyed that it cannot The cutting away of the
womb when it is patrefyed.
be restored unto his place again, we are commanded by the precepts of art to
cut it away, and then to cure the womb according to art, but first it should be
tied, and as much as is necessary must be cut off, and the rest seared with a
cautery. There are some women that have had almost all their womb cut off,
without any danger of their life, as Paulus testifies. Lib. 6.


John Langius Physician to the Count Palatine, writes that Carpus the
Chirurgian Epist. 3^. lib. 2. Epist. (...).
took out the womb of a woman of Bononia, he being present, and yet the woman
lived and was very well after it. Antonius Benivenius Physician of Florence,
writes that he was called by Ugolius the Physician to the cure of a woman
whose womb ^ract. de mirand. morbor. cause.
was corrupted and fell away from her by pieces, and yet she lived ten years
after it.

There was a certain woman, being found of body, of good repute, and about the
age of thirty years, in whom shortly after she had been married the second
time, A history.
which was in Anno 1571. having no child by her first husband, the lawful
signs of a right conception did appear: yet in process of time there arose
about the lower part of her privities the sense or feeling of a weight or
heaviness, being so troublesome unto her by reason that it was painful, and
also for that it stopped her urine, that she was constrained to disclose her
mischance to Christopher Mombey a Chirurgian her neighbor dwelling in the
suburbs of S. Germans; who having seen the tumor, or swelling in her groine,
assuaged the pain with mollifying and anodine fomentations and cataplasmes;
but presently after he had done this, he found on the inner side of the lip of
the orifice of the neck of the womb, an apostume rotten and running as if it
had bin out of an abscesse newly broken, with sanious matter, somewhat red,
yellow, and pale, running out a long time. Yet for all this the feeling of the
heaviness or weight was nothing diminished, but did rather increase daily, so
that from the year of our Lord 1573. she could not turn herself being in bed
on this or that side, unless she laid her hand on her belly to bear and ease
her self of the weight, and also she said when she turned her self, she seemed
to feel a thing like unto a bowl to roll in her body unto the side whereunto
she turned her self, neither could she go to stool, or avoid her excrements
standing or sitting, unless she lifted up that weight with her hands toward
her stomach or midriffe: when she was about to go she could scarce set
forwards her feet, as if there had something hanged between her thighs, that
did hinder her going. At certain seasons that rotten apostume would open, or
unclose of it self, and flow or run with its wonted sanious matter, but then
she was grievously vexed with pain of the head, and all her members, swouning,
loathing, vomiting, and almost chosing, so that by the persuasion of a foolish
woman she was induced and contented to take Antimonium; the working Antimonium
taken in a potion does cause the womb to fall down.
and strength thereof was so great and violent, that after many vomits, with
many frettings of the guts and watery dejections or stools, she thought her
fundament fell down; but being certified by a woman that was a familiar friend
of hers, unto whom she showed her self, that there was nothing fallen down at
or from her fundament, but it was from her womb, she called, in the year of
our Lord 1575. Chirurgians, as my self, James Guillemeau, and Antony Vieux,
that we might help her in this extremity.

When we had diligently and with good consideration weighed the whole estate
The signs of the substance of the womb drawn out.
of her disease, we agreed with one consent, that that which was fallen down
should be cut away, because that by the black color, stinking, and other
such signs it gave a manifest testimony of a putrefyed and corrupted thing.
Therefore for two days we drew out the body by little and little, and
piece-meale, which seemed unto the Physicians that we had called, as Alexius,
Gaudinus, Feureus, and Violaneus, and also to our selves, to be the body of the
womb, which thing we proved to be so, because one of the testicles came out
whole, and also a thick membrane or skin, being the relick of the mola, which
being suppurated, and the abscesse broken, came out by little and little in
matter; after that all this body was so drawn away, the sick woman began to
wax better and better, yet notwithstanding for the space of nine days before
it was taken away, she voided nothing by siege, and her urine also was stopped
for the space of four days.

After this all things became as they were before, and she lived in good
health three months after, and then died of a Pleurisy that came on her very
suddenly, and I having opened her body, observing and marking everything very
diligently, could not find the womb at all, but instead thereof there was a
certain hard and callous body, which nature, who is never idle, had framed in
stead thereof to supply the want thereof, or to fill the hollownesse of the
belly.

CHAP. XLII. Of the tunicle or membrane called Hymen.
IN some virgins or maidens in the orifice of the neck of the womb Whether
there be a membrane called Hymen.
there is found a certain tunicle or membrane called of ancient writers Hymen,
which prohibiteth the copulation of a man, and causes a woman to be barren;
this tunicle is supposed by many, and they not of the common sort only, but
also learned Physicians, to be, as it were, the enclosure of the virginity or
maidenhead. But I could never find it in any, seeking of all ages from three
to twelve, of all that I had under my hands in the Hospital of Paris.

Yet once I saw it in a virgin of seaventeene years, whom her mother had
contracted to a man, and she knew nevertheless there was something in her
privy parts A history.
that hindered her from bearing of children, who desired me to see her; and I
found a certain very thin nervous membrane a little beneath the nymphae, near
unto the orifice of the neck of the womb; in the midst there was a very little
hole whereout the terms might flow: I seeing the thickenesse thereof, cut it
in sunder with my sizzers, and told her mother what she should do afterward:
and truly she married shortly after and bore children. Realdus Columbus is of
my opinion, and says that Lib. 11. cap. 16.
this is seen very seldom, for these are his words: under the nymphae in
many, but not in all virgins, there is another membrane, which when it is
present (which is but seldom) it stops, so that the yard cannot be put into
the orifice of the womb; for it is very thick above toward the bladder; it
has an hole by which the courses flow out. And he also adds that he
observed it in two young virgins, and in one elder maid.

Avicen writes that in virgins in the neck of the womb there are tunicles
composed Lib. 3. sent 21. fract. 1. cap. (...).
of veins and ligaments very little, rising from each part of the neck
thereof, which at the first time of copulation are wont to be broken, and the
blood to run out. Almansor writes that in virgins, the passage or neck of
the womb is very wrinkled, or narrow and straight, and those wrinkles to be
woaven or stayed together with many little veins and arteries, which are
broken at the first time of copulation.

These are the judgments of Physicians of this membrane: Midwives will
certainly The (...) of midwives about the membrane called Hymen.
affirm that they know a virgin from one that is defloured, by the breach or
soundness of that membrane. But by their report too credulous Judges are soon
brought to commit an error. For that Midwives can speak nothing certainly of
this membrane, may be proved by this, because that one says that the
situation thereof is in the very entrance of the privy parts, others say it is
in the midst of the neck of the womb, and others say it is within at the
inner orifice thereof, and some are of an opinion that they say or suppose that
it cannot be seen or perceived before the first birth. But truly of a thing so
rare, and which is contrary to nature, there cannot be any thing spoken for
certainty. Therefore the blood that comes out at the first time of
copulation, comes not always by the breaking of that membrane, but by the
breaking and violating or renting of the little veins which are woaven and
bespread all over the superficial and inward parts of the womb and neck
thereof, descending into the wrinkles, whichin those that have not yet used the
act of generation, are closed as if they were glewed together: although that
those maids that are at their What virgins at the first time of copulation do
not bleed at their privy parts. Lib. 3.
due time of marriage, feel no pain nor no flux of blood, especially if the
man's yard be answerable to the neck of the womb; whereby it appears evidently
how greatly the inhabitants of Fez, the metropolitan city of Mauritania, are
deceived: for Leo the Affrican writes that it is the custom among them, that
so soon as the married man and his spouse are returned home to their house from
the church where they have been married, they presently shut themselves into a
chamber, and make fast the door, while the marriage dinner is preparing: in the
mean while some old or grave matron stands waiting before the chamber door,
to receive a bloody linen cloth the new married husband is to deliver her
there, which when she has received, she brings it into the midst of all the
company of guests, as a fresh spoil and testimony of the married wives
virginity, and then for joy thereof they all fall to banqueting solemnly. But
if through evil fortune it happens that in this time of copulation the
spouse bleedeth not in the privy parts, she is restored again unto her
parents, which is a very great reproach unto them, and all the guests depart
home sad, heavy, and without dinner.

Moreover, there are some, that having learned the most filthy and infamous
arts of bawdry, prostitute common harlots to make gain thereof, making men
that are The filthy de^ of bauds and harlots.
naughtily given to believe that they are pure virgins, making them to think
that the act of generation is very painful and grievous unto them, as if they
had never used it before, although they are very expert therein indeed; for
they do cause the neck of the womb to be so wrinkled and shrunk together,
so that the sides thereof shall even almost close or meet together; then they
put thereinto the bladders of fishes, or galls of beasts filled full of blood,
and so deceive the ignorant and young lecher, by the fraud and deceit of their
evil arts, and in the time of copulation they mix sighs with groans, and
womanlike cryings, and the crocodiles tears, that they may seem to be
virgins, and never to have dealt with man before.

CHAP. XLIII. A memorable history of the membrane called Hymen.
JOhn Wierus writes that there was a maid at Camburge, who in the midst Lib.
deprost. demon. cap. 38.
of the neck of the womb, had a thick and strong membrane growing
overthwart, so that when the monthly terms should come out, it would not
permit them, so that thereby the menstruall matter was stopped and flowed back
again, which caused a great tumor and distension in the belly, with great
torment, as if she had been in travel with child: the mydwives being called,
and having seen and considered all that had been done, and did appear, did
all with one voice affirm, that she sustained the pains of childe-birth,
although that the maid her self denied that she ever dealt with man.
Therefore then this foresaid Author was called, who, when the mydwives were
void of help and counsel, might help this wretched maid, having already had
her urine stopped now three whole weeks, and perplexed with great watchings,
loss of appetite, and loathing: and when he had seen the grieved place, and
marked the orifice of the neck of the womb, he saw it stopped with a thick
membrane; he knew also that that sudden breaking out of blood into the womb
and the vessels thereof, and the passage for those matters that was stopped,
was the cause of her grievous and tormenting pain. And therefore he called a
Chirurgian presently, and willed him to divide the membrane that was in the
midst, that did stop the flux of the blood, which being done, there came forth
as much black congealed and putrefied blood as wayed some eight pounds. In
three days after she was well and void of all disease and pain. I have
thought it good to set down this example here, because it is worthy to be
noted, and profitable to be imitated, as the like occasion shall happen.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of the strangulation of the womb.
THe strangulation of the womb, or that comes from the womb, is an What is
the strangulation of the womb.
interception or stopping of the liberty in breathing or taking wind, because
that the womb, swollen or puffed up by reason of the access of gross vapors
and humors that are contained therein, and also snatched as it were by a
convulfive motion, by reason that the vessels and ligaments distended with
fullness, are so carried upwards against the midriffe and parts of the breast,
that it makes the breath to be short, and often as if a thing lay upon the
breast and pressed it.

Moreover, the womb swells, because there is contained or enclosed in it a
certain Why the womb swells.
substance, caused by the defluxion either of the seed or flowers, or of the
womb or whites, or of some other humor, tumor, abscesse, rotten apostume, or
some ill juice, putrefying, or getting or engendering an ill quality, and
resolved into gross vapors. These, as they affect sundry or diverse places,
infer diverse and sundry accidents, as rumbling and noise in the belly, if it
be in the guts, desire to vomit, after The accidents that come of the
strangling of the womb.
(with seldom vomiting) comes weariness and loathing of meat, if it trouble
the stomach. Choking with strangulation, if it assail the breast and throat;
swouning, if it vex the heart; madness, or else that which is contrary
thereto, sound sleep or drowsiness, if it grieve the brain: all which
oftentimes prove as malign as the biting of a mad dog, or equal the
stinging or bitings of venomous beasts.

It has been observed, that more grievous symptoms have proceeded from the
Why the strangulation that comes of the corruption of the seed is more
dangerous than that that comes of the corruption of the blood.
corruption of the seed, than of the menstruall blood. For by how much every
thing is more perfect and noble, while it is contained within the bounds of the
integrity of its own nature, by so much it is the more grievous and perilous,
when by corruption it has once transgressed the laws thereof. But this kind
of accident does very seldom grieve those women which have their menstruall
flux well and orderly, and do use copulation familiarly; but very often those
women that have not their menstruall flux as they should, and do want, and are
destitute of husbands, especially if they be great eaters, and lead a solitary
life. When the vessels and ligaments The cause of the diverse turning of the
womb into diverse parts of the body.
of the womb are swollen and distended as we said before, so much as is added
to their latitude or breadth, so much is wanting in their length: and therefore
it happens that the womb, being removed out of its seat, does one while fall
to the right side toward the liver, sometimes to the left side toward the
milt, sometimes upwards unto the midriffe and stomach, sometimes downwards,
and so forwards unto the bladder, whereof comes an Ischury and strangury; or
backwards, whereof comes oppression of the straight gut, and suppression of
the excrements, and the Tenesmus.

But although we acknowledge the womb to decline to those parts which we
named, yet it is not by accident only, as when it is drawn by the proper and
common ligaments and bands, when they are contracted or made shorter, being
distended with fullness, but also of its self, as when it is forced or
provoked through the grief of something contrary to nature that is contained
therein: it wandreth sometimes unto one side, and sometimes unto another part
with a plain and evident natural motion, like unto the stomach which
imbraceth any thing that is gentle and The womb is not so greatly moved by an
accident, but by it self.
mild, but avoydeth any thing that is offensive and hurtful; yet we deny that
so great accidents may be stirred up by the falling of it alone unto this or
that side, for then it might happen, that women that are great with child,
whose wombes are so distended by reason that the child is great, that it does
press the midriffe, might Whereof come such diverse accidents of strangulation
of the womb.
be troubled with a strangulation like unto this; but much rather by a venomous
humor breathing out a malign and gross vapor, not only by the veins and
arteries, but also by the pores that are invisible, which pollutes the
faculties of the parts which it touches with its venomous malignity and
infection, and intercepts the functions thereof. Neither does the variety of
the parts receiving only, but also of the matter received, cause variety of
accidents.

For, some accidents come by suppression of the terms, others come by
corruption The cause of sleepiners in the strangulation of the womb.
of the seed, but if the matter be cold, it brings a drowsiness, being
lifted up unto the brain, whereby the woman sinketh down as if she were
astonished, and lies without motion, and sense or feeling, and the beating of
the arteries, and the breathing are so small, that sometimes it is thought they
are not at all, but that the woman is altogether dead. If it be more gross, it
infers a convulsion; if it participate of the nature of a gross
melancholic humor, it brings such heaviness, fear, and sorrowfulness,
that the party that is vexed therewith shall think that she shall die
presently, and cannot be brought out of this mind by any means or reason: if
The cause of a drousie madness.
of a choleric humor, it causes the madness called furor uterinus, and such
a prattling, that they speak all things that are to be concealed; and a
giddiness of the head, by reason that the animal spirit is suddenly shaken by
the admixtion of a putrefied vapor and hot spirit: but nothing is more
admirable, than that this disease takes the patient sometimes with laughing,
and sometimes with weeping, for some at the first will weep and then laugh in
the same disease and state thereof.

But it exceeds all admiration which Hollerius writes usually happened to
two A hisrie.
of the daughters of the Provost of Roven. For they were held with long
laughter for an hour or two before the fit, which neither for fear,
admonition, nor for any other means they could hold; and their parents chid
them, and asked them wherefore they did so, they answered, that they were not
able to stay their laughter. The ascension of the womb is diligently to be
distinguished from the strangulation The ascension of the womb is to be
distinguished from the stangulation.
thereof; for the accidents of the ascension and of the strangulation are not
one, but the woman is only oppressed with a certain pain of the heart,
difficulty of breathing, or swouning, but yet without fear, without raving or
idle talking, or any other greater accident.

Therefore often times contrary causes infer the ascension: that is, overmuch
dryness of the womb, laboring through the defect of moisture, whereby it is
forced after too violent and immoderate evacuations of the flowers, and in
childebed, and such like, and laborious and painful travel in childbirth,
through which occasion it waxes hot, contrary to nature, and withers and
turns it self with a certain violence unto the parts adjoining, that is to
say, unto the liver, stomach and midriffe: if happily it may draw some
moisture therehence unto it. I omit that the womb may be brought unto its
place upwards by often smelling to aromatic things, yet in the mean while it
infers not the strangulation that we described before.

CHAP. XLV. The signs of imminent strangulation of the womb.
BEfore that these forenamed accidents come, the woman thinks that a certain
painful thing arises from her womb unto the orifice of the stomach and
heart, and she thinks her self to be oppressed and choked, she
complains her self to be in great pain, and that a certain lump or
heavy thing climes up from the lower parts unto her throat, and stops her
wind, her heart burns and pants. And in many the womb and vessels of the
womb so swell, that they cannot stand upright on their legs, but are
constrained to lie down flat on their bellies, that they may be the less
grieved with the pain, and to press that down strongly with their hands,
that seems to arise upwards, although that not the womb it self, but the
vapor ascends from the The womb it self does not so well make the
ascension as the vapor thereof.
womb, as we said before: but when the fit is at hand, their faces are pale
on a sudden, their understanding is darkened, they become slow and weak in the
legs, with unablenesse to stand. Hereof comes sound sleep, foolish
talking, interception of the senses, and breathe as if they were dead, loss of
speech, the contraction of their legs, and the like.

CHAP. XLVI. How to know whether the woman be dead in the strangulation of the
womb or not.
I Have thought it meet (because many women not only in ancient times, Women
living taken for dead.
but in our own and our fathers memory have been so taken with this kind of
symptom, that they have been supposed and laid out for dead, although truly
they were alive:) to set down the signs in such a case which do argue life
and death. Therefore first of all it may be proved, whether she be alive or
dead, by laying or holding a clear and smooth looking-glass before her mouth
and nostrils. For, if she breathe, although it be never so obscurely, the thin
vapor that comes out will stain or make the glass duskie. Also a fine
downish feather taken from under the wing of any bird, or else a fine flock
being held before the mouth, will by the trembling or shaking motion thereof,
show that there is some breath, and therefore life remaining in the body. But
you may prove most certainly whether there be any spark of life remaining in
the body, by How women that have the suffocation of the womb, live only by
transpration without breathing.
blowing some sneesing powders of pellitory of Spain, and ellebore into the
nostrils. But though there no breath appear, yet must you not judge the woman
for dead, for the small vital heat, by which, being drawn into the heart, she
yet lives, is contented with transpiration only, and requires not much
attraction, which is performed by the contraction and dilatation of the breast
and lungs unto the preservation of its self. For so flies, gnats; pismires and
such like, because they are of a cold temperament, How flies, gnats and
pismires do live all the winter without breathing.
live unmoveably enclosed in the caves of the earth, no token of breathing
appearing in them, because there is a little heat left in them, which may be
conserved by the office of the arteries and heart, that is to say, by
perspiration, without the motion of the breast, because the greatest use of
respiration is that the inward heat may be preserved by refrigeration and
ventilation. Those that do not mark this, fall int^ha^ error which almost cost
the life of him who in our time first gave life to anotomicall administration,
that was almost decayed and neglected.

For he being called in Spain to open the body of a noble woman which was
supposed A history.
dead through strangulation of the womb, behold at the second impression of
the incision knife, she began suddenly to come to her self, and by the moving
of her members and body, which was supposed to be altogether dead, and with
crying, to show manifest signs that there was some life remaining in her.
Which thing struck such an admiration and horror into the hearts of all her
friends that were present, that they accounted the Physician, being before of a
good fame and report, as infamous, odious and detestable, so that it wanted but
little but that they would have scratched out his eyes presently: wherefore he
thought there was no better way for him, if he would live safe, than to forsake
the country. But neither could he so also avoyde the horrible prick and
inward wound of his conscience (from whose judgment no offender can be
absolved) for his inconsiderate dealing, but within few days after, being
consumed with sorrow, he dyed, to the great loss of the common wealth, and the
art of physic.

CHAP. XLVII. How to know whether the strangulation of the womb comes of the
suppression of the flowers, or the corruption of the seed.
THere are two chief causes especially, as most frequently happening of the ^.
strangulation of the womb: but when it proceeds from the corruption of the
seed, all the accidents are more grievous and violent: difficulty of breathing
goes before, and shortly after comes deprivation thereof; the whole habit of
the body seems more cold than a stone: the woman is a widow: or else has
great store or abundance of seed, and has been used to the company of a man,
by the absence whereof she was before wont to be pained with heaviness of the
head, to loath her meat, and to be troubled with sadness and fear, but
chiefly The (...) when i^ of the suppossion (...) the flowers.
with melancholy. Moreover when she has satisfied, and every way fulfilled her
lust, and then presently on a sudden begins to contain her self. It is very
likely that she is suffocated by the supprossion of the flowers, which
formerly had them well and sufficiently, which formerly has bin fed with hot,
moist, and many meats, and therefore engendring much blood, which sits much,
which is grieved with some weight and swelling in the region of the belly, with
pain in the stomach, and a desire to vomit, and with such other accidents as
come by the suppression of the flowers. Those who are freed from the fit of the
suffocation of the womb, either by nature ^.
or by are, in a short time their color comes into their faces by little and
little, and the whole body begins to wax strong, and the teeth, that were
set and closed fast together, begi^ (the jaws being loosed) to open and
unclose again, and lastly, some moisture flows from the secret parts with a
certain tickling pleasure; but in some women, as in those especially in whom
the neck of the womb is tickled with the mydivives singer, in stead of that
moisture comes thick and gross seed, which moisture or seed when it is fallen,
the womb being before as it were raging, is restored unto its own proper
nature and place, and by little and little all symptoms vanish away. Men by
the suppression of their seed have not the like symptoms as women have,
because man's seed is not so cold and moist, but far more perfect and better
digested, Why the supprossion the (...) ^eri(...) or deadly ^^men.
and therefore more meet to resist putrefaction, and whiles it is brought or
drawn together by little and little, it is dissipated by great and violent
exercise.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the cure of the strangulation of the womb.
SEeing that the strangulation of the womb is a sudden and sharp disease, it
therefore requires a present and speedy remedy, for if it be neglected The
pulling the hair of the lower parts ^ both for this malady and for the cause
of the same.
it many times causes present death. Therefore, when this malady comes, the
sick woman must presently be placed on her back, having her breast and stomach
loose, and all her clothes and garments slack and loose about her, whereby she
may take breath the more easily; and she must be called on by her own name,
with a loud voice in her ears, and pulled hard by the hairs of the temples
and neck, but yet especially by the hairs of the secret parts, that by
provoking or causing pain in the lower parts, the patient may not only be
brought to her self again, but also that the sharp and malign vapor
ascending upwards, may be drawn downwards: the legs and arms must be bound
and tied with painful ligatures, all the body must be rubbed over with rough
linen clothes besprinkled with salt and vinegar, until it be very sore and
red, and let this pessary following be put into the womb.. succi mercurial.
artemis. an. ii. in quibus dissolve pull. bened. A Pessary.
iii. pull. radic. enulae camp. galang. minor. an. i. make thereof a pessary.
Then let the soales of her feet be anointed with oil of days, or with some
such like oil, let a great cupping-glasse with a greatflame be applied to the
belly below the navell, to the inner part of the thigh, and to the groin,
whereby both the matter that climes upwards, and also the womb it self running
the same way, may be brought downwards or drawn back. There may be made a
fumigation of spices to be received up into the womb, which, that it may be
the easier done, the womb may be held open by putting in this instrument here
described into the neck thereof. Let it be made of gold, silver or latin into
the form of a pessary; at the one end thereof, that is to say, that end which
goes up into the neck of the womb, let there be made many holes on each
side, but at the lower end let it be made with a spring, that it may open and
shut as you will have it. Also it must have two laces or bands by which it must
be made fast unto a swathe or girdle tied about the patients belly.

The form of a Pessary to be put into the neck of the womb to hold it open.


The description of a vessel made with a funnell or pipe for to fumigate the
womb.


The matter and ingredients of sweet and aromaticke fumigations, are cinnamon,
callam. aromat. lig. aloes, ladanum, benzoin, thyme, pepper, cloves, lavander,
calaminth, The matter of sweet fumigations.
mugwort, penniroyall, alepta moschat. nutmegs, musk, moss, amber, squinant,
and such like, which for their sweet smell and sympathy, allure or entice the
By what power sweet fumigations do restore the womb unto its own nature and
place. Stinking smells to be applied to the nostrils.
womb downwards, by their heat consume and digest the thick vapors, and
putrefied ill juice. Contrariwise, let the nostrils be perfumed with foetide
and rank smells, and let these be made with gum. galbanum, sagapenum,
ammoniacum, assa foetida, bitumen, oil of Jeat, snuff of a tallow candle when
it is blown out, with the fume of birds feathers, especially of Partridges and
Woodcocks, of man's hair or goats hair, of old leather, of horse hoofes, and
such like things burned, whose noisome or offensive savor the womb avoiding,
does return unto its own place or seat again.

Moreover it shall be very necessary to procure vomit by thrusting a goose
feather down into the throat, or else the hairs of the patients own head.
Shortly after she must use a potion of fifteen grains of black pepper
bruised and dissolved in Avicens secret for suffocation of the womb.
hydromel, or water and honey mixed together, or in some strong wine, which
remedy Avicen holds for a secret.

Also in stead thereof three hours before meat ss. of treacle dissolved in i.
of the water of wormwood may be given her: Also it is thought that one drop of
the oil of Jeat dropped on the tongue, is a very profitable remedy. There be
some that allow a potion of half a dram of Castoreum dissolved in white wine,
or in the Castoreum drunken.
broth of a capon: also it is profitable not only to give her treacle to
drink, but also to inject it into the womb, being first dissolved in aqua
vitae, and in the mean time to drop two drops of oil of sage, or some such
chymicall oil into the ears. Expressions into the womb.
If she be drousie or sleepy, she must be awaked or kept waking with sneesing
powders of white ellebore and pellitory.

It is also requisite to inject glysters both into the fundament and secret
parts, which must be made of the decoction of things that discuss wind, as of
calamint, The matter of pessaries.
mugwort, lavender, pennyroyall, chamomel, melilote, and such like; and let
pessaries or suppositories be made of ladanum, ginger, gallia moschat. treacle,
mithridate, civet and musk, of the oil of cloves, anniseeds, sage, rosemary,
and such like, chymically drawn; this following is a convenient description of
a glyster.. radic. enulae, A glyster scattering gross vapors.
camp. Ireos, ebuli, aristoloch. an. i. fol. absynth. artemesiae, matricar.
puleg. origani, an. m. i. baccarum lauri, juniperi and sambuc. an. p. i. sem.
amios, cymini, rutae an. ii. florum sloechados, rorismarin. salviae, centaur.
minor. an. p. ii. fiat decoctio, cape colaturae lb. i. in qua dissolve mellis
anthosati, sacch. rubr. and bened. an. i. diacharth. ii. olei aneth. nard. an.
iss. make thereof a glyster, and apply this plaster following to the belly..
mass. empl. oxycrocei, and melilot. an. iii. olei nard. as much as shall
suffice to make it conveniently soft, make thereof a plaster, and spread it on
leather, and apply it to the region of the belly when the fit is ended: if
she be married, let her forthwith use A quick, certain and a pleasant remedy
for the suffocation of the womb. Tickling of the neck of the womb.
copulation, and be strongly encountered by her husband, for there is no
remedy more present than this.

Let the mydwife anoint her fingers with oleum nardinum or moschetalinum, or
of cloves, or else of spike mixed with musk, ambergreese, civet, and other
sweet powders, and with these let her rub or tickle the top of the neck of the
womb which touches the inner orifice; but her secret parts must first be
warmed by the applying of warm linen clothes, for so at length the venomous
matter contained in the womb, shall be dissolved and flow out, and the
malign, sharp and flatulent vapors, whereby the womb is driven as it were
into a fury or rage, shall be resolved and dissipated, and so when the
conjunct matter of the disease is scattered and wasted, the womb, and also the
woman shall be restored unto themselves again. Some hold it for a secret to
rub the navell with the juice of garlic boiled and mixed with aloes.

CHAP. XLIX. Of women's monthly flux or courses.
USually they call the flux of blood, that issues from the secret parts of
The reason of the names of the monthly flux of women.
women, monthly flowers or courses, because it happens to them every month
so long as they are in health. There be some which call them terms, because
they return at their usual time. Many of the French men call it sepmaines,
because in such as sit much, and are given to plentiful feeding, it endures
almost for the space of seven days. Some call them purgations, because that by
this flux all a woman's body is purged of super fluous humors. There be some
also that call those fluxes the flowers, because that as in plants the flower
buddeth out before the fruits, so in women kind this flux goes before the
issue, or the conception thereof.

For the courses flow not before a woman be able to conceive: for how should
the seed being cast into the womb have his nourishment and increase, and how
should the child have his nourishment when it is formed of the seed, if this
necessary humor were wanting in the womb? yet it may be some women may
conceive What women do conceive this flux not appearing at all.
without this flux of the courses: but that is in such as have so much of the
humor gathered together, as is wont to remain in those which are purged,
although it be not so great a quantity that it may flow out, as it is recorded
by Aristotle. But as it is in some very great, and in some very little, so it
is in some seldom, and in some very often.

There are some that are purged twice, and some thrice in a month, but it is
altogether in those who have a great liver, large veins, and are filled and
fed with many and greatly nourishing meats, which sit idely at home all day,
which having What women have this menstruall flux often, abundantly and for a
longer space than others.
slept all night, do notwithstanding lie in bed sleeping a great part of the
day also, which live in a hot, moist, rainie and southerly air, which use
warm bathes of sweet waters and gentle frictions, which use and are greatly
delighted with carnal copulation: in these and such like women the courses
flow more frequently and abundantly.

But contrariwise, in those that have small and obscure veins, in those that
have What women have t^^ flux more seldom, less, and a far more shorrtime
than others.
their bodies more furnished and big either with flesh or with fat, are more
seldom purged, and also more sparingly, because that the superfluous quantity
of blood uses to go into the habit of the body. Also tender, delicate and
fair women are less purged than those that are brown and endued with a more
compact flesh, because that by the rarity of their bodies, they suffer a
greater wasting or dissipation of their substance by transpiration. Moreover,
they are not so greatly purged with this kind of purgation, which have some
other solemn or accustomed evacuation in any other place of their body, as by
the nose or hemorrhoids.

And as concerning their age, old women are purged when the Moon is old, and
Why young women are purged in the new of the Moon.
young women when the Moon is new, as it is thought. I think the cause
thereof is, for that the Moon rules moist bodies, for by the variable motion
thereof the Sea flows and ebbeth, and bones, marrow and plants abound with
their genitall humor.

Therefore young people which have much blood, and more fluxible, and their
bodies more fluxible, are soon moved unto a flux, although it be even in the
first quarter of the Moons risingor increasing: but the humors of old women,
because Why old women are purged in the wane of the Moon.
they wax stiff as it were with cold, and are not so abundant, and have more
dense bodies and straighter vessels, are not so apt to a flux, nor do they so
easily flow, except it be in the full of the Moon, or else in the decrease;
that is to say, because the blood that is gathered in the full of the Moon
falls from the body even of its own weight, for that by reason of the
decreasing or wane of the Moon this time of the month is more cold and moist.

CHAP. L. The causes of the monthly flux or courses.
BEcause a woman is more cold, and therefore has the digestive faculty more
weak, it comes to pass, that she requires and desires more The material
cause of the monthly flux.
meat or food than she can digest or concoct: And because that superfluous
humor that remains is not digested by exercise, nor by the efficacy of
strong and lively heat, therefore by the providence or benefit of nature it
flows out by the veins of the womb, by the power of the expulsive faculty,
at its own certain and prefixed season or time. But then especially When the
monthly flux begins to flow.
it begins to flow, and a certain crude portion of blood to be expelled,
being hurtful and malign otherwise in no quality, when nature has laid her
principal foundations of the increase of the body, so that in greatness of
the body, she has come as it were in a manner to the highest top, that is to
say, from the thirteenth to the fiftieth year of our age.

Moreover, the child cannot be formed in the womb, nor have his nutriment or
increase without this flux: therefore this is another final cause of the
monthly The final cause.
flux. Many are persuaded that women do far more abound with blood than men,
A woman exceeds a man in quantity of blood.
considering how great an abundance of blood they cast forth of their secret
parts every month, from the thirteenth to the fiftieth year of their age: how
much women great with child, of whom also many are menstruall, yield unto the
nutriment and increase of the child in their wombes, and how much Physicians
take from women that are with child by opening of a vein, which otherwise
would be delivered before their natural and prefixed time; how great a
quantity thereof they avoid in the birth of their children, and for ten or
twelve days after, and how great a quantity of milk they spend for the
nourishment of the child when they give suck, which milk is none other thing
than blood made white by the power of the kernels that are in the dugges, which
does suffice to nourish the child, be he great or little; yet notwithstanding
many nurses in the mean while are menstruall: and as that may be true, so
certainly this is true, that one dram (that I may so speak) of a man's
blood, is of more efficacy to nourish and increase, than two pounds of woman's A
man execedeth a woman in the quality of his blood.
blood, because it is far more perfect, more concocted, wrought, and better
replenished with abundance of spirits: whereby it comes to pass that a man
endued with a more strong heat, does more easily convert what meat soever he
eats A man is more hot than a woman, and therefore not menstruall.
unto the nourishment and substance of his body; and if that any superfluity
remains, he does easily digest and scatter it by insensible transpiration. But
a woman being more cold than a man, because she takes more than she can
concoct, does gather together more humors, which because she cannot disperse,
by reason of the unperfectnesse and weakness of her heat, it is necessary
that she should suffer, and have her monthly purgation, especially when she
grows unto some bigness; but there is no such need in a man.

CHAP. LI. The causes of the suppression of the courses or menstruall flux.
THe courses are suppressed or stopped by many causes, as by sharpvehement, and
long diseases, by fear, sorrow, hunger, immoderate labors, watchings, fluxes
of the belly, great bleeding, hoemorrhoides, fluxes of blood at the mouth, and
evacuations in any other part of the body whatsoever, often opening of a vein,
great sweats, ulcers flowing much and long, scabbinesse of the whole skin,
immoderate grossness and clamminesse of the blood, and by eating of raw
fruits, and drinking of cold water, by sluggishnesse and thickness of the
vessels, and also the obstruction of them by the defaults and diseases of the
womb, by distemperature, an abscesse, an ulcer, by the obstruction of the
inner orifice thereof, by the growing of a Callus, caruncle, cicatrize of a
wound or ulcer, or membrane growing there, by injecting of astringent things
into the neck of the The foolish endeavor of making the orifice of the womb
narrow, is rewarded with the discommodity of stopping of the flowers. What
women are called viragines. Lib. 6. epidem. sect. 7.
womb, which place many women endeavor foolishly to make narrow: I speak
nothing of age, greatness with child, and nursing of children, because these
causes are not besides nature, neither do they require the help of the
Physician.

Many women, when their flowers or terms be stopped, degenerate after a
manner into a certain manly nature, whence they are called Viragines, that is
to say, stout, or manly women; therefore their voice is more loud and big,
like unto a man's, and they become bearded.

In the city Abdera (says Hippocrates) Phaethusa the wife of Pytheas at the
first did bear children and was fruitful, but when her husband was exiled,
her flowers were stopped for a long time: but when these things happened, her
body became manlike and rough, and had a beard, and her voice was great and
shrill. The very same thing happened to Namysia the wife of Gorgippus in
Thasus. Those virgins that from the beginning have not their monthly flux,
and yet nevertheless enjoy their perfect The women that are called viragines
are barren.
health, they must necessarily be hot and dry, or rather of a manly heat and
dryness, that they may so disperse and dissipate by transpiration, as men do,
the excrements that are gathered, but verily all such are barren.

CHAP. LII. What accidents follow the suppression or stopping of the monthly
flux or flowers.
WHen the flowers or monthly flux are stopped, diseases affect the womb, and
from thence pass into all the whole body. For thereof comes suffocation of
the womb, headache, swouning, beating of the heart, and swelling of the breasts
and secret parts, inflammation of the womb, an abscesse, ulcer, cancer, a
fever, nauseousnesse, vomitings, difficult and slow concoction, the dropsy,
strangury, the full womb pressing upon the orifice of the bladder, black and
bloody Why the strang^ or bloodinesse of the urine follows the suppression of
the flowers.
urine, by reason that portion of the blood sweateth out into the bladder. In
many women the stopped matter of the monthly flux is excluded by vomiting,
urine, and the hoemorrhoides, in some it grows into varices. In my wife, when
she was a maid, the menstruall matter was excluded and purged by the
nostrills. The wife Histories of such as were purged of their menstruall flux
by the nose and dugges.
of Peter Feure of Casteaudun, was purged of her menstruall matter by the
dugges every month, and in such abundance, that scarce three or four clothes
were able to dry it and suck it up.

In those that have not the flux monthly to evacuate this plenitude by some
part or place of the body, there often follows difficulty of breathing,
melancholy, madness, the gout, an ill disposition of the whole body,
dissolution of the strength of the whole body, want of appetite, a consumption,
the falling sickness, an apoplexy.

Those whose blood is laudable, yet not so abundant, do receive no other
discommodity by the suppression of the flowers, unless it be that the womb
burns or itcheth with the desire of copulation, by reason that the womb is
distended with hot and itching blood, especially if they lead a sedentary life.
Those women that have been accustomed to bear children, are not so grieved
and evil at ease when To what women the suppression of the months is most
grievous
their flowers are stopped by any chance contrary to nature, as those women
which did never conceive, because they have been used to be filled, and the
vessels by reason of their customary repletion and distention, are more large
and capacious: when the courses flow, the appetite is partly dejected, for that
nature, being then wholly applied to expulsion, cannot thoroughly concoct or
digest, the face waxes pale, and without its lively color, because that the
heat with the spirits, go from without inwards, so to help and aid the
expulsive faculty.

CHAP. LIII. Of provoking the flowers or courses.
THe suppression of the flowers is a plethorick disease, and therefore must be
cured by evacuation, which must be done by opening the vein called Saphena
which is at the ankle, but first let the basilike vein of the arm be opened,
especially if the body be plethoricke, lest that there Why the vein called
basilica in the arm must be opened before the vein saphena in the foot.
Horse-leeches to be applied to the neck of the womb.
should a greater attraction be made into the womb, and by such attraction or
flowing in, there should come a greater obstruction. When the veins of the
womb are distended with so great a swelling that they may be seen, it will be
very profitable to apply horse-leeches to the neck thereof: pessaries for
women may be used; but fumigations of aromaticke things are more meet for
maids, because they are bashful and shamefaced. Unguents, liniments,
emplasters, cataplasmes, that serve for that matter, are to be prescribed and
applied to the secret parts, ligatures and frictions of the thighs and legs
are not to be omitted, fomentations and sternutatories are to be used, and
cupping glasses are to be applied to the groines, walking, dancing, riding,
often and wanton copulation with her husband, and such like exercises, provoke
the flowers. Of plants, the flowers of St. John's wort, the roots of fennel,
and asparagus, bruscus or butchers broom, of parsley, brooke-lime, basil,
balm, betony, Plants that provoke the flowers
garlic, onions, crista marina, costmary, the rind or bark of cassia
fistula, calamint, origanum, pennyroyall, mugwort, thyme, hissope, sage,
marjoram, rosemary, horehound, rue, savine, spurge, saffron, agaricke, the
flowers of elder, bay berries, the berries of Ivy, scammony, Cantharides,
pyrethrum or pellitory of Spain, suphorbium. The aromaticke things are amomum,
cynamon, squinanth, nutmegs, calamus Sweet things.
aromaticus, cyperus, ginger, cloves, galangall, pepper, cubibes, amber, musk,
spiknard, and such like; of all which let fomentations, fumigations, baths,
broaths, boles, potions, pills, syrupes, apozemes, and opiates be made as the
Physicians shall think good.

The apozeme that follows is proved to be very effectual.. flo. and flor.
dictam. An apozeme to provoke the flowers.
an. pii. pimpinel. m ss. omnium capillar. an. p i. artemis. thymi, marjor.
origan. an. m ss. rad. rub. major. petroselin. faenicul. an. i ss. rad. paeon.
bistort. an. ss. cicerum rub. sem. paeon. faenicul. an. ss. make thereof a
decoction in a sufficient quantity of water, adding thereto cinnamon iii. in one
pint of the decoction dissolve (after it is strained) of the syrup of
mugwort, and of hissope, an. ii. diarrhod. abbat. i. let it be strained
through a bag, with ii. of the kernells of dates, and let her take iiii. in
the morning.

Let pessaries be made with galbanum, ammoniacum, and such like mollifying
things, beaten into a mass in a mortar with a hot pestell, and made into the
form of a pessary, and then let them be mixed with oil of Jasmine,
euphorbium, an oxegall, the juice of mugwort, and other such like, wherein
there is power to provoke the flowers, as with scammony in powder: let them be
as big as ones thumb, six fingers long, and rolled in lawne, or some such
like thin linen cloth; of the same things nodula's may be made. Also
pessaries may be prepared with honey boiled, adding thereto convenient powders,
as of scammony, pellitory, and such like. Neither ought these to stay long in
the neck of the womb, lest they should exulcerate, and they must be pulled
back by a thread that must be put through them, and then the orifice of the
womb must be fomented with white wine of the decoction of pennyroyall or
mother-wort.

But it is to be noted, that if the suppression of the flowers happens
through the What causes of the stopping of the flowers must be cured before the
discase it self.
default of the stopped orifice of the womb, or by inflammation, these maladies
must first be cured before we come unto those things that of their proper
strength and virtue provoke the flowers: as for example, if such things be made
and given when the womb is enflamed, the blood being drawn into the grieved
place, and the humors sharpened, and the body of the womb heated, the
inflammation will be increased. So if there be any superfluous flesh, if there
be any Callus of a wound or ulcer, or if there be any membrane shutting the
orifice of the womb, and so stopping the flux of the flowers, they must first
be consumed and taken away before any of those things be administered. But the
opportunity of taking and applying of things, The fittest time to provoke the
flowers.
must be taken from the time wherein the sick woman was wont to be purged
before the stopping, or if she never had the flowers, in the decrease of the
moon; for so we shall have custom, nature, and the external efficient cause
to help art. When these Why hot houses do hurt those in whom the flowers are
to be provoked.
medicines are used, the women are not to be put into bathes or hot houses, as
many do, except the malady proceed from the density of the vessels, and the
grossness and clamminesse of the blood. For sweats hinder the menstruall
flux, by diverting and turning the matter another way.

CHAP. LIIII. The signs of the approaching of the menstruall flux.
WHen the monthly flux first approaches, the dugges itch and become more
swollen and hard than they were wont, the woman is more desirous of copulation,
by reason of the ebullition of the provoked blood, What women ^and what women
due loath the act of generation when the months are stopped.
and the acrimony of the blood that remains, her voice becomes bigger, her
secret parts itch, burn, swell, and wax red. If they stay long, she has
pain in her loins and head, nauseousnesse and vomiting troubles the
stomach: notwithstanding, if those matters which flow together in the womb,
either of their own nature, or by corruption, be cold, they loath the act of
generation, by reason that the womb waxes feeble through sluggishnesse and
watery humors filling the same, and it flows by the secret parts very
softly. Those maids that are marriageable, although they have the menstruall
flux very well, yet they With what accidents those that are manageable and
(...) mar^^^, a^ troubled.
are troubled with head ache, nauseousnesse, and often vomiting, want of
appetite, longing, an ill habit of body, difficulty of breathing, trembling of
the heart, swouning, melancholy, fearful dreams, watching, with sadness and
heaviness, because that the genitall parts burning and itching, they imagine
the act of generation, whereby it comes to pass that the seminall matter,
either remaining in the testicles in great abundance, or else powered into the
hollownesse of the womb, by the tickling ^ ^
of the genitalls, is corrupted, and acquireth a venomous quality, and causes
such like accidents as happens in the suffocation of the womb.

Maids that live in the country are not so troubled with those diseases,
because there is no such lying in wait for their maiden-heads, and also they
live sparingly and hardly, and spend their time in continual labor. You may
see many maids so full of juice, that it runs in great abundance, as if
they were not menstruall, into their dugges, and is there converted into milk,
which they have in as great quantity as nurses, as we read it recorded by
Hippocrates. If a woman which is neither great with Aph. 36. sect. 5.
child, nor has born children, has milk, she wants the menstruall fluxes;
whereby you may understand that that conclusion is not good which affirms
that a woman which has milk in her breasts, either to be delivered of child,
or to be great with child: for Cardanus writes that he knew one Antony Buzus
at Genua, who being Lib. 2. de subt.
thirty years of age, had so much milk in his breasts as was sufficient to
nurse a child; for the breeding and efficient cause of milk proceeds not only
from the engrafted faculty of the glandulous substance, but much rather from
the action of the man's The efficient cause of the milk is to be noted.
seed; for proof whereof you may see many men that have very much milk in
their breasts, and many women that almost have no milk, unless they receive
man's seed. Also women that are strong and lusty like unto men, which the
Latins call Viragines, that is to say, whose seed comes unto a manly nature,
when the flowers are stopped, concoct the blood, and therefore when it wants
passage forth, by the likeness of the substance it is drawn into the duggs,
and becomes perfect milk: those that have the flowers plentifully and
continually for the space of four or five days, are better purged and with
more happy success than those that have them for a longer time.

CHAP. LV. What accidents follow immoderate fluxes of the flowers or courses.
IF the menstruall flux flows immoderately, there also follows many
accidents; for the cocoction is frustrated, the appetite overthrown, then
follows coldness throughout all the body, exolution of all the faculties, an
ill habit of all the body, leanness, the dropsy, a hecticke fever,
convulsion, swouning, and often sudden death: if any have them too exceeding
immoderately, the blood is sharp and burning, and also stinking, the sick
woman is troubled with a continual fever, and her tongue will be dry, ulcers
arise in the gummes and all the whole mouth. In women the flowers do flow by
the veins By what pores the flowers due flow in a woman and in a maid.
and arteries which rise out of the spermaticke vessels, and are ended in the
bottom and sides of the womb, but in virgins and in women great with child,
whose children are sound and healthful, by the branches of the hypogastrick
vein and artery, which are spread and dispersed over the neck of the womb.
The cause of this immoderate flux is in the quantity or quality of the blood,
in both the fault is unreasonable The causes of an unteasionable flute of blood.
copulation, especially with a man that has a yard of a monstrous greatness,
and the dissolution of the retentive faculty of the vessels: oftentimes also
the flowers flow immoderately by reason of a painful and a difficult birth of
the child or the afterbirth, being pulled by violence from the cotyledons of
the womb, or by reason that the veins and arteries of the neck of the womb
are torn by the coming forth of the infant with great travel, and many times
by the use of sharp medicines, and exulcerating pessaries. Often times also
nature avoides all the juice of the whole body critically by the womb after a
great disease, which flux is not rashly or suddenly The critical flux of
the flowers. The signs of blood dowing from the womb or neck of the womb.
to be stopped. That menstruall blood that flows from the womb is more
gross, black, and clotty, but that which comes from the neck of the womb
is more clear, liquid and red.

CHAP. LVI. Of stopping the immoderate flowing of the flowers or courses.
YOu must make choice of such meats and drinks as have power to incrassate the
blood, for as the flowers are provoked with meats that are hot, and of subtle
parts, so they are stopped by such meats as are cooling, thickening,
astringent and stipticke, as are barley waters, sodden rice, the extreme parts
of beasts, as of oxen, calves, sheep, either fried or sodden with sorrel,
purslaine, plantaine, shepherds purse, sumach, the buds of brambles,
berberries, and such like. It is supposed that a hearts horn burned, washed,
and taken in astringent water, will stop all immoderate fluxes; likewise
sanguis draconis, terra sigillata, bolus armenus, lapis haematites, coral
beaten into most subtle powder and drunk in steeled water; also pappe made
with milk, wherein steel has often times been quenched, and the flower of
wheat, barley, beans or rice, is very effectual for the same. Quinces,
cervices, medlars, cornelian berries, or cherries may likewise be eaten at the
second course, Juleps are to be used of steeled waters, with the syrup of dry
roses, pomegranates, sorrel, myrtles, quinces, or old conserves of red roses,
but wine is to be avoided: but if the strength be so extenuated that they
require it, you must choose gross and astringent wine tempered with steeled
water; exercises are to be shunned, especially venereous exercises, anger is to
be avoided, a cold air is to be chosen, which, if it be not so naturally,
must be made so by sprinkeling The institution or order of (...).
cold things on the ground, especially if the summer or heat be then in his
full strength; sound sleeping stays all evacuations except sweating. The
opening of a vein in the arm, cupping glasses fastened on the breasts, bands,
and painful frictions of the upper parts are greatly commended in this malady.

But if you perceive that the cause of this accident lies in a choleric ill
juice mixed with the blood, the body must be purged with medicines that purge
choler and Purging
water, as Rubarbe, Myrobalanes, Tamarinds, Sebestens, and the purging syrup
of roses.

CHAP. LVII. Of local medicines to be used against the immoderate flowing of
the Courses.
ALso unguents are made to stay the immoderate flux of the terms, and
likewise injections and pessaries. This or such like may be the form of an
unguent.. ol. mastich. and myrt. an. ii. nucum cupres. olibani, myrtil. an. ii.
succi rosar. rubr. i. pulv. mastichin. ii. boli armen. terrae sigillat. An
unguent.
an. ss. cerae quantum sufficit, fiat unguentum. An injection may be thus
made.. aq. An astringent injection.
plantag. rosar. rubrar. bursae pastor. centinodii, an. lb ss. corticis querni,
nucum cupressi, gallar. non maturar. an. ii. berberis, sumach. balaust. alumin.
roch. an. i. make thereof a decoction, and inject it with a syringe blunt
pointed into the womb, lest if it should be sharp it might hurt the sides of
the neck of the womb; also snailes beaten with their shells and applied to
the navell, are very profitable. Quinces roasted under the coals, and
incorporated with the powder of myrtills, and bole armenick, and put into the
neck of the womb, are mavelous effectual for this matter. The form of a
pessary may be thus.. gallar. immaturar. combust. and in aceto extinctar. ii.
ammo. ss. sang. dracon. pull. rad. symphyt. sumach. mastich. succi acaciae,
cornu cer. Astringent pes^.
ust. colophon, myrrhae, scoriae ferri, an. i. caphur. ii. mix them, and
incorporate them all together with the juice of knot-grasse, syngreen,
nightshade, henbane, water lillies, plantaine, of each as much as is
sufficient, and make thereof a pessary.

Cooling things, as oxycrate, unguentum rosatum, and such like, are with great
profit used to the region of the loins, thighs, and genitall parts: but if
this immoderate flux do come by erosion, so that the matter thereof
continually exulcerateth the neck of the womb, let the place be anointed with
the milk of a she Ass, with barley water, or binding and astringent
mucelages, as of psilium, quinces, gum trugacanth, arabicke, and such like.

CHAP. LVIII. Of women's fluxes, or the Whites.
BEsides the forenamed flux, which by the law of nature happens to women
monthly, there is also another called a woman's flux, because The reason of
the name.
it is only proper and peculiar to them: this sometimes wearieth the woman
with a long and continual distillation from the womb, or The differences
through the womb, coming from the whole body without pain, no otherwise
than when the whole superfluous filth of the body is purged by the reins or
urine; sometimes it returns at uncertain seasons, and sometimes with pain
and exulcerating the places of the womb: it differs from the menstruall
flux, because that this for the space of a few days, as it shall seem
convenient to nature, casts forth laudable blood, but this woman's flux
yields impure ill juice, sometimes sanious, sometimes serous and livide,
otherwhiles white and thick, like unto barley cream, proceeding from
flegmaticke blood: this last kind thereof is most frequent. Therefore we see
women that are flegmaticke, and of a soft and loose habit of body, What women
are apt to this flux.
to be often troubled with this disease, and therefore they will say among
themselves that they have the whites. And as the matter is diverse, so it will
stain their smockes with a different color. Truly if it be perfectly red
and sanguine, it is to be thought that it comes by erosion, or the exolution
of the substance of the vessels of the womb, or of the neck thereof:
therefore it comes very seldom of Women's flux comes very seldom of blood.
blood, and not at all except the woman be either great with child, or cease
to be menstruall for some other cause; for then in stead of the monthly flux
there flows a certain whayish excrement, which staineth her clothes with the
color of water wherein flesh is washed.

Also it very seldom proceeds of a melancholy humor, and then for the most
part it causes a cancer in the womb. But often times the purulent and bloody
matter of an ulcer lying hidden in the womb, deceives the unskilful
Chirurgian or Physician: but it is not so hard to know these diseases one from
the other; for the matter that flows from an ulcer, because (as it is said)
it is purulent, it is By what signs an ulcer in the womb may be known from
the white flowers.
also lesser, grosser, stinking, and more white. But those that have ulcers in
those places, especially in the neck of the womb, cannot have copulation with
a man without pain.

CHAP. LIX. Of the causes of the Whites.
SOmetimes the cause of the whites consists in the proper weakness of the
womb, or else in the uncleanness thereof, and sometimes by the default of the
principal parts. For if the brain or the stomach be cooled, or the liver
stopped or schirrous, many crudities are engendered, which if they run or
fall down into the womb that is weak by nature, they cause the flux of the
womb, or whites: but if this flux be moderate and How a womane flux is
wholesome. How it causes diseases.
not sharp, it keeps the body from malign diseases; otherwise it uses to
infer a consumption, leanness, palenesse, and an oedematous swelling of the
legs, the falling down of the womb, the dejection of the appetite and all
the faculties, and continual sadness and sorrowfulness; from which it is
very hard to persuade the sick woman, because that her mind and heart will
be almost broken, by reason of the shame that she takes because such filth
flows continually; it hinders conception, because it either corrupts, or
drives out the seed when it is conceived. How it lets the conception.
Often times, if it stops for a few months, the matter that stays there
causes an abscesse about the womb in the body or neck thereof, and by the
breaking of the abscesse there follows rotten and cancerous ulcers, sometimes
in the womb, sometimes in the groine, and often in the hippes.

This disease is hard to be cured, not only by reason of it self, as because
all the whole filth and superfluous excrements of a woman's body flows down
into the Why it is hard to be cured.
womb, as it were into a sink, because it is naturally weak, has an inferior
situation, many vessels ending therein; and last of all, because the courses
are wont to come through it; as also by reason of the sick woman, who often
times had rather dye than to have that place seen, the disease known, or
permit local medicines to be applied thereto: for so says Montanus, that on
a time he was called to a noble woman A history.
of Italy who was troubled with this disease, unto whom he gave counsel to
have cleansing decoctions injected into her womb, which when she heard, she
fell into a swoune, and desired her husband never thereafter to use his
counsel in any thing.

CHAP. LX. The cure of the Whites.
IF the matter that flows out in this disease be of a red color, it If the
flux^ of a woman be red, wh^^ein it dif^er^th ^ro^ the ^uall ^lux.
differs from the natural monthly flux in this only, because it keeps no
order or certain time in its returning. Therefore phlebotomy and other remedies
which we have spoken of, as requisite for the menstruall flux when it flows
immoderately, is here necessary to be used. But if it be white, or does
testify or argue the ill juice of this or that humor by any other color, a
purgation must be prescribed of such things as are proper to the humor that
offends: for it is not good to stop such A woman's flux is not suddenly to be
stopped.
a flux suddenly; for it is necessary, that so the body should be purged of
such filth or abundance of humors: for they that do hasten to stop it, cause
the drop^ie, by reason that this sink of humors is turned back into the
liver; or else a cancer in the womb, because it is stayed there; or a fever,
or other diseases, according to the condition of the part that receives it.
Therefore we must not come to local detersives, de^i^catives, restrictives,
unless we have first used universal remedies according to art. Alom baths,
baths of brimstone, and of bitumen, or iron, are convenient for the whites that
come of a phlegmatic humor; instead whereof bathes may be made What baths
are profitable.
of the decoction of herbs that are hot, dry, and endued with an aromaticke
power, with alome and pebbles, or flint-stones red hot thrown into the same.
Let this be the form of a cleansin^ decoction and injection.. fol. absynth.
agrimon. centinod. burs. past. an. mss. boil them together, and make thereof a
decoction, in which An astringent ^nj^^tion.
dissolve mellis rosar. ii. aloes, myrrhae, salis nitri, an. i. make thereof an
injection, the woman being so placed on a pillow under her buttockes that the
neck of the womb being more high, may be wide open: when the injection is
received, let the woman ^et her legs acrosse, and draw them up to her
buttockes, and so she may keep that which is injected. They that endeavor to
dry and bind more strongly, add the juice of acatia, green galls, the rindes
of pomegranates, roch alome, roman vitrioll, and they boil them in Smithes
water and red wine; pessaries may be made of the like faculty.

If the matter that comes forth be of an ill color or smell, it is like that
there is a rotten ulcer; therefore we ought to inject those things that have
power to correct The signs of a putrefyed ulcer in the womb.
the putrefaction: among which aegyptiacum, dissolved in lie or red wine,
excels. There are women which when they are troubled with a virulent
Gonorrhaea, or an The virulent Gonorrhaea is like unto the duxe of women.
involuntary flux of the seed, cloaking the fault with an honest name, do
untruly say that they have the whites, because that in both these diseases a
great abundance of filth is voided. But the Chyrurgian may easily perceive that
malady by the rottenness of the matter that flows out, and he shall
persuade himself that it will not be cured without salivation or fluxing at
the mouth, and sweats. In the mean while let him put in an instrument made
like unto a pessary, and cause the sick woman to hold it there: this
instrument must have many holes in the upper end, through which the purulent
matter may pass, which by staying or stopping might get a sharpness; as also
that so the womb may breathe the more freely, and may be kept more temperate
and cool by receiving the air, by the benefit of a spring whereby this
instrument, being made like unto a pessary, is opened and shut.

The form of an instrument made like unto a pessary, whereby the womb may be
ventilated.
A. shows the end of the instrument, which must have many holes therein.

B. shows the body of the instrument.

C. shows the plate whereby the mouth of the instrument is opened and shut,
as wide and as close as you will, for to receive air more freely.

D. shows the spring.

EE show the laces and bands to tie about the patients body, that so the
instrument may be stayed and kept fast in his place.



CHAP. LXI. Of the hoemorrhoides and wartes of the neck of the womb.
LIke as in the fundament, so in the neck of the womb there are
hoemorrhoides, and as it were varicous veins, often times flowing The
differences of the hoemorrhoides of the neck of the womb.
with much blood, or with a red and stinking whayish humor. Some of these by
reason of their redness and great in equality as it were of knobs, are like
unripe mulberries, and are called vulgarly venae morales, that is to say, the
veins or hoemorrhoides like unto mulberries; others are like unto grapes, and
therefore are named uvales; other some are like unto warts, and therefore are
called venae verrucales: some appear and show themselves with a great tumor,
others are little and in the bottom of the neck of the womb, others are in
the side or edge thereof. Achrochordon is a kind of What an Acrochordon is.
wart with a callous bunch or knot, having a thin or slender root, and a
greater head, like unto the knot of a rope, hanging by a small thread; it is
called of the Arabians, verruc^ botoralis.

There is also another kind of wart, which because of his great roughness and
unequality is called thymus, as resembling the flower of Thyme. All such
diseases are What a thymus is.
exasperated and made more grievous by any exercise, especially by venereous
acts: many times they have a certain malignity, and an hidden virulency joined
with them, by occasion whereof they are aggravated even by touching only,
because they have their matter of a raging humor: therefore to these we may
not rightly use a true, but only the palliative cure, as they term it: the
Latins call them only ficus, but the French men name them with an adjunct,
St. Fiacrius figs. St. Fiacrius figs.


CHAP. LXII. Of the cure of the Warts that are in the neck of the womb.
THe warts that grow in the neck of the womb, if they be not malign, What
warts of the womb must be bound and so cut off.
are to be tied with a thread, and so cut of^. Those that lie hid more deep in
the womb, may be seen and cured by opening the matrix with a dilater made for
the purpose.

Diverse Specula matricis, or Dilators for the inspection of the matrix.


An other form of a dilater or Speculum matricis, whereof the declaration
follows.
A. shows the screw which shuts and opens the dilater of the matrix.

B. B. show the arms or branches of the instrument, which ought to be eight or
nine fingers long.



But these dilaters of the matrix ought to be of a bigness correspondent to
the patients body; let them be put into the matrix when the woman is placed as
we have said, when the child is to be drawn out of her body. That instrument
is most meet to tie the warts, which we have described in the relaxation of
the palate or Uvula: let them be tied harder and harder every day until they
fall away. Therefore for Three s^op^^ of the cure of wa^ts in the womb.
the curing of warts there are three chief scopes, as bands, sections,
cauteries; and lest they grow up again, let oil of vitrioll be dropped on the
place, or aqua fortis, or some of the lie wherewith potentiall cauteries are
made. This water following is most effectual to consume and waste warts.. aq.
plantag. vi. virid. aeris, ii. alum. An effectual water to consume warts.
roch. iii. sal. com. ss. vit. romans and sublim. an. ss. beat them all together,
and boil them; let one or two drops of this water be dropped on the grieved
place, not touching any place else; but if there be an ulcer, it must be cured
as I have showed before. A certain man, studious of physic, of late affirmed
to me that ox dung tempered Unguents to consume war^^.
with the leaves or powder of savine, would waste the warts of the womb, if it
were applied thereto warm; which whether it be true or not, let experience,
the mistress of things, be judge: verily cantharides put into unguents, will
do it, and (as it is likely) more effectually; for they will consume the
callousnesse which grows between the toes or fingers. I have proved by
experience that the warts that grow on the hands, may be cured by applying of
purslain beaten or stamped in its own juice. The leaves and flowers of marigolds
do certainly perform the self same thing.

CHAP. LXIII. Of chaps, and those wrinkled and hard excrescences which the
greeks call Condylomata.
CHapps or fissures, are cleft and very long little ulcers, with pain very
What (...) ar^.
sharp and burning, by reason of the biting of an acride, salt and dry^ng
humor, making so great a contraction, and often times narrowness in the
fundament and the neck of the womb, that scarcely the ^oppe of ones finger
may be put into the orifice thereof, like unto pieces of lea^^er or parchment,
which are wrinkled and parched by holding of them to the fire. They rise
sometimes in the mouth, so that the patient can neither speak, eat, nor open
his mouth, so that the Chirurgian is constrained to cut it. In the cure The
(...)
thereof, all sharp things are to be avoided, and those which mollify are to
be used, and the grieved part or place is to be moistened with fomentations,
liniments, cataplasmes, emplasters, and if the malady be in the womb, a
dilater of the matrix or pessary must be put thereinto very often, so to widen
that which is over hard, and too much drawn together or narrow, and then the
cleft little ulcers must be cicatrized. Condylomata are certain wrinkled and
hard bunches, and as it were excrescences of What co^dyl^mat^ ar^.
flesh, rising especially in the wrinkled edges of the fundament and neck of
the womb. Cooling and relaxing medicines ought to be used against this disease,
such as are oil of eggs, and oil of linseed, take of each of them two
ounces, beat them together The cure.
a long time in a leaden mortar, and therewith anoint the grieved part; but if
there be an inflammation, put thereto a little camphire.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the itching of the womb.
IN women, especially such as are old, there often times comes an itching
What the itch of the womb i^.
in the neck of the womb, which does so trouble them with pain and a desire to
scratch, that it takes away their sleep. Not long since a woman asked my
counsel, that was so troubled with this kind of malady, that she was
constrained to extinguish or stay the itching burning of her secret parts by
sprinkling cinders of fire, and rubbing them hard on the place; I counseled
her to take egypt. dissolved in seawater or lie, and inject it into her
secret parts with a syringe, and to wet stupes of flax in the same medicine,
and put them up into the womb, and so she was cured. Many times this itch
comes in the fundament or testicles of aged men, by reason of the gathering
together or confluxe of ^ ^
salt flagme, which when it falls into the eyes, it causes the patient to
have much ado to refrain scratching: when this matter has dispersed it self
into the whole habit of the body, it causes a burning or itching scabbe,
which must be cured by a cooling and a moistening diet, by phlebotomy and
purging of the salt humor, by bathes and horns applied, with scarification
and anointing of the whole body with the unction following.. axung. porcin.
recent. lb i ss. sap. nig. vel gallici, salis nitri, assat. tartar. staphisag.
an. ss. sulph. viv. i. argent. viv. ii. acet. ros. quart. i. in conporate them
all together, and make thereof a liniment according to art, and use (...) is
said before: unguentum enulatum cum mercurio is thought to have great force,
not without desert, to assuage the itch, and dry the scab. Some use this that
follows. ^
. alum. spum. nitr. sulph. viv. an. vi. staphis. i. let them all be dissolved
in vi^gar of roses, adding thereto butyr. recent. q. s. make thereof a liniment
for the forenamed use.

CHAP. LXV. Of the relaxation of the great gut or intestine, which happens to
women.
MAny women that have had great travel and strains in childbirth, have the
great intestine (called of the Latins crassum intestinum) or gut, relaxed ^
and slipped down; which kind of affect happens much to children, by reason
of a phlegmatic humor moistening the sphincter muscle of the fundament, and
the two others called levatores. For the cure thereof, first of all the gut
called rectum intestinum or the straight gut, is to be forented with a
decoction of heating and resolving herbs, as of sage, rosemary, lavander, ^
thyme, and such like; and then of astringent things, as of roses, myrtills,
the ^^ds of pomegranats, cypress nuts, galls, with a little alome, then it
must be sprinkied with the powder of things that are astringent without biting,
and last of all it is to be restored and gently thrust into its place. That is
supposed to be an effectual ^
and singular remedy for this purpose, which is made of twelve red snailes put
into a put with ss. of alome, and as much of salt, and shaken up and down a
long time, for so at length when they are dead there will remain an humor,
which must be put upon cotton, and applied to the gut that is fallen down. By
the same cause (that is in say of painful childe-birth in some women) there
arises a great swelling in the Thdifferences and signs.
navell; for when the peritonaeum is relaxed or broken, sometimes the Kall, and
sometimes the guts slip out: many times flatulencies come thither: the cause,
as I now showed, is over great straining or stretching of the belly, by a great
burden carried in the womb, and great travail in childe-birth: if the fallen
down guts make that tumor, pain joined together with that tumor does vex
the patient, and if it be pressed you may hear the noise of the guts going
back again: if it be the Kall, then the tumor is soft, and almost without
pain, neither can you hear any noise by compression: if it be wind, the
tumor is loose and soft, yet it is such as will yield to the pressing of the
finger with some sound, and will soon return again: if the tumor be great,
it cannot be cured unless the peritonaeum be cut, as it is said in the cure
of ruptures. In the church-porches of Paris I have seen begger-women, who by
the falling down of the guts, have had such tumors as big as a bowl, who
notwithstanding ^
could go, and do all other things as if they had been sound and in perfect
health: I think it was because the faeces or excrements, by reason of the
greatness of the tumor, and the bigness or wideness of the intestines, had a
free passage in and out.

CHAP. LXVI. Of the relaxation of the navell in children.
OFten times in children newly borne, the navell swells as big as an egg,
because it has not bin well cut or bound, or because the whayish humors are
flowed thither, or because that part has extended it self too much by crying,
by reason of the pains of the fretting of the childs guts, many times the
child brings that tumor joined with an abscesse with him from his mother
womb: but let not the Chirurgian assay to open that abscesse, for if it be
opened, the guts come out through the incision, as I An abscesse not to be
opened.
have seen in many, and especially in a child of my Lord Martigues; for when
Peter of the Rock, the Chirurgian, opened an abscesse that was in it, the
bowels ran out at the incision, and the infant died; and it wanted but little
that the Gentlemen of my Lords retinue that were there, had strangled the
Chirurgian. Therefore when John Gromontius the Carver desired me, and requested
me of late that I would do A history.
the like in his son, I refused to do it, because it was in danger of its
life by it already, and in three days after the abscesse broke, and the
bowels gushed out, and the child died.

CHAP. LXVII. Of the pain that children have in breeding of teeth.
CHildren are greatly vexed with their teeth, which cause great pain when they
begin to break, as it were, out of their shell or sheath, and begin to The time
of breeding of the teeth.
come forth, the gummes being broken, which for the most part happens about
the seventh month of the child's age. This pain comes with itching and
scratching of the gummes, an inflammation, flux of the belly, whereof many
times comes a fever, falling of the hair, a convulsion, and at length death.
The cause of the pain is the solution of the continuity of the gummes by the
coming The cause of the pain in breeding teeth. The signs.
forth of the teeth. The signs of that pain is an unaccustomed burning, or
heat of the childs mouth, which may be perceived by the nurse that gives it
suck, a swelling of the gummes and cheeks, and the childs being more wayward
and crying than it was wont, and it will put its fingers to its mouth, and it
will rub them on its gummes as though it were about to scratch, and it
slavereth much. That the The cure.
Physician may remedy this, he must cure the nurse as if she had the fever,
and she must not suffer the child to suck so often, but make him cool and
moist when he thirsts by giving him at certain times syrupus alexandrinus,
syrup. de limonibus, or the syrup of pomegranats with boiled water; yet the
child must not hold those things that are actually cold long in his mouth, for
such by binding the gums, do in some sort stay the teeth that are newly
coming forth; but things that lenifie and mollify are rather to be used,
that is to say, such things as do by little and little relaxe the loose flesh
of the gummes, and also assuage the pain. Therefore the nurse shall often
times rub the child's gummes with her fingers, anointed or besmeared with oil
of sweet almonds, fresh butter, honey, sugar, mucilage of the seeds of psilium,
or of the seeds of marsh mallows extracted in the water of pellitory of the
wall. Some think that the brain of a hare, or of a sucking pig roasted or
sodden, through a secret property, are effectual for the same: and on the
outside shall be applied a cataplasme of barley meal, milk, oil of roses, and
the yelkes of eggs. Also a stick of liquorice shaven and bruised and anointed
with honey, or any of the forenamed syrupes, and often rubbed in the mouth or on
the gummes, is likewise profitable: so What power scratching of the gums has
to assuage the pain of them.
is also any toy for the child to play withal, wherein a wolves tooth is set,
for this by scratching does assuage the painful itching, and rarifie the
gummes, and in some wears them that the teeth appear the sooner. But many
times it happens that all these and such like medicines profit nothing at
all, by reason of the contumacy of the gums, by hardness or the weakness of
the childs nature: therefore in such a cause, before the forenamed mortal
accidents come, I would persuade the Chirurgian to open the gummes in such
places as the teeth bunch out with a little swelling, with a knife or lancet,
so breaking and opening a way for them, notwithstanding that a little flux of
blood will follow by the tension of the gummes: of which kind of remedy I have
with prosperous and happy success made trial in some of mine own children,
in the presence of Feureus, Altinus, and Cortinus, Doctors of Physic, and
Guillemeau the Kings Chirurgian, which is much better and more safe than to do
as some nurses do, who taught only by the instinct of nature, with their
nails and scratching, break and tear, or rent the childrens gummes. The Duke
of Nevers had a son of eight months old, which died of late, and when we,
with A history.
the Physicians that were present, diligently sought for the cause of his
death, we could impute it unto nothing else, than to the contumacious hardness
of the gums, which was greater than was convenient for a child of that age;
for therefore the teeth could not break forth, nor make a passage for
themselves to come forth: of which our judgment this was the trial, that when
we cut his gummes with a knife, we found all his teeth appearing as it were in
an array, ready to come forth, which if it had bin done when he lived,
doubtless he might have been preserved.

The End of the twenty fourth Book.
OF MONSTERS AND PRODIGIES. THE TWENTY FIFTH BOOK.
THE PREFACE.
We call Monsters, what things soever are brought forth contrary to the common
decree and order of nature. So we term what a monste is.
that infant monstrous, which is borne with one arm alone, or with two heads.
But we define Prodigies, those things which happen contrary to the whole course
of nature, that is, altogether What a prodigy is.
differing and dissenting from nature: as, if a woman should be delivered of a
Snake, or a Dog. Of the first sort are thought all those, in which any of
those things, which ought, and are accustomed to be, according to nature, is
wanting, or does abound, is changed, worn, covered or defended, hurt, or not
put in his right place: for sometimes some are born with more fingers than they
should, other some but with one finger: some with those parts divided which
should be joined, others with those parts joined which should be divided: some
are borne with the privityes of both sexes, male and female. And Aristotle saw
a Goat with a horn upon her knee. No living creature was ever Lib. 4. cen.
anim. cap. 4.
borne which wanted the Heart, but some have been seen wanting the Spleen,
others with two Spleenes, and some wanting one of the Reins. And none have bin
known to have wanted the whole Liver, although some have bin found that had it
not perfect and whole: and there have been those which wanted the Gall, when
by nature they should have had it: and besides, it has been seen that the
Liver, contrary to his natural site, has lien on the left side, and the
Spleen on the right. Some women also have had their privities closed, and not
perforated, the membranous obstacle, which they call the Hymen, hindering. And
men are sometimes borne with their fundaments, ears, noses, and the rest of
the passages shut, and are accounted monstrous, nature erring from its intended
scope. But to conclude, those Monsters are thought to portend some ill, which
are much differing from their nature.

CHAP. I. Of the cause of Monsters; and first of those Monsters which appear
for the glory of God, and the punishent of men's wickedness.
THere are reckoned up many causes of monsters; the first whereof is the glory
of God, that his immense power may be manifested to those which are ignorant of
it, by the sending of those things which happen contrary to nature: for thus
our Savior Christ answered the Disciples (asking whether he or his parents had
offended, who, being born blind, received his sight from him) that neither he
nor his parents had committed any fault so great, but this to have happened
only that the glory and majesty of God should be divulged by that miracle, and
such great works.

Another cause is, that God may either punish men's wickedness, or show signs
of punishment at hand, because parents sometimes lie and join themselves
together without law and measure, or luxuriously and beastly, or at such times
as they ought to forbear by the command of God and the Church, such monstrous,
horrid and unnatural births do happen.

At Verona Anno Dom. 1254. a mare foaled a colt, with the perfect face of a
man, but all the rest of the body like an horse: a little after that, the war
between the Florentines and Pisans began, by which all Italy was in a
combustion.

The figure of a Colt with a man's face.


About the time that Pope Julius the second raised up all Italy, and the
greatest part of Christendom, against Lewis the twelfth the King of France, in
the year of our Lord 1512. (in which year, upon Easter day, near Ravenna was
fought that mortal battle, in which the Popes forces were overthrown) a
monster was borne in Ravenna, having a horn upon the crown of his head, and
besides, two wings, and one foot alone, most like to the feet of birds of prey,
and in the knee thereof an eye, the privities of male and female, the rest of
the body like a man, as you may see by the following figure.

The figure of awinged Monster.


The third cause is, an abundance of seed and overflowing matter. The fourth,
the same in too little quantity, and deficient. The fifth, the force and
efficacy of imagination. The sixth, the straightness of the womb. The
seventh, the disorderly site of the party with child, and the position of the
parts of the body. The eighth, a fall, strain or stroke, especially upon the
belly of a woman with child. The ninth, hereditary diseases, or affects by any
other accident. The tenth, the confusion and mingling together of the seed. The
eleventh, the craft and wickedness of the devil. There are some others which
are accounted for monsters, because they have their original or essence full
of admiration, or do assume a certain prodigious form by the craft of some
begging companions; therefore we will speak briefly of them in their place in
this our treatise of monsters.

CHAP. II. Of monsters caused by too great abundance of seed.
SEeing we have already handled the two former and truly final causes of
monsters, we must now come to those which are the matereall, corporeal, and
efficient causes, taking our beginning from that we call the too great
abundance of the matter of seed. It is the opinion of those Philosophers which
have written of monsters, that if at any time a creature bearing one at once,
as man, shall cast forth more seed in copulation than is necessary to the
generation of one body, it cannot be that only one should be begot of all
that; therefore from thence either two or more must arise: whereby it comes
to pass, that these are rather judged wonders, because they happen seldom,
and contrary to common custom. Superfluous parts happen by the same cause,
that twins, and many at one birth, contrary to natures course, do chance,
that is, by a larger effusion of seed than is required for the framing of that
part, that so it exceeds either in number or else in greatness. So Austin
tells that in his time in the East an infant was borne, having all the parts
from the belly upwards double, but from thence downwards single and simple:
for it had two heads, four eyes, two breasts, four hands, in all the rest
like to another child, and it lived a little while. Caelius Rhodiginus says he
saw two monsters in Italy, the one male, the other female, handsomely and neatly
made through all their bodies, except their heads, which were double; the male
died within a few days after it was borne; but the female (whose shape is here
delineated) lived 20. five years, which is contrary to the common custom of
monsters; for they for the most part are very Monste. seldom lo^. lived.
short lived, because they both live and are born, as it were, against natures
consent; to which may be added, they do not love themselves, by reason they
are made a scorn to others, and by that means lead a hated life.

The effigies of a maid with two heads.


But it is most remarkable which Lycosthenes tells of this woman-monster,
for excepting her two heads, she was framed in the rest of her body to an
exact perfection: her two heads had the like desire to eat and drink, to
sleep, to speak, and to do every thing; she begged from door to door, every
one giving to her freely. Yet at length she was banished Bavaria, lest that by
the frequent looking upon her, the imaginations of women with child, strongly
moved, should make the like impression in the infants they bare in their wombes.

The effigies of two girls whose backs grew together.


In the year of our Lord 1475. at Verona in Italy, two Girls were borne with
their backs sticking together from the lower part of the shoulders unto the
very buttockes. The novelty and strangeness of the thing moved their parents,
being but poor, to carry them through all the chief towns in Italy to get
money of all such as came to see them.

In the year 1530. there was a man to be seen at Paris, out of whose belly
another, perfect in all his members except his head, hanged forth as if he had
been grafted there. The man was forty years old, and he carried the other
implanted or growing out of him, in his arms, with such admiration to the
beholders, that many ran very earnestly to see him.

The figure of a man with another growing out of him.


The effigies of the horned or hooded monster.


At Quiers, a small village some ten miles from Turine in Savoy, in the year
1578. upon the seventeenth day of January, about eight a clock at night, an
honest matron brought forth a child having five horns, like to Rams horns,
set opposite to one another upon his head: he had also a long piece of flesh,
like in some sort to a French-hood which women used to wear, hanging down from
his forehead by the nape of his neck almost the length of his back: two other
pieces of flesh, like the collar of a shirt, were wrapped about his neck: the
fingers ends of both his hands somewhat resembled a Hawks talons, and his
knees seemed to be in his hammes: the right leg and the right foot were of a
very red color; the rest of the body was of a tawny color: it is said he gave
so terrible a scritch when he was brought forth, that the Midwives, and the
rest of the women that were at her labor, were so frighted that they presently
left the house and ran away. When the Duke of Savoy heard of this monster, he
commanded it should be brought to him, which performed, one would hardly think
what various censures the Courtiers gave of it.

The shape of a monster found in an egg.


The monster you see here delineated, was found in the middle and innermost
part of an egg, with the face of a man, but hairs yielding a horrid
representation of snakes; the chinne had three other snakes stretched forth
like a beard. It was first seen at Autun, at the house of one Bancheron a
Lawyer, a maid breaking many eggs to butter: the white of this egg given a
Cat, presently killed her. Lastly, this monster coming to the hands of the
Baron Senecy, was brought to King Charles the ninth being then at Metz.

The effigies of a monstrous child, having two heads, two arms and four legs.


In the year 1546. a woman at Paris in her sixth month of her account, brought
forth a child having two heads, two arms and four legs: I dissecting the
body of it, found but one heart, by which one may know it was but one infant.
For you may know this from Aristotle, whether the monstrous birth be one or
more joined together, by the principal Arist. in problem.
part: for if the body have but one heart, it is but one, if two, it is double
by the joining together in the conception.

The portraiture of Twins joined together with one head.


In the year 1569. a certain woman of Towers was delivered of twins joined
together with one head, and mutually embracing each other. Renatus Ciretus the
famous Chirurgian of those parts, sent me their Sceleton.

The effigies of two girls, being Twins, joined together by their foreheads.


Munster writes that in the village Bristant, not far from Worms, in the
year 1495. he saw two Girls perfect and entire in every part of their bodies,
but they had their foreheads so joined together that they could not be parted
or severed by any art: they lived together ten years; then the one dying, it
was needful to separate the living from the dead: but she did not long
outlive her sister, by reason of the malignity of the wound made in parting
them asunder.

In the year 1570. the twentieth of July, at Paris, in the street Gravilliers,
at the sign (...) the Bell, these two infants were borne, distering in sex,
with that shape of body ^^at you see expressed in the figure. They were
baptized in the Church of St. Nichlas of the fields, and named Ludovicus and
Ludovica, their father was a Mason, his n^me was Peter German, his surname
Petit Dieu (i) little-God, his mothers name was Mathea Petronilla.

The shape of the infants lately borne at Paris.


The figure of two girls joined together in their breasts and belly.


In the year 1572. in Pont de See, near Angers a little town, were borne
upon the tenth day of July, two girls, perfect in their limbs, but that they
had but four fingers apiece on their left hands: they clave together in their
(...) parts, from their chin to the navell, which (...) but one, as their heart
was also but one; their (...) was divided into four lobes: they lived ha^^ an
hour, and were baptized.

The figure of a child with two heads, and the body as big as one of fore
months old.


Caelius Rhodiginus tells that in a ^wn of his country called Sarzano, Italy
being roubled ^ (...) 3.
with civil wars, there was born monster of unusual bigness; for he had two
heads, having all his limbs answerable in gr^ness and tallnesse to a child of
four months old: between his two heads, which were both alike, at the setting
on of the shoulder, (...) had a third hand put forth, which did not ^^ceed the
ears in length, for it was not all ^n: it was born the 5. of the Ides of March
(...) 14.

The figure of one with four legs and as manyarmes.


Jovianus Pontanus tells in the year 1529. the ninth day of January, there was
a man child borne in Germany, having four arms and as many legs.

The figure of a man out of whose belly another head showed it self.


In the year that Francis the first King of France entered into league with
the Swisses, there was borne a monster in Germany, out of the midst of whose
belly there stood a great head; it came to man's age, and this lower, and as it
were inserted head, was nourished as much as the true and upper head.

In the year 1572. the last day of February, in the parish of Viaban, in the
way as you go from Carnuta to Paris, in a small village called Bordes, one
called Cypriana Girandae the, wife of James Merchant a husbandman, brought
forth this monster whose shape you see here delineated, which lived until the
Sunday following, being but of one only sex, which was the female.

The shape of two monstrous Twins, being but of one only Sex.


In the year 1572. on Easter Monday at Metz in Loraine, in the Inn whose
sign is the Holy Ghost, a Sow pigged a pigge, which had eight legs, four
ears, and the head of a dog; the hinder part from the belly downward was
parted in two as in twins, but the foreparts grew into one; it had two
tongues in the mouth, with four teeth in the upper jaw, and as many in the
lower. The sex was not to be distinguished, whether it were a Bore or Sow
pigge, for there was one slit under the tail, and the hinder parts were all
rent and open. The shape of this monster, as it is here set down, was sent me
by Borgesius the famous Physician of Metz.

The shape of a monstrous Pigge.


CHAP. III. Of women bringing many children at one birth.
WOman is a creature bringing usually but one at a birth: but the (...) been
some who have brought forth two, some three, some fou^ six, or more at one
birth. Empedocles thought that the abund^e of seed was the cause of such
numerous births: the Stoikes affirm^e diverse cells or partitions of the womb
to be the cause: for the se^ being variously parted into these partitions, and
the conception divided, there are more children brought forth; no otherwise
than in rivers, the water beating against the rocks, is turned into diverse
circles or rounds. But Aristotle says there is no reason to think so, for in
women that parting of the womb into cells, as in dogs and sowes, 4. de genesis
anim. cap. 4.
takes no place; for women's wombes have but one cavity, parted into two
recesses, the right and left, nothing coming between, except by chance
distinguished by a certain line; for often twins lie in the same side of the
womb. Aristotle's opinion is, that a woman cannot bring forth more than five
children at one birth. The maid of Augustus Caesar brought forth five at a
birth, and a short while after, she and her children died. In the year 1554. at
Bearn in Switzerland, the wife of Dr. John Gelinger brought forth five children
at one birth, three boys and two girls. Albucrasis, affirms a woman to have
bin the mother of seven children at one birth; and another, who by some
external injury did abort, brought forth fifteen perfectly shaped in all
their parts. Pliny reports that it was extant in the writings of Physicians,
that twelve children were borne at one birth; and that there was another in
Peloponnesus which four several Lib. 7. cap. 11. Cap. 3.
times was delivered of five children at one birth, and that the greater part
of those children lived. It is reported by Dalechampius that Bonaventura the
slave of one Savill, a Gentleman of Sena, at one time brought forth seven
children, of which four were baptized. In our time, between Sarte and Maine, in
the parish of Seaux, not far from Chambellay, there is a family and noble house
called Maldemeure; the wife of the Lord of Maldemeure, the first year she was
married brought forth twins, the second year she had three children, the
third year four, the fourth year five, the fifth year six, and of that
birth she died: of those six one is yet alive, and is Lord of Maldemeure. In
the valley of Beaufort, in the county of Anjou, a young woman the daughter of
Mace Channiere, when at one perfect birth she had brought forth one child, the
tenth day following she fell in labor of another, but could not be delivered
until it was pulled from her by force, and was the death of the mother. Martin
Cromerus the author of the Polish history, writes that one Margaret, a woman
The ninth book of the Polish history.
sprung from a noble and ancient family near Cracovia, and wife to Count
Virboslaus, brought forth at one birth thirty five live children, upon the
twentieth day of January, in the year 1296. Franciscus Picus Mirandula writes
that one Dorothy an Italian had twenty children at two births, at the first
nine, and at the second eleven, and that she was so big, that she was forced
to bear up her belly, which lay upon her knees, with a broad and large scarf
tied about her neck, as you may see by the following figure.

The picture of Dorothy, great with child with many children.


And they are to be reprehended here again, who affirm the cause of numerous
births to consist in the variety of the cells of the womb, for they feign a
woman's womb to have seven cells or partitions, three on the right side for
males, three on the left side for females, and one in the midst for
Hermaphrodites or Scrats: and this untruth has gone so far, that there have
bnene some that affirmed every of these seven cells to have bin divided into
ten partitions, into which the seed dispersed, does bring forth a diverse and
numerous increase, according to the variety of the cells furnished with the
matter of seed; which though it may seem to have been the opinion of
Hippocrates, in his book De natura Pueri, notwithstanding it is repugnant to
reason, and to those things which are manifestly apparent to the eyes and
senses.

The opinion of Aristotle is more probable, who says twins and more at one
birth, are begot and brought forth by the same cause that the sixth finger
grows on Lib. 4. de genesis anim. cap. 4.
the hand, that is, by the abundant plenty of the seed, which is greater and
more copious than can be all taken up in the natural framing of one body: for
if it all be forced into one, it makes one with the parts increased more than
is fit, eith^ greatness or number; but if it be, as it were, cloven into
diverse parts, it ca^ more than one at one birth.

CHAP. IV. Of Hermaphrodites of Scrats.
ANd here also we must speak of Hermaphrodites, because they draw the cause of
their generation and conformation from the plenty and abundance of seed, and
are called so because they are of both sexes, the woman yielding as much seed
as the man. For hereupon it comes to pass that the forming faculty (which
always endeavors to produce something like it self) does labor both the
matters almost with equal force, and is the cause that one body is of both
sexes.

Yet some make four differences of Hermaphrodites; the first of which is the
male Hermaphrodite, who is a perfect and absolute male, and has only a slit
in the Perinaeum not perforated, and from which neither urine nor seed does
flow. The second is the female, which besides her natural privity, has a
fleshy and skinny similitude of a man's yard, but unapt for erection and
ejaculation of seed, and wants the cod and stones; the third difference is of
those, which albeit they bear the express figures of members belonging to
both sexes, commonly set the one against the other, yet are found unapt for
generation, the one of them only serving for making of water: the fourth
difference is of those who are able in both sexes, and thoroughly perform the
part both of man and woman, because they have the genitalls of both sexes
complete and perfect, and also the right breast like a man, and the left like a
woman: the laws command those to choose the sex which they will use, and in
which they will remain and live, judging them to death if they be found to
have departed from the sex they made choice of, for some are thought to have
abused both, and promiscuously to have had their pleasure with men and women.
There are signs by which the Physicians may discern whether the
Hermaphrodires are able in the male or female sex, or whether they are
impotent in both: these signs are most apparent in the privities and face; for
if the matrix be exact in all its demensions, and so perforated that it may
admit a man's yard, if the courses flow that way, if the hair of the head be
long, slender, and soft, and to conclude, if to this tender habit of the body
a timide and weak condition of the mind be added, the female sex is
predominant, and they are plainly to be judged women. But if they have the
Perinaeum and fundament full of hairs (the which in women are commonly without
any) if they have a yard of a convenient largeness, if it stand well and
readily, and yield seed, the male sex has the pre-eminence, and they are to
be judged men. But if the conformation of both the genitalls be alike in
figure, quantity, and efficacy, it is thought to be equally able in both sexes:
although by the opinion of Aristotle, those who have double genitals, the one
of the male, the other of the female, the one of them is always perfect, the
other imperfect. Lib. 4. de generanim. cap. 5.


The figure of Hermaphrodite twins cleaving together with their backs.


Anno Dom. 1486. In the Palatinat^, at the village Robach, near Heidelberg,
there were twins, both Hermaphrodites, borne with their backs sticking
together.

The effigies of an Hermaphrodite, having four hands and feet.
The same day the Venetians and Genoeses entered into league, there was a
monster borne in Italy having four arms and feet, and but one head; it lived
a little after it was baptized. James Ruef a Helvetian Chirurgian says he saw
the like, but which besides had the privities of both sexes, whose figure I
have therefore here set forth.



CHAP. V. Of the changing of Sex.
AMatus Lusitanus reports that in the village Esquina, there was a maid named
Maria Pateca, who at the appointed age for her courses to flow, had in stead of
them a man's yard, lying before that time hid and covered, so that of a woman
she became a man, and therefore laying aside her woman's habit, was clothed in
man's, and changing her name, was called Emanuel; who when he had got much
wealth by many and great negotiations and commerce in India, returned into his
country, and married a wife: but Lusitanus says he did not certainly know
whether he had any children, but that he was certain he remained always
beardlesse.

Anthony Loqueneux, the Kings keeper or receiver of his rents of St. Quintin at
Vermandois, lately affirmed to me that he saw a man at Reimes, at the Inn
having the sign of the swan, in the year 1560. who was taken for a woman until
the fourteenth year of his age; for then it happened as he played somewhat
wantonly with a maid which lay in the same bed with him, his members (hitherto
lying hid) started forth and unfolded them selves: which when his parents knew
(by help of the Ecclesiasticke power) they changed his name from Ioane to
John, and put him in man's apparel.

Some years agone, being in the train of King Charles the ninth, in the
French Glasse-house, I was showed a man called Germane Garnierus, but by some
Germane Maria (because in former times when he was a woman he was called Mary)
he was of an indifferent stature, and well set body, with a thick and red
beard; he was taken for a girl until the fifteenth year of his age, because
there was no sign of being a man seen in his body, and for that amongst
women, he in like attire did those things which pertain to women: in the
fifteenth year of his age, whilst he somewhat earnestly pursued hogs given
into his charge to be kept, who running into the corn, he leaped violently
over a ditch, whereby it came to pass that the stays and foldings being
broken, his hidden members suddenly broke forth, but not without pain; going
home, he weeping complained to his mother that his guts came forth: with which
his mother amazed, calling Physicians and Surgeons to counsel, heard he was
turned into a man; therefore the whole business being brought to the Cardinal
the Bishop of Lenuncure, an assembly being called, he received the name and
habit of a man.

Pliny reports that the son of Cassinus of a girl became a boy, living with
his parents; but by the command of the Soothsayers he was carried into a desert
Isle, because they thought such monsters did always show or portend some
monstrous thing. Certainly women have so many and like parts lying in their
womb, as men have hanging forth; only a strong and lively heat seems to be
wanting, which may drive forth that which lies hid within: therefore in
process of time, the heat being increased and flourishing, and the humidity
(which is predominant in childhood) overcome, it is not impossible that the
virile members, which hitherto sluggish by defect of heat, lay hid, may be put
forth, especially if to that strength of the growing heat some vehement
concussion or jactation of the body be joined. Therefore I think it manifest
by these experiments and reasons, that it is not fabulous that some women have
been changed into men: but you shall find in no history men that have
degenerated into women; for nature always intends and goes from the imperfect
to the more perfect, but not basely from the more perfect to the imperfect.

CHAP. VI. Of monsters caused by defect of seed.
IF, on the contrary, the seed be any thing deficient in quantity, for the
conformation of the infant or infants, some one or more members will be
wanting, or more short and decrepite. Hereupon it happens that nature intending
twins, a child is borne with two heads, and but one arm, or altogether lame
in the rest of his limbs.

The effigies of a monstrous child, by reason of the defect of the matter of
seed.
Anno Dom. 1573. I saw at St. Andrews Church in Paris, a boy nine years old,
borne in the village Parpavilla, six miles from Guise; his fathers name was
Peter Renard, and his mother, Marquete: he had but two fingers on his right
hand, his arm was well proportioned from the top of his shoulder almost to his
wrest, but from thence to his two fingers ends it was very deformed, he wanted
his legs and thighs, although from the right buttocke a certain unperfect
figure, having only four toes, seemed to put it self forth; from the midst
of the left buttock two toes sprung out, the one of which was not much unlike a
man's yard, as you may see by the figure.



In the year 1562. in the Calends of November, at Villa-franca in Gascony,
this monster, a headless woman, whose figure thou here see, was borne,
which figure Dr. John Altinus the Physician gave to me when I went about this
book of Monsters, he having received it from Fontanus the Physician of
Angolestre, who seriously affirmed he saw it.

The figure of a monstrous woman without a head, before and behind.


A few years agone there was a man of forty years old to be seen at Paris,
who although he wanted his arms, notwithstanding did indifferently perform
all those things which are usually done with the hands, for with the top of his
shoulder, head and neck, he would strike an Axe or Hatchet with as sure and
strong a blow into a poast, as any other man could do with his hand; and he
would lash a coach-mans whip, that he would make it give a great crack, by the
strong refraction of the air: but he ate, drunk, played at cards, and such
like, with his feet. But at last he was taken for a thief and murderer, was
hanged and fastened to a wheel.

Also not long ago there was a woman at Paris without arms, which
nevertheless did cut, sew, and do many other things, as if she had had her
hands.

We read in Hippocrates, that Attagenis his wife brought forth a child all of
flesh Sect. 2. lib. 2. epidem.
without any bone, and notwithstanding it had all the parts well formed.

The effigies of a man without arms, doing all that is usually done with hands.


The effigies of a monster with two heads, two legs, and but one arm.


CHAP. VII. Of monsters which take their cause and shape by imagination.
THe ancients having diligently sought into all the secrets of nature, have
marked and observed other causes of the generation of monsters: for,
understanding The force of (...) upon the body and humors.
the force of imagination to be so powerful in us, as for the most part, it
may alter the body of them that imagine, they soon persuaded themselves that
the faculty which forms the infant may be led and governed by the firm and
strong cogitation of the Parents begetting them (often deluded by nocturnall
and deceitful apparitions) or by the mother conceiving them, and so that which
is strongly conceived in the mind, imprints the force into the infant conceived
in the womb: which thing many think to be confirmed by Moses, because he
tells that Jacob increased and bettered the part of the sheep granted to him
by Laban, Genesis chap. 30.
his wives father, by putting rods, having the bark in part pulled off,
finely stroaked with white and green, in the places where they used to drink,
especially at the time they engendered, that the representation apprehended in
the conception, should be presently impressed in the young; for the force of
imagination has so much power over the infant, that it sets upon it the notes
or characters of the thing conceived.

We have read in Heliodorus that Persina Queen of Aethiopia, by her husband
Hidustes, being also an Aethiope, had a daughter of a white complexion, because
in the embraces of her husband, by which she proved with child, she earnestly
fixed her eye and mind upon the picture of the fair Andromeda standing
opposite to her. Damascene reports that he saw a maid hairy like a Bear,
which had that deformity by no other cause or occasion than that her mother
earnestly beheld, in the very instant of receiving and conceiving the seed, the
image of St. John covered with a camells skin, hanging upon the poasts of the
bed.

They say Hippocrates, by this explication of the causes, freed a certain noble
woman from suspicion of adultery, who being white her self, and her husband
also white, brought forth a child as black as an Ethiopian, because in
copulation she strongly and continually had in her mind the picture of the
Aethiope.

The effigies of a maid all hairy, and an infant that was black by the
imagination of their Parents.


There are some who think the infant once formed in the womb, which is done
at the utmost within two and forty days after the conception, is in no danger
of the mothers imagination, neither of the seed of the father which is cast
into the womb; because when it has got a perfect figure, it cannot be altered
with any external form of things; which whether it be true, or no, is not here
to be enquired of: truly I think it best to keep the woman, all the time she
goes with child, from the sight of such shapes and figures.

The effigies of a horrid Monster, having feet, hands, and other parts like a
Calfe.
In Stecquer a village of Saxony, they say, a monster was borne, with four
feet, eyes, mouth, and nose like a calfe, with a round and read excrescence of
flesh on the forehead, and also a piece of flesh like a hood hung from his
neck upon his back, and it was deformed with its thighs torn and cut.



The figure of an infant with a face like a Frog.
Anno Dom. 1517. in the parish of Kings-wood, in the forest Biera, in the way
to Fontain-Bleau, there was a monster borne, with the face of a Frog, being
seen by John Bellanger, Chirurgian to the Kings Engineers, before the Justices
of the town of Harmoy; principally John Bribon the Kings procurator in that
place. The fathers name was Amadaeus the Little, his mothers, Magdalene
Sarbucata, who troubled with a fever, by a woman's persuasion, held a quick
frogge in her hand until it died, she came ^hus to bed with her husband and
conceived; Bellanger, a man of an acute wit, thought this was the cause of the
monstrous deformity of the child.



CHAP. VIII. Of Monsters caused by the straitness of the womb.
WE are constrained to confess by the event of things, that monsters are bred
and caused by the straitness of the womb; for so That the straitness or
littleness of the womb may be the occassion (...) monsters.
apples hanging upon the trees, if before they come to just ripeness, they be
put into strait vessels, their growth is hindered. So some whelps which women
take delight in, are hindered from any further growth by the littleness of the
place in which they are kept. Who knows not that the plants growing in the
earth, are hindered from a longer progress and propagation of their roots, by
the opposition of a flint, or any other solid body, and therefore in such
places are crooked, slender and weak, but on the other part, where they have
free nourishment, to be strait and strong? for seeing that by the opinion of
Naturalists, the place is the form of the thing placed; it is necessary that
those things that are shut up in straiter spaces, prohibited of free motion,
should be lessened, depraved and lamed.

Empedocles and Diphilus acknowledged three causes of monstrous births: The too
great or small matter of the seed; the corruption of the seed; and depravation
of growth by the straitness or figure of the womb: which they thought the
chiefest of all; because they thought the case was such in natural births, as
in forming of metals and fusible things, of which statues being made, do less
express the things they be made for, if the moldes or forms into which the
matter is poured, be rough, scabrous, too strait, or otherwise faulty.

CHAP. IX. Of monsters caused by the ill placing of the mother, in sitting,
lying down, or any other site of the body in the time of her being with child.
WE often too negligently and carelessly corrupt the benefits and corporal
endowments of nature in the comeliness and dignity of conformation: it is a
thing to be lamented and pitied in all, but especially in women with child,
because that fault does not only hurt the mother, but deformes and perverts
the infant which is contained in her womb: for we moving any manner of way,
must necessarily move whatsoever is within us. Therefore they which sit idely
at home all the time of their being with child, or crosse-legged, those which
holding their heads down, do sow or work with the needle, or do any other
labor, which press the belly too hard with clothes, breeches or swathes, do
produce children wrie-necked, stooping, crooked and disfigured in their feet,
hands, and the rest of their joints, as you may see in the following figure.

The effigies of a child, who from the first conception, by the site of the
mother, had his hands and feet standing crooked.


CHAP. X. Of monsters caused by a stroke, fall, or the like occasion.
THere is no doubt but if any injury happen to a woman with child, by reason
of a stroke, fall from on high, or the like occasion, the hurt also may extend
to the child. Therefore by these occasions the tender bones may be broken,
wrested, strained, or depraved after some other monstrous manner; and more, by
the like violence of such things, a vein is often opened or broken, or a flux
of blood, or great vomiting is caused by the vehement concussion of the whole
body, by which means the child wants nourishment, and therefore will be small
and little, and altogether monstrous.

CHAP. XI. Of monsters which have their original by reason of hereditary
diseases.
BY the injury of hereditary diseases, infants grow monstrous, that is,
monstrously deformed: for crooke-backt produce crooke-backt, and often times so
crooked, that between the bunch behind and before, the head lies hid, as a
Tortoise in her shell: so lame produce lame, flat nosed their like, dwarfes
bring forth dwarfes, lean bring forth lean, and fat produce fat.

CHAP. XII. Of monsters by the confusion of seed of diverse kinds.
THat which follows is a horrid thing to be spoken; but the chaste mind of
the Reader will give me pardon, and conceive that, which not only the
Stoikes, but all Philosophers, who are busied about the search of the causes of
things, must hold, That there is nothing obscene or filthy to be spoken. Those
things that are accounted obscene may be spoken without blame, but they cannot
be acted or perpetrated without great wickedness, fury and madness;
therefore that ill which is in obscenity consists not in word, but wholly in
the act. Therefore in times past there have been some, who nothing fearing the
Deity, neither Law, nor themselves, that is, their soul, have so abjected and
prostrated themselves, that they have thought themselves nothing different from
beasts: wherefore Atheists, Sodomites, Out-lawes, forgetful of their own
excellency and divinity, and transformed by filthy lust, have not doubted to
have filthy and abominable copulation with beasts. This so great, so horrid a
crime, for whose expiation all the fires in the world are not sufficient,
though they, too maliciously crafty, have concealed, and the conscious beasts
could not utter, yet the generated misshapen issue has abundantly spoken and
declared, by the unspeakable power of God, the revengerand punisher of such
impious and horrible actions. For of this various and promiscuous confusion of
seeds of a different kind, monsters have been generated and borne, who have
been partly men and partly beasts.

The like deformity of issue is produced, if beasts of a different species do
copulate together, nature always affecting to generate something which may be
like it self: for wheat grows not but by sowing of wheat, nor an apricocke
but by the setting or grafting of an apricocke; for nature is a most diligent
preserver of the species of things.

The effigies of a monster half man and half dog.
Anno Dom. 1493. there was generated of a woman and a dog, an issue, which
from the navell upwards perfectly resembled the shape of the mother, but
therehence downwards the sire, that is, the dog. This monster was sent to
the Pope that then reigned, as Volaterane writes: also Cardane mentions it;
wherefore I have here given you the figure thereof. ^ (...)* cap. 64.




C^lius Rhodiginus writes that at Sibaris, a heards-man called Chrathis fell in
love with a Goat, and accompanied with her, and of this detestable and brutish
copulation an infant was born, which in legs resembled the damme, but the
face was like the fathers.

The figure of a monster in face resembling a man, but a Goat in his other
members.


Anno Dom. 1110. In a certain town of Liege (as says Lycosthenes) a sow
farrowed a pig with the head, face, hands, and feet of a man, but in the rest
of the body resembling a swine.

The figure of a pigge, with the head, face, hands, and feet of a man.


Anno Dom. 1564. at Bruxels, at the house of one Joest Dictzpeert, in the
street Warmoesbroects, a sow farrowed six pigs, the first whereof was a
monster representing a man in the head, face, fore feet and shoulders, but in
the rest of the body another pigge, for it had the genitalls of a sow pigge,
and it sucked like the other pigs. But the second day after it was farrowed, it
was killed of the people together with the sow, by reason of the monstrousness
of the thing. Here follows the figure thereof.

The effigies of a monster half man and half swine.


Anno Dom. 1571. at Antwerpe, the wife of one Michaell a Printer, dwelling with
one John Molline a Graver or Carver, at the sign of the Golden Foot, in the
Camistrate, on St. Thomas his day, at ten of the clock in the morning, brought
forth a monster wholly like a dog, but that it had a shorter neck, and the
head of a bird, but without any feathers on it. This monster was not alive, for
that the mother was delivered before her time; but she giving a great scritch
in the instant of her deliverance, the chimney of the house fell down, yet
hurt nobody, no not so much as any one of four little children that sat by
the fire side.

The figure of a monster like a dog, but with a head like a bird.


Lewis Celleus writes that he has read in an approved author, that an Ewe
once brought forth a Lion, a beast of an unlike and adverse nature to her.

Anno Dom. 1577. in the town Blandy, three miles from Melon, there was lambed
a Lamb, having three heads, the middlemost of which was bigger than the rest,
when one bleated they all bleated. John Bellanger the Chirurgian of Melon
affirmed that he saw this monster, and he got it drawn, and sent the figure
thereof to me, with that humane monster that had the head of a Frogge, which
we have formerly described.

The figure of a three-headed Lamb.


There are some monsters in whose generation by this there may seem to be some
divine cause, for that their beginnings cannot be derived or drawn from the
general cause of monsters, that is, nature, or the errors thereof, by reason
of some of the forementioned particular causes; such are these monsters that
are wholly against all nature, like that which we formerly mentioned, of a Lion
yeaned by an Ewe.

Yet Astrologers (lest there should seem to be any thing which they are
ignorant of) refer the causes of these to certain constellations and aspects
of the Planets and Stars, according to Aristotle's saying in his Problemes; in
confirmation whereof they tell this tale. It happened in the time of Albertus
Magnus, that in a certain village, a Cow brought forth a Calfe, which was
half a man: the townsmen apprehended the heards-man, and condemned him as
guilty of such a crime, to be presently burnt together with the cow, but by
good luck Albertus was there, to whom they gave credit by reason of his much
and certain experience in Astrology, that it was not occasioned by any humane
wickedness, but by the efficacy of a certain position of the stars, that
this monster was borne.

CHAP. XIII. Of monsters occasioned by the craft and subtlety of the Devil.
IN treating of such monsters as are occasioned by the craft of the Devil, we
crave pardon of the courteous Reader, if peradventure going further from our
purpose, we may seem to speak more freely and largely of the existence,
nature, and kinds of Devils Therefore first it is manifest that there are
Conjurers, There are sorcerers, and how they come so to be.
Charmers, and Witches, which whatsoever they do, perform it by an agreement
and compact with the Devil, to whom they have addicted themselves: for none
can be admitted into that society of Witches, who has not forsaken God the
Creator, and his Savior, and has not transferred the worship due to him
above, upon the Devil, to whom he has obliged himself. And assuredly,
whosoever addicts himself to these magical vanities and witch-crafts, What
induces them thereto.
does it, either because he doubts of Gods power, promises, study and great
good will toward us: or else for that he is madded with an earnest desire of
knowing things to come; or else because disdaining poverty, he affects and
desires from a poor estate to become rich on the sudden. It is the constant
opinion of all, both ancient and modern, as well Philosophers as Divines, that
there are some such men; which when they have once addicted themselves to
impious and divellish arts, can by the wondrous craft of the Devil, do many
strange things, and change and corrupt bodies, and the health and life of them,
and the condition of all mundane things. Also experience forces us to confess
the same, for punishments are ordained by the laws against the professors and
practisers of such arts; but there are no laws ordained against those things
which neither ever have been, nor ever came into the knowledge of men: for
such things are rightly judged and accounted for impossibilities, which have
never been seen nor heard of.

Before the birth of Christ there have been many such people, for you may
find in Exodus and Leviticus laws made against such persons by Moses, by whom
God gave the law to his people. The Lord gave the sentence of death to Ochasias
by his Exodus cap. 22. Levit. cap. 19.
Prophet, for that he turned into these kind of people. We are taught by the
scriptures that there are good and evil spirits, and that the former are
termed Angels, but the latter Devils; for the law is also said to be given by
the ministry of Angels: and it is said that our bodies shall rise again at the
sound of a trumpet, and the voice Hebr. 1. 14. Galat. 3. 19. (...) These. 4. 16.
of an Arch-angell. Christ said that God would send his Angels to receive the
elect into the heavens.

The history of Job testifies that the Devil sent fire from heaven, and
killed his sheep and cattle, and raised winds that shook the four corners of
the house, and overwhelmed his children in the ruins thereof. The history of
Achab mentions John 13. Mar. 16. 34.
a certain lying spirit in the mouth of the false Prophets. Satan entering
into Judas, moved him to betray Christ. Devils, who in a great number possessed
the body of a man, were called a Legion, and obtained of Christ that they might
enter into swine, whom they carried headlong into the Sea.

In the beginning God created a great number of Angels, that those divine and
incorporeall spitits might inhabit heaven, and as messengers, signify Gods
pleasure to men, and as ministers or servants, perform his commands, who might
be as overseers and protectors of humane affairs. Yet of this great number
there were some who were blinded by pride, and thereby also cast down from the
presence, and heavenly habitation of God the creator. These harmefull and
crafty spirits delude men's minds by diverse juggling tricks, and are always
contriving something to The power of ev'll spirits over mankind.
our harm, and would in a short space destroy mankind, but that God
restraines their fury; for they can only do so much as is permitted them:
Expelled heaven, some of them inhabit the air, others, the bowels of the
earth, there to remain until The differences of devils.
God shall come to judge the world: and as you see the clouds in the air
some-whiles to resemble centaures, otherwhile serpents, rocks, towers, men,
birds, fishes, and other shapes: so these spirits turn themselves into all the
shapes and wondrous forms of things; as often times into wild beasts, into
serpents, toads, owls, lapwings, crows or ravens, goats, asses, dogs, cats,
wolves, bulls, and the like. Moreover, they often times assume and enter humane
bodies, as well dead as alive, whom they torment and punish, yea also they
transform themselves into angels of light.

They feign themselves to be shut up and forced by magical rings, but that
is only their deceit and craft, they wish, fear, love, hate, and often times as
by the appointment The delusions of devils.
and decree of God they punish malefactors: for we read that God sent evil
angels into Egypt, there to destroy. They houle on the night, they murmr and
rattle, as if they were bound in chains, they move benches, tables, counters,
props, cupboards, children in the cradles, play at tables and chesse, turn
over books, tell money, walk up and down rooms, and are heard to laugh, to open
windows and doors, cast sounding vessels, as brass and the like, upon the
ground, break stone pots and glasses, and make other the like noises. Yet none
of all these things appear to us when as we arise in the morning, neither
find we any thing out of its place or broken. They are called by diverse names;
as, Devils, evil Spirits, Incubi, Sucubi, Hobgoblines, Their titles and names.
Fairies, Robin-good-fellowes, evil Angels, Satan, Lucifer, the father of
lies, Prince of darkness and of the world, Legion, and other names agreeable
to their offices and natures.

CHAP. XIV. Of the subterrene Devils, and such as haunt Mines.
LEwis Lavater writes, that by the certain report of such as work in Mines,
that in some Mines there are seen spirits, who in the What the devils in
Mines do.
shape and habit of men, work there, and running up and down seem to do
much work, when as notwithstanding they do nothing indeed. But in the mean
time they hurt none of the bystanders, unless they be provoked thereto by
words, or laughter. For then they will throw some heavy or hard thing upon him
that hurt them, or injure them some other way.

The same author affirms that there is a silver Mine in Rhetia, out of which
Peter Briot, the Governor of the place, did in his time get much silver. In
this Mine there was a Devil, who chiefly on Frie-dayes, when as the Miners put
the mineral they had dug into tubbes, kept a great quarter, and made
himself exceeding busy, and poured the mineral, as he listed, out of one
tubbe into another. It happened one day that he was more busy than he used to
be, so that one of the Miners reviled him, and bad him be gone on a vengeance
to the punishment appointed for him. The Devil offended with his imprecation
and sco^^e, so wrested the Miner, taking him by the head, that twining his
neck about, he set his face behind him, yet was not the workman killed
therewith, but lived, and was known by diverse for many years after.

CHAP. XV. By what means the Devils may deceive us.
OUr minds involved in the earthy habitation of our bodies, may be deluded by
the Devils diverse ways; for they excel in purity and subtlety of essence,
and in the much use of things: besides, they challenge a great pre-eminence, as
the Princes of this world, over all sublunary Devils are spirits, and from
eternity.
bodies. Wherefore it is no marvel if they, the teachers and parents of lies,
should cast clouds and mists before our eyes from the beginning, and turn
themselves into a thousand shapes of things and bodies, that by these juglings
and tricks they may shadow and darken men's minds.

CHAP. XVI. Of Sucubi and Incubi.
Powerful by these forementioned arts and deceipts, they have sundry times
accompanied with men in copulation, whereupon such as have had to do with men,
were called Sucubi, those which made use of women, The reason of the name. Lib.
15. de civit Dei, cap. 22. and 23.
Incubi. Verily St. Augustine seems not to be altogether against it, but that
they, taking upon them the shape of man, may fill the genitalls, as by the
help of nature, to the end, that by this means they may draw aside the
unwary, by the flames of lust, from virtue and chastity.

John Ruef in his book of the conception and generation of man, writes that in
his time, a certain woman of monstrous lust, and wondrous impudency, had to
do by A history.
night with a Devil, that turned himself into a man, and that her belly
swelled up presently after the act; and when as she thought she was with
child, she fell into so grievous a disease, that she voided all her entrails
by stool, medicines nothing at all prevailing.

The like history is told of the servant of a certain Butcher, who thinking
too attentively on venereous matters, a Devil appeared to him in the shape of
a woman, Another.
with whom (supposing it to be a woman) when as he had to do, his genitalls
so burned after the act, that becoming enflamed, he died with a great deal
of torment.

Neither does Peter Paludanus, and Martin Arelatensis think it absurd to
affirm An opinion confuted.
that Devils may beget children, if they shall ejaculate into the woman's womb
seed taken from some man, either dead or alive. Yet this opinion is most absurd
and full of falsitie, man's seed consisting of a seminall or sanguineous matter,
and much spirit: if it run otherways than into the womb from the testicles,
and stay never so little a while, it loses its strength and efficacy, the heat
and spirits vanishing away; for even the too great length of a man's yard, is
reckoned amongst the causes of barrenness, by reason that the seed is cooled
by the length of the way. If any in copulation, after the ejaculation of the
seed, presently draw themselves from the woman's embraces, they are thought not
to generate, by reason of the air entering into theyet open womb, which is
thought to corrupt the seed. By which it appears how false that history in
Averrois is, of a certain woman that said she conceived with child by a man's
seed shed in a bath, and so drawn into her womb, she entering the bath
presently Averrois his history convict of falsehood.
after his departure forth. It is much less credible that Devils can copulate
with women, for they are of an absolute spirituous nature, but blood and flesh
are necessary for the generation of man. What natural reason can allow that
the incorporeall Devils can love corporeal women? And how can we think that
they can generate, who want the instruments of generation? How can they who
neither eat nor drink be said to swell with seed? Now where the propagation
of the species is not necessary to be supplied by the succession of
Individuals, Nature has given no desire of venery, neither has it imparted
the use of generation; but the devils once created were made immortal by Gods
appointment: If the faculty of generation should be granted to devils, long
since all places had been full of them. Wherefore if at any time women with
child by the familiarity of the devil, seem to travel, we must think it
happens by those arts we mentioned in the former chapter, to The illusions of
the devils.
wit, they use to stuff up the bodies of living women with old clouts, bones,
pieces of iron, thorns, twisted hairs, pieces of wood, serpents, and a world
of such trumpery, wholly dissenting from a woman's nature: who afterward, the
time, as it were, of their delivery drawing nigh, through the womb of her that
was falsely judged with child, before the blinded, and, as it were, bound up
eyes of the by-standing women, they give vent to their impostures. The
following history, recorded in the writings of many most credible authors, may
give credit hereto.

There was at Constance a fair damsel called Margaret, who served a wealthy
A history.
Citizen: she gave it out every where that she was with child by lying with the
devil on a certain night. Wherefore the Magistrates thought it fit she should
be kept in prison, that it might be apparent both to them and others, what
the end of this exploit would be. The time of deliverance approaching, she
felt pains like those which women endure in travel; at length, after many
throws, by the midwives help, in stead of a child, she brought forth iron
nails, pieces of wood, of glass, bones, stones, hairs, towe, and the like
things, as much different from each other, as from the nature of her that
brought them forth, and which were formerly thrust in by the devil to delude
the too credulous minds of men. Our sins are the cause that the devils abuse
us.


The Church acknowledges that devils, by the permission and appointment of God
punishing our wickedness, may abuse a certain shape, so to use copulation
with mankind. But that a humane birth may thence arise, it not only affirms
to be false, but detests as impious, as which believes that there was never
any man begot without the seed of man, our Savior Christ excepted. Now what
confusion and perturbation of creatures should possess this world (as
Cassianus says) if devils could conceive by copulation with men? or if women
should prove with child by accompanying them, howmany monsters would the
devils have brought forth from the beginning of the world? how many prodigies
by casting their seed into the wombes of wild and brute beasts? for by the
opinion of Philosophers, as often as faculty and will concur, the effect must
necessarily follow: now the Devils never have wanted will to disturb mankind,
and the order of this world: for the devil, as they say, is our enemy from the
beginning; and as God is the author of order, and beauty, so the devil, by
pride, contrary to God, is the causer of confusion and wickedness.

Wherefore if power should accrue equal to his evil mind and nature, and his
infinite desire of mischief and envy, who can doubt but a great confusion of
all things and species, and also great deformity would invade the decent and
comely order of this universe, monsters arising on every side? But seeing that
devils are incorporeall, what reason can induce us to believe that they can be
delighted with venereous actions? and what will can there be where as there is
no delight, nor any decay of the species to be feared? seeing that by Gods
appointment they are immortal, so to remain for ever in punishment: so what
need they succession of individualls by generation? wherefore if they neither
will nor can, it is a madness to think that they do commixe with man.

CHAP. XVII. Of Magic and supernatural diseases and remedies.
THat I may refresh the mind of the Reader, invited to these histories of
monsters, raised up by the art of the devil, witches, and conjurers, his
servants, I have thought good to add the following histories of certain
diseases, and remedies supernatural, and wholly magical, out of Fernelius.
There are diseases, which as they are sent Lib. 2. de abdit. cause. cap. 16.
amongst men by God being offended, so they cannot expect cure otherwise than
from God, from whence they are thought supernaturally to have their essence and
cure. Thus the air oft-times, yet chiefly in the time of King David, being
defiled with the pestilence, killed sixty odd thousand persons.

Thus Ezechias was struck with a grievous disease: Job was defiled with filthy
ulcers by Satan at Gods command. And as the Devil, the cruel enemy of
mankind, commonly uses by Gods permission to afflict those, so wicked persons
by the wondrous subtlety of the devil, offer violence, and do harm to many.
Some Witches hurt by the devils assistance.
invoke I know not what spirits, and adjure them with herbs, exorcismes,
imprecations, incantations, charms: others hang about their necks, or
otherwise carry certain writings, characters, rings, images, and other such
impious stuff. Some use songs, sounds or numbers: sometimes potions, perfumes,
and smells; sometimes gestures and juggling. There be some that make the
portraiture of the absent party in wax, and boast that they can cause or bring
a disease into what soever part thereof they prick, by the force of their words
and stars, into the like part of the party absent; and they have no few other
tricks to bring diseases.

We know for certain that magicians, witches, and conjurers, have by charms so
bound some, that they could not have to do with their wives; and have made
others so impotent, as if they had bin gelt or made eunuchs. Neither do wicked
men only send diseases into man's body, but also devils themselves. These
truly are soon distracted with a certain fury, but in this one thing they
differ from simple madness, for that they speak things of great difficulty,
tell things past and hid, disclose the secrets of such as are present, and
revile them many ways, and are terrified, tremble or grow angry by the power
of divine words.

One not very long agone, being by reason of heat exceeding dry in the night
time, A history.
rising out of his sleep, and not finding drink, took an apple that he found
by chance, and eating it, he thought his jaws were shut and held fast as by
ones hands, and that he was almost strangled: and also, now possessed of a
Devil entering into him, he seemed in the dark to be devoured of a huge
exceeding black dog, which he, afterward restored to his former health,
orderly related to me. There were diverse, who by his pulse, heat, and the
roughness of his tongue, thought him to be in a fever, and by his watching,
and the perturbation of his mind, thought him only to rave.

Another young Nobleman, some few years since, was troubled at set times with
a shaking of the body, and as it were, a convulsion, wherewith one while he A
history.
would move only his left arm, another while the right arm, and also
sometimes but one finger only, somewhiles but one leg, sometimes the other,
and at other times the whole trunk of his body, with such force and agility,
that lying in his bed, he could scarce be held by four men; his head lay
without any shaking, his tongue and speech was free, his understanding sound,
and all his senses perfect even in the height of his fit. He was taken at the
least ten times a day, well in the spaces between, but wearied with labor: it
might have been judged a true Epilepsie, if the understanding and senses had
failed.

The most judicious Physicians who were called to him, judged it a convulsion,
cosen-germane to the falling sickness, proceeding from a malign and venomous
vapor impact in the spine of the back, whence a vapor dispersed it self
over all the nerves, which pass from the spine every way into the limbs, but
not into the brain. To remove this, which they judged the cause, frequent
glysters are ordained, and strong purges of all sorts, cupping glasses are
applied to the beginnings of the nerves, ^omentations, unctions, emplasters,
first to discuss, then to strengthen and wear away the malign quality: These
things doing little good, he was sweated with bathes, stoves, and a decoction
of Guajacum, which did no more good than the former, for that we were all
far from the knowledge of the true cause of his disease: for in the third
month, a certain Devil was found to be the author of all this ill, bewraying
himself by voice, and unaccustomed words and sentences, as well latin as
greek (though the patient were ignorant of the greek tongue): he laid open
The devil shows himself by speaking of greek.
many secrets of the bystanders, but chiefly of the Physicians, deriding them
for that he had abused them to the patients great harm, because they had
brought his body so low by needless purgations.

When his father came to visit him, he would cry out long before he came at
him, or saw him, drive away this visitant, and keep him from coming in here,
or else pluck his chain from about his neck: for on this (as it is the
custom of the French order of Knights) there hangs the image of St. Michael.
If holy or divine things were read before him, he shook and trembled more
violently. When his fit was over, he remembered Devils wax angry, and are
terrifyed by divine things.
all that he had done, and affirmed that he did it against his will, and that
he was sorry for it. The devil, forced by ceremonies and exorcismes, denied
that he was damned for any crime, and said that he was a spirit: being asked
who he was, and by what means and power he did these things, he said that he
had many habitations into which he could betake him self, and in the time of
his rest, he could torment others: that he was cast into this body by a
certain person whom he would not name, and that he entered by his feet up to his
neck, and that he would go forth again the same way, when as his appointed
time was come. He spoke of sundry other things, as others which are possessed
use to do.

Now I speak not these things as new or strange, but that it may appear that
devils sometimes entering into the body, do somewhiles torment it by diverse
and uncouth ways; other whiles they do not enter in, but either agitate the
good humors of the body, or draw the ill into the principal parts, or with
them obstruct the veins or other passages, or change the structure of the
instruments, from which causes innumerable diseases proceed: of these, Devils
are the authors, and wretched and forlorn persons the ministers: and the
reason of these things is beyond the search of nature.

Pliny tells that the Emperor Nero in his time, found magical arts most vain
and false: but what need we allege profane writers, when as those things that
are recorded in scripture of the pythonisse, of the woman speaking in her
belly, of King Nebuchodonozor, of the Magitians of Pharaoh, and other such
things not a few, prove that there both is, and has been Magic? Pliny tells
of Denarc^us, that he tasting of the entrails of a sacrificed child, turned
himself into a Wolf. We read in Homer that Circes, in the long wandering of
Ulysses, changed his companions into beasts, with an enchanted cup or potion:
and in Virgil, that the growing corn may be spoiled or carried away by
enchantments: which things, unless they were approved and witnessed by many
men's credits, the wisdom of Magistrates and Lawyers, would not have made so
many Laws against Magitians, neither would there have been a mulct imposed
upon their heads by the law of the twelve tables, who had enchanted other men's
corn. But as in magical arts the devil does not exhibit things them selves,
as those which he cannot make, but only certain shows or appearances of
things: so in these which are any ways accommodated to the use of Physic,
the cure is neither certain, nor safe, but deceitful, captious, and dangerous.

I have seen the Jaundise, over the whole body, cured in one night, by a
written It is but a deceitful cure that is performed by the devil.
scroule hanged about the neck: also I have seen Agues chased away by words
and such ceremonies, but within a short while after they returned again and
became much worse. Now there are some vain things, and verily the fancies of
old women, which because they have long possessed the minds of men, weakened
with too much superstition, we term them superstitious. These are such as we
cannot truly say of them, wherefore and whence they have the faculties
ascribed to them: for they neither arise from the temperament, neither from
other manifest qualities, neither from the whole substance, neither from a
divine or magical power, from which two last mentioned, all medicines beyond
nature, and which are consequently to be used to diseases, whose essence are
supernatural, must proceed. Such like old wives medicines Old wives
superstitious medicines against diverse diseases.
and superstitious remedies are written figures and characters, rings, where
neither the assistance of God or Spirits is implored. Let me ask you, is it
not a superstitious medicine to heal the falling sickness, to carry in
writing the names of the three Kings, Gaspar, Melchior, and Balthazar, who came
to worship Christ? To help the tooth ache, if one whilst Mass is in saying,
touch his teeth, saying these words, Os non comminuet is ex co? To stay
vomiting with certain ceremonies and words, which they absent pronounce,
thinking it sufficient if that they but only know the patients name.

I saw a certain fellow that with murmuring a few words, and touching the
part, would stanch blood out of what part soever it flowed: there be some who
to that purpose say this, De latere ejus exivit Sanguis and Aqua. How many
prayers or charms are carried about to cure agues? some taking hold of the
patients hand, say, Aeque facilis tibi Febris haec sit, atque Mariae virgini
Christi partus. Another washes his hands with the patient before the fit,
saying to himself that solemn Psalm, Exalt^bo te Deus meus Rex, etc. If one
tell an Ass in his ear that he is stung by a Scorpion, they say that the
danger is immediately over.

As there are many superstitious words, so there are many superstitious
writings also. To help sore eyes, a paper wherein the two greek letters, P
and A* are written must be tied in a thread, and hanged about the neck. And
for the tooth ache this ridiculous saying, Strigiles, falcesque dentatae,
dentium dolorem persanate. Also often times there is no small superstition in
things that are outwardly applied. Such is that of Apollonius in Pliny, to
scarifie the gummes in the t^* ache with the tooth of one that died a violent
death: to make pills of the skull of one hanged, against the bitings of a mad
dog: to cure the falling sickness by eating the flesh of a wild beast,
killed with the same iron wherewith a man was killed: that he shall be freed
from a quartaine ague who shall drink the wine whereinto the sword that has
cut off a man's head, shall be put: and he, the parings of whose nails shall be
tied in a linen cloth to the neck of a quick Eele, and the Eele let go into
the water again. The pain of the Milt to be assuaged, if a beasts Milt be
laid upon it, and the Physician say that he cures or makes a medicine for the
Milt. Any one to be freed from the cough, who shall spit in the mouth of a
Toad, letting her go away alive. The halter wherein one has been hanged put
about the temples, to help the head ache. This word Abracadabra, written on a
paper, after the manner described by Serenus, and hanged about the neck, to
help agues or fevers, especially semitertians. What truth can be in that
which sundry affirm, that a leaf of Lathyris, which is a kind of Spurge, if
it be plucked upwards, will cause vomit, but broken downwards, will move to
stool? You may also find many other superstitious fictions concerning herbs,
such as Galen reports that Andreas and Pamphilus writ, as incantations,
transformations, and herbs dedicated to conjurers and devils. Lib. 6. de simp.


I had thought never in this place to have mentioned these and the like, but
that there may be every where found such wicked persons, who leaving the arts
and means, which are appointed by God to preserve the health of man's body, fly
to the superstitious and ridiculous remedies of sorcerers, or rather of devils,
which notwithstanding the devil sometimes makes to perform their wished for
effects, that so he may still keep them ensnared and addicted to his service.
Neither is it to be approved which many say, that it is good to be healed by
any art or means, for that healing is a good work. This saying is unworthy of
a Christian, and savours rather of him that trusts more in the devil than in
God. Those Empericks are not of the society of Sorcerers and Magitians, who
heal simple wounds with dry lint, or lint dipped in water: this cure is neither
magical nor miraculous, as many suppose, but wholly natural, proceeding from
the healing fountains of nature, wounds and fractures, which the Chirurgian may
heal by only taking away the impediments, that is, pain, defluxion,
inflammation, an abscesse and gangrene, which retard and hinder the cure of
such diseases. The following examples will sufficiently make evident the devils
maliciousness, always wickedly and craftily plotting against our safety and
life.

A certain woman at Florence (as Langius writes) having a malign ulcer, and
being Lib. epist. 38. ep.
troubled with intolerable pain at the stomach, so that the Physicians could
give her no ease: behold on a sudden she vomited up long and crooked nails,
and brass needles, wrapped up with wax and hairs, and at length a great
gobbit of flesh, so bi^ge that a Giants jaws could scarce swallow it.

But that which happened in the year of our redemption 1539. in a certain town
called Fugenstall, in the Bishopric of Eistet, exceeds all credit, unless
there were eyewitnesses of approved integrity yet living. In this town, one
Ulrich Neusesser a husbandman, was tormented with grievous pain in the one
side of his belly, he suddenly got hold of an iron key with his hand under
the skin, which was not hurt, the which the Barber-Chirurgian of the place
cut out with his razour; yet for all this the pain ceased not, but he grew
every day worse than other: wherefore expecting no other remedy but death, he
got a knife and cut his throat. His dead body was opened, and in his stomach
were found a round and longish piece of wood, four steel knives, part sharp,
and part toothed like a saw, and two sharp pieces of iron, each whereof
exceeded the length of a spanne, there was also as it were a ball of hair. All
these things were put in by the craft and deceit of the devil. Thus far
Langius.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Cozenages and crafty Tricks of Beggars.
HAving treated of Monsters, it follows that we speak of those things which
either of themselves, by reason of their nature full of admiration, have some
kind of monstrousness in them; or else from some other ways, as by the craft
and cozenage of men. And because to the last mentioned crafts of the Devil,
the subtle devices of begging companions are sowewhat alike, therefore I will
handle them in the next place, that the Chirurgian being admonished of them,
may be more cautious and cunning in discerning them when he meets with them.

Anno Dom. 1525. when I was at Anjou, there stood a crafty beggar begging at A
history of a counterfeit arm.
the Church door, who tying and hiding his own arm behind his back, showed
in steed thereof, one cut from the body of one that was hanged, and this he
propped up and bound to his breast, and so laid it open to view, as if it had
been all enflamed, so to move such as passed by unto greater commiseration of
him. The cozenage lay hid, every one giving him money, until at length his
counterfeit arm not being surely fastened, fell upon the ground, many seeing
and observing it: he being apprehended and laid in prison, by the appointment
of the Magistrate, was whipped through the town, with his false arm hanging
before him, and so banished.

I had a brother called John Parey, a Chirurgian, who dwelt at Vitre in
Britany; he Another of a cancrous breast.
once observed a young woman begging, who showed her breast, as if it had a
cancrous ulcer thereon, looking fearfully by reason of much and fordid filth,
wherewith it seemed to defile the cloth that lay under it. But when as he had
more diligently beheld the woman's face, and the fresh color thereof, as also
of the places about the ulcer, and the good habit of the whole body agreeable
to that color (for she was somewhat fat, and of a very good habit of body) he
was easily hereby induced to suspect some roguery and deceit. He acquainted the
Magistrate with this his suspicion, and got leave that he might carry her home
to his house, so to search her more narrowly. Where opening her breast, he
found under her arme-pit, a sponge moistened with a commixture of beasts blood
and milk, and carried through an elder pipe to the hidden holes of her
counterfeit cancer. Therefore he foments her breast with warm water, and with
the moisture thereof loses the skins of black, green, and yellow frogs,
laid upon it, and stuck together with glue, made of bole armenick, the white
of an egg, and flower; and these being thus fetched off, he found her breast
perfectly sound.

The beggar being cast for this into prison, confessed that she was taught
this trick by a beggar that lay with her, who himself also, by putting about
his leg an oxes Milt, and perforating it in sundry places, that so the
forementioned liquor might drop out, counterfeited an ulcer of a monstrous
bigness and malignity, covering A counterfeit ulcer of the leg
the edges of the Milt on every side with a filthy cloth. This beggar was
diligently enquired after, but could not be found; and so she was whipped and
banished.

Within less than a year after there came into the same city another notable
crafty Of one feigning himself eleprous.
companion, who presently taking up the church doors, laid open his wares, to
wit, a Kercher with some small pieces of money lying thereon, a wooden Barrel,
and Clicquets are things made somewhat resembling a small wool-card, but have
two or three little pieces of boords so fastened together with leather, that
they will make a great noise with them, and these are used by the French
beggars.
Cliquets, wherewith he would evernow and then make a great noise: his face was
spread over with great thick pustles, being of a blackish red color, and made
with glue like those that have the Leprosy: this his ghasty look made him to
be pitied by all men, which was the cause that every one gave him money. Then my
brother came somewhat nearer him, and asked him how long he had been troubled
with this so cruel disease; he answered with an obscure and hoarse voice,
that he was borne a Leper from his mothers womb, and that his parents both
died of this wicked disease, so that their members fell away piece-meale. Now
he had a woollen swathe about his chapps, wherewith (having his left hand
under his cloak) he so straitened his chapps, that much black blood rose
into his face, and made him so hoarse that he could scarce speak; yet he
could not contain himself, but that in speaking he ever now and then
slackened the swathe with his hand, the freelier to draw his breath: which when
my brother had observed, suspecting some cozenage, he obtained leave of the
Magistrate to search and examine the man whether he were truly leprous, or
no. First therefore he took away his swathe or rowler that was about his
neck, then washed his face with warm water, so that the counterfeit glewed
pustles were dissolved, and his face, free from all tainture, showed it self
of a good and natural color and shape. Then he laid bare his whole body, and
diligently viewed each part, and found no sign of a leprosy, one or other.
Which when the Magistrate once heard, he made him to be put in prison, and to
be thrice whipped through the streets of the city, with his barrel hanging
before him, and his cliquets behind him, adding thereto the punishment of
perpetual banishment. It happened that as he was whipped the third market
day, the people cried out to the hangman in jest, that he should not fear to
lash him soundly, for being leprous he could not feel it: the executioner
incited by this cry of the people, did so belabour him, that the wretch died of
his whipping within a short while after, having a just reward for his
wickedness. For these impostors, besides that they live like drones, feigning
this or that disease, and so being idle, enjoy the fruits of others labors;
they also diverse times conspiring together, take away the lives and goods of
honest and substantial citizens, and other people: for there are some of them,
that in an evening, as men that have no habitation, desire lodging for a night,
and it being granted them, they, when as the master of the house and his family
are asleep, open the doors to their comrades, men as wicked as themselves,
and kill and carry away all they can.

Certainly we may justly affirm that this crafty begging is the mother and
school of all dishonesty: for how many acts of bawdry and poisoning every
where corrupt A multitude of beggars hurtful to the city.
the wells and public fountains? how many places have been burnt under the
show of begging? where can you get more fit spies? where more sit undertakers
and workers of all manner of villainy, than out of the crew of these beggars?

Some of them there are, who besmeare their faces with soot laid in water, so
to seem to have the Jaundise. But you may at the first sight find out the
deceit, by the How to discover such as counterfeit the Jaundise.
native whiteness of the utter coat of the eye, called Adnata, which in such
as truly have the Jaundise, uses to be died and overcast with a yellowish
color; also you may be more certain thereof, if you wet a cloth in water or
spittle, and so rub the face, for the adventitious yellowness will quickly
vanish, and the true native color show it self.

Some there be, who not content to have mangled, and filthily exulcerated
their limbs with causticke herbs, and other cauteries; or to have made their
bodies more swollen, or else lean, with medicated drinks; or to have deformed
themselves some other way, but from good and honest Citizens, who have
charitably relieved them, they have stolen children, have broken or dislocated
their arms and legs, have cut out their tongues, have depressed the chest,
or whole breast, that with these, as their own children, begging up and down
the country, they may get the more relief, pitifully complaining that they
came by this mischance by thunder, or lightning, or some other strange accident.

Lastly they part the kingdom amongst themselves as into Provinces, and
communicate by letters one to another, what news or new quaint devises there
are to conceal or advance their roguery: to which purpose they have invented a
new language only known to themselves, so to discourse together and not be
understood by others. [We here vulgarly term it Canting].

Dr. Flecelle, a Physician of Paris, entreated me to bear him company to his
country house at Champigny, four miles from Paris. Where as soon as we
arrived, Of one counterfeiting the falling of the fundament.
and were walking in the Court, there came presently to us a good lusty well
flesht manly woman, begging alms for St. Fiacre sake, and taking up her coat
and her smock, she showed a great gut hanging down some half a foot, which
seemed as if it had hanged out of her fundament, whereout there dropped filth
like unto pus, which had all stained her legs and smock, most beastly and
filthy to look upon. Flecelle asked her how long she had been troubled with
this disease: she answered that it was four years since she first had it.
Hence he easily gathered that she played the counterfeit: for it was not likely
that such abundance of purulent matter came forth of the body of so well flesht
and colored a woman; for she would rather have been very lean and in a
consumption. Wherefore provoked with just anger, by reason of the wickedness
of the deceit, he run upon her and threw her down upon the ground, and trod
her under his feet, and hit her diverse blows upon the belly, so that he made
the gut which hung at her, to come away, and by threatening her with more
grievous punishment, made her confess the cozenage, and that it was not her
gut, but of an ox, which being filled with blood and milk, and tied at both
ends, she put the one of them into her fundament, and let the filth flow forth
at very little holes.

Not very long ago, a woman equally as shameless, offered herself to the
overseers Of one faigning the falling down of the womb.
of the poor of Paris, entreating that she might be entered for one of their
Pensioners, for that her womb was fallen down by a dangerous and difficult
birth, wherefore she was unable to work for her living. Then they commanded
that she should be tried and examined, according to the custom, by the
Chirurgians which are therefore appointed. Who seeing how the whole business
was carried, made report she was a counterfeit; for she had thrust an oxes
bladder, half blown and besmeared with beastly blood by the neck, whereto she
had fastened a little sponge, into the neck of her womb, for the sponge being
filled and swollen up by the accustomed moisture of the womb, so held up the
oxes bladder that hanged thereat, that she might safely go without any fear
of the falling of it out, neither could it be pulled forth but with good force.
For this her device she was put into Prison, and being first whipped, was
after banished. Their cozenage is not much unlike this, who by fitly applying a
sheep paunch to their groine, counterfeit themselves to be bursten.

Anno Dom. 1561. there came to Paris a lusty, stout, and very fat Norman woman,
Of a beggar that feigned her self to have a snake in her belly.
being about some thirty years old, who begging from door to door, did cast
to meet with rich women, and very familiarly and pitifully would relate unto
them her misfortune, saying she had a snake in her belly, which crept in at her
mouth as she slept in an hempe-land: she would let one feel her stir, by
putting their hand unto her belly, adding also that she was troubled day and
night with its uncessant gnawing of her guts. The novelty of this sad chance,
moved all to pity and admiration, wherefore as much as they could, they
assisted her with means and counsel. Amongst the rest, there was a woman of
great devotion and charity, who sending for Dr. Hollerius, Chevall, and me,
asked us if this snake could by any means be gotten forth. Hollerius gave her
a strong purgation, hoping that by stirring up the expulsive faculty, the
serpent might be cast forth, together with the noxious humors. But this hope
had no such success. Wherefore when as we met again, we thought it fit to
put a Speculum matricis into the neck of her womb, so to see if we could
discern either her head or tail: but I making large dilatation of her womb,
could see no such thing, only we observed a certain voluntary motion,
whereof she her self was the author, by contracting and dilating the muscles
of the lower belly. Which when as we had observed, perceiving the deceit and
imposture, we thought good so to terrify her and make her confess the deceit,
to tell her that she must take another, but that a more strong purgation, that
what we could not do by the former, as more gentle, we might attain to by
the latter, as far stronger. She dissembling all fear, and conscious of her
craft and dissimulation, after we were gone in the evening, packing up her
stuff, and a great deal more than her own, she secretly stole away, not
bidding her hostess farewell: and thus at length the fraud was apparent, to
the loss of the honest Gentlewoman. I saw this baggage, six days after,
sitting lustily upon a Packe-horse, at the gate Mont-martre, and laughing
heartily with such as brought Seafish to town; and she was returning (as it
was most likely) into her country, seeing her cozenage was discovered here.

Such as feign themselves dumb, draw back and double their tongues in their
mouths. Such as falling down counterfeit the falling sickness, bind straightly
both The craft of such asfaigne themselves to have the falling sickness.
their Wrests with plates of iron, tumble and roll themselves in the mire,
sprinkle and defile their heads and faces with beasts blood, and shake their
limbs and whole body. Lastly by putting soap into their mouths, they foame at
the mouth like those that have the falling sickness. Othersome with flower
make a kind of glue, wherewith Of such as faign themselves leprous.
they besmeare their whole bodies, as if they had that Leprosy or Scab, that
is vulgarly termed, Malum sancti manis. Neither must we think this art of
counterfeiting, and cheating begging to be new, and of late invention, for
long ago it flourished in Asia, even in the time of Hippocrates, as may
appear by his book De Aere, Locis, and Aquis. But by how much this disease
has taken more deep root, and grown more inveterate by process of time, by
so much it must more diligently and carefully be looked to and prevented, by
cruelly punishing such counterfeits: for that by this fained begging, as the
nourisher of sloth and shop of all dishonesty, that which is taken from the
good is bestowed upon the ill, and one wicked and counterfeit beggar hurts all
other wretched people.

CHAP. XIX. Of strange or monstrous accidents in Diseases.
WHat monstrousness soever was in the last mentioned parties, it was made up
by the craft of beggars for filthy gain. But if there be any monstrousness in
the following narrations, it is of nature, but working, as it were,
miraculously, by some secret and occult means; for thus there are often times
monsters in diseases. Before the town of St. John de Angeley, a soldier
called Francis, of the Monsters happen also in diseases. A bullet shot into the
belly came forth at the fundament.
company of Captain Muret, was wounded with a Harquebuze-shot on the belly,
between his navell and sides; the bullet was not taken out, because the
Chirurgians, who searched him diligently, could not find it: wherefore he was
troubled with grievous and tormenting pains, until the ninth day after he
received the wound, the bullet came forth at his fundament: wherefore within
three weeks after he was perfectly whole. He was healed by Simon Crinay, the
Chirurgian of the French companies.

James Pope, Lord of St. Albanes in Dauphine, was wounded at the skirmish at A
bullet sticking to the throat and patient recovering.
Chasenay, having three harquebuze bullets entering into his body, one whereof
pierced under his throat, where it buncheth out as with a knot, near to the
pipe of his lungs, even to the beginning of the vertebrae of the neck, in
which place the leaden bullet stuck, and as yet does remain. Hereupon he was
afflicted with many and fearful symptoms, as a fever, and a great swelling
of his whole neck, so that for ten whole days he could swallow nothing but
broaths and liquid things. Yet he recovered, and remains well at this
present, by the cure of James Dalam the Chirurgian.

Alexander Benedictus makes mention of a certain countrie-man, who, shot into
the back with a dart, drawing out the shaft, the head was left behind, being
in Lib. 3. anatom. cap 9 A crooked iron shot into the back came forth at the
fundament.
length about the breadth of two fingers, but hooked and sharp on the sides.
When as the Chirurgian had carefully and diligently sought for it, and could by
no means find it, he healed up the wound, but two months after this crooked
head came forth at his fundament.

The same author tells that at Venice a virgin swallowed a needle, which some
two years after she voided by urine, covered over with a stony matter,
gathered about A swallowed needle voided by urine.
viscous humors.

Catherine Perlan, the wife of William Guerrier, a Draper of Paris, dwelling in
the Jewry, as she rode on horseback into the country, a needle out of her pin
cushion, A needle running in at the buttocke came forth at the groine.
which got under her by accident, ran so deep into her right buttocke, that it
could not by any art or force be plucked forth. Four months after she sent
for me to come to her, and she told me that as often as she had to do with
her husband, she suffered extreme pricking pain i^ her right groine; putting
my hand thereto, as I felt it, my fingers met with something sharp and hard:
wherefore I used the matter so, that I drew forth the needle all rusty: this
may be counted a miracle, that steel, naturally heavy, should rise upwards,
from the buttocke to the groine, and pierce the muscles of the thigh, without
causing an abscesse.

Anno Dom. 1566. the two sons of Laurence Collo (men excellent in cutting for
the stone) took forth a stone of the bigness of a wall-nut, in the midst
whereof was A needle in the midst of a stone taken forth of the bladder.
a needle, just like those that shooe-makers use: the patients name was Peter
Cocquin, dwelling in the street Galand, at the place called Maubert at Paris,
and I think he is yet living. This stone was showed to King Charles the
ninth, for the monstrousness of the thing, I being then present, which being
given me by the Chirurgian, I preserve amongst my other rarities. Anno Dom.
1570. the Duchess of Ferrara at Paris, sent for John Collo, to take a stone
out of a Confectioner. This stone, though it waighed nine ounces, and was as
thick as ones fist, yet was it happily taken out, the patient recovering,
Francis Rousset, and Joseph Javelle, the Duchess Physicians, being present.
Yet not long after this Confectioner died by the stoppage of his water, by
reason of two other little stones, which about to descend from the kidneies to
the bladder, stayed in the midway of the Ureters. The figure of the extracted
stone was this.

The figure of a stone taken forth of the Bladder of a Confectioner.


Anno Dom. 1566. Laurence Collo the younger, took three stones out of the
bladder of one dwelling at Marly, called commonly Tire-vit: because being
troubled with the stone from the tenth year of his age, he continually
scratched his yard, each of the stones were as big as an Hens egg; of color
white, they all together waighed twelve ounces. When they were presented to
King Charles, then lying at Saint Maure des Faussez, he made one of them to
be broken with a hammer, and in the midst thereof there was found another,
of a chestnut color, but otherwise much like a Peach stone. These three stones,
bestowed on me by the brethren, I have here represented to the life.

The effigies of the three forementioned stones, whereof one is broken.


I have in the dissecting of dead bodies, observed diverse stones, of various
forms and figures, as of pigges, whelps, and the like. Dalechampius tells
that he saw a man, which by an abscesse of his loins, which turned to a
Fistula, voided many stones out of his kidneies, and yet notwithstanding could
endure to ride on horseback, or in a coach. John Magnus, the Kings most
learned and skillful Physician, having in cure a woman, troubled with cruel
torment and pains of the belly and fundament, sent for me, that by putting a
Speculum into the fundament, he might see if he could perceive any discernable
cause of so great and pertinacious pain: and when as he A stone by the force
of purging medicines voined by the fundament.
could see nothing which might further him in the finding out of the cause of
her pain (following reason as a guide) by giving her often glysters and
purgations, he brought it so to pass, that she at length voided a stone at
her fundament of the bigness of a Tennis ball: which once avoided, all her
pains ceased.

Hippocrates tells that the servant of Dyseris in Larissa, when she was young,
in using venery was much pained, and yet sometimes without pain, yet she
never conceived. 5. Epid.
But when as she was sixty years old, she was pained in the afternoon as if
she had been in labor. When as she one day before noone had eaten many
leekes, afterward she was taken with a most violent pain, far exceeding all
her former, A stone coming out of the neck of the womb.
and she felt a certain rough thing rising up in the orifice of her womb. But
she falling into a swoune, another woman putting in her hand, got out a sharp
stone of the bigness of a whirle, and then she forthwith became well, and
remained so.

In a certain woman, who, as Hollerius tells, for the space of four months
was troubled with an incredible pain in making water, two stones were found in
her Lib. (...). cap. de palp. cond.
heart, with many abscesses, her kidneyes and bladder being whole.

Anno Dom. 1558. I opened in John Bourlier a Taylour, dwelling in the street of
St. Honor, a watery abscesse in his knee, wherein I found a stone, white, hard,
and smooth, of the thickness of an Almond; which being taken out, he
recovered. Certainly there is no part of the body wherein stones may not breed
and grow.

Anthony Benevenius a Florentine Physician writes, that a certain woman
swallowed No part of the body wherein stones may not be found. A needle
swallowed, came forth as the navell some two years after.
a brass needle without any pain, and continued a year after without feeling
or complaining of it: but at the end thereof she was molested with great pains
in her belly; for helping of which she asked the advice of all the Physicians
she could, making, in the interim, no mention of the swallowed needle.
Wherefore she had no benefit by all the medicines she took; and she
continued in pain for the space of two years, until at length the needle
came forth at a little hole by her navell, and then she recovered her health.

A Scholar named Chambelant, a native of Bourges, a studient in Paris, in the
College of Press, swallowed a stalk of grass, which came afterward whole
out between A sprig of grass swallowed, came forth whole again between the
ribs.
two of his ribs, with the great danger of the scholars life. For it could
not come there unless by passing or breaking through the lungs, the
encompassing membrane, and the intercostall muscles, yet he recovered,
Fernelius and Huguet having him in cure.

Cabrolle Chirurgian to Mounsieur, the Marshall of Anville, told me that
Francis Guillenet the Chirurgian of Sommiers, a small village some eight miles
from Mompelier, A knife swallowed, came forth at an abscesse in the groine.
had in cure, and healed a certain shepherd, who was forced by thieves to
swallow a knife of the length of half a foot, with a horn handle of the
thickenesse of ones thumb: he kept it the space of half a year, yet with
great pain, and he fell much away, but yet was not in a consumption, until
at length an abscesse rising in his groine, with great store of very stinking
quitture, the knife was there taken forth in the presence of the Justices, and
left with Joubert the Physician of Mompelier.

Mounsieur the Duke of Rohan had a Fool called Guido, who swallowed the point
The point of a sword swallowed came forth at the fundament.
of a sword of the length of three fingers, and he voided it at his fundament
on the twelfth day following, yet with much ado: there are yet living many
Gentlemen of Britanie, who were eyewitnesses thereof.

There have been sundry women with child, who have so cast forth piece-meale
Wonderful excretions of infants cut of the womb.
children that have died in their wombes, as that the bones have broke
themselves a passage forth at the navill, but the flesh, dissolved as it were
into quitture, flowed out by the neck of the womb and the fundament, the
mothers remaining alive, as Dalechampius observes out of Albucrosis.

Is it not very strange that there have bin women, who troubled with a fit of
the Women troubled with the Mother laid out for dead.
Mother, have lien three whole days without motion, without breathing, or
pulse that were any way apparent, and so have been carried out for dead?

A certain young man, as Fernelius tells, by somewhat too vehement exercise,
was taken with such a cough, that it left him not for a moment of time, until
he An impostume spit out, of the bigness of a Pigeons egg.
therewith had cast forth a whole impostume of the bigness of a pigeons egg,
wherein, being opened, there was found quitture exquisitely white and equal.
He spit blood two days after, had a great fever, and was much distempered:
yet notwithstanding he recovered his health.

Anno Dom. 1578. Stephana Chartier, dwelling at St. Maure des Faussez, a widow
Worms cast up in the fit of an Ague.
of forty years old, being sick of a tertian Fever, in the beginning of her
fit vomited up a great quantity of choler, and together therewith three hairy
worms, in figure, color, and magnitude like the worms called Beare-wormes,
yet somewhat blacker; they lived eight whole days after without any food: the
Chirurgian of this town brought them to Dr. Milot, who showed them to Feure,
Le Gros, Marescot and Courtin Physicians, and to me also.

This following history, taken out of the Chronicles of Monstrele, exceeds all
admiration. This narration exceeds not only all admiration, but also belief.
A certain Franck-Archer of Meudon, four miles from Paris, was for robbery
condemned to be hanged: in the mean time it was told the King by the
Physicians, that many in Paris at that time were troubled with the stone, and
amongst the rest the Lord of Boscage, and that it would be for the good of
many, if they might view and discern with their eyes the parts themselves
wherein so cruel a disease did breed, and that it might be done much better in
a living than in a dead body, and that they might make try all upon the body of
the Franck-Archer, who had formerly been troubled with these pains. The King
granted their request; wherefore opening his body they viewed the breathing
parts, and satisfied themselves as much as they desired, and having diligently
and exactly restored each part to its proper place, the body, by the Kings
command, was sewed up again, and dressed and cured with great care. It came so
to pass, that this Franck-Archer recovered in a few days, and getting his
pardon, got good store of money besides.

Alexander Benedictus tells that he saw a woman called Victoria, who having
lost Pract. lib. 64. cap. 1.
all her teeth, and being bald, yet had others came up in their places, when as
she was fourscore years old.

Stephen Tessier a Chirurgian of Orleance, told me that not long ago he cured
one Charles Veriguell, a Sergeant of Orleance, of a wound received in his
hamme, whereby the two tendons bending the ham, were quite cut in sunder. He
took this order in the cure; he caused the patient to bend his leg, then he
sewed together the ends of the cut rendons, then placed the member in that
site, and handled it with that art. that at length he healed the wound, the
patient not halting at all. Truly this is very memorable thing, and carefully
and heedfully to be imitated by the young Chirurgian.

How many have I seen, who wounded and thrust through the body with swords,
arrows, pikes, bullets, have had portion of the brain cut off by a wound of
the head, an arm or leg taken away by a cannon bullet, yet have recovered?
and how many on the contrary, have died of light and small wounds, not worth
the speaking of?

A certain man was shot in near to his groine with an arrow, whom we have
seen, says Hippocrates, and he recovered beyond all men's expectation; The
arrow head 5. Epidem.
was not taken forth, for it was very deep in, neither did the wound bleed very
much, neither was it enflamed, neither did he halt: but we found the head, and
took it forth six years after he was hurt. Now Hippocrates gives no other
reason of its so long stay, but that he says it might be suspected it lay hid
between the nerves, and that no vein nor artery was cut thereby.

CHAP. XX. Of the wonderful original, or breeding of some creatures.
WE have read in Boistey, that a certain workman of Avignion, when as he
lived in that city, opened a leaden coffin, wherein a dead body Boist. in
histor. prodig.
lay, that was so closely soudered, that the air could not get in; and as he
opened it, he was bitten by a serpent that lay therein, with so venomous and
deadly a bite, that it had near to have cost him his life. Yet the original
of this creature is not so prodigious as he supposes, for it is an usual It
is a common thing for a serpent to breed of the dead corpse of a man. A live
serpent in a solid Marble.
thing for a Serpent to breed of any putrefyed carcass, but chiefly of a man's.

Baptista Leo writes, that in the time of Pope Martin the fifth, there was a
live serpent found enclosed in a vaste, but solid Marble, no chinke appearing
in such dense solidity, whereby this living creature might breath.

Whilst in my vineyard, that is at Meudon, I caused certain huge stones to be
broken to pieces, a Toad was found in the midst of one of them. When as I much
admired thereat, because there was no space wherein this creature could be
generated, increase or live, the Stone-cutter wished me not to marvel
thereat, for it was a common thing, and that he saw it almost every day.
Certainly it may come to pass that from the more moist portion of stones,
contained in places moist and under The cause of such wonderful generations.
ground, and the celestial heat mixing and diffusing it self over the whole
mass of the world, the matter may be animated for the generation of these
creatures.

CHAP. XXI. Of the wondrous nature of some marine things, and other living
creatures.
THE last mentioned creatures were wonderful in their original, or rather in
their growth: but these which follow, though they be not wonderful of
themselves, as those that consist of their own proper nature, and that working
well and after an ordinary manner; yet they are wondrous to us, or rather
monstrous, for that they are not very familiar to us. For the rarity and
vastness of bodies, is in some sort monstrous. Of this sort there are many,
especially in the Sea, whose secret corners and receptacles are not pervious to
men: as Tritons, which from the middle upwards are reported to have the shape
of men. And the Sirenes, Nercides or Mere-maides, who (according to Pliny) Lib.
9. cap. 5.
have the faces of women, and scaly bodies, yea where as they have the shape of
man: neither yet can the forementioned confusion and conjunction of seeds take
any place here, for, as we lately said, they consist of their own proper
nature.

When Mena was President of Egypt, and walked on the banks of Nilus, he saw a
Sea Monster in the shape of a man, coming forth of the waters: his shape was
just like a man even to the middle, with his countenance composed to gravity,
his hairs yellow, yet intermixed with some gray, his stomach bony, his arms
orderly made and jointed, his other parts ended in a fish. Three days after in
the morning there was seen another Sea Monster, but with the shape or
countenance of a woman, as appeared by her face, her long hair, and swollen
breasts: both these monsters continued so long above water that any one might
view them very well.

The effigies of the Triton and Siren of Nilus.


In our times, says Rondeletius, in Norway was a monster taken in a
tempestuous sea, the which as many as saw it, presently termed a Monk, by
reason of the shape which you may see here set forth.

The figure of a fish resembling a Monk.


Anno Dom. 1531. there was seen a sea monster in the habit of a Bishop,
covered over with scailes: Rondeletius and Gesner have described it.

The figure of a fish in the habit or shape of a Bishop.


Gesner professes that he received from Jerome Cardane this monster, having
the head of a Bear, the feet and hands of an Ape.

The effigies of a Sea Monster headed like a Bear.


Not long before the death of Pope Paul the third, in the midst of the Tyrrhene
sea, a monster was taken, and presented to the successor of this Paul: it was
in shape and bigness like to a Lion, but all scaily, and the voice was like a
man's voice. It was brought to Rome to the great admiration of all men, but it
lived not long there, being destitute of its own natural place and
nourishment, as it is reported by Philip Lib. 5. chron.
Forest.

The effigies of a Lion-like scaily Sea Monster.


Anno Dom. 1523. the third day of November, there was seen at Rome this
sea monster, of the bigness of a child of five years old, like to a man even
to the navell, except the ears; in the other parts it resembled a fish.

The effigies of a Sea Monster with a man's face.


Gesner makes mention of this Sea Monster, and says that he had the figure
thereof from a Painter, who took it from the very fish, which he saw at
Antwerpe. The head looks very ghastly, having two horns, prick ears, and
arms not much unlike a man, but in the other parts it was like a fish. It was
taken in the Illyrian Sea, as it came a shore out of the water to catch a
little child: for being hurt by stones cast by fishermen that saw it, it
returned a while after to the shore from whence it fled, and there died.

The effigies of a Sea Devil.


Gesner tells that a Sea Monster with the head, mane, and breast of a horse,
and the rest of his body like a fish, was seen and taken in the ocean Sea,
brought to Rome, and presented to the Pope.

Olaus Magnus tells that a Sea Monster taken at Bergen, with the head and shape
of a Calfe, was given him by a certain English Gentleman. The like of which
was presented lately to King Charles the ninth, and was long kept living in the
waters at Fountaine-Bleau, and it went often times ashore. This is much different
from the common Sea-calfe or Seal.

The effigies of a monstrous This here figured is the sea-Morse, taken commonly
by our men in their Greene-land voyages: and I udge the sea^ore and Elephant to
be the same, but that, the Painter ha^ showed his skill too much in ^e one: and
the other is an old ^orse, as this ^ere figured i a young one.
Sea-calfe.


This great monster was seen in the Ocean sea, with the head of a Bore, but
longer tuskes, sharp and cutting, with scailes set in a wonderful order, as
you may see by this figure.

The effigies of a Sea-bore.


Olaus Magnus writes that this monster was taken at Thyle an Island of the
North, Anno Dom. 1538. it was of a bigness almost incredible, as that which
was seventy two foot long, and fourteen high, and seven foot between the
eyes: now the liver was so large that therewith they filled five hogsheads, the
head resembled a swine, having as it were a half moon on the back, and three
eyes in the midst of his sides, his whole body was scaily.

The effigies of a monstrous Sea-swine.


The Sea Elephant is bigger than the land Elephant, as Hector Boethius writes in
his description of Scotland; it is a creature that lives both in the water and
a shore, having two teeth like to elephants, with which as often as he desires
to sleep, he hangs himself upon a rock, and then he sleeps so soundly, that
Mariners seeing him at sea, have time to come ashore, and to bind him, by
casting strong ropes about him. But when as he is not awaked by this means,
they throw stones at him, and make a great noise; with which awakned, he
endeavers to leap back into the sea with his accustoned violence, but finding
himself fast, he grows so gentle, that they may deal vith him as they
please. Wherefore they then kill him, take out his fat, and divide or cut his
skin into thongs, which because they are strong and do not rot, are much
esteemed of.

The effigies of a Sea-Elephant.


The Arabians of Mount Mazovan, which runs along the Red Sea, chiefly feed
on a fish called Orobone, which is very terrible and much feared by other fish,
being nine or ten foot long, and of a breadth agreeable thereto, and it is
covered with scailes like a Crocodile.

A Crocodile is a vaste creature, coming sometimes to be fifteen cubits
long, and seeing it is a creature that does not bring forth young, but eggs,
it uses at the most to lay some sixty eggs, no bigger than Goose eggs,
rising to such bigness from so small beginnings (for the hatched young one is
proportionable to the egg): she is very long lived.

It has so small and useless a tongue, that it may seem to have none at all.
Wherefore seeing it lives both on land and water; as it lives on land it is to
be taken for a tongue, but as it lives part of the life in the water it has
no use of a tongue, and therefore is not to be reputed one. For fishes either
wholly want tongues, or else have them so impedite and bound, that they serve
for little use. The Crocodile only of all other things moves the upper jaw,
the lower remaining unmovable: for her feet, they are neither good to take nor
hold any thing; she has eyes not unlike those The Crocodile only moves the
upper jaw.
of swine, long teeth standing forth of the mouth, most sharp claws, a scaily
skill, so hard that no weapon can pierce it. Of the land Crocodile (resembling
this both land and water one) is made the medicine Crocodilea, most singular
for sore eyes, being Expende diligenter Plinii locum lib. 23. cap. 8.
anointed with the juice of leekes, it is good against suffusions or dimnesse
of the sight; it takes away freckles, pustles, and spots; the Gall anointed on
the eyes, helps Cataracts, but the blood cleares the sight.

Thevet says they live in the fountains of the river Nilus, or rather in a
lake flowing Cosmographtom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 8. How they, take Crocodiles.
from the same fountains, and that he saw some that were six paces long, and
a yard cross the back, so that their very looks were formidable. They catch
them thus; when as the water of Nilus falls, the Egyptians let down a line,
having thereto fastened an iron hook of some three pound weight, made very
large and strong, upon this hook they put a piece of the flesh of a Camel or
some other beast; which when as he sees, he presently falls upon it, and
devoures it hook and all, wherewith when he finds himself to be cruelly
pulled and pinched, it would delight you to see how he frets and leaps aloft;
then they draw him thus hooked, by little and little to the shore, and fasten
the rope surely to the next tree, lest he should fall upon them that are about
him; then with prongs, and such things they so belabour his belly, where as his
skin is soft and thin, that at length they kill him, and uncasing him, they
make ready his flesh, and eat it for delicious food. John Lereus, in his
history of Brasil, writes that the Salvages of that country willingly feed upon
Crocodiles, cap. 10.
and that he saw some who brought into their houses young ones, wherewith the
children gathering about it, would play without receiving any harm thereby.

True (says Pliny) is that common opinion, Whatsoever is brought forth in any
Lib. 9. cap. 1.
part of Nature, that also is in the sea, and many other things over and above,
that are in no other place. You may perceive that there are not only the
resemblances of living creatures, but also of other things; if you look upon
the sword, saw, cowcumber, like in smell and color to that of the earth, that
you may less wonder at the Sea feather and grape, whose figures I have given
you out of Rondeletius.

The sea feather is like those feathers of birds, which are worn in hats for
ornament, after they are trimmed and dressed for that purpose. The fishermen call
them sea-prickes, for that one end of them resembles the end of a man's yard,
when the prepuce is drawn off it. As long as it is alive it swells, and
becomes sometimes bigger and sometimes lesser; but dead, it becomes very
flaccide and lanke: it shines bright on the night like a star.

You may by this gather, that this which we here express is the Grape whereof
Pliny makes mention, because in the surface and upper part thereof it much
resembles a fair bunch of Grapes; it is somewhat longish, like a misshapen
clubbe, and hangs upon a long stalk. The inner parts are nothing but
confusion, sometimes distinguished with little glandules, like that we have
here figured alone by it self.

The figures of the Sea Feather and Grape.


In the Sea near the Island Hispaniola in the West Indies, there may be seen
many monstrous fishes, amongst which Thevet in his Cosmography thought this
most rare and observable, which in the vulgar language of the natives is termed
Aloes. For it is just like a goose, with a long and straight neck, with the
head ending sharp, or in a Cone, not much unlike a sugar-peare, it is no
bigger than agoose, it wants scailes, it has four finnes under the belly
for swimming, when it is above water you would say that it were a goose.

The Sarmatian, or Eastern Germane Ocean contains fishes unknown to hot
countries, and very monstrous. Such is that which resembling a snaile, equals
a barrel in magnitude of body, and a stag in the largeness and branches of
her horns: the ends of her horns are rounded as it were into little balls,
shining like unto pearls, the neck is thick, the eyes shining like to
lighted candles, with a roundish nose set with hairs like to a cats, the mouth
wide, whereunder hangs a piece of flesh very ugly to behold. It goes on four
legs, with so many broad and crooked feet, the which with a longtaile, and
variegated like a Tiger, serves her for finnes to swim withal. This creature
is so timorous, that though it be an Amphibium, that is, which lives both in
the water and ashore, yet usually it keeps it self in the sea, neither does it
come ashore to feed unless in a very clear season. The flesh thereof is very
good and grateful meat, and the blood medicinable for such as have their
livers ill affected, or their lungs ulcerated, as the blood of great Tortoises
is good for the Leprosy. The blood of great sortoises good for the leprosy.
Tom. 2. lib. 20.
Thevet in his Cosmography affirms that he saw this in Denmark.

In a deep lake of fresh water, upon which stands the great city or town of
Themistitan, in the Kingdom of Mexico, which is built upon piles, like as
Venice is, there is found a fish of the bigness of a Calfe, called by the
southern Salvages, Andura, but by those of the place, and the Spaniards the
conquerers of that place, Hoga. It is headed and eared almost like a swine;
from the chaps hang five long bearded appendices, of the length of some half a
foot, like the beard of a Barbell. It has flesh very grateful and good to
eat. It brings forth live young like as the Whale. As it swimmes in the
waters, it seems green, yellow, red, and of many colors, like a Chameleon:
it is most frequently conversant about the shore sides of the lake, and there
it feeds upon the leaves of the tree called Hoga, whence also the fish has its
name. It is a fearfully toothed and fierce fish, killing and devouring such as
it meets withal, though they be biggerthan her self: which is the reason
why the Fishermen chiefly desire to kill her, as Thevet affirms in his
Cosmography.

The monstrous fish Hoga.


Andrew Thevet in his Cosmography writes that as he sailed to America, he saw
infinite store of flying fishes, called by the salvages Bulampech, who rising
out of the water, fly some fifty paces, escaping by that means from other
greater fish that think to devour them.

This kind of flying fish exceeds not the bigness of a Mackrell, is round
headed, with a bluish back, two wings which equal the length of almost all
their body. They often times fly in such a multitude, that they fall foul upon
the sails of ships, whilst they hinder one another sight, and by this means
they fall upon the decks, and become a prey to the Sailers: which same we have
read confirmed by John Lereus in his history of Brasil.

In the Venetian gulf, between Venice and Ravenna, two miles above Quioza,
anno Dom. 1550. there was taken a flying fish, very horrible and monstrous,
being four foot long, it had a very great head, with two eyes standing in a
line, and not one against another, with two ears, and a double mouth, a snout
very fleshy and green, two wings, five holes in her throat, like those of a
Lamprey, a tail an ell long, at the setting on whereof there were two little
wings. This monster was brought alive to Quioza, and presented to the chief of
the city, as a thing whereof the like had not been formerly seen.

The figure of a monstrous flying Fish.


There are so many and different sorts of shells to be found in the Sea, that
it may be truly said, that Nature, the handmaid of the Almighty, desports it
self in the framing of them. In so great diversity I have chiefly made choice
of three to treat of here, as those that are worthy of the greatest admiration.
In these lie hid certain little fishes, as snailes in their shells, which
Aristotle calls Cancelli, and he affirms 4. de hist. anim. cap. 4.
them to be the common companions of the By crusted is meant Crabs, Lobsters,
Shrimps, and such like. The description of the Hermire cray-fish.
crusted and shell fishes, as those which in their species or kind are like to
Lobsters, and use to be bred without shells; but as they creep into shells,
and there inhabit, they are like to shell fishes. It is one of these that is
termed the Hermit. He has two somewhat long and slender horns, under which
are his eyes, always standing out of his head, as those which he cannot pluck
and draw in, as Crabbes can. His fore-feet have claws upon them, where with he
defends himself, and carries meat to his mouth, having two other on each side,
and a third being lesser, the which he uses in going. The female lays eggs,
which hang forth at her back part as if they were put upon a thread, being
joined together by certain little membranes. Lastly, in the opinion of Aelian,
the Lib. 7. cap. 31.
Cancellus or small Cray-fish is borne naked and without a shell, but within a
while after, she of many which she finds empty, makes choice of a fit one,
and when as grown bigger, she cannot be contained or dwell any longer
therein, or else being They change their habitation for two causes.
stimulated with a natural desire of copulation, she removes into a more
capacious and convenient one. These little Cray-fishes often times fight together
for their habitation, and the stronger carries away the empty shell, or else
makes the weaker to quit possession. Now the shell is either of a Nerita, or
Turbo, and often times of a small Purple; and entering into possession, she
carries it about, there feeds and grows, and ^en seeks a more capacious one
as Aristotle says in the formerly cited place.

The effigies of the empty shells whereinto the Cancelli use to creep to dwell.


The effigies of Bernard the Hermit housed in his shell.


The figure of him out of his Cell.


Somethinke that this Bernard the Hermit is that kind of Cancellus which is
by Pliny termed Pinnoter; but in truth the Pinnoter is not a kind of Cancellus
or Cray-fish, but of a little Crab. Now in Aristotle there is much difference
between Cancellus and Cancer parvus, though Pliny may seem to confound them;
for he is bred What the Pinnoter, or dwaf crab is.
naked, having his crust only, but without a shell: wherefore seeing that by
nature he wants it, he diligently searches for it, and dwells in it, when as he
has found it: But the Pinnoter is not bred by it self alone, but in Pinna and
some others, and he changes not his habitation, because (as Aristotle thinks)
being of the kind of dwarf Crabbes, it never grows big, neither dwells it
in empty shells. Now the Pinna, What the Pinna is.
or Pime is a kind of shellfish, it breeds in muddy places, and is always
open, neither is it at any time without a companion, which they therefore call
the Pinnoter, or Pinnophylax(i. e.) the Pin-keeper, as Pliny says. Verily that
these things are thus, you may plainly perceive by these words of Athenaeus.
Chrysippus Solensis 5. de Honest. Lib. 9. cap. 42. Lib. 3. Deipne.
and Volupt. says the Pinna and Pinnoter assist and further each other,
neither can they liveasunder. The Pinna may be referred to the kinds of
oysters, but the Pinnoter is a dwarf Crabbe: the Pinna opens her shell for the
little fishes to enter thereinto; the Pinnoter stands by, observing if any come
in, which if they do, he gives the Pin The familiarity and craft of the Pinna
and Pinnoter,
noice thereof by biting, who presently thereupon shuts her shell, and so they
feed together upon that they catch by this means. Thus Athenaeus. She is also
for this her craft mentioned by Plutarch in his writings. The Pinnoter is
sometimes called by Pliny, Cancer dapis assectator.

But that which by these authors is attributed to the dwarf Crabbe, the same
by Cicero is ascribed to the little shrimpe: now the Pinna (says he) opening
her two Lib. 2. de ^at. decrum.
large shells, enters into confederacy with the little shrimp for getting of
food, wherefore when little fishes swim into her gaping shell, then the
Pinna, admonished by the shrimps biting her, shuts her shell; thus two unlike
creatures get their livings together. But Plutarch seems to make the Pinna to
be the Pearl Oister, in that work of his, whereas he enquireth whether the
craft of Water or Land beasts be the greater.

But amongst the most miraculous fishes may fitly be placed the Nautilos, or
Sayler, Psin. lib. 9. cap. 29.
of some called Pompylos (it is thought to be a kind of Polypus) it comes
with the face upwards to the top of the Sea, raising it self by little and
little, that casting forth all the water by a pipe, as if it had a Pumpe, it
easily floats; then putting back the two first tendrills or arms, it extends
between them a membrane of wondrous fineness or thinness, which gathering
air like as a sail, and she rowing with the rest of her arms, she guides her
self with her tail in the midst, as a Rudder. Thus she sails along in
imitation of Pinnaces, and if any thing affright her, she presently takes in
water, and sinkes herself.

The shape of the Nautilus, or Sayler-fish.


The better to store this treatise of Monsters, abusing the name with the
Poets, we will reckon up the whale amongst the Sea Monsters, by reason of his
monstrous and How the Whale may be reckoned amongst monsters.
wondrous magnitude. Now the Whale is the greatest by much of all the fishes of
the Sea, for most commonly this beast is thirty six cubits long, eight high,
the slit of his mouth is eighteen foot long, teeth they have none, but in
stead thereof in each Jaw horny black excrescences or finnes [which we
vulgarly term Whale bones] which by little and little end in small hairs like
to a swines bristles, which coming and standing out of his mouth, are in stead
of Guides, lest whilst he swimmes with a blind and rapide violence, he might
run against a rock. His eyes are distant one from the other the space of
four else, which outwardly appear small, but inwardly they are bigger than a
man's head; wherefore they are deceived that say that they are no bigger than an
Oxes eyes: his nose is short, but in the middle of his forhead he has a pipe
whereat he draws in the air, and casts forth a whole shower or river of
water, that therewith he will even sink the vessels or boats of the Mariners;
when he has filled himself beyond measure, he cries or roars with so great
or strong a voice, that he may be heard two miles off. He has two very
large sins upon his sides wherewith he swimmes, and under which in time of
danger he hides his young; he has none upon his back. His tail in site is
like to the tails of Dolphines, neither is it much unlike in shape, which when
he moves, he so tosseth the Sea, that he drownes and overturnes the boats that
he touches. You may by dissecting them find that a Whale brings forth live
young, and gives them suck; or A whale brings forth young, and sueklesthem.
the male has testicles and a yard, but the female a womb and dugges. They
are taken in diverse places about winter, but chiefly about the coast of
Aquitaine, a^a small town which is vulgarly called Biarris, some six miles
distant from Bayon: whereunto I being sent by King Charles the ninth when he
was at Bayon, to cure the Prince of Roche Sur-You, I was an eye witness how
they are caught; and also I confirmed that which I had formerly read to that
purpose, in that excellent and most true history of fishes set forth by
Rondeletius. Now at that town there is a little hill, in the top whereof
there is a Tower of very great antiquity, from which as from a How they are
caught.
Watchtower they keep watch whether or no any Whales swim that way.
Wherefore the watchmen from the tower, either seeing, or by the horrible noise
hearing a Whale to pass by that way, they give warning thereof to the
inhabitants by the beating of Drums, and ringing a Bell: which sign once
given, they all run forthwith, as to extinguish the city if it were on fire,
being furnished with weapons and all things fitting for that purpose. For the
people of that country are very diligent and expert in catching the Whale.
Wherefore in each of the boats furnished with all things either to assail or
fly, there are put ten lusty rowers, and diverse others furnished with
harping-irons to strike the Whale; which being cast and fastened in her, they
loose out huge long ropes fastened to them, until such time as he be dead,
then together with the ropes, and assisted by the waves of the sea, they draw
the Whale (wearied with running and laboring, and fainting by reason of the
magnitude and multitude of his wounds, being in the time of their conflict
diligently chased and driven toward the shore) a land; and merrily part the
prey, each whereof has his share, according to the number of the irons
thrown, the magnitude of the wound, and the necessity and excellency of the
wounded part for life: each of their harping-irons are known by their peculiar
marks. In the heat of the skirmish many stand up and down in boats, only for
this purpose, to take up such as chance to fall into the Sea, lest they should
be drowned. The males are caught with more difficulty, the females more easily,
especially if their young ones be with them; for Why the females are more
easily caught than the males.
whilst they linger to help and succor them, they lose the occasion of
escaping. The flesh is of no esteem, the tongue only is commendable; for
being very large, and of a very laxe substance, it is poudred, and by most
Gentlemen accounted for a dainty. The larde is dispersed over many countries,
to be boiled and eaten with fish in the time of Lent, that Gourmandizers may
have something to serve them instead of flesh which is then forbidden. There is
great store of fat in them in the parts under the skin and belly, which melted,
concretes not again, by reason of the subtlety of the parts, they keep it to
burn in lamps, and to use about their ships. The houses of the fish-eaters
are builded with their bones; also orchards in the coast of Aquitaine are
fenced with these bones. The finnes that stand forth of their mouths, which are
commonly called Whale-bones, being dried and polished, serve to make Whalebone.
buskes for women, whip-staves, and little staves, as also to stiffen garments.
Many make seats or stools of the vertebrae, or spondills of the backe-bone.

The manner of the cutting up of the Whale.


In the river Scalde, ten miles from Antwerpe, Anno Dom. 1577. the second day
of July, there was a Whale taken, of a blackish blue color, she had a spout
hole in the top of her head, out of which she cast great store of water: she
was fifty eight foot long, and sixteen foot high: hertaile was fourteen foot
broad; from the eye to the end of her nose was some sixteen foot. Her lower
jaw was six foot on each side, she had twenty five teeth, which she could
hide in her upper jaw, there being holes for them, it being wholly toothlesse;
for which one thing this Whale may be judged monstrous, for that nature has
denied them teeth, and for that in creatures that are not horned, it is so
ordained by nature, that when they have teeth in their lower jaw, they should
have others also in the upper to answer to them, so to chaw their meat. The
longest of these teeth exceeded not six inches.

There is (as Pliny reports) a very small fish accustomed to live about rocks,
it is Lib. 9. cap. 25. and lib. 32. ca. 1.
called Echencis, never exceeding the length of a foot; it is thought that
ships go more slowly if this stick to them: wherefore the Latins have also
given it the name of Remora, for that a ship being under sail with a good
wind, may by the Echeneis seazing on her as if she would devour her, be stayed
against the Sailors wills, and The wondrous power of the Remora.
stand still as if she were in a safe harbor. Wherefore she is said in the
Actian fight to have stayed the ship of Marcus Antonius, hastening to go about
and encourage his soldier, so that he was forced to enter into another ship,
and thereupon Casars navy came upon them too hastily, and before they were
provided.

She also staid the ship of the Emperor Caius, coming from Astura to Antes,
his ship of all the naive making no way; neither did they long wonder at this
stay, the cause being presently known; some forthwith leaping into the Sea to
find the cause thereof, there found her about the ship, even sticking to the
Rudder, and they showed her to Caius, being wrath that this so small a thing
should stop him, and countermaund the endeavor of forty Rowers.

Therefore this little fish tames and infringes the violence and madness of
the world, and that with no labor, not with holding or any other way, but only
by sticking thereto. Certainly how ever it comes to pass, who from this
example of holding of ships, can doubt of any power or effect of nature, in
medicines which grow naturally? Yea and without this example, the Torpedo out
of the sea also may be sufficient, The wondrous force of the Torpedo.
who a far off, and at a distance, if it be touched with a spear or rod,
will benumbe even the strongest arms, and retarde the feet, how ever nimble to
run away.

CHAP. XXII. Of the admirable nature of Birds, and of some Beasts.
THAT there be diverse things not only in the Sea, but also in the air, and
earth, which by the wonderful condition of their nature may equal that of
Monsters, the only Estrich may serve for a witness. It is the biggest of
Birds, though indeed it partly resembles a bird, and partly a beast (and it is
familiar to Africa and Aethiopia) as which contrary to the nature of The
Estrich is Between a bird and a beast.
beasts has feathers, and against the custom of birds, cannot fly aloft; for
it has not feathers fit to fly, but like unto hairs, yet will it outrun a
horse. The natural force of the stomach in concocting is miraculous, as to
which nothing is untameable: The wondrous force of her stomach.
she lays eggs of a wondrous largeness, so that they may be framed into
cups: their feathers are most beautiful, as you may perceive by this
following figure.

The figure of an Estrich.


Any one may easily gather of what a prodigious magnitude an Estrich is, by the
greatness of his bones. Three of these birds were kept at the Kings charge, by
the Mareschall de Rets: one whereof dying, it was bestowed upon me, whereof I
have with great diligence made a Sceleton.

The delineation of the Sceleton of an Estrich.
A. Shows the head, which was somewhat thicker than the head of a Crane, of
the length of ones hand, plain from the crown even to the beak; the beak
being divided to the middle region of the eye, being roundish at the end
thereof.

B. The neck, a yard long, consisting of seventeene vertebrae, each whereof on
each side is furnished with a transverse process looking downwards, of some
fingers length, excepting the two which are next the head, as which want these,
and are joined together by Ginglymos.

C. The back is of a foots length, consisting of seven Vertebrae.

D, The holy-bone of two foot long, in whose top there is a transverse
process, under which there lies a great hole.

E. Three more, but less.

F. G. H. After which there follows the cavity or socket, whereinto the head
of the thigh bone is received and hid. This externally and on the side
produces a perforated bone, noted with the letter, I. perforated I say at the
beginning, for it is presently united at the letter, K. then is it forked and
divided into two other bones, whereof one is bigger than the other. The less
is noted with the letter, L. then are they both united at the letter M. each of
them is half a foot and four inches long. But from that part whereas they
first begun to be divided, to that whereas they are united, there is a hole
some four fingers broad, but the length of ones hand, or more, and it is noted
with the letter, N. The residue of the bone is like to a pruning knife three
inches broad, but six in length: at the end whereunder is the letter, O. it is
joined by coalition.

P. The rumpe consisting of nine vertebrae, like to a man's. The thigh-bones are
two, whereof that which is noted with the letter Q. is of the length of a foot,
and of thickenesse equal to a horses thigh. The other next under (which
peradventure you may call the legge-bone) noted with R. is a foot and half
long: it has joined thereto the Fibula, or lesser focile of the like length,
but which grows smaller as it comes lower.

S. Is the leg, to which the foot adheres, being one foot and a half long,
divided at the end into two claws, the one bigger, the other less, whereof
each consists of three bones.

T. Eight ribs, which are inserted into the Sternon, the three middlemost of
these have a bony production like to a hook.

V. Is the Sternon, consisting of one bone of some foots length, representing a
buckler, to this there is joined another bone, which stretched over the three
first ribs, is in stead of clavicles or collar-bones.

X. The first bone of the wing, which is one foot and half long.

Y, Two bones under this, equivalent to the ell and wand, under which there are
six other bones composing the point of the wing, noted with Z.

This whole Sceleton is seven foot long, and so many foot or more high from the
feet to the beak: there are many other observable things in her composure, but
I have thought fit to omit them for brevities sake.



Jerome Cardane in his books De subtilitate, writes that in the Hands of the
Molucca's, The description of the bird of Paradise.
you may sometimes find lying upon the ground, or take up in the waters, a dead
bird called a Manucodiata, that is in Hebrew, the bird of God, it is never
seen alive. It lives aloft in the air, it is like a Swallow in body and
beak, yet distinguished with diverse colored feathers: for those on the top
of the head are of a golden color, those of the neck like to a Mallard, but
the tail and wings like Peacocks; Whosoever desires to know more of the truth
of this bird, let him read Clusius in the Auctarium ad lib. 5. cap. 1.
exoticorum.
it wants feet: Wherefore if it become weary with flying, or desire sleep, it
hangs up the body by twining the feathers about some bough of a tree. It
passes through the air, wherein it must remain as long as it lives, with
great celerity, and lives by the air and dew only. The cock has a cavity
deprest in the back, wherein the hen lays and sits upon her eggs. I saw one
at Paris which was presented to King Charles the ninth.

The effigies of a Manucodiata, or bird of Paradise.


We have read in Thevets Cosmography, that he saw a bird in America, which in
Tom. 2. lib. 21. cap. 12.
that country speech is called Touca, in this very monstrous and deformed, for
that the beak in length and thickenesse, exceeds the bigness of the rest of
the body; it feeds on pepper, as the black-birds and felfires with us do upon
Ivy berries, which are not less hot than pepper.

A certain Gentleman of Provence brought a bird of this kind from that
country, to present it to King Charles the ninth, but dying in the way he could
not present it alive. Wherefore the King wished the Marshall de Rets to give
her to me, that I might take forth her bowels and embalme her, that she might
be kept amongst the Kings rarities. I did what I could, yet not long after she
rotted: she resembled a crow in body and feathers, but had a yellowish beak,
clear, smooth, and toothed like a saw, and of such length and thickness as we
formerly mentioned. I keep it yet as a certain monstrous thing.

Thevet writes that in the Island Zocetera there is frequently found a certain
wild beast called Hulpalis, of the bigness of an Ethiopian Monkey. It is a
very monstroas Tom. 1. cap. 11. lib. 4.
creature, but in nothing more, than that it is thought to live upon the air
only; the skin, as if it were died in grain, is of a scarlet color, yet is
it in some places spotted and variegated: it has a round head like to a boule,
with feet round, broad, and wanting hurtful nails. The Moors kill it and use
to eat the flesh of it, being first bruised, that so it may be the more tender.

In the Realm of Camota, of Ahob, of Benga, and other mountains of Cangipa,
Plimatique and Catagan, which are in the inner India, beyond the river of
Ganges, Thevet tom. 1. lib. 11. cap. 13,
some five degrees beyond the Tropicke of Cancer, is found a beast, which the
western Germans call Giraffe. This beast in head, ears, and cloven feet, is
not much unlike our Do; it has a very slender neck, but it is some six foot
long, and there are few beasts that exceed him in the length of their legs:
his tail is round, but reaches no further than his hammes, his skin is
exceeding beautiful, yet somewhat rough, having hair thereon somewhat longer
than a Cow, it is spotted and variegared in some places with spors of a middle
color, between white and chestnut, so as Leopards are: for which cause by some
greek Historians it is called a Cameleopardalis: it is so wild before it be
taken, that with the good will it will not so much as be seen. Therefore it
inhabites and lives only in desert and secret places, unknown to the rest of
the beasts of that region. He presently flies away at the sight of a man, yet
is he taken at length, for that he is not very speedy in his running away; once
taken, he is as easily and speedily tamed as any wild beast whatsoever. He has
above his crown two straight horns covered with hairs, and of a foots length.
When as he holds up his head and neck he is as high as a Lance. He feeds upon
herbs, and the leaves and boughs of trees, yea and he is also delighted with
bread.

The effigies of a Giraffa.


Such as sail in the red sea along the coast of Arabia, meet with an Island
called by the Arabians Cademota; in that part thereof where the river Plata
runs, is found a wild beast, called by the barbarous inhabitants Parassoupi,
being of the bigness of a Mule, headed not unlike one, yet rough and haired
like to a Bear, but not of so dark a color, but inclining to yellow, with
cloven feet like a Heart: she has two long horns on her head, but not
branched, somewhat resembling those so much magnifyed horns of Unicornes. For
the natives of the place, bitten by the venomous tooth of either beast or fish,
are presently helped and recover by drinking the water wherein such horns have
been infused for six or seven days space, as Thevet in his Cosmography
reports.

In one of the Islands of the Molucca's there is found a Beast living both on
land and water like as a Crocodile; it is called Camphurch, it is of the
bigness of an Heart, it has one horn in the forehead, moveable after the
fashion of the nose of a Turky-cocke: it is some three foot and an half long,
and never thicker than a man's arm; his neck is covered over with hair of an
ash color, he has two feet like to a gooses feet, wherewith he swims both in
fresh and salt waters. His fore feet are like to a stags, he lives upon fish.
Many have persuaded themselves that this beast is a kind of Unicorne, and that
therefore his horn should be good against poisons. The King of the Island
loves to be called by the name of this beast; and so also other Kings take to
themselves the names of the wild beasts, fishes, or fruits, that are most
precious and observable in their dominions, as Thevet reports.

Mauritania and Aethiopia, and that part of Afric that is beyond the deserts
and syrtes, bring forth Elephants; but those of India are far larger. Now
although in the largeness of their body they exceed all four footed beasts,
yet may they be The Indian Elephants are bigger than the Africane.
more speedily and easily tamed than other beasts. For they may be taught to
do many things above the common nature of beasts. Their skin is somewhat like
to a Buffles, with little hair upon it, but that which is, is ash colored,
his head large, his neck short, his ears two handfulls broad, his nose or
trunk very long, and hanging down almost to the ground, hollow like as a
trumpet, the which he uses in stead of an hand, his mouth is not far from
his beast, not much unlike a swines, from the upper part whereof two large
teeth thrust forth themselves, his legs are thick and strong, not consisting
of one bone as many formerly have falsely believed (for they kneel to admit
their Rider, or to be laden, and then rise up again of themselves) his feet
are round like a quoit some two or three hands breadth, and divided into five
clefts. He has a tail like a Buffle, but not very rough, some three hands
breadth long, wherefore they would be much troubled with flies and waspes, but
How they keep flies from them.
that nature has recompensed the shortness of their tails by another way; for
when they find themselves molested, they contract their skin so strongly, that
they suffocate and kill these little creatures taken in the wrinkles thereof;
they overtake a man running by going only, for his legs are proportionable
to the rest of his body.

They feed upon the leaves and fruits of trees, neither is any tree so strong
or well rooted, which they cannot throw down and break. They grow to be
sixteen handfulls high, wherefore such as ride upon an Elephant are as much
troubled as if they went to sea. They are of so unbridled a nature, that they
cannot endure any head-stall or raines, therefore you must suffer them to take
the course and way they please. Yet do they obey their country men without any
great trouble; for they seem after some sort to understand their speech,
wherefore they are easily governed by their known voices and words. They throw
down a man that angers them, first taking him up with their Trunk and lifting
him aloft, and then letting him fall, Lib. 9. de list. anim. cap. 27.
they tread him under foot, and leave him not before he be dead. Aristotle
writes that Elephants generate not before they be twenty years old: they know
not adultery, neither touch they any female but one, from which they also
diligently abstain It is not known how long an Elephant goes with young.
when they know she has once conceived. It cannot be known how long they go
with young; the reason is for that their copulation is not seen, for they never
do it but in secret. The females bring forth resting upon their hind legs,
and with pain like women, they lick their young, and these presently see and
go, and suck with their mouths, and not with their Trunkes. You may see
Elephants teeth of a monstrous and stupendous bigness, at Venice, Rome,
Naples, and Paris; they term it Ivory, and it is used for Cabinets, Harps,
Combs, and other such like uses.

The figure of an Elephant.


We have read in Thevet, that in Florida there are great Bulls, called in that
country tongue Beautrol, they have horns of a foot long, a bunch on their
back like a Tom. 2. lib. 23. cap. 2.
Camel, their hair long and yellow, the tail of a Lion; there is scarce any
creature more fierce or wild, for it can never be tamed unless it be taken
from the dam. The Salvages use their Hides against the cold, and their horns
as an Antidote against Their horns good against poisons. Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap.
10.
poison.

The same author affirms that whilst he sailed in the red sea, he saw a
monster in the hands of certain Indian merchants, which in bigness and shape
of his limbs was not unlike a Tiger, yet had the face of a man, but a very flat
nose: besides, his fore feet were like a man's hands, but the hind like the
feet of a Tiger, he had no tail, he was of a dun color: to conclude, in
head, ears, neck, and face it resembled a man, but in the blackish and curled
hair, a More; for the other parts they were like a Tiger; they called it
Thanacth.

The figure of a beast called Thanacth.


This following monster is so strange that it will scarce be believed, but by
those that have seen it: it is bred in America, and by the Salvages called
Haiit, of the bigness of a Monkey, with a great belly, almost touching the
ground, and the head and face of a child: being taken, it mournes and sighs
like to a man that is troubled and perplexed; it is of an ash color, has the
feet divided into three claws, four fingers long, and sharper than those of a
Lion: it climbes trees, and lives there more frequently than upon the ground,
the tail is no longer than the breadth of three fingers. It is strange and
almost monstrous that these kind of creatures have never bin seen to feed
upon or eat any thing: for the salvages have kept them long in their houses to
make trial thereof, wherefore they think them to live by the air.

The figure of a beast called Haiit.


I have taken this following monster out of Leo's African history; it is very
deformed, being round after the manner of a Tortoise, two yellow lines crossing
each other at right angles, divide his back, at every end of which he has one
eye, and also one ear, so that such a creature may see on every side with his
four eyes, as also hear by his so many ears: yet has he but one mouth, and
one belly to contain his meat; but his round body is encompassed with many
feet, by whose help he can go any way he please without turning of his body,
his tail is something long and very hairy at the end. The inhabitants affirm
that his blood is more effectual in healing of wounds than any balsome. Blood
as good as balsome.




It is strange that the Rhinoceros should be a born enemy to the Elephant;
wherefore he whets his horn, which grows upon his nose, upon the rocks, and
so prepares Plin. lib. 8. cap. 29.
himself for fight, wherein he chiefly assailes the belly, as that which he
knows to be the softest: he is as long as an Elephant, but his legs are much
shorter, he is of the color of box, yet somewhat spotted, Pompey was the first
that showed one at Rome.

The effigies of a Rhinoceros.


The figure of a Chameleon.


Africa produces the Chameleon, yet is it more frequent Plin. lib. 8. cap. 33.
in India: he is in shape and greatness like a Lizard, but that his legs are
straight, and higher, his sides are joined to the belly as in fish, and Arist.
lib. 2. hist. anim. cap. 12.
his back stands up after the same manner, his nose stands out not much unlike
a swines, his tail is long, and ends sharp, and he foulds it up in a
round, like a serpent, his nails are crooked, his pace slow like as the
Tortoise, his body rough, he never shuts his eyes, neither does he look
about by the moving of the apple, but by the turning of the whole eye. The
nature of his color is very wonderful, for he changes The strange nature of
the color of the Chamelcon.
it now and then in his eyes and tail, and whole body beside; and he always
assimulates that which he is next to, unless it be red or white. His skin is
very thin, and his body clear; therefore the one of these two, either the
color of the neighboring things in so great subtlety of his clear skin,
easily shines as in a glass; or else various humors diversely stirred up in
him, according to the variety of his affections, represent diverse colors in
his skin, as a Turky-cocke does in those flethy excrescences under his
throat, and upon his head: he is pale when he is dead. Mathiolus writes that
the right eye taken from a living Chameleon takes away the white spots which
are upon the horny coat of the eye; his body being beaten, and mixed with Goats
milk, and rubbed upon any part, fetches off hairs; his gall discusseth the
Cataracts of the eye.

CHAP. XXIII. Of celestial Monsters.
PEradventure it has not bin strange that monsters have been generated upon
the earth and in the Sea: but for monsters to appear in heaven, and in the
upper region of the air, exceeds all admiration. Yet have we often read it
written by the ancients, that the face of heaven has been deformed, by
bearded, tailed, and haired Comets; by meteors representing burning Torches,
and lamps, pillars, darts, shields, troops of clouds, hostilely assailing each
other; Dragons, two Moons, Suns, and the like monsters and prodigies.

Antiquity has not seen any thing more prodigious than that Commet which
appeared with bloody hair in Uvestine, upon the ninth day of October, 1528.
for it A Comet with bloody hair.
was so horrible and fearful a spectacle, that diverse died with fear, and
many fell into grievous diseases; going from the East to the South, it endured
no longer than one hour and a quarter: in the top thereof was seen a
bending arm holding a great sword in a threatening hand; at the end thereof
appeared three stars, but that over which the point of the sword directly
hanged was more bright and clear than the rest: on each side of this Comet
were seen many spears, swords, and other kinds of weapons died with blood,
which were intermixed with men's heads, having long and terrible hair and
beards, as you may see in the following figure.

The figure of a fearful Comet.


Also there have been seen great and thick bars of Iron to have fallen
from heaven, which have presently been turned into swords and rapiers. At
Sugolia in the borders of Hungaria, a stone fell from heaven with a great
noise, the seventh day of September, anno Dom. 1514. it weighed two hundred and
fifty pound: the Citizens hanged it up with a great iron chain put through it,
in the midst of the Church of their City, and used to show it, as a miracle, to
travelers of better note that past that way. Pliny reports that the clashing
of armor, and the sound of a trumpet were Lib. 2. cap. 57.
heard from heaven often, before and after the Cimbrian war. The same author
also writes that in the third Consul-ship of Marius, the Amarines and
Tudortines saw the heavenly armies coming from East and West; and so joining,
those being vanquished which came from the East. Which samething was seen in
Lusalia, at a town called Jubea, two hours after midnight, anno Dom. 1535.
But in anno Dom. 1550. upon the nineteenth day of July, in Saxony, not far
from Wittenberg, there appeared in the air a great stagge, encompassed with
two armed hosts, making a great noise in their conflict, and at the same
instant it rained blood in great abundance, the sun seemed to be cloven into
two pieces, and the one of them to fall upon the earth. A little before the
taking of Constantinople from the Christians, Presages of the taking of
Constantinople.
there appeared a great army in the air appointed to fight, attended on with a
great company of dogs and other wild beasts. Julius Obsequius reports that in
anno Dom. 458. it rained flesh in Italy, in greater and lesser pieces, part of
which were devoured Monstrous rains
by the birds before they fell upon the earth: that which fell upon the earth
kept long unpurrefyed, and unchanged in color and smell. Anno Dom. 989. Otho
the third being Emperor, it rained corn in Italy. Anno Dom. 180. it rained
milk and oil in great abundance, and fruit-bearing trees brought forth corn.
Lycosthenes tells that in the time of Charles the fifth, whilst Maidenberg was
besieged, three suns first appeared about seven a clock in the morning, and
then were seen for a whole day, whereof the middlemost was the brightest, the
two others were reddish and of a bloody color; but in the night time there
appeared three moons. The same appeared in Bavaria, anno Dom. 1554.

But if so prodigious and strange things happen in the heavens besides the
common Earthquakes.
order of nature, shall we think it incredible that the like may happen in
the earth? Anno Dom. 542. the whole earth quaked, mount Aetna cast forth flames
and sparks of fire, with which many houses of the neighboring villages were
burnt. Anno Dom. 1531. in Portugal there was an earthquake for eight days,
and it quaked seven or eight times each day; so that in Lisbone alone it cast
down a thousand and fifty houses, and more than six hundred were spoiled.
Ferrara lately was almost wholly demolisht by a fearful earthquake. Above all
which ever have been heard is that prodigy which happened in the time of
Pliny, at the death of Nero the Lib. 2. cap. 73.
Emperor in the Marucine field, the whole Olive-field of Vectius Marcellus a
Roman Knight going over the high way, and the fields which were against it
coming into the place thereof. Why should I mention the miracles of waters,
from whose depth and streams, fires and great flames have often broke forth?
They tell out of St. Augustine, that the fire of the sacrifice, which for those
seventy years of the Babylonian captivity endured under the water, was
extinguished, Antiochus selling the priesthood to Jason. What miracle is this,
that the fire should live in the water, above its force and natural efficacy,
and that the water should forget the extinguishing faculty! Verily Philosophers
truly affirm that the elements, which are understood to be contrary, and to
fight in variety among themselves, are mutually joined and tied together by a
mavelous confederacy.

The End of the Twenty fifth Book.
OF THE FACULTIES OF SIMPLE MEDICINES, AS ALSO OF THEIR COMPOSItion and Use.
THE TWENTY SIXTH BOOK.
THE PREFACE.
AMongst the causes which we term healthful, and other remedies which pertain
to the health of man, and the expelling of Diseases, Medicines easily challenge
the prime place; which (as it is delivered by Solomon) God has produced out of
the earth, and they are not to be abhorred by a wise man; for there is The
excellency of Medicines.
nothing in the world, which sconer, and as by a miracle, asswageth the horride
torments of diseases. Therefore Herophilus called them fittingly administered,
The hands of the Gods. And hence it was that such Physicians as excelled in the
knowledge of Medicines, have amongst the Ancients acquired an opinion of
Divinity. It cannot by words be expressed what power they have in healing.
Wherefore the knowledge of them is very necessary not only for the prevention,
but also for the driving away of Diseases.

CHAP. I. What a Medicine is, and how it differs from nourishment.
WE define a medicine to be, That which has power to change the body
according to one or more qualities; and that such as cannot be changed into
our nature: contrary whereto we term that nourishment which may be converted
into the substance of our bodies. But we define them by the word power, because
they have not an absolute nature, but as by relation and depending upon the
condition of the bodies by whom they are taken. For that which is medicine to
one, is meat to another, and that which is meat to this, is medicine to that.
Thus for example, Hellebore is nourishment to the Quail, but a medicine to
man: Hemlocke is nourishment to a Sterling, but poison to a Goose: the Ferula
is food to an Ass, but poison to other cattle. Now this diversity is to be
attributed to the different natures of creatures.

It is recorded in history, that the same by long use may happen in men. They
report that a maid was presented to Alexander the great, who, nourished with
Napellus, and other poisons, had by long use made them familiar to her, so that
the very breath she breathed was deadly to the bystanders. Therefore it ought
to seem no marvel, if it at any time happen, that medicines turn into the
nature and nourishment of our bodies: for we commonly may see birds and swine
feed upon serpents and toads without any harm: and lastly,

-- Serpenti Ciconia pullos
Nutrit, and per devia rura lacerta:
Illi eadem sumptis quaerunt animalia pennis.
The Storke with Serpents and with Lizards caught,
In waylesse places nourishes her brood:
And they the same pursue, when as they are taught
To use their wing, to get their wished for food.
CHAP. II. The differences of Medicines in their matter and substance.
EVen as the concealed glory of worldly riches lies hid in the bowels of the
earth, and depths of the sea and waters, as gold, silver, and all The earth the
mother of riches and medicines.
sorts of metals, gemmes and precious stones, furnished with admirable virtues;
so we may behold the superficies of this earth clothed with almost an infinite
variety of trees, shrubs, and herbs: where we may contemplate and wonder at
the innumerable diversities of roots, leaves, flowers, fruits, gummes, their
smells, pleasant tastes and colors, but much more at their virtues. This same
mother Earth, as with her breasts, nourishes mavelous distinct kinds of
living creatures, various in their springing, increase and strength. Wherein
the immense goodness of God, the great Architect and framer of all things,
does most clearly appear toward man, as who has subjected to our
government, as a patrimony, so ample and plentiful provision of nature for our
delight in nourishment, and necessity of healing. Therefore the ancient
Physicians have rightly delivered, that all sorts of medicines may be
abundantly had from living creatures, plants, the earth, water and air.

Medicines are taken from living creatures either whole and entire, or else the
what medicines taken from living creatures.
parts and excrements of them. We often times use in Physic whole creatures,
as foxes, whelps, hedge-hogs, frogs, snailes, worms, crabbes, and other living
creatures. We also make use of some parts of them, as the liver of a wolf or
goat, the lungs of the fox, the bone of the stagges heart, Cranium humanum,
fat, blood, flesh, marrow, the cods of the Castor or Beaver, which is therefore
termed Castoreum, and such other particles that are useful in Physic. We
know also that there are some medicines taken from excrements, as horns,
nails, hairs, feathers, skin; as also from urine, dung, spittle, honey, eggs,
wax, milk, wool, sweat, and others of this kind, under which we may
comprehend musk, civet, pearl, oesipus, and sundry others of this nature.

We take medicines from plants, both whole, and also from their parts, whether
trees, shrubs, or herbs. For we often times use succory, marsh-mallowes,
mallows, What from plants.
plantaine, and the like, whole: but otherwhiles only the roots of plants,
their pith, wood, bark, shoots, stalks, leaves, flowers, seeds, fruits,
juices, gummes, rosines, mosses, and the like.

Things taken from the earth for the use and matter of medicine, are either
earths, What from the earth.
stones, or mineralls. The sorts of earth are Bole armenicke, Terra sigillata,
fullers earth, chalk, potters clay, and such like. Stones are the pumice,
Marchisite of gold, silver, brass, marble, the lodestone, plaster, chalk,
sulphur vivum, lapis specularis, and others. Metals and mineralls are gold,
silver, tin, lead, brass, iron, steel, antimony, cerusse, brimstone,
cinnaber, litharge of gold and silver, tutty, true Pompholix, verdigreece,
alume, roman vitrioll, coprose white and green, salts of sundry kinds, both
the Arsenickes, and such like.

The following medicines are from fresh water, rain water, spring water, river
What from the water.
water, and all things thence arising, as water lentile, common flagges, water
lillies, water mints, and all the creatures that live therein. From the salt
water are taken salt, Alcyonium, all sorts of coral, shells of fish, as also
cuttle bones, sponges, and all creatures of the sea. From waters mixed of salt
and fresh, the herb Androsace (which grows in plenty in the marshes at
Fontignan and Cape de Sete) Asphaltum, which is found in the dead sea.

From the air proceeds Manna, therefore called melaerium (i. e.) honey of the
air, What from the air.
and also all other kinds of dew that are useful in Physic by reason of the
virtues they receive from the sun which raises them up, from the air,
whereas they make some stay, as also from the plants, whereupon they fall and
reside.

CHAP. III. The differences of simples in their qualities and effects.
ALL the mentioned sorts of simples are endued with one or more of the four
faculties, whereof I now purpose to treat.

The first faculty common to all the rest, and as it were their foundation,
flows from the four first qualities of the prime bodies or elements, that is,
heat, coldness, dryness, and moisture, and this either simple or compound, as
one or two of these prime qualities exceed in the temper of the medicine, as it
may appear by the following tables.

The simple quality is either to Heat, Cool, Humect, Dry.

The compound, arising from two joined qualities, either Heats and dries, Heats
and moistens, Cooles and dries, Cooles and moistens.

Heat, which is moderate, Heats, Attenuates, Rarifyes, Opens the passages,
Digests, Suppurates.
immoderate Inflames and burns, Bites, whence follows Violent attraction,
Rubrification, Consumption, Colliquation, An eschar, Mortification.



Cold, which is moderate, Cools, Condenseth, Obstructeth.
immoderare, Congeales, Stupefyes, Mortifyes.


Moisture, which is moderate, Humects, Lubricates, Levigates and mitigates,
Glues.
immoderate, Obstructs, Lifts up into a flatulent tumor, especially if it be a
vaporous humidity.


Dryness, which is moderate, Dryes, Rarifyes, Attenuates.
immoderate, Binds, Contracts or shrinks, Causes chops and scailes.


The effect of these qualities is distinguished, and as Galen observes,
digested into these orders, which we term Degrees; so that by a certain
proportion and measure, 5. ^^^p. and 1. de aliment.
they may serve to oppugn diseases, as the same Galen affirms. For to a
disease (for example) hot in the second degree, no other medicine must be used
than that which is cold in the like degree: Wherefore all simple medicines are,

Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry,
in the Beginning, Middle, Extreme,
of the first, second, third, fourth,
degree.

The Heat, of the first, degree, is Obscure, The Coldness, of the second,
degree, is Manifest, The Moisture, of the third, degree, is Vehement, The
Dryness of the fourth degree, is Excessive.
An example of heat distinguished thus by degrees, may be thus, Warm water is
temperate; that which is a little hotter, is in the first degree of heat; if
manifestly Examples' of the degrees of heat.
hot, it is in the second degree; but if it heat more vehemently, it may be
thought to come to the third; but if it scald, then we know that it has
arrived to the fourth degree of heat. Such also is the distinction of
coldness, moisture, and dryness, by their degrees. Wherefore it will be worth
our labor, to give you examples of certain medicines, distinguished in their
order and degree, by which you may the more easily give conjecture of the rest.

Simple Medicines hot in the

First degree.
Absinthium. Althaea. Amygdala dulcia. Beta. Brassica. Chamaemelum. Ladanum.
Semen Lini. Saccharum. Ervum, sive Orobus. Vinum novum: For old is judged hot
in the second or third degree, as it is more or less years old.
Second degree.
Ammoniacum. Arthemisia. Anethum. Foenugraecum. Mastiche. Salvia Marrubium.
Melissa. Pix utraque tum arida corporibus particulisque solidioribus aptior,
tum liquida delicatioribus. Scilla. Sarcocolla. Bryonia. Apium. Chamaepytis.
Crocus. Ficus. Thus. Myrrhae. Mel. Nux moschata. Sal. Opopanax. Ammi.
Simples hot in the

Third degree.
Abrotanum. Agnus castus. Anisum. Asarum. Aristolochia. Chamaedrys. Sabina.
Calamintha. Cinamomum. Iris. Juniperus. Hyssopus. Origanum. Sagapenum.
Chelidonium majus. Ruta saliva.
Fourth degree.
Allium. Caepa. Euphorbium. Nasturtium. Pyrethrum. Sinapi. Tithymalli.
Anacardi. Chelidonium minus, Galeno. Yet ours, by reason of the gentleness of
the air, and moisture of our soil, is not so acride. Ruta sylvestris. This,
as all wild and not cultivated things, becomes more strong and acride than the
Garden Rue.
Simples cold in the

First degree.
Atriplex. Hordeum. Cydonia mala. Malva. Pyra. Pruna. Rosa. Viola.
Second degree.
Acacia. Cucurbita. Cucumis. Malagranata acida, dulcia enim temperata sunt
potius. Plantago. Polyganum. Solanum hortense, nam id quod somniferum dicitur,
vi refrigerandi ad papaver accedit.
Third degree.
Hyoscyamus. So^anum somniferum.
Fourth degree.
Cicuta. Papaveris genera omnia, excepto Cornicula.
Portulaca. Sempervivum. Mandragora.
to, huic enim incidendi and abstergendi vim attribuit Gal. Certe nitrosum and
salsum gustu percipitur, quo fit ut calida and siccae sit naturae. Opium.
Simples moist in the

First degree.
Buglossum. Viola. Malva. Rapum. Spinacia.
Second degree.
Ammoniacum. Lactuca. Cucurbita. Cucumis. Melones. Portulaca.
Simples dry in the

First degree.
Thus. Chamaemelum. Brassica. Sarcocolla. Crocus. Faba. Faenugraecum. Hora^^m
integrum.
Second degree.
Artemisia. Orobus. Balaustia. Lens. Mastiche. Mel. Sal. Anethum. Myrrha. Pix
arida. Plantago. Nux moschata.
Third degree.
Abrotonum ustum. Absinthium. Acetum. Milium. Sanguis draconis. Galla. Myrtus.
Aloe. Cuminum. Sabina.
Fourth degree.
Piper. Allium. Nasturtium. Sinapi. Euphorbium.
Those we have mentioned have of themselves and their own nature all such
qualities, The effects of the first qualities by accident.
yet do they produce far other effects by accident, and besides their own
nature in our bodies, by reason of which they are termed accidental causes.
This shall be made manifest by the following examples.

External heat by accident refrigerates the body within, because it opens the
passages and pores, and calls forth the internal heat, together with the
spirits and humors by sweats: whence it follows, that the digestion is worse,
and the appetite is diminished. The same encompassing heat also humects by
accident, whilst it diffuses the humors concrete with cold: for thus Venery
is thought to humect.

The like may be said of Cold, for that it heates not by its proper and native,
but by an adventitious force: whereof you may make trial in Winter, when as
the ambient cold, by shutting the pores of the body, hinders the breathing
forth and dissipation of the native heat. Whence it is inwardly doubled, and
the concoction better performed, and the appetite strengthened. This same cold
also dries by accident, when as it by accident repercusses the humor that was
ready to flow down into any part, and whilst it concretes that which is
gathered in the part: for thus by the immoderate use of repercussers, an
oedematous tumor, proceeding from gross and viscide phlegm, degenerates into
a scirrhus.

Dryness and moisture, because they are more passive qualities, show their
effects by not so manifest operations, as heat and cold do; but in comparison
of them they are rather to be judged as matter or a subject.

CHAP. IV. Of the second faculties of Medicines.
We term those the second faculties of Medicines, which have dependence upon
the first, which are formerly mentioned, as it is the part

Of Heat to Rarefie, Attract, Open, Attenuate, Levigate, Cleanse.


Of Cold to Condense, Repercusse, Shut up, Incrassate, Exasperate, Constipate.


Of Moisture to Soften, Relaxe.


Of Dryness to Harden, Stiffen.


Hence we term that an attractive medicine, which has an attractive faculty,
as on the contrary, that a repercussive, that repels; a detergent, that which
cleanses viscous matter. We call that an Emplasticke medicine, which not only
shuts up the pores of the body, but reduces the liquid bodies therein contained
to a certain equality of substance. Thus also emollients, relaxers, and the
rest, have their denominations from their effects, as we shall declare
hereafter.

CHAP. V. Of the third faculties of Medicines.
THe third faculty of medicines depends for the most part upon the first and
second faculties, sometimes conjoined, otherwhiles separate. Also sometimes it
follows neither of these faculties, but a certain property and inexplicable
quality, which is only known by experience. Now the operations of this third
faculty are to agglutinate, to fill with flesh, to cicatrize, to assuage pain,
to move or stay the urine, milk, seed, the courses, sweats, vomits, and
perform such like operations in or about the body.

Thus the generation of flesh is produced by the concourse of two faculties,
that is, of drying and cleansing. But dryness and astriction produce a
glutinating and cicatrizing faculty. A hot and attenuating faculty causes
sweats, moves urine, the courses, and the like in the body; but contrary
faculties retarde and stop the same.

To mitigate pain, proceeds only from the first faculty, to wit, from heat,
or a moderately heating faculty; to procure rest, from cold only, or coldness
joined with some moisture. But to procure vomit, proceeds neither from the
first nor second faculty, but from a certain occult and essential property,
which is naturally implanted in Agaricke, and other nauscous and vomitory
medicines.

CHAP. VI. Of the fourth faculty of Medicines.
THe fourth faculty of medicines is not of the same condition with those The
fourth faculty of medicines depends only upon an occult property.
that are formerly mentioned; for it depends not upon them, or any other
manifest or elementary quality, but on an occult property of the whole
substance, by means whereof, it works rather upon this than that part, upon
this rather than that humor. Wherefore Physicians cannot by any reason find
out this faculty, but only by experience, as we have said a little before of
medicines procuring vomit. Hence it is, that names are given to those medicines
from those parts that they chiefly respect: For they are termed Cephalicks,
which respect the head, as Betony, Marjerome, Sage, Rosemary, Staechas:
Pneumonicks, which respect the Lungs, as Liquorice, sweet Almonds, Orris,
Elecampane. Cordials, that strengthen the heart, as Saffron, Cinnamon, Citrons;
but chiefly their rindes, Buglosse, Coral, Ivory. Stomaticall, which respect
the stomach, and the orifice thereof, as Nutmegs, Mint, Anise, Masticke,
Pepper, Ginger. Hepaticks, which respect the Liver, as Wormwood, Agrimony,
Spikenard, Succory, Sanders. Spleniticks, which have relation to the spleen,
as Time, Epithymum, Broom flowers, Cetrach, Capers, the bark of their roots,
the bark of Tamariske. Diuretics, such as respect the kidneyes and urenary
passages, as the roots of Smallage, Asperagus, Fennel, Butchers brom, the
four greater cold seeds, Turpentine, Plantaine, Saxifrage. Arthniticks, or
such as strengthen the joints, as Cowslips, Chamaepytis, Elecampane, Calaminte,
Hermodactiles, and the like.

To this rank may be referred purging medicines, which, furnished with a
specificke property, show their efficacy on one humor more than another
humor, and that impact more in one part than in another. For thus Agricke
chiefly draws phlegm from the head and joints, Rubarbe draws choler chiefly
from the Liver, and hurts the kidneyes. But let us here forbear the
consideration of such things, as not appertaining to Surgery. But some
medicines of this kind are furnished with one simple faculty, othersome with
more, and those contrary, whereof your taste may give you sufficient notice:
for Rubarbe at the first touch of the tongue is found acride and hot; but when
you come to chaw and thoroughly to taste it, you shall find it to partake of an
earthy astriction. Therefore because tastes give notice of the faculties of
medicines, therefore I have thought good to treat of them briefly.

CHAP. VII. Of Tastes.
TAste, as Galen delivers according to Aristotle and Theophrastus, is a Lib. 1.
simpl.
certain concoction of moisture in dryness, caused by means of heat, which
we know or discern by the tongue well tempered, and fittingly furnished with
spittle and his nerves. There are nine differences of tastes; for there are
three judged hot, to wit, the acride, Differences of tastes.
bitter, and salt: three cold, the acide, austere, and ac^rbe: three temperate,
the sweet, the oily or fat, and the insipide. Now they are thought so many,
according to the different degrees of concoction; for it appears greater in
hot tastes, and as it were a certain assation, but less in cold, but
indifferent, and as it were an elixation in things temperate: therefore Nature
observes this order in the concoction of sapide bodies, that at the first the
acerbe taste should take place, then the austere, and lastly, the acide; from
these (as it were) rudiments of concoction, arises an insipide, then an oily,
then a sweet perfectly concocted and temperate. This concoction exceeding the
bounds of mediocrity, there arises a salt taste, then a bitter, and then an
acride with the highest excess, of almost a fiery heat. Yet I would be thus
understood, that all things that are by nature sapide, do not always ascend to
the height of sweetness by the degrees of acerbity, austerity, and acidity, as
though it were of absolute necessity, that all things that are sweet, they
should first be acerbe, austere, and acide. For there are many things found,
especially in plants and their fruits, which when they shall arrive to their
perfection and maturity, are acide, bitter, or salt, but being yet unripe, and
not come to full perfection, they have a certain sweetness, which afterward,
by a further digestion, or perfection and concoction, acquire a bitter,
austere, or acide taste. For thus bitterness in Wormwood and Aloes, acrimony
in Pepper or Pellitory, is a perfection of nature, a full ripeness and perfect
concoction, and not an excess of heat in that species. Also acerbity and
austerity is a perfection of nature, and not a rudiment in Services and
Cornelians; acidity or tartness is also so in verjuice. But in very many
things it so falls out, that the sweet or fatty taste become so, and acquire
their perfection by concoction, as in Grapes, Figs, Pears, Apples, and
almost all other such fruits, as we usually feed upon. Therefore I will now
treat of each of them in order, first beginning with the cold tastes.

The acerbe taste is cold and terrestrial, and of a substance absolutely
gross, being The acerbe taste.
less humide than the austere, but much less than the acide. It notably
cooles and dryes, it condensats, binds, repels, especially from the
superficies, and it also exasperates; this taste resides, and may be found in
Pomegranate pills, Galls, Sumach, and Cypress nuts.

The austere is nighest in temper and effects to the acerbe, but somewhat
moisture; The austere.
for the acerbe absolutely consists in a terrestrial and cold substance.
Wherefore this, increased by a degree of concoction, acquires more store either
of heat alone, or else of moisture alone, or else of both together: moisture,
I say, and that is either ayery, or else watery. Therefore if these fruits,
which before their maturity are acerbe, have an accession of heat, then do
they become sweet, as you perceive by Chestnuts; but if there be an acc^ssion of
moisture only, and that more gross, of acerbe they become austere: for both
the tastes are in the like degree of cold, but the austere is the moisture. But
if to the same frigidity remaining in fruits, a certain subtle humidity accrue,
then is there caused an acide taste. But if they have an accession of a watrish
moisture and heat, they will acquire a sweet taste, or else oily, if the
humidity accrewing with the heat be ayery.

I have judged it requisite to admonish you hereof, that you might know by what
means sapide bodies mitigated become sweet of acerbe, as it were by these
interposed degrees of austerity, acidity, and oylinesse, as they acquire a
various accession of heat and moisture separately, or conjunctly.

Now by all that we have delivered, you may gather, that all acerbe and
austere things are cold and dry; and as they are cold, they repel and hinder
defluxions: as they are dry and terrestrial, they condensate, incrassate,
constipate, and straiten the passages; yea, and they also cicatrize: but acerbe
things perform this far more powerfully, as those which are absolutely
terrene, cold, and dry, not partaking of moisture, or water. Now austere things
consist (as it were) in a middle matter, that is, in a more dilute terrene
body, as it is apparent in Services, unripe Grapes, Cornelians, Medlars, Crabs,
wild Pears, and all sorts of unripe fruits, whence it is termed a crude taste.

The acide taste is of a cold and watrish nature, but most subtle, by benefit
whereof The acide taste.
it penetrates, and divides almost as powerfully as the acride. It incides, or
divides, attenuates, bites, cleanses, opens obstructions, repels and dryes. For
by the means of the deep piercing cold, it repels all defluxions; and by the
drying faculty, which is strong even in its watery consistence, it stays and
stops all bleedings, the haemorrhoides and dysenteries. The force thereof is
chiefly manifest in Vinegar, as also in the juice of Citrons, Sorrel,
Cherries, Berberries, and the like. And this is the nature of cold tastes, now
it is time we speak of such as are temperate.

The insipide is unproperly termed a taste, as that which is rather a privation
of The insipide.
tastes, it is in some sort cold, and of a very watrish and gross nature, it
inspissates, constipates, and stupifies. This kind of taste is chiefly
manifest in water, and next in Gourds, Citruls, and many such like things.

The oily taste is hot, humide, and ayery; therefore it humects, relaxates,
mollifies, The oily.
lubricates. Of this kind are oil, butter, fat which is not raucide by age,
nor acride by nature, as that of Lions and Foxes.

The sweet taste is made by a moderate and well concocting heat, consisting in
a The sweet.
matter more tenuious and hot than the insipide, but in somewhat more gross
than the oily, from which in the first qualities it does not differ; therefore
it is of a hot, ayery, and temperate nature. Therefore every sweet thing
detergeth, levigates, concocts, ripens, relaxes, and asswageth pain. Examples
of this taste may be had in Sugar, Honey, Manna, sweet Almonds, Milk, and
other like. Now let us come to hot tastes.

The salt taste is hot and astringent, less earthy than the bitter, as that
which resides The salt.
as it were in a middle matter. For it proceeds from an earthy dryness, which
is formerly torrified and attenuated by the force of heat in a watery humidity.
Wherefore that which is salt contracts the pores, cuts, cleanses, digests, or
rather dryes up the humors by the dryness thereof, without any manifest sense
of heat, whence it is, that it vindicates from putrefaction. Under this kind
are contained all sorts of salt, as Saltpeter, niter, sal Ammoniacum, sal
gemmae, common salt, sea water, and such other like.

The bitter taste is hot, earthy, and drying; for the matter thereof is gross
and The bitter.
earthy, which the abounding heat has torrified and dried up. Wherefore
bitter things taken in wardly, purge and carry away superfluous humors: and
outwardly applied, they mundifie and deterge ulcers, they open the mouths and
passages of the veins oft-times by their abstergent faculty; whence it is that
they move the courses and haemorrhoides. The principal things endued with this
taste are Aloes, Gall, Wormwood, Gentian, the lesser Centaury, Coloquintida,
Fumitory, Soot, and such like.

The acride taste is hot, of a subtle and fiery nature; for it is kindled of a
hot, subtle, The acride.
and dry matter, neither can it consist in any other. Therefore that which is
acride, heats, pricks or bites the mouth by the acrimony, it heates, and
oft-times burns, it penetrates, opens the passages, attenuates, attracts and
draws sorth gross humors, evacuates and sends forth urine, the courses, and
sweat: besides it oft-times is septicke, blistering, and escharotick; and
lastly, burning, and causticke. The septicke and putrefactive things are
sublimate, Chamaelea, the juice of Thapsia. The vesicatories are Dittander,
Cantharides, Crowfoot, Mustard, Pellitory of Spain, Euphorbium. But the
causticke and escharoticke are Lime, Oak ashes, and the like.

But we know medicines not only by the taste, but also by our other senses,
as touch, sight, hearing, smell. And as by the taste, so also by these we judge
of and try the goodness of medicines, and distinguish the true legitimate from
the adulterate. The touch judges what are hot and cold, moist and dry, rough
and gentle, or smooth, hard and soft, brittle or friable, glutinous and
viscide, dry or slippery. We approve of the goodness of medicines by their
color, brightness, or duskinesse, whereof the eye is judge; for we commend
that Senna which is somewhat greenish, but dislike the whitish: as also we like
well of such Cassia as is black both within and without, shining and full, and
not dry and shrunk up. Yet the judgment of the first qualities, by the color
is deceitful, or none at all; for such things as are white, or of the color
of Snow, are not therefore cold: for sundry of them are hot, as Lime. Neither
are red things to be therefore judged hot; for Roses cool. Also medicines are
chosen by the smell; for such as have a good, fresh, and natural smell, are
commonly hot, and in their perfect vigor. On the contrary, things that want
smell are for the most part cold and evanide. By hearing we distinguish things
full from such as are empty: thus we choose Cassia, which shaken, makes no
noise with the grains or seeds rattling in it. Hitherto we have explained the
first, second, third, and fourth faculties of medicines in general, and have
showed how they may be found out: now must we more particularly treat of their
second and third faculties, because by reason of these they chiefly come into
use in Surgery: Yet let me first briefly show by what means and arts they may
be prepared.

CHAP. VIII. Of the preparation of medicines.
To prepare medicines, is nothing else, than by art to make them more
commodious for use and composition, whereby they are either made More gentle.
All which are performed By bruising, as when medicines are broken by striking
and rubbing or grinding in a mortar, and that either of Brass, Iron, Lead,
Glass, Wood, Marble, and other like.
considering The thing which is to be beaten. The strength or force wherewith
it must be performed. The time or space. The situation. The things to be added.
The consistence which the thing beaten must be of.
More strong. By searsing, whereby we separate the pure and finer from the more
impure and gross, which is done by sives and searses, made of Wood, Parchment,
Horse hair. Silk, Lawne.
Wherein is to be noted, that the same consideration is to be had in
searsing, as in beating; therefore such things as are to be finely powdered,
must be searsed in a finer searse: such as are more gross, in a courser. More
pleasant. By dissolving or mollifying. Which is nothing else but a dissolving
of a simple or compound medicine, of a thick or hard consistence, either into a
mean consistence, or a little more liquid or soft, which is performed Either by
heat only; for by heat gums and horns are mollified: or by liquor, as by
vinegar, water, wine, juice of Lemmons, etc. By desiccation or hardening, which
Is nothing else, but the consuming of the superfluous and hurtful moisture,
and this is performed, either By the Sun, or By Fire. More wholesome. By
infusion, which is nothing else but the tempering or macerating of a medicine a
little beaten or cut, in some liquor appropriate and fit for our purpose, as in
Milk, Vinegar, Water, Oil, and the like, so long as the nature of the
medicine requires. To infusion Nutrition may be reduced, which is nothing
else, but as it were a certain accression of the medicine, by being moistened,
macerated, rubbed, or ground with some moisture, especially with heat. By
burning, that is, by consuming the humidity which is in them. And that, either
that they may be the better powdered, being otherwise too glutinous, or that
they may lay aside their gross essence, and become of a subtler temper; or that
they may put off, or partly lose some fiery quality, as acrimony, Gal. lib. 4.
cap 9. simplicium. Or that they may acquire a new color. Now all things are
burnt, either Alone, as such things as have a fatty moisture, as hairs, sweaty
wool, horns: Or else with some combustible matter, as sulphur; alome, salt,
barley, etc. More fit for mixture. By boiling or elixation, which is performed
by a humide heat, as burning is by a dry, and that either that we may
increase the weak faculties of such medicines as are boiled, by boiling them
with such as are stronger; or else to weaken such as are too strong, or else
wholly to dissipate such as are contrary: Or that one faculty may arise of
sundry things of different faculties being boiled together, or for the longer
keeping them, or bringing them to a certain form or consistence: all which
are done, either by the Fire, or Sun. By washing or cleansing, whereby the
impurity of the medicine is wasted away or cleansed, and such things are either
Hard, as metals, stones, parts of living creatures, condensed juices, and
other like: Or soft, as Rosines, Gums, Fats, Oils. And these ought first

CHAP. IX. Of repelling, or repercussive medicines.
REpelling or repercussive medicines are cold, and of gross and earthy parts;
by which name also astringent medicines are understood, because Astringents are
understood by the name of repellers.
they hinder the falling down of the humors upon the part. Repercussives are
such, either of their nature and of themselves, or else by accident, being not
such of their own nature. These which of themselves are such, are of two kinds;
for some are watrish and moist, without any astrictive The differences of
repercussives
faculty, which almost wholly proceeds from an earthy essence; wherefore that
faculty of repelling which they possess, they have it wholly from coldness.
Of this kind are lettuce, purslaine, sow-thistle, duckes-meat, kidney wort,
cowcumbers, melons, gourds, house-leeke, mandrake apples, nightshade, henbane,
and the like, which cool powerfully, and unless they be taken away before the
part wax blackish, they extinguish the natural heat. Other some are of an
earthy essence, and therefore astrictive; but yet some of these are hot, other
some cold. Such things as are cold of temper, and of an earthy consistence, are
properly and truly termed repellers. Of these, some are simple, other some
compound: the simples are plantaine, vine leaves, leaves of roses, oaks,
brambles, cypress, berberies, sumach, all unripe fruits, verjuice, vinegar,
red wine, the juice of sower pomegranats, acacia, the juice of barberries, and
quinces, hypocistis, pomegranate pills; oak bark, the flowers of wild
pomegranates, the meal of barley, beans, panicke, oats, millet, orobus mixed
with juices in form of a pultis, bole armenick, sanguis draconis, cerusse,
litharge, terra sigillata, fullers earth, chalk, marle, the lodestone, lead,
coralls, all marchisites, antimony, spodium, true pomphilix, all sorts of
earth, and other things of the like nature.

Now compound things are oleum rosaceum, omphacinum, mirtillorum, papaveris,
cidoniorum, nenupharis, unguentum rosatum, album rhasis, camphoratum,
emplastrum diacalcitheos, dissolved in vinegar and oil of roses, desiccativum
rubrum, populeon, emplastrum nigrum soutetrapharmacum of Galens description,
empl. contra rupturam, de cerusa, pro matrice. All such cold repercussives are
more effectual if they be associated with tenuity of substance, either of
themselves, or by mixture with some other Why things of subtle parts are often
times mixed with repercussives.
things: for to this purpose we often mix vinegar, camphire, and the like
things of subtle parts, with repercussives of gross parts, that they may serve
as vehicles to carry in the repercussives faculty. Repercussives of gross
parts and hot, are worm wood, centory, gentian, agrimony, savin, coriander,
mint, bay leaves, cardamomes, calamus aromaticus, aloes, spikenard, saffron,
nutmeg, cinnamon, amber, salt, alome, coporose, sulphur, oleum absinthinum,
mastichinum, nardinum, costinum, ceratum, Gal. stomachicum, santalinum,
emplastrum diacalcitheos. But such things as repel by accident, are bandages,
compresses, linen clothes, and rowlers of all sorts, cases, cauteries,
Repellers by accident.
blood-letting, cupping, painful frictions in the opposite parts, and other
such like things as are properly said to make revulsion. The use of
repercussives is to force When, and to what parts repercussives must be applied.
back the humor which flows from any other place into the part, and thus
they mitigate the heat of such inflammation as that defluxion of humors has
caused, yea often times to assuage and help pain, the fever, abscesse, malign
ulcers, and mortification. Such repercussives must always be so opposed to
the disease, that respect may be had to the temper, complexion, and
particular nature of the part whereto they are applied; for all parts cannot
equally bear the like force of repercussives, as nervous and other spermatick
and cold parts. Furthermore, there are some parts whereto we may by no means
apply repercussives, as the groines, arme-pits, and those glandules or kernells
which are behind the ears and brain, lest the humor should retire back into
some of the principal parts: the like reason is also of bodies, for the bodies
of women, children, eunuchs, cannot endure so strong repercussives and the
like excess of cold as manly and vigorous bodies may. Besides, every disease
requires not repercussives, for if the body be repleat with ill humors, if it
be plethoricke, the use of repercussives, unless after general purgation,
cannot be safe; as neither if the humor which is in motion shall be venenate,
gross, acrid, critical, or shall cause great pain in the part, for then on
the contrary we must rather make use of attractives. But now if the disease be
great, weak repercussives will avail nothing against it, as lettuce against a
great inflammation; and thou shall do ill if thou set upon a small defluxion
with powerful repellers; for by that means the skin is straitened, and the
passages thereof stopped, whereby the inflammation is increased, or else brought
to a schirrhus. Wherefore let the Chirurgian have a care that he temper the
force of his Repercussives according to the magnitude of the disease.

CHAP. X. Of attractive medicines.
AN attractive medicine is contrary to the repeller; the greeks call it
Helcticum, What an attractive medicine is.
it is of a hot and thin substance, whereby it draws forth into the
superficies of the body that which lies hid in the center, although sometimes
it does it by an occult quality; other whiles also by accident, as by the
acrimony. Those things which by a manifest quality do attract, are either
simple or compound.

The simple are Bryonia, allium, caepa, porrum, arastolochia, hermodactyli,
ciclamen, Attractives by a manifest quality.
lilium, sigillum beatae Mariae, arum, asarum, asphodelus, gentiana, pyrethrum,
ruta, sabina, calamentum, omnes tithymalorum species, viscum, abrotanum,
anagallis, urtica, ranunculus, struthium, and such like: ammoniacum, bdellium,
gabbanum, sagapenum, euphorbium, asphaltum, cinis e faece vini vel aceti, calx
viva, sulphur, sal ammoniacus, omnes salis species, auripigmentum, oleum vetus,
adeps leonis, ursi, canis, anseris, viperae, ranarum, axungia porci vetustate
acris, aut attritu rotarum. Composita vero, ut oleum de spica, philosophorum,
de terebinthina, de croco, de scorpionibus, rutaceum, vulpinum, laurinum,
anethinum, de vitriolo, unguentum Agrippae, aragon, seu auxiliare, martiatum,
enulatum, theriaca, mithridatium, empl. de meliloto, diachylon magnum and
parvum, oxycroceum, divinum.

Those things which draw by a secret property in nature, as are the lodestone,
By an (...)
quicksilver, pyony, amber, all antidotes and treacles that are remedies
against the bitings of venomous beasts, and all purging medicines.

These which draw by accident, perform it otherwise than of their own nature,
By accident.
they have that quality out of putrefaction and corruption, as doves dung,
goats dung, cow dung, man's dung, and all kind of dungs: also leven, old
cheese, and such like.

Cupping glasses, leaches, syrenges, rougher and harder frictions, sucking,
pain, straight ligations, cauteries do also draw, but after a different
manner from them spoken of before.

Attractive medicaments must neither burn nor discuss, and being very strong
and sharp^, they should be tempered and mixed with oil of roses, and other
lenitives: but to weak ones should be added oil of bays, calx viva, and such
like to strengthen them. The use of attractives is to draw poison toward the
skin, and to hasten Their (...).
forward critical abscesses; and they make those parts which were benumbed and
consumed, to have life, they restore the refrigerated parts by drawing thither
the spirits; they draw forth the viscous filth of malign ulcers that lies hid
in the nerves, and hollow passages of them; they also draw out scailes of
bones, splinters of wood, nails, thorns, arrows, and that matter which is
impact in hardened inflammations.

CHAP. XI. Of resolving medicines.
THat is called a resolving medicine, which by heat, and the tenuity of his
substance opens the pores, attenuates the humors, dissipates and discusseth
What a resolving medicine is. The differences thereof.
by evaporating the unprofitable matter. There are two sorts of these kinds of
medicines; the one is called Araeoticum or ratifying; the other is termed
Diaphoreticum or digesting.

The Araeoticum by a mean heat, and not dry, and endued with a tenuity of
substance, opens and relaxeth the skin, and draws forth the matter shut
up under it, whereby it may ease pain, like as Anodines, because it does not
much depart from a temperate heat.

But the Diaphoreticum being much hotter, whatsoever sticks in the part being
there impact, it does by thin vapor insensibly dissipate: therefore the acrid
and hot things are in this case to be made use of rather than attractives,
because that cold and grossness is more difficultly to be digested, and the
length and involution of the ways being to be considered. The Araeoticke,
which we may call weak resolvers, are either simple or compound.

The simples are these, bismalvatota, parietaria, adianthum, mercurialis,
ebulus, valeriana, rosmarinus, salvia, thymus, chamaemelum, melilotum, anethum,
farina hordei, tritici, seminis lini, faenugraeci, nigella, furfur, adeps
gallinae, anseris, anatis, cuniculi, vituli; almost all metalls unless such as
are acrid. The compounds are oleum chamaemolinum, anethinum, liliaceum
catellorum, lumbricorum, Keirinum, de vitellis ovorum, de tritico, amygdalarum
dulcium, Unguentum de althaea, empl. diachylum, ireatum. Diaphoretickes or
digestives, are also both simple and compound: the simple are Aristolochia,
enula campana, iris, caepa, scylla, sigillum Salomonis, sigillum beatae Mariae,
bryonia, panis porcinus, dracunculus, asphodelus, origanum, mentha, pulegium,
sabina, serpillum, calamentha, hyssopus, urtica, arthemisia, lavendula,
chamepytis, anisum, foeniculum, cuminum, piper, nux moschata, coriandrum,
baccae lauri and juniperi, farina fabarum, lupinorum, orobi, milii, frumenti,
furfur, mica panis, acetum tepidum, oxycratum, vinum vetus aut aromaticum, mel,
aqua vitae, muria, adeps tauri, equi, leonis, canis, hirci, medulla cervi,
cruris bovis and arietis, ammoniacum, galbanum, opopanax, sagapenum, myrrha,
bdellium, thus, terebinthina, pix nigra, ladanum, styrax, calamita, benioinum,
stercus caprinum, columbinum, caninum, bubulum, and aliae stercorum species.

Compound diaphoretickes are oleum amygdalarum amararum, Juniperinum, laurinum,
de scorpionibus, irinum, costinum, nardinum, de terebinthina, de croco,
canabinum, raphaninum, e cucumere agresti, vulpinum, rutaceum, philosophorum de
lateribus, de euphorbio, de tartaro, de petroleo, de kerva, sive ricininum,
unguent. Agrippae, aragon, martiatum, enulatum, empl. de Vigo, without
addition, and with addition, oxycroceum, diacalcitheos, dissolved in a
digesting oil to the form of a cerat.

Araeotickes are profitably used in the increase and state of superficial
tumors.

But Diaphoretickes are not to be used in the increase of tumors, unless
some astringent The use of diaphoreticks.
be added, lest by their more strong digestion, they should draw and increase
the defluxion: but when the tumors decline, they are then only to be used in
the parts chiefly where the skin is dense and hard, and when the humor is
cold and gross, and lying hid deep in the body, so that the virtue of
medicaments can hardly come thereto: but consideration is to be had of the
parts to which resolutives are to be applied; for you may not apply relaxers or
diaphoretickes to the liver, spleen, stomach, or bowels, unless you add some
astringents, of which a great part must be aromatickes.

To the parts where sense is more dull, may be applied the stronger
diaphoreticks, but those parts which are endued with a more exquisite sense, as
the eye and the nerves, to them we must apply weaker. When the matter is gross
and cold, things cutting and attenuating, and then emollients are to be used,
and so by degrees come to diaphoretickes; otherwise that only is resolved
which is the most subtle of the unprofitable matter, the grosser becoming
concrete and hardened. But if the part be afflicted with a continual
defluxion, so that there may be danger of a gangrene or sphacel, it is not
lawful then to make use of resolvers, but you must in the place where the
humor flows, devide the skin by scarification, as it is most learnedly noted
by Hollerius in that profitable book of his left to posterity, whose title is,
De materia Chirurgica.

CHAP. XII. Of suppuratives.
A Suppurative medicine is said to be that, which shutting the pores, and What
a suppurative medicine is.
preventing transpiration by his emplasticke consistence, increases the matter
of native heat, and therefore turns the matter cast out of the vessels into
pus and sanies. It is of nature hot and moist, and proportionable to the native
heat of the part to which it is applied, and of an emplasticke consistence,
that so it may hinder the native heat from being exhaled; in which respect it
differs from emollients and malactickes, of which we shall speak hereafter.
There be two kinds of suppuratives, for some do it of themselves, and by
their Differences of suppuratives.
proper quality; others by accident. Those things which by their own strength
do bring to suppuration, are either simples or compounds.

Simples are radix liliorum, caepa, allium, malvarum omnium folia and semina,
buglossum, acanthus, senecio, violae, parietaria, crocus, caules, ficus,
passulae mundatae, with a decoction of these things, farina tritici, farina
volatilis, farina hordei excorticati, lolii, seminis lini and foenugraeci,
galbanum, ammoniacum, styrax pinguis, ladanum, viscum aucupatorum, thus, pix,
cera, resina, colla, adeps suillus, vitulinus, vaccinus, caprinus, butyrum,
vitellus ovi, oesipus humida, stercus suillum, columbinum, caprinum, pueri.

Compounds are oleum liliorum, lumbricorum, de croco, unguent. basilicum,
emplast. diachylon commune, magnum, de mucilaginibus.

Those things do suppurate by accident which work it only by the means of
Suppuratives by accident.
an emplasticke consistence: for so often times astringents, because they are
of earthy and thick parts, are found to suppurate; such are unguentum de bolo
nutritum, and such like. Such also are those which by their coldness keep the
heat in, and shut the pores. Hence is it that the qualities of sorrel are
commended to generate pus: for whilst it keeps the heat within, it
increases his effects, to the thickening of the suppurable matter, and the
overcomming other rebellious qualities. We use things ripening in great
inflammations, whose growth we cannot hinder with repellers, or increase with
resolvers or discussers.

CHAP. XIII. Of mollifying things.
THat is defined to be a mollifying medicine, which by a stronger heat than
Gal. cap. 7. lib. 5. simpl.
that which is proper to suppuratives, without any manifest quality of drying
or moistning, again malaxeth or softeneth hardened bodies: wherefore How
suppuratives and emollients differ.
this differs from that which suppurates, because that may be hot in the first
or second degree, according to the several temper of the body, or part to
which it is applied, working rather by the quantity of heat than the quality:
contrariwise, that which mollifieth being endued with a greater heat, rather
works by the quality of the heat, being otherwise in dryness and moisture
temperate.

Although as many things agree together in some respects, though of a diverse
nature; so many emollients are such as are hot in the first degree, and dry in
the second and third, that so they may the better disperse and diffuse that
which is congealed, by taking away a little of the humidity, which is contained
within the part affected; but not by exhausting it wholly by the violence of
heat or dryness: for hereon would follow a greater hardness.

Things mollifying, are either simple or compound; and these again strong or
The differences of emollients.
weak. The weak are, Radix liliorum alborum, cacumeris agrestis, althaeae,
folia malvae, bismalvae, liliorum, anethi summitates, viola, branca ursina,
semen malvae, bismalvae, lini, foenugraeci, carici pingues, passulae mundatae,
pedum, capitum, intestinorum vervecinorum decoctum, adeps exjunioribus and
castratis, domesticis, foeminis animalibus, ad^ps suillus, vitulinus, hoedinus,
caprinus, bubulus, vulpinus, gallinaceus, anserinus, anatinus, olorinus,
efficaces. The weaker are things more gentle, as, Butyrum, lana succida, cera
pinguis, vitellus ovi, medulla exossibus, cervina, ovilla, caprina. The
compound are oil, wherein are boiled mollifying herbs, as, Oleum liliorum,
chamaemelinum, amygdalarum dulcium. Stronger emollients are, Acetum, adeps
taurinus, ursinus, cervinus, leoninus, pardalinus, apri, equisevum, pinea,
picea, abietina, terebenthina, ammoniacum, bdelium, styrax, galbanum, ladanum,
propolis, opopanax, ung. de althaea, emp. diachylon commune and magnum, de
mucilaginibus, ceroneum, oxycroceum, Joannis de vigo.

We use emollients in scirrhous tumors of the muscles, or in the lips of
ulcers, in Their use.
any of the limbs, belly, glandules, bowels, by reason of a gross, cold, and
viscous matter, either flegmaticke, or melancholicke. Yet those tumors which
come of melancholy, commonly turn to cancers, which are exasperated by
mollifying things. On the contrary, such as proceed from a flegmaticke matter,
are brought to an equality of consistence, by the use of emollients.
Furthermore, there are three things observable Things observable in the use of
emollients.
in the use of emollients: the first is, duly to consider how much the
affected part differs from his proper and natural temper and proportion, that
so we may apply an equivalent remedy. The second is, that we distinguish the
natures of the parts. The third is, that we artificially gather after what
manner this mollifying must be performed, that is, whether we should mingle with
the emollients, detersive or discussing medicines. For there are many desperate
schirrhous tumors, that is, such as cannot be overcome by any emollient
medicine, as those which are grown so hard, that they have lost their sense;
and thereupon are become smooth and without hairs. Here you must observe, that
the part sometimes becomes cold in so great an excess, that the native heat
plainly appears to languish, so that it cannot actuate any medicine. That this
languishing heat may be resuscitated, an iron stove shall be set near to the
part, wherein a good thick piece of iron heated red hot shall be enclosed, for
so the stove will keep hot a long time.

The figure of an iron stove.
A. The casse of the stove.

B. The iron Bat to be heated.

C. The lidde to shut the stove.



CHAP. XIV. Of Detersives, or Mundificatives.
ADetersive is defined to be that which does deterge or cleanse an ulcer, and
purge forth a double kind of excrement; of the which one is thicker, which is
commonly called sordes, which is drawn forth from the bottom of the ulcer, by
the edificatious quality of the medicine, the other is more thin and watery,
which the Greeks call Ichor, the Latins Sanies, which is taken away by the
dryness of the medicine; and therefore Hippocrates has well advised, that
every ulcer must be cleansed and dried.

Of Detersives, some are simple, some compound, some stronger, some weaker.
Detersives,
The simple are either bitter, sweet, or sour: the bitter are Gentiana,
Aristolochia, iris, enula, scilla, serpentaria, centaurinum minus, absinthium,
marrubium, perforata, abrotonon, apium, chelidonium, ruta, hyssopus, scabiosa,
arthemisia, cupatorium, aloe, fumus terrae, haedera terrestris, a lixivium made
with the ashes of these things, lupini, orobus, amygdala amara, faba,
terebinthina, myrrha, mastiche, sagapenum, galbanum, ammoniacum, the gals of
Beasts, stercus caprinum, urina been cocta, squamma aeris, aes ustum, aerugo,
scoria aeris, antimonium, calx, chalcitis, misy, sorry, alumen. The sweet are
Viola, rosa, mellilo^um, ficus pingues, dactyli, uvae passae, glycyrrhiza, aqua
hordei, aqua mulsa; vinum dulce, mel, saccharum, serum lactis, manna, thus. The
sharp are all kind of sour things, Capreoli vitium, acetum, and other acide
things. The compound are Syrupus de absinthio, de fumaria, de marrubio, de
eupatorio, de arthemisia, acetosus, lixivium, oleum de vitellis ovorum, de
terebinthina, de tartaro, unguentum mundificativum de apio, apostolorum, pulvis
mercurialis. We use such things as deterge, that the superfluous Their use.
matter being taken away, nature may the more conveniently regenerate flesh to
fill up the cavity: But in the use of them, consideration is first to be had
of the whole body, whether it be healthy, plethoricke, or ill disposed, there
is consideration to be had of the part, which is moyster and drier, endued with
a more exquisite or duller sense. But oftentimes accidents befall ulcers
besides nature, as a callus, a defluxion of a hot or otherwise malign humor,
and the like symptoms. Lastly, consideration is to be had, whether it be a new
or inveterate ulcer; for from hence, according to the indication, remedies are
appointed different in quantity and quality: so that oftentimes we are
constrained to appoint the bitter remedy in stead of the sweet. Neither truly
with a painful and dry ulcer does any other than a liquid detersive agree:
neither to the moist any other than that of a dry consistence, as Powders.

CHAP. XV. Of Sarcoticks.
THat medicine is said to be sarcotick, which by its dryness helps nature to
regenerate flesh in an ulcer hollow, and diligently cleansed from all
excrements. But this is properly done by blood indifferent in quality and
quantity. Wherefore, if we must speak according No medicine truly sarcotick.
to the truth of the thing, there is no medicine which can properly and truly
be called sarcoticke: For those which vulgarly go under that name, are only
accidentally such; as those which without biting and erosion do dry up and
deterge the excrements of an ulcer, which hinder the endeavor of nature in
generating of flesh. For as by the law of nature, from that nourishment which
flows to the nourishing of the part, there is a remain, or a certain thin
excrement, flowing from some other place, called by the Greeks Ichor, and by
the Latins Sanies: Thus by the corruption of the part there concretes another
grosser excrement, termed Rypos by the Greeks, and Sordes by the Latins. That
makes the ulcer more moist, this more filthy. Hence it is, that every wound
which requires restitution of the lost substance, must be cured with two sorts
of medicines, the one to dry up and waste the superfluous humidity thereof, the
other to fetch off the filth: and by how much the wound is the deeper, by so
much it requires more liquid medicines, that so they may the more easily enter
into every part thereof.

But diversity of things shall be appointed according to the various temper of
the part. For if the affected part shall be moist by nature, such things shall
be chosen as shall be less dry: if on the contrary the part be dry, then such
things shall be used as be more dry; but many sorts of medicines shall be
associated with the sarcoticks, according to the manifold complication of the
affects possessing the ulcer. Therefore nature only is to be accounted the
workmaster, and the efficient cause in the regenerating of flesh, and laudable
blood the matteriall cause, and the medicine the helping or assisting cause, or
rather the cause without which it cannot be: as, that by cleansing and
moderately drying without any vehement heat, takes away all hindrances of
incarnation and orders, and fits the blood to receive the form of flesh. This
kind of medicine, according to Galen, ought to be dry only in the first
degree, lest by too much dryness, it might drink up the blood and matter of
the future flesh, which notwithstanding is to be understood of sarcoticks,
which are to be applied to a delicate and temperate body. For if the ulcer be
more moist, or the body more hard than is fit, we may ascend to such things as
are dry, even in the third degree. And hence it is, that such drying medicines
may first be called detersives, and then presently sarcoticks. A sarcoticke
medicine is either simple or compound, stronger or weaker. Simple sarcoticke
medicines are, Aristolochia utraque, iris, acorus, dracunculus, asarum,
symphyti omnia genera, betonica, sanicula, millefolium, lingua canis, Simple
Sarcotickes.
verbena, scabiosa, pinpinella, hypericon, scordium, plantago, rubia major and
minor, eorumque succi. Terebinthina lota and non lota, resinapini, gummi
arabicum, sarcocolla, mastiche, colophonia, manna thuris, cortex ejusdem, aloe,
olibanum, myrrha, mel, vinum, sanguis draconis, lythargyros auri, spodium,
pompholix, iutia, plumbum ustum lotum, scoria ferri. The compound sarcoticks
are, Oleum hypericonis, ol^ovorum, mastichinum, Compound Sarcotickes.
and catera olea, quaebalsami nomine appellantur, unguentum aureum, emp. de
betonica, vigonis, de janua, Emp. gratia Dei, Emp. nigrum. We use not
sarcoticks before that the ulcer be cleansed and freed from pain, defluxion,
inflammation, hardness, and distemper. In using these things we consider the
temper of the body, and the affected part: For oft-times a part otherwise less
dry by nature, requires a more powerful drying medicine, and stronger
sarcotick, than another part which is more dry, and this for some other reason,
which ought to come into our consideration: For example, the glans would be
more dried than the prepuce, although it be of a temper less dry, because it
is the passage of the urine. Wherefore we must diligently observe the
condition of the affected parts, and thence taking indication, make choice of
more strong sarcoticks. For both that which is too little, and that which is
too much sarcoticke, makes a sordid ulcer: the first, because it dries not
sufficiently; the latter, for that by its acrimony it causes defluxion.
Therefore diligent care must be used in the examination hereof.

CHAP. XVI. Of Epuloticks, or skinning medicines.
AN Epuloticke medicine is that which covers the part with skin: it is said
to be such as by dryness and astriction without biting desiccates, binds,
and condensates the flesh into a certain callous substance, like to the skin,
which we commonly call a cicatrize or scarre: yet this, as the generating of
flesh, is the work of nature. A medicine therefore is said to be Epuloticke,
for that it assists nature in substituting and generating a scarre, in stead of
the true skin, whilst it consumes the superfluous humidities, condensates,
incrassates, and binds the next adjacent flesh; therefore it ought to dry more
powerfully than a sarcoticke. Epuloticke medicines are of three kinds: the
first is the true epulotick, Three sorts of Epuloticks.
which only dries and binds. The second is an acride and biting epuloticke,
which, for that it wastes the proud flesh, is called so; and this must be
sparingly used, and that only to hard and rusticke bodies. The third is that
which only dries without astriction. The things whereof they consist are
these: Aristolochia utraque, gentiana, iris, centaurium majus, pentaphyllon,
symphitum majus, chamaedrys, betonica, cauda equina, eupatorium, verbenaca,
plantaginis and symphyti folia, gallae, baccae myrti, glandes and earum
calices, balaustia, cupressi nuces, malicorium, cortex quercus, cortex
tamaricis, cortex ligni aloes, acacia, colophonia, sarcocolla, sanguis
draconis, ladanum, lithargyros auri, argenti, cerusa, plumbum ustum, alumen
ustum, tuthia, squamma aeris and ferri, and eorum scoria, aerugo, flos aeris,
as ustum and lotum, sulphur vivum, chrysocolla, corali, bolus armenus, terra
sigillata, cineres buccinarum, ostreorum, silicis, ossa usta and siccata,
caries lignorum, ung. diapompholygos, ung. alb. rhasis, desiccativum rubrum,
emp. de cerusa, de betonica, diacalcitheos, emp. nigrum.

We use Epuloticks when as the ulcer is almost filled up, and equal to the
adjacent Their use.
skin. In the use of these we must also have respect to the tenderness and
hardness of the body; for such things as are corrosives to tender and delicate
bodies, are epuloticke to hard and rusticke bodies. Also we must have regard,
whether the body be plethoricke or replete with ill humors, for such do not
easily admit cicatrization. Also it is most worthy of your observation, to
mark whether the ulcer that is to be cicatrized, be fed or nourished by the
present defect of any part, as the liver, spleen, lungs, or a varix lying
about it. For it cannot be cicatrized before these impediments (if any such be)
be taken away. Lastly, the callous lips of an ulcer, unless they be scarified
or softened, hinder cicatrization. Therefore all such defaults must be taken
away, and then such an epulotickeapplyed, as may not by the too much dryness
leave the scarre too hollow, or the too little, leave it too high.

CHAP. XVII. Of Agglutinatives.
AGlutinating or agglutinative medicine is of a middle nature, between the
sarcoticke and epuloticke, more strong than the former, and weaker than the
latter, for it is dry to the second degree. It by the drying and astrictive
faculty, void of all detersion, conjoynes parts that are distant, or rather
lends helping hands to nature the principal agent in this work. Glutinatives,
whether they be strongly or weakly such, do agglutinate either by their proper
or accidental nature: Of this sort are Plantagin is omnes species, consolida
utraque, Agglutinative medicines.
buglossa, millefolium, verbena, pimpinella, pilosella, cauda equina,
sempervivum, telephium, sanicula, atractilis, folia quercus and dracunculi,
salix, ebulus, sambucus, pentaphyllon, veronica, cortex pini, ulmi, palmae
quercus, Aqua vitis, aq. e folliculis ulmi, succus calaminthae, vinumausterum,
terebinthina, myrrha, sanguis draconis, bolus armenus, terra sigillata, omnia
denique acerba.

Glutinatives by accident are those that hinder defluxion, and bind the part,
as Glutinatives by accident.
Sutures, Bandages, rest, rowlers, and the like. We use glutinatives in green,
and as yet bloody wounds, whence the Greeks call a glutinative medicine
Enaema, although sometimes they are used to inveterate, malign, fistulous and
sinuous ulcers; for they hinder the defluxion from coming to the lips of
ulcers. You must confider, when as you intend to apply them, whether the skin
be whole or no: For ulcers knit together, or heal more difficultly, if the
skin be rubbed off, or cut, or otherwise lost. Neither ought you to be
unmindfull of the forementioned cautions and indications drawn from the sex,
the tenderness or hardness of the affected body, the continuance and
magnitude of the ulcer: for hence indication must be taken, what the quantity
and quality of the medicine ought to be.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Pyrotickes, or causticke Medicines.
THat medicine is said to be Pyroticke or Causticke, which by its acrimony and
biting, commonly consisting in an earthy consistence, either superficially
corrodes, or more deeply eats and putrefies, or lastly, burns and consumes
the skin and flesh, so that it even pierces into callous and hard bodies.
Therefore there are three degrees of Pyrotickes; for some are termed
cathaereticke Three degrees of Causticks.
or corroding, for that they waste the proud flesh of an ulcerated or any other
part, and these are judged the weaker sort of the Pyrotickes. Othersome are
termed Septicke or putrefying, as those which destroy and dissolve the tender
and new sprung up flesh, and raise blisters in the skin, and these are more
powerful than the cathaeretickes. Lastly, there are othersome termed most
powerful Escharotickes, which by their fiery and terrestrial quality cause
eschars or crusts; whereupon they are also termed Ruptoria, and potentiall
Cauteries: Now all these differences are taken from that they are more or less
powerful. For it oft-times happens, that according to the different temper and
consistence of the parts, according to the longer or shorter stay, a
Cathaereticke may penetrate as far as a Septicke, and on the contrary, an
Escharoticke may enter no farther than a Septicke.

These are judged Cathaeretickes, Spongia usta, alumen ustum and non ustum,
vitriolum Cathaereticks.
ustum, calx mediocriter lota, arugo, chalcanthum, squamma aeris, oleum de
vitriolo, trochisci andronis, phasionis, asphodelorum, ung. Aegyptiacum,
apostolorum, pulvis mercurii, arsenicum sublimatum.

Septickes and Vesicatories are, Radix scillae, bryoniae, sigill. beatae
Mariae, buglossa, Septicks and Vesicatories.
radix ranunculi, panis porcini, apium, risus, lac tithymallorum, lac fici,
euphorbium, anacardus, sinapi, cantharides, arsenicum sublimatum: For all these
weaken the native temper and consistence of the part, and draw thereunto
humors plainly contrary to nature.

Escharotickes or Caustickes are, Calx viva, fax vini cremata, and pracipue
aceti, Escharoticks.
ignis, whereto are referred all Cauteries, as well actual as potentiall,
whereof we shall treat hereafter.

We use Cathaeretickes in tender bodies and diseases not very contumacious;
Their use.
therefore by how much they are less acride and painful, by so much oft-times
they penetrate the deeper, for that they are less trouble some by delay; but
we use Septickes, and sometimes Escharotickes in ulcers that are callons,
putride, and of inexhausted humidity, but principally in cancers, carbuncles,
and excessive haemorrhagies. When as we make use of these, the patient must
have a convenient diet appointed, must abstain from wine: lastly, they must
not be used but with great discretion; for otherwise they may cause fevers,
great inflammations, intolerable pains, swounings, gangrenes, and sphacels.
Cauteries heedfully used, strengthen and dry the part, amend an untameable
distemper, dull the force of poison, bridle putrefaction and mortification, and
bring sundry other benefits.

CHAP. XIX. Of Anodynes, or such as mitigate or assuage pain.
BEfore we treat of Anodyne medicines, we think it fit to speak of the nature
of pain. Now pain is a sorrowful and trouble some sense, caused What pain
is.
by some sudden distemper, or solution of continuity. There are three things
necessary to cause pain; The efficient cause, that is, a sudden departure from
a natural temper or union: the sensiblenesse of the body receiving the
dolorificke cause: lastly, the apprehension of this induced change, caused
either by distemper or union; for otherwise with how exquisite soever sense the
body receiving the cause is endued with, unless it apprehend and mark it,
there is no pain present. Hence is that Aphorism of Hippocrates, Quicunque
part aliqua corporis dolentes dolorem omnino non sentiunt, his men's agrotat,
that is, Whosoever pained in any part of their bodies do wholly feel no
pain, their understanding is ill affected and depraved. Heat, cold, moisture,
and dryness, induce a sudden change of temper; and heat and cold cause sharp
pain, dryness moderate, but moisture scarce any at all: for moisture causes
not pain so much by its quality, as it does by the quantity. Both the
forementioned qualities, especially associated with matter, as also certain
external causes too violently assailing, such as these that may cause
contusion, cut, prick, or too much extend. Wherefore pain is a symptom of
the touch, accompanying almost all diseases; therefore oft-times leaving these,
they turn the council of the Physician to mitigate them, which is performed
either by mitigating the efficient causes of pain, or dulling the sense of the
part. Hereupon they make three differences of Anodynes: For some serve to cure
the disease, othersome to mitigate it, othersome stupefie, and are narcotick.
We term such curative of the diseases, which resist, and are contrary to the
causes of diseases. Thus pain, caused by a hot distemper, is taken away by
oil of Roses, Oxycrate, and other such like things, which amend and take away
the cause of pain, to wit, the excess of heat. Pain caused by a cold
distemper, is amended by Olcum Laurinum, Nardinum, de Castoreo. Pain
occasioned by too much dryness, is helped by Hydraeleum, a bath of fresh and
warm water. Lastly, by this word Anodyne, taken in the largest sense, we
understand all purging medicines, Phlebotomy, Scarification, Cauteries,
Cuppings, Glysters, and other such like things as evacuate any store of the
dolorificke matter. But such as are properly termed Anodynes, are of two sorts:
for some are What properly termed Anodynes are.
temperate, others hot and moist in the first degree, and consequently, near
to those that are temperate: these preserve the native heat in the proper
integrity, thus they amend all distemperatures; of this kind are accounted
Sallade oil, oil of sweet almonds, the yolks of eggs, and a few other such
like things, these strengthen the native heat, that thus increased in
substance, it may with the more facility overcome the cause of pain: besides
also, they rarifie, attenuate, digest, and consequently evacuate both gross
and viscide humors, as also cloudy flatulencies hindered from passing forth:
such are flores chamaemeli, meliloti, crocus, oleum chamaemelinum, anethinum,
oleum lini, oleum ex semine althaeae, lumbricorum, ovorum, ex tritico, butyrum,
lana succida, suillus adeps, vitulinus, gallinaceus, anserinus, humanus, ex
anguilla, cunicula, and aliis. Lac muliebre, and vaccinum, mucago seminis lini,
foenugraeci, althaa, malvae, velejusmodi seminum decoctum: as also Decoctum
liliorum, violariae, capitis, pedum, and intestinorum arietis and hoedi.

Narcotickes, or stupefying medicines, improperly termed Anodines, are cold in
the fourth degree, therefore by their excess of cold, they intercept or hinder
the Narcoticks improperly termed anodines.
passage of the animal spirit to the part, whence it is that they take away
sense: of this sort are hyoseyamus, cicuta, solanum manicum, mandragora,
papaver, opium, arctissima vincula.

You may make use of the first sort of Anodynes in all diseases, which are
cured by the opposition of their contraries: but of the second, to expugne
pains that The use of them.
are not very contumacious, that by their application we may resist defluxion,
inflammation, the fever, and other symptoms. But whereas the bitterness of
pain is so excessive great that it will not stoop to other medicines, then at
the length must we come to the third sort of anodynes. Yet often times the
bitterness of pain is so great that very narcoticks must be applied in the
first place, if we would have the part and the whole man to be in safety. Yet
the too frequent use of them, especially alone without the addition of saffron,
myrrh, castoreum, or some such like thing, uses to be very dangerous: for they
extinguish the native heat, and cause mortification, manifested by the
blackenesse of the part. But intolerable pains, to wit, such as are occasioned
by the excess of inflammation and gangrenes, may be sooner mitigated by
opening a vein, purging and scarifying the part affected, than either by
properly termed anodines or narcotickes, to wit, that pain may be the remedy
of pain. By purgers we here understand not only such, as taken by the mouth,
produce that effect, but also such as outwardly applied perform the same, as
those whereof Actius T^trab. 1. sem. 3. cap. 35.
makes mention. As,

. pulpa seu medul. colocynth. semin. eruc. rut. sylvest. elaterii, gr. cindii,
lathyrid. expurgatar. galban, nitri, cerae, singulorum, iiii. opopan. ii.
terebinth. vi. terendaterito, Purgatives to be externally applied.
and taurino fell paulatim irrigato, donec apt imbibantur. Then apply it
about the navill even to the share, for thus it will purge by stool; if on the
contrary you apply it to the bottom of the stomach, it will cause vomit.
Another;. elaterii, iii. colocynth. scammon. squammae aeris, radic. cucumer.
agrest. lathyrid. an. i. aut pro lathyrid. tithymal. succum terito and
cribrato, ac cum oleo plurimum salis habente subigito; magnam inde pilame lana
confertam hoc medicamento illitam, umbilico aut lumbis applicato. Or,. fellis
taurin. i. gr. cindii virid. iv. succi lupinor. virid. ii. euphorb. The
composition of a purging oil and ointment.
i. pulp. colocynth. tantundem adip. vulpin. recent. ii. adip. viper. ii ss.
stercor. muris, iv. succi poeon. castor. singulor. iv. ol. ligustrin. vi. ol.
antiq. i. fiat unguentum vel oleum. It purges without trouble, and besides the
other commodities it also is good against distraction or madness. Two
spoonefulls is the greatest quantity to be used at one time, for in some one is
sufficient: anoint with it the navill and thereabouts, and a just purgation
will ensue thereupon, which if it shall fly out beyond your expectation, you
may foment the belly with a sponge moistened in warm wine and pressed forth
again, and it will be presently stayed. Moreover Fernelius lib. 7. methodi,
makes mention of a laxative ointment.

CHAP. XX. Of the composition and use of Medicines.
HItherto we have spoken of the faculties of simple medicines, now we think
good to say something of the compounding of them: for so by the Architect are
had and known every thing apart, and then he settles the workmen to the
building, the conceived form of which has been in his mind ever since he
did enterprise it. Therefore the composition of diverse medicaments with their
qualities and effects, is a mingling appointed by the art of the Physician.
Hence therefore rheum, aloe, rosa, absintbium, although they have diverse Gal.
3. simp. 4. de san^t. t^end.
substances and faculties, yet are notwithstanding called simple medicines,
because they have that variety from nature, not from art. But we many times
call simple such things as are compounded by art, as oxym. simpl. oxysacch.
simplex, as compared to greater compositions. And therefore often times we use
compound medicines, because always the simple medicine alone, has not
strength enough to oppugn the The necessity of compound medicines.
disease. For many times the sick labor with manifold, and not simple
affects, from which there being taken a various indication, we gather contrary
simple medicines, to apply to every affect, in one composition. But often times
the nature of the part of the patient, or of the body affected, requires
another kind of medicament which may be proper for the removing that disease;
wherefore it is so made to oppugn the disease and not offend the body: and we
mingle many other together, whose effects may temper one another. Moreover, the
composition of medicines was necessary, that because those things which have
not a good taste, color, or smell, by art or composition might be made more
grateful. Compound medicines of which we intend to speak, are Glysters,
Suppositories, Noduli, Pessaries, Oiles, Liniments, Ointments, Emplasters,
Cerats, Pultisses, Cataplasmes, Fomentations, Embrocations, Epithemaes,
Vesicatories, Cauteries, Collyria, Errhina, Sneesing powders, Masticatories,
Gargarismes, Dentifrices, Bags, Fumigations, Semicupiums, Baths. But first it
is expedient that I say something of weights and measures, with their notes, by
which medicines commonly are measured and noted by Physicians.

CHAP. XXI. Of weights and measures, and the notes of both of them.
EVery weight arises from a beginning and foundation, as it were; for as A
grain the beginning of all weight.
our bodies do arise of the four first simple bodies or elements, into which
they are often resolved: so all weights do arise from the grain, which is as
it were the beginning and end of the rest. Now hereby is What is meant by
agraine.
understood a barley corn or grain, and that such as is neither too dry, or
overgrowne with ^uldi^ss^r rancide, but well conditioned, and of an indifferent
bigness.

Ten grains of these m^ ^bolus; two Oboli, or twenty grains make a scruple,
Obolus. A scruple. A dram. An ounce. A pound.
three scruples, or sixt^ grains make a dram, eight drammes make one ounce,
twelve oune^ake one pound medicinal, which is for the most part the greatest
weight used^ Physicians, and which they seldom exceed; and it is resolved into
ounces, dr^mes, scruples, oboli and grains, which is the least weight. To
express these weights we use certain notes, the pound is expressed by this
note, (...). the ounc^ this,. the drammethus,. the scruple thus,. the obolus
with the beginning^ ^ter thus, obol. the grain with his beginning letter thus,
g. But sometimes we me^e the quantity of medicines by measures and not always
by weights; and th^fore we express a handful by this note, m. a pugill thus,
p. number thus, n. and the half part of every weight and measure is expressed
by this note, ss. put after every note of the aforesaid weights and measures of
the same sort, as the half pound, lb ss. the half ounce, ss. and so of the
rest. Moreover, in describing the same medicament we use the notes sometimes
of weights, sometimes of measures; and therefore it is to be noted that
herbs, green or dry, are signed with these notes, m. p. but those which are
dry and be brought to powder, with these notes,.. p. Roots, Barks, Seeds,
Fruits,
by these notes,.. p. m..... an. p.... p. m... p...


All other medicaments either dry or liquid, are described with these notes,
lb.... obol. g.

Having expounded these things, let us come to the description of compound
medicines, beginning with glysters first, as the remedy which is most common
and familiar, and almost chiefly necessary of all others.

CHAP. XXII. Of Glysters.
A Glyster is an injection prepared first and properly for the gross
intestines and fundament; for sometimes glysters are used and made for the
stomach, What a glyster is.
spleen, reins, bladder, womb, mesentery, and also for the head, from whence
often times by sharp glysters, the hurtful matter is brought downwards, as
we see in Apoplexies. Therefore there is no part of the body which receives not
some benefit by glysters, but more or less according to the vicinity they have
with the belly, and the strength of the glyster: for there are diverse sorts
Differences of glysters.
of glysters, some emollients, other evacuating, some anodines, some
astringents, some cleansing, some sarcoticke, and epuloticke, and some may be
said to nourish. They are all made of the parts of plants or beasts, with
compound medicines either solutive or altering, and others according to the advice of the Physician. The parts The materials of glysters.
of plants which are used to this purpose, are roots, seeds, leaves, flowers,
fruits, shouts, juices, mucilages. Parts of beasts are yelkes of eggs and
whites, honey, chickens, capons, old cocks well beaten, heads and feet of
sheep, the intestines, whey, milk, sewer, axungia, and such like in
decoctions, wherein we mingle and dissolve simple and compound medicines. We
sometimes use without any other medicament, to make a glyster with oil alone,
as oil of nuts for the Cholicke, of whey alone, the decoction of the head and
feet of the sheep alone, and of the decoction of Cicers and barley do we
prepare glysters.

The quantity of a glyster is sometimes less according to the diverse
disposition of men and their diseases: for weak children the (...) is less:
for women with Their quantity.
child, and in the cholicke, dysentery, lyentery, o^ ^uch hardened excrement is
within. But when we would abundantly move ^ement, and there is nothing that
may hinder, the dose of a glyster for the mo^art is half a pound, one pound,
or three quarters of a pound. The glyster must be injected ^rme or hot, more
or less, according to the nature or condition of the sick; for b^ cold it
offends the intestines, and the neighboring nervous parts, which are co^ of
themselves. It must be given by degrees, for being injected suddenly, the w^
which is usually in the guts will beat it back again, whence comes
intolerable p^ But this will be more clear by that we shall teach concerning
the differences o^ glysters, whereof there shall be sufficient examples.

. malv. violar. bismalv. acanth. an. mi^ radic. alth. lilior. an. i. passul.
fi^ ping. ss. fiat decoctio ad lb i. in qua dissolve cass. butyr. recent. an.
i. ol. viol. iii. fiat An emollient glyster.
clyster.

Glysters, that do evacuate, are prepared by the council of the Physician,
and of diverse Simples, being boiled for several purposes. Therefore if the
humors be cold which are to be evacuated, the Glyster shall be after this
manner:. Salviae, A Glyster to evacuate a cold phlegmatic humor.
origani, abrotoni, chamaem. melilot. an. m. ss. seminum anisi, foenic. cumini,
an. iii. semin. carthar. ii. Make a decoction of them, wherein dissolve
Diaphon. Hier. Simpl. an. ss. ol. aneth. chamaem. an. i. ss. Mellis Antho.
sach. rub. an.. i. fiat Clyster.

To evacuate Choleric matter, prepare a Glyster after this manner.

. quat. remollient. pariet. Cichor. endi. an. m. ss. Semin. quat. frigid.
Major. an. iii. hordei integri p. i. Make a decoction of them, and dissolve in
it Cass.. i. Ol. viol. mellis viol. an. ii. fiat Clyster.

To evacuate melancholy, this Glyster following will be useful.

. Fumiter. Centaur. minoris, Mercurialis, an. m. i. Polyp. Qu. folicul. sennae,
an. iii. seminis agni casti, Thymi, an. ii. Make a decoction, and dissolve
therein, Confect. Hamech. ss. Cass. recens extract. iii. olei violati, lilior.
an. ss. Sach. rub. mellis viol. an. iss. salis, i. And those Glysters do not
only evacuate the humors that offend, but also correct the distemper of the
bowels and inward parts. For the Glysters described against pituitous and
melancholy matter, help the cold distemper; but that which is for choler, the
hot distemper. Purging medicines, which are dissolved in the decoctions of
Glysters, are very strong, as, Confect. Hamech. Benedicta, Diaprun. Solutivum,
Diaphaenicon, being used from. vi. to i. at most: but the weaker and more
gentle are Catholicon. Cassia, Hiera simplex, from vi. to ii. at most.

An Anodyne Glyster is usually made without such things as purge or evacuate:
as,

. Flor. Chamaem. melil. Aneth. an. p. i. rad. Bismal.. i. boil them in Milk,
and to An Anodyne Glyster.
the decoction add Mucaginis seminis lini foenugraeci extractae in aqua Malvae
ii. sachari albi, olei anethi, chamaemeli, an. i. vitellos ovorum duos, fiat
Clyster. These Glysters should be kept longer in the body, that so they may
more easily mitigate pain.

The example of an astringent Glyster.

. Equiseti, plantag. poligani. an. m. i. boil them in lacte ustulato, to xii.
to the An astringent Glysters.
decoction strained add Boli armeni, sanguinis draconis, an. ii. olei rosati,
ii. album. ovorum duorum, fiat Clyster. We use these kind of Glysters in
Dysenteries, and in the immoderate flux of the Hemotoid veins, having first
evacuated the usual excrements. Glysters, which be ^oticke, epuloticke, and
cleansers of the greater guts, and fit for the curing of ulcers, are to be
prepared of such medicines as are described before in their proper Chapters.

Alimentary Glysters are made of the decoction of Chickens, Capons, Cocks,
Nourishing Glysters.
being boiled to a gelly, and strongly pressed forth. They are also prepared of
Marrow, gelly, which are not altogether so strong as those which are commonly
taken by the mouth, because the faculty of concoction in the guts, is much
weaker than that of the stomach. Oftentimes also the matter of these kind of
Glysters are prepared in wine, where there is no pain of the head or fever,
but more frequently in the decoction of Barley, and in Milk, adding the yelkes
of Eggs, and some small quantity of white Sugar, lest by the cleansing faculty
it move the guts to excretion. And therefore Sugar of Roses is thought better,
which is conceived to be somewhat binding. Here you may have examples of such
Glysters.. Decoctionis Capi perfect cocti lb. i. ss. sachari albi, ss. misce,
fiat Clyster.. Decocti Pulli and Galatinae, an. lb. ss. vini opt. iv. fiat
Clyster.. Decocti hordei mundati, and in cremorem redacti lb. ss. luctis boni
lb. i. Vitellos ovorum duos, fiat Clyster. We use these kind of Glysters to
strengthen Their use.
children, old and weak men, and bodies which are in a Consumption. But in the
use of these there are three things to be observed: First, that the faeculent
excrements be taken away, either by strength of nature, or by art, as by a
suppository, or an emollient Glyster, lest the alimentary matter, being mingled
with them, should so be infected and corrupted. The other is, that there be
great quantity given, that so some may ascend to the upper guts. The third is,
that the sick sleep after the taking of it; for so it is more easily converted
into nourishment, and the alimentary matter is better kept: for sleep hinders
evacuations. In Glysters of this kind we must be ware of Salt, Honey, and
Oil; for the two first provoke excretion by their acrimony, and the last by
his humidity does relaxate and lubricate. They, who think no kind of Glyster
can nourish or sustain the body, rely upon this reason: That it is necessary
whatsoever nourishes, should have a triple commutation or Their Argument that
deny Glysters to nourish. Confuted first by reason.
concoction in the body: first, in the stomach; secondly, in the liver:
thirdly, in all the members. But this opinion is repugnant to reason and
experience: to reason, for that a certain sense of such things as are
defective, is implanted in all and every of the natural parts of our body.
Therefore seeing nutrition is a repletion of that which is empty, without doubt
the empty and hungry parts will draw from any place that nourishment which is
fit and convenient for them, and in defect thereof, whatsoever they meet with,
which by any familiarity may assuage and satisfy their desire. But the
alimentary Glysters, by us described, consist of things which agree very well
with the nature of our bodies, and such as are boiled and ordered with much
art, so to supply the chylification to be performed in the stomach. Therefore
they may be drawn in by the meseraicke veins of the guts, which, according to
Galen, have a certain attractive faculty. And thence they may be easily
carried through the gate vein, liver, and so over the whole body. And
experience teaches, Secondly, by experience.
that many sick people, when they could take nothing by the mouth, have bin
sustained many days by the help of these kind of Glysters. What is more to
be said? We have seen those who have taken a Suppository by the fundament, and
vomited it at the mouth; by which it also appears, that something may flow
without danger of the sick from the guts into the stomach.

Commonly they give Glysters any hour of the day, without any respect of time,
but it should not be done unless a great while after meals, otherwise the
meat, being hindered from digestion, will be drawn out of the stomach by the
Glyster.

Glysters are used to help the weaker expulsive faculty of the guts, and by
consequence also of the other parts, both that such as through want of age, and
old people, The common use of Glysters.
and such as by reason of great imbecility by sickness cannot admit of a
purging medicine, may by this means at least ease themselves of the trouble
and burden of hurtful humors. Galen has attributed to Storkes the invention
of Glysters, which with their bills, having drunk Sea water, which from
saltness has a purging quality, wash themselves by that part, whereby they
use to bring away the excrements of their meats, and of the body. But a
Glyster is fitly taken after this manner: whilst the Syrenge is expressed, let
the patient hold open his mouth; for by this means all the muscles of the
Abdomen, which help by compression the excretion of the guts, are relaxed. Let
him wear nothing that may gird in his belly, let him lie upon his right side,
bending in a semicircular figure; and so the Glyster will the more easily pass
to the upper guts, and (as it were) by an overflowing, wet and wash all the
guts and excrements. It happens otherwise to those who lie upon their left
side; for the Glyster being so injected, is conceived to abide, and (as it
were) to stop in the Intestinum rectum, or Colon, because in this site these
two Intestines are oppressed, and as it were shut up with the weight of the
upper guts. A little while he may The sick, having received the Glyster, must
turn to the side grieved.
lie upon his back after he have received the Glyster, and presently after
he may turn himself on either side. And if there be pain in any part, so
long as he is able he may incline to that side. Moreover, because there are
many, who cannot by any reason be persuaded to show their buttockes to him
that should administer the Glyster, a foolish shamefastness hindering them:
therefore I thought good in this place to give the figure of an Instrument,
with which one may give a Glyster to himself, by putting up the pipe into the
fundament, lifting the buttockes a little up. The pipe is marked with this
Letter A. The body of the Syrenge, whereinto the Glyster must be put, with this
Letter B.

The figure of a Glyster pipe and Syrenge, by benefit whereof a man may give
himself a Glyster.


CHAP. XXIII. Of Suppositories, Nodules, and Pessaries.
A Suppository is a certain medicament, formed like unto a tent, or gobbet of
paste, such as is commonly used to fat Foul. It is put up into the fundament,
that it might excite the sphincter muscle to send forth those excrements which
are kept in the guts. Anciently it had the form of an Acorne, whence it is
called to this day Glans. The Suppositories we now usually make have the form
of a Pessary, that is, round and longish, in the form of a wax Candle. They
are either weak, stronger, or sharp; the weak are The differences.
made of the stalks or the roots of Beets, of Lard, boiled Honey with Salt,
or of Castle-sope. The stronger of purging powders, as, Hiera with Salt and
Honey. The sharp with Scammony, Euphorbium, Coloquintida, and like things
powdered, and with Honey, or the juices of sharp herbs, or mingled with the
gals of Beasts. It is commonly made thus: as,. Mellis i. Salis aut pulveris
alterius irritantis i. The form.


. Mellis cocti i. pull. Colocynthidos ss. Salis gemmae. i. fiat Suppositorium.
We use The use.
Suppositories, when the sick by his infirmity is unwilling, or not able to
bear or away with a Glyster, as in burning Fevers: or, when as one being
injected, is slow, and rests in the guts. And we use the sharper
Suppositories in seporiferous affects of the head, that they might provoke the
dull faculty of the guts to expulsion. As also, when the condition of the
disease is such, that by the use of Glysters there is manifest hurt; as, in an
Enterocele, where the gut so swells, that over and above it be filled by the
glyster infused, it would the more press the Peritonaeum, so that
straightwaies by the relaxed or broken part it might easily be devolved into
the Codde.

Nodules have the same use with Suppositories, and are oftentimes substituted
in stead of Glysters. They are made of gentle medicines, as the yelkes of Eggs
with a little Salt and Butter, or of Gall and Honey tied up in a cloth in the
form of a Filbert, the string of it may hang forth, whereby the Nodule in the
fundament may be drawn forth. This description may be an example of Nodules:.
Vitellum unius The form of a Nodule.
ovi, cui add salis modicum, fellis vervecis, mellis an. ss. butyri iii.
misce, fiant Noduli filo appensi.

A Pessary is grosser than a Suppository, and is appointed for the womb, being
Pessaries.
made with Cotton-wooll or Silk steeped in some medicament, and then put into
the neck of the womb.

A pessary is used either to ulcers of the neck of the womb, or for the
procuring, or stopping of the Menstrua, or against sordide and hurtful humors
of the womb Their use.
causing hystericall passions, and therefore to be wasted away and evacuated.
Therefore in the composition of pessaries are used gummes, juices, seeds of
herbs, roots, and many other things, according to the advice of the Physician;
they are also made of a solid consistence, the bigness of a finger, that they
may enter into the neck of the womb; these being tied with a string, which
must hang forth to pluck it out withal when occasion serves. This following
may be an example of their description. rum. myrrh. aloes, an. i. sabin. semin.
nigel. arthemis. an. ii. radic. ellebor. nig. i. croci, i. cum succo mercurial.
and melle fiat pessus; let it be tied to the thigh with a thread. Or this,.
mastich. thurii, an. iii. alum. ros. rub. nuc. cupres. an. ii. ladan. hypoci.
sumach, myrtil. an. iii. fiant pessi cum succo arnoglos. and cotoniorum.
According to this example others may be made for to mollify, to bind, to
cleanse, to incarnate, to cicatrize and cover the ulcers of the womb: they are
to be put up when the patient lies in bed, and to be kept all night.

Pessaries are also made of medicinable powders, not only mingled with some
juice, but also with those powders alone being put into a little bag of some
thin matter, being stuffed with a little cotton that it might be of a
convenient stiffenesse, and this kind of pessaries may be used profitably in
the falling of the mother.

An example of one mentioned by Rondeletius in his book of inward Medicines,
is as follows.

. Benioini, styracis, caryoph. an. i. gal. mosch. ss. moschi, gr. vi. fiat
pulvis; this Against the suffocation of the Mother.
being made up with cotton may be put up into the body.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Oils.
PRoperly and commonly we call oil that juice which is pressed forth of
Olives; but the word is used more largely, for we call every juice of a
fluxible, unctuous, and aerie substance, Oil. There are three differences of
these oleaginous juices: The first is of those things which yield oil by
expression, as well fruits as seeds being bruised, that by beating the oily
juice may be pressed forth; some are drawn without fire, as oil of sweet and
bitter almonds, oil of nuts, of palma Christi. Others are made to run by the
help of fire, by which means is gotten oil of baies, linseed oil, rape
oil, oil of hemp, and such like: The manner of drawing oil from seeds is
set down by Mesue in his third book.

The second sort is of those oils which are made by the infusion of simple
medicines in oil, wherein they leave their qualities: and this is done three
several The making olies by infusion.
ways, the first is by boiling of roots, leaves, tops of flowers, fruits,
seeds, gummes, whole beasts, with wine, water, or some other juice, with
common, or any other oil, until the wine, water, or juice be consumed, which
you may perceive to be perfectly done, if you cast a drop of the oil into
the fire, and it makes no noise but burns. It is to be remembered that
sometimes the seeds or fruits are for a certain time to be macerated before
they are set to the fire; but it must be boiled in a double vessel, lest the
oil partake of the fire.

After this manner is made oleum costinum, rutaceum, de croco, cydoniorum,
myrtillorum, mastichinum, de euphorbio, vulpinum, de scorpionibus, and many
others. The second is by a certain time of maceration, some upon hot ashes,
others in horse dung, that by that moderate heat the oil might draw forth the
effects of the infused medicines into it self. The third is by insolation,
that is, when these or these flowers, being infused in oil, are exposed to the
sun, that by the heat thereof the oil may change, and draw into him self
the faculty of the flowers which are infused: of this kind are oil of roses,
chamomile, dill, lillies, of water lillies, violets, and others, as you may see
in Mesue.

The third kind is properly that of the Chimists, and is done by resolution
made after diverse manners, and of this sort there are diverse admirable
qualities of diverse The manner o^ oiles by resolution.
oleaginous juices, whether they be made by the sun or fire, or putrefaction,
as we shall speak in his place hereafter.

We use oiles when we would have the virtue of the medicament to pierce
deep, or the substance of the medicines mingled with the oil to be soft and
gentle. Moreover, when we prepare oiles that should be of a cooling quality,
the common oil of the unripe Olive is to be used: of that should the oil of
roses be made.

Again, when we would prepare oiles of heating qualities, such as are Oleum
philosophorum, or of Tiles, sweet and ripe oil is to be chosen.

CHAP. XXV. Of Liniments.
ALiniment is an external medicine of a mean consistence, What a liniment is.
between an oil and an ointment, for it is thicker than an oil; for besides
oil it is compounded with butter, axungia, and such like, which is the reason
why a liniment is more efficacious in ripening and mitigating pain, than
simple oil. The varieties of liniments is drawn from their effects, some
cool, others heat, some humect, some ripen, others by composition are made for
diverse uses. The matter whereof they are usually made, is oil, axungia, sewet,
butter, all those things which have an oily substance or consistence, as styrax
liquida, turpentine, the mucilages of fenugreeke, marsh-mallowes, marrow, and
other like. To these are sometimes added powders of roots, seeds, flowers,
rindes, metals, but sparingly, that the liniment may be of a liquid consistence.

An example of a liniment that is good to attenuate, heat, and digest, is this
that follows.

. ol. amygd. amar. lilior. an. i. axung. anat. gallin. an. ss. butyr. sal.
expert. i. mucag. sem. alth. foenugr. extract. in aq. hyssop. an. ss. pulver.
croci, ireos, an. i. fiat linimentum.

This may be an example of a liniment to humect and mollify.

. ol. amygd. dulc. ii. axung. human. ss. mucag. semin. malv. extract. in aq.
parietar. ss. fiat linimentum: you may add a little saffron. There be many
others like these which may be made for diverse affects. They are easily applied
to every part of the body, because they are not so liquid as oiles: the reason
is, they are more agreeable to any of the parts. If they be to enter into any
crooked narrow passage, such as the ear, they must be more liquid, and have
more oil: if they be to stick on the part, they will admit of more axungia
and sewet.

They are deceived who think that the difference between liniments and
ointments is, that there is no wax in liniments as there is in unguents; for
there be some unguents which admit not any wax to be added, as aegyptiacum,
and all such as are used in gangrenes, and all sorts of putride ulcers; because
to these kinds of diseases all fatty things, as oiles, fats, rosines, and wax,
are enemies. Therefore we substitute in the place of them in aegyptiacum, honey
and verdigreace; for of these it has his consistence, and his quality of
cleansing.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Ointments.
Ointments are of a more solid consistence than Liniments, and are therefore of
more force. Their differences are partly taken from Ointments and their
differences.
their effects; for some heat, others cool, some dry, and some humect, some
cleanse, some corroborate, some waste dead flesh, and others cicatrize, partly
from the variety of colors, partly from the first invertors, as, Album rhasis,
Desiccativum rubrum: partly from the number of the simple medicaments whereof
they be made, as, Tetrapharmacum, Tripharmacum, or Nutritum: partly from that
medicament which is principal in the composition, hence are they called,
Unguentum de Lythargyro, de Minio, Diapompholigos, and such like. They are
compounded of herbs, roots, seeds, fruits, metals, and parts of Beasts; the
juices and other liquid things being consumed away by boiling, as we have said
in the Chapter of compound Oils. Herbs, and the parts of them, if they be
dry, must be powdered, and also metals; but being green, they are boiled and
strained forth, and the juice so pressed is wasted by boiling. Gums and Rosins
some are powdered, others being put to some convenient liquor are dissolved by
fire: So Wax is dissolved in the Oil. In the composition of unguents this
proportion is usually observed, that for one ounce of powder, two ounces of
Wax, and eight of Oil is added: notwithstanding for that Wax serves only
to the consistence of the ointment, it is better to leave the quantity to the
will of the Apothecary; but he may be more sparing in adding Wax to the
ointments in the Summer than in Winter: for the heat of Summer, drying them,
adds to the consistence; by examples propounded, these common preceps will
more plainly appear.

. Olei ros. iv. pil. lepor. bol. armen. terrae sigil. an. i. bal. Gallar. an.
ss. tritis terendis, Unguentum adstringens.
and simul mixtis, addita cera quod sufficit, fiat unguentum. Here we must
observe, that there be three ways of making Ointments: The first is of those
which are made only by stirring or grinding in the Mortar without any fire, and
so is made Unguentum nutritum. The second is, when we dissolve Wax in Oil,
Fat, or some such substance with fire: and being all dissolved, we mingle the
powders according to the proportion we noted before. After which manner are
made Unguentum Aureum, Basilicon, Diapompholigos, Desiccativum rubrum,
Enulatum. The third sort is, when we bruise herbs with a Pestell, and mingle
them with Axungy, boiling them together, and then straining them, and the
Ointment is that which is strained. Therefore let us proceed to explain this
by examples.

. Lythar. auri triti and loti lb ss. olei ros. lb. i. aceti ros. iv. fiat
Unguentum. First, we put the Lytharge into the Mortar, pouring in a little
Oil, and working it with a Unguentum nutritum.
Pestell, that it may grow thick, then with the Oil we put a little Vinegar,
continually working, until they mingle into one body, now and then between
whiles adding sometimes a little Oil, sometimes a little Vinegar, until the
whole be brought to the consistence of an Ointment. If of an Ointment of this
kind thou would make a black plaster, by degrees consume all the Vinegar,
so shall the plaster shine and grow black.

. Cerae citr. vi. olei boni lb. ii. tereb. ii. resin. and coloph. an. i ss.
olib. mastich. an. i. croci, i. fiat Unguentum. First, dissolve the Wax with a
good part of the Oil, then Vnguentum aureum.
add the Rosin and Colophony broken small. These being dissolved, take the
composition from the fire, and then add the Turpentine; when the whole is
somewhat cooled, add the Olibanum and Masticke being finely powdered, then the
Saffron, which shall be macerated in the rest of the Oil.

Tetrapharmacon is so called, because it is made of four simple medicines,
Vng. Tetraph^macum, scu Basi^m.
Wax, Rosin, Pitch, Tallow, of each a like quantity, and so equally mixed.

Resin. picis nigr. adip. vituli. and cerae an. ii. ss. Olei veteris olivarum
maturarum, lb i ss. or if you would have it harder, lb i. that ointment also is
called Basilicon, the Wax being cut small and dissolved in Oil, then add the
rest of the things, which being dissolved, thou shall have the desired ointment.

. Olei ros. ix. cer. alb. iii. succi solani hortensis, iv. Cerus. lot. i.
Pompholygos, plumbi Ung. Diapompholygos.
usti and loti, olib. puri, an. ss. fiat Unguentum. Dissolve the Wax in the
Oil with a gentle fire, then you shall take it from the fire, and add to the
rest of the ingredients, working them together in a stone Mortar, pouring on
the juice by degrees, at least so much of it as will incorporate.

. Lap. calam. ter. sig. an. ii. Litharg. auri, cerus. an. i ss. Camphor. ss.
cerae, ii ss. Olei Vng. desiccatvum rubrum.
rosat. viol. an. iii. fiat Unguentum. Dissolve the Wax in the Oil, then set
it to cool, and work in the powders with a spatter, and at last add the
Camphor dissolved in a little Oil of Roses, or Rosewater.

. Rad. enul. campan. coct. cum aceto and contus. ut decet lb ss. Axung. porci,
olei commu. Ung. Enulatum.
an. i ss. argen. vivi extincti, and tereb. lot. an. i. sal. commu. pulverati,
ii. incorporate them according to art. The boiled roots must be drawn through
a Sieve, which being boiled by a gentle fire with the Axungia, must be
continually stirred, then put to the Salt with Oil and Wax: when you set it
from the fire to cool, then add the Quick silver, being killed with a little
Axungia and Turpentine.

. Olei rosat. ix. cerus. alb. iii. cer. alb. ii. make it thus: Let the Cerusse
be finely Vng. album Rhasis.
powdered, and put into the Oil and Wax whilst it is hot, and so work the
whole together, until they shall be brought into a body.

. Rad. Ath. lb i. semi. lini, foenugr. an. lb. ss. Scillae iii. Olei com. lb.
ii. cer. lb ss. terebinth. De Althaea.
gum. heder. galb. an. i. coloph. and resin. iii. The roots and seeds being
bruised, are infused for three days in five pintes of water; boil them until
three ounces be consumed, and then draw forth the Mucilage, and boil it with
the Oil, then add Wax cut small: these being taken from the fire, the
Galbanum being dissolved with Vinegar, and mingled with the Turpentine, must be
added together with the Gum Hederae, Colophony, and Rosin.

. Ocul. populi arb. lb i ss. fol. papaveris nigr. Mandrag. byoscyami, lactucae,
sompervivi Vng. Populeu^
parvi and magni, violae nigrae, solani, umbilici veneris, seu cymbalar.
bardanae, an. ss. (Cordus, Fernelius, and Nicolaus singulorum iii.
praescribunt) Adipis suilli recentis salis expertis, lb ii. vini boni, lb i.
fiat Unguentum. The Poplar buds and Violet leaves must be bruised and maccrated
in the Axungia for the space of two months, that is, until the rest of the
herbs be ready; for they cannot be gathered before the Summer time, but the
Poplar buds and Violets may be had in March. They must be bruised and mingled
very well, and set in a warm place for eight days; then add one pint of
strong Vinegar, and boil them till it be consumed, which may be perceived by
casting a little of it into the fire, then strain it forth, and put up the
Ointment.

. Tereb. cer. alb. res. an. xiv. Opopanacis, floris, seu viridis aeris (nam hic
flo^ aris non Vng. Apostolorum.
proprie accipitur pro granulis, quae scintillarum instar ab aere exiliunt dum
a fabris ferrariis aqua tingitur: sed pro viridi aeris usurpatur, cujus contra
maligna ulcera notae sunt vires, contra quae omnino id Unguentum est
comparatum) an. ii. ammon. xiv. aristol. lon. thuris masculi an. vi. myrrhae
and galbani an. iii. bdellii, vi. Litharg. ix. olei, lb ii. fiat Unguentum. The
Litharge is to be mingled with two ounces of Oil for the space of five hours,
and with a gentle fire to be boiled until it come to the consistence of Honey,
and be always stirring, lest it burn: being taken from the fire and warm,
the Wax and the Rosin, being dissolved, with the rest of the Oil, must be
added. Then put to it, when it is cooling, the Gummes dissolved in Vinegar,
boiled and incorporated with the Turpentine. Then the Aristolochia, Myrrh, and
Frankinsense are to be mingled, and last of all the Verdigrease, being in fine
powder, and sprinkled in: and so the unguent is made.

. Cortic. median. castan. cortic. median. querc. cortic. median. gland. mirtil.
eques. cortic. Com^
fabar. acinor. uvar. sorbor. siccor. immatur. mespillor. immaturor. rad.
ch^lidon. folior. prunor. silvest. an. iss. Aquae plantaginis, lb viii. cer.
nov. viii ss. olei myrtillor. lb iiss. Then these things which follow, being
finely powdered, are to be sprinkled in.

. Pulveris corticis mediani castan. corticis mediani gland. cortic. median.
arb. gland. id est, querc. gallar. an. i. Cineris oss. cruris bovis, myrtill.
acinor. uvar. sorbor. siccor. an. ss. Trochiscorum de carabe, ii. fiat
Unguentum. First, make a decoction corticis mediani arboris quercus, acini
uvar. rad. chelid. mespil. sorbor. equis. seminis myrtil. folior. pruni
sylvestris, cort. fabar. cortic. mediani gland. cortic. castan. and gallar. in
the Plantaine water for the space of two hours, then strain it, and divide
the liquor into nine parts, washing the Wax, dissolved with the Oil of
Myrtils seven times; the liquor being all spent, and the Wax and Oil being
melted, then insperge the powders, Cruris bovis, ossium, cortic. median. querc.
median. cortic. gland. castan. gallar. sorbor. mespil. seminum myrtil. acinor.
uvar. and at last the Trochisces carab. after this manner shall you make this
Ointment.

. Olei absinth. mastich. de spic. rosat. an. ss. pulver. absinth. ros. major.
menth. an. i. Caryoph. cinam. mastich. galang. an. i. Powder those things which
are to be powdered, Ung. pto stomacho.
and with a sufficient quantity of Wax make a soft ointment, wherewith let the
stomach be anointed one hour before meals continually.

. Cer. alb. lb ii. cerus. litharg. auri, an. lb i. myrrh. medull. cervi, an.
ii. thuris, i. olei, lb ss. Boil the Litharge in the oil to a mean
consistence, then add to the Wax Ung. ad morsus rubiosos, ex li. 1. Gal. de
comp. sce. genera.
and Cerusse, and when it will not stick to the fingers, take it from the
fire, and put in the Medulla, when it begins to cool, the Myrrha and Thus,
being finely powdered, must be cast in by little and little, and the ointment
may be put up for use. The chops of the fundament, and remollient Pessaries are
likewise made of it, and it is very good against the bitings of mad Dogs,
and the punctures of nerves and tendons, keeping wounds so that they do not
agglutinate.

. Picis pinguis, lb i. Opopanacis in aceto forti, oleo liliorum, and veteri
porci axungia cocti, iii. fiat Unguentum. Oleum ex sinapi is good against those
bitings of mad beasts 3. De comp. med. see. genesis
and punctured nerves: for it does open wounds when they are cicatrized.
Ointments are used to overcome the contumacy of a stubborn evil by their
firm and close sticking to, especially if there shall need no medicine to go
further into the body.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Cerats and Emplasters.
SUch affinity there is in the composition of a Cerat and Emplaster, that What
a Cerat is.
oftentimes the one is taken for the other, as is usually done in Ointments and
Liniments. A Cerat is a composition more solid and hard The differences.
than an ointment, and softer than a plaster, having his name from Wax, which
taking away the fluidness of the oil, brings him to his consistence. The
differences of Cerats are taken some from the parts by which they are called,
as Ceratum stomachicum: some from the effects, as Ceratum refrigerans Galeni:
Others from the simple medicaments which are the chief in the composition, as,
Ceratum Santalinum. The proper matter of Cerats is, new Wax and Oils, being
appropriated to the grief of these, or those parts; so that Liniments and
Ointments do scarce differ from Cerats, if they admit of Wax: for if ointment
of Roses should have Wax added to it, it were no longer an ointment, but a
Cerat.

Cerats, which are made with Rosins, Gummes, and Metals, do rather deserve the
names of Emplasters than Cerats. And therefore Ceratum ad Hernias, we commonly
call Emplastrum contra Rupturam. If that pain or inflammation do grieve any
part, we make Cerats of plaster, dissolved with Oil, lest that the more hard
and heavy consistence of the Emplaster should be troublesome to the part, and
hinder perspiration: and therefore laying aside the composition of Cerats, let
us speak of Emplasters.

An Emplaster is a composition which is made up of all kind of medicines,
especially Emplasters.
of fat and dry things, agreeing in one gross, viscous, solid, and hard body
sticking to the fingers. The differences of Emplasters are taken from those
things, which the variety of ointments are taken from. Of those things which
go into the composition of an Emplaster, some are only used for their quality
and faculty, as Wine, Vinegar, Juices. Others to make the consistence, as
Litharge (which, according to Galen, is the proper matter of Emplasters) Wax,
Oil, and Rosin. Others be useful for both, as, Gums, Metals, parts of beasts,
Rosin, as Turpentine to digest, to cleanse, and dry. Of Emplasters, some are
made by boiling, some are brought into a form without boiling; those which be
made without fire, do suddenly dry, nor are they viscous: they are made with
meal and powder, with some juice, or with some humid matter mingled with them.
But plasters of this kind may rather be called hard ointments, or cataplasmes:
for plasters properly so called are boiled, some of them longer, some shorter,
according to the nature of those things which make to the composition of the
Emplaster: Therefore it will be worth our labor to know what Emplasters do
ask more, or which less boiling. For roots, woods, leaves, stalks, flowers,
seeds, being dried, and brought into powder, are to be added last, when the
plaster is boiled as it were, and taken from the fire, lest the virtue of these
things be lost. But if green things are to be used in a composition, they are
to be boiled in some liquor, and being pressed forth, that which is strained to
be mingled with the rest of the composition; or if there be juice to be used,
it is to be bruised and pressed forth, which is so to be boiled with the other
things, that nothing but the quality is to remain with the mixture, as we use
to do in Empl. de Janua, seu Betonica, and Gratia Dei. The same is to be done
with Mucilages, but that by their clamminesse they do more resist the fire. But
there does much of oil and honey remain in plasters when they are made. Those
juices which are hardened by concretion, as, Aloes, Hypocystis, Acacia, when
they are used in the composition of a plaster, and be yet new, they must be
macerated and dissolved in some proper liquor, and then they are to be boiled
to the consumption of that liquor. Gums, as, Opopanax, Galbanum, Sagapaenum,
Ammoniacum, must be dissolved in Wine, Vinegar, or Aqua vitae, then strained
and boiled to the consumption of the liquor, and then mixed with the rest of
the plaster. And that they may have the exact quantity of Gums and Pitch, it is
necessary that first they be dissolved, strained, and boiled, because of the
sticks and sordid matter which are mingled with them. You must have respect
also to the liquor you use to dissolve them in; for Vinegar of the best Wine
does more powerfully penetrate, than that which is of weak and bad Wine.

Other Gums, which are drier, are to be powdered, and are to be mingled with
plasters last of all. Metals, as, Aes ustum, Chalcitis, Magnes, Bolus Armenus,
Sulphur, Auripigmentum, and others, which may be brought to powder, must be
mingled last, unless advice be given by long boiling to dull the fierce
qualities of them. The like consideration is to be had of Rosin, Pitch, and
Turpentine, which must be put in after the Wax, and may not be boiled but very
gently; but the fats are mingled whilst the other things are boiling. The
Litharge is to be boiled with the oil to a just consistence, if we would have
the plaster dry without biting. Cerusse may endure as long boiling, but then
the plaster shall not be white, neither will the Litharge of filver make a
plaster with so good a color as Litharge of gold. Moreover, this order must
be observed in boiling up of plasters: the Litharge must be boiled to his
consistence; juices or mucilages are to be boiled away, then add the fats,
then the dry Rosin, Wax, Gums, Turpentine, and after them the powders: You
shall know the plaster is boiled enough by his consistence, gross, hard,
glutinous, Signs of a plaster perfectly boiled.
and sticking to the fingers, being cooled in the air, water, or upon a stone.
Also you shall know it by his exact mixtion, if that all the things become one
mass hard to be broken.

The quantity of things which are to be put into a plaster can hardly be
described, The quantity of things to be put into plasters.
but an artificial conjecture may be given, by considering the medicaments,
which make the plaster stiff, and of a consistence, and the just hardness and
softness they make being boiled. Wax is not put into such plasters wherein is
Labdanum; for that is in stead of Wax. For if there shall be in the
composition of a plaster some emplasticke medicaments, the Wax shall be the
less: Contrariwise, if they shall be almost all liquid things, the Wax shall
be increased so much as shall be necessary for the consistence of the plaster.
The quantity of the Wax also must be altered according to the time, or the
air; therefore it is fit to leave this to the art and judgment of the
Apothecarie. Emplasters are sometimes made of ointments by the addition of
wax, or dry rosine, or some other hard or solid matter. Some would that a
handful of medicaments poudred, should be mingled with one ounce, or an ounce
and an half of oil, or some such liquor, but for this thing nothing can
certainly be determined: Only in plasters described by the Ancients there
must be great care had, wherein he must be very well versed, who will not
err in the describing the dose of them; and therefore we will here give you
the more common forms of plasters.

. ol. chamaem. aneth. de spica, liliacci, an. ii. ol. de croco, i pingued.
porci, lb i. Empl. de Vigo with Mercury.
pingued. vitul. lb ss. euphorb. v. thuris, x. ol. lauri, i ss. ranas viv. nu.
vi. pingued. viper. vel ejus loco human. ii ss. lumbricor. lotor. in vino, iii
(...). succi ebuli, enul. ana, ii. schoenanthi, staechados, matricar. an. m ii.
vini oderiferi, lb ii. litharg. auri, lb i. terebinth. clarae, ii. styracis
liquid. i s8. argenti vivi extincti, so much as the present occasion shall
require, and the sick shall be able to bear, and make up the plaster. To one
pound of the plaster they do commonly add four ounces of quicksilver, yet
for the most part they do increase the dose, as they desire the plaster should
be stronger: the worms must be washed with fair water, and then with a little
wine to cleanse them from their earthie filth, of which they are full, and so
the frogs are to be washed and macerated in wine, and so boiled together to the
consumption of a third part; then the squinanth must be bruised, the feverfew
and the staechas cut small, and they being added, to be boiled to the
consumption of one pint, and being boiled sufficiently, the decoction being
cooled shall be strained and kept; and the Letharge is to be infused for
twelve hours in the oil of chamomile, dill, lillies, saffron, and the
axungies above spoken of. Then boil them all with a gentle fire, by and by
taking it from the fire, and add one quart of the decoction above spoken of,
then set it to the fire again that the decoction may be consumed, and then by
degrees add to the rest of the decoction: the oil of spike shall be reserved
unto the last, which may give the plaster a good smell. Then are added the
juices of walwort and enula, which must be boiled until they be wasted away.
Afterward it being taken from the fire, to the composition is added the
frankincense and euphorbium, and white wax as much as shall suffice. When the
whole mass shall cool, then at last is mingled the quicksilver extinct,
turpentine, oil of bitter almonds, baies, spike, of line, styrax and axungia,
being continually stirred, and it shall be made up upon a stone into rolls.
Unless the quicksilver be well extinguished, it will run all into one
place, and unless you tarry until the composition cool, it will vapor away
in fume.

. croci, ii. bdellii, mastich. ammon. styrac. liquid. an. ss. cerae alb. lb s8.
tereb. vi. medul. cruris vaccae, adipis anserini, an. i. aesypi, vel si desit,
axung. gallin. ix. olei Ceratum oesipiex Philagrio.
nard quantum satis ad magdaleones formandos, expressionis scillae, i s8.
olibani, sevi vitul. i. The oesypus, sepum, adeps, medulla, cera, are to be
dissolved together; when they cool, add the ammoniacum dissolved in the
decoction of faenugreeke and chamomile, half an ounce, and so much juice of
squils, then put to the styrax and turpentine, stirring them continually; then
add the bdellium, olibanum, mastich, aloes, brought into fine powder, and when
they are perfectly incorporated into a mass, let them be made up with oleum
nardinum into rolls.

rum. terebinth. lb s8. resin. lb i. cer. alb. iv. mastich. i. fol. verben.
betonic. pimpinel. an. m i. The herbs being green, the tops are to be cut
and bruised in a stone mortar, Degratia Dei.
and boiled in red wine to the consumption of one third part. To the strained
liquor add wax cut into small pieces, and being dissolved by the fire; the
liquor being consumed put to the rosine, when it shall cool add the Mastick
powdered, working it with your hands, by which it may be incorporated with the
rest of the things.

. succi beton. plantag. apii, an. lb i. cerae, picis, resin. tereb. an. lb s8.
fiat empl. the De janua seu de Betonica.
juices are to be mingled with the wax being dissolved, and boiling them
until three parts be consumed, add the rosine and pitch, which being
dissolved and hot, must be strained, and then add the Turpentine, and make up
the plaster.

rum. croci, picis com. (or rather picis navalis, because this emplaster is
used to discuss Emplastrum oxycroceum.
and draw forth the matter which causes the pain of the joints) coloph.
cerae, an. ii. tereb. galb. ammon. thuris, myrrhae, mastioh. an. v ss. The
cera, pix, and colophonia are by little and little to be dissolved, to which
add the gummes dissolved according to art, and mingled with the terebinth; and
taking it from the fire add the thus, myrrha, and at last the crocus in fine
powder, and then make it up into rowles with oil of worms.

rum. ol. com. lb ii. cerus. subtilis. lb i. boil them together with a gentle
fire, stirring De cerusa.
them continually until they come to the body of an emplaster: if you would
have the plaster whiter, take but ix. of the oil.

. lytharg. triti, acet. fortis. an. lb ss. ol. antiq. lb i. fiat emplastrum:
let the oil be Tripharmacum, seu nigrum.
mingled with the litharge for the space of twelve hours, then boil them
until they come to a good consistence, putting in the vinegar by little and
little; but you shall not take it from the fire until the vinegar be quite
wasted away.

rum. ol. vet. lb iii. axung. vet. sine sale, lb ii. lytharg. trit. lb iii.
vitriol. iv. let the Diapalma, seu diachalciteos.
oil be mingled with the lytharge for the space of twelve hours, and boil
them to a good consistence, then add to the axungia, stirring them continually
with a spatter made of the palm tree, reed, or willow, and being sufficiently
boiled, take it from the fire; and add the vitrioll in fine powder.

. picis naval. aloes, an. iii. lytharg. cerae, coloph. galban. ammoniac. an.
ii. visci Contrarupturam.
querni, vi. gypsi ust. utriusque aristoloch. ana, iv. myrrhae, thuris, an. vi.
tereb. ii. pulveris vermium terrestrium, gallar. utriusq. consolid. bol. arm.
an. iv. sang. humani, lb i. fiat emplast. If you would have it of a very good
consistence, you may add of the oil of myrtills or mastich; lb ss. you shall
make it thus: Take the skin of a Ram cut in pieces, and boil it in an
hundred pints of water and vinegar until it come to a glue or stiff gelly, in
which you shall dissolve the visco quer. then add the pitch and wax broken
into small pieces, and if you will you may add the oil with them, afterward
the galban. and ammoniac. dissolved in vinegar, being mingled with the
terebinth, may be added. Then add the litharge, gypsum, bol. aristoloch.
consolida, vermes, and sang. human. At last the myrrh, thus, colophon, and
aloe, stirring them continually; and that they may be the better mingled,
work the plaster with a hot pestell in a mortar.

rum. mucag. sem. lini, rad. alth. foenug. median. corticis ulmi, an. iv. olei
liliacei, cham. De mucaginibus.
aneth. an. i ss. ammon. opopanac. sagap. ana ss. croci, ii. cerae nov. lb ss.
tereb. ss. fiat empl. Fernelius has xx. of wax: the wax being cut small must
be mingled with the oiles and the mucilages, stirring them continually with a
wooden spatter till the liquor be consumed. Then the gummes dissolved and
mingled with the terebinthina must be added, and last of all the saffron finely
poudered.

rum. ol. ros. myrtil. ung. populeon, ana, iv. pinguedinis gallin. ii. sebi
arietis castrati, De minio.
sepi vaccini, an. vi. pingued. porci, x. lytharg. auri, argenti, an. iii.
cerus. iv. minii, iii. tereb. iv. cerae, q. s. fiat emplastrum vel ceratum
molle. The lithargiros, cerusa, and minium are to be brought into fine powder,
severally being sprinkled with a little rose water, lest the finest of it
should fly away; these being mingled with the oil of roses and myrtles, with
a gentle fire may be boiled until they come to the consistence of honey; then
add the axungia's, and boil them till the whole grow black, after add the
sebum, and that being dissolved take it from the fire, and then add the
unguentum populeon, and some wax if there be need, and so bring it to the
form of a plaster.

. litharg. puri pull. xii. ol. irin. chamaem. aneth. an. viii. mucag. sem. lini,
foenug. Diachylon magnum.
rad. alth. ficuum ping. uvar. passar. succi ireos, scillae, oesipi,
icthyocollae, an. xii ss. tereb. iii. res. pini, cerae flavae, an. ii. fiat
emplastrum: The litharge is to be mingled with the oil before it be set to the
fire, then by a gentle fire it is to be boiled to a just consistence; after the
mucilage by degrees must be put in, which being consumed the juices must be
added and the icthyocolla, and they being wasted too, then put to the wax and
rosine, then taking the whole from the fire, and the oesipus and terebinthina.

We use plasters when we would have the remedy stick longer and firmer to the
The use of plasters.
part, and would not have the strength of the medicament to fly away or exhale
too suddenly.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cataplasmes and Pultisses.
CAtaplasmes are not much unlike to emplasters less properly so called, for
they may be spread upon linen clothes and stoupes like them, and The matter of
cataplasmes.
so applied to the grieved parts. They are composed of roots, leaves, fruits,
flowers, seeds, herbs, juices, oiles, fats, marrowes, meals, rosines. Of
these some must be boiled, others crude. The boiled are made of herbs boiled
tender, and so drawn through an hair searse, adding oiles and axungia's
thereto. The crude are made of herbs beaten, or their juices mixed with oil
and flower, or other powders appropriate to the part or disease, as the
Physician shall think fit. The quantity of medicines entering these
compositions can scarce be defined, for that they must be varied as we would
have the composition of a softer or harder body. Verily they ought to be more
gross and dense when as we desire to ripen anything, but more soft and liquid
when we endeavor to discuss. We use cataplasmes to assuage pain, digest,
discuss and resolve unnatural tumors Their use.
and flatulencies. They ought to be moderately hot and of subtle parts, so to
attract and draw forth; yet their use is suspected the body being not yet
purged, for thus they draw down more matter into the affected part. Neither
must we use these when as the matter that is to be discussed is more gross
and earthy, for thus the subtler parts will be oaely discussed, and the gross
remain impact in the part unless your cataplasme be made of an equal mixture
of things, not only discussing, but also emollient, as it is largely handled by
Galen.

This shall be largely illustrated by examples. As,. medul. panis, lb ss.
decoquantur Lib. 2. ad glaucubi deschirrho.
in lacte pingui, add olei chamam. ss. axung. galin. i. fiat cataplasma. Or,.
rad. alth. iii. fol. malv. senecionis, an. m i. sem. lini, faenug. an. ii.
ficus, ping. nu. vi. decoquantar An anodine cataplasme A ripening cataplasme. A
discussing caplasme. How pultisses differ from caplasmes.
in aqua, and per setaceum transmittantur, addendo olet lilior. i. far. hord.
ii. axung. porcin. i ss. fi at cataplasma. Or,. far. fab. and orob. an. ii.
pulv. chamam. and melil. an. iii. ol. irin. and amygd. amar. an. i. succi rut.
ss. fiat cataplasma. Pultisses differ not from cataplasmes, but that they
usually consist of meals boiled in oil, water, honey, or axungia. Pultisses
for the ripening of tumors are made of the flower of barley, wheat, and milk,
especially in the affects of the entralles; or else to dry and bind, of the
meal of rice, lentiles, or Orobus with vinegar; or to cleanse, and they are
made of honey, the flower of beans and lupines, adding thereto some old oil,
or any other oil of hot quality, and so make a discussing pultis. Also anodine
pultisses may be made with milk; as thus for example,. farin. triticeae, ii.
mica A ripening cataplasme.
panis purissimi, iii. decoquantur in lacte, and fiat pulticula.. farin. hordei
and fab. an. ii. far. orob. iii. decoquantur in hydromelete, addendo mell is
quart. i. olei amyg. amar. ii. fiat pulticula. We use pultisses for the same
purpose as we do cataplasmes, to the affects both of the internal and
external parts. We sometimes use them for the killing of worms, and such are
made of the meal of lupines boiled in vinegar, with an Oxes gall, or in a
decoction of Worme-wood, and other such like bitter things.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Fomentations.
A Fotus or fomentation is an evaporation or hot lotion, chiefly used to
mollify, relaxe and assuage pain, consisting of medicines having these
faculties. A fomentation commonly uses to be moist, being usually made of the
same things as embrocations, to wit, of roots, seeds, flowers, boiled in water
or wine. The roots here used are commonly of mallows, marsh-mallowes, and
lillies. The seeds are of mallows, marsh-mallowes, parsley, smallage, line,
fenugreeke. Flowers are of chamomile, melilote, figs, raisons, and the like:
all which are to be boiled in wine, water, or lie, to the consumption of the
third part or the half: as,

. Rad. alth. and lilil. an. ii. sem. lini, foenug* cumin. an. iii. flo. cham.
melil. and aneth. an p. i. summit. orig. m. ss. bulliant in aequis partibus
aquae and vini, aut in duabus partibus aqua, and una vini, aut in Lixivio
cineris sarmentorum, ad tertiae partis consumptionem, fiat fotus. In imitation
hereof you may easily describe other fomentations, as occasion and necessity
shall require.

We use fomentations before we apply cataplasmes, ointments or plasters to the
Their use.
part, that so we may open the breathing places or pores of the skin, relaxe
the parts, attenuate the humor, that thus the way may be the more open to the
following medicines. The body being first purged, fomentations may be used to
what parts you please. They may be applied with a female sponge, for it is
gentler and softer than the male; with felt, woollen clothes, or the like
dipped in the warm decoction wrung out, and often renewed; otherwise, you may
fill a Swines bladder half full (especially in pains of the sides) of the
decoction, or else a stone bottle, so to keep hot the longer; yet so, that the
bottle be wrapped in cotton, wool, or the like soft thing, that so it may not
be the hardness and roughness offend the part, according to Hippocrates. 2.
De victu i^ ^cutis.


CHAP. XXX. Of Embrocations.
AN Embroche, or Embrocation is a watering, when as from on high we What an
Embrocation is.
(as it were) shower down some moisture upon any part. This kind of remedy is
chiefly used in the parts of the head, and it is used to the coronall suture,
for that the skull is more thin in that part, so that by the spiracula or
breathing places of this suture, more open than those of the other sutures, the
force of the medicine may more easily penetrate unto the Meninges, or membranes
of the brain. The matter of Embrocations is roots, leaves, flowers, seeds,
fruits, and other things, according to the intention and will of the Physician.
They are boiled in water and wine, to the half or third part. Embrocations may
also be made of Lie or Brine against the cold and humide affects of the brain.
Sometimes of oil and vinegar, otherwhiles of oil only.. fol. plantag. and
solan. an. m. i. sem. portul. and cucurb. an. ii. myrtil. i. flor. nymph. and
ros. an. p. ss. fiat decot. ad lb i. cum aceti ii. si alte subeundum sit, ex
qua irrigetur pars inflammata. In affects of the brain, when we would
repercusse, we often and with good success use oil of Roses, with a fourth
part of vinegar.

We use Embrocations, that together with the air drawn into the body by the
Their use.
Diastole of the arteries, the subtler part of the humor may penetrate, and so
cool the inflamed part: for the chief use of embrocations is in hot affects.
Also we use embrocations, when as for fear of an haemorrhagie, or the flying
asunder of a broken or dislocated member, we dare not loose the bandages
wherewith the member is bound. For then we drop down some decoction or oil
from high upon the bandages, that by these the force of the medicine may enter
into the affected member.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Epithemes.
EPithema, or an Epitheme, is a composition used in the diseases of the parts
of the lower and middle belly, like to a fomentation, and not much What an
Epitheme is.
unlike an embrocation. They are made of waters, juices, and powders, by means
whereof they are used to the heart, chest, liver, and other parts. Wine is
added to them for the more or less penetration, as the condition of the hot or
cold affect shall seem to require; for if you desire to heat, more wine must
be added, as in swouning by the clotting of blood, by the corruption of seed,
by drinking some cold poison: the contrary is to be done in a fainting by
dissipation of the spirits by feverish heates, also vinegar may be added. The
matter of medicines proper to the entrails is formerly described, yet we
commonly use the species of electuaries, In the sixth Chapter.
as the species elect. triasantali the liver being affected, and Diamargariton
in affects of the heart. The proportion of the juices or liquors to the
powders, uses to be this, to every pint of them i. or i ss. of these, of wine
or else of vinegar i. You may gather this by the following example.

. aqu. ros. bugl. borag. an. iii. succi scabios. ii. pull. elect. diamarg.
frigid. ii. cort. citri A cordial Epitheme.
sicci i. coral. ras. ebor. an. ss. sem. citri and card. ben. an. iiss. croci
and moschi an. gra. 5. addendo vini albi ii. fiat Epithema pro cord.

Epithemes are profitably applied in hecticke and burning fevers to the liver,
Their use.
heart, and chest, if so be that they be rather applied to the region of the
lungs; than of the heart; for the heat of the lungs being by this means
tempered, the drawn in air becomes less hot in pestilent and drying fevers.
They are prepared of humecting, refrigerating, and cordial things, so to
temper the heat, and recreate the vital faculty. Sometimes also we use
Epithemes to strengthen the heart, and drive there-hence venenate exhalations,
lifted or raised up from any part which is gangrenate or sphacelate. Some
cotton, or the like, steeped or moistened with such liquor, and powders warmed,
is now and then to be applied to the affected entraile; this kind of remedy,
as also all other topic and particular medicines, ought not to be used,
unless you have first premised general things.

CHAP. XXXII. Of potentiall Cauteries.
THat kind of Pyroticke, which is termed a Potentiall Cautery, burns, and
causes an eschar. The use of these kinds of Cauteries is to make evacuation,
derivation, revulsion, or attraction of The use of potentiall cauteries.
the humors by those parts whereto they are applied. Wherefore they are often
and with good success used in the punctures and bites of venomous beasts, in a
venenous, as also in a pestilent Bubo and Carbuncle, unless the inflammation
be great: for the fire does not only open the part, but also retunds the force
of the poison, calls forth and plentifully evacuates the conjunct matter. Also
they are good in phlegmatic and contumacious tumors; for by their heat they
take away the force and endeavors of our weak heat. Also they are profitably
applied to stanch bleeding, to eat or waste the superfluous flesh of ulcers
and wens, to bring down the callous lips of ulcers, and other things too long
here to insist upon.

The materials of these Cauteries are Oak ashes, Pot ashes, the ashes of
Tartar, of The matter of them.
Tithymals or spurges, the Fig Tree, the stalks of Coleworts and Beans,
cuttings of Vines, as also sal ammoniacum, alkali, axungia vitri, sal nitrum,
Roman Vitrioll, and the like; for of these things there is made a salt, which
by its heat is causticke and escharoticke, like to an hot iron and burning
coal: Therefore it violently looses the continuity by eating into the skin,
together with the flesh there-under. I have thought good here to give you
diverse forms of them.

Take of unquencht Lime extinguished in a bowl of Barbers Lie three pounds:
The forms of them.
When the Lie is settled, let it be strained, and into the straining put of
Axungia vitri, or Sandiver, calcined Argol, of each two pounds, of Sal nitrum
and ammoniacum, of each four ounces, these things must be beaten into a gross
powder, then must they be boiled over the fire, and after the boiling let them
remain in the Lie for four and twenty hours space, being often stirred
about, and then strained through a thick and double linen cloth, lest any of
the earthy dross get through together with the liquor. This strained liquor,
which is as clear as water, they call Capitellum, and they put it in a brazen
Basin, such as Barbers use, and so set it upon the fire, and as soon as it
boyles, they keep it with continual stirring, lest the salt should adhere to
the Basin; the Capitellum being half boiled away, they put in two ounces of
powdered vitrioll, so to hasten the falling of the eschar, and so they keep the
basin over the fire until all the liquor be almost wasted away. Then they cut
into pieces the salt or that earthy matter, which remains after the boiling
away of the Capitellum, and with a knife or hot iron spatula form them into
cauteries of such figure and magnitude as they think fitting, and so they lay
them up, or keep them for use in a violl or glass closly stopped, that the
air get not in: Or,

Take a bundle or sufficient quantity of Bean stalks or husks, of Colewort
stalks two little bundles, of cuttings of Vines four bundles, burn them all to
ashes, which put into a vessel of river water, so let them infuse for a days
space, being stirred ever now and then; to this add two pounds of unquencht
lime, of Axungia vitri half a pound, of calcined Tartar two pounds, of Sal
niter four ounces, infuse all these, being made into powder, in the foresaid
Lie for two or three days space, often stirring it, then strain the
Capitellum or liquor through a thick cloth until it become clear. Put it
into a basin, and set it over the fire, and when as the moisture is almost
wholly spent, let two or three ounces of vitrioll be added, when the moisture
is sufficiently evaporated, make cauteries of that which remains, after the
formerly mentioned manner.

Take of the ashes of sound, knotty, old Oak as much as you please, make
thereof a Lie; power this Lie again upon other fresh ashes of the same wood,
let this be done three or four times, then quench some lime in this Lie, and
of these two make a Capitellum, whereof you may make most approved cauteries.
For such ashes are hot in the fourth degree; and in like sort the stones,
whereof the lime by burning becomes fiery and hot to the fourth degree: Verily,
I have made cauteries of Oak ashes only, which have wrought quickly and
powerfully. The Capitellum or Lie is The sign of good Capitellum.
thought sufficiently strong, if that an Egg will swim therein without
sinking.

Or, Take of the ashes of Bean stalks three pounds, of unquencht lime, Argoll,
of the ashes of Oak wood, being all well burnt, of each two pounds. Let them
for two days space be infused in a vessel full of Lie made of the ashes of
Oak wood, and be often stirred up and down. Let this Lie then be put into
another vessel, having many holes in the bottom thereof, covered with strums
or straw pipes, that the Capitellum flowing through these strait passages may
become more clear. Let it be put twice or thrice upon the ashes, that so it
may the better extract the heat and causticke quality of the ashes. Then
putting it into a Barbers basin, set it over the fire, and when it shall begin
to grow thick, the fire must be increased, and cauteries made of this
concreating matter.

The following cauteries are the best that ever I made trial of, as those that
applied to the arm in the bigness of a Pease, in the space of half an hour
without The faculty of the silken Cautery.
pain, especially if the part of it self be painlesse and free from
inflammation, eat into the skin and flesh even to the bone, and make an
ulcer of the bigness of ones fingers end, and they leave an eschar so moist
and humide, that within four or five days space it will fall away of it self
without any scarification. I have thought good to call these cauteries Silken
or Velvet ones, not only for that they are like The cause of the name.
Silk, gentle and without pain, but chiefly because I obtained the
description of them of a certain Chemist, who kept it as a great secret, for
some Velvet and much entreaty: Their description is this.

Take of the ashes of Bean stalks, of the ashes of Oak wood well burnt, of
Their description.
each three pounds, let them be infused in a pretty quantity of river water,
and be often stirred up and down, then add thereto of unqueneht lime four
pounds, which being quenched, stir it now and then together for two days
space, that the Capitellum may become the stronger, then strain it through a
thick and strong linen cloth, and thus strained, put it three or four times
upon the ashes, that so it may draw more of the causticke faculties from them,
then boil it in a Barbers basin, or else an earthen one well leaded, upon a
good Char-cole fire, until it become thick. But a great part of the secret or
art consists in the manner and limit of this boiling; for this Capitellum
becoming thick and concreating into salt, must not be kept so long upon the
fire, until all the moisture shall be vanished and spent by the heat
thereof: for thus also the force of the foresaid medicines, which also consists
in a spirituous substance, will be much dissipated and weakened; therefore
before it be come to extreme dryness, it shall be taken off from the fire, to
wit, when as yet there shall some thick moisture remain, which may not hinder
the cauteries from being made up into a form. The made up cauteries shall be
put up into a glass most closely luted up or stopped, that the air may not
dissolve them, and so they shall be laid up and kept in a dry place. Now,
because the powder of Mercury is near to cauteries in the effects and faculty
thereof, which therefore is termed Pulvis Angelicus for the excellency;
therefore I have thought good to give you the description thereof, which is
thus:

. Auripigmenti citrini, floris aeris, an. ii. salis nitri, lb iss. alumin.
rochae, lb ii. vitrioli The description of Mercury, or Angelical powder.
romans lb iii. Let them all be powdered, and put into a Retort, having a large
receiver well luted put thereto. Then set the Retort over a Furnace, and let
the distillation be made first with a gentle fire, then increased by little and
little, so that the receiver may wax a little reddish.

. Argenti vivi, lb ss. aquae fortis, lb i. ponantur in phiala, and fiat pulvis,
ut sequitur.

Take a large earthen pot, whereinto put the violl or bolt head wherein the
Argentum vivum and Aqua fortis are contained, setting it in ashes up to the
neck thereof, then set the pot over a furnace, or upon hot coals, so that it
may boil and evapourate away the Aqua fortis: neither in the interim will the
glass be in any danger of breaking, when all the water is vanished away,
which you may know is done when as it leaves smoking; suffer it to become
cold, then take it forth of the ashes, and you shall find calcined Mercury in
the bottom, of the color of red Lead, separated from the white, yellow or
black excrement; for the white that concretes in the top is called
Sublimate, which if it should remain with the calcined Mercury, would make it
more painful in the operation. Wherefore separating this calcined Mercury, you
shall make it into powder, and put it in a brass vessel upon some coals,
stirring or turning it with a spatula for the space of an hour or two: for
thus it will lose a great part of the acrimony and biting, whence it will
become less painful in the operation.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Vesicatories.
VEsicatorie and rubrifying ointments, cataplasmes, or plasters are made of
What vesicatorie and rubrif^ing medicines are.
acride medicines, which have power to draw forth to the superficies of the
body such humors as lie deep, by exulcerating the skin and causing blisters.
Their matter is the same with septicke medicines, as sinapi, anacardus,
cantharides, euphorb. radices scillae, bryon. and the like, which with honey,
turpentine, leaven, gum, or rosine, may be made into cataplasmes, ointments, or
plasters; therefore the composure of vesicatories, or rather their consistence
differs not from that of hard or soft unguents. Therefore I will give you one
example or description of them, which is thus.

. cantharid. euphorbii, sinapi, an. ss. mellis anacardini, i. modico aceti, and
fermenti The description of a vesicatory.
quod sit satis excipiantur, and fiat vesicatorium. Some of the ancients think
it better to make up these medicines with water rather than with vinegar,
because experience teaches that vinegar abates the strength of mustard. We
use this kind of Their use.
medicine in long diseases, when as we cannot any thing prevail with other
remedies; especially in the headache, megrime, epilepsie, sciatica, gout, the
bites and punctures of venomous creatures, pestilent carbuncles, and other
inveterate and contumacious diseases.

Also we use them when as we would restore life and strength to a dead or
decayed part, for thus they are drawn back together with the hear; for which
purpose we must make choice of more gentle vesicatories, as such which only
rubrifie, so that the part may only become red, and not be burnt: the part
must first be strongly rubbed, that the decayed and dull heat may be rowzed
and stirred up, the pores of the skin more opened, that the force of the
medicine may enter the deeper into the body.

CHAP. XXXIV. of Collyria.
A Collyrium is a medicine proper for the eyes, made of powder finely What a
collyrium is.
levigated and ground into the form of Alcohol, as the Arabians and our
Alchymists term it: yet the word in a more general acception is used for any
liquide medicine, made with liquors and powders, and applied or used to any
part. Wherefore collyria The difference* of them.
are of three kinds, some are moist or liquid, which are properly called
collyria; others dry, which are of the same consistence with Trochisces; others
have the consistence of honey, or a liniment. The liquid serve for Their use,
the greater and lesser corners of the eyes; those of the consistence of honey
are meet for the apple of the eye; but the dry are to be made into powder, and
so blown into the eyes: also sometimes they are to be dissolved in some juice,
or other convenient liquor, that so they may be made into moist collyria.

Therefore collyria have diverse uses, and are applied to several parts
according to the intention and counsel of the Physician: for liquid collyria
put into the corners of the eyes do more readily mitigate the heat of their
inflammation, by reason they enter more easily by the tenuity of their
substance, such things as have a more firm consistence adhere more
tenaciously, and work more certainly. Moist collyria are made of juices,
mucilages, waters of herbs, flowers, seeds, metalline bodies, Their matter,
galls, and other such like medicines, which are repercussives, resolvers,
detergents, anodines, and the like, according to the nature of the present
disease.

Sometimes they are made of juices and distilled waters only, otherwhiles
powders, or dry collyria made into powder, are mixed with them, together with
the white of an egg. Powders are prescribed to ii. and liquors to iv. or v. in
medicines for the eyes; but for other parts, as when it is to be injected into
the urenary passage, they may be prescribed to the quantity of a pint. Dry
Collyria are made of powders exceeding finely beaten or ground, and
incorporated with some juice, whence it is that they differ little from
Trochisces. Wherefore the collyrium album Rhasis is now usually termed a
Trochisce, and kept with them. Cathaereticke powders are not applied in the
form of a moist collyrium, but in the form of a liniment, that is,
incorporated with fat or oil. All these things shall be made more plain by
the following examples,

. aq. plant. and rosar. an. ii. album. ovi unum, been agitatum, misce, fiat
collyrium. A repercussive collyrium. An anodine. A detergent.
. aq. rosar. and viol. an. iii. trochis. alb. Rhas. cum opio, ii. fiat
collyrium. Or,. decoct. foenug. iii. mucag. sem. lini, ii. sacchar. cand. i.
croci, i. fiat collyr.. thuris, myrrh. an. ii. tut. prepar. and antimon. let.
an. ii. cum succo chelidon. fiat collyrium in umbra siccand.. fellis perdic.
aut lepor. ss. succi foenicul. i. sacchar. cand. ii. syrup. ros. excipiantur,
fiat collyrium.

We use collyria in wounds, ulcers, fistula's, suffusions, inflammations, and
other diseases of the eyes.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Errhines and Sternutatories.
ERrhines are medicines appointed to be put into the nose to purge the brain
of its excrementitious humors by the nostrills, or to deterge What an errhine
is.
such excrements as are therein, by reason of an ozana, polypus, or the like
disease. Errhines are either liquid or dry, or else hard, and of the Their
differences.
consistence of an emplaster. Liquid errhines, which usually are to purge the
head, are made of the juices of herbs, as beets, coleworts, marjoram,
pimpernell, hyssope or balm, or of their decoctions taken alone, or mixed with
wine, or syrup, as oxymel scilliticum, syrup of hyssope, roses, or mel
anthosatum: sometimes powders are mixed with these liquors, as of pepper,
euphorbium, pellitory of Spain, hore-hound, nigella romana, castoreum, myrrh,
white ellebore, sow-bread, and other like, in a small quantity, to wit, to i.
little more or less according to the vehemence of the disease. We will make
this more plain by examples.

. succi betae, majoran, brassic. an. i. depurentur, and modice bulliant cum
vini albi, The form of one.
ii. oxymelit. scillit. ss. fiat errhinum. When as you desire to attract more
powerfully from the brain, you may dissolve in errhines some purging
medicines, as agaricke, diaph oenicon, senna, carthamus, and the like: hence
does arise the distinction of errhines into such as are meet to purge phlegm,
choler, and melancholy. This following example is set down by Rondeletius..
rad. pyreth. irid. an. i. puleg. calam. origon. an. mi. agar. trochisc. iii.
flor. anthos and staechad. an. pi. fiat decoctioin An errhine purging phlegm.
colatur. lb i. dissolve mellis anthosati and scillit. an. iii. fiat
caputpurgium. But it is better to this purpose to make use of purging simples,
as agarick, turbeth, coloquintida, and the like, than of compositions, as
diaphaenicon, for these make the decoction more thick, and less fit to enter
the passages of the nostrils, and the sieve-like bones, but apt rather there to
cause obstruction, and intercept the freedom of respiration.

. succi betae, i. aq. salv. and beton. an. iiss. pull. castor. ss. piper. and
pyreth. an. An errhine with powders.
i. fiat caputpurgium. Dry errhines that are termed sternutatories, for that
they cause sneesing, are made of powders only, to which purpose the last
mentioned things are used; as also aromaticke things in a small quantity, as to
ii. at the most: as,. major. nigel. caryoph. zinzib. an. i. acor. pyreth. and
panis porcin. an. ss. euphorb. A Rernutatory.
i. terantur diligenter, and in nares mittantur, aut insufflentur. Errhines of
the consistence of emplasters, by the Latins vulgarly called Nasalia, are made
of the described powders or gums dissolved in the juice of some of the
forementioned herbs, incorporated with turpentine and wax, that so they may
the better be made into a pyramidall form to be put into the nostrills. As,.
majoran. salv. nigel. ii. pip. The matter of solid errhines.
alb. caryoph. galang. an. i. pyreth. euphorb. an. ss. panis porcin. ellebor.
alb. an. i. terantur, and in pulverem redigantur. And then with turpentine and
wax as much as shall be sufficient, make them up into Nasalia of a pyramidall
or taper fashion. We Their use.
use errhines in inveterate diseases of the brain, as the epilepsie, fear of
blindnsse, an apoplexy, lethargy, convulsion, the lost sense of smelling: yet
we first use general remedies and evacuations, lest by sneesing and the like
concussion of the brain for the exclusion of that which is offensive thereto,
there should be made a greater attraction of impurity from the subjacent parts.
Liquid things must be drawn The manner of using them.
up into the nostrils warm out of the palm of the hand, to the quantity of
ss. the mouth being in the interim filled with water, lest the attracted liquor
should fall upon the pallat, and so upon the lungs: dry errhines are to be
blown into the nose with a pipe or quill: solid ones must be fastened to a
thread, that they may be drawn forth as need requires, when as they are put up
into the nostrils. The morning (the belly being empty) is the fittest time for
the use of errhines. If by their use the nose shall be troubled with an
itching, the pain thereof must be mitigated with woman's milk, or oil of
violets. The use of attractive errhines is hurtful to such as are troubled To
whom they are hurtful.
with diseases of the eyes, or ulcers in the nose, as it often times falls out in
the Lues venerea: wherefore in this case it will be best to use
Apophlegmatismes, which may divert the matter from the nose.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Apophlegmatismes, or Masticatories.
APophlegmatismoi in Greek, and Masticatoria in Latin, are medicines What an
apophlegmatism is.
which kept or held in the mouth and somewhat chawed, do draw by the mouth
forth of the brain excrementitious humors, especially phlegm: now they are
chiefly made four manner of ways; the first is The differences
when as the medicines are received in honey or wax, and formed into pills, and
so given to chaw upon. The second is when as the same things are bound up in a
fine linen cloth, so to be held in the mouth. The third is when as a
decoction of acride medicines is kept in the mouth for a pretty space. The
fourth is when as some acride medicine, or otherwise drawing phlegm, as
pellitory of Spain, mastich, and the like, is taken of it self to the
quantity of a hasell nut, and so chawed in the mouth for some space. The matter
of masticatories is of the kind of acrid medicines, as of pepper, mustard,
hyssope, ginger, pellitory of Spain, and the like; amongst which you must make
choice chiefly of such as are not trouble some by any ingrate taste, that so
they may be the longer kept in the mouth with the less offense and loathing.
Yet masticatories are sometimes made of harsh or acerbe medicines, as of
berberies, the stones of prunes or cherries, which held for some space in the
mouth, draw no less store of phlegm than acrid things; for the very motion and
rolling them up and down the mouth attracts, because it heats, compresses, and
expresses: the quantity of the medicine ought to be from ss. to iss.: as,.
pyreth. staphisag. an. iss. mastich. ss. pulverentur and involventur nodulis in
masticatoria. Or,. zinzib. sinap. an. i. euphorb. ii. piper. ss. excipiantur
melle, and fiant pastilli pro masticatoriis.. byssop. thym. origan. salv. an.
pi. bolie them in water to wash the mouth withal. Or,. zinzib. caryoph. an. i.
pyreth. pip. an. ss. staphisagr. ii. mastiches, ss. excipiantur, fiant pastilli
pro masticatoriis. We use masticatories in old The use of masticatories.
diseases of the brain, dimnesse of the sight, deafness, pustles of the head
and face, and sometimes to divert the excrements which run to the nose being
ulcerated.

Masticatories are very hurtful to such as have their mouths or throats
ulcerated, To whom hurtful.
as also to them whose lungs are subject to inflammations, destillations and
ulcers; for then errhines are more profitable to derive the matter of the
disease by the nostrils. For though the humor drawn from the brain into the
mouth by the means of the masticatory, may be thence cast forth by coughing
and spitting, yet in the interim nature will be so inured to that passage for
the humor, so that it will run that way when as we sleep, and fall down
upon the parts thereunder, weak either by nature or by accident.

The time fittest for the use of Apophlegmatismes is the morning, the body
being first purged: if any ungrateful taste remain in the mouth, or adhere to
the tongue by using of masticatories, you shall take it away by washing the
mouth with warm water, or a decoction of liquorice and barley.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Gargarismes.
A Gargle or gargarisme is a liquid composition fit for to wash the mouth and
all the parts thereof, to hinder defluxion and inflammation, What a gargle is.
to heal the ulcers which are in those parts, to assuage pain. Their
composition is twofold, the first is of a decoction of roots, leaves, flowers,
fruits, and seeds fit for the disease; now The differences thereof.
the decoction is to be made either in fair water alone, or with the admixture
of white or red wine, or in the decoction of liquorice and barley, or of
pectorall things, as the intention of the Physician is to repel, cool, or
hinder inflammation, as in the toothache caused by matter which is yet in
motion; to discuss, as in the toothache already at the height; or to cleanse,
as in the ulcers of the mouth; or to dry and bind, as when it is fit to heal
the ulcers already cleansed.

The other way of making of gargarismes is without decoction, which is, when as
we make them either of distilled waters only, or by mixing them with syrupes,
Their matter.
mucilages, milk, the whey of Goats milk carefully strained. There are mixed
sometimes with a decoction, distilled waters and mucilages, melrosatum, oxymel
simplex, diamoron, dianucum, hier a picra, oxysacchara, syrup. de rosis siccis,
syrupus acetosus, and other things, as the present case shall seem to require,
as alome, balaustia, myrrh, olibanum, ginger, pepper, cinnamon, dry roses, and
many such things, even so that often times there enter into gargles such
medicines as have force to draw from the brain, as pellitory of Spain,
carthamus, turbith, and such things as have no bitterness, which is the cause
that neither agrick nor coloquintida ought to enter into gargarismes.

The quantity of liquor for a gargarisme is commonly from lb ss. to lb i. mix
therewith some ii. of syrupes, but put in powders sparingly, as some iii. Alome
may sometimes be put in to vi. let mucilages be extracted out of ii. of seeds:
let these serve for some examples.

. plant. polygon. oxalidis, an. m i. rosar. rub. p ss. hordei, p i. fiat
decoctio ad viii. An astringent gargle. An anodine gargle.
in qua dissolve syrupi myrtillorum, vi. dianucum, ss. fiat gargarisma. Or,.
cham. melil. aneth. an. p i. ros. rub. p ss. passul. mund. and ficuum, an. p
iii. decoquantur in aequis partibus vini and aquae, ad vi. addendo mucag. sem.
lini, and foenugr. an. ii. fiat gargarisma.

Or else,. aq. plantag. ligust. absinth. an ii. mellis rosati colati, vi.
syrupi rosar. siccar. and de absinth. an. vi. fiat gargarisma. A detersive.


We use gargles in the morning fasting after general purgations; they are
sometimes taken or used cold, when as a malign, acride, and thin humor falls
down, sometimes warm, but let these things be done according as the
Physician shall advise.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Dentifrices.
DEntifrices are medicines prepared and serving diverse ways for to cleanse,
whiten, and fasten the teeth; for from their use they take What a dentifrice is.
their name. Of these some are dry, othersome moist: of the dry The differences
some have the form of opiats, others of pouders grossly beaten, but the
moist are commonly made by distillation: the matter of dry The matter whereof
they consist.
dentifrices is taken from detergent and drying things, such as are coral
white and red, harts-horne, scuttle bones, alome, crystal, pumice, sal nitre,
myrrh, frankincense, balaustia, acornes, all sorts of shells of fishes: all
these are to be made into powder either by burning, or without it, for scuttle
bones burnt cast forth a stinking and unpleasant smell. To these for smell sake
are added certain aromaticke things, as cinnamon, cloves, nutmegs, and the
like: such powders if mixed with some syrup, as oxymel scilliticum, or with
mucilage of gum arabicke and tragacanth, will become opiates, to be made into a
pyramidall form of some fingers length, round or square, and sharp pointed,
that dried they may serve for dentifrices.

Sometimes emollient roots are boiled with salt or alome, that dried again
they may be used for dentrifices: moist ones are made of drying herbs,
distilled together with drying and astringent things.

All the differences shall appear by the following examples.. lapidis spong.
pumicis, A powder for a Dentifricc.
and cornu cervi ust. an. ii. coral. rub. and crystal. an. i. alum. and sal.
ust. an. i ss. cinamom. and caryoph. rosar. rub. pulver. an. ii. fiat pulvis
pro dentifricio. Or, rum. ossis saepia, ss. masticbes, coralli rubri usti, an.
ii. cornu cervi usti, i ss. aluminis, carbonis, rorismarini, an. i. cinamomi,
ii. fiat pulvis pro dentifricio. Or, rum. ossis saepiae, alum. and salis usti,
an. i. crystalli, glandium, myrrhae, thuris, an. ii. corticis granatorum,
macis, cinamomi, an. i. fiat pulvis qui excipiatur mucagine gummi tragacanth.
and formentur pyramides longae, siccand. pro dentifricio. Or,. rad. malvae
junioris, and bismalvae, an. ii. coquantur in aqua salsa aut aluminosa, deinde
siccentur in furno pro dentifricio.. salis, vi. alumin. iii. thuris, mastiches,
sang. dracon. an. ss. aquae ros. vi. distillentur in alembico vitreo pro
dentifricio.

Dentrifices are not only good to polish, cleanse, and strengthen the teeth;
but Their us^
we also often times use them for the toothache, the diseases of the mouth, and
ulccrs of the gummes. You may use them in the morning, before and after meat.

The ancients, of lentiske wood made themselves tooth-picks, and such devices
to strengthen their loose teeth, which also at this day is in use with those of
Languedock, with whom this wood is plentiful, so that it may be brought thence
for the use of Noblemen and Gentlemen; myrrh may also serve for this same use,
and any other astringent wood.

Our people commonly use the stalks of fennel, yet have they no faculty to
fasten the teeth, but their smell is grateful.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Bags or Quilts.
Physicians term a bag or sacculus, the composition or mixture of Whata bag
or quilt is.
dry and powdered medicines put in a bag, therefore it is as it were a dry
fomentation. Their differences are not drawn from any other Their differences.
thing than from the variety of the parts whereto they are applied: such as are
for the head must be made into the fashion of a cap, those which be for the
whole ventricle must be made into the form of a citherne; those for the
spleen, like to an oxes tongue: lastly, such as are for the liver, heart and
other parts must be made according to the figure of those parts. Their matter
is usually taken from whole seeds fried in a drying pan, or made into powder;
there are sometimes added roots, flowers, fruits, rinds, cordial powders, and
other dry medicines, which may be easily brought into powder, and conduce to
the grieved parts; the quantity is different according to the magnitude of the
affected parts; In the books of practisers it is commonly found prescribed from
iii. to viss. sometimes flowers, and dry herbs are prescribed by handfulls and
pugils: and here there is need of an artificial conjecture to conceive and
appoint a fit quantity of powders: but let us give you some examples.

rum. rosar. rub. p i. mastich. ss. coralli rub. iii. sem. anisi, and faenic.
an. ii. nucis moschat. i. summitat. absinth. and menth. an. m i. tritis
omnibus, fiat sacculus consutus A quilt for the stomach.
and compunctus pro ventriculo.

. furfuris macri, p i. milii, i. salis, ii. rosar. rub. flor. rorismarini,
staechados, caryoph. A cap for a cold head.
an. m ii. fol. beton. and salv. an. iii. tritis omnibus fiat cucupha,
intersuta and calefacta fumo thuris, and sandarachae exustorum, capiti
apponatur.

rum. flor. borag. buglos. and violar. an. p ii. cortic. citri sicci, macis,
ligni aloes, rasurae eboris, A quilt for the heart.
an. i. ossis de cord cervi, croci, an. ii. fol. melis. m ss. pulveris
diambrae, ss. contritis omnibus fiat sacculus e serico pro cord, irror andus
aquascabiosae.

We use bags for the strengthening of the noble parts, as the brain, heart,
liver, Their use.
as also for those less noble, as the stomach, spleen, breast; lastly for
discussing flatulen cies in what part soever, as in the collicke, and in a
bastard pleurisy proceeding from flatulencies. The powders must be strawed
upon carded bombast, that they run not together, and then they must be sewed
up or quilted in a bag of linen or taffaty.

We often times moisten these bags in wine or distilled water, and sometimes
not with the substance thereof, but by the vapor only of such liquors put into
a hot dish: thus often times the bags are heated by the vapor only, and often
times at the fire in a dish by often turning them. These, if intended for the
heart, ought to be of crimson or skarlet silk, because the skarlet berry,
called by the Arabians Kermes, is said to refresh and recreate the heart.
Certainly they must always be made of some fine thing, whether it be linen or
silk.

CHAP. XL. Of Fumigations.
A Suffitus or fumigation is an evaporation of medicines having some viscous
and fatty moisture: of fumigations some What a fumigation is.
are dry, othersome moist, the dry have the form of trochisces or pills: their
matter ought to be fatty and viscous, so that it Their differences and matter.
may send forth a smoke by being burnt: such are ladanum, myrrh, masticke,
pitch, wax, rosine, turpentine, castoreum, styrax, frankincense, olibanum, and
other gummes, which may be mixed with convenient powders: for they yield them
a body and firm consistence; the fumigations that are made of powders only,
yield neither so strong nor long a fume.

The quantity of the powders must be from ss. to i ss. but the gummes to ii.
as,. sandarachae, mastiches, rosar. an. i. benioini, galang. an. iii.
terebinthina excipiantur, A cephalicke sum.
and fiant trochisci, quibus incensis suffumigentur tegumenta capitis. rum.
marcasitae, ii. bdellii, myrrhae, styracis, an. i ss. cerae flavae, and
terebinth. quod sufficit, fiant formulae pro suffumigio. rum. cinnabaris, ii.
styracis and benzolni, an. ii. cumterebinth. fiant trochisci pro suffumigio per
embotum. For the hardness of the sinews.


We use fumigations in great obstructions of the brain, ulcers of the lungs,
the asthma, an old cough, pains of the sides, womb, and the diseases of some
other parts; sometimes the whole body is fumigated, as in the cure of the Lues
venerea to For the relics of the Lues venerea.
procure sweat; sometimes only some one part whereto some relics of the Lues
adheres; such fumigations are made of cinnabaris, wherein there is much
hydrargyrum. The manner of using them.
The fume must be received by a funnell, that so it may not be dispersed, but
may all be carried unto the part affected, as is usually done in the affects of
the womb and ears.

In fumigations for the brain and chest, the vapor would be received with
open mouth; which thence may pass by the weazon into the chest, by the palate
and nostrils into the brain: but in the interim let the head be veiled, that
none of the vapor may fly away. Moist fumigations are made somewhiles of the
decoction of herbs, otherwhiles of some one simple medicine boiled in oil,
sometimes a hot fire-stone is quenched in vinegar, wine, aqua vitae, or the like
liquor, so to raise a humide vapor. We often times use this kind of fumigation
in overcomming scirrhous affects, when as we would cut, discuss, penetrate
deep, and dry: take this as an example thereof.

. laterem unum satis crassum, aut marchasitam ponderis lb i. heat it red hot,
and then The manner of a moist fumigation.
let it be quenched in sharp vinegar, pouring thereon in the mean while a
little aqua vitae, make a fumigation for the grieved part.

Fumes of the decoction of herbs do very little differ from fomentations
properly so called; for they differ not in the manner of their composure, but
only in the application to the affected parts: therefore let this be an
example of a humide fumigation.

. absinth. salv. rut. origan. an. pi. rad. bryon. and asar. an. ss. sem. sinap.
and cumin. A moist fume for the ears.
an. ii. decoquantur in duabus partibus aquae, and una vini pro suffitu auris
cum emboto: and often times such fumigations are made for the whole body, whereof
we shall treat hereafter.

CHAP. XLI. Of a particular, or halfe-Bath.
ASemicupium or halfe-bath is a bath for the one half of the body, What an
ins^ is.
that is, for the parts from the belly downwards; it is called also an
insessiv, because the patient sits to bathe in the decoction of herbs: in
which form and respect a semicupium differs from a fomentation; for it is
composed of the same matter, to wit, a decoction The matter.
of herbs, roots, seeds, fruits, but in this the quantity of the decoction is
the greater, as we shall teach by the following example.

. malv. bismalv. cum toto, an. mi ss. beton. saxifrag. pariet. an. m i. sem.
melon. milii A half bath for the stone in the kidneies.
solis, alkekengi, an. iii. citer. rub. p ii. rad. apii, graminis, foeniculi,
eryngii, an. i. decoquantur insufficienti quantitate aquae pro insessu.

We use these halfe-baths in affects of the kidneyes, bladder, womb,
fundament, The use.
and lower belly, or otherwise when as the patient by reason of weakness and
fear of dissipating the spirits, cannot suffer or away with a whole bath. The
manner of The manner of using it.
using it is thus; fill some bags with the boiled herbs, or other parts of
plants, and cause the patient to sit upon them; yet in the interim keep the
vapors from the head, lest they should offend it, by casting over it a linen
cloth, or else let him not enter thereinto until the vapor be exhaled.

CHAP. XLII. Of Bathes.
BAthes are nothing else than as it were a fomentation of the whole body, both
for preserving health, and the cure of diseases: this is a very commodious form
of medicine, and among other external medicines much celebrated by the Greek,
Arabian, and Latin Physicians. For a bath, besides that it digests the acrid
humors, and sooty excrements lying under The faculties of Bathes.
the skin, mitigates pains and weariness, and corrects all excess of
distemper: moreover, in the cure of fevers, and many other contumacious and
inveterate diseases it is the chief and last remedy, and as it were the refuge
of health, stored with pleasing delight. Bathes are of two sorts, some
natural, others artificial: natural, are those which of their own accord,
without the operation or help of art, prevail Their differences. Natural
Baths.
or excel in any medicinal quality. For the water which of it self is
devoide of all quality that is perceivable by the taste, if it chance to be
strained through the veins of metals, it furnishes and impregnates it self
with their qualities and effects: hence it is that all such water excells in a
drying faculty, sometimes with cooling and astriction, and otherwhiles with
heat and a discussing quality. The bathes whose waters being hot or warm, do
boil up, take their heat from the cavities of the earth and mines filled with
fire; which thing is of much admiration whence this fire should arise in
subterrene places, what may kindle it, what feed or nourish it for so many
years, and keep it from being extinct. Some Philosophers would have it kindled
by the beams of the sun, others by the force of lightnings penetrating the
bowels of the earth, others by the violence of the air vehemently or violently
agitated, no otherwise than fire is struck by the collision of a flint and
steel. Yet it is better to refer the cause of so great an effect unto God
the maker of the Universe, whose providence piercing every way into all parts
of the World, enters and governes the secret parts and passages thereof.
Notwithstanding they seem to have come nearest the truth, who refer the
cause of heat in waters unto the store of brimstone contained in certain
places of the earth, because amongst all minerals it has most fire and matter
fittest for the nourishing thereof. Therefore to it they attribute the flames
of fire which the Sicilian mountain Aetna continually sends forth. Hence also
it is that the most part of such waters smell of Sulphur, yet others smell of
Alom, others of nitre, others of Tar, and some of Coprosse.

Now you may know from the admixture of what metalline bodies the waters
acquire their faculties by their taste, sent, color, mud, which adheres to the
How to know whence the Bathes have their efficacy.
channels through which the water runs, as also by an artificial separation
of the more terrestrial parts from the more subtle. For the earthy dross
which subsides or remains by the boiling of such waters, will retain the
faculties and substance of Brimstone, Alume, and the like minerals: besides
also, by the effects and the cure of these or these diseases you may also
gather of what nature they are. Wherefore we will describe each of these kinds
of waters by their effects, beginning first with the sulphurous.

Sulphurous waters powerfully heat, dry, resolve, open, and draw from the
center The condition of natural sulphurous waters.
unto the surface of the body; they cleanse the skin troubled with scabs and
tettars; they cease the itching of ulcers, and digest and exhaust the causes of
the gout, they help pains of the collicke and hardened spleenes. But they are
not good to be drunk, not only by reason of their ungrateful smell and taste,
but also by reason of the malitiousnesse of their substance, offensive to the
inner parts of the body, but chiefly to the liver.

Aluminous waters taste very astrictively, therefore they dry powerfully, they
have no such manifest heat, yet drunk, they loose the belly: I believe by
reason of Of aluminous waters.
their heat and nitrous quality they cleanse and stay defluxions, and the
courses flowing too immoderately; they also are good against the toothache,
eating ulcers, and the hidden abscesses of the other parts of the mouth.

Salt and nitrous waters show themselves sufficiently by their heat: they heat,
dry, Of salt and nitious.
bind, cleanse, discuss, attenuate, resist putrefaction, take away the
blackenesse coming of bruises, heal scabby and malign ulcers, and help all
oedematous tumors.

Bituminous waters heat, digest, and by long continuance soften the hardened
sinews; O^ bituminous.
they are different according to the various conditions of the bitumen that
they wash, and partake of the qualities thereof.

Brazen waters, that is, such as retain the qualities of brass, heat, dry,
cleanse, Of brazen.
digest, cut, bind, are good against eating ulcers, fistula's, the hardness
of the eyelids, and they waste and eat away the fleshy excrescences of the
nose and fundament.

Iron waters cool, dry, and bind powerfully, therefore they help abscesses,
Of iron.
hardened milts, the weaknesses of the stomach and ventricle, the unvoluntary
shedding of the urine, and the too much flowing terms, as also the hot
distemper of the liver and kidneyes. Some such are in the Lucan territory in
Italy.

Leaden waters refrigerate, dry, and perform such other operations as lead
does: Of leaden.
the like may be said of those waters that flow by chalk, plaster, and other
such mineralls, as which all of them take and perform the qualities of the
bodies by which they pass.

Hot waters or bathes help cold and moist diseases, as the Palsic, convulsion,
the Of hot baths.
stiffenesse and attraction of the nerves, trembling palpitations, cold
distillations upon the joints, the inflation of the members by a dropsy, the
jaundise by obstruction of a gross, tough, and cold humor, the pains of the
sides, colic, and kidneies, barrenness in women, the suppression of their
courses, the suffocation of the womb, causeless weariness, those diseases
that spoil the skin, as tettars, the leprosy of both sorts, the scabbe, and
other diseases arising from a gross, cold and obstructing humor, for they
provoke sweats.

Yet such must shun them as are of a choleric nature, and have a hot liver,
for To whom hurtful. The faculties of cold baths.
they would cause a cachexia and dropsy by overheating the liver. Cold waters
or baths heal the hot distemper of the whole body and each of the parts
thereof, and they are more frequently taken inwardly than applied outwardly;
they help the laxnesse of the bowels, as the resolution of the retentive
faculty of the stomach, entralls, kidneies, bladder, and they also add
strength to them. Wherefore they both temper the heat of the liver, and also
strengthen it, they stay the Diarrhaea, Dysentery, Courses, unvoluntary
shedding of urine, the Gonnorrhaea, Sweats, and Bleedings. In The Spaw*
this kind are chiefly commendable the waters of the Spaw in the country of
Liege, which inwardly and outwardly have almost the same faculty, and bring
much benefit without any inconvenience, as those that are commonly used in the
drinks and broaths of the inhabitants.

In imitation of natural baths, there may in want of them be made artificial
ones, Of artificial baths.
by the infusing and mixing the powders of the formerly described mineralls;
as, Brimstone, Alume, Nitre, Bitumen: also you may many times quench in common
or rain water, iron, brass, silver and gold heated red hot, and so give them
to be drunk by the patient, for such waters do often times retain the qualities
and faculties of the metals quenched in them, as you may perceive by the happy
success of such as have used them against the Dysentery.

Besides these there are also other bathes made by art of simple water,
sometimes The faculty of a bath of warm water.
without the admixture of any other thing, but otherwhiles with medicinal
things mixed therewith, and boiled therein. But after what manner soever these
be made, they ought to be warm, for warm water humects, relaxes, mollifies
the solid parts, if at any time they be too dry, hard, and tense; by the
ascititious heat it opens the pores of the skin, digests, attracts, and
discusses fuliginous and acrid excrements remaining between the flesh and the
skin. It is good against sun-burning and weariness, whereby the similar parts
are dried more than is fit. To conclude, whether we be too hot or cold, or too
dry, or be nauseous, we find manifest profit by baths made of sweet or warm
water, as those that may supply the defect of frictions and exercises: for they
bring the body to a mediocrity of temper, they increase and strengthen the
native color, and by procuring sweat discuss flatulencies: therefore they are
very useful in hecticke fevers, and in the declension of all fevers, and
against raving and talking idely, for they procure sleep. But because water
alone cannot long Why w^ put oil into baths.
adhere to the body, let oil be mixed or put in them, which may hold in the
water, and keep it longer to the skin.

These bathes are good against the inflammations of the lungs and sides, for
they mitigate pain, and help forward that which is suppurated to exclusion,
when as general remedies according to art have preceded, for otherwise they
will cause a greater defluxion on the afflicted parts: for a bath (in Galens
opinion) is profitably used to diseases when as the morbifick matter is
concocted. To this purpose is chosen rain water, then river water, so that it
be not muddy, and then fountain water; the water of standing lakes and fennes
is not approved of, for it is fit that the water which is made choice of for a
bath of sweet water, should be light and of subtle parts, for baths of waters
which are more than moderately hot or cold yield no such commodity; but verily
they hurt in this, that they shut up or close the pores of the body, and keep
in the fuliginous excrements under the skin; other bathes of sweet or fresh
water consist of the same matter as fomentations do, whence it is that some of
them relaxe, others mitigate pain, others cleanse, and othersome procure the
courses, that is compounded of a decoction of ingredients or plants having such
operations. To these there is sometimes added wine, other whiles oil,
sometimes fresh butter or milk, as when the urine is stopped, when nephriticke
pains are violent, when the nerves are contracted, when the habit of the body
wastes and wrinkles with a hecticke dryness, for this corrugation is amended
by relaxing things, but it is watered, and as it were fatted by humecting
things, which may penetrate and trans-fuse the oily or fatty humidity into the
body thus rarefied and opened by the warmness of a bath.

Anodine bathes are made of a decoction of medicines of a middle nature, such
as are temperate and relaxing things, with which we may also sometimes mix
resolving things; they are boiled in water and wine, especially in pains of
the collicke proceeding from vitreous phlegm, or gross and thick
flatulencies contained or shut up in the belly, kidneyes, or womb. In such
bathes it is not fit to sweat, but Why we must not continue in the bath till we
sweat.
only to sit in them so long until the bitterness of the pain be assuaged
or mitigated, lest the powers weakened by pain, should be more resolved by
the breaking forth of sweat: emollients are sometimes mixed with gentle
detergents, when as the skin is rough and cold, or when the scailes or crust of
scabs is more hard than usual, then in conclusion we must come to strong
detersives and driers, lastly to drying and somewhat astrictive medicines, so
to strengthen the skin, that it may not yield it self so easy and open to
receive defluxions. By giving you one example the whole manner of prescribing a
bath may apppeare.

. rad. lilior. albor. bismalv. an. lb ii. malv. pariet. violar. an. m ss. sem.
lini, foenug. A mollifying and anodine bath.
bismalv. an. lb i. flor. cham. mclil. aneth. an. p vi. fiat decoctio in
sufficienti aquae quantitate, cui permiscito olei liliorum and lini, ana, lb
ii. fiat balneum in quo diutius natet aeger.

Bathes though noble remedies approved by use and reason, yet unless they be
fitly and discreetly used in time, plenty, and quality, they do much harm;
for they Cautions to be observed in the use of baths.
cause shakings and chillness, pains, density of the skin, or too much
rarefaction thereof, and often times a resolution of all the faculties. Wherefore
a man must be mindful of these cautions before he enter a bath: first, that
there be no weakness of any noble and principal bowell, for the weak parts
easily receive the humors which the bath has diffused and rarefied, the ways
lying open which tend from the whole body to the principal parts. Neither must
there be any plenty of crude humors in the first region, for so they should be
attracted and diffused over all the body: therefore it is not only sit that
general purgations should precede, but also particular by the belly and urine:
besides, the patient should be strong that can fasting endure a bath as long
as it is needful. Lastly, the bath ought to be in a warm and silent place,
lest any cold air by its blowing, or the water by its cold appulse, cause a
shivering or shaking of the body, whence a fever may ensue.

The morning is a fit time for bathing, the stomach being fasting and empty,
or six hours after meat, if it be requisite that the patient should bath twice
a day, other-wise The fittest time for bathing.
the meat yet crude would be snatched by the heat of the bath out of the
stomach into the veins and habit of the body. Many, of all the seasons of
the year make choice of the spring and end of summer, and in these times they
choose a clear day, neither troubled with stormy winds, nor too sharp an
air. As long as the patient is in the bath, it is fit that he take no meat,
unless peradventure to comfort him he take a little bread moistened in wine,
or the juice of an orange, or some damask prunes to quench his thirst: his
strength will show how long it is fit that he should stay in, for he must not
stay there to the resolution of his powers, for in baths the humide and
spirituous substance is much dissipated. Coming forth of the bath, How to
order the patient coming forth of the bath.
they must presently get them to bed, and be well covered, that by sweating,
the excrements, drawn unto the skin by the heat of the bath, may break out:
the sweat cleansed, let him use gentle frictions, or walking, then let him
feed upon meat of good juice and easy digestion, by reason that the stomach
cannot but be weakened in some sort by the bath.

That quantity of meat is judged moderate, the weight whereof shall not
oppress the stomach: venery after bathing must not be used, because to the
resolution of the spirits by the bath, it adds another new cause of further
spending or dissipating them. Some wish those that use the bath by reason of
some contraction, pain, or other affects of the nerves, presently after
bathing, to dawbe or besmeare the affected nervous parts with the clay or mudde
of the bathe, that by making it up as it were in this paste, the virtue of the
bath may work more effectually, and may more thoroughly enter into the affected
part.

These cautions being diligently observed, there is no doubt but the profit by
bathes will be great and wonderful: the same things are to be observed in the
use of Stoves or Hot-houses, for the use and effect of baths and hot-houses is
almost the same, which the ancients therefore used by turn, so that coming
forth of the bath they entered a stove, and called it also by the name of a
bath, as you may gather from sundry places of Galen in his Methodus med.
wherefore I think it fit in the next to speak of them.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Stoves or Hot-houses.
SToves are either dry or moist: Dry, by raising a hot and dry aerie The
differences of Stoves.
exhalation, so to imprint their faculties in the body, that it thereby waxes
hot, and the pores being opened, runs down with sweat. There are sundry ways
to raise such an exhalation: at Paris, and How made.
wheresoever there are stoves or public hot-houses, they are raised by a
clear fire put under a vaulted furnace, whence it being presently diffused,
heats the whole room. Yet every one may make himself such a stove as he shall
judge best and fittest.

Also you may put red hot cogle stones or bricks into a tubbe, having first
laid the bottom thereof with brickes or iron plates, and so set a seat in the
midst thereof; wherein the patient sitting, well covered with a canopy drawn
over him, may receive the exhalation arising from the stones that are about
him, and so have the benefit sweating: but in this case we must often look to
and see the patient, for it sometimes happens that some, neglected by their
keepers otherwise employed, becoming faint, and their sense failing them by
the dissipation of their sptrits by the force of the hot exhalation, have sunk
down with all their bodies upon the stones lying under them, and so have been
carried half dead and burnt into their beds. Some also take the benefit of
sweating in a furnace or oven, as soon as bread is drawn out thereof. But I
do not much approve of this kind of sweating, because the patient cannot as
he will, much less as he pleases, lie or turn himself therein.

Humid stoves or sudatories are those wherein sweat is caused by a vapor or
moist heat: this vapor must be raised from a decoction of roots, leaves,
flowers, and seeds, A vaporous stove or bath.
which are thought fit for this purpose; the decoction is to be made in water
or wine, or both together. Therefore let them all be put into a great vessel
well luted, from the top of whose cover iron or tin pipes may come into the
bathing tub standing near thereto, between the two bottomes thereof, by
means whereof the hot vapor may enter thereinto, and diffuse it self
therein. Now it is fit the bathing tub should be furnished with a double
bottom, the one below and whole, the other somewhat higher and perforated with
many holes, whereupon the patient sitting may receive a sudorificke vapor over
all his body: now this vapor, if at any time it become too hot, must be
tempered by opening the hole, which must for the same purpose be made in the
top of the pipe, that so it may be opened and shut at pleasure. In the interim
the tub shall be closely covered wherein the patient sits, he putting forth
only his head, that so he may draw in the cool air. In defect of such
pipes, the herbs shall be boiled by themselves in a caldron or kettle, and
this shall be set thus hot into the bathing tubbe at the patients feet, and so
by casting into it heated stones, a great and sudorificke vapor shall be
raised.

The delineation of a bathing Tubbe, having a double bottom, with a vessel
near thereto, with pipes coming therefrom, and entering between the two
bottomes of the Tubbe.


CHAP. XLIV. Of Fuci, that is, washes, and such things for the smoothing and
beautifying of the skin.
THis following discourse is not intended for those women which addicted to
filthy lust, seek to beautify their faces, as baits and allurements to filthy
pleasures: but it is intended for those only, which the better to restrain
the wandering lusts of their husbands, may endeavor by art to take away those
spots and deformities which have happened to fall on their faces either by
accident or age.

The color that appears in the face, either laudible or illaudible,
abundantly As the color of the skin is, such is the humor that is thereunder.
shows the temper both of the body, as also of those humors that have the
chief dominion therein: for every humor dies the skin of the whole body,
but chiefly of the face, with the color thereof: for choler bearing sway in
the body, the face looks yellowish; phlegm ruling, it looks whitish or pale;
if melancholy exceed, then blackish or swart; but if blood have the dominion,
the color is fresh and red. Yet there are other things happening externally
which change the native color of the face, as sun burning, cold, pleasure,
sorrow, fear, watching, fasting, pain, old diseases, the corruption of meats
and drinks: for the flourishing color of the cheeks is not only extinguished
by the too immoderate use of vinegar, but by the drinking of corrupt waters the
face becomes swollen and pale.

On the contrary, laudible meats and drinks make the body to be well colored
and comely, for that they yield good juice, and consequently a good habit.
Therefore if the spots of the face proceed from the plenitude and ill
disposition of humors, the body shall be evacuated by blood-letting: if from
the infirmity of any principal bowell, that must first of all be
strengthened; but the care of all these things belongs to the Physician: we
here only seek after particular remedies which may smooth the face, and take
away the spots, and other defects thereof, and give it a laudible color.

First the face shall be washed with the water of lilly flowers, of bean
flowers, water Waters wherewith to wash the face.
lillies, of distilled milk, or else with the water wherein some barley or
starch has bin steeped. The dried face shall be anointed with the ointments
presently to be described; for such washing cleanses and prepares the face to
receive the force of the ointments, no otherwise than an alumed lie prepares
the hairs to drink up and retain the color that we desire. Therefore the
face being thus cleansed and prepared, you may use the following medicines, as
those that have a faculty to beautify, extend, and smooth the skin: as,

. gum. tragacanth. conquass. ii. distemperentur in vase vitrio cum lb ii. aquae
communis, Compound liquors wherewith to wash the face. Virgins (...)
sic gummi dissolventur, inde albescet aqua. Or else,. lithargyri auri, ii.
cerus. and salis com. an. ss. aceti, aquae plantag. an. ii. caphur. ss.
macerentur lithargyros and cerusa in aceto seor sim per tres aut quatuor hor
as, sal vero and camphora in aqua qua^ instituto tuo aptam delegeris: then
filter them both several, and mix them together being so filtred, when as you
would use them.

. lactis vaccini, lb ii. aranciorum and limon. an. nu. iv. sacchari albissimi,
and alum. roch. an. i. distillentur omnia simul: let the lemmons and oranges
be cut into slices, and then be infused in milk, adding thereto the sugar and
alome; then let the mall be distilled together in balneo Mariae; the water that
comes thereof will make the face smooth and lovely. Therefore about bed time it
will be good to cover the face with linen clothes dipped therein. A water also
distilled of snailes gathered in a vineyard, juice of lemmons, the flowers of
white mullaine, mixed together in equal proportion, with a like quantity of
the liquor contained in the bladders of elm leaves, is very good for the same
purpose. Also this,

. mica panis albi, lb iv. flor. fabar. rosar. alb. flor. naenuph. lilior. and
ireos, an. lb ii. lactis vaccini, lb vi. ova. nu. viii. aceti opt. lb i.
distillentur omnia simul in alembico vitreo, and fiat aqua ad faciei and manuum
lotionem. Or,. olci de tartaro, iii. mucag. sem. psilii, i. cerus. in oleo ros.
dissolut. i ss. borac. sal. gem. an. i. fiat lintmentum pro facie. Or.. caponem
vivum, and caseum ex lacte caprino recenter confectum, limon. nu. iv. ovor. nu.
vi. cerus. lot. in aq. rosar. ii. boracis, i ss. camph. ii. aq. flor. fabar. lb
iv. fiat omnium infusio per xxiv. horas, postea distillentur in alembico vitreo.

There is a most excellent fucus made of the marrow of sheep bones, which The
marrow of sheeps bones good to smooth the face.
smooths the roughness of the skin, beautifies the face; now it must be thus
extracted. Take the bones, severed from the flesh by boiling, beat them, and so
boil them in water, when they are well boiled, take them from the fire, and
when the water is cold, gather the fat that swimmes upon it, and therewith
anoint your face when as you go to bed, and wash it in the morning with the
formerly prescribed water.

. salis ceruss. ii. ung. citrin. vel spermat. ceti, i. malaxentur simul, and
fiat linimentum, How to mak^ Salcerussae.
addendo olci ovor. ii. The Sal cerussae is thus made, grind Cerusse into very
fine powder, and infuse lb i. thereof in a pottle of distilled vinegar for
four or five days, then filter it, then set that you have filtred in a glased
earthen vessel over a gentle fire until it concrete into salt, just as you
do the capitellum in making of Cauteries.

. excrementi lacert. ossis saepiae, tartari, vini albi, rasur. corn. cerv.
farin. oriz. an. parts aequales, fiat pulvis, infundatur in aqua distillata
amygdalarum dulcium, limacum vinealium, flor. nenuph. huic addito mellis albi
par pondus: let them be all incorporated in a marble mortar, and kept in a
glass or silver vessel, and at night anoint the face herewith; it wonderfully
prevails against the redness of the face, if after the a^ointing it you shall
cover the face with a linen cloth moistened in the formerly described water.

. sublim. i. argent. viv. saliv. extinct. ii. margarit. non perforat. i. caph.
i ss. incorporentur simul in mortario marmoreo, cum pistillo ligneo, per tres
horas ducantur and fricentur, reducanturque in tenuissimum pulverem, confectus
pulvis abluatur aqua myrti and desiccetur, serveturque ad usum, add foliorum
auri and argenti, nu. x. When as you would use this powder, put into the palm
of your hand a little oil of mastick, or of sweet almonds, then presently in
that oil dissolve a little of the described powder, and so work it into an
ointment, wherewith let the face be anointed at bedtime: but it is fit first
to wash the face with the formerly described waters, and again in the morning
when you rise.

When the sace is freed from wrinkles and spots, then may you paint the cheeks
How to paint the face.
with a rosy and flourishing color; for of the commixture of white and red
arises a native and beautiful color: for this purpose take as much as you
shall think fit of brasill, and alchunet; steep them in alume water, and there
with touch the cheeks and lips, and so suffer it to dry in: there is also
spanish red made for this purpose; others rub the mentioned parts with a sheeps
skin died red: moreover the friction that is made by the hand only, a
pleasing redness in the face, by drawing thither the blood and spirits.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Gutta Rosacea, or a fiery face.
THis treatise of Fuci puts me in mind to say something in this place of
helping the preternaturall redness which possesses the nose and cheeks, and
often times all the face besides, one while with a tumor, other whiles without,
sometimes with pustles and scabs, by reason of the admixtion of a nitrous and
adust humor. Practitioners have termed it Gutta rosacea. This shows Why worse
in winter than in summer.
both more and more ugly in winter than in summer, because the cold closes the
pores of the skin, so that the matter contained thereunder is pent up for
want of transpiration, whence it becomes acrid and biting, so that as it were
boiling up, it lifts or raises the skin into pustles and scabs; it is a
contumacious disease, and often times not to be helped by medicine.

For the general method of curing this disease, it is fit that the patient
abstain from wine, and from all things in general that by their heat inflame
the blood, and Di^^.
diffuse it by their vaporous substance: he shall shun hot and very cold
places, and shall procure that his belly may be soluble, either by nature or
art. Let blood first be drawn out of the basilica, then from the vena front is,
and lastly from the vein of the nose. Let leaches be applied to sundry places
of the face, and cupping glasses with scarification to the shoulders.

For particular or proper remedies, if the disease be inveterate, the hardness
shall Remedies.
first be softened with emollient things, then assaulted with the following
ointments, which shall be used or changed by the Chirurgian as the Physician
shall think fit.

. succi citri, iii. cerus. quantum sufficit ad eum inspissandum, argenti vivi
cum saliva and sulphur vivo extincti, ss. incorporentur simul, and fiat
unguentum. An approved ointment.


. boracis, ii. farin. cicer. and fabar. an. i ss. caph. i. cum melle and succo
cepae fiant trochisci: when you would use them, dissolve them in rose and
plantaine water, and spread them upon linen clothes, and so apply them on the
night time to the affected parts, and so let them be often times renewed.

. unguenti citrini recenter dispensati, ii. sulphuris vivi, ss. cum modico olei
scm. cucurb. and succi limonum, fiat unguentum; with this let the face be
anointed when you go to bed, in the morning let it be washed away with rose
water, being white by reason of bran infused therein: moreover, sharp vinegar
boiled with branne and rose water, and applied as before, powerfully takes away
the redness of the face.

. cerus. and litharg. auri, sulphur is vivi pulverisati, an. ss. ponantur in
phiala cum aceto and aquarosarum: linen clothes dipped herein shall be applied
to the face on the night, and it shall be washed in the morning with the water
of the infusion of bran: this kind of medicine shall be continued for a month.

. sanguinis tauri, lb i. butyri recentis, lb ss. fiat distillatio, utatur. The
liquor which is distilled for the first days is troubled and stinking, but
these passed, it becomes clear and well smelling. Some boil bran in vinegar
and the water of water lillies, and in this decoction they dissolve of sulphur
and camphire a fit proportion to the quantity of the decoction, and they apply
clothes moistened in this medicine to the face in the evening.

. album. ovor. nu. ii. aquae ros. i ss. succi plantag. and lapath. acut. an. i
ss. sublimati, To dry up the pustles.
i. incorporentur in mortario marmoreo.. axung. porcidecies in aceto lota, iv.
argenti vivi, i. aluminis, sulphuris vivi, an. i. pistentur omnia diu in
mortario plumbeo, and fiat unguentum; argentum vivum non debet nisi extremo
loco affundi.. rad. lapath. acut. and asphodel. an. ii. coquantur in aceto
scillitico, postea tundantur, and setaceo trajiciantur, addendo auripigmenti,
ii. sulphuris vivi, x. let them be incorporated and make an ointment to be used
to dry up the pustles.

. rad. liliorum sub cineribus coctorum, iv. pistillo tusis, and setaceo
trajectis, add butyri recentis, and axung. porci, lotae in aceto, an. i.
sulphuris vivi, iii. camphor. iii. succi limonum quantum sufficit, malaxentur
simul and fiat unguentum.. lactis virginalis, lb ss. aluminis, ss. sulphuris
vivi, i. succi limonum, vi. salis com. ss. let them all be distilled in a
glass alembicke, and the water kept for the forementioned uses.

. lapath. acut. plantagin. and asphodel. an. i ss. olei vitel. ovor. i.
terebinth. venet. ss. succi limonum, iii. aluminis combust. i. argenti vivi
extinct. i. olei liliorum, ss. tundantur omnia in mortario plumbeo, addendo sub
finem argent. viv. ne mortario adhaerescat. The juice of onions beaten with
salt, or the yelkes of eggs are good for the same purpose.

For staying and killing of Ring-wormes and Tettars, the leaves of hellebore
beaten To kill tettar^.
with vinegar are good, the milk of the fig tree is good of it self, as also
that of the spurges, or mustard dissolved in strong vinegar with a little
sulphur. Or,

. sulphuris, calcanthi, and aluminis, an. i. macerentur in aceto forti,
trajiciantur per linteum, apply the expressed juice. Others macerate an egg in
sharp vinegar, with coporose and sulphur vivum beaten into fine powder, then
they strain or press it through a linen cloth.

But seeing the forementioned medicines are acride, and for the most part
eating and corroding, it cannot be but that they must make the skin harsh
and rough, therefore to smooth and levigate it again, you shall make use of
the following ointment.

. tereb. ven. tam diu lotae, ut acrimoniam nullam habeat, butyri salis
expertis, an. i ss. To smooth the skin.
olei vitel. ovor. i. axung. porci in aqua rosarum lotae, ss. cerae parum, fiat
linimentum ad usum. To the same purpose you may also make use of some of the
forementioned medicines.

CHAP. XLVI. To black the hair.
AT first the hairs, (to take the fucus or tincture, and to retain it) must
be prepared with Lie, wherein a little roche Alome is dissolved. Thus the fatty
scales may be washed and taken away, which hinder, and (as it were) keep away
the fucus, that it cannot adhere or penetrate into the body of the hair. Then
must we come to particular or proper and fitting medicines for this purpose.
These ought to be aromaticke and cephalicke, and somewhat stiptick, that by
their odoriferous and astringent power they may strengthen the animal What
things are fit to die the hair.
faculty: Furthermore, they must be of subtle parts, that they may enter even
into the inner roots of the hairs.

. Sulphuris, vitrioli, gallarum, calcis vivae, lithargyri, an. ii. scoriae
ferri, ss. in pollinem reducantur, and cum aq. communi incorporentur, ut inde
fiat massa: with this at bed time let the hairs be rubbed, and in the morning
let them be smoothed with the same.

. calcis lotae, i. lithargyri utriusque ss. cum decocto gallarum, corticum,
nucum, fiat massa, addendo olei chamem. ii.. lytharg. auri, ii. ciner.
clavellat. i s8. calcis viv. i. dissolve omnia cum urena hominis donec
acquirant consistentiam unguenti pro unctione capillorum.. calcis lotae, iv.
lithargyri utriusque an. ii. cum decoct. salv. and cort. granat. fiat pasta ad
formam pultis satis liquidae: let the hair at bed time be died herewith, and
washed in the morning with wine and water.

Now the manner of washing lime is thus: Infuse in ten or twelve pints of fair
water one pound of lime, then pour out the water by stooping the vessel,
putting How to wash Lime.
more in the stead thereof; the third time in stead of common water power
thereon the water of the decoction of sage and galls, let the lime lie therein
for so many hours, then in like manner power it off by stooping the vessel;
and thus you shall have your lime well washed. There is also found a way how to
die or black the hair by only pouring of some liquor thereon: as,. argenti
purissimi, ii. reducantur in A water to black the hair.
tenuissimas laminas, ponantur in ampulla vitrea cum ii. aquae separationis
auri and argenti, and aquae rosar. vi. The preparing of this water is thus, put
into a violl the water of separation and the silver, and set it upon hot coals
so to dissolve the silver, which being done then take it from the fire, and
when it is cold, add thereto the rose water. But if you would black it more
deeply, add more silver thereto, if less, then a smaller quantity; to use it,
you must steep the comb wherewith you comb your head in this water.

. plumbi usti, ii. gallarum non perforat. cortic. nucum, an. iii. terrae sigil.
ferret. hispan. an. ii. vitriol. romans vi. salis gem. i ss. caryoph. nucis
mosch. an. i. salis ammon. aloes, an. ss. fiat pulvis subtilissimus: let this
powder be macerated in vinegar for three days space, then distill it all in an
alembick, the water that comes therefrom is good for the foresaid use. The
following medicine is good to make the hairs of a flaxen color.. flor.
genist. staechad. and cardamom. an. i. lupinor. conquassat. rasur. To make the
hair of a flaxen color.
buxi, corticis citri, rad. gentian. and berber. an. i ss. cum aqua nitri fiat
lenta decoctio: herewith bathe and moisten the hairs for many days.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Psilothra, or Depilatories: and also of Sweet waters.
MEdicines to fetch off hair, which by the Greeks are termed Psilothra, and
Depilatoria in latin vulgarly, are made as you may learn by these following
examples.. calcis vivae, iii. auripigmenti, i. let the lime be quenched in
fair water, and then the orpiment added A depilatory.
with some aromaticke thing: have a care that the medicine lie not too long
upon the part, otherwise it will burn; and this medicine must be made to the
consistence of a pultis and applied warm, first fomenting the part with warm
water; for then the hair will fall off by gentle rubbing or washing it with
warm water: but if there happen any excoriation thereupon, you may help it by
the use of unguentum rosatum, or some other of the like faculty.

. calcis viv. aurip. citrin. an. i. amyl. spumae argent. an. ss. terantur and
incorporentur cum aq. com. and bulliant simul: you shall certainly know that it
is sufficiently boiled, Another.
if putting thereinto a gooses quill, the feathers come presently off: some
make into powder equal parts of unquencht lime and orpiment, they tie them up
in a cloth, with which being steeped in water they besmear the part, and
within a while after by gently stroaking the head, the hair falls away of it
self. The following Sweet waters.
waters are very fitting for to wash the hands, face, and whole body, as also
linen, because they yield a grateful smell: the first is lavander water thus
to be made., Lavander water.
flor. lavend. lb iv. aq. rosar. and vini alb. an. lb ii. aq. vitae, iv.
misceantur omnia simul, and fiat distillatio in balneo Mariae: this same water
may also be had without distillation, if you put some lavander flowers in
fair water, and so set them to sun in a glass, or put them in balneo,
adding a little oil of spike and musk. Clove water is thus made:. caryoph.
ii. aq. rosar. lb ii. macerentur spatio xxiv. horarum, and distillentur Clove
water
in balneo Mariae. Sweet water commonly so called, is made of diverse
odoriferous Sweet water.
things put together; as thus,. menthae, majoranae, hyssopi, salviae,
rorismarini, lavendulae, an. m ii. radicis ireos, ii. caryophylorum, cinamomi,
nncis moschatae, ana, ss. limonum, number. iv. macerentur omnia in aqua rosarum,
spatio viginti quatuor horarum, distillentur in balneo Mariae, addendo Moschi,
ss.

The End of the Twenty sixth Book.

OF DISTILLATIONS. THE TVVENTIEIGHTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. What Distillation is, and how many kinds thereof there be.
HAving finished the Treatise of the faculties of medicines, it now seems
requisite that we speak somewhat of Chemistry and such medicines as are
extracted by fire. These arc such as consist of a certain fifth essence
separated from their earthy inpurity by Distillation, in which there is a
singular, and almost divine efficacy in the cure of diseases. So that of so
great an abundance of the medicines there is scarce any which at this day
Chemists do not distill, or otherwise make them more strong and effectual
than they were before. Now Distillation is a certain art or way by which the
liquor or humid part of things, by What distillation is.
the virtue and force of fire or some semblable heat (as the matter shall
seem to require) is extracted and drawn, being first resolved into vapor and
then condensed again by cold. Some call this art Sublimation or subliming,
which signifies nothing else but to separate the pure from the unpure; the
parts that are more subtle and delicate, from those that are more corpulent,
gross and excrementitious; as also to make those matters whose substance is
more gross, to become more pure and sincere, either for that the terrestrial
parts are ill united and conjoined, or otherwise confused into the whole and
dispersed by the heat and so carried up, the other grosser parts remaining
together in the bottom of the vessel. Or a distillation is the extraction or
effusion of moisture distilling drop by drop from the nose of the Alembecke or
any such like vessels. Before this effusion or falling down of the liquor
there goes a certain concoction performed by the virtue of heat; which
separates the substances of one kind from those of another that were confusedly
mixed together in one body, and so brings them into one certain form or body,
which may be good and profitable for diverse diseases. Some things require the
heat of a clear fire, others a flame, others the heat of the Sun, others
of Ashes or sand or the filings of Iron; others horse dung, or boiling water or
the oiely vapor or steame thereof. In all these kinds of fires, there are
four considerable degrees of heat. The first is contained in the limits of
warmth, and such is warm water, or the vapor of hot water. The second is a
little hotter, but yet so as the hand may abide it without Four degrees of
heat.
any harm, such is the heat of Ashes. The third exceeds the vehemence of the
second, wherefore the hand cannot long endure this without hurt, and such is
the heat of sand. The fourth is so violent, that it burns any thing that
comes near, and such are the filings of Iron.

The first degree is most convenient to distill such things as are subtle and
moist as What heat fittest for what things.
flowers. The second such as are subtle and dry as those things which are
odoriferous and aromaticall, as Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves. The third is fittest
to distill such things are of a more dense substance and fuller of juice; such
as are some Roots, and gumms. The fourth is fit for mettalls and mineralls as,
Alum, Vitrioll, Amber, Iet, etc. In like manner you may also distill without
heat; as we use to do in those things which are distilled by straining, as
when the more pure is drawn and separated from that which is most unpure and
earthy, as we do in Lac Virginale, and other things which are strained
through an hypocras bag, or with a piece of cloth cut in the form of a
tongue, or by settling, or by a vessel made of Ivy wood: sometimes also
somethings may be distilled, by coldness and humidity, and so we make the
oil of Tartar, Myrrh and Vitriolls, by laying them upon a marble in a cold
and moist place.

CHAP. II. Of the matter and form of Fornaces.
THe matter and form of Fornaces uses to be diverse. For some Fornaces The
matter the best for Fornaces.
use to be made of brickes and clay, othersome of clay only, which are the
better and more lasting, if so be the clay be fat and well tempered with
whites of Eggs and hair. Yet in sudden occasions when there is present
necessity of distillation, fornaces may be made of bricks, so laid together
that the joints may not agree, but be unequal, for so the structure will be
the stronger. The best and fittest form of a Furnace for distillation A round
form the best for Fornaces.
is round; for so the heat of the fire carried up equally diffuses it self
every way, which happens not in a Furnace of another figure, as square or
triangular, for the corners disperse and separate the force of the fire. Their
magnitude must be such as shall be fit for the receiving of the vessel. For
their thickness, so great as necessity shall seem to require. They must be
made with two bottomes, distinguished as it were into two forges, one below
which may receive the ashes of the coals or the like other fuel, the other
above to contain the burning coals or fire. The bottom of this upper must
either be an iron grate, or else it must be perforated with many holes, that
so the ashes may the more easily fall down into the bottom, which otherwise
would extinguish the fire; yet some Fornaces have three partitions, as the
Furnace for reverberation. In the first and lowest the ashes are received, in
the second the coals are put, and in the third the matter which is calcined or
else distilled. The third ought to have a semicircular cover, that so the heat
or flame may be reflected upon the contained matter. The lower partition shall
have one or more doors, by which the fallen down ashes may be taken forth.
But the upper must have but one, whereby the coals or wood may be put in. But
in the top or upper part of the Furnace where it shall seem most fit, there
shall be two or three holes made, that by them you may blow the fire and that
the smoke may more freely pass out. But these forementioned doors must have
their shutters, just like an ovens mouth. But in defect of a furnace or fit
matter to build one withal, we may use a kettle, set upon a trefoote after
the manner that we shall presently declare when we come to speak of that
distillation which is to be made by Balneum Mariae.

CHAP. III. Of vessels fit for Distillation.
Vessels for Distillation consist of different matter and form, for they are
either of Lead, Tin or Brass, or else earthen vessels and these are
sometimes leaded, sometimes not: or else they are of Gold, silver or glass.
Now for leaden vessels they are worse than the rest, and utterly Leaden
vessels ill.
to be refused, especially when as the liquors which are drawn by them are to
be taken into the body by the mouth, by reason of the malign qualities which
are said to be in Lead; by which occasion; Galen condemns those waters which
run, and are contained in Leaden pipes, which by reason of their saltishnesse
and acrimony which savovrs of quick silver, they cause dysenteries. Therefore
you may perceive such waters as are distilled through a leaden head to be
endued with a more acrid and violent piercing vapor, by reason the portion of
that saltishnesse dissolved in them, and as it were shaved from the top of the
Alembecke or head, defiles the distilled liquors, and whitens and turns them
into a milky substance but copper or brass Brass worse.
heads are more hurtful than Lead, for they make the waters that come through
them to savor or participate of brass. Those that are of gold and silver are
less The best vessels for distillation.
hurtful; but the greatness of the cost hinders us from making heads of such
mettalls; therefore we must have a care that our vessels for distillation be
either of potters metal leaded, or else of brass, or of that jugge metal
which is commonly called terra belovacensis, and these rather than of Lead, or
any other metal. Verily glasses are thought the best; and next to them,
earthen vessels leaded, then of jugge metal, and lastly these of tin.
There is great variety of vessels for distillation in form and figure; for
some are of an ovall or cilindricall figure, that is, of a round and longish;
others are twined and crooked, others of other shapes, as you may see in the
beakes of the Chimicks. Of this almost infinite variety of figures I will in
fit place give you the delineation and use of such as shall seem to be most
necessary.

CHAP. IIII. What things are to be cousidered in distillation.
FIrst make choice of a fit place in your house for the furnace, so that it may
neither hinder any thing, nor be in danger of the falling of any thing that
shall lie over it. When you shall distill any thing of a malign or venenate
quality, ye shall stand by it as little as you may, least the vapor should do
you any harm: when you provide glass vessels for distillation, make choice
of such, as are exquisitely baked, without flawes or crackes, and such as are
every where smooth. Let not the fire at first be very violent, not only for
fear of breaking the vessels, but also for that the first fire in
distillation must be gentle, and so increased by little and little. The things
to be distilled, ought not to be put in too great quantity into the body of the
still, least they should rise up or fly over. Hot things, that they may be more
effectual must be twice or Hot things must be often distilled.
thrice distilled, by pouring upon them their own distilled water or other
fresh materials, or else by distilling them severally and by themselves: of
this kind are gummes, wax, fatts, or oils.

But in each other repeated distillations you must something lessen the force
of the fire, for the matter attenuated by the former distillation cannot
afterward endure so great heat: but aromaticke things, as Cloves, Cinnamon,
etc. as also the chimicall oils of Sage, Rosemary, Time, etc. ought not to be
distilled or rectified over again, for that we must presently after the first
distillation have a diligent care to separate them from the phlegm, that is,
the more watery substance of the whole liquor; to whic purpose we must have
regard to that which is distilled, for there are some things which first send
over their phlegm as Vinegar, others, wherein it comes last, as By Aquavita in
this and most other places is meant nothing but the spirit of (...)*
aquavita.

If you would give to things to be distilled another taste or smell than that
which they have naturally, you may mix with them some odoriferous thing, as
Cinnamon, Camphire, or Musk, or the like, as you please, and so distill them
together. The distilled liquors which are drawn by the heat of ashes or sand,
savor of and retain a certain empyreuma; or smatch of the fire; for the
helping of which, you shall put them into glasses very close stopped, and so
expose them to the sun, and now and then open the glasses that this fiery
impression may exhale, and the phlegmon be consumed, if that there shall be
any. But though in all distillation, three are many things to be observed, yet
are there two things, chiefly worthy of note: The first is, the matter that is
to be distilled and wrought upon, that is, of what kind it is, and what the
nature thereof may do and suffer. The other is the Furnace, which ought to be
provided of a convenient matter and figure for that which is to be distilled:
for you cannot draw any thing of any matter, neither of every mixture being
distilled can you rightly expect oil or water. For mixed bodies do not consist
of an equal portion of the four Elements, but some are more aerie, others
more fiery, some participate more of the water, others more of the earth, and
that presently from their ^st original. Therefore as watery things, yield more
water, so aerie and fiery things yield more oil when they are distilled;
neither are all instruments fit for the extracting of every liquor. Moreover
you must note, that the watery liquor sometimes comes forth in the first place,
and presently after by the help of a stronger fire follows the oilely, which
we find happens as often as the plant or parts of the plants which are
distilled, are of a cold temperament; for in hot things it happens otherwise,
for the first liquor which comes forth is oilely, and the following waterish.

CHAP. V. Of what fashion the vessels for the distilling of waters ought to be.
FOr the distilling of any kind of waters, two kind of vessels are necessary,
which are comprehended under this one general name of an Alembecke. They call
one of them the body, or containing vessel, the other The parts of an
Alembecke.
the head, that is, the cap or top wherein the ascending vapors are
condensated or turned into water. It is called the head, because it stands over
the body, like as an head; from the head there comes out a pipe or nose whereby
the distilled liquor flows drop by drop into the receiver, as you may see by
the following figure.

The Furnace for a Bolneum Mariae with the Alembeck, and their receivers.
A. Shows a brass kettle full of water.

B. The cover of the kettle perforated in two places, to give passage forth to
the Vessels.

C. A pipe or Chimney added to the kettle, wherein the fire is contained to
heat the water.

D. The Alembecke consisting of his body and head.

E. The receiver whereinto the distilled liquor runs.



The effigics of another balneum Mariae, not so easy to be remooved as the
former.
A. Shows the vessel or Copper that contains the water.

B. The Alembecke set in water.

But least the bottom of the Alembicke being half full, should floate up and
down in the water, and so stick against the sides of the Kettle; I have
thought good to show you the way and means to prevent that danger.



A. Shows the Vessel or glass Alembecke.

B. A plate of Lead whereon it stands.

C. Strings that bind the Alembecke to the plate.

D. Kings through which the strings are put, to fasten the Alembecke.

You may also distill the liquors of things by the vapor or steame of boiling
water, if so be that you be provided of Vessels and forms made after this
following manner.



A Furnace with his vessels to distill liquors with the steme of boiling water.
A. Shows the head of the Alembecke.

B The body thereof, placed in a brass vessel made for that purpose.

C. A brass vessel perforated in many places to receive the vapor of the
water. This vessel shall contain th'Alembecke compassed about with sawdust,
not only that it may the better and longer retain the heat of the vapor,
but also least it should be broken by the hard touch of the brazen vessel.

D. Shows the brass vessel containing the water as it is placed in the
Furnace.

E. The Furnace containing the vessel.

F. A Funnell by which you may now and then power in water, in stead of that
which is vanished and dissipated by the heat of the fire.

G. The Receiver.



Now for the faculties of distilled waters it is certain, that those which are
drawn in balne Mariae or a double vessel, are far better and efficacious,
because, they do not only retain the smell of the things which are
distilled, but also the taste, as acidity, harshnesse, sweetness, bitterness,
and other qualities, so that they will neither Why those things that are
distilled in Balneo retain more of the strength of things.
savor of smoke nor burning; for the mild and gentle heat of a bath
contains by his humidity, the more subtle parts of the plants that are
distilled, that they be not dissipated and exhaled, contrary to which it
usually happens in things which are distilled by the burning heat of wood or
coals. For these have a certain nitrous and acrid taste, savouring of the
smoke of fire. Besides, they acquire a malign quality from the vessels out
of which they are distilled, especially if they be of Lead, whence they
contract qualities hurtful to the principal, vital, and natural parts.

Therefore the plants which are thus distilled, if they be bitter by nature,
presently become insipid, as you may perceive by wormwood water thus
distilled. Those things which are distilled in Balneo Mariae are contained in a
glass vessel, from which they can borrow no malign quality. Therefore the
waters so drawn are more effectual and pleasing in taste, smell, and sight.
You may draw waters not only from one kind of plant, but also from many
compounded and mixed together: Of these some are alimentary, others medicinal,
yea and purging; others acquired for smell, others for washing or smoothing of
women's faces, as we shall show hereafter.

CHAP. VI. How the materials must be prepared before Distillation.
THings before they be put into the Alembecke must undergo a preparation, that
is, they must be cut small, beaten and macerated, that is, steeped in some
liquor, that so they may be the more easily distilled and yield the more water,
and retain their native smell and faculties; yet such preparation is not
convenient for all things; for there be some things, which need no infusion or
maceration, but must rather be dried before they be distilled, as What things
need not to be macerated before they be dissolved.
Sage, Time, Rosemary, and the like, by reason of their too much humidity; it
will be sufficient to sprinkle other things with some liquor only. In this
preparation there are two things observable, to wit, the time of the infusion
and condition of the liquor wherein these things ought to be infused. The time
of the infusion is different according to the variety of the matter to be
macerated; for things that are hard, solid, dry or whole, must be longer
macerated, than such as are tender, freshly gathered or beaten: whence it is
that roots and seeds require a longer time of infusion; flowers and leaves a
shorter, and the like of other things. The liquors wherein infusion must be
made, ought to be agreeable to the things infused. For hot ingredients require
hot liquors, and cold such as are cold wherein they may be infused.

Such things as have not much juice, as Betonie, wormwood and the like, or
which are very odoriferous, as all aromaticke things, would be infused in wine,
so to preserve their smell, which otherwise by the force of the fire, by reason
of the tenuity of the substance, easily vanishes. But if we desire that the
distilled liquor should more exactly retain and have the faculty of the things
whereof it is distilled, then must you infuse it in the juice thereof, or some
such appropriate The maceration of plants in their own juice.
liquor, that it may swim in it whilst it is distilled, or at least let it
be sprinkled therewith.

CHAP. VII. Of the art of distilling of waters.
BEfore I describe the manner how to distill waters, I think it not amiss
briefly to reckon up how many sorts of distilled waters there be, and what The
varieties of stilled waters.
the faculties of them are. Therefore of distilled waters some are medicinal,
as the waters of Roses, Plantaine, Sorrel, Sage, and the like: others are
alimentary, as those waters that we call Restauratives; othersome are composed
of both, such as are these restaurative waters which are also mixed with
medicinal things; others are purging, as the distilled water of green and
fresh Rubarbe; othersome serve for smoothing the skin, and others for smell;
of which sort are those that are destilled of aromaticke things.

To distill Rose water, it will be good to macerate the Roses before you
distill Rose water.
them for the space of two or three days, in some formerly distilled
Rosewater, or their pressed out juice, luting the vessel close; then put them
into an Alembecke closely luted to his head and his receiver, and so put into a
Balneum Mariae, as we have formerly described.

The distilled Alimentary liquors are nothing else than those that we vulgarly
call Restauratives.
Restauratives; this is the manner and art of preparing them. Take of Veale,
Mutton, Kid, Capon, Pullet, Cock, Partridge, Pheasant, as much as shall seem
fit for your purpose: cut it small, and least it should acquire heat, or
empyreuma from the fire, mix therewith a handful of French Barley, and of red
Rose leaves dry and fresh, but first steeped in the juice of Pomegranats, or
citrons and Rosewater with a little Cinnamon, as much.

But if you desire that this restaurative should not only be alimentary but
also medicinal, you shall add thereto such things as shall resist the
disease, such as are Cordial pouders as of El. Diamargarit. frigid. De Gemmis,
Aromaticum Rosat. Conserve of Buglosse, Borrage, roots, herbs, seeds and
other things of that kind. But if it be in a pestiferous season, Treacle,
Mithridate and other Antidotes shall be added; each of these shall be laid in
ranks or orders one over another, which is vulgarly termed stratum super
stratum, in a glass Alembeck, and distilled in balneo Mariae with the heat of
Ashes, or else of warm sand, as the following figure shows.

The delineation of a Balneum Mariae, which may also serve for to distill with
Ashes.
A. Shows the Furnace with the hole to take forth the Ashes.

B. Shows another Furnace, as it were set in the other: now it is of Brass,
and runs through the midst of the kettle made also of brass, that so the
contained water or ashes may be the more easily heated.

C. The kettle wherein the water, ashes, or sand are contained.

D. The Alembecke set in the water, ashes, or sand, with the mouths of the
receivers.

E. The bottom of the second brass Furnace, whose top is marked with B. which
contains the fire.



There may be made other restrauratives in shorter time with less labor and
cost. To this purpose the flesh must be beaten and cut thin, and so thrust
through with a Another way of making restorative Liquors.
double thread, so that the pieces thereof may touch each other; then put them
into a Glass, and let the thread hang out; so stop up the glass close with a
linen cloth, Cotton, or Towe, and lute it up with paste made of meal and the
whites of eggs; then set it up to the neck in a kettle of water, but so that
it touch not the bottom, but let it be kept upright by the formerly described
means; then make a gentle fire thereunder, until the contained flesh by long
boiling shall be dissolved into juice, and that will commonly be in some four
hours space. This being done, let the fire be taken from under the kettle, but
take not forth the glass before the water be cold, least it being hot should
be broken by the sudden appulse of the cold air. Wherefore when as it is
cold, let it be opened, and the thread with the pieces of flesh be drawn forth,
so that only the juice may be left remaining; then strain it through a bag,
and aromatize it with Sugar and Cinnamon, adding a little juice of Citron,
Verjuice or Vinegar, as it shall best like the patients palate.

After this manner you may quickly, easily and without great cost have and
prepare all sorts of restauratives as well medicated as simple. But the force
and faculty of purging medicines is extracted after a clean contrary manner
than the oils and waters are drawn of Aromaticke things, as Sage, Rosemary,
Time, Aniseedes, Fennel, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and the like. For the
strength of these, as that which is subtle and ayery, flies upwards in
distillation; but the strength of purging things, as Turbith, Agaricke, Rubarbe
and the like, subside in the bottom. For the purgative faculty of these
purgers inseparably adheres to the bodies and substances.

Now for sweet waters and such as serve to smooth the skin of the face, they
may be distilled in Balneo Mariae like as Rose water.

CHAP. VIII. How to distill Aqua vitae, or the spirit of wine.
TAke of good White or Clarret wine or Sack which is not sour nor mustie, nor
otherwise corrupt, or of the Lees that quantity which may serve to fill the
vessel wherein you make the distillation to a third part; then put on your
head furnished with the nose or pipe, and so make your distillation in Balneo
Mariae. The oftener it is distilled, or (as they term it) rectified, the more
noble and effectual it becomes. Therefore some distill it seven times Spirit
of wine seven times rectified.
over.

At the first distillation it may suffice to draw a fourth or third part of the
whole; to wit, of 24. pints of Wine or Lees, draw 6. or 8. pints of distilled
liquor.

At the second time the half part of that is 3. or 4. pints.

At the third distillation the half part again, that is, two pints; so that
the oftener you distill it over, the less liquor you have, but it will be a
great deal the more efficacious. I do well like that the first distillation
be made in Ashes; the second in Balneum Mariae. To conclude, that aqua vitae
is to be approoved of, neither is it any oftener to be distilled, which put into
a spoone or saucer, and there set on fire, burns wholly away and leaves no
liquor, or moisture in the bottom of the vessel; if you drop a drop of oil
into this same water, it incontinently falls to the bottom; or if you drop a
drop thereof into the palm of your hand, it will quickly vanish away, which
are two other notes of probation of this liquor.

The faculties and effects of aqua vitae are innumerable, it is good against
the epilepsie and all cold diseases, it asswages the pains of the teeth, it is
good for punctures The faculties of the spirit of wine.
and wounds of the Nerves, faintings, sownings, gangreenes and mortification,
both of its flesh, as also put to other medicines for a vehicle.

There is this difference between the distilling of wine and Vinegar, wine
being of an ayery and vaporous substance, that which is the best and most
effectual in it, to wit, the aerie and fiery liquor, comes from it presently
at the first distillation. Therefore the residue that remains in the bottom
of the vessel, is of a cold, dry and acrid nature; on the contrary, the water
that comes first from Vinegar being distilled, is insipide and flegmaticke. For
Vinegar is made by the corruption of wine, and the segregation of the fiery and
aerie parts; wherefore the wine becoming sour, there remains nothing almost
of the former substance but phlegm; wherefore seeing phlegm is chiefly
predominant in Vinegar, it first rises in distillation. Wherefore he that hopes
to distill the spirit of Vinegar, he must cast away the phlegmatic substance
that first rises, and when by his taste he shall perceive the spirit of the
Vinegar, he shall keep the fire there under, until the flowing liquor shall
become as thick as honey; then must the fire be taken away, otherwise the
burning of it will cause a great stinch.

The vessels fit to distill aqua vitae and Vinegar are diverse, as an
Alembicke or The distilling of Wine and Vinegar is different.
Retort set in sand or Ashes; a Coppar or brass bottom of a still, with a
head thereto, having a pipe coming forth thereof which runs into a worm, or
pipe fastened in a barrel or vessel filled with cold water, and having the
lower end coming forth thereof, whose figure we shall give you when as we
come to speak of the drawing of oils out of vegetables.

CHAP. IX. Of the manner of rectifying, that is, how to increase the strength
of waters, that have been once distilled.
TO rectify the waters that have been distilled in Balneo Mariae, you must
set them in the Sun in glasses well stopped and half filled, being set in
The first way.
sand to the third part of their height, that the water waxing hot by the heat
of the Sun may separate it self from the phlegm mixed therewith, which will
be performed in 12. or 15. days. There is another better way to The second.
do this, which is to distill them again in Balneo with a gentle fire, or if
you will put them into a retort furnished with his receiver, and set them upon
crystal or iron bowls, or in an iron mortar directly opposite to the beams
of the Sun, as you may learn by these ensuing signs.

A Retort with his receiver standing upon Crystal bowls, just opposite to the
Sun beams.
A. Shows the Retort.

B. The receiver.

C. The Crystal bowls.



Another Retort with his receiver standing in a Marble or Iron mortar, directly
opposite to the Sun.
A. Shows the Retort.

B. The Marble, or Iron mortar.

C. The receiver.



CHAP. X. Of distillation by filtring.
YOu shall set three basins or vessels of convenient matter in that site and
order that each may be higher than other; that which stands in the highest
place, shall contain the liquor to be distilled, and that which stands lowest
shall receive the distilled liquor. Out of the first and second vessel shall
hang shreds or pieces of cloth or cotton, with their broader ends in the liquor
or upper vessel, and the other sharper ends hanging down, whereby the more
subtle and defaecate liquor may fall down by drops into the vessel that
stands under it, but the grosser and more feculent part may subside in the
first and second vessel. You by this means may at the same time distill the
same liquor diverse times, if you place many vessels one under another after
the forementioned manner, and so put shreds into each of them, so that the
lowest vessel may receivethe purified liquor. In stead of this distillation
Apothecaries often times use bags.

This manner of distillation was invented to make more clear and pure waters,
and all juices and compositions, which are of such a liquid consistence. You
may take an example of this from Lac Virginis, or Virgins milk, of which this
is the description. Lac Virginis.


. litharg. auri diligenter pulveris. iij. macerentur in aceti boni vj. trium
horarum spa^^o, seorsim etiam in aqua plantaginis, solani, rosarum, aut communi
sal infundatur; then distill them both by shreads, then mix the distilled
liquors, and you shall have that which for the milkie whiteness is termed
Virgins milk, being good against the redness and pimples in the face, as we
have noted in our Antidotary. Chapter 44. of suci.


The description of vessels to perform the distillation or filtration by
shreds.
A, Shows the vessel:

B, The Clothes or shreds:



CHAP. XI. What and how many ways they are to make Oils.
YOu may by three means especially draw or extract the oils that you desire.
The first is by expression, and so are made the oils of Olives, nuts, seeds,
fruits and the like. Under this is thought to be contained Oiles by expression.
elixation, when as the beaten materials are boiled in water, that so the oil
may swim aloft, and by this means are made the oils of the seeds of the
berries of Elder and Danewort, and of bay berries. Another is by infusion, as
that which is by infusing the parts of plants and other things in oils. The
third is by distillation, such is that which is drawn by the heat of the
fire, whether By infusion.
by ascent or by descent, or by concourse; The first way is known by all; now
it is By distillation.
thus, take almonds in their husks, beat them, work them into a mass, then
put them into a bag made of hair, or else of strong cloth first steeped in
water or in white Wine, then put them into press and so extract their oil.
You may do the same in pine apple kernells, Hazell nuts, Coco nuts, nutmegs,
peach kernells, the seeds of gourds and cucumbers, pisticke nuts, and all such
oiely things. Oil of bays may be made of ripe bay berries newly gathered, let
them be beaten in a mortar and Oil of Bay Berries.
so boiled in a double vessel, and then forthwith put into press, so to
extract oil as you do from Almonds, unless you had rather get it by boiling
as we have formerly noted. Oil of Eggs is made of the yoalkes of Eggs boiled
very hard; when Of Eggs.
they are so, rub them to pieces with your fingers, then fry them in a pan
over a gentle fire, continually stirring them with a spoone until they become
red, and the oil be resolved and flow from them; then put them into a hair
cloth, and so press forth the oil. The oils prepared by infusion are thus
made, make choice of good oil wherein let plants, or creatures, or the parts
of them be macerated for some convenient time, that is, until they may seem
to have transfused their faculties into the oil, then let them be boiled, so
strained or pressed out. But if any aquosity remain, let it be evaporated by
boiling. Some in compounding of oils add gums to them, of which though we
have formerly spoken in our Antidotary, yet have I thought good to give you
this one example.. flor. hyper. lb ss. immittantur in phialam Oil of S. John's
wort.
cum flo. cent. and gum. elemi, an. ij. olei com. lb. ij. Let them be exposed
all the heat of Summer to the Sun. If any will add aqua vitae wherein some
Benzoin is dissolved, he shall have a most excellent oil in this kind. Oil of
Masticke is made Of Masticke.
Ex olei rosati xij. mastich. iij. vini optimi viij. Let them all be boiled
together to the consumption of the wine, then strain the Oil and reserve it
in a vessel.

CHAP. XII. Of extracting Oiles of vegetables by Distillation.
ALmost all herbs that carry their flowers and seeds in an umbell, have
seeeds of a hot, subtle and aerie substanc, and consequently oily. Now because
the oily substance that is contained in simple bodies is of two kinds,
therefore the manner also of extracting is twofold. For some is gross, earthy,
viscous, and wholly confused and mixed with the bodies out of which they ought to
be drawn, as that which we have said is usually extracted by expression; What
oils are to be drawn by expression.
this because it most tenaciously adheres to the grosser substance, and part of
the body, therefore it cannot by reason of this natural grossnesse, be lifted
up, or ascend. Othersome are of a slender, and aerie substance, which is easily
severed from their body, wherefore being put to distillation it easily rises:
such is the oily substance of aromaticke things, as of Juniper, Aniseeds,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Pepper, Ginger, and the like odoriferous and spicy
things. This is the manner of The first manner of drawing oiles by distillation.
extracting oils out of them; let your matter be well beaten and infused in
water to that proportion, that for every pound of the material, there may be
ten pints of water; infuse it in a copper bottom, having a head thereto either
tinned or silvered over, and furnished with a couller filled with cold water.
Set your vessel upon a furnace having a fire in it, or else in sand, or ashes.
When as the water contained in the head shall wax hot, you must draw it forth,
and put in cold, that so the spirits may the better be condensed, and may not
fly away: you shall put a long neckt receiver to the nose of the Alembecke, and
you shall increase the fire, until the things contained in the Alembecke boil.

There is also another manner of performing this distillation, the matter
preserved Another way,
and infused as we have formerly declared, shall be put in a brass or copper
bottom covered with his head, to which shall be fitted, and well luted, a
worm of Tin, this worm shall run through a barrel filled with cold
water, that the liquor which flows forth with the oil, may be cooled in the
passage forth; at the lower end of this worm you shall set your receiver. The
fire gentle at the first, shall be increased by little and little, until the
contained matter, as we formerly said, do boil; but take heed that you make
not too quick or vehement a fire, for so the matter swelling up by boiling may
exceed the bounds of the containing vessel, and so violently fly over.

Observing these things, you shall presently at the very first see an oiely
moisture flowing forth together with the watrish. When the oil has done owing
which you may know by the color of the distilled liquor, as also by the
consistence and taste, then put out the ^^re; and you may separate the oil
from the water by a little vessel made like a Thimble and tied to the end of a
stick; [or, which is better, with a glass funnell, or instrument made of
glass for the same purpose.] Here you must also note that there be some oiles
that swim upon the top of the water, as oil of aniseedes; othersome on the
contrary, which fall to the bottom, as oil of What oiles fall to the bottom.
Cinnamon, Mace, and Cloves.

Moreover you must note, that the watrish moisture, or water that is distilled
with oil of Aniseede and Cinnamon, is whitish, and in success of time, will
in some small proportion turn into oil. Also these waters must be kept
several, for they are far more excellent than those that are distilled by
Balneum Mariae, especially those that first come forth together with the oil.
Oiles are of the same faculties with the bodies from whence they are extracted,
but much more effectual; for the force which formerly was diffused in many
pounds of this, or that medicine, is after distillation contracted in a few
drams. For example, the faculty that was dispersed over j. pound of Cloves,
will be contracted into two ounces of oil at the most; and that which was in a
pound of Cinnamon will be drawn into iss. or ij. at the most of oil. But to
draw the greater quantity with the lesser charge, and without fear of breaking
the vessels, whereto glasses are subject, I like that you distill them in
copper vessels, for you need not fear that the oil which is distilled by
them will contract an ill quality from the copper, for the watrish moisture
that flows forth together therewith will hinder it, especially if the copper
shall betinned or silvered over. I have thought good to describe and set before
your eyes, the whole manner of this operation.

A Furnace with set vessels to extract the Chymicall oiles, or spirits of
Sage, Rosemary, Time, Lavender, Aniseeds, Fennel seeds, Cloves, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Pepper, Ginger, and the like; as also to distill the spirit of wine,
of Vinegar and aqua vitae. In stead of the barrel and worm, you may use a
head with a bucket or rowler about it.
A. Shows the bottom, which ought to be of Copper and tinned on the inside.

B. The head.

C. The Barrel filled with cold water to refrigerate and condensate the water
and oil that run through the pipe or worm that is put through it.

D. Apipe of brass or lattin, or rather a worm of Tin running through the
Barrel.

E. The Alembecke set in the furnace with the fire under it.



Now because we have made mention of Cinnamon, Pepper, and other spices, which
grew, not here with us, I have thought good to describe these out of Thevets
Cosmography, he having seen them growing. Pepper grows on shrubs in India,
these shrubs send forth little branches whereon hang clusters of berries, like
to Ivy berries, The description of Pepper.
or bunches of small black grapes, or currance. The leaves are like those of
the Citron tree, but sharpish and pricking.

The Indians gather those berries with great diligence, and stow them up in
large cellars, as soon as they come to perfect maturity. Wherefore it often
times happens, that there are more than 200. ships upon the coast of the
lesser Iava an Island of that country, to carry thence Pepper and other spices.
Pepper is used in Antidotes The uses thereof.
against poisons, it provokes urine, digests, attracts, resolves, and cures the
bites of Serpents. It is properly applied and taken inwardly against a cold
stomach; in sauces it helps concotion and procures appetite; you must make
choice of such as is black, heavy, and not flaccide. The trees which bear
white, and those that bear black pepper, are so like each other, that the
natives themselves know not which, is which, unless when they have their
fruit hanging upon them, as the like happens upon our Vines which bear white
and black grapes.

The tree that yields Cinnamon grows in the mountains of India and has
leaves The Cinnamon tree.
very like to bay leaves; branches and shootes at certain times of the year
are cut from this tree, by the appointment of the King of that province, the
bark of which is that we term Cinnamon. This is sold to no stranger unless
at the Kings pleasure and he setting the price thereof, it is not lawful for
others to cut any thereof.

Galen writes that Cinnamon is of very subtle parts, hot in the third degree,
and partaking of some astriction; therefore it cuts and dissolves the
excrements of the body, 7. simp.
strengthens the parts, provokes the courses when as they stop by reason of
the admixture of gross humors; it sweetens the breath, and yields a fine taste
and smell to medicines, hippocras, and sauces. Of Cinnamon there is made an
excellent water against all cold diseases, and also against swoonings, the
plague and poisons. The composition thereof is this. Take of the choysest and
best Cinnamon one pound, beat it grossly, and put thereto of Rose water 4
pints, of white wine half a pint, being An excellent Cinnamon tree.
thus mixed, put them into a glass and so let them stand in infusion 24
hours, often stirring of them. Then distill them in Balneo Mariae, closely
luting the receiver and vessels least the spirit should fly away.

CHAP. XIII. Another manner how to draw the essence and spirits of herbs,
flowers, seeds, and spices; as also of Rubarbe, Agaricke, Turbith,
Hermodactiles, and other Purgers.
YOu may extract the essences and spirits of the things mentioned in the title
of this chapter, as thus. Take Sugar, Rubarbe, Cinnamon, or any other material
you please; cut it small, or else beat it, then put it into a glass with a
long neck, and pour thereupon as much aqua vitae as shall be sufficient to
cover the materials or ingredients, and to overtop them some fingers breadth,
then stop up the glass very close that no air enter thereinto; Thus suffer it
to infuse for 8 days in balneo with a very gentle heat; for thus the aqua
vitae will extract the facultyes of the ingredients, which you shall know that
it has done, when as you shall see it perfectly tinctured with the color of
the ingredients. The eight days A sign that the spirit of wine has fetched
out the strength of the ingredients.
ended, you shall put this same aqua vitae into another vessel filled with the
like quantity of the same materials prepared after the same manner, that it
may also take forth the tincture thereof, and do thus three or four times,
until the aqua vitae be deeply tinctured with the color of the infused
Ingredients.

But if the materials from whence you desire to extract this spirit or
essence, be of great price, as Lignum Alo^s, Rubarbe, etc. You must not think
it sufficient to infuse it once only, but you must go over it twice, or
thrice, until all the efficacy be extracted out thereof; you may know that it
is all wholly insipide.

These things thus done, as is fitting, put all the liquor tinctured and
furnished A sign that the ingredients have lo^^ their strength.
with the color and strength of the ingredients, into an Alembecke, fitted and
closely luted to its head, and so put into Balneum Mariae, that so you may
extract or draw off the aqua vitae, to keep for the like purpose, and so you
shall have the spirit, and essence remaining in the bottom.

Now if you desire to bring this extract to the height of honey, set it in an
earthen pot well leaded, upon hot ashes, so that the thin part thereof may be
evaporated, for thus at length, you shall have a most noble and effectual
essence of that thing which you have distilled, whereof one scruple will be
more powerful in purging, than two or three drammes of the thing its self.

CHAP. XIIII. How to extract oil out of Gums, condensed juices, and rosines,
as also out of some woods.
ALL oils that are drawn out of Gummes, oyely woods and mettalls, are
extracted by that vessel which we vulgarly term a Retort. It must be made of
glass, or jugges metal well Leaded, and of such bigness as What a Retort is.
shall be convenient for the operation you intend, though commonly it should be
made to hold some gallon and an half of water; the neck thereof must be a
foot and an half, or at least a foot long. The receiver is commonly a vial
whereinto the neck of the Retort is fitted and inserted. Then the Retort shall
be set in an earthen pan filled with ashes, or sand, and so set into a
furnace, as you may see by the following figure.

Of gummes some are liquid, some solid; and of the solid, some are more
solid than othersome; those that are solid are more troublesome to distill
than the liquide, The differences of Gummes.
for they are not so easily dissolved or melted, neither do they yield so well
to the fire, so that often times they are burnt before they be dissolved; whence
it is that some for every pound of solid gum, add two or three pounds of
most clear and liquide oil of Turpentine. Besides, liquide things are also
hard to be distilled, because when as they come to be thoroughly hot at the
fire, they swell up so much, that Cautions in distilling of gummes.
they exceed, or run out of the Retort, and so fall into the receiver, as
they were put into the Retort, especially if so be that the fire be too hot at
the first. Many to shun this inconvenience, add to the things put into the
Retort, some sand, as it were, to balast it withal.

The figure of a furnace, with his earthen pan and receiver:
A. Shows the furnace.

B. The earthen pan, or vessel to set the Retort in.

C. The Retort or Cucurbite.

D. The receiver.



Oil of Rosin and Turpentine is thus made; take two or three pounds of
Turpentine, and put it into a Retort of such largeness, that three parts
thereof might remain How to make oil of Turpentin^
empty, and for every pound of Turpentine add three or four ounces of sand;
then place the Retort in an earthen pan, filled with sifted ashes, and set it
upon the furnace as is fit, and to the neck thereof fit and closely lute a
receiver. Lastly, kindle thereunder a soft fire at the first, least the
contained materials should run over; increase this fire by little, and
little, and take heed that the things become not too hot on a sudden. At the
first a clear and acide liquor will drop out, wherein a certain sediment uses
to concreat; then will flow forth a most clear oil, somewhat resembling the
watery and phlegmatic liquor; then must the fire be some what increased, that
the third oily, clear, thin and very golden colored liquor may rife and
distill; but then also a clearer and more violent fire must be raised, that so
you may extract an oil that will be red like a carbuncle, and of a consistence
indifferently thick. Thus therefore you may extract, four kinds of liquors
out of Turpentine, and receive them being different in several receivers; yet
I judge it better to receive them all in one, that so by distilling them again
afterward you may separate your desired oil; now there will ten or twelve
ounces of oil, flow from an ounce of Turpentine. This kind of oil is
effectual against the Palsy, Convulsions, punctures of the nerves, and wounds
of all the nervous parts.

But you shall thus extract oil out of wax; take one pound of wax, melt it,
and How to make oil of wax.
put it into a glass Retort set in sand, or ashes, as we mentioned a little
before in drawing of oil of Turpentine, then destill it, by increasing the
fire by degrees. There distills nothing forth of wax, besides an oily
substance and a little Phlegma, yet portion of this oily substance, presently
concreats into a certain butter-like matter, which therefore would be
distilled over again; you may draw vj, or viij. of oil, from one pound of
wax.

This oil is effectual against Contusions, and also very good against cold
affects. The faculties thereof.


CHAP. XV. Of extracting of oils out of the harder sorts of Gummes, as myrrh,
mastich, frankincense and the like.
SOme there be who extract these kinds of oils with the Retort set in ashes or
sand, as we mentioned in the former Chapter of oils of more liquid gums,
adding for every pound of gum two pints of Aqua vitae, and two or three
ounces of oil of Turpentine, then let them infuse for eight or ten days in
Balneo Mariae, or else in horse dung; then they set it to distill in a Retort.
Now this is the true manner of making of oils of Myrrh; Take Myrrh made into
fine How to make oil of myrrh.
powder, and therewith fill hard Eggs in stead of their yoalkes being taken
out; then place the Eggs upon a gridiron, or such like grate in some moist
place as a cellar, and set under them a Leaden earthen pan; the Myrrh will
dissolve into an oilely water, which being presently put into a glass and well
stopped, with an equal quantity of rectified aqua vitae, and so set for three
or four months in hot horse dung, which past the vessel shall be taken
forth, and so stopped that the contained liquor may be poured into an
Alembecke, for there will certain gross settling by this means remain in the
bottom, then set your Alembecke in Balneo and so How to give it a pleasing
color and smell.
draw off the aqua vitae and phlegmatic liquor, and there will remain in the
bottom a pure and clear oil, whereto you may give a curious color by mixing
therewith some Alkanet, and a smell by droping thereinto a little oil of Sage,
Cinnamon or cloves

Now let us show the composition and manner of making of balsames by giving you
one or two examples; the first of which is taken out of Vesalius his
Surgery; and is this.

. terebinth. opt. lb. j. ol. laurini iiij. galbani, iij. gum. elem. iiij ss.
thuris, Myrrhae, Vesalius hi^ balsame.
gum. hederae, centaur. majoris, ligni aloes, an. iij. galangae, caryophyll.
consolidae majoris, Cinamoni, nucis moschat. zedoaniae, zinzib. dictamni albi,
an. j. olei vermium terrestrium, ij. aq. vitae lb. vj.

The manner of making it is this, let all these things be beaten and made
small, and so i^fused for three days space in aqua vitae, then distilled in a
Retort just as we said, you must distill oil of Turpentine and wax. There
will flow hence three sorts of liquors, the first watrish and clear, the other
thin, and of pure golden color; the third of the color of a Carbuncle,
which is the true Balsame. The first liquor is effectual against the
weakness of the stomach coming of a cold cause, for that it cuts phlegm and
discusses ^^atulencies; the second helps fresh and hot bleeeing wounds, as
also the palsy. The third is chiefly effectual against these same effects.
The composition of the following Balsamum is out of Fallopius; and is this..
terebinth. clarae, lb. ij. olei de semine lini lb. j. resinae pini, vj, thuris,
myrrhae, aloes, mastiches, sarcocollae, an. iij. macis, ligni Aloes, an. ij.
Fallopius hi^ balsame.
croci, ss. Let them all be put in a glass Retort, set in ashes and so
distilled. First there will come forth a clear water, then presently after, a
reddish oil, most pro^^table for wounds.

Now you must know that by this means, we may easily distill all Axungia's,
fatts, parts of creatures, woods, all kinds of barks and seeds, if so be that
they be first macerated as they ought to be, yet so that there will come forth
more watery than oily humidity. Now for that we have formerly frequently
mentioned Thus or frankinsense, I have here thought good out of Thevets
Cosmography to give you the description of the tree from which it flows. The
frankincense tree (says he) grows naturally in Arabia, resembles a pine,
yielding a moisture that is presently What frankin^ense is.
hardened, and it concreates into whitish clear grains, fatty within, which
cast into the fire, take flame. Now frankincense is adulte rated with
pine-rosin and Gum, which is the cause that you shall seldom find that with
us, as it is here described; you may find out the deceit as thus, for that
neither Rosin nor any other gum takes flame, for R^sin goes away in smoke,
but frankincese presently burns. The smell also be^ayes the counterfeite, for
it yields no grateful smell as frankincense does. The Arabians wound the tree
that so the liquor may the more readily flow forth, whereof they make great
gain. It fills up hollow Ulcers and cicatrizes them; wherefore it enters as a
chief ingredient into artificial balsame; fr^n^ alone The faculties thereof.
made into powder and applied, stanches the blood that flows out or wounds.

Mathiolus faith, that it being mixed with Fullers earth, and oil of Roses, is
a singular remedy against the inflammation of the breasts of women, lately
delivered of child.

CHAP. XVI. The making of oil of Vitriall.
TAke ten pounds of Vitrioll, which being made into powder, put it into an
earthen pot, and set it upon hot coals, until it be calcined, which is when
as it becomes reddish; after some five, or six hours, when as it shall be
thoroughly cold, break the pot, and let the vitrioll be again made into
powder, that so it may be calcined again, and you shall do thus so often and
long The sign of perfectly calcined vitrioll.
until it shall be perfectly calcined, which is when as it shall be exactly
red; then let it be made into powder, and put into an earthen Retort, like that
wherein aqua fortis is usually drawn, adding for every pound of your calcined
vitrioll of tile shreds, or powdered brick 1 quarter; then put the Retort
furnished with its receiver into a furnace of Reverberation, always keeping a
strong fire, and that for the space of 48 hours, more or less according to
the manner and plenty of the distilling liquor. You shall know the distillation
is finished when as the receiver shall begin to recover his native perspicuity,
being not now filled with vaporouse spirits, wherewith as long as the humor
distills it is replenished and looks white.

Now for the receiver there are 2 things to be observed. The first is, that it
be great and very capacious, that it may not be distended and broken by the
abundant flowing of vaporous spirits, as it does often times happen; another
thing is, that you set it in a vessel filled with cold water, least it should
be broken by being over hot; you may easily perceive all this by the ensuing
figure.

A Furnace or Reverberation furnished with his Retort and Receiver.
A. Shows the Furnace.

B. The Retort.

C. The Receiver.

D. The vessel filled with cold water.



CHAP. XVII. A table or Catalogue of medicines and instruments serving for the
cure of Diseases.
MEdicines and medicinallmeates fit for the cure of diseases, are taken from
living Creatures, plants and mineralls. From living creatures are taken,

Horns. Hooves. Hairs. Feathers. Shells. Sculles. Scailes. Sweates. Skins.
Fatts. Flesh. Blood. Entrails. Urine.
Smells whether they be stinking or sweet, as also poisons: whole creatures
themselves, as,
Foxes. Whelps. Hedgehogs. Frogs. Worms. Crabs. Cray-fishes. Scorpions.
Horseleaches. Swallows. Dungs. Bones. Extreme parts. Hearts. Liver. Lungs.
Brain. Womb. Secundine. Testicles. Pizle. Bladder. Sperme. Tail. Coats of
the Ventricle. Expirations. Bristles. Silk. Webbes. Tears. Spittle. Honey.
Wax. Eggs. Milk. Butter. Cheese. Marrow. Rennet.
From Plants, that is, Trees, shrubs, and herbs are taken,
Roots. Moss. Pith. Si^ns. Buds. Stalks. Leaves. Flowers. Cups. Fibers, or
hairy threads. Ears. Seeds. Bark. Wood. Meal. Juices. Tears. Oils. Gums.
Rosins. Rottennesses
Mass or spissament. Manna, which falling down like dew upon plants,
presently concreates.
Whole plants, as Mallows. Onions, etc.
Mettalls, or mineralls, are taken either from the water, or earth, and are
either kinds of earth, stones, or mettalls, etc.

The kinds of earth are,
Bole Armenicke. Terra sigillata. Fullers earth. Chaulke. Okar. Plaster. Lime.
Now the kinds of stone are,
Flints. Lapis judaicus. Lapis Lyncis. The Pumice. Lap. Haematites. Amiantus.
Galactites. Sponge stones. Diamonds. Sapphire. Chrysolite. Topace. Loadstone.
The Pyrites or fire-stone. Alablaster. Marble. Cristall, and many other
precious stones.
The kinds of Salts as well natural as artficiare,
Common salt. Sal nitrum. Sal Alkali. Sal Ammoniacum. Salt of Urine. Salt of
tartar and generally all salts that may be made of any kind of plants.
Those that are commonly called mineralls are,

Marchasite. Antimony. Muscovy Glass. Tutty. Arsnicke, Orpiment, Lazure, or
blew, Rose agar. Brimstone: Quick silver, White Coprose, Chalcitis, Psory.
Roman Vitrioll Colcothar, vitrioll, or green Coprose. Alumen scissile, Common
Alome, Alumen rotundum. Round Alome. Alumen liquidum. Alumen plumosum. Boraxe,
or Burrace, Bitumen, Naphtha. Cinnabaris, or Vermillion. Litharge of Gold.
Litharge of Silver Chrysocolla. Scandaracha. Red Lead. White Lead, and diverse
other
Now the Metals themselves are,

Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, Tin, Brass, Copper, Steel. Lattin and such as
arise from these, as the scailes, verdegreace, rust, etc.
Now from the waters, as the Sea, Rivers, Lakes and Fountains, and the mud of
these waters, are taken diverse medicines, as white and red Corrall, Pearls and
infinite other things which nature the handmayd of the great Architect of this
world, has produced for the cure of diseases; so that into what part soever
you turn your eyes, whether to the surface of the earth, or the bowels
thereof, a great multitude of remedies present themselves to your view. The
choice of all which is taken from their substance, or quantity, quality,
action, place, season, smell, taste, site, figure, and weight, other
circumstances, as Sylvius has abundantly showed in his book written upon
this subject. Of these simples are made diverse compositions; as,

Collyria. Caputpurgia. Eclegmata. Dentifrices. Dentiscalpia. Apophlegmatismi.
Gargarismes. Pills. Boles. Potions. Emplaisters. Unguents. Cerates. Liniments.
Embrocations. Fomentations. Epithemes. Attractives: Resolvers. Suppuratives:
Emollients. Mundificatives: Incarnatives. Cicatrisers. Putrifiers. Corrosives.
Agglutinatives. Anodynes. Apozemes. Iuleps. Syrupes. Powders. Tablets. Opiates.
Conserves. Preserves. Confections. Rowles. Vomits. Sternutatoryes.
Sudorifickes. Glysters. Pessaries. Suppositoryes: Fumigations. Trochisces.
Frontalls. Cappes. Stomichers. Bags. Bathes. Halfe-bathes. Virgins-milke.
Fuci. Pications. Depilatoryes. Vesicatoryes. Potentiall canteri^s. Nose-gayes.
Fannes. Cannopyes, or extended clothes to make wind. Artificial fountains,
to distill or drop down liquors.
Now these that are thought to be nourishing medicines are,

Restauratiues Cullisses Expressions Gellyes Ptisans Barly-creames Ponadoes
Almond-milkes Marchpaines Wafers Hydro sacchar Hydromel and such other drinks.
Mucilages Oxymel Oxycrate Rose Vinegar Hydraelium Metheglin Cider Drink of
Servisses Ale Beer Vinegar Verjuice Oil Steeled water Water brewed with bread
crummes Hippocras Perry, and such like.
Waters and distilled oils, and diverse other Chymicall extractions.

As the waters and oils of hot, dry and aromaticke things, drawn in a copper
Alembecke, with a cooler, with ten times as much water in weight as of herbs;
now the herbs must be dry, that the distillation may the better succeed.

Waters are extracted cut of flowers put in a Retort, by the heat of the
Sun, or of dung, or of an heap of pressed out Grapes, or by Balneo, if there
be a receiver put and closely lured thereto. All kinds of salt of things
calcined, dissolved in water, and twice or thrice filtred, that so they may
become more pure and fit to yield oil.

Other distillations are made either in Cellars by the coldness or moisture of
the place, the things being laid either upon a marble, or else hanged up in a
bag; and thus is made oil of Tartar, and of salts, and other things of An
aluminous nature.

Bones must be distilled by descent, or by the joining together of vessels.
All woods, roots, barks, shells of fishes, and seeds, or grains, as of
corn, broom, beans, and other things whose juice cannot be got out by
expression, must be distilled by descent, or by the joining together of
vessels in a Reverberatory furnace.

Mettalls calcined and having acquired the nature of salt, ought to be
dissolved and filtted, and then evaporated till they be dry; then let them be
dissolved in distilled vinegar, and then evaporated and dried again; for so
they will easily distill in a Cellar upon a Marble, or in a bag. Or else by
putting them into a glassie retort, and setting it in sand, and so giving fire
thereto by degrees until all the watery humidity be distilled; then change the
receiver, and lute another close to the Retort, then increase the fire above
and below, and thus there will flow forth an oil very red colored; Thus are
all metalline things distilled, as Alomes, salts, etc.

Gummes axungiae, and generally all rosins are distilled by retort set in an
earthen vessel filled with Ashes upon a furnace; now the fire must be
increased by little and little according to the different condition of the
distilled matters.

The vessels and Instruments serving for distillations are commonly these.
Bottomes of Alembeckes. The heads of them, from whence the liquors drop.
Refrigeratories. Vessels for sublimation. For Reverberation. For distilling by
descent. Crucibiles and other such. Vessels for Calcination. Hair strainers.
Bags. Earthen platters. Vessels for circulation, as Pellicanes. Earthen
Basins for filtring: Fornaces. The secret fornaces of Philosophers: The
Philosophers egg: Cucurbites Retorts Bolt heads Vrinalls Receivers Vessels so
fitted together that the lowermost receives the mouth of the uppermost, whence
they may be termed conjoined Vessels: They are used in distilling per
descensum, Marbes exquisitly smooth for distillations to be made in Cellars.
Pots to dissolve calcined m^in.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Chirurgions Instruments mentioned in this whole work.
RIngs wherein little Lancets lie hid, to open Impostumes. Trunkes or hellow
Instruments going with springs. A vent, or cooler for the womb made like a
pessary. Hollow tents. Sundry Cauteries, as flat round, sharp pointed,
cutting, etc. Constrictory rings to twitch or bind the Columella. Speculum
Oris. Ocul. Any. Vteri.

A trunk or pipe with an actual Cautery in it. Crooked Knives. A pipe in
form of a quill. Diverse trusses with one, or more boulsters. A shoulder-band
to be put about the neck, to hold up a trusse. A needle to draw through a
golden wire, etc. Pipes with fenestells, and needles fit for sutures. Cutting
mullets. Mullets only to hold and not to cut. Mullets to take forth splinters
of bones. Mullets to draw teeth. An incision knife. Scrapers to plain or
smooth the bones, or else to cut them. Cutting or hollow Scrapers. A Leaden
mallet to drive the scrapers or Chissels into the scull. A Gimblet in shape and
use resembling that which Coopers use to lift up the sunk staves of their
caske withal. Levatories, of which kind is the three footed one. Other
Levatories, which taken by their handles, and their tongues put under the
deprest bones, lift them up. Sawes. A desquamatory Trepan. Plyers to take forth
splinters of bones. A Gimblet to perforate the scull. A Trepan fit to divide
the scull, with the screw, peirnt or procer, brace, and cover or cap that
keeps it from running in too far. A plate to set one foot of the compass
upon. A cutting pair of Compasses both open and shut. A fit instrument to
depresse the Dura Matter without hurting thereof. A syring to make injection
withal. A pair of Pincers with holes through them to take up the skin for
making a Seton. Setons as well dry, as moystened with ointments. Crows,
Parrots, Swans, Duckes, Beakes, and these either straight, crooked, toothed, or
smooth.

Lizards, Cranes,
Catch-bullets, and Plyers to draw forth pieces of maile, and splinters of
bones that lie deep in. Hollow and smooth Dilaters, diversely made for the
different wounds of the parts. Probes fit for to put flamulaes into wounds; and
these either straight, or crooked, perforated, or unperforated. Screwed mullets
to draw forth barbed heads of Arrows and the like. Lancets to let blood, and
scarrifie as well straight, as crooked. A Pyulc^s, or Matter-drawer. Ligatures,
bands, swathes, thongs of Leather, woollen, linen, round, slit, sown
together; again some are upper binders, others under binders. Again these are
either expressing, or else containing, and that either the applied medicines,
or the lips of wounds, or members put in a fit posture, which therefore they
call a sarcoticke Ligature. Thread. Bottomes, or clewes of thread, or yarne.
Pledgets, compresses, boulsters, doubled clothes. Ferulae, or Splints. Casses.
Boxes. Iunckes. Glossocomies. Ambi, a kind of Glossocomie. A pully, with its
wheels, and wooden and Iron pinnes, whereon the wheels may run: Ropes
as well to draw and extend, as hold up the member, etc, Screw pins. A hand-vice.
Hooks. Buttons or stays to fasten to the skin to hold together the lips
of the wounds. Linte. Cushions, pillowes, linen clothes. Files. Dentiscalpia,
Dentifricia, Dentispicia. Catheters, guiders of the work. A bathing chair or
seat, bathing tubbes, half tubs, caldrons, funnells, with all other
circumstances belonging to a bath. Stoves, or hot houses to sweat in. Cocks
to turn and let out water. A Gimblet to break the stone. Hooks. Hollow
probes slit on their upper sides. Winged Instruments to draw forth stones. An
instrument to cleanse the bladder. Spathulues straight and crooked.
Cupping-glasses. Horns. Pipes or catheters to wear Caruncles. Artificial
members, as eyes of gold enamelled, etc. An Vrinall, or case to save the water
in. An artificial yard. Crutches. Niples, or leaden covers for sore breasts.
Griffins tallents to draw forth a Mola, out of the womb. A sucking glass to
draw a breast withal. Pessaries, both long and ovall. Syrings to give
glisters, as also to make injection into the ears, and womb.
THE EFFIGIES OF HIPPOCRATES OF COOS, THE PRINCE OF PHYSICIANS.


INVICTVM (Hippocrates quod te potuere superbae
Eoi nunquam flectere Regis opes,
Cecropidae fronti ex auro fulgente coronam
Promeriti memores imposuere tuae.
Gratia sed levis est, Actaeis tantus Athenis
Nec fuit hinc uni quam tibi partus honos.
Nam quod quae recreent languentia corpora morbo
Paeonias fueris promere largus opes.
Sed tua tam fundit, quam magni machina mundi
Gratia, and insignis tam tua fama volat.
BON. GRA. PARIS. MEDIC.
SELECT APHORISMS CONCERNING CHIRVRGErie, collected out of the Aphorisms of
the great Hippocrates.
Aph. 27. sect. 6. Whosoever being suppurate or hydropicall, are burnt, or cut
therefore, if all the matter, or water flow forth at once, they certainly dye.
31. 6. The drinking of wine, or a bath, fomentation, blood-letting, or purging,
help the pains of the eyes. 38. 6. Such as have hidden, or not ulcerated
Cancers, had better not to cure them. For healed they quickly dye, not cured
they live the longer. 55. 6. Gouty pains usually stir in the Spring and
Fall. 28. 6. Eunuchs are not troubled with the Gout, neither do they become
bald. 49. 6. Whosoever are troubled with the Gout, have ease in forty days,
the inflammation ceasing. 66. 5. In great and dangerous wounds if no swelling
appear, it is ill. 67. 5. Soft tumors are good, but crude ones ill. 25. 6. For
an Erysipelas, or inflammation to return from without inwards, it is not good;
but to come from within outward, is very good. 19. 7. An Erysipelas coming
upon the baring of a bone, is evil. 20. 7. Putrefaction, or suppuration
coming upon an Erisipelas, is ill. 21. 6. If Varices or Haemorrhoides happen
to such as are mad, their madness ceases. 21. 7. A flux of blood ensuing upon
a great pulsation in Ulcers is ill. 26. 2. It is better that a fever happen
upon a convulsion, than a convulsion upon a fever. 4. 6. Those Ulcers that
have the skin smooth or shining about them, are evil. 18. 6. The wound is
deadly whereby the bladder, brain, heart, midriffe, any of the small Guts,
stomach or Liver are hurt. 45. 6. Whatsoever Ulcers are of a years
continuance or more, the bone must necessarily scaile, and the scarres become
hollow. 2. 7. The bone being affected, if the flesh be livide, it is ill. 14.
7. Stupidity and lack of reason, upon a blow of the head, is evil. 24. 7. A
Delirium happens if a bone (to wit, the scull) be cut even to the hollownesse
thereof. Whilst (...), or matter is in generating, pains and fevers happen
rather than when it is already made. 18. 5. Cold things are hurtful to the
bones, teeth, nerves, brain, spinall marrow, but hot things are good. 46. 2.
Two pains infesting together, but not the same place, the more vehement
obscures the other. 74. 7. A corruption and abscesse of the bone is caused by
the corruption of the flesh. 506. Coacar praen^s. A livid or dry Ulcer, or
yellowish, is deadly. 19. 6. When as a bone, or gristle, or nerve, or small
portion of the cheek, or the prepuce is cut as^^der, it neither increases, nor
grows together. 24. 6. Aph. and 513. Coacar. If any of the small guts be cut,
it knits not again. 50. 7. Those that have the brain sphacelate, that is,
corrupt, they dye within three days; if they escape these, they recover. 9. 7.
Bleeding at a wound causing a Convulsion, is the foreteller of death. 20. 5.
Cold is biting to Ulcers, hardens the skin, causes pain, not easily coming to
suppuration; blackness, aguish shakings, convulsions, erampes. 508. Coac.
Those who have the temples cut, have a Convulsion upon the parts contrary to
the section. 44. 7. Whosoever being suppurate are burnt or cut, if pure and
white quitture shall flow forth they escape; out if that which is bloody,
feculent, and stinking, then they dye. Galen. comment. ad Aphor. 29. 2. It is
not ^it to take in hand to cure such as are in a desperate case, but to leave
them, only foretelling the end of the disease. Celsus, Cap. 10. Lib. 2. It is
better to try a doubtful remedy than none at all.
FINIS.
THE EFFIGIES OF GALEN THE PRINCE OF PHYSICIANS NEXT TO HIPPOCRATES.


AEQVVM erat Hippocratem divino e semine Divum,
Orbem muneribus conciliare sibi:
Scripta sed involuit tam multo aenigmate, verum
Vt quamuis solers nullus habere queat;
Pergamei auxilio nisi sint monimenta Galeni,
Qui docta ambages sustulit art senis.
Ergo macte esto virtute, arcana resolvens,
Quae nulli fuer ant nota (Galene) prius;
Obstringensque orbem aeterno tibi munere totum,
Aeternis sacras te quoque temporibus.
BON. GRA. PARIS. MEDIC.
RVLES OF CHIRVRGERY BY THE AVTHOR.
1 Practice is an operation agreeable to the rules and laws of the Theory. 2
Health is not received by words, but by remedies fitly used. 3 Remedies known
and approved by use and reason, are to be preferred before such as are
unknown, or but lately found out. 4 Science without experience gets the
Physician no great credit with the patient. 5 He that would perform any great
and notable work, must diligently apply himself to the knowledge of his
subject. 6 It is the part of a good Physician to heal the disease, or
certainly to bring it to a better pass, as nature shall give leave. 7 The
Surgeon must be active, industrious, and well handed, and not trust too much
to books. 8 He that has not been versed in the operations of the Art, nor a
frequent auditor of the Lectures of such as are learned therein, and sets forth
himself for a brave Surgeon for that he has read much, he is either much
deceived or impudent. 9 He shall never do any thing praiseworthy, that has
got his mastery in Surgery by gold, not by use. 10 You shall comfort the
patient with hope of recovery, even when as there is danger of death. 11 To
change Physicians and Chirurgions is troublesome, but not good for the Patient.
12 Though the disease prove long, yet it is not fit that the Physician give
over the patient. 13 Great wounds of large vessels, are to be judged deadly.
14 Every contusion must be brought to suppuration. 15 As the nature or kind of
the disease must be known, so also must the remedy. 16 An Abscesse of the
bone of the palate, is in danger to cause a stinking breath. 17 Bleeding
caused by heat must be represt by cold. 18 Wounds of nervous parts require
medicines which by the subtlety of the parts may enter in and draw from far.
19 It is not fit for such as have Ulcers in their Legs, neither to walk,
stand nor sit, but to rest themselves in bed. 20 All biting and acrid medicines
are offensive to clean Ulcers. 21 For restoring of dislocations you must hold
them fast, stretch them out, and force them in. 22 A great Gangreene admits no
cure, but cutting. 23 A monster is a thing dissenting from the laws of nature.
24 Wounds of the Chest presently become sanious and purulent. 25 The wounds
made by all venomous creatures are dangerous. 26 The south wind blowing,
wounded members easily become mortifyed. 27 Such as are wounded, and desire to
be quickly whole, must keep a spare diet. 28 Intemperate bodies do not
easily recover of diseases. 29 Round Ulcers unless they be drawn into another
figure, do not easily heal up. 30 An Erysipelatous Ulcer requires purgation
by stool. 31 Crying is good for an infant, for it serves in stead of exercise
and evacuation. 32 Grief is good for none but such as are very fat. 33
Idleness wealens and extinguisheth the native heat. 34 An ill natured Ulcer
yields not unless to a powerful remedy. 35 A bath resolves and discusses
humors, and gently procures sweat. 36 Cold diseases are troublesome to old
people, and hard to be helped; but in young bodies they are neither so
troublesome, nor contumacious. 37 Exercised bodies are less subject to
diseases. 38 Moist bodies though they need small nourishment, yet stand they
in need of large evacuation. 39 Sick people dye sooner of an hot distemper
than of a cold, by reason of the quick and active operation of fire. 40 The
quitture that flows from an Ulcer is laudible, which is white, smooth and
equal.
The end of the twentiseaventh Book.
HOW TO MAKE REPORTS, AND TO EMBALME THE DEAD. THE TVVENTIEIGHTH BOOK.
NOw it only remains that we instruct the Surgeon Why a Surgeon must
be careful in making of Reports.
in making or framing his report, or opinion, either of the death of any
person, or of the weakness, or deprivation of any member in the function or
execution of its proper office and duty. Herein it is meet that he be very
considerate, that is to say, ingenious or wise in making his report, because
the events of diseases are oftentimes doubtful and uncertain, neither can
any man foretell them certainly, whether they will be for life or death, by
reason of the manifold nature of the subject of which we speak, and also the
uncertain condition of the humors both in their kind and Why judgment is
difficult.
motion. Which was the cause why Hippocrates even in the first of his
Aphorisms pronounces, that judgment is difficult. But first of all, it is
very expedient that a Surgeon be of an honest mind, that he may always
have before his eyes a careful regard of true piety, that is to say, the fear
of God and faith in Christ, and love toward his neighbors with hope of life
everlasting, least that he being carried away by favor, or corrupted with
money or rewards, should affirm or testify these wounds to be small that are
great, and these great that are small; for the report of the wound is received
of the Surgeon according to the civil Law.

It is recorded in the works of ancient Physicians that wounds may be called
great for three respects. Wounds te^med great for three respects.


The first is by reason of the greatness of the dissolved unity or resolution
of Continuity, and such are these wounds which made by a violent stroke with a
backesword, have cut off the arm, or leg, or overthwart the breast. The
second is by reason of the dignity or worthiness of the part; now this
dignity depends on the excellency of the action; therefore thus any little
wound made with a bodkin, knife, in any part whose substance is noble, as in
the Brain, Heart, Liver or any other part whose action and function is
necessary to preserve life, as in the Weasant, Lungs or Bladder, is judged
great. The third is, by reason of the greatness and ill habit, or the
abundance of ill humors or debility of all the wounded body; so those wounds
that are made in nervous parts, and old decayed people, are said to be great.
But in searching of wounds let the Surgeon take heed that he be not
deceived by his probe. For many times it cannot go into the bottom of the
wound but stops, and sticks in the way, either because he has not placed
the patient, in the same posture, wherein he was when he received his hurt; or
else for that the stroke being made down right, slipped aside to the right or
left hand, or else from below upwards, or from above downwards, and therefore
he may expect that the wound is but little and will be cured in a short time,
when it is like to be long in curing, or else mortal. Therefore from the
first day it behooveth him to How long a Surgeon must suspend his judgment
in some cases.
suspend his judgment of the wound until the ninth, for in that time the
accidents will show themselves manifestly, whether they be small or great,
according to the condition of the wound, or wounded bodies, and the state of
the air according to his primitive qualities, or venomous corruption.

But generally the signs, whereby we may judge of diseases, whether they be
General signs whereby we judge of diseases.
great or small, of long or short continuance, mortal or not mortal, are
four. For they are drawn either from the nature, and essence of the disease,
or from the cause or effects thereof, or else from the similitude, proportion
and comparison, of those diseases with the season or present constitution of
the times. Therefore if we are called to the cure of a green wound, whose
nature and danger, is no other but a simple solution of Continuity in the
musculous flesh, we may presently pronounce that wound to be of no danger, and
that it will soon be cured. But if it have an Ulcer annexed unto it, that is,
if it be sanious, then we may say it will be more difficult and long in the
curing; and so we may pronounce of all diseases, taking a sign of their
essence and nature. But of the signs that are taken of the causes, let this
be an example. A wound that is made with a sharp pointed and heavy weapon,
as with an halbeard being stricken with great violence, must be accounted
great, yea and also mortal if the accidents be correspondent.

But if the patient fall to the ground through the violence of the stroke, if
a choleric vomiting follow thereon, if his sight fail him, together with a
giddiness, if blood come forth at his eyes and nosthrills, if distraction
follow with loss of memory and sense of feeling, we may say; that all the hope
of life, remains in one small sign which is to be deduced from the effects
of the wound. But by the comparing it unto the season that then is, and
diseases that then assault man's body, we Wounds deadly by the fault of the
air.
may say, that all those that are wounded with gunshot are in danger of death,
as it happened in the schirmishes at the seige of Roan, and at the battall of
Saint Denis. For at that time, whether it were by reason of the fault of the
heavens, or air, through the evil humors of man's body, and the disturbance of
them; all wounds that were made by gunshot, were for the most part mortal. So
likewise at certain seasons of the year, we see the small pockes and measels
break forth in children, as it were by a certain pestilent contagion to the
destruction of children only, inferring a most cruel vomit and laske, and in
such a season the judgment of those diseases is not difficult. But you by the
following signs may know what parts are wounded. Singnes of a fractured scull.
If the patient fall down with the stroke, if he lie senseless, as it were
asleep, if he void his excrements unwittingly, if he be taken with
giddiness, if blood come out at his ears, mouth, and nose, and if he vomit
choler, you may understand that the scull is fractured, or pierced through, by
the defect in his understanding and discourse. You also may know when the scull
is fractured, by the judgment of your external senses, as if by feeling it
with your finger you find it elevated or depressed beyond the natural limits,
if by striking it with the end of a probe, when the Pericranium or nervous
filme that investeth the scull is cut cross wise; and so divided there from
it, yield a base and unperfect sound like unto a pot sheard that is broken, or
rather like unto an earthen pitcher that has a cleft, or rent therein.

But we may say, that death is at hand if his reason and understanding fail
him, if Signs of death by a wound on the head.
he be speechless, if his sight forsake him, if he would tumble headlong out
of his bed, being not at all able to moove the other parts of his body; if he
have a continual fever, if his tongue be black with drienesse, if the edges
of the wound be black or dry, and cast forth no sanious matter, if they
resemble the color of salted flesh, if he have an apoplexy, frenzy,
convulsion or palsy with an involuntarie excretion, or absolute suppr^ssion of
the Urine and excrements. You may know that a man has his throat, that is,
his weason and wind pipe cut. First by the sight of his Signs that the
throat is cut.
wound, and next by the abolishment of the function or office thereof both
ways, for the patient can neither speak nor swallow any meat or drink; and
the parts that are cut asunder, divide themselves by retraction upwards or
downwards one from another, whereof comes sudden or present death. You may
know that a Signs that a wound has pierced in the cap^city of the chest.
wound has peirced into the breast or concavity, of the body, if the air come
forth at the wound, making a certain whizzing noise, if the patient breathe
with great difficulty, if he feel a great heaviness or weight, on or about
the midriffe, whereby it may be gathered that a great quantity of blood, lies
on the place or midriffe, and so causes him to feel a weight or heaviness,
which by little and little, will be cast up by vomiting. But a little after a
fever comes, and the breath is unsavory, and stinking, by reason that the
putrefying blood is turned into sanies: the patient cannot lie but on his
back, and he has an often desire to vomit, but if he escape death, his wound
will degenerate into a Fistula, and at length will consume him by little and
little.

We may know that the Lungs are wounded, by the foaming and spumous blood,
Signs that the Lungs are wounded.
coming out both at the wound and cast up by vomiting; he is vexed with a
greevous shortness of breath and with a pain in his sides. We may perceive
the Heart to be wounded by the abundance of blood that comes out at the
wound, by the trembling of all the whole body, by the faint and small pulse,
palenesse of the face, That the heart is wounded.
cold sweat, with often swounding, coldness of the extreme parts, and
sudden death.

When the midriffe (which the Latins call Diaphragma) is wounded, the patient
The midriffe.
feels a great weight in that place, he raveth and talks idly, he is
troubled with shortness of wind, a cough, and fit of greevous pain, and
drawing of the entralls upwards. Wherefore when all these accidents appear, we
may certainly pronounce that death is at hand.

Death appears suddenly, by a wound of the hollow Vein, or the great
Artery, The V^ ^a and great Artery.
by reason of the great and violent evacuation of blood and spirits, whereby
the functions of the Heart and Lungs are stopped and hindered.

The marrow of the backebone being pierced, the patient is assaulted with a
Palsy The spinall marrow.
or convulsion very suddenly, and sense and motion fails in the parts
beneath it, the excrements of the bladder, are either evacuated against the
patients will, or else are altogether stopped.

When the Liver is wounded, much blood comes out at the wound, and pricking
pain disperseth it self even unto the sword-like gristle, which has its
situation The Liver.
at the Lower end of the breast bone called Sternon: the blood that falls from
thence down into the intestines does oftentimes infer most malign
accidents, yea and sometimes death.

When the stomach is wounded, the meat and drink come out at the wound, there
The stomach
follows a vomiting of pure choler, then comes sweating and coldness, of
the extreme parts, and therefore we ought to prognosticate death to follow
such a wound.

When the milt or spleen is wounded, black and gross blood comes out at the
The spleen
wound, the patient will be very thirsty, with pain on the left side, and the
blood breaks forth into the belly, and there putrefying causes most malign
and greevous accidents and often times death to follow.

When the guts are wounded, the whole body is griped and pained, the excrements
The guts.
come out at the wound, whereat also often times the guts break forth with
great violence.

When the reins or Kidnyes are wounded, the patient will have great pain in
making his Urine, and the blood comes out together therewith, the pain
comes The kidneyes.
down even unto the groine, yard, and testicles.

When the bladder and Vreters are wounded, the pain goes even unto the
entralls; The bladder.
the parts all about, and belonging to the groine are distended, the Urine is
bloody that is made, and the same also comes often times out at the wound.

When the womb is wounded, the blood comes out at the privities, and all
other accidents appear, like as when the bladder is wounded. The womb.


When the sinews are pricked or cut half asunder, there is great pain in the
affected The Nerves.
place, and there follows a sudden inflammation, flux, abscesse, fever,
convulsion, and oftentimes a gangreene or mortification of the part, whereof
comes death, unless it be speedily prevented.

Having declared the signs and tokens of wounded parts, it now remains that
we set down other signs of certain kinds of death that are not common, or
natural, whereabout when there is great strife and contention made, it
oftentimes is determined and ended by the judgment of the discreet Physician
or Surgeon.

Therefore if it chance that a nurse either through drunkenness, or
negligence, Signs that an infant is smothered, or over-layd.
lies upon her infant lying in bed with her, and so stifles or smothers it to
death: If your judgment be required, whether the infant dyed through the
default, or negligence of the nurse? or through some violent or sudden
diseases that lay hidden and lurking in the body thereof? You shall find out
the truth of the matter by these signs following.

For if the infant were in good health before, if he were not froward or
crying, if his mouth and nosethrills now being dead, be moystned or bedewed
with a certain foame, if his face be not pale but of a Violet or purple
color; if when the body is opened the Lungs be found swollen and puffed up, as
it were with a certain vaporous foame and all the other entralls found, it is
a token that the infant was stifled, smothered or strangled by some outward
violence.

If the body or dead corpse of a man be found lying in a field, or house alone,
and you be called by a magistrate to deliver your opinion, whether the man were
slain by lightning or some other violent death? you may by the following
signs find out the certainety hereof.

For every body that is blasted, or stricken with lightning, does cast forth or
breathe Signs of such as are slain by Lightning.
out an unholsome, stinking or sulphurous smell, so that the birds or fowls
of the air, nor dogs will not once touch it, much less prey or feed on it:
the part that was stricken often times sound, and without any wound, but if you
search it well, you shall find the bones under the skin to be bruised,
broken or shivered in pieces.

But if the lightening has pierced into the body, which making a wound therein
(according to the judgment of Pliny) the wounded part is far colder than all
the rest of the body. For lightning drives the most thin and fiery air
before it, and Lib. 2. cap. 54.
strikes it into the body with great violence, by the force whereof the heat
that was in the part is soon dispersed, wasted and consumed. Lightening does
always leave some impression or sign of some fire either by ustion or
blackness: for no lightning is without fire.

Moreover whereas all other living creatures when they are stricken with
lightening fall on the contrary side, only man falls on the affected side,
if he be not turned with violence toward the coast or region from whence the
lightening came.

If a man be stricken with lightening while he is asleep, he will be found
with eyes open; contrariwise, if he be stricken while he is awake, his eyes
will be closed (as Pliny writes:) Philip Commines writes that those bodies
that are stricken with lightning are not subject to corruption as others are.

Therefore in ancient time it was their custom neither to burn, nor bury
them, for the brimstone which the lightning brings with it, was unto them in
stead of salt, for that by the dryness and fiery heat thereof it did preserve
them from putrefaction.

Also it may be enquired in judgment, Whether any that is dead and wounded,
received these wounds alive or dead. Truly the wounds that are made on a
living Signs of wounds given to a living and dead man.
man, if he dye of them, after his death will appear red and bloody, with the
sides or edges swollne, or pale round about: contrary wise, those that are made
in a dead man, will be neither red, bloody, swollne, nor puffed up. For all
the faculties and functions of life in the body do cease and fall together by
death; so that thenceforth no spirits nor blood can be sent, or flow unto the
wounded place. Therefore by these signs which shall appear, it may be
declared that he was wounded dead or alive.

The like question may come in judgment when a man is found hanged, whether
Signs whether on be hanged alive or dead.
he were dead, or alive. Therefore if he were hanged alive, the impression or
print of the rope will appear red, pale, or black, and the skin round about
it will be contracted or wrinkled, by reason of the compression which the cord
has made; also often times the head of the aspera arteria is rent and torn,
and the second spondile, and the neck luxated or moved out of his place. Also
the arms and legs will be pale, by reason of the violent and sudden
suffocation of the spirits: moreover there will be a foame about his mouth, and
a foamie and filthy matter hanging out at his nosethrills, being sent thither
both by reason that the Lungs are suddenly heated and suffocated, as also by
the convulsive concussion of the brain like as it were in the falling
sickness. Contrariwise, if he be hanged dead, none of these signs appear:
for neither the print of the rope appears red or pale, but of the same color
as the other parts of the body are, because in dead men the blood and spirits
do not flow to the greeved parts.

Whosoever is found dead in the waters, you shall know whether they were
Whether one found dead in the water came therein a live or dead
thrown into the water alive or dead. For all the belly of him that was
thrown in alive, will be swollen, and puffed up by reason of the water that is
contained therein; certain clammie excrements come out at his mouth and
nosethrills, the ends of his fingers will be worn and excoriated, because that
he dyed striving and digging or scraping in the sand or bottom of the river,
seeking somewhat whereon he might take hold to save himself from drowning.
Contrariwise if he be thrown into the waters being dead before, his belly will
not be swollne, because that in a dead man all the passages and conduites of
the body do fall together, and are stopped and closed, and for that a dead man
breathes not, there appears no foame nor filthy matter about his mouth and
nose, and much less can the tops of his fingers be worn and excoriated, for
when a man is already dead, he cannot strive against death.

But as concerning the bodies of those that are drowned, those that swim on
the upper part of the water being swollne or puffed up, they are not so by
reason of the water that is contained in the belly, but by reason of a certain
vapor, into which a great portion of the humors of the body are converted by
the efficacy of the putryfying heat. Therefore this swelling appears not in
all men which do perish, or else are cast out dead into the waters, but only
in them which are corrupted with the filthiness or muddinesse of the water,
long time after they were drowned; and are cast on the shore.

But now I will declare the accidents that come to those that are suffocated
and (...) such as are smothered by Charcoale.
stifled or smoothered with the vapor of kindled or burning charcoales, and
how you may foretell the causes thereof by the history following. In the year
of our Lord God 1575. the tenth day of May, I with Robert Greauline Doctor of
Physic, was sent for by Master Hamell an advocate of the Court of Parliament
of Paris, to see and show my opinion on two of his servants, of whom the one
was his Clarke, and the other his Horse-keeper. All his family supposed them
dead, because they could not perceive or feel their Arteries to beat, all the
extreme parts of their bodies were cold, they could neither speak nor move,
their faces were pale and wanne, neither could they be raised up with any
violent beating or plucking by the hair. Therefore all men accounted them
dead, and the question was only of what kind of death they dyed, for their
master suspected that some body had strangled them, others thought that each of
them had stopped one another wind with their hands: and others judged that
they were taken with a sudden apoplexy. But I presently enquired whether
there had been any fire made with Coals in the house lately, whereunto their
master giving care, sought about all the corners of the chamber (for the
chamber was very little and close) and at last found an earthen pan with
charcoale half burned; which when we once saw, we all affirmed with one voice,
that it was the cause of all this misfortune, and that it was the malign fume
and venomous vapor, which had smothered them, as it were by stopping the
passages of their breath. Therefore I put my hand to the regions of their
hearts, where I might perceive that there was some life remaining by the heat
and pulsation that I felt though it were very little, wherefore we thought it
convenient to augment and increase it. Therefore first of all, artificially
opened their mouths, which were very fast closed, and sticking obstinately
together; and thereinto both with a spoone and also with a silver pipe, we put
aqua vitae often distilled with dissolved hiera and treacle; when we had
injected these medicines often into their mouths, they began to moove and to
stretch themselves, and to cast up and expel many viscous excrementall and
filthy humors at their mouth and nostrells, and their Lungs seemed to be hot,
as it were in their throats.

Therefore then we gave them vomitories of a great quantity of Oxymel, and
beat them often violently on the last spondill of the back, and first of the
loins, both with the hand and knee (for unto this place the orifice of the
stomach is turned) that by the power of the vomitory medicine, and concussion
of the stomach, they might be constrained to vomit. Neither did our purpose
fail us, for presently they voided clammie, yellow and spumous fleame and
blood.

But we not being content with all this, blowed up into their nostrells out of
a Goose quill, the powder of Euphorbium, that the expulsive faculty of the
brain might be stirred up to the expulsion of that which oppressed it;
therefore presently the brain being shaken, or moved with sneesing and
instimulated thereunto by rubbing the chymicall oil of mints on the palate
and on the cheeks, they expelled much viscous and clammie matter at their
nostrells.

Then we used frictions of their arms, legs, and backe-bones; and ministered
sharp glisters, by whose efficacy the belly being abundantly loosened, they
began presently to speak and to take things that were ministered unto them
of their own accord, and so came to themselves again.

In the doing of all these things, James Guillemeau Surgeon unto the King,
and of Paris, and John of Saint Germans the Apothecary, did much help and
further us.

In the afternoon that the matter being well begun might have good success,
John Hautie, and Lewis Thibaut, both most learned Physicians, were sent for
unto us, with whom we might consult on other things that were to be done. They
highly commending all things that we had done already, thought it very
convenient that cordialls should be ministered unto them, which by ingendering
of laudable humors, might not only generate new spirits, but also attenuate
and purify those that were gross and cloudy in their bodies. The rest of our
consultation was spent in the inquiry of the cause of so dire a mischance. For
they said that it was no new or strange thing, that men may be smothered with
the fume and cloudy vapor of burning coals.

For we read in the works of Fulgosius, Volateranus and Egnatius, that as the
Emperor Lib. 9. cap. 12. lib. 23. A history.
Iovinian, traveled in winter time toward Rome, he being weary in his journey,
rested at a Village called Didastanes, which divides Bithynia from Galatia,
where he lay in a chamber that was newly made, and plaistered with lime,
wherein they burnt many coals, for to dry the work or plaistering, that was
but as yet green on the walls or roof of the chamber. Now he dyed the very
same night being smothered or strangled with the deadly and poisonous vapor of
the burned charcoale, in the midst of the night; this happened to him in the
eighth month of his reign, the thirtyeth year of his age, and on the
twentyeth day of August. But what need we to exemplify this matter by the
ancient histories, seeing that not many years since three servants dyed in the
house of John Big^ne goldsmith, who dwells at the turning of the bridge of
the Change, by reason of a fire made of coals in a close chamber, without a
chimney where they lay. And as concerning the causes, these were alleged. Many
were of opinion that it happened by the default of the vapor proceeding from
the burned coals, which being in a place void of all air or wind, inferres
such like accidents as the vapor of must or new wine does, that is to say,
pain, and giddiness of the head. For both these kinds of vapor besides that
they are crude, like unto those things whereof they come, can also very
suddenly obstruct the original of the Nerves, and so cause a convulsion, by
reason of the grossnesse of their substance.

For so Hippocrat^s writing of those accidents that happen by the vapor of new
Sect. 5. Aph. 5.
wine, speaks. If any man being drunken do suddenly become speechless and
has a convulsion, he dies unless he have a fever therewithal; or if he
recover not his speech again when his drunkenness is over.

Even on the same manner the vapor of the coals assaulting the brain caused
them to be speechless, unmovable and void of all sense, and had dyed shortly
unless by ministering and applying warm medicines into the mouth and to the
nosethrells, the grossnesse of the vapor had been attenuated, and the
expulsive faculties moved or provoked to expel all those things that were
noisome: and also although at the first sight the Lungs appeared to be greeved
more than all the other parts, by reason that they drew the malign vapor into
the body, yet when you consider them well, it will manifestly appear that they
are not greeved, unless it be by the simpathy or affinity that they have with
the brain when it is very greevously afflicted.

The proof hereof is, because presently after, there follows an interception
or defect of the voice, sense and motion: which accidents could not be unless
the beginning or original of the nerves were intercepted or let from
performing its function, being burdened by some matter contrary to nature.

And even as those that have an apoplexy do not dye but for want of
respiration, The occasion of the death of such as have the apoplexy.
yet without any offense of the Lungs, even so these two young men's deaths
were at hand, by reason that their respiration or breathing was in a manner
altogether intercepted, not through any default of the Lungs, but of the brain
and nerves distributing sense and motion to the whole body and especially to
the instruments of respiration. Others contrariwise contended and said, that
there was no default in the brain, but conjectured the interception of the
vital spirits let or hindered from going up unto the brain from the heart,
by reason that the passages of the Lungs were stopped, to be the occasion that
sufficient matter could not be afforded for to perserve and feed the animal
spirit. Which was the cause that those young men were in danger of death, for
want of respiration, without the which there can be no life.

For the heart being in such a case, cannot deliver it self from the
fuliginous vapor that encompasseth it, by reason that the Lungs are obstructed
by the grossnesse of the vapor of the coals, whereby inspiration cannot well
be made, for it is made by the compassing air drawn into our bodies* but the
air that compasses us does that which nature endeavors to do by
inspiration, for it moderateth the heat of the heart, and therefore it ought
to be endued with four qualities. The first is, that the quantity that is
drawn into the body be sufficient. The second is, that it be cold, or
temperate in quantity. The third is, that it be of a thin and mean
consistence. The fourth is, that it be of a gentle and benign substance.

But these four conditions were wanting in the air which these two young men
drew into their bodies being in a close chamber.

For first, it was little in quantity, by reason that small quantity that was
contained Conditions of the air good to breath in.
in that little close chamber, was partly consumed by the fire of coals, no
otherwise than the air that is contained in a cupping glass is consumed in a
moment by the flame so soon as it is kindled.

Furthermore it was neither cold nor temperate, but as it were enflamed with
the burning fire of coals.

Thirdly, it was more gross in consistence than it should be by reason of the
admixtion of the grosser vapor of the coals: for the nature of the air is so
that it may be soon altered, and will very quickly receive the forms and
impressions of those substances that are about it.

Lastly, it was noisome and hurtful in substance, and altogether offensive to
the aerie substance of our bodies. For Charcoale are made of green wood burnt
in pits under ground, and then extinguished with their own fume or smoke, as
all Colliers can tell. These were the opinions of most learned men although
they were not altogether agreeable one unto another, yet both of them depended
on their proper reasons. For this at least is manifest, that those passages
which are common to the breast and brain, were then stopped with the
grossness of the vapor of the coals: whereby it appears that both these
parts were in fault, for as much as the consent and connection of them with the
other parts of the body is so great, that they cannot long abide sound and
perfect without their mutual help by reason of the loving and friendly
sympathy and affinity that is between all the parts of the body one with
another.

Wherefore the ventricles of the brain, the passages of the lungs and the
sleepie Arteries being stopped, the vital spirit was prohibited from entering
into the brain, and consequently the animal spirit retained and kept in, so
that it could not come or disperse its self through the whole body, whence
happened the defect of two of the faculties necessary for life.

It many times happens and is a question too frequently handled concerning
women's madenheads; whereof the judgment is very difficult. Yet some ancient Of
the signs of virginity.
women and Midwives will brag that they assuredly know it by certain and
infallible signs. For (say they) in such as are virgins there is a certain
membrane or parchment-like skin in the neck of the womb, which will hinder the
thrusting in of the finger if it be put in any thing deep, which membraine is
broken when first they have carnal copulation, as may afterward be perceived
by the free entrance of the finger. Besides, such as are defloured have the
neck of their womb more large and wide; as on the contrary, it is more
contracted, strait and narrow in virgins. But how deceitful and untrue these
signs and tokens are, shall appear by that which follows; for this
membraine is a thing preternaturall, and which is scarce found to be in one of
a thousand from the first conformation. Now the neck of the womb will be more
open or strait according to the bigness and age of the party. For all the
parts of the body have a certain mutual proportion and commensuration in a
well made body.

Ioubertus has written, that at Lectoure in Gasconye, a woman was delivered of
a child in the ninth year of her age, and that she is yet alive and called
Ioane du Perie Lib. de err^r. popul.
being wife to Videau Beche the receiver of the amercements of the King of
Navare* which is a most evident argument, that there are some women more able
to accompany with a man at nine years old, than many other at fifteen, by
reason of the ample capacity of their womb and the neck thereof; Besides
also, this passage is enlarged in many by some accident, as by thrusting their
own fingers more strongly thereinto by reason of some itching, or by the
putting up of a Nodule, or Pessarie of the bigness of a man's yard, for to
bring down the courses. Neither to have milk in their breasts is any certain
sign of lost virginity; For Hippocrates Aph. 39. sect. 5.
thus writes; But if a woman which is neither with child, nor has had one,
have milk in her breasts, then her courses have failed her.

Moreover, Aristotle reports that there be men who have such plenty of milk in
Lib. 4. de hist. animal. cap. 20. Lib. 12. de subtilet.
their breasts, that it may be sucked or milked out.

Cardan writes, that he saw at Venice one Antony Bussey some 30. years old,
who had milk in his breasts in such plenty, as sufficed to suckle a child, so
that it did not only drop; but spring out with violence like a woman's milk.
Wherefore let Magistrates beware least thus admonished, they too rashly assent
to the reports of women. Let Physicians and Chirurgions have a care least they
do too impudently bring magistrates into an error, which will not redound so
much to the judges disgrace, as to theirs.

But if any desire to know, whether one be poisoned, let him search for the
Symptoms and signs in the foregoing and particular treatise of poisons. But
that this doctrine of making Reports may be the easier, I think it fit, to
give presidents, in imitation whereof the young Surgeon may frame others.
The first president shall be of death to ensue; a second of a doubfull
judgment of life and death; the third of an impotency of a member; the fourth
of the hurting of many members.

I A. P. Surgeon of Paris, this twentieth day of May by the command of the A
certificate of death.
Counsel, entered into the house of John Brossey, whom I found lying in bed,
wounded on his head, with a wound in his left temple, piercing the bone with a
fracture and effracture, or depression of the broken bone, scailes and m^ninges
into the substance of the brain, by means whereof, his pulse was weak, he
was troubled with raving, convulsion, cold sweat, and his appetite was
dejected. Whereby may be gathered that certain and speedy death is at hand.
In witness whereof I have signed this Report with my own hand.

By the Coroners command I have visited Peter Lucey, whom I found sick in bed,
Another in a doubtful case
being wounded with a Halbard on his right thigh. Now the wound is of the
breadth of three fingers, and so deep that it pierces quite through his thigh
with the cutting also of a vein and Artery, whence ensued much effusion of
blood, which has exceedingly weakened him, and caused him to swound often; now
all his thigh is woll^e, livide, and gives occasion to fear worse symptoms,
which is the cause that the health and safety of the party is to be doubted of.

By the Justices command I entered into the house of James Bertey, to visit his
In the loss of a member.
own brother; I found him wounded in his right harm, with a wound of some
four fingers bigness, with the cutting of the tendons bending the leg, and
of the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves. Wherefore I affirm that he is in danger
of his life, by reason of the malign symptoms that usually happen upon such
wounds, such as are great pain, a fever, inflammation, abscesse, convulsion,
gangreene and the like. Wherefore he stands in need of provident and careful
dressing, by benefit whereof if he escape death, without doubt he will continue
lame, during the remainder of his life, by reason of the impotency of the
wounded part. And this I affirm under my hand.

We the Chirurgions of Paris, by the command of the Senate, this twentieth
Another in the hurts of diverse parts.
day of March, have visited Master Lewis Vert^man, whom we found hurt with
five wounds. The first inflicted on his head, in the middle of his forehead
bone, to the bigness of three fingers, and it penetrates even to the second
table, so that we were forced to pluck away three splinters of the same bone.
The other was atwhart his right cheek, and reaches from his ear, to the
midst of his nose, wherefore we stitched it with four stitches. The third is
on the midst of his belly, of the bigness of two fingers, but so deep that it
ascends into the capacity of the belly, so that we were forced to cut away
portion of the Kall, coming out thereat, to the bigness of a wallnut, because
having lost its natural color, it grew black and putrified. The fourth was
upon the back of his left hand, the bigness almost of four fingers, with the
cutting of the Veins, Arteries Nerves and part of the bones of that part;
whence it is, that he will be lame of that hand, howsoever carefully and
diligently healed.

Now because by hurting the spinall marrow, men become lame, sometimes of a
leg; it is fit you know that the spinall marrow descends from the brain like
a rivelet for the distribution of the Nerves, who might distribute sense and
motion to all the parts under the head; wherefore if by hurting the spinall
marrow, the patients arms or hands are resolved or numme, or wholly without
sense, it is a sign these Nerves are hurt which come forth of the fifth,
sixth, seventh vertebrae of the neck. But if the same accidents happen to the
thigh, leg or foot with refrigeration, so that the excrements flow
unvoluntarily, without the patients knowledge, or else are totally suppressed, it
is a sign that the ^inewes which proceed from the vertebrae of the loins and
holy-bone are hurt or in fault; so that the animal faculty bestowing sense and
motion upon the whole body, and the benefit of opening and shutting to the
sphincter muscle of the bladder and fundament, cannot show its self in these
parts, by which means sudden death happens, especially if there be
difficulty of breathing therewith.

Being to make report of a child killed with the mother, have a care that you
make a discreet report, whether the child were perfect in all the parts and
members A caution in making report of a woman with child being killed.
thereof, that the judge may equally punish the author thereof. For he meriteth
far greater punishment, who has killed a child perfectly shaped and made in
all the members; that is, he which has killed a live child, than he which
has killed an Embryon, that is, a certain concretion of the spermaticke body.
For Moses punishes the former with death, as that he should give life for
life, but the other with a pecuniary mulcte. But I judge it fit to ex emplifie
this report by a president.

I A. P. by the Judges command visited Mistress Margaret Vlmary, whom I found
sick in bed, having a strong fever upon her, with a convulsion and effluxe of
blood out of her womb, by reason of a wound in her lower belly, below her
navill on the right side, penetrating into the capacity of her belly, and the
womb therein; whence it has come to pass, that she was delivered before her
time, of a male child, perfect in all his members but dead, being killed by
the same wound piercing through his scull, into the marrow of the brain. Which
in a short time will be the death of the mother also. In testimony whereof I
have put my hand and seal.

The manner how to Embalme the dead.
I Had determined to finish this my tedious work with the precedent treatise
of Reports; but a better thought came in my head, which was, to bring man whose
cure I had undertaken, from his infancy, to his end, and even to his grave, so
that nothing might be here defective which the Surgeon might by his
profession, perform about man's body either alive, or dead. Verily there has
scarce ever been a nation so barbarous, which has not only been careful
for the burial, but also for the Embalming or preserving of their dead bodies.
For the very Scythians, who have seemed to exceed other nations in
barbarousnesse, and The care of the Scythians in the Embalming their dead.
inhumanity, have done this; for (according to Herodotus) the Scythians bury
not the corpse of their King, before that being embowelled and stuffed full of
beaten Cypress, frankincense, the seeds of Persly, and Annise, he be also
wrapped in cearcloathes. The like care has also possessed the minds of the
Ethiopians; for having disburdened the corpse of their friends, of their
entrails and flesh, they plaistered The like care of the Ethiopians.
them over, and then having thus rough cast them, they painted them with
colors so to express^ the dead to the life; they enclosed them thus adorned in
a hollow pillar of glass, that thus enclosed they might be seen and yet not
anoy the spectators with their smell. Then were they kept the space of a year,
in the hands of their next kindred; who during this space offered and
sacrifized to them. The year ended, they carried them forth of the City and
placed them about the walls each in his proper vault, as Herodotus affirms.
But this pious care of the dead, did far otherwise affect the Egyptians,
than it did other nations. For they were so studious to preserve Lib. 3.
the memory of their ancestors, that they embalmed their whole body with
aromaticke Of the Egyptians.
ointments, and set them in translucent V^nes, or glass Colls in the more
eminent and honored part of their houses, that so they might have them daily
in their sight, and might be as monuments, and inciters to stir them up to
imitate their fathers and Grand^ires virtues. Besides also the bodies thus
embalmed with aromatic and balsamic ointments were in steed of a most sure
pawn, so that if any Egyptian had need of a great sum of money, they might
easily procure it, of such as knew them and their neighbors, by pawning the
body of some of their dead parents. For by this means the creditour was
certain, that he which pawned it would sooner loose his life, than break his
promise. But if all things so unhappily succeeded with any, so that through
poverty he could not fetch home his pawn again, but was force^ to forgo it,
he was so infamous amongst all men, during the rest of the life, as one
banished, or forlorn; and loosing his freedom he shall become a servant, yea
scorned and reviled of all men, he should be accounted unworthy to enjoy the
light and society of men. And certainly the Egyptians understanding the life,
which we here lead, to be of short continuance, comparison being made with
that which we are to live after the separation of the soul from the body,
they were more negligent in building their houses they dwelt in, but in raring
the pyramides which should serve them in The reason of building the Egyptian
Pyramides.
steed of sepulchers, they were so beyond reason sumptuous and magnificent,
that for the building of one of these edifices so renowned over all the world,
which King Cheopes begun, a hundred thousand men were every 3 months, for
twenty years space there kept at work: it was five furlongs, and being
square, each side was 800. foot long, and so much in height. Almost all the
pieces of marble went to the building thereof, were thirty foot long, engraven
and carved with various workmanship, as Herodotus reports. But before the
bodies were committed to these magnificent Lib. 2.
Sepulchers, they were carried to the Salters and Embalmers, who for that
purpose had allowance out of the public stock. These besmeared them with
Aromaticke, and balsamicke ointments, and sowed up the incisions they made,
then strewed them over with salt, and then covered them with brine, for 70.
days; which being expired, they washed them, being taken thence, and all the
filth being taken off, they wrapped them in Cotton clothes, glewed together
with a certain gum; then their kinsemen placed them thus ordered in a wooden
Coffinne carved like to a man. This was the sacred and accustomed rite of
embalming and burying dead bodies amongst the Egyptians which were of the
richer sort. Our Countrie-men the French stirred up with the like desire,
embalme the bodies of their Kings and Nobles, with spices and sweet ointments.
Which custom they may seem piously and christianly to have taken from the Old
and New Testament, and the ancient and laudible custom of the Jews; for you
may read in the New Testament John 19, 39.
that Joseph bought a fine linen cloth, and Nicodemus brought a mixture of
myrrh and Aloes about 100. pound weight, that they might embalme and bury the
body of Jesus Christ our Savior, for a sign and argument of the renovation
and future integrity which they hoped for by the resurrection of the dead.
Which thing the Jews had received by tradition from their ancestors. For
Joseph in the old Testament Gen 50, 2.
commanded his Physicians, they should embalme the dead body of his father
with spices.

But the body which is to be embalmed with spices for very long continuance,
must The manner of embalming for the long continuance.
first of all be embowelled, keeping the heart apart, that it may be embalmed
and kept as the kinsfolks shall think fit. Also the brain, the scull being
divided with a saw, shall be taken out. Then shall you make deep incisions
along the arms, thighs, legs, back, loins and buttockes, especially
where the greater Veins and Arteries run, first that by this means the
blood may be pressed forth, which otherwise would putrify and give occasion
and beginning to putrefaction to the rest of the body; and then that there may
be space to put in the aromaticke powders; the whole body shall be washed over
with a sponge dipped in Aqua vitae, and strong vinegar, wherein shall be boiled
wormwood, aloes, coloquintida, common salt and Alume. Then these incisions,
and all the passages and open places of the body, and the three bellyes shall
be stuffed with the following spices grossly powdered. R. pull. rosar. chamaem.
melil. balsami, menthae, ane^hi, salviae, lavend. rorismar. majoran. thymi,
absinthij, cyperi, calami aromat. gentianae, ireos florent. assae odoratae;
caryophyll. nucis moschat. cinamoni, styracis, calamitae. benjoini, myrrhae,
aloes* santal. omnium quod sufficit. Let the incisions be sowed up and the open
spaces that nothing fall out; then forth with let the whole body be anointed
with Turpentine dissolved with oil of roses and Chamomile, adding if you shall
think it fit, some Chymicall oils of spices, and then let it be again
strewed over with the forementioned powder; then wrap it in a linen cloth,
and then in ceare-cloathes.

Lastly, let it be put in a Coffin of Lead, sure soudred and filled up with dry
sweet How to embalme bodies when as we want spices.
herbs. But if there be no plenty of the forementioned spices, as it usual
happens in beseiged towns, the Surgeon shall be contented with the powder
of quenched lime, common ashes made of Oak wood. Why the bodies of our
Princes, how wellsoever embalmed, corrupt in a few days.


For thus the body being over and above washed in strong vinegar, or Lie, shall
be kept a long time, if so be that a great and dissolving heat do not bear
sway, or if it be not put in a hot and moist place. And this condition of time
and place is the cause why the dead bodies of Princes and Kings, though
embalmed with Art and cost, within the space of six or seven days, in which
they are kept to be showed to the people after their embalming, do cast forth
so greevous a sent, that none can endure it, so that they are forced to be put
in a leaden Coffinne. For the air which encompasseth them grows so hot by
reason of the multitude of people flowing to the spectacle, and the burning of
lights night and day, that the small portion of the native heat which
remains being dissipated, they easily putrefie, especially when as they are
not first moystened and macerated in the liquor of aromaticke things, as the
Egyptians anciently used to do, steeping them in brine for 70 days, as I
formerly told you out of Herodotus. I put in mind hereby, use, that so the
embalming may become the more dureable, to steep the bodies (being embowelled,
and pricked all over with sharp bodkinnes, that so the liquor hindering
putrefaction may penetrate the deeper into them) in a wooden tubbe filled with
strong vinegar of the decoction of aromaticke and bitter things, as Aloes, Rue,
Wormwood, and Coloquintida; and there keep them for twenty days, pouring
thereinto eleven or twelve pin^s of Aqua vitae. Then taking it forth, and
setting it on the feet, I keep it in a clear and dry place. I have at home
the body of one that was hanged, which I begged of the Shriffe, embalmed after
this manner, which remains sound for more than 25 years, so that you may tell
all the muscles of the right side (which I have cut up even to their heads, and
plucked them from those that are next them for distinctions sake, that so I may
view them with my eyes, and handle them with my hands as often as I please,
that by renewing my memory I may work more certainly and surely, when as I
have any more curious operation to be performed) the left side remains whole,
and the Lungs, Heart, Diaphragma, stomach, spleen, kidneyes, beard, hairs,
yea and the nails, which being pared, I have often observed to grow again to
their former bigness.

And let this be the bound of this our immense labor, and by Gods favor our
rest; to whom Almighty, all powerful, immortal and invisible, be ascribed all
honor and glory for ever, and ever,

Amen.
Labor improbus omnia vincit.
The end of the Treatise of reports, and embalming the dead.
THE APOLOGY AND TREATISE, CONTAINING THE VOYAGES MADE INTO DIVERSE PLACES. BY
AMBROSE PARE of Laval in Maine, Counselor and chief Surgeon to the King.
THE TVVENTI NINTH BOOK.
Truly I had not put my hand to the pen, to write on Of what the Adversary
accuses the Author.
such a thing, were it not that some have impudently injured, taxed, and more
through particular hatred, disgraced me, than for zeal or love they bear to
the public good; which was, concerning my manner of tying the Veins and
Arteries, writing thus as follows.

Male igitur and nimium arrogdnter inconsultus and temerarius The words of the
Adversary.
quidam, vasorum ustionem post emortui membri resectionem a veteribus omnibus
plurimum commendatam and semper probatam damnare ausus est, novum quendam
deligandi vasa modum, contra veteres omnes medicos sine ratione, experientia
and judicio docere cupiens, nec animadvertit majora multo pericula ex ipsa
vasorum deligatione quam acu partemsanam profunde transfigendo administrari
vult, imminere quam ex ipsa ustione. Nam si acu nervosam aliquam partem, vel
nervum ipsum pupugerit, dum ita novo and inusitato modo venam absurd conatur
constringere, nova inflammatio necessario consequetur, a qua Convulsio and a
convulsione cita mors. Quorum symptomatum metu Galenus non ante transversa
vulnera suere audebat (quod tamen minus erat periculosum) quam masculorum
apoucuroses denudasset. Add quod forcipes quibus post sectionem iterum carnem
dilacerat, cum retracta versus originem vasa se posse extrahere somniat, non
minorem adferant dolorem quam ignita ferramenta admota. Quod si quis laniatum
expertus incolumis evaserit, is Deo optimo maximo cuius Beneficentia
crudelitate ista and carnificina liberatus est, maximas gratias habere and
semper agere debet; which is thus: Ill then, and too arrogantly a certain
indiscreet and rash person would blame and condemn the cauterizing of vessels
after the amputation of a rotten and corrupted member, much praised and
commended and always approved by the Ancients; desiring to show and teach us
without reason, judgment, and experience, a new way to tie the vessels,
against the opinion of the Ancient Physicians, taking no heed, nor being well
advised, that there happens far greater perils, and accidents, through this
new way of tying the vessels (which he will have to be made with a needle,
piercing deeply the sound part) than by the burning and ustion of the said
vessels; for if the needle shall prick any nervous part, yea the nerve it
self, when he shall by this new and accustomed way absurdly constrain the
vein by binding it, there must necessarily follow a new inflammation; from an
inflammation^ convulsion, from a convulsion death: for fear of which
accidents, Galen never durst stitch transversall veins, (which notwithstanding
were less dangerous) before he had discovered the Aponeuroses of the muscles.
Moreover the pincers with which after the section, (...) is again dilacerated,
while he thinks to draw the vessels out which are drwne in toward their
original, bring no less pain than the cautering irons do. And if any one
having experimented this new manner of cruelty have escaped danger, he ought to
render thanks to almighty God forever, th^oug^ whose goodness he has been
freed from such tyranny, feeling rather his executioner than his
methodicall-Chirurgion.

O what sweet words are here for one, who is said to be a wise and learned
Doctor? he remembers not that his white beard admonishes him, not to speak
any The Authors answer.
thing unworthy of his age, and that he ought to put off and drive out of him
all envy and ^ancor conceived against his neighbor. So now I will prove by
authority, reason and experience, that the said Veins and Arteryes ought to be
tied.

Authorities.
AS for Authorities, I will come to that of that worthy man Hippocrates, who
wills and commands the cure of Fistula's in the fundament by ligature, as well
to In the book of Fistulaes of the fundament in the 3 chap. 5. book 4. leaf.
2. Treatise chap. 17. Treatise 3. doct. 1. chap. 3
consume the callosity, as to avoid hemorragie.

Galen in his method, speaking of a flux of blood made by an outward cause, of
whom see here the words, It is (says he) most sure to tie the foot of the
vessel, which I understand to be that which is most near to the Liver, or the
heart.

Avicen commands to tie the vein and the Artery, after it is discovered,
toward his original.

Guido of Cauliac, speaking of the wounds of the Veins and Arteries, injoyneth
the Surgeon to make the ligature in the vessel.

Master Hollier speaking of a flux of blood, commands expressly, to tie the
vessels. In the 3 book chap. 4. of the matter of Surgery. Wounds chap. 12.
In the 26 chap. of the 5 book.


Calmetheus in the chapter of the wounds in the Veins and Arteries, tells a
most sure way to stay a flux of blood, by ligature of the vessel.

Celsus from whom the said Physician has snatched the most part of his book,
charge expressly, to tie the vessels in a flux of blood happening to
wounds; as a remedy most easy and most sure.

Vesalius in his Surgery, wills that the vessels be tied in a flux of
blood.

John de Vigo treating of a hemorragie in bleeding wounds, commands to tie the
In the 4 chapter of the 3 book. In the book (...) treatise.
Vein, and the Artery.

Tagaultius treating of the means to stay a flux of blood, commands to pinch
the Vein or Artery with a Crow or Parrots bill, then to tie it with a very
strong In the 12. chap. of the 2. book.
thread.

Peter of Argillata of Bullongne, discoursing of a flux of blood, and the
means to stop it, gives a fourth way expressly, which is made by ligature
of the vessels. In the 4 treat. 11 chap. 1. book.


John Andreas a Cruce, a Venetian, makes mention of a method, to stay a flux
of In the first book 1 section 3. chap. 16. page 5 upon the ^8. chapter of the
book of Paul.
blood by the ligature of the vessels.

D'Alechamp commands to tie the Veins, and Arteries.

See then (my little good man) the authorities which command you to tie the
vessels. As for the reasons, I will debate of them.

The hemorragie (say you) is not so much to be feared in the section of the
Call, as that of the Varices, and the incision of the temporal Arteries, as
after the amputation In the book 2. chapter of Angealogie, lea^e. 76. In the book
1 chapter of stiches.
of a member. Now you your self command, that in cutting the Vari^es, the
flux of blood be stopped by the ligature of the vessels. You command the
same, speaking of the stitch, with the amputation and section of the Call,
changed by the outward air, see here your own words: After that must be
considered concerning the Call: for if there be any part corrupted, putrified,
withered, or blackish. First having tied, for fear of a flux of blood, you
do not bid afterward to have it cauterized; but to say the truth, you have
your eyes shut, and all your senses dulled, when you would speak against so
sure a method, and that it is not but through anger, and an ill will. For there
is nothing which has more power to drive reason from her seat, than choler
and anger. Moreover when one comes to cauterize the dismembered parts,
oftentimes when the escar comes to fall off, there happens a new flux of blood:
As I have seen diverse times, not having yet been inspired by God, with so
sure a means then, when I used the heat of fire. Which if you have not found,
or understood this method in the books of the Ancients, you ought not thus to
tread it under your feet, and speak unluckely of one who all his life has
preferred the profit of the Commonwealth before his own particular. Is it not
more than reasonable to be founded upon the saying of Hippocrates; upon whose
authority you serve your self, which is thus? That what the medicament In the
chapter of burning, 2 book lea^e 2^6. In the first book leaf the 5.
cures not, the iron does, and what the iron does not amend, the fire
exterminateth: It is a thing which savours not of a Christian, to fall to
burning at the first dash without staying for any more gentle remedies. As you
your self write, speaking of the conditions required in a Surgeon to cure
well; which passage you borrow from some other place: for that which may be
done gently without fire, is much more Galen in 4. book of the Meth. and in
the book of Art of Hippocrates Apho. the 6. book 1. In the book of ^rte
(...).
commended than otherwise. Is it not a thing which all schools hold as a
Maxim, that we must always begin with most easy remedies, which if they be
not sufficient, we must then come to extreme, following the doctrine of
Hippocrates? Galen commands in the place before alleged, to treat or dress
the diseased quickly, safely, and with the least of pain that is possible.

Let us come now to Reason.
NOw so it is, that one cannot apply hot irons but with extreme and vehement
pain in a sensible part, void of a Gangreene, which would be cause of a
Convulsion, Fever, yea often times of death. Moreover, it would be a long while
afterward before the poor patients were cured, because that by the action of
the fire there is made an eschar, which proceeds from the subject flesh, which
being fallen, Of what the esch^r is made.
nature must regenerate a new flesh in stead of that which has been burned,
as also the bone remains discovered and bare; and by this means, for the most
part there remains an Ulcer incurable. Moreover there is yet another accident.
It happens that oftentimes the crust being fallen off, the flesh not being
well renewed, the blood issues out as much as it did before. But when they
shall be tied, the ligature falls not off until first the flesh have very well
covered them again: which is prooved by Galen, saying, that escharoticke
medicines which cause a crust or eschar, whenever they fall off, leave the
part more bare than the natural habit In the 5 book of his Meth.
requires. For the generation of a crust proceeds from the parts subject, and
which are situate round about it, being also burned, as I may say: wherefore
by how much the part is burnt, by so much it loses the natural heat. Then
tell Words of the adversary.
me when it is necessary to use escharoticke medicines, or cautering irons? It Is
when the flux of blood is caused by erosion, or some Gangreene or putrefaction.
Now is it thus? In fresh bleeding wounds there is neither Gangreene nor
putrefaction. Therefore, the cauteries ought not to be there applied. And when
the Ancients commanded to apply hot irons to the mouths of the vessels, it
has not been only to stay the flux of blood, but cheefely to correct the
malignitie, or gangreenous putrefaction which might spoil the neighboring
parts. And it must be here noted, that if I had known such accidents to
happen, which you have declared in your book, in drawing and tying the
vessels, I had never been twice deceived; nor would I ever have left by my
writings to posterity, such a way of stopping a flux of blood: But I writ it
after I had seen it done and did it very often, with happy success. See then
what may happen through your inconsiderate counsel, without examining, or
standing upon the facility of tying the said vessels. For see, here is
Proposition of the Adversary.
your scope and proposition, to tie the vessels after amputation is a new
remedy, say you; then it must not be used, it is an ill argument for a Doctor.

But as for that (say you) one must use fire after the amputation of members,
to consume, and dry the putrefaction, which is a common thing in Gangreenes,
and mortifications, that indeed has no place here, because the practice is to
amputate the part above that which is mortified, and corrupted; as Celsus
writes and commands, In the 5, book chapter 26, and in the 7 book chapter 33^
to make the amputation upon the sound part, rather than to leave any whit of
the corrupted. I would willingly ask you, if when a vein is cut transverse,
and that it is very much retracted toward the original, whether you would
make no conscience to burn till that you had found the orifice of the vein,
or artery; and if it be not more easy only with a Crow bill to pinch and draw
the vessel, and so tie it? In which you may openly show your ignorance, and
that you have your mind In the chapter of cutting book the 2.
seized with much rancor and choler. We daily see the ligature of the vessels
practiced with happy success after the amputation of a part, which I will now
verify by experiences and histories, of those to whom the said ligature has
been made, and persons yet living.

Experiences.
THe 16. day of June 1582. in the presence of Master John Liebaud doctor in the
faculty of Physic at Paris, Claud Viard sworn Surgeon, Master Mathurin A
notable history.
Huron, Surgeon of Monsieur de Souvray, and I, John Charbonell master Barbes
Surgeon of Paris, well understanding the Theoricke, and Practicke of
Surgery, did with good dexterity amputate the left leg of a woman
tormented the space of three years with extreme pain, by reason of a great
Caries which was in the bone Astragal, Cyboides, great and little focile, and
through all the nervous parts, through which she feit extreme and intolerable
pains night and day: she is called Mary of Hostel, aged 28 years, or
thereabouts, wife of Peter Herve, Esquire of the Kitchen to the Lady Duchess
of Vzez, dwelling in the street of Verbois on the other side Saint Martin in
the fields, dwelling at the sign of the Saint John's head; where the said
Charbonell cut off the said leg, the breadth of four large fingers below the
Knee, and after that he had incised the flesh, and sawed the bone, he griped
the The operation of Charbonell.
Vein with the Crow bill, then the Artery, then tied them; from whence I
protest to God (which the company that were there, can witness) that in all
the operation which was suddenly done, there was not spilt one porrenger of
blood; and I bid the said, Charbonell to let it bleed more, following the
precept of Hippocrates, that In the 7, sentence of the book of Ulcers.
it is good in all wounds and also in inveterate ulcers, so let the blood
run; by this means, the part is less subject to inflammation. The said
Charbonell continued the dressing of her, who was cured in two months, without
any flux of blood happening unto her, or other ill accident; and she went to
see you at your lodging being perfectly cured.

Another history of late memory, of a singing man of our Ladies Church named
Another history.
master Colt, who broke both the bones of his leg which were crushed in diverse
pieces, insomuch that there was no hope of cure: to withstand a gangreene and
mortification, and by consequence death. Monsieur Helin Doctor, Regent in the
faculty of Physic, a man of honor and of good knowledge, Claud Viard, and
Simon Peter, sworn Chirurgions of Paris, men well exercised in Surgery; and
Balthazar of Lestre, and Leonard de Leschenal, Master Barber Chirurgions, well
experimented in the operations of Surgery, were all of opinion to withstand
the accidents aforesaid, to make entire amputation of the whole leg, a little
above the Operation done by Viard.
broken and shivered bones and the torn nerves, veins, arteries; the
operation was nimbly done, by the said Viard, and the blood stancht by the
ligature of the vessels in the presence of the said Helin, and master Tonsard
great Vicar of our Ladies Church, and was continually dressed by the said
Lesche^al, and I went to see him other whiles; he was happily cured without the
application of hot irons, and walks lustily on a wooden leg.

Another History.
IN the year 1583. the 10. day of December, Toussaint Posso^ borne at
Ronieville, at this present dwelling at Beauvais near Dourdan, having his
Leg all ulcered, and all the bones cariez'd and rotten, prayed me for the
honor of God to cut off his Leg by reason of the great pain which he could
no longer endure. After his body was prepared I caused his leg to be cut off,
four fingers below the rotula of the knee, by Daniel Powlet one of my
servants, to teach him and to imbolden him in such works; and there he readily
tied the vessels to stay the bleeding, without application of hot irons, in
the presence of James Guillemea^ ordinary Surgeon to the King, and John
Charbonell master Barber Surgeon of Paris: and during the cure was visited
by Master Laffile and Master Courtin Doctors, Regents in the faculty of
Medicine at Paris. The said operation was made in the house of John Gohell
Inkeeper, dwelling at the sign of the white horse in the Greve. I will not
here forget to say, that the Lady Princess of Montpe^sier, knowing that he was
poor, and in my hands, gave him money to pay for his chamber and diet. He was
well cured, God be praised, and is returned home to his house with a wooden Leg.

Another History.
A Gangreene happened to half of the Leg to one named Nicholas Mesnager
Gangreene happening by an antecedent cause.
aged threescore and sixteen years, dwelling in S. Honores street, at the
sign of the Basket; which happened to him through an inward cause, so that we
were constrained to cut off his Leg to save his life: and it was taken; off
by Anthony Renaud, master Barber Surgeon of Paris the 16. day of December
1583. in the presence of Master Le Fort, and Master La Noue sworn Chirurgions
of Paris; and the blood was stanched by the Ligature of the vessels, and he
is at this present cured and in health, walking with a wooden Leg.

Another History.
A Waterman at the Port of Nesle, dwelling near Monsieur de Mas, Postmaster,
named John Boussereau, in whose hands a Musket brake asunder* which broke the
bones of his head, and rent and tore the other parts in such sort that it was
needful and necessary to make amputation of the hand two fingers above the
wrist: which was done by James Guillemeau then Surgeon in ordinary to the
king, who Operation done Guilles meau.
dwelt at that time with me. The operation likewise being redily done, and the
blood stancht by the Ligature of the vessels without burning irons: he is at
this present living.

Another History.
A Merchant Grocer dwelling in St, Denis street at the sign of the great
Tournois Operation done by the Author.
named the Judge, who fell upon his head, where was made a wound near the
temporal muscle, where he had an artery opened, from whence issued forth blood
with great impet^osity, in so much that common remedies would not serve the
turn; I was called thither, where I found Master Rasse, Master Cointeret,
Master Viard, sworn Chirurgions of Paris, to stay the blood; where presently I
took a needle and thread, and tied the artery, and it bled no more after
that, and was quickly cured. Master Rousselet can witness it, not long since
Deacon of your Faculty, who was in the cure with us.

Another History.
A Sergeant of the Chastler dwelling near S. Andrew des Arts, who had a
stroke Another operation.
of a sword upon the throat in the Clackes meadow, which cut asunder the
jugular vein externe, as soon as he was hurt he put his handkercher upon the
wound, and came to look me at my house, and when he took away his
handkercher the blood leaped out with great impetuosity: I suddenly tied the
vein toward the root; he by this means was stanched and cured thanks be to
God. And if one had followed your manner of stanching blood by cauteries, I
leave it to be supposed whether he had been cured; I think he had been dead
in the hands of the operator. If I would recite all those whose vessels were
tied to stay the blood which have been cured, I should not have ended this
long time; so that me thinks there are Histories enough recited to make you
believe the blood of veins and arteries is surely stanched without applying
any actual cauteries.

DV BARTVS.
He that does strive against experience,
Daignes not to talk of any learned science.
NOw my little Master, seeing that you reproach me, that I have not written all
the operations of Surgery in my works which the Ancients writ of, I should
be very sorry for it: for then indeed might you justly call me Carnifex. I
Book the 6. Chap. 4 and 5 book 2. chap. 4. book 3, chapter 9, section 7.
have left them because they are too cruel, and am willing to follow the
modernes, who have moderated such cruelty: which notwithstanding you have
followed step by step, as appears by the operations here written, extracted
from your book, which you have drawn here and there from certain ancient
Authors, such as follow: and such as you have never practiced nor seen.

The first operation.
TO inveterate fluxions of the eyes, and Migrimes, Paulus Aegineta as also
Albucasis command to make Arteriotomie, see here the words of the same
Aeginete. You In the 2. book of the chap. of Hypospatisme, book 14, chapter last,
of the Meth. In the 4. chap. of the 16. book of my work. Book 6 chap. 7,
Book 2, chap. 5.
mark the Arteries which are behind the ears, then divide them in cutting to
the very bone, and make a great incision the breadth of two fingers; which is
the will also of Aetius that the incision be made tranverse, cutting or
incising the length of two fingers, even till that the Artery be found, as you
command to be done in your book; but I holding the opinion of Galen, who
commands to dress the diseased quickly, safely and with the least pain that
is possible, I teach the young Surgeon the means to remedy such evils in
opening the Arteries behind the ears, and those of the Temples, with one only
incision, as a letting blood, and not to make a great incision and cut out
work for a long time.

The second operation.
TO fluxions which are made a long time upon the eyes, Paul Aeginete and
Albucasis command to make incision which they call Periscythismos or Augiologie
of the Greeks; and see here the words of Paul, In this operation first the
head is shaved, In the 2, book chap. of Periscythisme.
then taking heed of touching the temporal muscles, a transverse incision
must be made, beginning at the left Temple and finishing at the right, which
you have put in your book word for word, without changing any thing: which
shows openly you are a right wound-maker; as may be s^ene in the Chapter
which you call the Crown cut, which is made half round under the Coronall
suture from one temple to the another even to the bone. Now I do not teach
such a cruel kind of remedy, In the 26. chapter of the 9. book of my works.
but instruct the operator by reason, authority and notable proof of a sure
and certain way to remedy such affections without butchering men in this kind.

The third.
IN the cure of the Empyema, Paul Aeginete, Albucasis and Celsus commanded to
apply some 13. others 15. Cauterles to give issue to the matter contained in
the Book 6. chap. 44. book 2, chap. 3. book 3. chap. 22.
breast, as the said Celsus in the aforesaid place appoints for Asthmatick
people, which is a thing out of all reason (with respect to their honor be it
spoken) that since the Chirurgions scope is to give issue to the matter therein
contained, there is no other question than to make apertion, to evacuate the
matter in the most inferior part, I have showed the young Surgeon the means
to do it safely, without tormenting the patients for nothing.

The fourth.
IN Paps that are too great, Paul Aeginet and Albucrasis commands to make a
cross Guide of Ca^liac the 2, treatise. Doct. 1. chap. 1. Book 7. chap 10.
book 6. chap 46, book 2, chap. 47.
incision, to take out all the fat, and then join together the wound by
stitch: In brief, it is to flea a man alive, which I have never practiced, nor
counsel it to be done by the young Surgeon.

The fifth.
ALbucrasis and Paul Aeginet will cauterize the Liver and the Spleen with hot
In the first book, chap. 29, and 30. also in book 2, chap. 32. Book 6, chap.
47, and 48. In the (...), book chap. 1, De internes morbis. Book 1. chap. 33.
book 3, sect. 2, chap. 89. book the 6, chap. 50. In the 3. book 12. chap. 6, 7.
irons, which the modernes have never practiced; for indeed reason is
manifestly repugnant thereunto.

The Sixth.
IN the Paracentesis which is made in the third kind of Dropsy called Ascites,
Celius Aurelianus commands diverse apertions to be made in the belly.
Albucrasis applies nine actual cauteries, that is to say, four about the
Navell, one upon the Stomach, one upon the Spleen, one upon the Liver, two
behind the back upon the spondills, one of them near the breast, the last
near the Stomach. Aetius is likewise of the same opinion, to open the belly
with diverse cauteries. Paul Aeginet commands to apply five actual cauteries to
make the said Paracentesis. But abhorring such a kind of burning of which you
speak much in your third book, I show another kind of practice, the which is
done in making a simple incision in the said belly, as may be seen in my
works, with happy success. I do not teach young men in my works the manner
of burning, which the Ancients have called infibulare, that is not in practice
though Celsus writes of it.

The Seventh.
IN the Sciaticke proceeding from an internal cause, and because the viscous
humors In the 7. book chap. 25. book 6, chap. 76. book 2, chap, 72, upon the
sentence 49. of the (...) section of the book of Arts.
displace the bones, Paul commands to burn or cauterize the said joy (...) the
bone: Di^scorides commands the same, Which I do not find expedient, ^king
indication from the subjacent parts: for there where one would burn, it is in
the place of the four twin muscles, under which passes the great. Nerve
descunding from the holy bone; which being burnt, I leave it to your censure
what might happen, as Galen remarketh speaking of the Vstion which must be made
in the shoulder called humerus.

The Eighth.
IN the outward Laxation of the Spondills, Hippocrates commands to bind the man
Sentence the 22, and 23, of the 3 section of the book of the joints, chap. 1^.
of the 15. book.
right upon a Ladder, the Arms and Legs tied and bound: then afterward
having raised the Ladder to the top of a tower, or the ridge of an house, with
a great rope in a pully, then to let the patient fall plumbe down upon the
hard pavement; which Hippocrates says was done in his time. But I do not show
any such way of giving the strapado to men, but I show the Surgeon in my
works, the way to reduce them surely, and without great pain. Moreover I
should be sorry to follow the saying of the said Hippocrates, in the third
book De morbis, who commands in the disease called Volvu^us to cause the belly
to be blown with a pair of Bellows, putting the nosell of them into the
intestinum rectum, and then blow there till the belly be much stretched,
afterward to give an emollient glister, and to stop the fundament with a
sponge. Such practice as this is not made now a days, therefore wonder not if
I have not spoken of it. And you not being contented to patch together the
operations of the above said Authors, you have also taken diverse in my works,
as every man may know: which shows manifestly that there is nothing of your
own in your Chirurgions Guide. I leave out diverse other unprofitable
operations which you quote in your book, without knowing what beasts they are,
in never having seen them practiced; but because you have found them written
in the books of the Ancients, you have put them into your book.

Moreover you say that you will teach me my lesson in the operations of
Surgery, which I think you cannot do: because I have not only learned
them in my Study, and by the hearing for many years the lessons of Doctors of
Physic: but as I have said before in my Epistle to the Reader, I was resident
the space of three years in the Hospital of Paris, where I had the means to
see and learn diverse works of Surgery, upon diverse diseases, together with
the Anatomy, upon a great number of dead bodies, as oftentimes I have
sufficiently made trial publicly in the Physicians school at Paris, and my
good luck has made me seen much more. For being called to the service of
the Kings of France (four of which I have served) I have been in company at
Battles, Skirmishes, assaults, and beseiging of Cities and Fortresses; as
also I have been shut up in Cities with those that have been beseiged,
having charge to dress those that were hurt. Also I have dwelt many years in
this great and famous City of Paris, where, thanks be to God, I have lived
in very good reputation amongst all men, and have not been esteemed the least
in rank of men of my profession, seeing there was not any cure, were it never
so difficult and great, where my hand and my counsel have not been required,
as I make it appear in this my work. Now dare you (these things being
understood) say you will teach me to perform the works of Surgery, since
you never went further than your study? The operations of the same are four in
general (as we have declared heretofore) where you make but three, that is to
say, join that which is separated, separate that which was conjoined, and to
take away that which is superfluous, and the fourth which I make, is as much
necessary as industrious invention, to add to Nature that which is wanting, as
I have showed here above. Also it is your will that the Surgeon make but
the three operations above said without meddling to ordain a simple Cataplasme,
saying it is that which comes to your part belonging to the Physician: And that
the Ancients (in the discourse which you have made to the Reader) have divided
the practice of Physic into three kinds, that is to say, Diet, Medicine, and
Surgery. But I would willingly demand of you, who has made the partition,
and where any thing should be done, who are those which are content with their
part, without any enterprise upon the other? For Hippocrates, Galen, Aetius,
Avicen, in brief, all the Physicians, as well Greeks and Latins as Arabians,
have never so treated of the one, that they have not treated of the other, for
the great affinity and tie that there is between them two, and it should be
very difficult to do otherwise. Now when you will vilify Surgery so much,
you speak against your self; for in your Epistle which you have dedicated to
Monsieur of Martignes, you say, that Surgery is the most noble part of
Physic, as well by reason of the original, antiquity, necessity, as
certainty in her actions; for she works Luce aperta, as learnedly writes
Celsu^ in the beginning of his seventh book; therefore it is to be believed
you never went out of your study, but to teach the Theorick^ (if you have been
able to do it.)

The operations of Surgery are learned by the eye, and by the touch. I will
say that you much resemble a young Lad of Low Britany, of plump buttocks, where
was stuff A fair similitude.
sufficient; who demanded leave of his father to come to Paris, to take France;
being arrived the Organist of our Ladys Church, met with him as the Palace
gate, who took him to blow the Organs, where he was remaining three years:
he saw he could somewhat speak French, he returns to his father, and told
him that he spoke good French, and moreover he knew well, to play on the
Organs: his father received him very joyfully, for that he was so wise and
learned in so short a time. He went to the Organist of their great Church, and
prayed him to permit his son to play on the Organs, to the end he might know
whether his son was become so skillful a master, as he said he was; which the
Organist agreed to very willingly. Being entered to the Organs, he cast himself
with a full leap to the bellows, the master Organist bid him play, and that
he would blow; then this good master answeares, Let him play himself on the
Organs if he would for him, he could do nothing but play on the bellows. I
think also my little master, that you know nothing else, but to prattle in a
chair; but I will play upon the keys, and make the Organs sound (that is to
say) I will do the operations of Surgery, that which you cannot in any wise
do, because you have not gone from your study or the schools, as I have said
before. But also, as I have said already in the Epistle to the Reader, that the
labourer does little profit by talking of the seasons, discourse of the manner
of tilling the earth, to show what seeds are proper to each soil; all which
is nothing if he put not his hand to the Plough, and couple the Oxen together.
So like-wise is it no great matter if you do not know the Practicke, for a man
may execute Surgery well, although he have no tongue at all. As Cornelius
Celsus has very well remarked in his first book when he says, Morbos non
eloquentia, sed remedijs curari: quae si quis elinguis, usu discretus been
norit, hunc aliquantia majorem medicum futurum, quam si sine usu linguam suam
excoluerit; that is to say; Diseases are not to be cured by eloquence, but by
remedies well and duly applied, which if any wise and discreet man though he
have no tongue know well the use thereof, this man in time shall become the
greater Physician, than if without practice his tongue were dipped with oratory;
the which you your self confess in your said book by a Tetrasticke which is
thus:

To talke's not all in Chirurgions Art,
But working with the hands.
Aptly to dress each greeved part,
And guide, fire, knife, and bands.
Aristotle in the first book of his Metaphysics the first chapter says,
Experience is almost like unto science, and by the same, Art and science have
been invented. And indeed we see these which are experimented, attain sooner
to that which they intend, than those which have reason and not experience,
because that the said experience is a knowledge of singular and particular
things, and science on the contrary is a knowledge of things universal. Now
that which is particular is more healeable than that which is universal,
therefore those which have experience are more wise and more esteemed, than
those which want it, by reason they know what they do. Moreover I say, that
science without experience, brings no great assurance.

Alciat a Doctor of Milan, boasted one day of himself, that his glory was
greater and more famous than that of Counselors, Presidents, masters of
Request: because that it was by his science, and his instructions that they
became such: but he was answered by a Counselor, that he was like unto a
whetstone, which made the knife sharp and ready to cut, not being able so to
do it self, and alleged the verses of Horace that:

Fungebatur vice cotis, acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secandi.
See you now (my little master) my answers to your calumniations, and pray you,
if you bear a good mind (to the public good) to review and correct your
book, as soon as you can, and not to hold young Surgeon in this error by
the reading of the same, where you teach them to use hot irons after the
amputation of members, to stay a flux of blood, seeing there is another
means, and not so cruel and more sure and easy. Moreover if to day after an
assault of a City, where diverse Soldiers have had arms and legs broken,
and shot off by Cannon Bullets, Cutlas or other instruments of war; to stay
the flux of blood, if you should use hot irons, it would be needful to have a
forge, and much coals to heat them: and also the soldiers would hold you in
such horror for this cruelty, that they would kill you like a Calfe, even as in
times past they did to one of the chiefest Chirurgions of Rome, which may be
found written before in the third chapter of the Introduction of Surgery,
the (...) book. Now least the Sectators of your writings should fall into such
inconveniencie, I pray them to follow the method aforesaid, the which I have
showed to be true and certain, and approved by authority, reason and
experience.

The Voyage of Thurin, 1536.
MOreover, I will here show to the readers the places where I have had means
to learn the Art of Surgery, for the better instructing of the young
Surgeon: and first in the year 1536, the great King Francis sent a great
Army to Thurin, to recover the Cittyes and Castles, which the Marquess of
Guas^, Lieutenant general of the Emperor had taken: where the high Constable
of France the great master, was Lieutenant general of the Army, and Monsieur
de Montian Colonel general of the foot, of which I was then Surgeon. A
great part of the Army The retiring of the enemies.
arrived in the Country of Suze; we found the enemy which stopped the passage,
and had made certain Forts, and trenches, insomuch that to hunt them out and
make them leave the place, we were forced to fight, where there were diverse
hurt and slain, as well of the one side as of the other: but the enemies were
coustrayned to retire, and get into the Castle, which was caused partly by one
Captain Ratt, who climed with diverse of the soldiers of his company upon a
little Mountain; there where he shot directly upon the enemies, he received a
shot upon the anckle of his right foot, wherewith presently he fell to the
ground; and said then, Now is the Rat taken. I dressed him, and God healed him.
We entered the throng in the City, and passed over the dead bodies, and some
which were not yet dead, we heard them cry under our horses feet, which made
my heart relent to hear them. And truly I repented to have forsaken Paris to
see so pitiful a spectacle. Being in the City, I entered into a stable
thinking to lodge my own, and my man's horse, where I found four dead
soldiers, and three which were leaning against the wall, their faces wholly
disfigured, and neither saw nor heard, nor spoake; and their clothes did yet
flame with the gunpowder which had burnt them. Beholding History.
them with pity, there happened to come an old soldier, who asked me if there
were any possible means to cure them, I told him no: he presently approached
to them, and gently cut their throats without choler. Seeing this great
cruelty, I told him he was a wicked man, he answered me that he prayed to God,
that whenever he should be in such a case, that he might find some one that
would do as much to him, to the end he might not miserably languish. And to
return to our former discourse, the enemy was so^moned to render, which they
soon did, and went out, their lives only saved, with a white staff in their
hands; the greatest part whereof went and got to the Castle of Villane, where
there was about 200. Spaniards; Monsieur the Constable would not leave them
behind, to the end that the way might be made free. This Castle is seated upon
a little mountain, which gave great assurance to them within, that one could
not plant the Ordinance to beat upon it, and were sommoned to render, or that
they should be cut in pieces; which they flatly refused, making answer that
they were as good and faithful servants to the Emperor, as Monsieur the
Constable could be to the King his master. Their answer Brave answer of the
Soldiers.
heard, they made by force of arm, two great Cannons to be mounted in the
night with cords and ropes, by the Swissers and Lansquenets; when as the ill
luck would have it, the two Cannons being seated, a Gunner by great negligence
set on fire a great bag of Gunpowder; wherewith he was burned together with
to^ or twelve soldiers; and moreover the flame of the powder was a cause of
discovering the Artillery, which made them that all night, they of the Castle
did nothing but shoot at that place where they discovered the two pieces of
Ordinance, wherewith they killed and hurt a great number of our people.

The next day early in the morning a Battery was made, which in a few hours
made a breach, which being made they demanded to parley with us; but it was too
late for them; For in the mean time our French foot, seeing them amazed,
mounted to the breach, and cut them all in pieces, except a fair young lusty
maid of Piedmount, Exemplary punishment.
which a great Lord would have kept and preserved for him to keep him company
in the night, for fear of the greedy wolf. The Captain and Ensign were
taken alive, but soon after were hanged upon the gate of the City, to the end
they might give example and fear to the Imperial soldiers not to be so rash
and foolish, to be willing to hold such places against so great a Army. Now all
the said soldiers of the Castle, seeing our people coming with a most violent
fury, did all their endeavor to defend themselves, they killed and hurt a great
company of our soldiers, with Pikes, Muskets, and stones, where the
Chirurgions had good store of work cut out. Now at that time I was a fresh
water Soldier, I had not yet seen wouuds made by gunshot at the first
dressing. It is true, I had read in John de Vigo, in the first book of wounds
in general, the eighth chapter, that wounds made Counsel of De Vigo.
by weapons of fire did participate of Venenosity, by reason of the powder, and
for their cure commands to cauterize them with oil of Elders scalding hot, in
which should be mingled a little Treackle; and not to fail, before I would
apply of the said oil, knowing that such a thing might bring to the Patient
great pain, I was willing to know first, before I applied it, how the other
Chirurgions did for the first dressing, which was to apply the said oil the
hottest that was possible into the wounds, with tents and setons; insomuch that
I took courage to do as they did. At last I wanted oil, and was constrained
in steed thereof, to apply a disgestive of yolks of eggs, oil of Roses, and
Turpentine. In the night I could not sleep in quiet, fearing some default in
not cauterizing, that I should find those to whom I had not used the burning
oil dead impoysoned; which made me rise very early to visit Experience of a
bold man happy success
them, where beyond my expectation I found those to whom I had applied my
digestive medicine, to feel little pain, and their wounds without
inflammation or tumor, having rested reasonable well in the night: the other to
whom was used the said burning oil, I found them feverish, with great pain
and tumor about the edges of their wounds. And then I resolved with my self
never so cruelly, to burn poor men wounded with gunshot. Being at Thurin I
found a Surgeon, who had the ^ame above all others, for the curing of wounds
of Gunshot, into whose favor I found means to insinuate my self, to have the
receipt of his balm, as he called it wherewith he dressed wounds of that kind,
and he held me off the space of two years, before I could possible draw the
receipt from him. In the end by gifts and presents he gave it me, which was
this, to boil young whelps new pupped, in Receipt of an excellent balm for
wounds with Gunshot.
oil of Lillies, prepared earth worms, with Turpentine of Venice. Then was I
joyful and my heart made glad, that I had understood his remedy, which was
like to that which I had obtained by great chance. See then how I have learned
to dress wounds made with gunshot, not by books. My Lord Marshall of Montian
remained Lieutenant general for the King in Piedmont, having ten or twelve
thousand men in garrison through the Cittyes and Castles, who often combated
with swords and other weapons, as also with muskets; and if there were four
hurt, I had always three of them, and if there were question of cutting off an
arm or a leg, or to ^repan, or to reduce a fracture or dislocation, I
brought it well to pass. The said Lord Marshall sent me one while this way,
another while that way, for to dress the appointed Soldiers which were beaten
as well in other Cities as that of Thurin, insomuch that I was always in the
Country one way or other Monsieur the Marshall sent for a Physician to Milan,
who had no less reputation in the medicinal Art (than the deceased Monsieur
le Grand) to take him in hand for an hepaticall flux, whereof at last he dyed.
This Physician was a certain while at Thurin to deal with him, and was often
called to visit the hurt people, where he always found me, and I consulted
with him, and some other Chirurgions, and when we had resolved to do any
serious work of Surgery, it was Ambrose Pare that put his hand thereto, where
I did it promptly and with dexterity, and with a great assurance, in so much
that the said Physician admired me, to see me so ready in the operation of
Surgery, seeing the small age which I had, One day discoursing with the said
Lord Marshall, he said to him, Signor, tu hai un Chirurgico giovane de anni, ma
egli (...) vecckio di sapere e di esperientia. Guarda l^ been, perch egli ti
fara servicio and honor. That is to Witness of the dexterity of the Author.
say, Thou have a young Surgeon of age, but he is old in knowledge and
experience, preserve him well; for he will do thee service, and honor. But
the old man knew not that I had dwelt three years in the Hospital of Paris,
there to dress the diseased. In the end Monsieur Marshall dyed with his
hepaticall flux. Being dead, the King sent Monsieur the Marshall of Annebae^t
to be in this place, who did me this honor The death of Marshall Montian.
to pray me to dwell with him, and that he would use me as well or better, than
Monsieur the Marshall Mountain; which I would not do for the grief I had for
the loss of my master who loved me intimately, and I him in the like manner;
and so I came back to Paris.

The Voyage of Marolle and of low Brritany, 1543.
I Went to the Camp of Marolle, with the deceased Monsieur de Rohan, where King
Francis was in person, and I was Surgeon of the company of the said Monsieur
de Rohan. Now the King was advertized by Monsieur de Estampes, governor of
Brittany, that the English had hoyste Sail to land in Low Brittany, and prayed
him that he would send Monsieur de Rohan, and Monsieur de Laval for succor,
because they were the Lords of that Country, and for their sakes those of that
Country would beat back the enemy and keep them from landing. Having
received this advertisement, his Majesty dispatched to send the said Lords for
the relief of their Country, and to each was given as much power as to the
Governor; in so much that they were all three the Kings Lievetenants. They
took willingly this charge upon them, and speedily went away in Post, and
lead me with them to Landreneau, there where we found every one in arms, the
Alarm bells sounding on every side, yea five or six leagues about the
Harbors, that is to say, Breast, Conquet, Crozon, Le Fou Doulac, Laudanec, each
of them well furnished with Artillery, as Cannons, Demy-cannons, Culverins,
Sakers, Serpentines, Falcons, Harque buzes, in brief there was nothing wanting
in Artillery, or soldiers as well Brittanes as French, to hinder that the
English made no landing, as they had resolved at their parting from England.
The enemies Army came unto the very mouth of the Cannon, and when we perceived
them that they would land, they were saluted with Cannon shot, and we
discovered our men of war, together with our Artillery: they fled to Sea
again, where I was glad to see their vessels hoise sail again, which was in
a great number The English retire.
and in good order, and seemed like a Forest which marched upon the Sea. I saw
a thing also whereat I marveiled much, which was that the bullets of great
pieces made great rebounds, and grazed upon the water as upon the ground. Now
to make the matter short, the English did us no harm, and returned whole and
sound into England, and left us in peace. We stayed in that Country in
garrison, till we were assured that their army was dispersed. In the mean time
our horsement exercised their feats of activity, as to run at the ring, fight
in duel, and others, so that there was still something to employ me withal.
Monsieur de Estampes, to make sport and pleasure to the said Monsieur de Rohan,
and Laval, and other gentlemen, caused diverse Country wenches, to come to the
feasts, to sing songs in the Low Brittan tongue, where their harmony was like
the croaking of Frogs, while they are in love. Moreover made them dance the
Brittany Triory, without mooving feet or Dances of the Country Wenches.
buttockes, he made them hear and see much good. Otherwhiles they caused the
Wrastlers of the Cittyes, and Towns, to come where there was a Prize for the
best, and the sport was seldom ended, but that one or other had a leg or an
Wrastlers; little Brittan and good wrastler.
arm broken, or the shoulder or hippe displaced: there was a little man of Low
Britany of a square body and well set, who held a long time the credit of the
field, and by his skill, and strength, threw five or six to the ground; there
came to him a great school master, who was said to be one of the best
wrastlers of all Brittany: he entered into the lists, having taken off his long
jacket, in hose and doublet, and being near the little man, he seemed as if he
had been tied to his girdle. Notwithstanding when each of them took hold of
the collar, they were a long time without doing any thing, and they thought
they would remain equal in force and skill* but the little man cast himself
with an ambling leap under this great Pedant, and took him on his shoulder,
and cast him on his Kidneyes spread abroad like a frogge, and then all the
company laughed at the skill and strength of this little fellow. This great
Dativo had a great spite, for being cast by so little a man: he rose again in
choler, and would have his revenge. They took hold again of each others
collar, and were again a good while at their hold without falling to ground:
in the end this great man let himself fall upon the little, and in falling put
his elbow upon the The little Brittan killed.
pitch of his stomach, and burst his heart, and killed him stark dead. And
knowing he had given him his deaths blow, took again his long cassocke, and
went away with his tail between his legs and hid himself, seeing that the
little man came not again to himself, either for Wine, Vinegar or any other
thing that was presented unto him; I drew near to him, and felt his pulse
which did not beat at all, then I said he was dead; then the Brittanes who
assisted the wrestling said aloud in their jabbering, that is not in the sport.
And some said that the said Pedagoge was accustomed to do so, and that but a
year passed he had done the like in a wrestling. I would needs open the body
to know the cause of this sudden death, where I The body opened by the Author.
found much blood in the Thorax and in the inferior belly, and I strived to
find out any ape^tion in the place, from whence might issue so great a
quantity of blood, which I could not do for all the diligence I could make.
Now I believe it was per Diapedesin or Anastomosin, that is to say by, the
apertion of the mouths of the vessels, or by their porosities; the poor
little wrastler was buried. I took leave of Messieurs de Rohan, de Laval, and
Estamps. Monsieur de Rohan, gave me a present of fifty double ducats, and an
ambling horse, and Monsieur de Laval another for my man, and Monsieur de
Estamps, a Diamond of thirty Crowns, and so I returned to my house at Paris.

The Voyage of Parpignan, 1543.
A Little while after Monsieur de Rohan took me with him post, to the camp
of Parpignan; being there, the enemy made a Sally forth, and came and enclosed
three pieces of our Artillery, where they were beaten back, to the gates of the
City: which was not done without hurting and killing many, and amongst the
rest de Briss^c, (who was then chief master of the Artillery) received a
musket shot upon the shoulder: returning to his Tent, all the others that were
hurt followed him, hoping to be dressed by the Chirurgions, that ought to dress
them. Being come to his Tent and laid on his bed, the bullet was searched for
by three or four the most expert Chirurgions of the Army, who could not find
it, but said it was entered into his body.

In the end he called for me, to see if I were more skillful than them,
because Address of the Author.
he had known me before in Piedmount: by and by I made him rise from his bed,
and prayed him to put his body into that posture as it was then when he
received his hurt; which he did taking a javelin between his hands as he held
the Pike in the skirmish. I put my hand about the wound, and found the bullet
in the flesh, making a little tumor under the Omoplate: having found it I
showed them the place where it was, and it was taken out by Master Nicholas
Lavernaut Surgeon to Monsieur the Dolphin, who was the Kings Lieutenant in
that army, yet notwithstanding the honor remained to me for finding of it.

I saw one thing of great remark, which is this: that a soldier in my presence
gave to History.
one of his fellows a stroke with an Halbard upon the head, penetrating even
to the left ventricle of the brain, without falling to the ground. He that
struck him said, he had heard that he had cheated at Dice, and that he had
drawn a great sum of money, and that it was his custom to cheat; I was
called to dress him, which I did as it were for the last, knowing well that he
would quickly die: having dressed him he returned all alone to his lodging, which
was at least two hundred paces distant: I bid one of his companions send for a
Priest to dispose of the affairs of his soul; he helped him to one who stayed
with him to the last gasp. The next day the patient sent for me by his / she
friend in a boys apparel to come to dress him, which I would not do,
fearing he should die under my hands; and to put it off, I said I must not
take off the dressing till the third day, by reason he would die though he
were never touched. The third day he came staggering, and found me in my Tent
accompanied with his wench, and prayed me most affectionately to dress him:
And showed me a purse wherein he had an hundred or sixscore pieces of Gold, and
that he would content me to my desire; for all that, yet notwithstanding I left
not off to defer the taking off his dressing, fearing least he should die at
the same instant. Certain Gentlemen desired me to go dress him, which I did
at their request, but in dressing him he died under my hands in a Convulsion.
Now this Priest accompanied him until death, who seized upon the purse for
fear least another should take it, saying, he would say Masses for his soul.
Moreover he furnished himself with his clothes, and with all the rest of his
things. I have recited this History as a monstrous thing, that the Soldier
fell not to ground when he had received this great stroke, and was in good
senses even till death. Soon after, the Camp was broken for diverse causes;
the one because we were advertized that four companies of Spaniards were
entered into Parpignam; the other, that the Plague begun much in our Camp, and
it was told us by the people of the country that shortly there would be a
great overflowing of the Sea, which might drown us all; and the presage which
they had, was a very great wind from Sea, which arose in such manner that
there remained not one Tent which was not broken and overthrown, for all the
strength and diligence that could be given; and the Kitchins being all
uncovered, the wind raised so the dust and sand which salted and poudred our
meat, in such sort that we could not eat it, so that we were constrained to
boil it in pots and other vessels well covered.

Now we did not uncampe our selves in so good time, but that there were many
Carts and Carters Mules, and Mule drivers drowned in the Sea, with great loss
of baggage. The Camp broken, I returned to Paris.

The voyage to Landresy. 1544.
KIng Francis raised a great Army to victual Landresy: on the other side the
Emperor had no less people, yea much more; that is to say, eighteen thousand
Germans, ten thousand Spaniards, six thousand Wallons, ten thousand
English, and a matter of thirteen or fourteen thousand Horse. I saw the two
Armies near one another, within Canon shot, and it was thought they would
never part without giving battle. There were some certain foolish Gentlemen
who would approach the enemies Camp; certain shot was made at them, and some
dyed at the place, others had their Legs or Arms carried away. The King
having done what he desired, which was to revictuall Landresy, retired
himself with his Army to Guise, which was the day after All Saints, one
thousand five hundred forty four, and from thence I returned to Paris.

The Voyage of Boulogne. 1545.
A Little while after we went to Boulogne, where the English seeing our Army,
left the Forts which they had, that is to say, Moulambers; the little Paradise,
Monplaisir, the fort of Shatillon, the Portet, the Fort Dardelot. One day going
through the Camp to dress my hurt people, the enemies who were in the Tower
of Order, shot off a piece of Ordinance, thinking to kill two horsemen which
stayed to talk one with another. It happened that the Bullet passed very near
one of them, which threw him to the ground, and it was thought the said Bullet
had touched him, which it did not at all, but only the wind of the said Bullet
in the midst of his coat, which went with such a force that all the outward
part of the Thigh became black and blew, and had muchadoe to stand. I dressed
him, and made him diverse Scarifications to evacuate the contused blood, which
the wind of the said Bullet had made; and the rebounds that it made on the
ground, killed four soldiers which remained dead in the place. I was not far
from this stroke, so that I felt somewhat the moved air, without doing me
any harm, than a little fear which made me stoop my head very low, but the
Bullet was already passed far beyond me.

The Soldiers mocked me to be afraid of a Bullet already gone. (My little
Master) I think if you had been there, that I had not been afraid alone,
and that you would have had your share of it. What shall I say more? Monsieur
the Duke of Guise, Francis of Lorraine, was hurt before Bullogne with a stroke
of a Lance, which The hurt of Monsieur de Guise.
above the right eye, declining toward the nose, entered and passed quite
through on the other side between the nucha and the ear, with so great a
violence, that the head of the Lance with a great part of the wood was broken
and remained within, in such sort that it could not be drawn out but with
great force, yea with Smithes pincers. Notwithstanding all this violence which
was not done without breaking of bones, nerves, and arteries, and other parts;
my said Lord, by the help of God was cured: the said Lord went always with
open face, which was the cause that the Lance went through on the other side.

The voyage of Germany. 1552.
I Went the voyage to Germany in the year 1552. with Monsieur De Rohan
Captain of 50. horse, where I was Surgeon of his company, which I have said
already. In this voyage Monsieur the high Constable of France was General of
the Army: Monsieur de Chastillon, since Admiral, was chief Colonel of the
foot, having four Regiments of Lansquenets, under the conduct of these
Captains, Recrod and Ri^grave, having each of them two Regiments, each
Regiment was of ten Ensigns, and each Ensign of five hundred men. And
besides these, was Captain Chartel, who conducted the troops that the
Protestant Princes had sent to the King. This was a very fair company on
foot, accompanied with fifteen hundred Horse, with the following of each one
two Archers, which might make four thousand five hundred Horse, besides two
thousand Light horse, and as many Muskettieres on horseback, of whom Monsieur
de Aumalle was General, besides the great number of Nobility who came for
their pleasure. Moreover, the King was accompanied with two hundred Gentlemen
of his house, and likewise with diverse Princes; there was also for his troop
that served him, the French, Scottish, and Swissers Guards, amounting to six
hundred men on foot, and the companies of Monsieur the Dolphin, Messieres de
Guise, de Aumalle, and of the Marshall S. Andrew, which amounted to four
hundred Lances, which was a mervelous thing to see such a fair Company; and in
this equipage the King entered into Thou and Mets. I will not omit to tell that
it was ordained, that the Companions of Messieres de Rohan, of the Count of
Sancerr, of Iarnac, which was each of them of fifty horse, went by the Wings of
the Camp; and God knows we had scarcity of victuals, and I protest to God
that at three diverse times I had thought I should have been famisht, and it
was not for want of money for I had enough, and we could not have victuals but
by force, by reason that the Pesants withdrew it all into the Cities and
Castles.

One of the servants of a Captain of the company of Monsieur de Rohan, went
History.
with others thinking to enter into a Church where the Pesants were retired,
thinking to find victuals by force or love: but amongst the rest this man was
well beaten, and returned with seven wounds, with a sword in the head; the
least of which penetrated the second table of the scull, and he had four other
upon the arms, and upon the right shoulder, which cut more than one half of
the blade-bone, or Omoplate. He was brought back to his masters lodging, who
seeing of him so wounded, and that they were to depart thence the morrow after
at the break of day, and not thinking ever he could be cured, made him a
grave, and would have cast him therein, saying that, or else the Pesants would
massacre and kill him; I moved with pity Charity of the Author.
told him that he might yet be cured if he were well dressed: diverse Gentlemen of
the company prayed him that he would cause him to be brought along with the
Baggage, seeing I had the willingness to dress him; to which he agreed, and
after that I had clothed him, he was but put into a Cart upon a bed well
covered and well accommodated, which one horse did draw. I did the office of a
Physician, Apothecary, Surgeon, and Cook; I dressed him even to the end of
his cure, and God cured him, in so much that all these three Companies admired
at this cure. The horsemen of the company of Monsieur de Rohan, the first
muster that was made, gave me each one, one Crown, and the Archers half a
Crown.

The voyage of Danvilliers. 1552.
AT the return from the German Camp, King Henry beseiged Danvilliers, those
within would not render. They were well beaten and our powder failed us, in the
mean time they shot much at our people. There was a Culverin shot passed a
traverse the Tent of Monsieur de Rohan, which hit a Gentleman's Leg, which was
of his train; which I was feign to finish the cutting off, the which was done
without applying hot irons.

The King sent for powder to Sedan, which being come they began a greater
battery than before, in such sort that they made a breach. Messiers de Guise,
and the Another History.
high Constable being in the Kings Chamber, told him they concluded the next
day to make assault, and that they were assured they should enter into it, and
that they should keep it secret lest the enemy were advertized. And all of them
promised not to speak of it to any one. Now there was a Groom of the Kings
chamber who lay under the Kings bed in the Camp to sleep, understood that they
resolved the next day to give an assault, he presently revealed it to a
certain. Captain and told him that for certain the day following assault
should be given, and that he had heard it of the King, and praid the said
Captain that he would not speak a word of it to any body, which he promised,
but his promise was not kept, for at the same instant, he went and declared it
to a Captain, and this Captain to another Captain, and from the Captains to
some of the Soldiers, saying always, say nothing. It was so well hid that the
next day early in the morning there was seen the greatest part of the
Soldiers with their round hose and their breeches cut at knee for the better
mounting at the breach. The King was advertised of the rumor which run
through the Camp, that the assault must be given, whereof he much mervailed,
seeing there was but three of that advise, which had promised one to another,
not to tell it to any one. The King sent for Monsieur de Guise, to know if he
had not talked of this assault; he swore and affirmed to him he had not told
it to any body; and Monsieur the Constable said as much; who said to the King
he must expressly know who had declared this secret counsel; seeing they were
but three. Inquisition was made from Captain to Captain, in the end the truth
was found; for one said it was such a one told me, another said as much, till at
length they came to the first, who declared he had learnd it of a Groom of the
Kings chamber, named Guyard, borne at Blois, the son of the deceased King
Francis his Barber. The King sent for him into his Tent, in the presence of
Monsieur de Guise, and of Monsieur the Constable, to understand from him whence
he had it, and who told him that this assault was to be given. The King told
him that if he did not tell the truth, that he would cause him to be hanged;
then he declared, he lay down under his bed thinking to sleep, and so having
heard it, he declared it to a Captain who was a friend of his, to the end he
might prepare himself with his Soldiers the first for the assault. After the
King knew the truth; he told him, he should never serve him again, and that he
deserved to be hanged, and forbid him ever to come again to the Court. My
Groom What it is to reveal the secrets of Princes.
of the Chamber went away with this sad news, and lay with one of the Kings
Chirurgions in ordinary, named Master Lewis, and in the night gave himself six
wounds with a knife, and cut his throat; yet the said Surgeon perceived
nothing till morning, till he saw the bed bloody, and the dead body by him:
he much mervailed at this spectacle upon his waking, and was afraid least they
should say he was the cause of this murder; but was soon freed, knowing the
cause to be from desperation, having lost the good amity which the King bore
to him. The said Guyard was buried. And those of Danvilliers when they saw the
breach large enough for them to enter in, and the Souldies prepared for the
assault, yielded themselves to the mercy of the King. The chief of them were
prisoners, and the Soldiers sent away without arms. The Camp being broken up
I returned to Paris with my Gentleman whose Leg I had cut off, I dressed him and
God cured him; I sent him to his house merry with a wooden Leg, and was
content, saying that he escaped good cheap, not to have been miserably burnt,
as you write in your book, my little Master.

The Voyage of Castle the Count. 1552.
A Little while after King Henry levied an Army of thirty thousand men, to go
The King of Navarre prayed the Author to follow him.
make spoil about Hedin. The King of Navarre who was then called Monsieur de
Vendosme, was chief of the Army, and the Kings Lieutenant. Being at S. Denis
in France, staying while the companies passed by, he sent for me to Paris to
come speak with him; being there, he prayed me, and his request was a command,
that I would follow him this voyage; and I about to make my excuse told him him
my wife was sick in her bed, he made me answer, that there were Physicians at
Paris for to cure her; and that he as well left his own, who was as well
descended as mine; promising me that he would use me well, and forthwith gave
command that I should be lodged as one of his Train. Seeing this great
affection, which he had to lead me with him, I durst not to refuse him. I went
and met with him at the Castale of Count, within 3. or 4. leagues of Hedin,
there where there was the Emperors Soldiers in garrison with a number of
Pessants round about: he caused them to be summond to render themselves; and
they made answer they should never have them but by pieces, and let them do
their worst, and they would do their best to defend themselves. They put
confidence in their ditches full of water, and in two hours with a great
number of Bavins, and certain empty Caskes, way was made to pass over the
foot: when they must go to the assault and were beaten with five pieces of
Cannon, till a breach was made large enough to enter in, where they within
received the assault very valiantly, and not without killing and hurting a
great number of our people with musket shot, pikes and stones. In the end when
they saw themselves constrained, they put fire to their powder and munition,
which was the cause of burning many of History of desperate people.
our people, and of theirs likewise, and they were all almost put to the edge
of the sword. Notwithstanding some of our Soldiers had taken twenty or
thirty, hoping to have ransom for them. That was known, and ordered by the
Counsel that it should be proclaimed by the Trumpet through the Camp, that
all Soldiers who had any Spaniards prisoners were to kill them, upon pain to
be hanged and strangled, which was done upon cold blood. From thence we went
and burnt diver Villages, whose barnes were full of all kind of grain, to my
great grief. We went along even to Tournaban, where there was a very great
Tower where the Enemies retired, but there was no man found in it, all was
pillaged, and The taking of Castle of Count.
the Tower was made to leap by a Mine, and then with Gunpouder turned topsy
turvy. After that, the Camp was broken up, and I returned to Paris. I will not
yet forget to write that the day after the Castle of Count was taken, Monsieur
de Vendosme sent a Gentleman to the King to make report to him of all which had
passed, and amongst other things, told the King that I had greatly done my duty
in dressing those that were wounded, and that I had showed him eighteen
Bullets which I had taken or drawn out of the hurt bodies, and that there were
diverse more which I could neither find, nor draw out, and told more good of
me than there was by half. Then the King said he would have me into his
service, and commanded Monsieur de Goguier his chief Physician to write me
down as entertained one of his Chirurgions in ordinary, and that I should go
meet with him at Rheimes within ten or twelve days; which I did, where he did
me the honor to command me that I would dwell near him, and that he would do
me good. Then I thankt him most humbly for the honor it pleased him to do me,
in calling me to his service.

The Voyage of Mets. 1552.
THe Emperor having beseiged Mets, and in the hardest time of winter, as each
one knows of fresh memory: and that there was in the City five or six
thousand men, and amongst the rest seven Princes; that is to say, Monsieur the
Duke of Guise the Kings Lieutenant, Messieurs d'Anguien, de Conde, de
Montpensier, de La The names of the Princes who were at the seige of Meth.
Roch upon Yon, Monsieur de Nemours, and diverse other Gentlemen, with a number
of old Captains of war, who often made sallies forth upon the enemies, (as
we shall speak of hereafter) which was not done without slaying many, as well
on the one side as the other. For the most part all our wounded people dyed,
and it was thought the medicaments wherewith they were dressed were poisoned;
which caused Monsieur de Guise and other Princes to send to the King for me,
and that he would send me with Drogues to them, for they believed theirs were
poisoned, seeing that of their hurt people few escaped. I do not believe there
was any poison, but the great strokes of the Cutlasses, Musket shot, and the
extremity of cold were the cause. The King caused one to write to Monsieur the
Marshall of S. Andrew which was his Lieutenant at Verdun, that he found some
means to make me enter into Mets. The said Lord Marshall of S. Andrew and
Monsieur the Marshall of old Ville, got an Italian Captain, who promised them
to make me enter in, Nota.
which he did, and for which he had fifteen hundred Crowns: the King having
heard of the promise which the Italian Captain had made, sent for me and
commanded me to take of his Apothecary named Daigue such, and as many Drogues
as I should think fit for the hurt who were beseiged, which I did, as much as
a posthorse could carry. The King gave me charge to speak to Monsieur de Guise
and to the Princes, and Captains who were at Mets. Being arrived at Verdun, a
few days after Monsieur the Marshall of S. Andrew, caused horses to be given
to me, Commission of the Author.
and my man and for the Italian, who spoke very good high Dutch, Spanish and
Walon with his own natural tongu^. When we were within eight or ten Leagues
of Mets, we went not but in the night, and being near the Camp, I saw a
league and a half off bright fires round about the City, which seemed as if
all the earth were on fire, and I thought we could never pass through those
fires without being discovered, and by consequent be hanged and strangled, or
cut in pieces, or pay a great ransom. To speak truth, I wished my self at
Paris, for the eminent danger which I foresaw. God guided so well our affairs
that we entered into the City at midnight with a certain Token, which the
Captain had with another Captain of the company of Monsieur de Guise: which
Lord I went to, and found him in bed, who received me with great thanks, being
joyful of my coming. I did my message to him of all that the King had
commanded me to say to him; I told him I had a little letter to give him, and
that the next day I would not fail to deliver it him. That done he commanded
me a good lodging, and that I should be well used, and bid me I should not
fail to be the next day upon the Breach, where I should meet with all the
Princes, and diverse Captains, which I did; who received me with great joy, who
did me the honor to embrace me, and tell me I was very welcome, adding
withal they did not fear to dye if they should chance to be hurt. Monsieur de
La Roch upon Yon was the first that feasted me, and inquired of me what they
said at the Court concerning the City of Mets; I told him what I thought good.
Then presently he desired me to go see one of his Gentlemen, named Monsieur
de Magnane at this present Knight of the Kings order, and Lieutenant of his
Majesty's Guard; who had his Leg broken by a Cannon shot. I found him in his
bed, his Leg bended and crooked, without any dressing upon it; because a
Gentleman promised him cure, having his name, and his History.
girdle, with certain words. The poor Gentleman wept, and cried with pain
which he felt, not sleeping either night or day, in four days: then I mocked
at this imposture and false promise. Presently I did so nimbly restore and
dress his Leg, that he was without pain and slept all night, and since
(thanks be to God) was cured, and is yet at this present living, doing service
to the King. The said Lord of the Roch upon Yon sent me a Tun of wine to my
lodging, and bid tell me, when it was dronken he would send me another. That
done, Monsieur de Guise gave me a list of certain Captains and Lords, and
commanded me to tell them what the King had given me in charge; which I did,
which was to do his commendations and a thanksgivng for the duty they had
done, and did in the keeping of the City of Mets, and that he would
acknowledge it. I was more than eight days in acquitting my charge, because
they were many; first to the Princes and others, as the Duke of Horace, the
Count of Martigues, and his brother, Monsieur de Bauge, the Lords Montmorancy,
and d'Anville, then Marshall of France, Monsieur de La Chapel, Bonnivet Caroug
now Governor of Rohan, the Vidasme of Chartres, the Count of Lude, Monsieur de
Biron now Marshall of France, Monsieur de Randan the Rochfoucaut, Boxdaille
d'Etrez, the younger, Monsieur de S. John in Dolphiny, and many others which it
would be too long to recite; and chiefly to diverse Captains who had very
well done their duty in defense of their lives, and City. I demanded
afterward of Monsieur de Guise, what it pleased I should do with the Drogues
which I had brought, he bid me impart them to the Chirurgions and Apothecaries,
and chiefly to the poor hurt Soldiers in the Hospital which were in great
number; which I did, and can assure you, I could not do so much as go see
them, but they sent for me to visit and dress them. All the beseiged Lords
prayed me carefully The hurt of Monsieur de Pienne, trepand and cured.
to solicit above all others Monsieur de Pienne who was hurt at the breach by
a stone raised by a Cannon shot in the Temple with a fracture, and depression
of the bone. They told me that presently when he received the stroke, he
fell to the earth as dead, and cast blood out of his mouth, nose, and ears
with great vomitings, and was fourteen days without speaking one word, or
having any reason; there happened to him also startings somewhat like
Convulsions, and had all his face swelled and livid. He was trepan'd on the
side of the temporll muscle upon the Os Coronale. I dressed him with other
Chirurgions, and God cured him, and is at this day living, God be thanked. The
Emperor caused battery to be made with forty double Cannons, where they spared
no powder night nor day. Presently when Monsieur de Guise saw the Artillery
seated to make a breach, he made the nearest houses to be pulled down to make
Ramparts, and the posts and beams were ranged, end to end, and between two
clods of earth, beds and packs of wool, and then other posts and beams were
put again upon them as before. Now much wood of the houses of the suburbs
which had been put to the ground (for fear least the enemy should be lodged,
close covered, and that they should not help themselves with any wood) served
well to repair the breach. Every one was busied to carry Princes carried the
Baskets.
earth to make the Ramparts night and day. Messieres the Princes, Lords and
Captains, Lievtenants, Ensigns, did all carry the basket, to give example to
the Soldiers, and Citizens to do the like, which they did; yea both Ladies
and Gentlewomen, and those which had not baskets, helped themselves with
kettles, panniers, sackes, sheets, and with what else they could to carry
earth; in so much that the enemy had no sooner beaten down the wall, but he
found behind a Rampart more strong. The wall being fallen our Soldiers cried
to those without, the Fox, the Fox, the Fox, and spoke a thousand injuries one
to another. Monsieur de Guise commanded upon pain of death that no man should
speak to them without, for fear least there should be some Traitor who would
give them intelligence what was done in the City; the command made, they tied
living Cats at the end of their Pikes, and put them upon the Wall and cried
with the Cats miau, miau.

Truly the Emperialists were very much vexed to have been so long making a
Breach.
breach, and at so great expense, which was the breach of fourscore steps, to
enter fifty men in front, where they found a Rampart more strong than the wall;
they fell upon the poor Catts, and shot at them with their muskets as they use
to do at birds. Our people did oftentimes make sallies by the command of
Monsieur de Guise. The day before there was a great press, to make themselves
enrowled, who must make the sally chiefly of the young Nobility, led by well
experimented Captains. Insomuch that it was a great favor, to permit them to
sally forth, and run upon the enemy: and they sallied forth always the
number of one hundred, or sixescore armed men with Cutlasses, Muskets,
Pistolls, Pikes, Partisans and Halberds, which went even to their trenches to
awaken them. Where they presently made an alarm throughout all their Camp,
and their Drums sounded, plan, plan, ta, ti, ta, ta, ta, ti, ta, tou, touf,
touf: likewise their Trumpets and Cornets, sounded, to the saddle, to the
saddle, to the saddle, to horse, to horse, to horse, to the saddle, to horse.
And all their soldiers cried Arm, arm, arm, to arms, to arms, to arms,
arm, to arms, arm, to arms, like the cry after Wolves, and all diverse
tongues, according to their nations: and they were seen to go out from their
tents, and little lodgings, as thick as little Bees, when their Hive is
discovered; to succor their fellows, who had their throats cut like sheep.
The horsemen like-wise came from all parts, a great gallop, patati, patata,
patati, patapa, ta, ta, patata, patata, and ^arried well that they might not
be in the throng, where strokes were imparted to give and receive. And when
our men saw they were forced, they returned into the City, still fighting, and
those who run after were beaten back with the Artillery which they had
charged with flint stones, and foure-square pieces of iron; and our soldiers
who were upon the said wall made a volley of shot, and showred down their
bullets upon them like hail, to send them back to their lodging, where diverse
remained in the place of the combat, and also our men did not all come with
whole skins, and there still remained some for the Tithe, who were joyful to
dye in the bed of honor. And where there was a horse hurt he was flayed, and
eaten by the Soldiers in steed of beef and bacon, and it was fit I must
run, to dress our hurt men. A few days after, other sallyes were made,
which did much anger the enemies, because they did not let them sleep but
little in safety. Monsieur de Guise, made a warlike stratagem which was, he
sent a Pesant who was none of the wisest with two pair of Letters toward the
King, to whom he gave ten Crowns, and promised the King should give him an
hundred, provided he gave him the letters. In the one he sent word that the
enemy made no sign of retiring himself, and by all force made a great breach
which he hoped to defend, yea to the losing of his life, and of all those that
were within, and that the enemy had so well placed his Artillery in a certain
place which he named, that with great difficulty was it kept that they had not
entered into it, seeing it was a place the most weak of all the City: but he
hoped quickly to fill it up again in such sort, that they cannot be able to
enter. One of these letters was sowed in the lining of his doublet, and he was
bid to take heed that he told it not to any man. And there was also another
given to him; wherein the said Monsieur de Guise sent word to the King, that he
and all the beseiged did hope well to keep the City, and other matters, which
I cease to speak of. They made the Pesant go forth in the night, and
presently after, he was taken by one that stood Sentinel, and carried to the
Duke of Albe, to understand what was done in the City, and they asked him if
he had any letters, he said yes, and gave them one; and having seen it he was
put to his oath, whether he had any other, and he swore, not; then they felt
and searched him, and found that which was sowed to his doublet, and the poor
messenger was hanged.

The said letters were communicated to the Emperor, who caused his counsel to
be called there, where it was resolved since they could do nothing at the
first breach, that presently the Artillery should be drawn to the place which
they thought the most weak, where they made great attempts to make another
breach, and dig'd and undermined the wall, and endeavored to take the Tower of
Hell, yet they durst not come to the assault. The Duke of Albe declared to the
Emperor that the soldiers dyed daily, yet, more than the number of two
hundred, and that there was but little hope to enter into the City, seeing the
season, and the great quantity of soldiers that there were. The Emperor
demanded what people they were that dyed, and if that they were gentlemen of
remarke or quality: answer was made, that they were all poor soldiers; then
said he, it makes no matter if they dye, comparing them to caterpillars and
grasshoppers, which eat the buddes of the earth: And if they were of any
fashion, they would not be in the camp for twelve shillings the month, and
therefore no great harm if they dyed. Moreover he said he would nener part
from before that City, till he had taken it by force, or famine, although he
should loose all his army: by reason of the great number of Princes which were
therein, with the most part of the Nobility of France. From whom he hoped to
draw double his expense, and that he would go once again to Paris, to visit
the Parisiens, and make himself King of all the kingdom of France. Monsieur
de Guise with the Princes, Captains, and Soldiers, and generally all the
Citizens of the City, having understood the intention of the Emperor, which
was to extirpate us all, they advised of all they had to do: And since it was
not permitted to the soldiers, nor Citizens, no nor to the Princes, nor Lords
themselves to eat either fresh fish, or Venison, as likewise some Partridges,
Woodcockes, Larkes, Plovers, for fear least they had gathered some
pestilentiall air which might give us any contagion; but that they should
content themselves with the ammunition fare, that is to say, with Bisquite,
Beef, poudered Cowes, Lard, and gammons of Bacon: Likewise fish, as
Greenefish, Salmon, Sturgeon, Anchovies, Pilchers and Herrings, also Pease,
Beans, Rise, Garlike, Onions, Prunes, Cheese, Butter, Oil, Salt, Pepper,
Ginger, Nutmegges, and other Spiceries to put into pyes, cheefely to
horseflesh, which without that would have had a very ill taste; diverse Citizens
having gardens in the City sowed therein great Raddishes, Turnippes, Carrots,
and Leekes, which they kept well and full dear, against the extremity of
hunger. Now all these ammunition victuals were distributed by weight, measure,
and justice, according to the quality of the person, because we knew not how
long the seige would last. For having understood from the mouth of the Emperor,
that he would never part from before Mets, till he had taken it by force, or
famine; the victuals were lessened, for that which was wont to be distributed
to three, was now shared amongst four, and defense made they should not sell
what remained after their dinner, but it was permitted to give it to the wenches
that followed the Camp. And rose always from table with an appetite, for
fear they should be subject to take Physic. And before we would yield our
selves to the mercy of our enemies; had resolved to eat our Asses, Mules,
Horses, Dogs, Cats, and Ratts, vea our boots and other skins which we
could soften and fry. All the beseiged did generally resolve to defend
themselves with all sorts of instruments of war, that is to say, to rank,
and charge the Artillery, at the entry of the breach with bullets, stones, Cart
nails, bars, and chains of iron. Also all kinds and differences of
artificial fire; as Boeites, Bariquadoes, Grenades, Potts, Lances, torches,
squibbes, burning faggots. Moreover scalding water, melted lead, powder of
unquenched lime to blind their eyes. Also they were resolved to have made holes
through, and through their houses, there to lodge musketeers, there to batter
in the flank and hasten them to go, or else make them lie for altogether.
Also there was order given to the women to unpave the streets, and to cast
them out at their windows, billets, tables, tressles, forms, and stools,
which would have troubled their brains: moreover there was a little further, a
strong Court of Guard, filled with carts and pallisadoes, pipes and hogs heads,
filled with earth, for barriquadoes to serve to interlay with faulcons,
faulconets, field pieces, harquibuzes, muskets, and pistolls and wild fire,
which would have broken legs and thighs, insomuch that they had been beaten
in head, in flancke, and in tail; and where they had forced this Court of
Guard, there was others at the crossing of the streets, each distant an hundred
paces, who have been as bad companions as the first, and would not have been
without making a great many Widows, and Orphans. And if fortune would have
been so much against us, as to have broken our Courts of guard, there was yet
seven great Bastallions ordered in square, and triangle, to combat
altogether, each one accompanied with a Prince to give them boldness, and
encourage them to fight, even till the last gasp, and to dye altogether.
Moreover it was resolved, that each one should carry his treasure, rings, and
jewels, and their household stuff of the best, to burn them in the great
place, and to put them into ashes rather than the enemy should prevail and
make tropheyes of their spoils; likewise there was people appointed to put
fire to the munition, and to beat out the heads of the Wine caskes, others to
put the fire in each house, to burn our enemies and us together: the Citizens
had accorded it thus, rather than to see the bloody knife upon their throat,
and their Wives and Daughters violated, and to be taken by force, by the cruel
and inhumane Spaniards. Now we had certain prisoners which Monsieur de Guise
sent away upon their faith, to whom was secretly imparted our last resolution,
will and desperate minds; who being arrived in their Camp, do not defer the
publishing; which bridled the great impetuosity, and will of the soldiers to
enter any more into the City to cut our throats, and to enrich themselves of
our pillage. The Emperor having understood this deliberation of the great
warrior, the Duke of Guise, put water in his wine, and restrained his great
choler and fury, saying, He could not enter into the City without making a
great slaughter, and butchery, and spill much blood, as well of the defendants,
as of the assaillants, and that they should be dead together, and in the end
could have nothing else but a few ashes, and that afterward it might be spoken
of that, as of the destruction of Jerusalem already made by Titus and
Vespasian. The Emperor then having understood our last resolution, and seeing
their little prevailing by their battery, and underming, and the great plague
which was in his whole army, and the indisposition of the time; and the want of
victuals and money, and that his soldiers forsook him, and went away in
great companies; concluded in the end to retire themselves accompanied with the
Cavallery of his Vantgard, with the greatest part of his Artillery, and the
Battalia; The Marquess of Brandeborg was the last which uncampt, maintained by
certain bands of Spaniards, Bohemians, and his Germane companies, and there
remained one day and a half after, to the great grief of Monsieur de Guise,
who caused four pieces of Artillery to be brought out of the City, which he
caused to be discharged at him on one side; and the other to hasten them to be
gone, which he did full quickly, with all his Troops. He being a quarter of a
league from Mets was taken with a fear least our Cavallery should fall upon
him in the Rere, which caused him to put fire to his munition powder, and leave
certain pieces of Artillery and much baggage which he could not carry because
the Vantgard, and the Battalia, and great Cannons had too much broken the way.
Our horsemen would by all means have gone out of the City to have fallen upon
their breech. But Monsieur de Guise would never permit them, but on the
contrary we should rather make plain their way, and make them bridges of gold
and silver, and let them go, being like to a good shepherd, who will not
loose one of his sheep. See now how our wellbeloved Imperialists went away
from before the City of Mets, which was the day after Christmas day, to the
great contentment of the beseiged, and honor of Princes, Captains and
Soldiers who had endured the travells of this seige the space of two months.
Notwithstanding they did not all go, there wanted twenty thousand who were
dead as well by Artillery, by the sword, as also by the plague, cold, and
hunger, and for spite they could not enter into the City to cut our throats,
and have the pillage: and also a great number of their horses dyed, of which
they had eaten a great part in steed of Beef and Bacon. They went where they
had been encamped, where they found diverse dead bodies not yet buried, and the
earth all dihged like Saint Innocents Churchyard, in the time of the plague.
They did likewise leave in their lodgings, pavillions and tents, diverse sick
people: also bullets, arms, Carts, Wagons, and other baggage with a great
many of Munition loaves spoiled and rotten by the rain and snow, yet the
soldiers had it not but by weight and measure; and likewise they left great
provision of wood, of the remainders of the houses of the Villages which they
had plucked down 2 or 3 miles compass, likewise diverse other houses of
pleasure belonging to the Citizens accompanied with fair gardens, grass
plotts filled with fruit trees, for without that they had been sterv'd with
cold, and had been constrained to have raised the seige sooner. The said
Monsieur de Guise caused the dead to be buried, and dress their sick people:
likewise the enemies left in the Abbey of S. Arnoul diverse of their hurt
soldiers which they could not lead with them: the said Monsieur de Guise sent
them all Victuals enough, and commanded me and other Chirurgions to go dress
them and give them medicines; which we willingly did, and think they would not
have done the like toward others (because the Spaniard is most cruel,
per^idious and inhumane, and therefore enemy to all nations) which is proved by
Lopez a Spaniard and Benzo of Milan and others who have written the history of
America, and the West Indies, who have been constrained to confess, that the
cruelty, avarice, blasphemy, and wickedness of the Spaniards, have altogether
alienated the poor Indians, from the religion which the said Spaniards are
said to hold. And all write they are less worth than the Idolatrous Indians,
by the cruel usage done to the said Indians.

And a few days after we sent a Trompet to Thionville toward the enemy, that
they should send back for their wounded men in safety, which they did with
Carts and Wagons, but not enough. Monsieur de Guise, caused them to have Carts
and Carters, to help to carry them to the said Thionville. Our said Carters
being returned back, brought us word that the way was paved with dead bodies,
and that they never lead back the half, for they dyed in their Carts, and the
Spaniards seeing them at the point of death, before they had cast out their
last gasp, cast them out of their Carts, and buried them in the mudde, and
mire, saying they had no order to bring back the dead. Moreover our said
Carters said, they met by the way diverse Carts laden with baggage sticking in
the mire, which they durst not send for back, for fear least those of Mets
should fall upon them. I will again return to the cause of their mortality,
which was principally through honger, plague, and cold; for the snow was two
foot thick upon the earth, and they were lodged in the caves of the earth,
only covered with a little straw. Notwithstanding each soldier had his field
bed, and a covering strewed with glittering stars, more bright than fine
gold, and every day had white sheets, and lodged at the sign of the Moon,
and made good cheer when they had it, and paid their host so well over night,
that in the morning they went away quitte, shaking their ears, and they needed
no comb, to take away the down out of their hairs, either of head or beard,
and found always a white table cloth, losing good meals for want of
Victuals. Also the greatest part of them had neither boots, nor buskinnes,
slippers, hose, or shoes, and diverse had rather have none than have them,
because they were always in mudde, half way of the leg; and because they
went bare legged, we called them the Emperors Apostles. After the Camp was
wholly broaken, I distributed my patients into the hands of the Chirurgions of
the City, to finish their cure: then I took leave of Monsieur de Guise, and
came back toward the King, who received me with a loving countenance, and
demanded of me how I did enter into the City of Mets. I recounted to him, all
that I had done, he caused two hundred crowns to be given me, and one hundred
I had at my going out, and told me he would not leave me poor; then I thanked
him most humbly of the good and the honor which he pleased to do me.

The Voyage of Hedin, 1553.
CHarles the Emperor caused the City of Therounne to be beseiged, where
Monsieut the Duke of Savoy, was General of the whole army: it was taken by
assault where there was a great number of our men slain and prisoners. The
King willing to prevent that the enemy should not also come to beseige the
City and Castle of Hedin, sent Messiers the Duke Bouillion, the Duke Horace,
the Marquess of Villars, a number of Captains, and about eight hundred
soldiers, and during the seige of Therouenne, the said Lords fortified the
said Castle of Hedin, in such sort that it seemed impregnable. The King sent me
to the said Lords to help them with my Art, if there were any need. Now soon
after the taking of Therouenne, we were beseiged with the army: there was a
quick clear fountain or Spring, within Cannon shot, where there was about
fourscore whores, and wenches of the enemies, who were round about it to draw
water. I was upon a Rampart beholding the Camp, and seeing so many idlers
about the said fountain, I prayed Monsieur de Pont Commissary of the
Artillery, to make one Cannon shot, at that roguish company, he made me much
denial, answering me that such kind of people were not worth the powder they
should waste. Again I prayed him to level the Cannon, telling of him, the
more dead the fewer enemies; which he did through my request, and at that shot
fifteen or sixteen were killed and many hurt. Our soldiers sallied forth upon
the enemies, where there was many killed, and flaine with musket shot and swords,
as well on the one side, as of the other, and our soldiers did often make
sallyes forth upon the enemies before their trenches were made; where I had
much work cut out, so that I had no rest night nor day for dressing the
wounded. And I will tell this by the way, that we had put many of them in a
great Tower, laid upon a little straw, and their pillowes were stones, their
coverlets were their cloakes, of those that had any. Whilst the battery was
making, as many shot as the Cannons made, the patients said they felt pain in
their wounds, as if one had given them blows with a staff, the one cried his
head, the other his arm, and so of other parts; diverse of their wounds bled
afresh yea in greater quantity than first when they were wounded, and then it
was I must run to stay their bleeding. My little master, if you had been
there, you had been much troubled with your hot irons, you had need to have
had much charcoale to make them red hot, and belee ve they would have slain
you like a Calfe for this cruelty. Now through this diabolical tempest of the
Echo from these thundering Instruments, and by the great and vehement agitation
of the collision of the air resounding and reverberating in the wounds of the
hurt people, diverse dyed, and others because they could not rest by reason of
the groans and cries that they made, night and day; and also for want of good
nourishment and other good usage necessary to wounded people. Now my little
master, if you had been there, you would hardly have given them gelly,
restauratives, cullises, pressures, panado, cleansed barley, white meat, almond
milk, Prunes, Raisons, and other proper meats for sick people: your
ordinance would only have been accomplished in paper, but in effect they could
have had nothing but old Cow beef, which was taken about Hedin for our
munition, salted and half boiled, insomuch that who would have eat it he must
pull it with the force of his teeth, as birds of Prey do carrion. I will not
forget their linen wherewith they were dressed, which was only rewashed every
day, and dried at the fire, and therefore dry and stubborn like Parchment, I
leave you to think how their wounds could heal well. There was ^oure lusty
whores to whom charg was given to wash their linen, who discharged their duty
under penalty of the batoone, and also they wanted both soape and water. See
then how the sick people dyed for want of nourishments, and other necessary
things. One day our enemies fained to give us a general assault, to draw our
Soldiers upon the breach, to the end to know our countenance and behavior:
every one ran thither, we had made great provision of artificial fire, to
defend the breach; a Priest belonging to Monsieur du Bouillon took a granado,
thinking to throw it on the enemies, and set it on fire sooner then he ought to
have done: it brake asunder, and the fire fell amongst our fire works, which
were put into a house near the breach; which was to us a mervelous disastre,
because it burned diverse poor soldiers: it also took hold on the house it
self, and we had been all burned had not great help been used for to quench
it; there was but one Well there wherein was water in our Castle, which was
almost quite dried up, and in steed of water, we took beer and quenched it:
then afterward we had great scarcity of water; and to drink the rest that
remained which we must strain through napkins.

Now the enemy seeing this smoke and tempest of the fire works which cast a
very great flame and clashing noise, believed we had put the fire on purpose
for the defense of our breach, to burn them, and that we had great store of
others. That made them to be of another opinion, than to taken us by assault;
they did undermine, and dig into the greatest part of our walls, so that it
was the way to overthrow wholly the Castle topsie turvie, and when the mines
were finished, and that their Artillery shot, the whole Castle did shake under
us, like an earthquake, which did much astonish us. Moreover he had levelled
five pieces of Artillery which they had seated upon a little hill, to play upon
our backs when we should go to defend the breach.

The Duke Horace had a Cannon shot upon one shoulder, which carried away his
arm on one side, and the body on the other, without being able to speak one
only word. His death was to us a great disasture for the rank which he held
in this place.

Likewise Monsieur de Martigues had a stroke with a Bullet which peire't
through his Lungs; I dressed him, as I will declare hereafter. Then we demanded
Parle, and a Trumpet was sent toward the Prince of Piedmont, to know what
composition it pleased him to make us: His answer was, that all the chief, as
Gentlemen, Captains, Lievtenants, and Ensigns, should be taken for ransom,
and the Soldiers should go out without Arms; and if they refused this fair
and honest proffer, the next day we ought to be assured they would have us by
assault or otherwise. Counsel was held, where I was called to know if I would
sign as diverse Captains, Gentlemen and others, that the place should be
rendered up. I made answer it was not possible to be held, and that I would
sign it with my proper blood, for the little hope that I had, that we could
resist the enemies force, and also for the great desire which I had to be out
of this torment, and hell; for I slept not either night or day, by reason of
the great number of hurt people, which were about two hundred. The dead bodies
yielded a great putrefaction, being heaped one upon the other like Fagots, and
not being covered with earth because we had it not; and when I entered into one
lodging, Soldiers attended me at the door to go dress others at another;
when I went forth, there was striving who should have me, and they carried me
like a holy body not touching the ground with my foot in spite one of
another, nor could I satisfy so great a number of hurt people. Moreover I had
not what was necessary to dress them withal; for it is not sufficient that
the Surgeon do his duty toward the patients, but the patient must also do
his, and the assistance, and all exterior things; witness Hippocrates in his
first Aphorism. Now having understood the resolution of the yielding up of our
place, I knew our affairs went not well; and for fear of being known I gave
a velvet Coat, a Satin doublet, a very fine cloth cloak lined with velvet, to
a Soldier, who gave me a scurvy old torn doublet cut and flasht with using,
and a leather jerkin well examined, and an ill favored hat, and a little
cloak; I smutcht the collar of my shirt with water in which I had mingled a
little soote; likewise I wore out my stockings with a stone at the knees and
the heels as if they had been worn a long time, and I did as much to my
shoes, in so much that they would rather take me for a Chimney sweeper, than a
Kings Surgeon. I went in this equipage toward Monsieur de Martigues, where
I prayed him that he would take order that I might remain near him to dress
him, which he agreed to most willingly, and had as much desire I should remain
with him as I my self. Soon after, the Commissioners who had charge to elect
the prisoners, entered into the Castle, the seaventeenth day of July one
thousand five hundred fifty three, where they made Messieurs the Duke of
Bouillon, the Marquess of Villars, the Baron of Culan, Monsieur du Pont
commissary of the Artillery, and Monsieur de Martigues and I to be taken
through the request that he made to them; and all other Gentlemen which they
could perceive were able to pay any ransom, and the most part of the Soldiers
and the chief of the Companies, having such, and so many prisoners as they
would.

Afterward the Spanish Soldiers entered by the Breach without any resistance,
for ours esteemed they would hold their faith and composition that they should
have their lives saved. They entered in with a great fury to kill, pillage, and
rifle all they retained: some hoping to have ransom, they tied their stones
with Arquebuse cords, which was cast over a Pike which two held upon their
shoulders, then pulled the said cord with a great violence and derision, as if
they would ring a Bell, telling them that they must put themselves to the
ransom, and tell of what houses they were; and if they saw they could have no
profit, made them cruelly dye between their hands, or presently after their
genitall parts would have ^alne into a Gangreene, and total mortification; but
they killed them all with their Daggers, and cut their throats. See now their
great cruelty and persidiousnesse, let him trust to it that will. Now to
return to my purpose being lead from the Castle to the City with Monsieur de
Martigues, there was a Gentleman of the Duke of Savoyes, who asked me if
Monsieur de Martigues wound was curable, I answered, not; who presently went
and told the Duke of Savoy; now I thought he would send Physicians and
Chirurgions to visit and dress my said Monsieur de Martigues: in the mean
time I thought with my self whether I ought to make it nice and not to
acknowledge my self a Surgeon for fear least they should retain me to
dress their wounded, and in the end they would know I was the Kings
Surgeon, and that they would make me pay a great ransom. On the other side
I feared, if I should not make my self known to be a Surgeon, and to have
carefully dressed Monsieur de Martigues, they would cut my throat, so that I
took a resolution to make it appear to them he would not dye for want of good
dressing and looking to. Soon after, see, their arrives diverse gentlemen
accompanied with the Physician and Surgeon to the Emperor, and those of the
said Duke of Savoy, with six other Chirurgions following the Army, to see the
hurt of the said Lord of Martigues, and to know of me how I had dressed him,
and with what medicines. The Emperors Physician bid me declare the essence of
the wound, and how I had dressed it. Now all the assistance had a very attentive
ear to know if the wound were mortal or not: I began to make a discourse that
Monsieur de Martigues looking over the wall to perceive them that did undermine
it, received a shot from an Arquebuse quite through the body; presently I was
called to dress him, I saw he cast blood out of his mouth, and his wounds.
Moreover he had a great difficulty of breathing, and cast out wind by the
said wounds with a whistling, in so much that it would blow out a Candle, and
he said he had a most sharp pricking pain at the entrance of the Bullet. I
do believe and think it might be some little pieces of bones which pricked
the Lungs. When they made their Systole and Diastole, I put my finger into him;
where I found the entrance of the Bullet to have broken the fourth Rib in the
middle and scales of bones which the said Bullet had thrust in, and the
outgoing of it had likewise broken the fifth Rib with pieces of bones which had
been driven from within outward; I drew out some but not all, because they
were very deep and adherent. I put in each wound a Tent, having the head very
large, tied with a thread, least by the inspiration it might be drawn into
the capacity of the Thorax, which has been known by experience to the
detriment of the poor wounded; for being fallen in, it cannot be taken out,
which is the cause that engenders putrefaction, a thing contrary to nature. The
said Tents were anointed with a medicine composed of yolks of Eggs, Venice
Turpentine, with a little oil of Roses: My intention for putting the Tents was
to stay the flux of blood, and to hinder that the outward air did not enter
into the breast, which might have cooled the Lungs and by consequent the heart.
The said Tents were also put, to the end that issue might be given for the
blood that was spilt within the Thorax. I put upon the wound great Emplasters
of Diacalcitheos in which I had relented oil of Roses and Vinigar to the
avoiding of inflammation, then I put great stupes of Oxycrate, and bound him
up, but not hard, to the end he might have easy respiration; that done I drew
from him five porrengers of blood from the Basilicke vein of the right arm,
to the end to make revulsion of the blood which runs from the wounds into the
Thorax, having first taken indication from the wounded part, and cheefely his
forces, considering his youth and his sanguine temper; He presently after went
to stool, and by his urine and seege cast great quantity of blood. And as for
the pain which he said he felt at the entrance of the Bullet which was as if
he had been pricked with a bodkin, that was because the Lungs by their motion
beat against the splinters of the broken Rib. Now the Lungs are covered with a
coat coming from the membrane called Pleura, interweaved with nerves of the
sixth conjugation from the brain, which was cause of the extreme pain he
felt; likewise he he had a great difficulty of breathing, which proceeded from
the blood which was spilt in the capacity of the Thorax, and upon the
Diaphragme, the principal instrument of respiration, and from the dilaceration
of the muscles which are between each Rib, which help also to make the
expiration and the inspiration; and likewise because the Lungs were torn and
wounded by the Bullet, which has caused him ever since to spit black and
putrid blood in coughing. The Fever seized him soon after he was hurt, with
faintings and swoonings. It seemed to me that the said fever proceeded from
the putredinous vapors arising from the blood which is out of his proper
vessels, which has fallen down, and will yet flow down. The wound of the
Lungs is grown great and will grow more great, because it is in perpetual
motion, both fleeping and waking, and is dilated and comprest to let in the
air to the heart, and cast fuliginous vapors out: by the unnatural heat is
made inflammation, then the expulsive virtue is constrained to cast out by
cough whatsoever is obnoxious unto it: for the Lungs cannot be purged but by
coughing, and by coughing the wound is dilated, and grows greater, from whence
the blood issues out in great abundance, which blood is drawn from the heart
by the vein arteriall to give them nourishment, and to the heart by the vena
cava; his meat was barley broth, stewed prunes, sometimes panado; his drink
was Ptisan: He could not lie but upon his back which showed he had a great
quantity of blood spilt within the capacity of the Thorax, and being spread or
spilled along the spondills, does not so much press the Lungs as it does being
laid on the sides or sitting.

What shall I say more, but that the said Lord Martigues since the time he was
hurt has not reposed one hour only, and has always cast out bloody urines
and stools. These things then Messieres considered, one can make no other
prognosticke but that he will dye in a few days, which is to my great grief.
Having ended my discourse I dressed him as I was wont; having discovered his
wounds, the Physicians and other assistants presently knew the truth of what I
had said.

The said Physicians having felt his pulse and known his forces to be almost
spent, and abolished, concluded with me that in a few days he would dye; and
at the same instant went all toward the Lord of Savoy, where they all said,
that the said Lord Martigues would dye in a short time; he answered, it were
possible if he were well dressed he might escape: Then they all with one voice
said, he had been very well dressed, and solicited with all things necessary
for the curing of his wounds, and could not be better, and that it was
impossible to cure him, and that his wound was mortal of necessity. The
Monsieur de Savoy showed himself to be very much discontented and wept, and
asked them again if for certain they all held him deplored and remediless,
they all answered, yes. Then a certain Spanish impostor offered himself, who
promised on his life that he would cure him, and if he failed to cure him, they
should cut him in an hundred pieces; but he would not have any Physicians,
Chirurgions or Apothecaries with him. And at the same instant the said Lord of
Savoy told the Physicians and Chirurgions they should not in any wise go any
more to see the said Lord of Martigues Also he sent a Gentleman to me to forbid
me upon pain of life not to touch any more the said Lord of Martigues, which I
promised not to do; wherefore I was very glad, seeing he should not dye in my
hands, and commanded the said impostor to dress the said Lord of Martigues.
And that he should have no other Physicians nor Chirurgions but him; he came
presently to the said Lord of Martigues, who told him,

Senor Cavallero el senor Dugue me ha mandado que viniesse a curar vostra
herida, yo os juro a Dios que antes de acho dias yo os haga subir a Cavallo con
la lansa en puno contalque no ago que yo quos togue, Comereis y bibereis todas
comidas que fueren de vostro gusto y yo hare la dieta pro V. m. y desto os de
veu aseguirar sobre de mi, yo he sanado mun hos que tenian magores heridas que
la Vostra. That is to say, Lord Cavalleere, Monsieur the Duke of Savoy has
commanded me to come dress thy wound; I swear to thee by God, that before
eight days I will make thee mount on horseback with thy Lance in thy hand,
provided, that no man may touch thee but my self; thou shall eat and drink
any thing thou have a mind to, I will perform thy diet for thee, and of this
thou may be assured upon my promise, I have cured diverse who have had greater
wounds than thine: and the Lord replied, God give you the grace to do it.

He demanded of the said Lord a shirt and tore it in little rags, which he
put a cross, muttering, and murmuring certain words over the wound; and
having dressed him, permitted him to eat and drink what he would, telling him
he would observe a diet for him, which he did, eating but six prunes and six
bits of bread at a meal, and drinking but beer. Notwithstanding, two days
after, the said Lord of Martigues dyed; and my Spaniard, seeing of him in the
agony, eclipst himself and got away without bidding, farewell to any body; and
I believe if he had been taken he had bin hanged for his false promises, which
he had made to Monsieur the Duke of Savoy, and to diverse other gentlemen.

He dyed about ten of the clock in the morning, and after dinner, the said
Lord of Savoy, sent Physicians and Chirurgions and his Apothecary, with a great
quantity of Drogues, to embalme him; they came accompanied with diverse
gentlemen and Captains of the Army.

The Emperors Surgeon came near to me, and prayed me kindly to open the
body; which I refused, telling him I was not worthy to carry his plaster box
after him: he prayed me again, which then I did for his sake, if it so liked
him. I would yet again have excused my self, that seeing he was not willing
to embalme him, that he would give this charge to another Surgeon of the
company; he made me yet answer, that he would it should be I, and if I would
not do it, I might hereafter repent it: knowing this his affection, for fear
he should not do me any displeasure, I took the rasor and presented it to all
in particular, telling them I was not well practiced to do such operations
which they all refused.

The body being placed upon a table, truly I purposed to show them that I was
an Anatomist, declaring to them diverse things, which should be here too long
to recite. I began to tell all the company that I was sure the bullet had
broken two ribs, and that it had past through the Lungs, and that they should
find the wound much enlarged, because they are in perpetual motion, sleeping
or waking, and by this motion the wound was the more dilacerated. Also that
there was great quantity of blood spilt in the capacity of the breast, and upon
the midriffe, and splinters of the broken ribs which were beaten in at the
entrance of the bullet, and the issuing forth of it, had carried out. Indeed
all which I had told them was found true in the dead body.

One of the Physicians asked me, which way the blood might pass to be cast out
by Urine, being contained in the Thorax. I answered him that there was a
manifest conduit, which is the Vena A^ygos, who having nourisht the ribs, the
rest of the blood descends under the Diaphragme, and on the left side is
conjoined to the emulgent vein, which is the way by which the matter in
pleuresies and in Empiema, do manifestly empty themselves by urine and stool.
As it is likewise seen, the pure milk of the breasts of women newly brought to
bed, to descend by the Mammillary Veins, and to be evacuated downwards by the
neck of the womb without being mixed with the blood. And such a thing is done
(as it were by a miracle of nature) by her expulsive and sequesting virtue,
which is seen by experience of two glass vessels called Mount-wine; let the
one be filled with water, and the other with Claret wine, and let them be put
the one upon the other, that is to say, that which shall be filled with water,
upon that which shall be filled with wine; and you shall apparently see the
wine mount up to the top of the vessel quite through the water, and the water
descend atraverse the wine, and go to the bottom of the vessel without
mixture of both; and if such a thing be done so exteriorly and openly to the
sense of our eye, by things without life: you must believe the same in our
understanding. That nature can make matter and blood to pass, having been out
of their vessels yea through the bones without being mingled with the good
blood.

Our discourse ended, I embalmed the body, and put it into a Coffinne; after
that the Emperors Surgeon took me apart, and told me if I would remain
with him that he would use me very well, and that he would cloth me anew, also
that I should ride on horseback. I thanked him very kindly for the honor he
did me, and told him that I had no desire to do service to strangers, and
enemies to my Country; then he told me I was a fool, and if he were prisoner
as I, he would serve the devil to get his liberty. In the end I told him flat
that I would not dwell at all with him.

The Emperors Physician returned toward the said Lord of Savoy, where he
declared the cause of the death of the said Lord of Martigues, and told him
that it was impossible for all the men in the would to have cured him; and
confirmed again, that I had done what was necessary to be done, and prayed him
to win me to his service, and spoke better of me than I deserved.

Having been persuaded to take me to his service, he gave charge to one of his
stewards named Monfieur du Bouchet, to tell me, if I would dwell in his service
that he would use me kindly: I answered him, that I thank't him most humbly,
and that I had resolved not to dwell with any stranger. This my answer being
heard by the Duke of Savoy, he was somewhat in choler, and said, he would
send me to the Galleys.

Monsieur de Vandeville, Governor of Gravelin, and Colonel of seaventeene
Ensigns of foot, prayed him, to give me to him, to dress him of an Ulcer
which he had in his Leg this six or seven years; Monsieur de Savoy told him
because I was of worth, that he was content, and if I ranckled his Leg it would
be ^ell done; He answered that if he perceaved any thing, that he would
cause my throat to be cut.

Soon after, the said Lord of Vaudeville sent for me by four Germane
Halberdiers, which affrighted me much, not knowing whither they led me, they
spoke no more French than I high Dutch; being arrived at his lodging, he told
me I was welcome, and that I was his; and as soon as I should have cured him
of that Ulcer in his Leg, that he would give me leave to be gone without taking
any ransom of me. I told him I was not able to pay any ransom.

Then he made his Physician and Chirurgions in ordinary to show me his
ulcerated Leg; having seen and considered it, we went apart into a Chamber
where I began to tell them, that the said Ulcer was annual, not being simple
but complicated: that is to say, of a round figure, and scaly, having the lips
hard and callous, hollow and sordid, accompanied with a great varicous vein
which did perpetually feed it; besides a great tumor, and a phlegmonous
distemper very painful through the whole Leg, in a body of choleric
complexion; as the hair of his face and beard demonstrated. The method to cure
it (if cured it could be) was to begin with universal things, that is, with
purgation and bleeding, and with this order of diet, that he should not use
any wine at all, nor any salt meats, or of great nourishment, chiefly these
which did heat the blood: afterward the cure must begun with making diverse
scarifications about the Ulcer, and totally cutting away the callous edges or
lips, and giving a long or a triangular figure, for the round will very hardly
cure, as the Ancients have left it in writing, which is seen by experience.
That done, the filth must be mundified, as also the corrupted flesh, which
should be done with Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and upon it a bolster dipped in juice
of Plantaine and Nightshade and Oxycrate, and roll the Leg beginning at the
foot, and finishing at the knee, not forgetting a little bolster upon the
Varicous vein, to the end no superfluities should flow to the Ulcer. Moreover
that he should take rest in his bed, which is commanded by Hippocrates, who
says, that those who have soar Legs should not use much standing or sitting,
but lying along. And after these things done and the Ulcer well mundified, a
plate of Lead rubbed with quickesilver should be applied. See then the means,
by which the said Lord Vaudeville might be cured of the said Ulcer; all which
they found good. Then the Physician left me with the Surgeon, and went to
the Lord Vaudeville; to tell him that he did assure him I would cure him, and
told him all that I had resolved to do, for the cure of his Ulcer: whereof he
was very joyful. He made me to be called to him, and asked me if I was of
the opinion that his Ulcer could be cured, and I told him, yes, provided he
would be obedient to do what he ought. He made me a promise he would perform
all things which I would appoint; and as soon as his Ulcer should be cured, he
would give me liberty to return without paying any ransom. Then I beseech't
him to come to a better composition with me, telling him that the time would be
too long to be in liberty, if I stayed till he was perfectly well, and that I
hoped within fifteen days the Ulcer should be diminished more than one
half, and it should be without pain, and that his Physicians and Chirurgions
would finish the rest of the cure very easily. To which he agreed, and then I
took a piece of paper, and cut it the largeness of the Ulcer, which I gave
him, and kept as much my self. I prayed him to keep promise, when he should
find his business done: He swore by the faith of a Gentleman he would do it;
then I resolved to dress him well, according to the method of Galen, which
was, that after all strange things were taken out of the Ulcer, and that there
wanted nothing but filling up with flesh, I dressed him but once a day, and he
found that very strange. And likewise his physician which was but a fresh man
in those affairs, who would persuade me with the Patient, to dress him two
or three times a day, I prayed him to let me do what I thought good; and that
it was not to prolong the cure, but on the contrary to hasten it, for the great
desire I had to be in liberty. And that he would look in Galen in the fourth
book of the composition of medicaments secundum genera, who says, that if a
medicine do not remain long upon the part it profits not so much, as when it
does continue long, a thing which many Physicians have been ignorant of, and
have thought it has been better to change the Plaster often. And this ill
custom is so inveterate and rooted, that the Patients themselves accuse
oftentimes the Chirurgions of negligence, because they do not oftener remove
their emplasters; but they are deceived. For as you have understood and read in
my works in diverse places: The qualities of all bodies which mutually touch,
operate one against another, and both of them suffer something, where one of
them is much stronger than the other, by means whereof the said qualities are
united, they familiarise with the time, although they are very much differing
from the manner, that the quality of the medicament does unite, and sometimes
becomes like to that of the body, which is a very profitable thing. Therefore
they say, he is to be praised much who first invented not to change the
Plasters so often, because it is known by experience, this is a good invention.

Moreover it is said, great fault is committed to dress Ulcers often in wiping
of them hard, for one takes not away only the unprofitable excrement, which is
the pu^ or Sanies of the Ulcer, but the matter whereof the flesh is engendered;
wherefore for the reasons aforesaid it is not needful to dress Ulcers so
often.

The said Lord Vaudeville, would see whether that which I alleged out of Galen
were true, and commanded the said Physician to look there, for that he would
know it; he caused the book to be brought upon the table, where my saying was
found true, and then the Physician was ashamed, and I very joyful. So that the
said Lord of Vaudeville desired not to be dressed but once a day, in so much
that within fifteen days the Ulcer was almost cicatrized; the composition
being made between us, I began to be merry. He made me eat and drink at his
Table, when there was not men of more great rank with him.

He gave me a great red sear^e, which he commanded me to wear. I may say I
was as glad of it as a dog that has a clog, for fear he should go into the
vineyard and eat the grapes. The Physician and Surgeon led me through the
Camp to visit their hurt people, where I took notice what our enemies did; I
perceived they had no more pieces of Cannon, but only twenty five or thirty
pieces for the field.

Monsieur de Vaudeville held Monsieur de Bauge prisoner, the brother of
Monsieur de Martigues who dyed at Hedin. The said Lord of Bauge was prisoner in
the Castle of the heap of wood belonging to the Emperor, who had been taken
at Ther^uenne by two Spanish Soldiers. Now the said Lord of Vaudeville having
looked well upon him, conceived he must be a Gentleman of some good house, and
to be the better assured, he caused him to have his stockings pulled off, and
seeing his stockings and his feet clear and neat, together with his white
fine socke, it confirmed him the better in his opinion, that it was a man was
able to pay some good ransom. He demands of the Soldiers if they would take
thirty Crowns for their prisoner, and that he would give it to them presently,
to which they agreed willingly, because they had neither means to keep him,
nor feed him; besides they knew not his worth, therefore they delivered their
prisoner into the hands of the said Lord of Vaudeville, who presently sent him
to the Castle of the heap of wood with a guard of four Soldiers with other
Gentlemen prisoners of ours. The said Lord Bauge would not discover himself,
who he was, and endured very much, being kept but with bread and water, and
lay upon a little straw. The said Lord of Vaudeville after the taking of Hedin,
sent word to the said Lord Bauge and other prisoners, that the place of Hedin
was taken, and the list of those that had been slain, and amongst the rest,
Monsieur de Martigues: and when the said Lord of Bauge heard the sound of the
death of his brother the Lord Martigues, he began much to weep and lament; his
keeper demanded of him, why he made so many and sogreat lamentations? He
declared unto them that it was for Monsieur de Martigues his brothers sake.
Having understood that, the Captain of the Castle dispatched a man away
quickly, to tell it to Monsieur de Vaudeville that he had a good prisoner; who
having received this good news rejoiced greatly, and the next day sent me with
his physician and four Soldiers to the wood Castle to know if his prisoner
would give him fifteen thousand Crowns for a ransom; he would send him free
to his own house, and for the present he desired but the security of two
Merchants of Antwerp, that he would name. The said Lord Vaudeville pers vaded
me that I would make his agreement with his prisoner. See then why he sent me
to the wooden Castle, and commanded the Captain of the Castle to use him
well, and to put him into a Chamber hung with Tap^strie, and that they should
make his guard more strong, and from that time they made him good cheer at his
expense.

The answer of the said Lord of Bauge was, that to put himself to ransom he
was not able; and that, that depended upon Monsieur d'Estamps his Uncle, and
of Mistrisse de Bressure his Aunt, and that he had not any means to pay such a
ransom. I returned with my keepers to the said Lord Vaudeville, and told him
the answer of his said prisoner, who told me, Perhaps he should not out at so
good a rate, which was true, for he was discovered. And forthwith the Queen of
Hungary, and the Duke of Savoy sent word to the Lord Vaudeville, that this
morsel was too great for him, and that he must send him to them, (which he
did) and that he had enough prisoners besides him: he was put to forty thousand
Crowns ransom besides other expenses.

Returning toward the said Lord Vaudeville I passed by S. Omer, where I saw
their great pieces of battery, whereof the greatest part was flawed and broken.
I came back also by Therouenne, where I did not see so much as stone upon
stone, unless the mark of a great Church. For the Emperor gave commandment
to the country people within five or six leagues about, that they should empty
and carry away the stones; in so much, that now one may drive a Cart over the
City, as is likewise done at Hedin, without any appearance of Castle or
Fortress. See then the mischief which comes by the wars.

And to return to my purpose, presently after my said Lord Vaudeville was very
well of his Ulcer and little wanted of the entire cure, which was the cause he
gave me my leave, and made me be conducted with a Passeport by a Trumpet to
Abbeville, where I took post, and went and found the King Henry my Master at
Au^imon, who received me with joy, and a good countenance.

He sent for the Duke of Guise the high Constable of France, and Monsieur
d'Estrez, to understand by me what had past at the taking of Hedin; and I made
them a faithful report, and assured them I had seen the great pieces of
Battery, which they had carried to S. Omer. Whereof the King was very joyful,
because he feared least the enemy should come further into France. He gave me
two hundred Crowns to retire my self to my own house, and I was very glad to
be in liberty and out of this great torment and noise of Thunder from the
Diabolicke artillery, and far from the Soldiers, blasphemers and deniers of
God. I will not omit to tell here that after the taking of Hedin, the king was
advertised that I was not slain, but that I was a prisoner, which his Majesty
caused to be written to my wife by Monsieur du Goguier his chief Physician,
and that she should not be in any trouble of mind for me, for that I was safe
and well, and that he would pay my ransom.

The Battle of S. Quintin. 1557.
AFter the battle of S. Quintin, the King sent me to the Fere in Tartemis
toward Monsieur the Marshall of Bourdillon, to have a Passeport by the Duke of
Savoy to go to dress Monsieur the Constable, who was grievously hurt with a
Pistollshot in the back, whereof he was like to dye, and remained a prisoner
in his enemies hands. But the Duke of Savoy would never give consent that I
should go to the said Lord Constable, saying he should not remain without a
Surgeon, and that he doubted I was not sent only to dress him, but to give
him some advertisement, and that he knew I understood something else besides
Surgery, and that he knew me to have been his prisoner at Hedin. Monsieur
the Marshall of Bourdillon advertized the King of the Dukes denial, by which
means the King writ to the said Lord of Bourdillon, that if my Lady, the Lord
high Constables wife, did send any body of her house; which was an able man,
that I should give him a letter, and that I should also have told him by word
of mouth, what the King and Monsieur the Cardinal of Lorraine had given me in
charge. Two days after there arrives a servant of the Lord Constables Chamber,
who brought him shirts, and other linen, for which the said Lord Marshall gave
Passe-port, to go to the said Lord Constable; I was very glad thereof, and
gave him my letter, and gave him his lesson, of that which his Master should
do, being prisoner. I had thought being discharged of my embassage to return
toward the King. But the said Lord of Bourdillon prayed me to stay with him at
the Fere to dress a great number of people who were hurt, and were thither
retired after the battle; and that he would send word to the King, the cause
of my stay; which I did. The wounds of the hurt people were greatly stin^king,
and full of worms with Gangreene and putrefaction; so that I was constrained
to come to my knife to amputate that which was spoyld, which was not without
cutting off arms and legs, as also to Trepan diverse. Now there were not any
medicines to be had at the F^re, because the Chirurgions of our Camp had
carried all with them; I found out that the Chariot of the Artillery tarried
behind at the Fere, nor had it yet been touched. I prayed the said Lord
Marshall that he would cause some of the drogues to be delivered unto me which
were in it; which he did, and there was given to me, one half only at a time*
and five or six days after I way constrained to take therest, neither was
there half enough to dress so great a number of the people, and to correct
and stay the putrefaction, and to kill the worms which were entered into their
wounds; I washed them with Aeyptiacum dissolved in wine and Aqua vitae, and did
for them, all which I could possible, yet notwithstanding all my diligence,
very many of them dyed.

There were Gentlemen at the Fere who had charge to find out the dead body of
Monsieur de Bois-Dolphin the elder, who had been slain in the battle; they
prayed me to accompany them to the Camp to find him out amongst the dead, if
it were possible, which indeed was impossible; seeing that the bodies were all
disfavoured and overwhelmed with putrefaction. We saw more than half a league
about us the earth covered with dead bodies; neither could we abide long there,
for the cadaverous sents, which did arise from the dead bodies, as well of men,
as of horses. And I think we were the cause, that so great a number of flies,
rose from the dead bodees, which were procreated by their humidity and the
heat of the Sun, having their tails green and blew; that being up in the
air made a shadow in the Sun We heard them buzze, or humme, which was much
mervaile to us. And I think it was enough to cause the Plague, where they
alighted. (My little master) I would you had been there as I was, to
distinguish the ordures and also to make report to them which were never there.
Now being cloyed and annoyed in that Country, I prayed Monsieur the Lord
Marshall, to give me my leave to be gone, and that I was affrayd I should be
sick, by reason of my too great pains, and the stinckes which did arise from
the wounded bodies, which did almost all dye, for what diligence soever was
used unto them. He made other Chirurgions, to come finish the dressing of the
said hurt people, and I went away with his good grace and favor. He wrote a
letter to the King, of the pains I had taken with the poor wounded. Then I
returned to Paris, where I found yet many Gentlemen who had been hurt, and
were there retired after the battle.

The Voyage of the Camp of Amiens, 1558.
THe King sent me to Dourlan, and made me to be conducted by Captain Govas^
with fifty men in arms, for fear I should be taken by the enemies. And seeing
that in the way we were always in alarums, I caused my man to alight, making
him to be my master for that time, and I got upon his horse, which carried my
male, and took his cloak and hat, and gave him my ambling Mare. My man being
upon her back, one would have taken him for the master, and I for the servant.
Those of Dourlan seeing us far off, thought we were enemies, and let fly
their Cannon shot at us. Captain Govas^ my conductor, made sign with his hat,
that we were not enemies, so that they left shooting, and we entered into
Dourlan with great joy. Those of Dourlan made a sally forth, upon the enemies
five or six days before, who killed and hurt diverse of our Captains, and good
soldiers; and amongst the rest Captain St. Aubin valiant at the sword, whom
Monsieur de Guise loved very well, and for whom chiefly the King sent me
thither, who being in the fit of a quartaine fever, would needs go out to
command the greatest part of his company: a Spaniard seeing him that he
commanded, perceived he was a Captain, and shot a musket bullet quite through
his neck; my Captain Saint Aubin thought with this stroke he was dead, and
with the fear (I protest to God) he lost his quartane ague, and was altogether
freed from it. I dressed him with Anthony Portall Surgeon in ordinary to the
King, and diverse other Soldiers: some dyed, others escaped quit with the loss
of a leg, or an arm, or the loss of an eye, and they said they escaped good
cheap, escape that can. When the enemy had broke their Camp, I returned to
Paris. Here I hold my peace of my little master, who was more at ease in his
house than I at the Wars.

The voyage of Harbor of Grace, 1563.
YEt I will not omit to speak of the voyage of the Harbor of Grace; then when
they made the approaches to plant the Artillery, the English who were within it
killed some of our Soldiers, and diverse Pioners, who undermined, who when they
were seen to be so hurt that there was no hope of curing, their fellows
stripped them and put them yet alive, in the mines, which served them for so much
filling earth. The English seeing they could not withstand an assault, because
they were very much attainted with diseases, and chiefly with the Plague, they
yielded, their lives and jewels saved. The King caused them to have ships to
return to England, being glad to be out of this place infected with the
Plague: the greatest part dyed, and carried the Plague into England, and since
have not yet been exempted. Captain Sarlabous master of the Camp, was left
there in garrison, with six Ensigns on foot, who had no fear of the Plague,
and were very joyful to enter therein, hoping there to make good cheer. My
little master had you been there you had done as they.

The Voyage to Rouen, 1562.
NOw for the taking of Rouen they killed diverse of ours before the assault, and
at the assault: the day after they entered into the City, I Trepaned eight or
nine, who were hurt at the breach with the strokes of stones. There was so
malignant an air, that diverse dyed, yea of very small hurts, insomuch that
some thought they had poisoned their bullets: those within said the like by us,
for although they were well treated in their necessities within the City, yet
they dyed also as well as those without. The King of Navar was hurt in the
shoulder with a bullet some sew days before the assault; I visited and help^
to dress him, with his own Surgeon, named Master Gilbert one of the chief
of Montpelier, and others. They could not find the bullet, I searched for it
very exactly, I perceived by conjecture, that it was entered by the head of the
Adiutorium, and that it had run into the cavity of the said bone, which was
the cause we could not find it. The most part of them said it was entered and
loft within the cavity of the body. Monsieur the Prince of the Rock upon You,
who intimately loved the King of Navarre, drew me to one side, and asked me if
the wound was mortal. I told him yea, because all wounds made in great joints,
and principally contused wounds, were mortal according to all Authors who have
written of them. He enquired of the others what they thought, and cheefely of
the said Gilbert, who told him that he had great hope that the King his
master, would be cured, and the said Prince was very joyful. Four days after
the King and the Queen mother, Monsieur the Cardinal of Bourbon his brother,
Monsieur the Prince of Rock upon Yon, Monsieur de Guise, and other great
personages, after we had dressed the King of Navarre, caused a consultation to
be made in their presences, where there was diverse Physicians and Chirurgions:
each man said what seemed good unto him, and there was not one of them, who had
not good hope of him; saying that the King would be cured, and I persisted
always on the contrary.

Monsieur the Prince of the Rock upon Yon who loved me, withdrew me aside, and
said I was only against the opinion of all the rest, and prayed me not to be
obstinate against so many worthy men. I answered him, that when I saw any good
signs of cure, I would change my advise. Diverse consultations were made, where
I never changed my word, and prognosticke, such as I had made at the first
dressing, and always said that the arm would fall into a Gangreene, which it
did, what diligence soever could be had to the contrary; and gave up his soul
to God the eighteenth day of his hurt. Monsieur the Prince Upon Yon, having
heard of the death of the said King, sent his Physician and Surgeon toward
me, named Feure now in ordinary to the King, and to the Queen Mother, to tell
me, that he would have the bullet taken out, and that it should be looked for in
what place so ever it could be found: then I was very joyful, and told them
that I was well assured to find it quickly, which I did in their presences,
and diverse gentlemen. It was lodged in the very midst of the cavity of the
Adiutory bone. My said Prince having it, showed it to the King and the Queen,
who all said, my prognosticke was found true. The body was laid to rest in the
Castle Galliard, and I returned to Paris, where I found diverse hurt men who
were hurt at the breach at Rouen, and cheefely Italians, who desired me very
much to dress them, which I did willingly; there were diverse that recovered;
and others dyed. I believe (my little master) you were called to dress some of
them, for the great number there was of them.

The Voyage of the battle of Dreux 1562.
THe day after the battle given at Dreun, the King commanded me, to go dress
Monsieur the Count of Eu, who had been hurt with a Pistol shot in the right
thigh, near the joint of the hippe; which fractured and broke the Os femoris
in diverse places, from whence diverse accidents did arise, and then death, which
was to my great grief. The day after my arrival I would go to the field,
where the battle was given, to see the dead bodies; I saw a league about, all
the earth covered, where there was by estimation five and twenty thousand men,
or more. All which were dispatched in the space of two hours. I would (my
little master) for the love I bear you, that you had been there to recount it
to your scholars and to your children. Now in the mean time while I was at
Dreux I visited and dressed a great number of gentlemen and poor Soldiers, and
amongst the rest many Swisser Captains, I dressed 14 in one chamber, only all
hurt with Pistol shot, and other instruments of Diabolical fire, and not one
of the fourteen dyed. Monsieur the Count of E^ being dead, I made no long
tarrying at Dreux: there came Chirurgions from Paris who performed well their
duty toward the hurt people, as Pigray, Cointeret, Hubert, and others; and I
returned to Paris, where I found diverse gentlemen wounded, who had retired
themselves thither after the battle to be dressed of their hurts.

The Voyage of the battle of Moncontor. 1569.
DVring the battle of Moncontour King Charles was at Plessei the Towers, where
he neard they had won it; a great number of hurt gentlemen and Soldiers with
drew themselves into the City and suburbs of Towers, to be dressed and help^,
where the King and Queen Mother commanded me to show my duty with the other
Chirurgions, who were then in quarter, as Pigray, du Bois, Portail, and one
named Siret, a Surgeon of Towers, a man very skillful in Surgery, and at
that time Surgeon to the Kings brother; and for the multitude of the wounded
we were but little in repose, nor the Physicians likewise. Count Mansfield
Governer of the Duchy of Luxembourge, Knight of the King of Spaines order, was
greatly hurt in the battle, in the left arm, with a Pistol shot, which broke
a great part of the joint of the elbow, and had retired himself to Bourgueil
near Towers; being there he sent a gentlemen to the King, affectionately to
beseech him to send one of his Chirurgions to help him in his hurt. Counsel
was held what Surgeon should be sent. Monsieur the Marshall of Montmorency
told the King and the Queen, that it were best to send him his chief
Surgeon, and declared to them that the said Lord Mansfield was one part of
the cause of winning the battle. The King said flat he would not that I should
go, but would have me remain close to him. Then the Queen Mother said, I
should but go and come, and that he must consider it was a strange Lord, who
was come from the King of Spaines side, to help and succor him. And upon this
he permitted me to go, provided that I should return quickly. After this
resolution he sent for me, and likewise the Queen Mother, and commanded me to
go find the said Lord Mansfield in the place, where I was to serve him in all
I could, for the cure of his hurt; I went and found him, having with me a
letter from their Majesty's: having seen it, he received me with a good will,
and from thenceforth discharged three other Chirurgions that dressed him; which
was to my great grief, because his hurt seemed to me uncureable. Now at
Bourgueil there were retired diverse gentlmen, who had been hurt at the said
battle, knowing that Mounsieur de Guise was there, who had been also very
much hurt with a Pistol shot through one leg, well assured that he would
have good Chirurgions to dress him, and also that he being kind and liberal,
would assist them with a great part of their necessities. And for my part, I
did help and aid them in my Art as much as it was possible; some dyed, some
recovered, according to their hurts. The Count Ringrave died, who had such a
shot in the shoulder, as the King of Navarro before Rouen, Monsieure de
Bassompiere Colonel of twelve hundred horse, was hurt also in such a like
place as Count Mansfield, whom I dressed and God cured. God so well blessed my
work that within three weeks I led him back to Paris, where I must yet make
some incisions in the arm of the said Lord Mansfield, to draw out the bones
which were greatly broken and caries'd, he was cured by the grace of God, and
gave me an honest reward, so that I was well contented with him and he with me,
as he has since made it appear: he writ a letter to the Duke of Ascot how
that he was cured of his hurt, and also Monsieur de Bassompiere of his, and
diverse others, which I had dress'^ after the battle of Montcontour, and
counseled him to beseech the King of France my good master, to give me leave
to go see Monsieur the Marquess of Auret his brother.

Voyage of Flanders.
MOnsieur the Duke of Ascot did not fail to send a Gentleman to the King with
a letter, humbly to beseech him to do him so much good and honor, as to
permit and command his chief Surgeon to come see the Marquess of Auret his
brother; who had received a Musket shot near the knee, with fracture of the
bone, about seven months since, with the Physicians and Chirurgions in those
parts were much troubled to cure. The King sent for me, and commanded me to go
see the said Lord Auret, and to help him in all that I could for the cure of
his hurt; I told him I would employ all that little knowledge which it had
pleased God to give me. I went then conducted by two Gentlemen to the Castle of
Auret, which is a league and a half from Mounts in Hainaut, where the said
Marquess was: as soon as I arrived I visited him, and told him the King had
commanded me to come see him, and to dress him of his hurt; he told me he was
glad of my coming, and was much bound to the King to have done him the honor,
to have sent me to him. I found him in a great Fever, his eyes very much
sunk, with a countenance ghastly and yellow, his tongue dry and rough, and all
the body emaciated and lean, his speech low like that of a dying man: then I
found his thigh much swelled, apostemated, ulcerated, and casting out a green
stinking matter; I searched it with a silver probe, and by the same I found a
cavity near the groyne, ending in the middle of the thigh, and others about
the knee, sauious and cuniculous; also certain scales of bones some separated,
others not. The Leg was much tumified, and soaked with a pituitous humor,
cold, moist, and flatulent; in so much that the natural heat was in the way
to be suffocated, and extinguished, and the said Leg crooked and retracted
toward the buttockes, his rumpe ulcerated the breadth of the palm of an hand,
and he said he felt there a great pain and smarting, and likewise in his
reins, inso much that he could not take any rest night or day; neither had
he any appetite to eat, but to drink enough; it was told me he fell often
into faintings and swoonings, and sometimes as it were into an Epilepsie, and
had oftentimes desire to vomit, with such a trembling that he could not carry
his hands to his mouth. Seeing and considering all these great accidents, and
the forces much abated; truly I was much grieved to have gone to him, because
me thought there was little appearance that he could escape. Notwithstanding to
give him courage and good hope, I told him, that I would quickly set him on
foot by the grace of God, and the Physicians and Chirurgions help. Having
seen him, I went a walking into a Garden, where I prayed to God that he would
give me the grace to cure him, and that he would give a blessing to our hands,
and medicaments, to combat against so many complicated maladies. I bethought
in my mind the ways I must keep to do it. They called me to dinner, I
entered into the kitehin where I saw taken out of a great pot, half, a Mutton,
a quarter of Veale, three great pieces of Beef, and two Pullets, and a great
piece of Bacon, with great store of good Herbs. Then I said to my self this
broth was full of juice, and of good nourishment; After dinner all the
Physicians and Chirurgions assembled, we entered into conference in the presence
of Monsieur the Duke of Ascot, and some Gentlemen that did accompany him; I
began to tell the Chirurgions that I mervailed much they had made no apertions
in the Marquesses thigh; which was all apostemated, and the matter which issued
out was very foul and stinking, which showed it had a long time lurked there,
and that I had found with my probe a Caries in the bone, and small scales which
were already separated; they made me answer, he would never give consent, and
likewise it was almost two months since they could win him to put on clean
sheets on his bed, neither dust one scarce touch the coverlet, he feelt so
great pain. Then said I, for to cure him, we must touch other things than the
coverlet of the bed. Each one said what he thought best of the Lords grief,
and for conclusion held it altogether deplorable. I told them there was yet
some hope, because of his youth, and that God and nature do sometime such
things which seem to Physicians and Chirurgions to be impossible. My
consultation was, that all these accidents were come by reason of the bullet
hitting near the joint of the knee, which had broken the Ligaments, tendons,
and aponeureses of the muscles which tie the said joint together with the Os
femoris; also nerves, veins, and arteries from whence had followed pain,
inflammation, aposteme and ulcer: and that we must begin the cure by the
disease, which was the cause of all the said accidents, that is to say, to make
apertions to give issue to the matter retained in the interspaces of the
muscles, and in the substance of them: Likewise to the bones which caused a
great corruption in the whole thigh, from whence the vapors did arise and were
carried to the heart, which caused the sincope, and the fever; and the fever
an universal heat through the whole body; and by consequent, depravation of
the whole Occonomie; Like-wise that the said vapors were communicated to the
brain, which caused the Epilipsie, and trembling, and to the stomach disdain
and loathing, and hindered it from doing his functions, which are cheefely to
concoct and digest the meat, and to convert it into Chylu^; which not being
well concocted, they engender crudities and obstructions, which makes that the
parts are not nourished, and by consequent the body dryes, and grows lean;
and because also it did not do any exercise, for every part which has not his
motion remains languid, and atrophiated, because the heat and spirits are
not sent or drawn thither, from whence follows mortification. And to nourish
and fatten the body, frictions must be made universally through the whole body,
with warm linen clothes, above, below, on the right side, and left, and
round about: to the end to draw the blood and spirits from within outward, and
to resolve any fuliginous vapors retained between the skin, and the flesh;
thereby the parts shall be nourished and restored, (as I have heretofore said
in the tenth book treating of wounds of Gunshot) and we must then cease when
we see heat and redness in the skin, for fear of resolving that we have
already drawn, and by consequent make it become more lean. As for the Ulcer
which he had upon his rumpe, which came through too long lying upon it without
being remooved, which was the cause that the spirits could not flourish or shine
in it; by the means of which there should be inflammation, aposteme and then
ulcer, yea with loss of substance of the subject flesh, with a very great
pain; because of the nerves which are disseminated in this part. That we must
likewise put him into another soft bed, and give him a clean shirt, and
sheets; otherwise all that we could do would serve for nothing, because that
those excrements and vapors of the matter retained so long in his bed, are
drawn in by the Systole and Diastole of the Arteries which are disseminated
through the skin, and cause the spirits to change and acquire an ill quality
and corruption, which is seen in some that shall lie in a bed where one has
sweat for the Pox, who will get the Pox by the putrid vapors which shall
remain soaked in the sheets and coverlets. Now the cause why he could in no
wise sleep, and was as it were in a consumption, it was because he eat little,
and did not do any exercise, and because he was grieved with extreme pain.
For there is nothing that abateth so much the strength as pain. The cause why
his tongue was dry and foul, was through the vehemence of the heat of the
fever, by the vapors which ascended through the whole body to the mouth. For
as we say in a common proverb, when an Oven is well heat, the throat feels
it. Having discoursed of the causes and accidents, I said they must be cured by
their contraries, and first we must appease the pain, making apertions in the
thigh to evacuate the matter retained, not evacuating all at a time for fear
least by a sudden great evacuation there might happen a great decay of
spirits, which might much weaken the patient and shorten his days. Secondly,
to look unto the great swelling and cold in his Leg, fearing least it should
fall into a Gangreene; and that actual heat must be applied unto him because
the potentiall could not reduce the intemperature, de potenti^ ad actum; for
this cause hot brickes must be applied round about, on which should be cast a
decoction of nervall herbs boiled in wine and Vinegar, then wrapped up in some
napkin, and to the feet an earthen bottle filled with the said decoction,
stopped and wrapped up with some linen clothes; also that somentations much be
made upon the thigh, and the whole Leg, of a decoction made of Sage,
Rosemary, Time, Lavender, flowers of Camomile, melilot, and red Roses boiled in
white wine, and a Lixivium made with oak ashes with a little Vinegar, and
half an handful of salt. This decoction has virtue to attenuate, incise,
resolve and dry the gross viscous humor. The said fomentations must be used
a long while, to the end there may be a greater resolution; for being so done
a long time together, more is resolved than attracted, because the humor
contained in the part is liquified, the skin and the flesh of the muscles is
ratified. Thirdly, that there must be applied upon the rumpe a great emplaster
made of the red desiccative and Vnguentum Comitissae of each equal parts
incorporated together, to the end to appease his pain and dry up the Ulcer,
also to make him a little down pillow which might bear his rumpe aloft
without leaning upon it. Fourthly to refresh the heat of his kidneys one
should apply the unguent called Refrigerans Galeni freshly made, and upon that
the leaves of water Lillies. Then a napkin dipped in Oxycrate, wrung out and
often renewed: and for the corroboration and strengthening of his heart a
refreshing medicine should be applied made with oil of nenuphar, and unguent
of Roses and a little saffron dissolved in Rose Vinegar, and Treakle spread
upon a piece of Scarlet: For the Sincope which proceeded from the debilitation
of the natural strength troubling the brain. Also he must use good
nourishment full of juice, as rere eggs, Damask prunes stewed in wine and
sugar, also Panado made with the broth of the great pot (of which I have
already spoken) with the white fleshy parts of Capons, and Partridge wings
minced small, and other rostmeate easy of disgestion, as Veale, Goat, Pigeon,
Partridge, and the like. The sauce should be Orenges, Verjuice, Sorrel, sharp
Pomegranets; and that he should likewise eat of them boiled with good herbs;
as Sorrel, Lettice, Purslan, Succory, Boglosse, Marygolds, and other the like.
At night he might use cleansed barley with juice of Nenuphar and Sorrel, of
each two ounces, with five or six grains of Opium and of the four cold seeds
bruised, of each half an ounce, which is a remedy nourishing and medicinal,
which will provoke him to sleep: that his bread should be of Meslin, neither
too new nor too stale; and for the great pain of his head, his hair must be
cut, and rub his head with Oxirrhodinum luke warm, and leave a double cloth
wet therein upon it; likewise should be made for him a frontall of oil of
Roses, Nenuphar, Poppies, and a little opium and Rose Vinegar, and a little
Campher and to renew it sometimes. Moreover one should cause him to smell to
the flowers of Henbane and Nenuphar bruised with Viniger Rosewater, and a
little campher wrapped in a handkercher, which shall be often and a long time
held to his nose to the end that the smell may be communicated to the brain,
and these things to be continned till that the great inflammation and pain be
past, for fear of cooling the brain too much. Besides, one may cause it to
rain artificially in pouring down from some high place into a kettle, and
that it make such a noise that the patient may hear it, by these means sleep
shall be provoked on him. And as for the retraction of his Leg that there
was hope to redress it, when evacuation was made of the matter and other
humors contained in the thigh, which by their extention (made by repletion)
have drawn back the Leg, which might be remedied in rubbing the whole joint
of the knee with Vnguentum Dialth^a and oil of Lillies, and a little aqu^
vitae, and upon it to be laid, black wool with the grease thereof. Likewise
putting in the hamme a feather-pillow foulded in double, and by little and
little to make his Leg to stretch out. All which my discourse was well
approoved of by the Physicians and Chirurgions: the consultation ended we went
to the sick patient, and I made him three apertions in his thigh, from whence
issued out great quantity of matter and Sanies; and at the same time I drew out
some scales of bones, nor would I let out too much abundance of the said
matter for fear of too much decaying his strength: Then two or three hours
after I caused a bed to be made near his own, where there were clean white
sheets then a strong man lifted him into it, and rejoiced much in that he was
taken out of his foul stinking bed. Soon after he demanded to sleep, which
he did almost four hours, where all the people of the house began to
rejoice, cheefely Monsieur the Duke of Ascot his brother.

The days following I made injections into the bottom and cavities of the
Ulcer, made with Aegyptiacum, dissolved sometimes in aqu^ vitae, and sometimes
in wine. I applied to mundifie and dry the spongie and loose flesh, bolsters,
at the bottom of the sinuosityes hollow tents of Lead, that the Sanies might
have passage out; and upon it a great Emplaster of Diacalcitheos dissolved in
wine: likewise I did roll it with such dexterity, that he had no pain, which
being appea^ed the fever began much to diminish. Then I made him drink wine
moderately allayed with water, knowing that it restores and quickens the
spirits: and all the things which we rested on in the consultation were
accomplished, according to time, and order; and his pains and fever ceased, he
began to grow better, and discharged two of his Chirurgions, and one of his
Physicians, so that we were but three with him. Now I remained thereabout two
months, which was not without seeing diverse sick people, as well rich as
poor which came to me three or four leagues about. They gave meat and drink
to the needy, all which he recommended to me, and prayed me also for his sake
to help them. I protest I did not refuse any one, and did to them what I
possibly could, whereof he was joyful. Then when I saw he began to mend, I
told him he must have a consort of Violons and a jester to make him merry,
which he did: in one month we so wrought, that he could hold himself up in a
chair, and made himself to be carried and walk in his garden, and at the
gate of his Castle to see the people pass by. The Country people of two or
three leagues about, knowing they could see him, came the feast day male and
female, to sing and dance pell mell, in joy of his amendment, allbeing very
glad to see him, which was not done without good laughing and drinking. He
caused still a barrel of beer to be given them, and they drank all merrily
to his good health. And the Citizens of Mont Hainaut and other gentlemen
neighbors came to see him in admiration, as a man coming from the tomb. And
as soon as he began to mend, he was not without company, and as one went out
another came in, to visit him: his table was always well covered. He was
greatly loved of the Nobility, and of the common people, as well for his
liberality as by reason of his beauty, and honesty, having a pleasant look and
a gracious speech, insomuch that those that beheld his face were constrained to
love him. The chief of the City of Monts came on Saturday to beseech him to
permit me to go to Monts, where they had a great desire to feast, and make me
good cheer for his sake. He told them he would pray me to go there, which he
did. But I made them answer that they should not do me so much honor, as
also that they could not give me better cheer than I had with him. And he
prayed me again affectionately to go thither, and that I should do that for
his sake, to which I agreed. The day after they fetched me with two Coaches, and
being arrived at Monts we found the dinner ready, and the chief of the City
with their wives, stayed for me with a good will. We went to the Table and
they placed me at the upper end, and drank all to me, and to the health of
Monsieur D'auret, saying that he was very happy, and they likewise to have
obtained me to take him in hand, for that they knew that in this company, he
was greatly honored and loved. After dinner they led me back to the Castle
of Auret, where Monsieur the Marquess stayed for me with great expectation to
recount unto him, what we had done in our banquet, I told him that all the
company had drank diverse times to his health in 6 weeks he began to uphold
himself a little with crutches, and to grow very fat and get a lively natural
color. Now he had a desire to go to Beaumont which is the dwelling place of
Monsieur the Duke of Ascot, and made himself be carried in a great chair with
eight men by turns, and the Country folks where we passed along, knowing
'twas Monsieur the Marquess fought and strove together who should carry him,
and constrained us to drink, but it was but Beer, but I believe had it been
Wine or Hippocras they would have given it us with a very good will, so much
did they show themselves joyful to see the said Marquess, and prayed all to
God for him. Being arrived at Beaumont all the people came before us to do him
reverence, and prayed God to bless him, and keep him in good health. We
entered into the Castle where there was more than 50 gentlemen which the Duke of
Ascot had sent for to come make good cheer with his brother, who kept his
table furnished three days together. After dinner the gentlemen run at the
Ring, played at Foyles, and rejoiced greatly to see Monsieur Auret, because they
had heard he would never come out of his bed again, or be cured of his hurt. I
was always at the upper end of the table, where every one draul^^ ^arouses to
him, and me, thinking to make me foxt, which they could not do: for I drank but
according to my old custom. A few days after we returned back and took
leave of Madam the Duchess of Ascot, who took a Diamond ring from her finger
which she gave me, acknowledging I had very well dressed her brother; which
Diamond was more worth than fifty Crowns. Monsieur Auret grew still better and
better, and walked all alone round about his garden with crutches. I begged
leave of him diverse times, to come away to Paris, declaring that his Physician,
and Surgeon, would well do the rest that remained, for the cure of his
grief. And now to begin a little to estrange my self from him, I prayed him to
give me leave to go see the City of Antwerp, which he willingly accorded to:
and commanded his Steward to conduct me thither accompanied with two Pages: we
passed through Malign^s and Bruxelle, where the chief of the City prayed the
said Steward, that at our return they might hear of it; and that they had a
great desire to feast me, as they of Monts had done. I thank't them most
kindly, and told them that I was not worthy of such honor; I was two days and
a half to see the City of Antwerp, where some Merchants knowing the Steward,
prayed him to do them the honor, that they might bestow a dinner or supper
upon us. There was striving who should have us, and were all very joyful to
hear of the good health of the Marquess of Auret, doing me more honor than I
expected. To conclude, we came back to the Marquess making good cheer, and
within five or six days I asked my leave of him, which he granted with great
grief, and gave me an honest Present, and of great value, and made me be
conducted by the said master of his house and two Pages, even to my house at
Paris.

I have forgot to tell you, that the Spaniards have since ruined, and demolisht
his Castle of Auret, sacked, pillaged, rifled and burnt all the houses, and
Villages belonging unto him, because he would not be of their side, in the
slaughters and ruins of the Low Countries.

The Voyage of Bourges, 1562.
THe King with his Camp remained not long at Bourges, but those within yielded
it up, and went out with their jewels saved. I know nothing worthy of memory,
but that a Boy of the Kings privy kitchen, who being near the walls of the
City before the composition was made, cried with a loud voice, Huguenot,
huguenot; shoot here, shoot here, having his arms lifted up, and his hand
stretched out; a soldier shot his hand quite through with a bullet: having
received his stroke, he came and found me out to dress him. My Lord high
Constable, seeing the Boy to have his hand all bloody, and all rent and torn;
demanded of him who had hurt him. Then there was a gentleman who saw the shot
made, said it was well bestowed because he cried, Huguenot, shoot here, shoot
here. Then the said Lord Constable said this Huguenot was a good musketiere,
and bare a pitiful mind, for it was very likely if he would have shot at his
head, he might have done it more easily than in the hand. I dressed the said
Cook who was very sick, but at length was cured, but with lamenesse of his
hand, and ever since his companions call him Huguenot; he is living.

The battle of Saint De^is, 1567.
ANd as for the battle of Saint Denis, there were diverse slain as well on one
side as on the other: ours being hurt, went back to Paris to be dressed
together with the Prisoners who were taken, whereof I dressed a great part. The
King commanded me by the request of the Lady high Constable, to go to her
house to dress my Lord, who had received a Pistol shot in the middle of the
spondills of his back, whereby he presently lost all sense and motion of
thighs and legs, with retention of excrements, not being able to cast out
his Urine, nor anything by the fundament, because that the spinall marrow,
(from whence proceed the sinews to give sense and motion to the inferior
parts,) was bruised, broken, and torn by the vehemence of the bullet. He
likewise loft his reason, and understanding, and in a few days he dyed. The
Chirurgions of Paris were a long time troubled to dress the said wounded
people, I believe (my little master) that you saw some of them. I beseech the
great God of Victories, that we may never be employed in such evil encounters,
and disasters.

The voyage of Bayonne, 1564.
NOw I say moreover, what I did in the voyage with the King to Bayonne, where
we have been two years and more to compass all this Kingdom, where in
diverse Cities and Villages I have been called into consultations for diverse
diseases, with the deceased Monsieur Chaplain chief Physician to the King,
and Monsieur Chastellan chief to the Queen Mother, a man of great honor and
knowledge in Physic and Surgery: making this voyage I was always
inquisitive of the Chirurgions if they had marked any rare thing of remarke in
their practice, to the end to learn some new thing. Being at Bayonne there
happened two things of remarke for the young Chirurgions. The first was, that I
dressed a Spanish Gentleman, who had a greevous great impostume in his throat:
he came to have been touched by the deceased King Charles for the Evil. I
made incision in his Aposteme, where there was found great quantity of creeping
worms as big as the point of a spindle, having a black head; and there was
great quantity of rotten flesh. Moreover there was under his tongue an
impostume called ^anula, which hindered him to utter forth his words, and to
eat and swallow his meat: he prayed me with his held up hands to open it for
him if it could be done without peril of his person, which I immediately did,
and found under my Lancet a solid body, which was five stones like those which
are drawn from the bladder. The greatest was as big as an Almond and the other
like little long Beans, which were five in number; in this aposteme was
contained a slimy humor of a yellow color which was more than four
spoonefulls; I left him in the hands of a Surgeon of the City to finish the
cure.

Monsieur de Fontaine Knight of the Kings Order, had a great continual
pestilent Fever, accompanied with diverse Carboneles in diverse parts of his
body, who was two days without ceasing to bleed at nose, nor could it be
stancht; and by that means the fever ceased with a very great sweat, and
soon after the Charboncles ripened and were by me dressed and by the grace of
God cured.

I have published this Apology to the end that each man may know, with what
foot I have always marched, and I think there is not any man so ticklish,
which takes not in good part what I have said, seeing my discourse is true,
and that the effect shows the thing to the eye, reason being my warrant
against all Calumnies.

The end of the Apology and Voyages.
FINIS.
A GENERAL TABLE OF ALL THE CHIEF THINGS TREAted of in this Work.
A
ABortions why frequent in a pestilent season. Page 821 their causes, etc. 921
Abductores musculi. 223, and 238 Abscesses how to be opened. 259 Aconite, the
symptoms caused thereby, and their cure. 807 Actual Cauteries preferred
before Potentiall, 749. Their forms and use, 750. 751. Their force against
venomous bites. 784 Action, the definition and division thereof, 23 Voluntary
Action. 24 Adders their bitings, the symptoms thereone usuing, together with
the cure. 790 Adiposa vena. 116 Adductores musculi. 222 Adjuncts of things
natural. 27 Ad^ata, sive Conjunctiva, one of the coats of the Eye. 182
Aegilops what, 948. the differences thereof, Ibid. the cure. 649 Aegyptiacum,
the force thereof against putrefaction, 433. a cleanser and not a suppurative,
46. descriptions thereof, 456, 423. the praise thereof. 856 Afterbirth, see
Secundine. 1 After-tongue. 195 After-wrest. 518 Age what, the division thereof.
9 Ages compared to the four seasons of the year. 10 Agony what. 40 Agues,
see Quotidian, Quartaine, Tertian. Bastard Agues how cured. 286 Agglutinative
medicines, 326. their nature and use. 1046 Air an Element, the prime qualities
thereof, 6 the necessity thereof for life, 29. which hurtful, 30. What
understood thereby, ib. How it changes our bodies, 31. Though in Summer colder
than the Brain, 357. How it becomes hurtful, 416. How to be corrected, 429.
Of what force in breeding diseases, 433. What force the Star, have upon it,
434. How that which is corrupt or venomous may kill a man, 782. How it may be
corrupted, 819. Pent up it is apt to putrify, 837. change thereof conduces to
the cure of the Plague. 837 Alae what. 130 Allantoides tunica, there is no
such, showed by three several reasons. 132 Albugineus humor, the use thereof.
184 Almonds of the throat or ears, their History, 193. their tumor with the
causes and signs thereof, 293. The cure. 294 Almonds increase the pain of the
head. 357 Alopecia what; the cause, which curable, and how, and which not. 637
Amnios tunica the substance and composure thereof. 132 Amphiblistroides, vel
retiformis tunica. 183 Amputation of a member when to be made, 457. How to be
performed, 458. To stanch bleeding ensuing thereon, 459. how to dress the
part, 460. To perform the rest of the cure, 461. Sometimes made at a joint.
463 Anatomy, the necessity of the knowledge thereof, 79. A threefold method
thereof, 80. The definition thereof, etc. ibid.
Anatomicall administration of the lower Belly, 87. Of the sternon, 139.
Axioms, 122 152, 183, 212, 226 Aneurisma what, 286. How cured, 287. Which
incurable. ibid. Anger, the effects thereof. 39 Angina, see squinancie. Anima
how many ways taken. 7. See soul. Animal parts which, 83. Their division. 84
Anodyne medicines, 1047. For the eyes, 379 in pains of the teeth. 401 Antidots
must be given in great quantities, 785, No one against all poisons, 809. To be
used in the cure of the plague. 843, 844 Antipathy, see sympathy. Antipathy
between some Men and a Cat, 804. Of poisons with poisons. 823 Ants. 59. Their
care. 60 Apes their immitation of men's actions. 69 Apium risus, the poisonous
quallity thereof, with the cure. 805 Apology concerning wounds made by
Gunshot. 432. That such wounds are not poysonea, 436. Concerning binding of
vessels, etc. 1133 Apophlegmatismes what, and their use. 1069 Apophyses
clinoides. 172, 174 Aphorisms concerning Surgery selected out of
Hippocrates, 1116. 1117. Of the Author. 1119 Apostumes, see impostumes.
Apothecaries, choice of such as shall have care of those sick of the Plague.
830 Appendices glandulosae. 122
Aqua fortis the poisonous quality, and the cure thereof. 810 Aqua theriacalis
the description and manner of making thereof, 755, 824. good against the
Plague. 824 Aqua vitae how distilled. 1100 Aqueus humor. 183 Arachnoides, sive
araneosa tunica. 183 Ar^oticke medicines. 1040 Archagatus a Roman Surgeon,
slain by the people. 5 Argentum Vivum, see Hydrargyrum. l Aristomachus the
Philosopher a great observer of Bees. 59 Arm or shoulderbone, the fractures
thereof. 575 Arm and the bone and muscles thereof, 214. The defect thereof how
to be supplied. 880, 882 Arsnicke, the poyson^us quality thereof, and the cure.
810 Arrows, wounds made by them, and their several forms, 438. How to be
drawn forth. 440 Artery what, 97. The division of the great descendent Artery,
113, 115. Distribution of the left subclavian Artery, 153. Of the Axillarie,
211. Of the crurall, 223. Not dangerous to be opened, 641. Rough Artery, 157.
Figure of the Arteries. 154 Arteria Venosa, and the distribution thereof, 147.
Carotydes, 153. Cervicalis, ibid. Intercostalis, ibid. Mammaria, ibid.
musculosa, ibid. Humeraria duplex, ibid. Thoracica duplex, ibid. Aspera, 156.
Muscula, 225. Arthrodia what. 243 Articulation and the kinds thereof, 242. 243,
244 Ascarides have known. 766 Ascites, see Dropsy. Aspe his bite, and the
symptoms that happen thereon, with their cure. 794 Asses milk how to be used
in the cure of a Heotique. 395 A stragalus. 233 Atheroma what, 271. The cure
thereof, (...). Atrophia how helped. 634, 635 Attractive medicines what, 1039
Auricula cordis. 145 Auripigmentum, the poisonous quality, and the cure
thereof. 810 Autumn, the condition thereof. 10 Axioms anatomicall, 122. 152,
183, 212, 226. Philosophical. 184
B
Backe-bone and the use thereof. 198 Bags, the diversity and use. 1071 Ball
bellows. 415 Balneum Mariae. 1096, 1097 Balsames fit to heal simple, not
contused wounds. 434 Balsame of Vesalius his description, 1107. Of Fallopius
his description, ibid. An anodyne, and sarcoticke one. 402 Bandages, their
differences, 553. What cloth best for them, ibid. Indications how to fit them,
554. Three kinds necessary in fractures, 555 Common precepts for their use,
557. Uses whereto they serve. 558 Barnard the Hermit. 1017 Barrennes, the
cause thereof in men, 931. In women. 932 Basiliske, her description, bite and
the cure thereof. 792 Battail^s where the Author was present, See Voyages. 20
Bathes good in pain of the Eyes. 646 Bathes their faculties and differences,
1074 How to know whence they have their efficacy, ibid. Their faculties and to
whom hurtful 1075. half bathes. 1073 Beautroll a beast of Florida, 1021
Bearwormes, the bites and the cure thereof. 798 Bears, their craft: 56 Beasts,
inventors of some remedies, 56. Their faculty in persaging 57. Their love and
cure of their young, 60. Most wild ones may be tamed, 64. They know one
another voice. 72 Bees their government, 58. Care and justice 59. Their
stinging and the cure thereof, 798 Baggars their cousenages and crafty tricks.
992, 993, etc. Belly, why not bony, 85. The division of the lower belly. ibid.
Bezoar and Bezoarticke medicines. 808 Biceps musculus. 218, and 231 Binding of
the vessels for bleeding, 341. An apology therefore, 1133. Authorities
therefore. 1134. Reason, 1135. Experience, 1136. Histories to confirm it. 1137
Birds their industry in building their nests, 58. Ravenous birds, 70.
Counterfeit man's voice, 72. They have taught men to sing. ibid. Bird of
Paradise. 1017 Birth, see Childbirth. Bitings of man and Beast venenate. 360*
1782 Bitings of a Mad-dogge, Adder etc. see Dog, Adder, etc. Bitter things not
fit to be injected into wounds of the Chest. 390 Bladder of the Gall. 110
Bladder of Urine, 123. The substance, figure, etc. ibid. Signs of the wounds
thereof, 397. Ulcers thereof and their cure 481. 686 Bleare-eyes their
differences and cure. 644 Bleeding in wounds, how helped 328. How stopped by
binding the vessels, 341. Why devised by our Author. 462. In amputation of
Members. 459 Blood, the temper thereof, 11. The material and efficient causes
thereof, 12. Where perfected, ibid. All the four humors comprehended under
that general name, ibid. compared with new wine, ibid. the nature,
consistance, color, taste and use. 13 Blood-letting whether necessary at the
beginning of pestilent diseases. 845 Bloodletting, when necessary in a
synochus. 261. When in an Erysipelas, 263. When in a Tertian, 267. In what
wounds not necessary, 326. The two chief indications thereof, 359. Why
necessary in the Fracture of the beele, 632. See Phlebotomie. Bloody Urine and
the causes thereof. etc. 685 Boate-bone. 234 Body how divided, 83. 85. The
forepart thereof, 86. The back part, 87. The crookedness thereof how helped.
876 Bolsters and other use. 359 Bones, how they feel, 81. Their definition,
138. Their differences, 139. How hurt by the Trepan, 365. What hastens their
scailing, ibid. Their corruption, 371. How helped. 372 Bones of the scull, 162.
Of the face, 178. Of the nose. 179. Of the auditory passage, 191 Of the arm,
214. Of the back, 198. Of the breast, 136. Of the cubit, 217 Of the wrest,
afterwrest and fingers, 218. Seede-bones 220. Of the Thigh, 228. Of the Leg,
231. Of the foot, 233. Of the Toes, 234. A brief recital of all the Bones.
239 Bones more brittle in frosty weather, 562. sooner knit in young bodies,
563. Their general cure being broken or dislocated, 564. How to help the
symptoms happening thereon, 566. Why they become rotten in the Lue venerea,
and how it may be perceived, 747. How helped. ib. Bones sticking in the Throat
or law, how to be got out. 556 Brachiaeus Musculus. 218 Brain and the History
thereof. 165. The Ventricles thereof, 166. The mamillary proccsses. ibid.
Brain, the mooving or concussion thereof, 350 how cured. 376 Breasts, 137.
Their magnitude, figure, etc. ibid. How they communicate with the womb. 138
Breast Bone, the History thereof. 126 Breast bone, the depression or fracture
thereof, bow helped. 570 Brevis musculus. 218 Bronchocele, the differences
thereof and the cure. 298 Bruises, see Contusions. Bubo's, by what means the
humor that causes them flows down. 224 Bubo's, venereall ones returning in
again causes the Lues venerea, 724. Their efficient and material causes, 746.
Their cure. ibid Bubo's in the Plague, whence their original 817. The
description, signs and cure, 853 prognostics. 857 Bubonocele what: 304
Bullets shot out of Guns do not burn, 410. They cannot be poisoned, 412. 437.
remain in the body after the healing of wounds. 429 Buprestes their poison and
the cure. 800 Burns, how kept from blistring, 410. See Combustions.
Byshop-fish. 1002
C.
Cacochymia what. 37 Caecum intestinum. 106 Calcaneum os. 234 Caeliaca arteria.
113 Callus what, and whence it proceeds, 323 Better generated by meats of
gross nourishment, 562. Made more handsome by Ligation, ibid. The material
and efficient causes thereof, 588. Medicines conducing to the generation
thereof, ibid. How to know it is a breeding, 589. What may hinder the
generation thereof, and how to help it being ill formed. 590 Camells their
kinds and condition. 70 Cancer, the reason of the name, 279. Causes thereof,
ibid. differences, 280. Which not to be cured, ibid. The cure if not ulcerated,
ibid. Cure if ulcerated, 281. Topicke medicines to be thereto applied. 282
Cancer or Canker in a child's mouth how to be helped. 905 Cannons, see Guns.
Cantharides, their malignitie and the help thereof, 799. Applied to the head
they ulcerate the bladder. 800 Capons subject to the Gout. 707 Carbuncles
whence their original, 817. Why so called, together with their nature, causes
and signs, 857. prognostickes, ibid. cure 859 Caries ossium. 371 Carpiflexores
musculi. 222 Carpitensores musculi. 221 Cartilago scutiformis, vel en^iformis.
136 Caruncles, their causes, figures and cure, 742. Other ways of cure: 744
Cases, their form and use. 560 Caspilly a strange Fish. 69 Catagmaticke
pouders. 363 Catalogue of Medicines and Instruments for their preparation, 1109
1110, etc. Of Chirurgicall Instruments, 1113, 1114 Cataplasmes, their matter
and use. 1062 Catarractes, where bred, 184. Their differences, causes, etc.
651. Their cure at the beginning, ibid. The couching of them. 653 Catarrhe
sometimes malign and killing many. 821 Cathareticke medicines. 1046 Cats,
their poisonous quality, and the Antipathy between some men and them. 804
Causticke medicines their nature and use. 1046, 1047 Cauteries, actual ones
preferred before potentiall, 749. Their several forms, 749, 750, 751. Their
use, 741. Their force against venomous bites, 784. Potentiall ones. 1064
Cephale what. 243 Cephalica vena. 210 Cephalicke pouders how composed. 752
Cerats what, their differences. 1508 Ceratum oesypi ex Philagrio. 1060 Cerusse,
the poisonous quality thereof, and the cure. 810 Certificates in sundry cases.
1129 Chalazion an affect of the eyelid. 642 Chamelion his shape and nature.
1024 Chance sometimes exceedes Art, 49. Finds out remedies. 409 Change of
native temper, how it happens. 18 Chaphs, or Chops occasicned by the Lues
venerea, and the cure, 754. In diverse parts by other means, and their cure.
957 Charcoale causes suffocation. 1125 Chemosis an affect of the Eyelids. 647
Chest and the parts thereof, 136. Why partly gristly, partly bony, ibid. The
division thereof, 137. The wounds thereof, 388. Their cure, 389. They easily
degenerate into a Fistula. 391 Child, whether alive or dead in the womb, 913.
If dead, then how to be extracted, 914, 915 Children why like their fathers,
and grandfathers, 888. Borne without a passage in the fundament, 898. Their
site in the womb, 900 901. When and how to be weaned, 913. Their pain in
breeping teeth, 959. They may have impostumes in their mothers womb. 594
Childbirth and the cause thereof, 899. The natural and unnatural time
thereof, 901 women have no certain time, ibid. Signs it is at hand 902. What Is
to be done after it. 904 China root, the preparation and use thereof. 730
Surgery, see Surgery. Surgeon, see Surgion. Choler, the temper thereof,
11. The nature consistance, color, taste and use, 13. The effects thereof, 15.
Not natural how bred and the kinds thereof. 16 Choleric persons, their
habit of body, manners and diseases, 17. They cann^t long brook fasting. 707
Chorion what. 132 Chylus, what. 12 Cirsocele, a kind of Rupture, etc. 304. The
cure. 312 Cinnamon and the water thereof. 1105 Chavicle, see Collar-bone.
Cleitoris. 130 Clyster, when presently to be given after bloodletting, 262.
See Glyster. Coats, common coat of the Muscles, the substance, quantity, etc.
thereof, 91. Of the eyes, 182. Of the womb. 132 Cockatrice, see Basiliske.
Cocks are kingly and martial birds. 66 Colchicum the poisonous quality
thereof, and the cure. 866 Collicke, and the kinds thereof, etc. 689 Colon. 106
Collar-bones, or Clavicles, their History, 138, 139. Their fracture, 568. How
to help it, ibid. Their dislocation and cure, 601 Collyria what, their
differences and use, 1067 Color is the bewrayer of the temperament, 28
Columella, see Uvula. Combustions and their differences, 449. their cure. 450
Common sense what, 896 Comparison between the bigger and lesser world. 761
Complexus musculus. 201 Composition of medicines, the necessity thereof. 1099
Compresses, see Bolsters. Concoction, fault of the first concoction not mended
in the after. 707 Concussion of the Brain, 350. how helped. 376 Condylomata,
what they are, and their cure, 957 Conformation, the faults thereof must be
speedily helped. 904 Congestion, two tauses thereof. 250 Contusions what, their
causes, 442. Their general cure, ibid. How to be handled if joined with a
wound 445. How without a wound, ib. how kept from gangrening, 446 Contusions of
the ribs, 447. Their cure 634 Convulsion, the kinds and causes thereof, 329 the
cure, 330 331. Why on the contrary part in wounds of the head. 357 Convulsive
twitching in broken members and the cause thereof. 586 Conies have taught the
art of undermining 66 Cornea tunica. 183 Corone, what. 243 Coronalis vena, 112
Corroborating medicines. 270 Cotyle what. 243 Cotyledones what. 129, 891
Courses, how to provoke them, 863 948. How to stop them, 864, 951 952. The
reason of their name, 945. Their causes, 946. causes of their suppression, 947.
What symptoms follow thereon, 948 symptoms that follow their immoderate
flowing, 951 Crabs. 69 Crampe the cause and cure thereof. 722 Cranes observe
order in flying and keep watch. 67 Cremaster muscles. 120 Cridones what
disease, and the cure. 319 Crocodiles may be tamed. 76 Crookedness how helped.
876 Crurall vein, 224. Artery. 223 Crureus musculus. 232 Crus how taken. 223
Crystallinus humor. 184 Cubit, the bones and muscles thereof. 217 Cubit-bones,
the fracture of them. 555 Cuboides os. 234 Cupping glasses and their use, 694.
Their use in the cure of a Bubo. 853 Cures accidental and strange, 49, 50.
Deceitful. 51 Custom how forcible. 33 Cuticle, the matter, quantity, figure,
etc. thereof. 88 Cuttell-fish his craft. 68 Cysticae gemellae. 112
D.
Dartos. 119 Death, the inevitable cause thereof, 41. How sudden to many. 778
Definition of Surgery. 3 Definition how different from a description. 80
Defluxion of humor show diverted. 256 Delirium, the causes thereof, 334. The
cure. 335 Deliverance in Childbirth how furthered, 903. Which difficult, 921.
Which easy. ib. Deltoides musculus. 216 Dentifrices, their differences,
matter, and for me. 1071 Depilatories. 1182 Derma. 89 Detersives, 259. 1043.
Their use. ibid. Devils and their differences, 986. Their titles and names,
987. They are terrified and angered by diverse things. 990 Devil of the Sea.
1004 Diabete what, the causes, signs and cure. 688 Diaphoreticke medicines.
140 Diaphragma, see Midriffe, Why called Phrenes. 142 Diaphysis what. 231 Diary
fever, the causes and signs, 260. The cure. 261
Diarthrosis. 242 Die-bone. 234 Diet has power to alter or preserve the
temperament. 28 Diet convenient for such as have the Gout, 707. For such as
fear the stone, 667. In prevention of the Plague, 822. In the cure thereof.
839, 840, 841 Differences of muscles. 92, 93 Digitum flexores musculi. 222,
237. 238 Digitum tensores musculi. 221, 237 Diploe what. 163 Disease the
definition and division thereof, 41. Causes. ibid. Diseases strange and
monstrom. 49 Diseases incident to sangnine, choleric, phlegmatic and
melancholicke persons 17. Wherefore some are hereditary, 886. supernatural,
989. Monstrous accidents in them. 996 Dislocations, their kinds and manner,
593. their differences, 594. Causes, ib. Signs, 595. Prognostics, 595. The
general cure, 564. 597. Symptoms that may be fall a dislocated member. 634
Dislocation of the jaw, 600. The cure, ibid. and 601. Of the Collar-bone, 601.
Of the spine, 602. Of the head, 603. Of the neck, 603. Of the Rumpe, 607. Of
the Ribs, ibid. Of the shoulder, 608. Of the Elbow, 619. Of the Styliformis
processus, 621. Of the wrest, 622. Of the After-wrest, 623. Of the Fingers,
ibid. Of the thigh or hip, ibid. Of the whirlebone, 630. Of the knee forwards.
631. Of the greater and less Focile, 631. 632. Of the heel, 632. Of the
Pasterne or Anckle, bone, 633. Of the instep and back of the foot, 633. Of
the toes. 634 Dismembring, see Amputation. Distemperature and the diver sity
thereof. 41 Distillation and the kinds thereof, 1093. Fornaces and the vessels
therefore. 1094. What to be considered therein. 1095. How to prepare the
materials therefore. 1098 How to distill waters. 1099. How aqua vita. 1100.
How to rectify them. 1101. To distill in the Sun. ibid. By filtring: 1102. Of
Oils. 1103. Of Spirits, 1105. Of Oils out of Gummes. 1107. Of Oil of
Vitrioll. 1108 Docillity of Beasts. 69 Dogs their love to their masters, 61.
Their docillitie. 69. Why they become mad sooner than other creatures, 785. How
their bites may be known. 786. Prognostics. 787. The cure of such as are
bitten by them. 788 Dorycnium, the poisonous quality thereof and the cure. 805
Doves free from adultery. 62 Draco marinus, the Sea Dragon his poisonous
puncture, the symptoms and cure. 801 Dracunculus what, 315. The cure. 316
Dragons their craft. 68 Dreams of the sangnine, choleric, phlegmatic and
malancholicke persons, 17, 18. Not to be neglected. 36 Dropsy what, 299. The
differences, Symptoms and causes, ibid. Signs and prognostics, 300. The
cure, 301. Following upon a Tumor of the mesentery. 930 Dugges, their
substance, magnitude, etc. 137 What to be done to them to dry up milk. 918
Duodemum, the magnitude, etc. 105 Dura matter what, 164. The hurts thereof by
Trepanning, and how helped, 373. Remedies for the inflammation and the
Apostumation thereof, 374. Why it easily endures acride medicines. 375
E
Ears, their parts and composure. 189. Their wounds and cure, 386. To supply
their defects, 875. Their ulcers, 479. Their stopping and things falling into
them how helped. 655 Ears of the heart. 145 Ear wax, for what use it serves.
190 Earth a cold and dry element. 6 Earthquakes, their cause. 415 Ecchymosis
what and how cured. 343 Echo, the cause thereof. 190 Effects of Phlegm. 14. Of
choler and melancholy. 15 Ejaculatorie vessels in men, 121. In women. 127
Elbow the dislocation thereof, 619. how to restore it dislocated outwardly,
619. To the inside, 621. Why most subject to anchyliosis. ibid. Elements how
understood, and their principal qualities, 6. What those of generation are, 7.
What these of mixed bodies are, ibid. The cause of their transmutation. 415
Elephants, their strength, piety, etc. 62, 63. Where bred, and their qualities.
1019 Embalming the dead, 1130. The manner how. 1131 Embrion, when it takes that
name. 893 Embrocation what, and how performed, 1063 Emollient and resolving
medicines, 275, 278 Emplasters what, their differences, 1058. Signs they are
perfectly boiled, 1059. Their use, 1061. Cautions in their application. 269,
270 Emplastrum de Vigo cum Mercurio, 1060 De gratia Dei. ibid. De Betonica sive
de Ianua. ibid. Oxycrocium, 1061. De cerusa, ibid. Tripharmacum se^^igrum.
ibid. Diapalma seu Diacalcitheos, ibid. Contra Rupturam, ib. De Mucilaginibus,
ibid. De minio, ibid. Diachylum magnum. ibid. Empyema what, 298. The cure
thereof. 299 Emptiness. 37 Emulgens Arteria, 114. Vena, 116 Enarthrosis, a
kind of articulation. 242 Enterocele a kind of Rupture. 304 Ephemera febris,
260. The causes and signs thereef, ibid. The cure. 262 Epidermis. 88
Epidydimis. 119 Epigastriu^ what, 87. The containing parts thereof. ibid.
Epigastrica vena. 117 Epiglottis what. 195 Epiploon what. 101 Epiplois vena.
113 Epiplocele. 304 Epithemes to strengthen the principal parts, 845. Their
composition and use. 1064 Epomis musculus. 216 Epulis what, the symptoms and
cure. 292 Epuloticke, or skinning medicines, their kinds and use. 1045 Errhines
their differences, description and use. 1068 Erysipelas what, 262. What tumors
referred thereto, 253, The differences thereof, 262. Prognostics, 267. Their
cure. ibid. Erythrois tunica. 119 Eschar how to hasten the falling away
thereof, 856. Medicines causing it. 1047 Escharoticks, 1047. Why used to
spreading Ulcers. 401 Estrich between a bird and a beast, 1014. The sceleton
of one. 1015
Evacuation and the kinds thereof, 37. What to be observed therein. 38 Eunnches
assimulated to women. 27 Excrements of the first, second and third concoction
what. 898 Exercise, the use and best time for it, 34. The quality thereof. 35
Exomphalos, or standing forth of the navill 303 Epostosis in Lue venerea. 746
Experience without reason, of what account. 45 Eyebrows. 181 Eyelids, 181. To
stay them being too laxe, 641. To open them fastened together, 643. To help
their itching. 644
Eyes their site and quickness, 181. Figure, composure, etc, 182. Their
muscles, coats and humors, 182, 183, 184. their wounds, 379. to hide the loss
or defect of them, 669, their ulcers, 476. their cure, 477. their affects, 641,
642, etc. their inflammation. 645
F.
FAce a discloser of affections and passions 40. the wounds thereof, 378. How
to help the redness thereof. 1080 Faculties what, 21. their division. 22
Falling down of the Fundament the causes and cure thereof. 313 Fat, the
substance, and cause, etc. thereof, 90. 91. Why not generated under the skull,
377. How to be distinguished from the Brain, ibid. the cure thereof being
wounded. 398 Fauces what! 194 Faulcon, her sight with the Herne. 70 Faults of
conformation must be speedily helped, 904. Of the first concoction, not helped
in the after. 707 Fear and the effects thereof. 39 Fever sometimes a
symptom, otherwhiles a disease. Fevers accompanying Phlegmons and their cure,
260. Happening upon Erysipelous tumors, 165. Upon Oedematous tumors, 275. Upon
Schirrous tumors, 284. The cure of bastard intermitting Fevers. 286 Feet and
their bones, 233. Their twofold use. 236 Feirce Clare a fish. 803 Females of
what seed generated. 888 Fibra auris what. 189 Fibula. 231 Figures in Anatomy,
and first of the forepart of man, 86. Of the backparts, 87. Of the lower belly,
and parts thereof, 100, 102, 107, 114, 122. Of the stomach, 104. Of the
vessels of seed, and Urine, 118. Of the Bladder and Yard, 124. Of the womb,
127. Of some parts in women different from those of men, 131. Of the hollow
vein, 149. Of the Arteries, 154. Of the rough Artery, or weazon, 157. First
and and second of the brain, 164. Third of the Cerebellum, 167. Fourth and
fifth of the brain, 169. The sixth of the brain 170. Seventh showing the
Nerves of the Brain, 171. The eighth of the brain, 173. Of the spinall
marrow, 176. Of the Eye 185. Of the chief muscles of the face, 188. Of the
lower Iaw, 189. Of the ears, 190. Of the backbone, 197. Of the muscles in
sundry parts of the body, 199, 200 201, 202, 203, 204, 247. Of the nerves 215.
Of the bones in the hands, 220. Of the thigh bone, 228. Of the bones of the
feet, 235. Of the Sceleton, 239, 240, 241 Figures of Instruments used in
Surgery, See Instruments. Figures of diverse sorts of Iavelins and Arrow
heads. 438 Figures of monsters, 962, 963, etc. Of diverse beasts, etc. as of the
Succarath, 61. Of the Elephant, 63. 1020. Of the Rhinoceros, 65. Of the
Cammell, 71. Of the Crocodile, 77, 1023. Of a Crab, 279. Of the Scorpion, etc.
762, 764. Of the Serpent Hamorrhous, 791. Of the Serpent seps, 792. Of the
basiliske, 793. Of the salamander and Torpedo, 794. Of the sting-Ray, 803. Of
the Sea-hare, 804. Of the Monk and Bishop-fish, 1002. Of the Sea Devil, 1004.
Of the Sea Morse and Bore, 1105. 1006. Of the Fish Hoga. 1008. Of a monstrous
flying fish, 1009. Of Bernard the Hermit, 1010. Of the sailing fiish, 1011. Of
the Whale, 1013. Of an Estrich, 1014. Of the birds of Paradise, 1016. Of a
Giraffa, 1018. Of a Beast called Thanacth, 1021. Of the beast Haijt and a
monstrous African beast, 1022 of a Chamaeleon. 1024. Figures of Furnaces and
other things fit for distillation, 1096, 1093, 1099, 1101, 1102. 1104. 1106,
1109. Figure of a fractured arm with a wound in a fit posture, 576. Of a Leg
fractured with a wound and bound up, 584. Of Ligatures for extension, 598. How
to restore the dislocated spine, 605. Of putting the shoulder into joint, 609,
610, 611, 612, 613, 614. Of the Ambi and the use thereof, 615, 616. Of
restoring the dislocated Elbow, 610. Of the thighbone dislocated inwards, 628.
Outward, 629. Of restoring a knee dislocated forwards. 631 Figure of a
Semicupium. 670. Of a Barrel to be used in the cure of a Caruncle, 743. Of the
Helmet flower, 807. Of the site of the child in the womb, 900. Of leaden
Nipples, 912. Of a glass to suck the breasts with. 919 Figures of Artificial
Eyes, 870. Of Noses, 871. Of Teeth, 872. Palats, 873. How to supply the defect
of the tongue, 874. of the Ears, 875. Iron Breastplates, 876. of an
Vrine-Bason and artificial Yard, 877. of an iron finger stall, 878. of an
erector of the Hand, 879. of Boots for such as are crookelegged, 880. of an
artificial hand, 881. of an arm and leg, 882, 883. of a Crutch. 884 Filings
of Lead, their harm taken inwardly, and cure. 811. Filtration the manner and
use thereof. 1102 Fingers and their parts, etc. 218. their dislocation, 623.
Why easily restored, ibid. how to take away such as be superfluous, and help
those that stick together, 661. How to supply their defects. 878. Fire and the
qualities thereof, 6. The force thereof against the Plague. 823 Fishes their
industry, 57. They may be tamed 64 Fisher, a Fish so called. 68 Flatulent
Tumors, their causes, signs and cure. 269 Flatulencies about the joints
counterfeiting the Gout. 718 Fistula lachrimosa, see Aegilops. Fistulaes what,
their differences, signs, etc. 484. Their cure, ibid. In the Fundament, 485.
The cure, 486. Upon wounds of the Chest and the cure. 391 Fleshy Pannicle, the
History thereof. 90 Flesh quickly putrifies in maritime parts. 416 Flexores
musculi. 230. Superior. 238 Flux of blood in wounds how helped. 328 Flux of the
belly how to be stopped. 865, 866 Flying fish of a monstrous shape. 1009
Focile what, 231. How to cure the separation of the greater and lesser, 631.
The separation from the pasterne bone. 632 Fomentations and their use, 1063.
For broken bones. 591. They hurt plethoricke bodies, 591. What to be observed
in their use. 591, 634. Fornaces, their matter and form, 1094, 1096, 1097,
etc. Fornix. 168 Foxes and their craft. 67 Fracture what and the differences
thereof, 501. Their causes, 562. Signs and prognostics, ibid. Their general
cure, 564. How to help the symptoms, 566. Why deadly in the joint of the
shoulder, 570. why near a joint more dangerous, 581 Fractures of the scull,
their differences, 337, 338. Of the causes and signs, 339, Signs manifest to
sense, 346. A Fissure, the first kind of Fracture, 341. How to find it being
less manifest, 342: A contusion the second kind of fracture, 343. An
Effracture the third kind, 346. A Seat the fourth kind, 348. Resonitus the fifth
kind, ibid. The Proguosticks, 352. general cure of them and their symptoms
356. They are hurt by venery, 359 By noise, 360. The particular cure, 362. Why
Trepa^ed. 364 Fractures more particularly and first of the nose, 567. Of the
lower jaw, ibid. Of the Collar-bone, 568. Of the shoulderblade, 569. Of the
breast bone, 570. Of the Ribs, 571. Of the vertebrae. or Rack-bones. 573. Of
the Holy-bone, 574. Of the Rumpe, ibid. Of the Hip, ibid. Of the shoulder or
armebone, 575. Of the Cubite or Ell a Wand, ibid. Of the Hand, 577. Of the
Thigh, ibid. Of the Thigh near the joint, 581. Of the patella or whirle-bone,
582. Of the leg, 582. Of the bones of the feet. 591 Fractures associated
with wounds, how to be bound up. 557, 584 French Poxes, see Lues venerea.
Frictions, their kinds and use. 34 Fuci, how made. 1078 Fumigations, their
differences, matter and form. 1072, 1073 Fundament, the falling down thereof.
313, 958. The causes and cure. ibid. Fungus, an excrescence sometimes
happening, in Fractures of the scull. 370, 371
G.
GAlens Effigies and praise. 1118 Gall and the bladder thereof, etc. 110
Ganglion what, 272. Properly so called. 274 Gangreene what, 452. The general
and particall causes, ibid. That which is occasioned by cold, upon what part it
seases, 454. Signs, 454. Prognostics, 455. The general cure. ibid. The
particular cure. 456 Gargareon. 193 Gargarismes, their matter and for me, 1070.
repelling, ripening and detergent ones. 297 Garlic good against the Plague.
823 Gastrica vena. 112 Gastrepiplois vena, 112 Major. (...) 113 Geese their
wariness in fleeing over mount Taurus. 68 Gemelli musculi. 237 Gemini musculi.
230 Generation, what it is, 23. What necessary thereto. 889 Generation of the
Navill. 891 Giddiness, see Vertigo. Ginglymos what. 243 Giraffa a strange
beast. 1017, 1018 Glandula what sort of Tumor. 272 Glandula lachrimalis. 182
Glandules in general, 108. At the root of the tongue, 193. Their inflammation
and cure. 293 294 Glans penis, 126. Not rightly perforated, how to be helped.
663 Glysters, their differences, materials, etc. 1050. Several descriptions
of them, 1051. They may nourish. 1052 Goats dung is good to discuss
sehirr^ous tumors. 279 Golden ligature, how made. 309 Gomplosis what. 243
Gonorrhaea, how different from a virulent strangury, 738. The cure. 740 Gout,
the names and kinds thereof, 697. The occult causes thereof, ibid. The manifest
causes thereof, 699. out of what parts it may flow, 701. Signs that i^ flows
from the Brain, or Liver, ibid. How to know this or that humor accompanying
the Gouty malignitie, 702. Prognostickes. ibid. The general method to prevent
and cure it, 704. Vomiting sometimes good, 705. other general remedies, 706.
Diet convenient, 707. What wine not good, 708. How to strengthen the joints,
ibid. The palliative cure thereof, 709. Local medicines in a cold Gout, 710.
In a hot or sanguine Gout, 713. In a Choleric Gout, 714. What is to be done
after the sit is over, 717. Tophi or knots how caused, ibid. The hip-goute or
sciatica, 719. The cure thereof. 720 Gristles what, 136. of the nose, 186. of
the Larinx. 194 Groines their wounds, 399. Their Tumors, see Bubo's. Guajacum,
The choice faculties and parts, 728. The preparation of the decoction thereof,
729. The use. 730 Gullet and the History thereof, 157. The wounds thereof. 387
Gums overgrowne with flesh, how to be helped. 293 Guns, who their inventer,
406. Their force, 407. The cause of their reports. 415 Gunpouder not poisonous,
409. 412. How made. 412 Gutta rosacea what, 1080. The cure. 1081 Guts, their
substance, figure and number, 105 Their site and connection, 106. Action, 107.
How to be taken forth, 115. Signs that they are wounded, 396. Their cure, 397.
Their Ulcers. 480
H.
HAemorrhoides what, their differences and cure, 487. In the neck of the
womb. 955 Haemorrhoidalis interna, 112. Externa. 117 Haemorrhoidalisarteria,
^ive mesente^ica inferior. 115 Haemorrhou^ a Serpent his bite, the signs und
cure. 791 Haijt, a strange beast. 1022 Hair what the original and use, 160.
How to make it black, 1081. 1082. How to take it off. 1082 Hairy sealpe, the
connection and use. 160. The wounds thereof not to be neglected, ibid. The cure
thereof being contused, 361 Hand taken generally what, 208, 209. The fracture
thereof with the cure, 577. How to supply the defect thereof. 879, 881 Hares
how they provide for their young. 61 Hare-lips what, 383. Their cure. 384
Harmonia what. 243 Hawks. 70 Head, the general description thereof, 159. The
containing and contained parts thereof, 160. The musculous skin thereof, ibid.
Why affected when any membranous part is hurt, 160. The watery Tumor thereof.
289. The wounds thereof. 337, 338, etc. The falling away of the Hair and other
affects thereof, 637, 638, etc. The dislocation thereof. 603 Hearing, the
Organe, object, etc. thereof, 24 Heart and the History thereof, 144, 145. The
ventricles thereof, 145. Signs of the wounds thereof. 388 Heat one and the
same the efficient cause of all humors at the same time, ^14. Three causes
thereof. 250 Hecticke fever with the differences, causes, signs and cure. 393
Hedg-hogs, how they provide for their young. 61 Heel, and the parts thereof,
234. Why a fracture thereof so dangerous, ibid. The dislocation thereof, 632.
symptoms following upon the contusion thereof, ibid. Why subject to
inflammation. 633 Hemicrania, see Megrim. Hemlocke the poisonous quality
thereof, and the cure. 806 Henbane the poisonous quality, and the cure. 805
Hermaphrodites, 28, and 972. Herne, his sight, and the Falcon. 70 Hernia and
the kinds thereof, 304. Humoralis. 313 Herpes and the kinds thereof, 264. The
cure. 265 Hip-gout, see Sciatica. Hippe, the dislocation thereof, 623.
prognostickes, 624. signs that it is dislocated out-wardly or inwardly, 625.
dislocated forwards 626. backwards ibid. how to restore the inward dislocation,
627. the outward dislocation, 629. the forward dislocation, ibid. the backward
dislocation, 630 Hippocrates his effigies, 1115 Hoga, a monstrous fish, 1008
Holes of the inner Basis of the scull, 174. of the external Basis thereof,
175. small ones sometimes remain after the cure of great wounds, 384 Holy-bone,
his number of Vertebrae, and their use, 198. the fracture thereof, 575
Hordeolum, an affect of the Eyelids, 642 Horns used in stead of Ventoses, 696
Horse-leaches, their application and use, ibid. their virulency, and the cure,
800 Hot-houses, how made, 1077 Hulpalis, a monstrous beast, 1017 Humeraria
arteria, 153 Vena, 210
Humors, their temperaments, 11. the knowledge of them necessary, ibid. their
definition and division, 12. Serous and secundary, as Ros, Cambium, Gluten, 15.
An argument of their great putrefaction, 417 Humors of the eye, 182 Aqueus,
183 Crystallinus, 184 Vitreus, ibid.
Hydatis, 643 Hydrargyrum, the choice, preparation, and use thereof in the Lues
venerea, 731 Hydrophalia, whether uncureable, 787 What cure must be used
therein, 789
Hydrocephalos, what, 289. The causes, differences, signs, etc. ibid. The
cure, 290 Hydrocele, 304. 311 Hymen, 130 Whether any or no, 937 A history
thereof, 938
Hyoides os, the reason of the name, composure, site, etc. thereof, 191
Hypochondria, their site, 85 Hypochyma. 651 Hypogastricae venae, 117 Hypopyon,
650 Hypothenar, 222
I.
JAundice, a medicine therefore, 303 Jaw, the bones thereof, and their
productions, 178 The fracture of the lower jaw, 567 How to helpeit, 568 The
dislocation thereof, 600 The cure, ibid.
Ibis, abird, the inventer of glysters, 56 Ichneumon, how he arms himself to
assail the Crocodile, 66 Idleness, the discommodities thereof, 35 Jejunum
intestinum, 105 Ileon, 106 Iliaca arteria, 115 Vena, 117
Ilium os, 227 Ill conformation, 41 Imagination, and the force thereof, 897
Impostors, their impudency and craft, 51 372 Impostume, what, their causes and
differences, 249 Signs of them in general, 250 Prognostickes, 252 What
considerable in opening of them, 259
Inanition, see Emptiness. Incus, 163. 191 Indication, whence to be drawn, 5.
of feeding, 33. what, 42. the kinds, 43. a table of them, 48. observable in
wounds by gunshot, 426 Infant, what he must take before he suck, 907 their
crying what it does, 912. how to be preserved in the womb when the mother is
dead, 923. See Child. Inflammation of the almonds of the throat, and their
cure, 293. 294. of the Uvula, 294. of the eyes, 645 Inflammation hinders the
reposition, or putting dislocated members into joint, 619 Insessus, what, their
manner, matter, and use, 1073 Instruments used in Surgery for opening
abscesses, 258. 259 A vent for the womb, 283. 955 An iron plate and actual
cautery for the cure of the Ranula, 293 Constrictory rings to bind the
Columella, 295 Speculum oris, ibid. and 332 A trunk with cautery to cauterize
the Uvula, 296 An incision knife, 298 An actual cautery with the plate, for
the cure of the Empyema, 299. of a pipe to evacuate the water in the Dropsy,
303. Wherewith to make the golden ligature, 310. to stitch up wounds, 327 A
Razour or incision knife, 341. A chisel, ib. Radulae, vel Scalpri, 343. A
threefooted levatory, 344. Other levatories, 345. 346. Sawes to divide the
skull, ib. a desquamatory Trepan, 346. Rostra psittaci, 347. Scrapers, pincers,
and a leaden mallet, ib. A piercer to enter a Trepan, 365. Trepans, 366. 367.
Terebellum, 367. A lentill-like Scraper, ib. cutting compasses, 368. 369. A
conduit pipe. and syrenge, 370. to depresse the dura Meninx, 1373. speculum
oculi, 379. for making a Seton, 382. Pipes used in wounds of the chest, 392. to
draw out bullets, 419. 420. etc. Dilaters, and Probes to draw through
flammula's, 422. to draw forth arrow-heads, 439. 441. A scarificator, 446. A
dismembring knife, and saw, 459. A dilater to open the mouth, 464. A pyoulcos,
or Matter-drawer, 479. A Glossocomium, 578. A lattin Casse, 587. A pulley and
hand-vice, 599. the glossocomium called Ambi, 615. little hooks, needles, and an
incision knife to take away the Web, 648. files for filing the teeth, 658. for
cleansing and drawing the teeth, 660. cutting mullets, to take off superfluous
fingers, 662. a Cathaeter, 665. Gimblet to break the stone in the passage of
the yard, 671. other instruments to take out the stone, 672. used in cutting
for the stone, 673. etc. 680. 681. (...) Lancet, and Cupping-glasses, 695.
Horns to be used for ventoses, 696. Cathaeters to wear away caruncles 744.
Trepans for rotten bones, 748. actual cauteries, 749. Gryphons tallons, 927.
929. Hooks to draw forth the child, 916. Specula matricis, 956
Instruments, when necessary in restoring broken bones, 565 Intercartalaginei
musculi, 206. 2071 Intercostalis arteria, 113. 153 Intercostales musculi
externi, 206. interni, 207 Interosses musculi, 223. 239. Intestinalis vena, 112
Intromoventes musculi, 230 Joy, and the effects thereof, 39 Joints, their
wounds, 403. how to strengthen them, 708. how to mitigate their pains caused
only by distemper, 716 Ischiadica vena, 224. Ischium o^. 227 Issues, or
fontanells, 706 Itching of the Womb, 957 Judgment, why difficult, 1131 Junks,
what, 559. their use, 560.
K.
KAll, its substance, etc. 101. 102. what to be done when it falls out in
wounds, 308 Kernels of the ears, 189. Kibes, where bred, 238 Kidneyes, their
substance, etc. 117. signs that they are wounded, 397 ulcers, and their cure,
481. 686. their heat how tempered, 850 King's Evil, what, the cause, 274. the
cure, 275 Knee dislocated forward, how to restore it, 631
L.
LAgophthalmia, what, 378. the causes and cure, 642 Lamenes how helped, 884
Lamprey, their care of their young, 64 Lampron, their poysonons bite, 801
Larinx, what meant thereby, 194. its magnitude, figure, composure, etc. ib.
Latissimus musculus, 208 Leaches, see Horse-leaches. Leg, taken in general,
what, 223. the bone thereof, 231. the wounds, 399. the fracture and cure, 582.
the cure of the Authors leg being broken, 582. 585. their crookedness how
helped, 879. defect supplied, 882. 883 Leprosy, and the causes thereof, 769.
the signs, 770, etc. why called Morbus Ieoninus, 771 the prognostics, diet,
cure, 773. it sometimes follows the Lues venerea, 724 Lepus marinus, the
poison, the symptoms, and cure, 803 Levator musculus, 208. Levatores Any, 107
Life, what, and its effects, 895. See Soul. Ligaments, their use, 96. why
without sense, 198 their difference, 199. their wounds, 404. Ligatures for
wounds are of three sorts, 325 too hard hurtful, 374. they must be neatly
made, 555. for what uses they chiefly serve, 358. in use at this day for
fractures, 579. how infractures joined with wounds, 584 which for extension,
598. See Bandages. Lightning, the wonderful nature, and the stinking smell
thereof, 414. how it may infect the Air, 781 Lime unquencht, the hurtful
quality and cure, 810 Linime^^s are not to be used in wounds of the Chest, 390.
their matter, form, and use, 1055 Lion, his provident care in going, 66 Lion of
the sea, 1003. Lippi^udo, 644 Litharge, its poisonous quality and cure, 810
Liver, what, 109. its substance, etc. ibid. 110. sggns of the wounds thereof,
396. why it is called parenchyma, 893 Loins, their nerves, 226 Lo^gus
musculus, 205. 218. 232 Lays venerea, what, 723. the hurt it causes, ib. the
causes thereof, 724. in what humor the malignity resideth, 725. it causes more
pain in the night than in the day, ib. sometimes lies long hid, ib. signs
thereof, 746. prognostics, 727. how to be oppugned, 728. to whom wine may be
allowed, 730. the second manner of cure, ibid. the third manner of cure, 734.
the fourth manner, 736. how to cure its symptoms 737. it causes bunches on the
bones, 746. rotten bones, how perceived and cured, 747. tettars and chaps
occasioned thereby, and their cure, 754. how to cure children of this disease,
755. it kills by excess of moisture, 779 Lumbaris regio, sive lumbi, 85.
Arteria, 114. Vena. 116.
Lumbrici musculi, 222. 239 Lungs, their substance, etc. 142. 143. signs of
their wounds, 388. which curable, 392. Lupiae, what, their causes and cure, 272
Luxation, 593. which uncureable, 95. Lying in bed, how it must be, 36
M
Mad dog, see Dog. Magic, and the power thereof, 989 Magistrates office
in time of plague, 829 Males of what seed generated, 888 Malleolus, one of the
bones of the auditory passage, 163. 191 Mammillary processes, 166. their use,
169 Mammaria arteria, 153 Man, his excellency, 74. etc. the division of his
body, 83. why distinguished into male and female. 885 Mandrake, its danger, and
cure, 806 Marrow, why it may seem to have the sense of feeling. 589 Masseter
muscle. 188 Mastoideus musculus. 204 Masticatories, their form and use, 1069
Matrix, see Womb. Medow-saffron, the poisonous quality thereof, and cure. 809
Meat, the quantity and quality thereof, 31 accustomed more grateful and
nourishing 32. order to be observed in eating, 33. the time, ib. fit to
generate a Callus. 589 Meazels, what, their matter, 757. why they itch not,
758. their cure. 759 Mediastinum, its substance, etc. 141 Medicines, their
excellency. 1027. their definition and difference in matter and substance.
1028. in qualities, and of their first faculties, 1029. their second, third,
and fourth faculties, 1033. the preparation, 1037. the composition, necessity,
and use thereof. 1049 Megrim, the causes, etc. thereof. 640 Melancholy, the
temper thereof, 11. the nature, consistence, etc. 13. the effects thereof, 15.
of it corrupted. 16 Melancholic persons, their complexion, etc 18. why they
hurt themselves. 786. Meliceris, what kind of tumor, 271 Membranosus musculus,
232 Memory, what. 897 Menstruall flux, signs of the first approach thereof,
950. See Courses. Meninges, their number, etc. 164 Mercury, sublimate, its
caustic force, 809 the cure, 810
Meremaid, 1004 Mesentery, its substance, etc. 108. the tumors thereof, 929. the
sink of the body, 930 Midriffe, its substance, etc. 141. 142. signs of the
wounds thereof. 388 Milk soon corrupts in a phlegmatic stomach 907. the choice
thereof. 909. how to drive it downwards, 918. Millepes, cast forth by urine,
762 Milt, see Spleen. Mola, the reason of the name, and how bred, 925. how to
be discerned from a true conception, 925. a history and description of a
strange one, 926. the figure thereof, 927. what cure to be used thereto, 928.
Mollifying medicines, 141. 142 Monks-hood, the poison and cure, 905 Monstrous
creatures bred in man, 762, etc. Monsters what, 961 their causes, and
descriptions, 962. etc. caused by defect of seed, 975. by imagination, 978. by
straitness of the womb, 980. by the site of the mother, ib. by a stroke, etc.
981. by confusion of seed of diverse kinds, 982. by the craft of the Devil, 985.
Of the Sea, 1001. 1002. etc. Morse, Sea-calfe or Elephant, 1005. 1006
Mortification, and the signs thereof, 475 Mother, see Womb. Mothers fittest to
nurse their own children, 907. their milk most familiar to them, ib. Motion,
which voluntary, 25. taken for all manner of exercise, 34 Mouth, and the parts
thereof, 193. the ulcers and their cure, 478. how to prevent and heal them in
cure of the Lues venerea, 735 Mummie, frequently used in contusions, 447. not
good therein, 448 Mundificatives, 1043 Muscles, what, 92. their differences,
and whence taken, 93, etc. their parts, 95. a further inquiry into the parts
of them, 96. Muscles of the Epigastrium, 97. of the fundament, 106. of the
testicles, 120. of the bladder, 124. of the yard, 125. the broad muscle, 180.
that open and shut the eye ibid. of the eye, 182. of the nose, 186. of the
face, ibid. of the lower jaw, 188. of the bone Hyoides, 191. of the tongue,
192. of the Larinx, 194. of the Epiglottis, 195. of the neck, 199. of the chest
and loins, 205, 206. 207. of the shoulder blade, 207. of the arm, 214. of the
cubit, 217. moving the hand, 220. of the inside of the hand, 222. moving the
thigh, 229. of the leg, 232. moving the foot, 237. of the toes, 238. An
epitome or brief recital of all the muscles, 244. 245. Musculous skin of
the head, 160. the wounds thereof and their cure, 360. Musculosae venae, 117.
Arteriae, 153. Mushromes, their hurtful and deadly quality, and the cure, 805.
Music, the power thereof, 49. Mydriasis, a disease of the eye, the cause, and
cure, 650.
N.
Nails, why added to the fingers, 209. why grow continually, ibid. whence
generated. 220. Napellus, the poisonous quality and cure, 805 Narcotickes, 257.
cautions in their use, 264 improperly termed Anodines, 1048. Nata, what, 272.
Nates, 168. Nature often does strange things in curing diseases, 385. Natural
parts, and their division, 84. Natural, see Things, Faculties, Actions,
Navell, what, the figure, and composure, 133. the generation thereof, 891. the
relaxation thereof in children, 959. the swelling or standing forth thereof,
303. the cure, 304.
Nautilus, or sayling-fish. 1011. Neck, and the parts thereof, 196. the wounds
thereof, 386. the dislocation thereof, 603. Necrosis, or mortification, 457.
Nerves, what, 96. their distribution to the natural parts, 115. of the sixth
conjugation, and their distribution, 152. Ramus costalis, ib. recurrens, ib.
stomachicus, 153. their seven conjugations, 170. Nerves of the neck, back, and
arms, 212. of the loins, holy-bone, and thigh, 226. Nerves and nervous parts,
their wounds, 399. their cure, 400. Nightshade, the deadly nightshade, his
poisonous quality, and the cure, 805. Nightingales sing excellently, 72.
Nipples, 138. how to help their soreness, 912 Nodus, what, 272. Nodules, their
form and use, 1053. Northren people how tempered, 20. Nose and the parts
thereof, 186. the wounds thereof, 384. their cure, ib. how to supply the defect
thereof, 871. the ulcers thereof, 477. their cure, ib. the fracture, 567.
Nurses, their error in binding and lacing of children, 606. they may infect
children with the Lues venerea, and be infected by them, 724. participate their
diseases to their children, 907. the choice of them, 908. 909. of their diet,
and other circumstances, 910. Nutrition, what, 22. 24. Nymphae, 130.
O.
OBlique descendent muscles, 97. ascendent muscles, 98. Obliquator externus
musculus, 221. Obturatores musculi, 230. Oedema, what, 267. which tumors
referred thereto, 254. the differences thereof, 267. the causes, ib. signs,
prognostics, cure, 268 Oesophagus, or Gullet, the substance, attractive force,
etc. thereof, 157. the magnitude, figure, site, temper, and action, 158. Oil
of whelps, the description, and use thereof, 409. 423. it helps forward the
scailing of bones, 751. Oiles, and the several making of them, 1054. 1055.
1102. by distillation, 1103. out of gums, 1106. 1107. Ointments, their
differences, descriptions, and use, 1056. 1057. 1058. Old age, and the division
thereof, 9. it is a disease, 32. Old wives medicines, 991. Olecranum, what,
217. Omentum, or the K^ll, the substance, magnitude, figure, and composure
thereof, 101. the connection, temper, and twofold use, 102. it sometimes hinders
conception, ibid. Operations of Surgery, of what nature, 4. why some which are
mentioned by the Ancients, are omitted by our Author, 1138. 1139. Opium, why
not used in poisoning, 806. the symptoms caused by it, and their cure, ib.
Order to be observed in eating our meat, etc. 33. in lying to sleep, 34.
Organicall parts, which, 81. What observable in each of them, ibid.
Orifices of the heart, 146. Orpiment, the poisonous quality thereof, and the
cure, 810. Os and ossa, occipitis, 162. Basiliare, ibid. Coronale, ib.
Bregmatis, sive parietalia, ib. Petrosa, ibid. Cuneiforme, sive sphenoides, ib.
Ethmoides, cribrosum, seu spongiosum, ibid. Zygoma, sive jugale. 178. Hyoides,
ypsiloides, etc. 191. Sesamoidia, 220. Ilium, 227. Ischium, ibid. Pubis, 228.
Innominata, 234. See Bones.
Ozaena, a filthy ulcer of the nose, the cause and cure, 477.
P.
Pain, and the causes thereof, 250. It must be assuaged, 256. The
discommodities thereof, 257. In wounds how helped, 329.
Palate, the nerves, holes, and coat thereof, etc. 193. How to supply the
defects thereof, 873.
Palmaris musculus, 222. Palsy, the differences, causes, etc. thereof, 332.
The cure, 333. Follows upon wounds of the neck, 386.
Pancreas, the substance, site, etc. thereof, 109. The tumors thereof, 929.
Pannicle, see Fleshy. Pappe, how to be made for children, 911. and the
condition thereof, ibid. Paracentesis, and the reasons for and against it, 301.
The place where, and manner how, 302.
Parassoupi, a strange beast, 1018. Parastates, their substance, etc. 120.
Paronychia, what, 314. The cure, ibid.
Parotides, their site and use, 191. Their difference, prognosticke, cure, etc.
291. 292.
Partridge, their care of their young, 60. Parts, similar, 81. Organicall,
ibid. Isntrumental, 82. Things considerable in each part, ibid. Principal
parts which, and why so called, ibid. Of generation, 82. 886. distinguished
into three, 83. The containing parts of the lower belly, 87. Of the chest, 137.
Passions of the mind, their force, 39. They help forward putrefaction, 820.
Pastinaca marina, or the sting-Ray 802. Patella, what, 231. Pectoralis
musculus, 208. Pedium, what, 234. Pediosus musculus, 238. Pelvis, the site and
use thereof, 168. Pericardium, and the history thereof, 143. Pericranium, what,
and the use thereof, 160. Perinaeum, what, 125. Periostium, 160. Peritonaeum,
the substance and quantity thereof, 100. The figure, composure, site, use, etc.
101.
Perone, 231. Peronaeus musculus, 237. Perturbations of the mind, see
Passions. Pessaries, their form and use, 1053. 1054. Pestilence, see Plague.
Pestilent fever, how bred, 837. Pharinx, what, 194. Phlebotomy, the invention
thereof, 56. Necessary in a Synochus putrida, 261. The use, scope, etc.
thereof, 691. How to be performed, 693. See Blood-letting.

Phlegm, the temper thereof, 11. is blood half concocted, 13. Why it has no
proper receptacle, ibid. The nature, consistence, color, taste and use, ibid.
The effects thereof, 14. Not natural, how bred, and the kinds thereof, 16.
How many ways it becomes so, 267.
Phlegmatic persons, their manners and diseases, 17. In fasting they feed
upon themselves, 707.
Phlegmon, what kind of tumor, 254. What tumors may be reduced thereto, 253.
How different from apblegmonous tumor, 254. How generated, ibid. The causes,
and signs thereof, 255. The cure, 256. The cure when it is ulcerated. 258.
Phrenica Arteria, 113. Phthisis oculi, 646. Phymosis and paraphymosis, what,
663. Physic, the subject thereof, 81. Physicians to have care of such as have
the plague, how to be chosen, 830. Physocele, 304. Pia matter, the consistence,
use, etc. 164. Pigeons, see Doves, Pilot fish, 67. Pine glandule, 168. Pinna
auris, which 189. Pinna and Pinnoter, 1011. Pismire, see Ant, Pith of the
back, 175. Plague what, 817. How it comes to kill, ib. Divine causes thereof,
818. Natural causes, ibid. Signs of the air and earth that prognosticate it,
821. Cautions in air and diet to prevent it, 822. Preservatives against it,
824. 825. 826. Other observations for prevention, 828. Such as die thereof
quickly putrefie, 829. How such as undertake the cure thereof must arm
themselves, 831. Signs of infection, 832. Mortal signs, 833. Signs thereof,
without fault of the humors, ib. with the putrefaction of them, 834.
Prognostickes therein, 835. What to be done when one finds himself infected,
837. Diet, 839. 840. 841. Antidotes, 843. 844. Epithemes to strengthen the
principal parts, 845. Whether purging and bleeding be necessary at the
beginning, 845. What purges fit, 847. Symptoms accompanying the disease, 849.
Spots or Tokens, 851. Their cure, 852. Sores, 853. etc. See Bubo's, and
Carbuncles. Sundry evacuations, 861. 862. How to cure infants and children
thereof, 867. Plaster, the hurtful quality thereof, and the cure, 810.
Plasters, see Emplasters. Plantaris musculus, 238. Pleura what, the original,
magnitude, figure, etc. 140. Pleurisy, what, 298. Plexus choroides, 167.
Pneumatocele, 312. Polypus, the reason of the name, 290. The differences, ibid.
The cure, 291.
Poplitaeus musculus, 233. Porus biliaris, 111. Potentiall Cauteries, 1064.
1065. Pox, French Pox, see Lues venerea. Small pox what, their matter, 757.
What pernicious symptoms may happen upon them, 758. Prognostickes, ibid. The
cure, 759. What parts to be armed against, and preserved therefrom, 760.
Poisons, the cause of writing them, 775. What they are, ibid. Their
differences, 776. All of them have not a peculiar Antipapathy with the heart,
ibid. How in small quantities they may work great alterations by touch only,
ibid. The reasons of their wondrous effects, 777. none of them kill at a set
time, ibid. How they kill sooner or later, ibid. Whether things feeding on
poisons, be poisonous, ibid. General signs that one is poisoned, 778. How to
shun poison, 780. The general cure of poisons, ibid. Whether vapors arising
from things burnt, may poison one, 781. Each poison has its proper effects,
782. Their effects and prognostics, ibid. The cure of poisonous bites, 783.
Poison of Adders, Asps, Toads, etc. see Adders, Asps, Toads, etc. Poisonous
plants, and the remedies against them, 805. Poisons of Minerals, and their
remedies, 809. Praeputium, 126. to help the shortness thereof, and such as
have been circumcised, 662. The ulcers thereof are worse than those of the
Glans, 737. Praeparation of simple medicines, and the diverse kinds thereof,
1037. Preservatives against the plague, 824. 825. 826. Principal parts which,
and why so called, 82. Processus mammillares, 167. Processes of the Vertebrae,
right, oblique, transverse, 196. that called the tooth, ib. Acromion and
Coracoides, 208. Prodigy, what, 961. diverse of them, 1025. 1026. Prognostickes
in Impostumes, 252. in an Erisipelas, 267. in an Oedema, 268. in a Scyrrhus,
278. in a quartain Ag^e, 285. in an Aneurisma, 287. in the Parotides, 291. in
the Dropsy, 300. in a Sarcocele, 312. in wounds, 323. in fractures of the
skull, 352. in wounds of the liver and guts, 397. in a Gangren^, 455. in
ulcers, 468. in Fractures, 562. in Dislocations, 595. in a dislocated Jaw, 600.
in the dislocated Vertebrae, 606. in a dislocated Hippe, 624. in the stone,
666. in suppression of the urine, 684. in the ulcerated reins and bladder,
686. in the Gout, 702. in the Lues venerea, 727. in a virulent strangury, 739.
in the small pox, 758. in the leprosy, 773. concerning poisons, 782. in the
bite of a mad dog, 787. in the plague, 835. in plague sores, 857. Pronatores
musculi, 222. Properties of a good Surgeon, 5. Proptosis oculi, 646. Prostates,
121. Proud flesh in ulcers, how helped, 472. Psilothra, their form and use,
1082. Pudendae venae. 117. Pulse, the triple use thereof, 22. Pulsation in a
Phlegmon how caused, 255. Pulti^^es how different from Cataplasmes, 1062.
Punctus aureus, 309. Puncture of a nerve, why deadly, 400. Purging, whether
necessary in the beginning of pestilent diseases, 845. Purple spots, or tokens
in the plague, 851. Their cure, 852.
Pus, or quitture, the signs thereof, 258. Now it may flow from the wounded
part, and be evacuated by urine and stool, 684.
Putrefaction in the plague different from common putrefaction, 819. Three
causes thereof, 820.
Pyes may be taught to speak, 72. Pylorus, 104. Pyramidall muscles, 99.
Pyrotickes, their nature, kinds, and use, 1046.
Q.
QUadrigemini musculi, 230. Quartaine ague or fever, the causes, signs,
symptoms, 284. Prognostics, and cure, 285.
Quicksilver, why so called, 811. Whether hot or cold, ibid. Wherefore good,
812. The kinds thereof, ibid. How to purify it, 813. See Hydrargyrum.

Quotidian fever, the cause thereof, 275. The signs, symptoms, etc. 276. The
cure, 277. How to be distinguished from a double Tertian, ibid.

R.
RAcke-bones, their fracture, 573. Radish root draws out venom powerfully,
860. Radius, what, 217. Ramus splenicus, 112. Mesenteriacus, 113.
Ranula, why so called, the cause and cure, 293. Rats-bane, or Roseager, the
poisonous quality and care, 810. Raving, see Delyrium. Reason, and the
functions thereof, 897. Recti musculi, 202. 232. Rectum intestinum, 106.
Reins, see Kidneies. Remedies supernatural, 989. See medicines.
Remora, the wondrous force thereof, 1013 Repletio ad vasa and ad vires, 37.
Repercussives, 461. What disswades their use, 253. When to be used, 256. Fit to
be put into, and upon the eye, 379. Their differences, etc. 1038.
Reports how to be made, 1121. Resolving medicines, and their kinds, 1040.
Resolving and strengthening medicines, 264. 292. Respiration how a voluntary
motion, 25. The use thereof, 143.
Rest necessary for knitting of broken bones, 580. Rete mirabile, 172. Whether
different from the Plexus choroides, 174.
Rhinocerote, 65. His enmity with the Elephant, 1023.
Rhomboides musculus, 206. 208. Ribs, their number, connection, and consistence,
139. Their contusion, and a strange symptom sometimes happening thereon, 447.
Their fracture, the danger and cure, 571. Symptoms ensuing thereon, 572. Their
dislocation and cure, 607.
Right muscles of the Epigastrium, 98. Rim of the belly, 100. The figure,
composure, etc. thereof, 101.
Ring-wormes, 264. Rotula genu, 231. Rough artery, 156. Rowlers, see Bandages.
Rules of Surgery, 1119. Rumpe, the fractures thereof, 575. The dislocation
thereof, 607. The cure, ibid.
Ruptures, 304. Their kinds, ibid. Their cure, 305. 306. 307. 311.

S.
SAcer musculus, 207. Sacrae venae. 117. Sacro-lumbus musculus, 206.
Salamander, the symptoms that ensue upon his poison, and the cure, 793.
Salivation, 38. Sanguine persons, their manners and diseases, 17. Sapheia vena
when and where to be opened, 224. Sarcocele, 304. The progrostickes and cure,
312.
Sarcotickes, simple and compound, 1044. None truly such, ibid.
Scabious, the effect thereof against a pestilent Carbuncle, 860. Scailes, how
known to be severed from the bones, 586. Scailes of Brass, their poisonous
quality and cure, 810. Of iron, their harm and cure, ibid.
Scald-head, the signs and cure thereof, 638. Scalenus musculus, 205. Scalpe,
hairy scalpe, 160. Scaphoides os, 234. Scarrs, how to help their deformity,
861. Scarus, a fish, 67. Sceleton, 239. 240. 241. what, 242. Sciatica, the
cause, etc. 719. The cure, 720.
Scirrhus, what, 278. What tumors referred thereto, 254. The differences,
signs, and prognostics, 278. Cure, ibid.
Scorpion bred in the brain by smelling to Basil, 761. Their description,
sting, and cure, 797.
Scrophulae, their cause and cure, 274. Scull and the bones thereof, 162. The
fractures thereof, See Fractures. Depression thereof how helped, 344. Where to
be trepaned, 369.
Sea feather and grape, 1007. Sea-hare, his description, poison, and the cure
thereof, 803. Seasons of the year, 10. Secundine, why presently to be taken
away after the birth of the child, 904. Why so called, 906. Causes of the
stay, and symptoms that follow thereon, ibid.
Seed- bones; 220. 236. Seed, the condition of that which is good, 885. The
qualities, 888. The ebullition thereof, etc. 893. Why the greatest portion
thereof goes to the generation of the head and brain, 894.
Seeing, the instrument, object, etc. thereof, 24. Semicupium, the form,
manner, and use thereof, 1073. Semispinatus musculus, 207. Sense, common sense,
and the functions thereof, 896. Septum lucidum, 167. Septicke medicines, 1046.
Serpent Haemorrous, his bite and cure, 791. Seps, his bite and cure, ibid.
Basiliske, his bite and cure, 792. Aspe, his bite and cure, 794. Snake, his
bite and cure, 795.
Serratus musculus major, 206. posterior and superior, ibid. minor, 208. Serous
humor, 15. Sesamoidia ossa, 220. 236. Seton, wherefore good, 381. the manner
of making thereof, ibid. Sepe, what, and the difference thereof, 27^. Histories
of the change thereof, 974.
Shame and shame fac'tnesse, their effects, 40 Shin- bone, 231. Shoulder Blade,
the fractures thereof, 569. the cure, 570. the dislocation, 608. the first
manner of restoring it, 609. the second manner, 610. the third manner. 611. the
fourth manner, ibid. the fifth, 612. the sixth, 614. how to restore it
dislocated forwards, 617. outward, 618. upwards, ibid. Signs of sanguine,
choleric, phlegmatic, and melancholic persons, 17. 18. Signs in general
whereby to judge of diseases, 1122. etc. Silkewormes, their industry, 60.
Similar parts, how many and which, 81. Simple medicines, their difference in
qualities and effects, 1029. hot, cold, moist, dry in all degrees, 1031. 1032.
their accidental qualities, 1032. their preparation, 1037. Siren, 1001. Skin
twofold, the utmost or scarfe-skin. 88. the true skin, 89. the substance,
magnitude, etc. thereof. ib. Sleep, what it is, 35. the fit time, the use and
abuse thereof, 36. when hurtful, 277. how to procure it, 850. Smelling, the
object and medium thereof, 24. Snake, his bite, and the cure, 795. Solanum
manicum, the poisonous quality, and cure, 805. Soleus musculus, 238. Solution
of continuitie, 42. why harder to repair in bones, 562. Sorrow, the effects
thereof, 39. Soul, or life, what it performs in plants, beasts and men, 7.
when it enters into man's body, etc. 895. Sounds, whence the difference, 191.
Southern people how tempered, 17. South wind why pestilent, 823. Sowning
what, the causes and cure. 334. Sparrowes with what care they breed their
young. 58. Spermatica arteria, 114, vena, 116. Spermatick vessels in men, 119.
in women, 126. the cause of their foldings, 887. Sphincter muscle of the
fundament, 106. of the bladder, 124. Spiders, their industry, 58. their
differences and bites, 798. Spinall marrow, the coats, substance, use, etc.
thereof, 175. signs of the wounds thereof, 389. Spinatus musculus, 205. Spine,
the dislocation thereof, 602. 603. how to restore it, 604. a further inquiry
thereof, 605. prognostics, 606. Spirit what, 25. threefold, viz. Animal,
Vital, and Natural, 25. 26. fixed, ib. their use, 27. Spirits, how to be
extracted out of herbs and flowers, etc. 1105. Spleen, the substance,
magnitude, figure, etc. thereof, 111, 112. Splenius musculus, 201. Splints and
their use, 559. Spring, the temper thereof, 10. Squinancie, the differences,
symptoms, etc. thereof, 296. the cure, 297. Stapes, one of the bones of the
Auditorie passage, 163. 191. Staphiloma,, an affect of the eyes, the causes
thereof, 649. Stars, how they work upon the Air, 30. Steatoma, what, 271.
Sternon, the anatomicall administration thereof, 139. Sternutamentories, their
description and use, 1068. Stinging of Bees, Wasps, Scorpions, etc. see Bees,
Wasps, Scorpions, etc. Sting-Ray, the symptoms that follow his sting, and the
cure, 802. Stink an inseparable companion of putrefaction, 318. Stomach, the
substance, magnitude, etc. thereof, 103. the orifices thereof, 104. signs of
the wounds thereof, 396. the ulcers thereof, 480. Stones, see Testicles. Stone,
the causes thereof, 664. signs of it in the kidneyes and bladder, ibid.
prognostickes, 666. the prevention thereof, 667. what to be done when the
stone falls into the ureter, 669. signs it is fallen out of the ureter into
the bladder, 670. what to be done when it is in the neck of the bladder, or
the passage of the yard, 671. how to cut for the stone in the bladder, 672.
673. 674. etc. how to cure the wound, 679. to help the ulcer when the urine
flows out by it, 681. how to cut women for the stone, 682. diverse strange ones
mentioned, 996. 997. Storkes, their piety, 61. Stoves, how to be made, 1077.
Strangury, the causes, etc. thereof, 688. a virulent one, what, 738. the causes
and differences thereof, ibid. prognostickes, 739. from what part the matter
thereof flows, ibid. the general cure, 740. the proper cure, 741. why it
succeeds immoderate copulation, 887. Strangulation of the mother or womb,
939. signs of the approach thereof, 941. the causes and cure, 942.
Strengthening medicines, see Corroborating. Strumae, see Kings-evill.
Sublimate, see Mercury. Subclavian, see Artery and Vein. Subclauius musculus,
206. Succarath, a beast of the west Indies, 61 Suffusio, see Cataract.
Sugillations, see Contusions. Summer, the temper thereof, 10. Supinatores
musculi, 221. Suppuration, the signs thereof, 251. caused by natural heat,
275. Suppuratives, 258. 275. 292. an effectual one, 433. their differences,
etc. 1041. how they differ from emollients, ibid. Superfoetation what, 924. the
reason, thereof, ibid. Suppositories, their difference, form and use, 1703.
Suppression of urine, see Urine. Surgery, what, 3. the operations thereof, 4.
Surgeons, what necessary for them, 3. their office, 4. the choice of such as
shall have care of those sick of the plague, 830. they must be careful in
making reports, 1121 how long in some cases they must suspend their judgments,
I. 122. they must have a care lest they bring Magistrates into an error, 1128.
how to report, or make certificates in diverse cases, 1129 Sutures of the skull,
their number, etc. 161 wanting in some, ib. why not to be trepaned, 162. 167.
Sutures in wounds, their sorts and manner how to be performed, 326. 327.
Sweating sickness, 821 Sweet bread, 108. Sweet waters, 1083 Swine assist their
fellows. 67 Symptoms, their denfition, and division, 42 Sympathy and
Antipathy of living creatures, 73 Symphysis, a kind of articulation, 243
Synarcosis, Synarthrosis, Synchondrosis, Syneurosis, 243 Synochus putrida, its
cause and cure, 261
T.
TAlparia, what, 272 Tarentula's poisonous bite, and cure, 49 Tarsus, what, 181
Tastes, what, their differences, 1034. their several denominations, and
natures, 1035. Tasting, what, 22. Teeth, their number, division, and use, 179
wherein they differ from other bones, ib. pain of them how helped, 401. their
affects, 657. how to draw them, 659. to cleanse the^, 660. how to supply their
defect, 872. to help the pain in breeding them, 959 Temporal muscle, 188. what
ensues the cutting, thereof, 369 Temperament, what, the division thereof, 7 ad
pondus, ib. ad justitiam, 8. of a bone, ligament, gristle, tendon, vein,
artery, 9. of ages, ib. of humors, 11. Temper of the four seasons of the
year, 10 native temper how changed, 18 Temperatures in particular, as of the
southern, northern, etc. people, 19. 20 Tensores musculi, 230. Tentigo, 130
Tertian agues, or fevers, their causes, etc. 265. their cure, 266 Testicles,
their substance, 119. in women 126. their wounds, 399 Testudo, what, 272
Tettars, their kinds, and causes, 264. their cure, 265. 1081. occasioned by the
Lues venerea, 754. their cure, ib. Thanacth, a strange beast, 1021 Thenar
musculus, 222. and 238. Thigh, the nerves thereof, 226. its proper parts, 227.
and wounds thereof, 399. Thigh Bone, the appendices and processes thereof, 228.
229. the fracture and cure, 577. nigh to the joint, 580. its dislocation, 623.
720. see Hip. Things natural, 5. not natural, 29. why so called, ib. against
nature, 41 Thorax, the chest and parts thereof, 135 Thoracica arteria, 153
Throat, how to get out bones, and such like things that stick therein, 655
Throttle, and the parts thereof, 194 Throws, and their cause, 903 Thymus,
what, 156. Tibia, 231 Tibiaeus anticus musculus, 237. posticus, 238. Tinea,
what, 638 Toad, his bite and cure, 796 Tongue, its quantity, etc. 192. its
wounds, its cure, 385. its impediment and contraction, and the cure, 661. to
supply its defects, 873. Tonsillae, 293. their inflammations, and their cure,
293. 294 Toothache, the causes, signs etc. 656. Tophi, or knots at the joints
in some that have the gout, how caused, 717. in the Lues venerea how helped,
746 Torpedo, his craft and stupefying force, 794 Touching, how performed, 22
Toucha, a strange bird, 1016 Trapezius musculus, 208 Transverfarius musculus,
205 Transverse muscles of the Epigastrium, 99 Treacle, how useful in the gout,
706. how it dulls the force of simple poisons, 783 Trepan, when to be applied,
342. their description, 365. where to be applied, 369 Trepaning why used, 364.
how performed, ib. a caution in performance thereof. 366 Triangulus musculus,
207 Triton, 1001. Trochanter, 229 Trusses, their form and use, 306. 307.
Tumors, their differences, 249. their general causes, signs, 250. general
cure, 252. which hardest to be cured, ib. the four principal, 253. flatulent
and watrish, their signs and cure, 269. 270. of the gums, 292. of the almonds
of the throat, 293. of the navell, 303. of the groine and cods, 304. of the
knees, 314 Turtles, 62 Tympanites, s^^ Dropsy.
V.
VAlves of the heart, their action, site, etc. 146. Varicous bodies, 120
Varices, what, their causes, signs and cure, 483. V^ breve, seu venosum. 113
Vsa ejaculatoria, 121. Vasti musculi, 232 Vein, what, 97. Gate vein, and its
distribution, 112. descendent hollow vein, and its distribution, ascendent
hollow vein, and its distribution, 116 they are more than arteries, 155. those
of the eyes, 184. which to be opened in the inflammation of the eyes, 186. the
cephalic, 210. median, ib. distribution of the subclavian vein, ib. of the
axilary, 211. of the crurall, 224 Venae, porta, 112. cava, 216. arteriosa, 147.
phre^icae, coronales, azygos, intercostalis, mammariae, cervicalis, musculosa,
148. axillaris, humeralis, jugularis interna and externa, 149. recta, pupis,
152. cephalica, humeraria, mediana, 210. salvatella, and plenica 211. sapheia,
vel saphena, ischiadica, 224. muscula, poplitea, suralis, ischiadica major, 225
Venery, its discommodities in wounds of the head, 359 Venomous bites and
stings, how to be cured, 783 Venom of a mad dog outwardly applied, causes
madness, 787 Ventoses, their form and use, 694. 695 Ventricle, see stomach.
Ventricles of the brain, 166 Verdegreace, its poisonous quality and cure, 810
Vertebrae, and their processes 196. of the neck, ib. of the holy-hone, 198. how
different from those of the loins, 205. Tenth of the back, how the middle of
the spine, 206, their dislocation. See Spine. Vertigo, its causes and signs,
639. the cure, 640 Vessels for distillation, 1094. 1096. 1097 etc. Vesicatories
why better than cauteries in cure of a pestilent bubo, 854. whereof made, 1046.
their description and use, 1067. Viper, see Adder. Virginity, the signs
thereof, 1128 Vital parts which, 84. their division, ibid. Vitreus humor, 184
Viver, or, as some term it, the Weaver, a fish, his poisonous prick and the
cure, 801 ^cers conjoined with tumors how cured, 265. in^ at bodies not easily
cured, 417. their nature, ^uses, etc. 466. 467. signs, prognostics, 468 their
general cure, 470. signs of a distempered one, and the cure, 471. a painful
one and the cure. 472. with proud flesh in them, ib. putrid and breeding
worms, 473. a sordid one, ibib. a malign, virulent, and eating one, 474.
advertisements concerning the time of dressing ulcers, 475. how to bind them
up, 476. such as run are good in time of the plague, 828. Ulcers in particular,
and first of the eyes, 476. of the nose, 477. of the mouth, 478. of the ears,
479. of the winde-pipe, weazon, stomach and guts, 480. of the kidneis and
bladder, 481. of the womb, 482. that happen upon the fracture, of the leg,
rump and heel, 586 how to prevent them, 587. they must be seldom dressed when
the callus is breeding, 589 Umbilicall vessels, how many and what, 892 Unction
to be used in the Lues venerea, 731. their use, 732. cautions in their use,
ib. and the inconveniences following the immoderat use, 734 Ungula, or the web
on the eye, the causes, prognostickes, and cure, 647 Unguentum adstringens,
1056, nutritum, ib. aureum, ib. basilicum, sive tetrapharmacum, ib.
diapompholigos, 1057. desiccativum rub. ib. enulatum, ib. Album Rhasis, ib.
Altheae, ib. populeon, ib. apostolorum, ib. comitissae, ib. pro stomacho, 1058.
ad morsus rabiosos, (...) ibid. Unicorn, if any such beast what the name
imports, 813. what the ordinary horns are, 814. not effectual against poison,
ib. effectual only to dry, ib. in what cases good, 815 Voices, whence so
various, 194 Vomits, their force, 38. their descriptions, 277 Vomiting, why it
happens in the Colic, 106. the fittest time therefore, 705. to make it easy,
ib. Voyages and other employments wherein the Author was present; of Thurin,
1142. of Marolle and low Britany, 1144. of Perpignan, 1145. of Landresie, and
Bologne, 1146. of Germany, 1147. of Danvilliers, 1148. of Castle of Count,
1149. of Mets, 1150. of Hedin, 1155. Battle of S. Quintin, 1164. Voyage of
Amiens, of Harbor of Grace, 1165. to Roven, ib. battle of Dreux, 1166 of
Moncontour, 1167. voyage of Flanders 1168. of Burges. 1172. battle of S.
Denis, 1172. voyage of Bayon, 1173 Uraclius, 134. Ureters, their substance,
etc. 123 Urine s^opt by dislocation of the thigh bone, 626 suppression thereof
how deadly, 666. how it happens by internal causes, 683. by external, 684
prognostics, ib. things unprofitable in the whole body, purged thereby, 683.
bloody, the differences and causes thereof, 685. the cure, 687. scalding thereof
how helped, 740. a receptacle for such as cannot keep it, 877. Urines of such
as have the plague sometimes like those that are in health, 832 Utelif. a
strange fish, 69. Uvea tunica, 183 Vulnerary potions, their use, 752. the names
of the simples whereof they are composed, 753. their form, and when chiefly to
be used, ib. Uvula, the site and use thereof, 193. the infla^mation and
relaxation thereof, 294. the cure, 295.
W.
WAlnut tree, and the malignity thereof, 808 Warts of the neck of the womb, 955.
their cure, 956. Washes to be beautify the skin, 1079 Wasps, their stinging
how helped, 789 Watching, and the discommodities thereof, 37 Water, its
qualities, 6. best in time of plague, 824 Waters, how to b^^distilled, 1099.
Watrish tumors, their signs and cure, 269. 270 Weapons, of the Ancients
compared with those of the modern times, 407 Weazon, the substance, etc.
thereof, 156. how to be opened in extreme diseases. 294. the wounds thereof, 387.
the ulcers thereof, 480 Weakness, two causes thereof, 250 Web on the eye,
which curable, and which not, 647 the cure, ibid. Wedge bone, 172 Weights and
measures, with their notes, 1049 Wens, their causes and cure, 272. 273. how to
distinguish them in the breast from a Cancer, 273 Whale, why reckoned among
monsters. 1012. they bring forth young and suckle them, ib. how caught, ibid.
Whale-bone, 1013 Whirle-bone, the fracture thereof and cure, 582 the
dislocation thereof, 630 White lime, 100 Whites, the reason of the name,
differences, etc. 952. causes, 953. their cure, 954 Whitlowes, 314 Wine, which
not good in the Gout. 708 Winds, their tempers and qualities, 20. 30 Winter,
and the temper thereof, 10. how it increases the native heat, 11 Wisdom the
daughter of memory and experience, 898 Witches hurtby the Devils assistance,
989 Wolves, their deceits and ambushes, 66 Womb, the substance, magnitude,
etc. thereof, 128. 129. the coats thereof, 132. signs of the wounds thereof,
347. ulcers thereof, and their cure, 482. when it has received the seed it is
shut up, 891. the falling down thereof how caused, 906 it is not distinguished
into cells, 924. a scirrhus thereof, 930. signs of the distemper thereof, 933
which meet for conception, ib. of the falling down pervertion or turning
thereof, 934. the cure thereof, 935. it must be cut away when it is putrefyed,
936. the strangulation or suffocation thereof, 939. see Strangulation. Women,
their nature, 27. how to know whether they have conceived, 890. their travel
in childbirth, and the cause thereof, 899. what must be done to them
presently after their deliverance, 917. bearing many children at a birth, 970.
971 Wonderful net, 172 Wondrous original of some creatures, 1000. nature of
some marine things, ibid. Worms in the teeth, their causes, and how killed,
658. bred in the head, 762. cast forth by urine, 765. how generated, and their
differences, ibid. of monstrous length, 766. signs, ib. the cure, 7^7 Wounds
may be cured only with li^^ and water, 52 Wounds termed great in three
respects, 323, 112. Wounds poisoned how cured, ^80 Wounds of the head at Paris,
and of the leg* at Avignon, why hard to be cured, 4^7 Wounds, what, the diverse
appellation and divison of them, 321. their causes and signs, 322.
prognostickes, 323. small ones sometimes mortal, 324 their cure in general,
ibid. to stay their bleeding, 328. to help pain, 329. why some die of small
ones, and others recover of great, 351. whether better to cure in children or
in old people, 352 Wounds of the head, see Fractures. Of the musculous skin
thereof, 360. their cure, 361. of the face, 378. of the eyebrows, ib. of the
eyes, 379 of the cheek, 382. of the nose, 384. of the tongue 385. of the
ears, 386. of the neck and throat, ibid. of the weazon and Gullet, 387. of
the chest, 388. of the heart, lungs and midriffe, ibid. of the spine, 389. what
wounds of the lungs cureable, 392. of the Epigastrium or lower belly, 396.
their cure, 397. of the Kall and fat, 398. of the groines, yard, and testicles,
399. of the thighs, and legs, ibid. of the nerves and nervous parts, ibid.
of the joints, 403. of the ligaments, 404 Wounds contused must be brought to
suppuration, 417 Wounds made by gunshot are not burnt, neither must they be
cauterized, 408. they may be dressed with suppuratives, 410. why hard to cure,
ibid. why they look black, 413. they have no Eschar, ibid. why so deadly,
415. in what bodies not easily cured, 417. their division, 418. signs, ibid.
how to be dressed at the first, 419. 423. how the second time, 424. they all are
contused, 432 Wounds made by arrows how different from those made by gunshot,
438 Wrest, and the bones thereof, 218. the dislocation thereof, and the cure,
622
Y
YArd, and the parts thereof, 125. the wound thereof, 399. to help the cord
thereof, 663 the malign ulcers thereof, 737. to supply the defect thereof, for
making water, 877 Yew tree, his malignity, 807
Z
ZIrbus, the Kall, the substance, etc. thereof, 101
FINIS.

