THE SECRETS OF PHYSIC and PHILOSOPHY, Divided into two Books:

In the first is showed the true and perfect order to distill, or draw forth
the Oils of all manner of Gummes, Spices, Seeds, Roots, and Herbs, with
their perfect taste, smell and virtues.

In the second is showed the true and perfect order to prepare, calcine,
sublime, and dissolve all manner of Minerals, and how ye shall dravv forth
their oils and Salts, which are most wonderful in their Operations, for the
health of Man's Body.

First written in the German Tongue by the most learned Theophrastus
Paraselsus, and now published in the English Tongue, by JOHN HESTER,
Practitioner in the Art of Distillation.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Lugger, and are be sold at the Posterne
Gate at Tower Hill. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, and his singular good Lord, John Watson,
by the grace of God, Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the right Honorable
Order of the Garter, I. H. wishes health and peace, and long life in JESUS
CHRIST.
Pretty and pithie is the tale (my Good Lord) that Plato tells in his
Protagoras, and somewhat appliable to my present purpose, and therefore not
absurd for me to set down, to the better preferment of my pretense. Among
other his excellent Inventions (as he is in all his things most like himself
still very divine) he shows how Jove looking down from heaven with a
pitiful regard upon the hard and untoward condition of men, seeing the sundry
calamities, and infinite miseries that they were subject unto, while yet they
lived savage like beasts amongst beasts, every man leading his life after the
level of his own lust, took order strait with his winged Messenger Mercury,
to descend down with expedition, with travel to collect and gather together
the dispersed multitude, that so united they might both be stronger to defend
themselves from the bruit beasts their common enemy: and linked as it were in
a body politic, each presented as well with the daily view of his own want,
as the continual show of the like lack in others, might with joint assent and
consent (as driven by necessity) endeavor to drive necessity from themselves.
For the speedier accomplishing whereof, he had in charge to establish a law,
that if any amongst them were found unfurnished with justice, and void of
shamefastness: the same should be compted as an unprofitable droane among
laboring bees, and should suffer punishment accordingly. A worthy talk, and
fit so worthy a Philosopher. By the which he highly delivered in general
terms, that which we daily find in particular proof: to weet, no common
wealth, nor society to continue long happy where the members and parts thereof
either for love of Justice, or fear of shame are not like affectioned each
other. Now lest I should seem to allow of this tale in speech, and to dislike
it in practice, I have presumed by this bare translation, to testify my
forwardness in furthering her that fosters me. And yet is not my Translation
so bare, (my good Lord) but that it carries in it more plainness to the
Reader, then perhaps they shall find in the first writer: For beside that I
have culled out their choice things, I have from the same choice proined, and
cut off their superfluity, I have supplied their defects, I have laid open
their obscurity, and I have shadowed their defaults, neither yet arrogating to
my self, not derogating from them, but as Dies diem docet, So; Experimentum
experiendo confirmatur. What my travel herein shall profit, I know not: but sure
I am, my trouble in the trial of them has been great, my expenses large, my
proofs painful, and nothing at all herein pleasant save only a little
knowledge that I have got, above the capacity of the common sort, a thing sure
that I value far above the price that it cost me. Which knowledge indeed such
is my grossness, or such the subtlenesse of the matter if self that I can
easilier by demonstration show it, then by declaration teach it: and therefore
dare I not vnder-credite warrant perspicuitie to all men, but to those that are
Filijartis, I promise more then I found, and yet found I more then they having
would willingly loose: To the residue I may say, that as Hens sit, but hatch
not Chickens in one day: so men read, but learn not Arts in one day.

To you, my good Lord, whose Countenance herein I crave for protection, whose
judgment and skill I appeal to for favor, I must needs confess they are not
written) although loath to have them masterlesse like their master, I am over
bold, to shroud them under your wings) to you I say they are not written,
except overlade^ with the deep and grave mysteries of higher and more heavenly
Philosophy, it may please you for delight, now and then to look down into
the plentiful and pleasant storehouse of Nature; a matter no doubt that all
your whole life time, you have been singularly delighted with, as most
plainly do declare the singularity, that you have happily attained unto in
all and every the parts of her, no less to your great content at home, then to
your like commendation abroad: which because I can neither praise to your
desert not in praising please your desire, I leave to speak farther of: only
desiring your good Lordship with your wonted clemency, to accept of this small
testimony of my great good will, assuring your self, that amongst the great
number of your well willers, there is no one more dutiful then your poor

John Hester.

To the Reader.
EXperience, the Daughter of Time, the mother of Wisdom, the Reward of
Travel, and the only Jewel of a few the wiser, is commonly, good Reader,
set out at so high a price, and valewed at so dear a pennyworth, that she
has ever more Cheapners, then Chapmen, more lookers on her, then likers of
her: and yet is she bought of some, although one dram of her cost them a
whole pound of Repentance. To descend into particulars, were but to tie thee to
a wearisome tale, and to lead thee along through a tedious Labyrinth, stuffed
full of Examples of former ages: a matter already so open to the view of the
whole world, that for me to stir further therein, were but to set a lighted
candle in the bright Sun. Only for proof, it may please thee (good Reader)
to admit the Instance in my self. When I began first to shake hands with the
variety of delights, that unstayed Youth are commonly carried away with: and
looking back, (as it were over my shoulder) saw the vast Sea of sugered
miseries that I had waded through, I then began to think it high time to set
down a surer Compass to direct the remnant of the course that I have yet to
run. And although at that time I carried in my purse sufficient wealth to
support my calling, in my body sufficient health to maintain my life; and
those both so reasonable, as might have satisfied a reasonable man, (were not
Natura hominum novitatis avida) yet found I neither such content in the one,
nor the other, as might longer content me to continue in that state. But
drawn on a while by this instinct, or infection (I know not whether to callit)
I was driven at last by a greedy kind of jealousy, to envy the store that I
saw in others, in respect of mine own penury: and therewithal I fell into
consideration how I might become one of the small number of those, whom the
greatest number wondered at. To enter the straight path that many the learned
had happily to their great commendation perfectly trodden, I saw it almost
unpossible, unless peradventure I should get me where the Muses dwell, to
Oxford and Cambridge, and there putting my self Apprentice seven years to the
seven liberal Sciences, might afterward become as long journeyman I cannot
tell to who^: and in the end (as too many the learned do) get I cannot tell
what. This course yielded so course a liking, as I sooner passed over it, then
into it: and casting about again with my self, I was combred with a hundred
other odd crochets, all as far beyond the compass of my reach, as they were
short of the condition of my likeing, till at lengh in the midst of this
muse, I met in my mind with two such minions, as in my conceit were the only
Paragons of the rest: the one gallant and gorgeous garnished with gold and
silver, bedect with jewels, sole Lady and Governesse of all the rich Mines and
Mineralls that are in the bowels of the earth: the other sweet and odoriferous,
adorned with flowers and herbs, beautified with delicate spices, sole Lady and
Regent of all pleasant things that grow upon the face of the earth. These I
vowed to serve and to honor, even to the l^sse of life and limme: neither have
I greatly broken promise with them, though they have not kept touch with me.
Goodly and many golden mountains they promised me, Mary hitherto have seantly
performed any leaden mole-hills. But howsoever the bargainestand between them
and me, I am neither disposed to accuse them, nor excuse my self. We agreed
upon wages, and I wear their Liveries: their Cognusance, such as it is, I
bear where I am not ashamed to show it: diverse and sundry their Affairs have
they employed me in, in the which I have saithfully, painfully, and chargeably
applied my self, and attained by their instructions, (to mine own destruction
almost) many their hidden secrets as well in Metals and Mineralls, as in
Herbs and Spices: part whereof I have diligently collected together, and for
non-payment of my board wages at their hands, am forced to set them with the
residue of my skill to sale, with offer unto thee (good Reader) of preferment
to the best things I have: yet at a far easier price then they cost me, being
no less my Summa summarum cast up, and the foot of my account set down, then
the wasting out of my former health, and the wearing of the little wealth I
had. So that what experiences soever I have dug out of hard stones, blown
out from hot fire, raked out from foul ashes, with great cost, and greater
travail, that have thou here in my Book to see, and in my shop to use with
great ease at thy commandment.

John Hester.

A TRVE AND perfect Order to make Oils out of all manner of Gumms, Spice,
Seeds, Roots and Herbs Whereunto is added some of their virtues, gathered out
of sundry Authors.
To make Oil of Masticke.
TAke the purest Masticke that may be got, which is not mixed with Sandrake,
or such like, and beat it to powder, then put it into a glass with a long
neck, and put therein as much pure Aqua vitae, as will cover it three fingers
high, and then slop it close that it take no air, then set it in warm
horse-dung, or in a soft Balneo, until it be dissolved: then pour it into a
glass, and put therein as much wine as you shall think good, and distill it
with a head, and receiver in sand, with a small fire, and you shall receive both
oil and water together, the which you shall separate one from an other. Then
increase your fire, and there will come fourth another oil, which smells
somewhat of the fire, and i^ best to be used outwardly. Ye may rectify it
again with a small fire, and so it will come sweet.

The virtues of this oil. It is excellent against all cold diseases of the
Maw: it comforeteth the liver and the lights, and all other inward parts of the
body. Being drunken it helps those that vomit or spit blood: it consumes and
breaks all inward sores. This oil being anointed on the belly, it stops
the flixe, it stops women's Terms, it is also good for the Mother that is
fallen down, if you annoint it therewith, and the under part of the belly: It
is good for young children whose Arse-gut comes forth, if you anoint it
therewith, and put it up again: It is also good for those that are Bursten, if
you annoint them therewith, and let them wear a Trusse fit for that purpose:
it helps fresh wounds very quickly, if you annoint them therewith, and lay
thereon a cloth wet in the same. It fastneth the teeth if you annoint the
gummes therewith: it comfort a weak stomach, and causes good digestion, if
you annoint it therewith.

This Oil has all the virtues of Masticke, but it is an hundred times more of
force.

To make Oil of Mirra.
TAke pure Mirra that is new and fat, six ounces, and put it into a glass
with a long neck, and put thereon twelve ounces of pure rectified Aqua vitae,
then lute the glass fast, and set it in horse-dung until it be dissolved.
Then pour it into an Vrinall with a head and a receiver, and distill away the
Aqua vitae in Balneo, with a soft fire, and the oil will remain in the
bottom, the which strain through a fine cloth, and keep it in a glass. His
virtues are these.

This Oil by his natural Virtue preserves all things from putrefaction that
is anointed therewith: likewise the face and hands being anointed therewith,
it presents the^ in youthful state, a long time. It helps* all stinking
sores and wounds quickly: it helps: pains of the ears, if it be put
therein. It preserves the sight of the Eyes, if your put one or two drops
therein: Helps all pains of the Mother, if it be anointed therewith: it
stays the hair from falling: if any be troubled with a Fever, let him
anoint his whole-body therewith, and lay him down to sweat. This Oil dries
and consumes all Accidents after birth. Being drunk, it makes a sweet
breath, and helps the Cough: it is good against short wind: it helps the
stitch in the side; if you drink thereof one dram: it stops the flux of the
bellys it makes a clean voice. The Armepits being anointed therewith, it
takes away the stinch from those parts: if ye mix it with wine, and wash the
mouth therewith, it will comfort the gumm^; and fasten the teeth: it is also
good for wounds in the head.

If thou will use this oil to preserve any part, you shall use it in this
order; first, make a Bath with some sweet herbs, and then hold that part the
which you will preserve over the fume, that the poares may open, then dry it
with a linen cloth, then annoint it with this Oil, and chafe it in: that
being done, if there remain any yellowness of the Oil, ye may wash it away
with white wine. This Oil would be occupied when you are in the Stewe or
hot-house.

To make Oil of Storax liquida.
TAke the purest Storax that you can get, and put it in a glass with a long
neck, and set it in horse-dung for a month, then take it forth, and distill
it in an Vrinall that has a wide mouth, in sand, with a gentle fire, and you
shall have both Oil and water, the which you shall, separate, and keep to
your use.

Risius writes in his great Book of Distillations, that this Oil has the
same Virtues that the Oil of Mirra has: but that it is a little more hot and
piercing.

To make Oil of Storax Calamite.
THis oil may be made diverse ways, of the which I will show you the best.
Take the purest Storax that you can find, and beat it into Powder, then put it
into a long necked glass, and put thereon pure rectified Aqua vitae, and lute
the glass, then set it in warm dung, or in a soft Balneo a month. Then
distill it in sand with a small fire, and thou shall have both Oil and water,
which you shall separate. You shall understand, that toward the end of the
distillation, there will ascend a certain matter like Manna, the which is
pleasant.

The virtues of this oil. Three or four drops being drunk, it comforts the
Breast and Lungs, and all inward parts: it helps the pains of the Mother if
it be drunk, and also anoint those parts therewith: it stoppes the Rheum
that falls to the breast and neck: this being drunk, it makes a man merry,
and of light courage, but beware you take not too much. If you put two or three
drops into the Ears, it takes away the singing in them.

To make Oil of Benjamin.
THis is made as you made the oil of Storax Calamite, and is only used in
perfuming: some distill this Benjamin with rose water, but I think it will not
be so perfect in smell, nor so easily done.

To make Oil of Galbanum.
TAke the purest Galbanum thou can get, and put it into a glass close luted,
then set it in Balneo Mariae until it be dissolved, then distill it with a
soft fire, and then will come forth a fair yellow oil, the which ye shall
separate.

This oil being drunk, is good against an old cough, and for such as are
short winded, and can not easily draw their breath, but are always panting and
breathing. It is also very good for such as are broken, and bruised within, and
against Crampes, and shrinking of sinews. This oil being drunk in Wine with
oil of Mirra, is good against all venom drunken, or shot into the body with
venomous darts or arrows. Being taken in the same order, it provokes women's
terms, and delivers the dead child. It has the same virtue, if a persume
thereof be received in the secret parts This Perfume does also help women
that are grieved with the rising, or strangling of the Mother, and them that
have the Falling sickness, and being laid to the Navell, it causes the Matrix
or Mother that is remooved from his natural place, to settle again. This oil
does mollify and soften, and draws forth thorns, splinters, or shivers,
and cold humors, being mixed with any convenient unguent. It is good to
anoint the side against the stopping and hardness of the Milt. The perfume or
sent of this Oil drives away serpents from the place where it is burned: and
no venomous beasts have power to hurt such as be anointed with the Oil of
Galbanum, and if ye mix this oil with the root of Angelica, or the seed or
root of Spondilium, and touch any Serpent or venomous beast therewith, it
causes them to die.

To make Oil of Sagapenum, a Gum running out of the Herb Ferula.
TAke this Gum, and dissolve it in strong Wine, in Balneo Mariae, and then
distill it in the sand with a gentle fire.

This oil is good for the stitch in the side, It takes away the Cough that
has continued long: It helps the swelling of the breast, whereby the breast
is stopped. It is very good against the Crampe: it warmeth the joints, and
helps the pains of the hippes, and all such like diseases coming of cold.
It is good for women that have great pain in their-bed, if you annoint the
nostrills therewith: For it drives forth both the quick and the dead fruit
quickly: being drunk with wine it helps against poison, and is also good
against the biting of an Adder: being put into the eye, it takes away spots:
You shall note, that women with child must take great heed of this Oil.

To make oil of Opoponax.
THis is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these.

If you drink three or four drops with Wine, it helps the Cough, and all
impediments of the Milt: it helps also all Impediments of the Bladder, and
cleanses it of all scabs and fores: It helps the stitch in the side: it
causes speedy deliverie in Women with child: it helps against wind in the
Matrix, and dissolveth the hardness of those parts, and causes the pain to
cease.

To make Oil of Euphorbium.
THis it made as is said before, and his virtues are these.

Ye shall note, that this Oil is not to be occupied inwardly, by reason of
his great heat, except it be mixed with some other thing, as if it be mixed
with honey, it purges the belly marveylously: it helps those that are
troubled with obliviousnesse, if ye annoint the parts therewith: It draws
forth thorns and such like out of the flesh: it helps the biting of an
Adder: it is also good for stiffenesse of the joints coming of cold, if ye
annoint the parts therewith.

To make Oil of Ambre, or Succinum.
TAke Ambre, and beat it to powder, and put it into a glass with a Head and a
Receiver, and distill it in sand with a gentle fire, and there will come forth
both oil and water, the which ye shall separate one from another.

This Oil being perfectly distilled, is good against pains of the head, and
resolution of sinews, and against swimming in the head, and falling sickness.
If ye drink thereof three or four drops in the morning with Pionie water, it
preserves a man from all poisons and pestiferous airs, if ye annoint the
nostrilles therewith, or put it into some medicine fit for that purpose. It is
excellent against diseases of the Blader and Reins, and drives forth the
Stone, and provokes Urine, if ye drink it with Malmesie, or Parcelie water,
or such like. It helps the Collicke. and choking of the Matrix; if you also
annoint the parts therewith, it drives forth the fruit, and causes a woman
to be fairly delivered; if she drink three or four drops, it is good against
all fluxes of the head.

To make Oil of Amoniacum.
TAke this Gum, and put it into a glass close luted: and set it in warm
dung, or in Balneo Mariae, until it be dissolved; then distill it in sand
with a head and a receiver, and thou shall have both Oil and water, the which
ye shall separate one from another: ye shall understand, that there will come
forth more water then oil, as I have prooved many times.

This Oil helps the Cough coming of moisture: it purges the breast, and
helps Ulcers in that place, three or four drops being taken in an Egg: it
helps pains in the side, if ye annoint it therewith: It dissolveth all
hardness, and swellings, and takes away the pains of the Gowt. If ye mix
this oil with as much oil of Galbanum, and a very little oil of Wormwood,
and anoint the Milt, it takes away all the pains: being mixed with oil of
Wormwood, and anointed in the navill, it kills worms.

To make Oil of Sarcocolla.
THis is an excellent Balsome against all wounds, and fills them with flesh:
it purges all old sores, without pain and smart: it breaks hard
Impostumes, it helps all running Eyes, if you use it in a Collirie: it
helps wheales in the eyelids: Being drunk with Wine, it helps the Phewme
that falls to the teeth, and for that cause it is used of those that are
troubled with abundance of flegmatique humors: You shall note, that this oil
is specially used in fresh wounds, and old sores. This Oil is made as you made
the oil of Serapynum.

To make Oil of Castoreum.
TAke the fattest that thou can get, and stamp it well; then put it into a
glass, and set it to putrify in Balneo Mariae, five or six days, then
distill it with a soft fire, and thou shall have an excellent Oil.

This is good against all cold Cramps, and Balsies, being mixed with Rue and
Vinegar, and put into the nostrills, it comfort the brain, and takes away
pains of the head. Being anointed on the neck, and also drunk with Wine,
it helps much those that are troubled with the Falling Sickness: It helps
Convulsions, and pains of the sinews, if you annoint them therewith: Being
drunk with Pepper and Hidromell, it provokes women's terms, and also the
fruit, it warmeth cold places; it is also excellent against Appoplexia it
helps those that are deaf, it mooveth Venery. It cures the Collicke, and
the suffocation of the Matrix, and strengthens the natural parts.

To make Oils of Frankincense.
TAke Frankincense, as much as you will, and put it into a Retort of glass
well luted, and put thereunto for every pound of stuff, four ounces of clean
sand, and then distill it with a gentle fire, until all the substance be come
forth, and thou shall have both water and oil, the which ye must separate.

The water is good against wind in the stomach, if it be drunk: it is also
good for choppes in the hands and feet, if ye wash them therewith, and annoint
them with the oil against the fire, and strait ways put on a pair of gloves,
and so doing three times they shall be whole.

This Oil helps simple wounds in three or four days, if ye annoint them
therewith, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same, it preserves all flesh
from putrefying and alteration, and takes away the pain: It helps all aches
and bruises if ye anoint them therewith. Ye shall note, that you must use no
tent where you occupy this oil, but wash the wound clean, and join it, or
stitch it close together, and then lay thereon a cloth wet in the same; for if
ye fall a tenting, ye make work for the Surgeon.

To make Oil of Turpentine.
TAke pure and clean Turpentine as much as you will, and put it into a glass,
so that three parts be empty, and put therein a certain quantity of Sand, as
much as you shall think good; then distill it in sand with a soft fire, and
there will come forth four Liquors: The one is a clear water, the other a
clear Oil, the third a yellow Oil, the fourth a red and stinking, the which
a number of Potecaries do fell in stead of Balm. Ye shall note, that the
first Oil is hot, the second hotter, the third hottest of all, and not so good
to occupy inwardly, as the first.

Falopius in his book of secrets writes, that this oil will help fresh
wounds in four and twenty hours, if ye anoint them therewith, and lay thereon
a cloth wet in the same. So is the oil of Tile-stones, or the blessed oil
mixed with Grayes or Badgers grease. This oil is made with powder of
tyle-stones burnt redd hot, and quenched in the best oil olive, and then with
a retort and strong fire purchased.

It is good against contraction or sinews coming of cold: It provokes urine,
if ye drink one dram of the first oil in white wine: it breaks wind in the
body, and dissolveth the Plurisie, and pestilent Fever: it provokes an
appetite if ye annoint the stomach therewith. It helps against cold diseases
of the Maw, and helps a stinking breath, and the cough.

To make Oil of Wax.
TAke new yellow Wax as much as you shall think good, and melt it on the fire;
then power it into sweet Wine, and wring it between your hands, then melt it
again, and power it into Wine again; and this you shall do five or six
times at the least, and every time you must have fresh Wine, then at the last
you shall put it into a Retort of glass well luted with his Receiver, and
distill it in Sand, and there will come forth a fair yellow oil, the which
will congeale like pap when it is cold. You shall understand, that for every
pound of Wax, ye shall put thereto four ounces of the powder of Brickes into
the glass.

Raymonde Lullie greatly commends this Oil, approoving it rather to be a
Celestial or divine Medicine, then humane: for because this in wounds works
most miraculously, which for his marveilous commodity, is not so well to be
used of the common Surgeon: Because this precious Oil heals a vvound be
the same never so big or wide, being before wide stitched up, in the space of
eleven days, or twelve at the most: But those that are small, this Oil
heals in three or four days, by annoynting only the wound therewith, and
laying thereon a'cloath wet in the same.

Also for inward diseases this Oil works miracles: For if you give one
dram at a time to drink with white wine, it stays the shedding of the
hair, either on the head or beard, by anointing the place therewith. Moreover,
it is excellent in provoking of Urine which is stopped: it helps stitches and
pains in the loins, if you drink the foresaid quantity with White Wine: It
helps the cold Gowt or Sciatica, and all other griefs coming of cold. Ye
shall understand, that if you rectify this oil, it will congeale no more, but
then it will be too hot to take inwardly, for it pierces marvellously, and is
good to be mixed with other medicines, to cause them to pierce the better.

To make the Quintessence of Honey.
YOu shall understand that Honey is a liquor rather divine then humane, because
it falls from heaven upon the herbs, and is such a sweet thing, that the
like cannot be found upon the earth. And this Raymond Lullie calls the
Flower of Flowers, because Bees gather it upon the Flowers in the field. And
truly it is a most strange thing if we would consider well the quality of
Honey and Wax: and therefore the wise Baruch Arabico, in the Academie of
Avicene, did write this sentence: Mel dentro, and olio difuori, satisfying us
by this, that Honey and Oil were the first two liquors in the world. And truly
it is so if we consider well, as it may well be prooved by holy Scripture.

The order to make this Quintessence, is thus: Take two pound of perfect pure
Honey, and put it into a great glass, that four parts of five may remain
empty: Lute it well with a Head and Receiver, and give it fire until there
appear certain white fumes, which you shall turn into water, with wetting of
clothes in cold water, and laying them on the Receiver and Head, and they will
turn into water of a redd color like blood. When it is all distilled, keep
the glass close shut, and let it stand till it be clear, and in the color
of a Rubine. Then distill it in Bal^e^ Mariae, at least six or seven times,
and so it will lose his red color, and remain in the color of Gold, having
a great smell, and so pleasant, that the like cannot be found in the world.

The juice of a Limmon does dissolve Leafe-golde in vvarme ashes, with the
Quintessence of this honey, and makes it potable in forty eight hours.

This Quintessence dissolveth gold, and makes it potable, and likewise any
sort of Jewel that is put therein. It is of such virtue, that if any be a
dying, and drink two or three drammes thereof, presently he will recover, as
the Quintessence of Wine will do. If you wash any wound therewith, or other
sore, it will heal quickly. It is also good against the Cough, Catarre, and
pains of the Milt, and many other diseases which I will not speak of: for but
few. and they very hardly, will believe the great virtue and operation thereof.

I gave this six and forty days unto one that had the Palsy, and he was
helped. It helps also the falling sickness, and preserves the body from
putrefaction, so that by these you may perceive that it is a celestial
medicine. If therefore any virtuous man would take a little pain, in the
experience hereof, he shall do wonderful things, as many times I have, so
that the people deemed that I wrought by Enchantment, when as indeed I did it
by virtue of this liquor, ministering the same so privily that they could not
see it, which fell out to my great honor, and benefit of the sick, as you
shall read in my Thesauro della vita humana. And therefore I would wish them
that profess Physic and Chirurgerie, to use such Experience, whereby comes
Honor and gain to the Physician, and profit to the Patient.

To make Oil of Lignum vitae, or Guaicum.
TAke the freshest Wood that thou can get, and make it in powder, then put it
into a vessel of glass well luted, and set it in hors-dung, or in Balneo, to
digest, then take it forth, and distill it with a gentle fire, as thou would
distill Nutmegs, and thou shall have both oil and water, the which thou shall
separate by themselves: then take the feces and put it into a new earthen pot,
and set it in a furnace of reverberation, until it be burnt: into ashes, then
take that ashes and make thereof a Lie with Fumetarie water, and when thou see
that the ashes will make the water no more sharp, cast them away, and let the
water settle clear, then vapor away the water with a soft fire, and in the
bottom will remain a Salt, the which you shall dissolve and congeale until
it be clear and fair, as Sal ^ron, or Eniallie, then keep it to thy use: the
water is to drink with Wine.

The Oil is to annoint the fores or aches, and the salt is to purge, and the
order to use it is thus: Either in the Pox, Gowt, or the Palsy.

First, you shall purge the Patient well with this: Take of the salt half a
scruple, Theriaca Alexandria, two drammes, mix them, and give them thereof
half a scruple at a time: you shall give this three or four times, according
to the infection of the disease; for in this Salt is virtue to purge all
humors that causes the Gowt, the Palsy, and the Pox, and such like has not
been found, neither by vomiting or purging. Then when the patient is well
purged, if the patient have any sores or holes, you shall mundifie them with
this salt; and when they are mundified, you shall dress them twice a day with
the Oil, until they be whole, but if the Patient have no holes, you shall
annoint those places where he feels ache or grief: Also every morning early
in his bed, and at night an hour after supper, you shall give him a good
spoonefull of the water with Rennish wine to drink, and let him sweat thereon
well; also he shall use this with his meat if he will. Ye shall understand,
that the cure lies not in meat nor drink, but in the medicine, and therefore
keep him not too hungry, but let him have good meat, and well seasoned with
salt, and let him drink wine; and so using this order, thou shall be able to
help the Gowt, Pox, or Palsy.

To make Oil of Butter.
TAke new fresh Butter, as much as you will, and put it in a Retort of glass
well luted, and there will come forth three liquors, the which thou must
separate.

This Oil does pearce marvellously, and takes away the pains of the Gowt,
if you anoint them therewith: If you anoint the hands and face therewith, it
will preserve them fair: It is also good for those that are troubled with a
Catarre, if you give them thereof an ounce fasting; for presently it arriveth
to the stomach, and mollifieth the Catarre, in such order as you shall spit it
forth at the mouth.

To make Oil of Eggs.
TAke Eggs and seethe them hard; then take forth the yelks, and stamp them
in a mortar, then put them in a frying-panne, and set them over the fire, and
continually stir them until you see them turn to oil, then take them
forth, and put them into a Canvas bag, and press it forth. This Oil helps
wounds with great speed: it makes the hair of the head or beard black: It
takes away the pains of the Emerodes; it is excellent against burning with
fire, or scalding with water: you shall understand this oil may be made very
perfect by the art of Distillation without impression, as I have prooved diverse
times.

Here begins the Order to make Oils of all manner of Spices and Seeds.
To make Oil of Sinamon.
TAke Sinamon as much as you will, and stamp it grossly; then put it into a
glass with pure Aqua vitae, and so let it stand five or six days, then
distill it with a small fire, and there will come forth both oil and water,
the which you shall separate one from another, for the Oil will sink to the
bottom: some use to distill this with wine, and some with Rose Water.

You shall understand, that this Oil is of a marveilous nature, for it
pierces through the flesh and bones, and is very hot and dry, and is good
against all cold and moist diseases, and in special for the heart and head,
in so much that if a man lay speechless, and could scant draw his wind, it
would presently recover him again, so that his time be not yet come: most
miraculous to see: and to be short, this Oil is of such operation and virtue,
that if a man drink never so little, he shall feel the working in his
fingers and toes with great marvel: and therefore to be short, it pierces
through the whole body, and helps all diseases that are come through cold and
flegmatique matter. This oil is hot and sharp: it digesteth and makes thin,
and drives down women's terms: it helps women that have great pains and
smart in their travail, and brings forth their fruit, if you give the
Patient a little of this Oil, with oil of Mirra in Wine to drink, and
annoint the parts therewith. The face and hands being anointed with this oil,
it drives away the Measells and Spots. It warmeth the breast, and helps the
cold Cough: It consumes all cold Fluxes, that proceed from the brain, and
head, and causes quiet sleep.

This Oil may be occupied in stead of the natural Baulme for many Diseases:
Ye shall note, that the water of Sinamon is also good against the aforesaid
Diseases, but yet nothing of so much force as the Oil; for one drop of Oil
will do more, then four spoonfulls of the water: therefore they would be
used together.

To make Oil of Cloves.
THis Oil is made in this order: Take the best Cloves thou can get, and beat
them grossly, then put them into pure wine into a glass with a long neck
close luted; then set it in warm hors-dung the space of a month, then distill
it in sand with a soft fire, and thou shall have a fair Oil, which will sink
to the bottom, the which you shall separate: and his virtues are these.

It strengthens the brain, head, and heart, and reviveth the spirits; it
serves against al cold diseases, it consumes all evil phlegm: being outwardly
applied, it has great virtue in healing, and may be occupied in steed of balm
for wounds. One or two drops taken in the morning with wine helps a stinking
breath: it maks the heart merry, and cleanses the filthiness thereof, and
opens the liver that is stopped: being put into the eye it cleeres the sight,
it comforts a cold stomach, and causes good digestion, it purges melancholy:
this oil may be made in manus Christi with sugar, and they will have the
aforesaid virtue and strength.

To make Oil of Nutmegs.
THis Oil is made as the Oil of Cloves, and will swim upon the wine: but if
you distill this again in Balneo, it will be most pure and subtle, and may
be kept an hundred years in his perfect strength and virtue.

This Oil being drunk with Wine, drives down women's terms, and also the
quick and the dead fruit: and therefore women with child shall not occupy
this oil, until such time as they be in travel with child, and then it
causes them to be fair delivered without pain and danger: Being drunk with
wine, it takes away al pains of the head coming of cold: It comforts the maw,
and opens the liver, milt, and kidneyes, and such like, it is excellent against
beating of the heart, and faintness and swouning; if ye drink thereof, and
anoint the region of the heart therewith: it makes good blood, and expels
flegmatique and melancholy humors, and makes a man merry: being used at
night, it takes away all fancies and dreams: if any had a vvound, or had
broken a ribbe within him with a fall, let him drink this Oil with any slight
wound-drinke, and it will help him although he were almost dead: it is good in
all filthy sores which are counted uncurable: it is also precious for all cold
diseases of the joints and sinews: it makes a sweet breath: if the spleen do
swell, ye shall anoint therewith the left side: it helps all effects in the
blather if it be drunk.

To make Oil of Mace.
THis oil is made as aforesaid, and is hot in operation, it has great virtue
against the chollicke, which comes of cold causes, or of a rheum descending
from the head: it comforts the heart, the stomach, and the womb, it is good
in the strangurie, and all cold diseases: if ye drink thereof three or four
drops fasting with a spoonful of wine or broth, or eat two or three manus
Christi made there with.

To make Oil of Pepper.
THis oil is distilled as is said before, and is very clear and light, and his
virtues are these.

This oil has more virtue then the Pepper has in piercing, and specially in
the cholicke, and other weak places filled with phlegm, if you take thereof
three or four drops with one scruple of the juice of a Quince, two hours
before the fit, after the body is well purged, and let blood; it stays also
the shaking at the first time, or else at the second, it takes away the fit.

Ye shall understand that this Oil is only the ayrie part, separated from
the other Elements. I saw once this Oil made by a German, which had the
perfect taste, savor, and smell, and was so hot on the tongue as oil of
Vitrioll.

To make Oil of Saffron.
TAke the best Saffron thou can get, and put it into a glass, and put
thereon pure rectified Aqua vitae, then lute the glass fast, and set it in
warm horse-dung a month: then distill it in Balneo Maria with a soft fire,
until all the Aqua vitae be come forth: then take forth the Saffron, and
press it in a press made for that purpose, within a strong Canvasse bag,
and you shall have both oil and water, which you shall digest five or six
days, and then separate them by art.

If this oil be drunken with Wine it makes a man merry, and to have a fair
color: if ye anoint the temples of a man overcome with drink it will help
him. This oil being anointed on Saint Anthonies fire it quenches it, and
preserues the place: this oil being mixed with women's milk stops the
running of the eyes: being anointed on the heart it makes it merry. The head
being anointed with this oil it provokes sleep, by reason whereof the
ancient Doctors heretofore did use it to such as were mad, annoynting the
temples therewith, it cleanses old sores.

To make Oil of Anniseede.
TAke as much Anniseed as thou will, and beat it grossly, then infuse it in
strong wine four or five days, and distill it in a gourd with a head and
receiver, in sand, and there will come forth both oil and water, which thou
shall separate.

This oil being drunk with wine in the morning fasting, makes a man to have
a sweet breath, if ye put a little into the nostrils when you go to bed, and
annoint the temples therewith: it takes away all pains coming of cold, and
causes the patient to sleep quietly: it is good against wind in the gutts
and stomach, and causes the pain to cease, if ye drink three or four
drops and annoint the stomach therewith: It breaks also Phlegm, and causes
it to come forth at the mouth: It provokes venerous acts, and drives forth
poison by sweat: it is most excellent for those that are short winded, and
cannot fetch their breath but with great pain: it comfort the Breast and
lungs: it breaks the stone in the Reins and, Bladder: it is good against the
Blocdy flixe and piles. If any chest be anointed therewith, it will not suffer
Moaths to breed therein.

To make Oil of Fennel seed.
THis is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these: It is most excellent
against all pains of the eyes, in so much that if a man were almost blind, it
would recover his sight again, if he drink thereof once a day, and dropp one
drop into the eye morning and evening: It makes a sweet breath, and comforts
the head of cold humors: it comfort the Maw, and opens the liver and Milt
that is stopped: It helps the dropsy and yellow Iaundise, of what cause
soever it be: in hot diseases ye must occupy it with cold waters, and in cold
diseases with wine: Ex Philippo Hermano.

This oil as writes Evonimus, breaks the stone in the reins, and provokes
menstrue and urine: it comfort the stomach and breaks wind, this oil may
be made in manus Christi, with sugar, and is very pleasant, and has the self
same virtue.

To make Oil of Cumin seed.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid, and is good against wounds that pierce the
spleen: it is also most excellent to scatter and break all the windiness of
the stomach, the belly, the bowels and matrixe; also it is singular against
gryping torments, and gnawings or frettings of the belly, not only to be used
inwardly, but to be put into glisters, or to be laid to outwardly with barley
meal. This oil being drunk with wine, is good for those that are hurt with
any venomous beasts: this oil either eaten in Manus Christi, or drunk is very
profitable for such as have the cough and have taken cold, and for those whose
breasts are charged or stopped. This oil being too much used, decays the
natural complexion and lively color, causing one to look wanne and pale.

To make Oil of Carraway seed.
THis Oil is made in the aforesaid order, and is very good and convenient for
the Stomach, and for the mouth: at helps disgestion, and provokes Urine: it
swageth and dissolveth all kind of windiness and blastings of the inward
parts. And to conclude, it is answerable to the Oil of Annis seed, in virtue
and operation.

To make Oil of Dill seed.
THis Oil is made in the aforesaid order: This oil being eaten in Manus
Christi, or drunk with wine, causes women to have great plenty of Milk: it
drives away ventositie or windiness, and swageth the blastings and griping
torment of the belly: it stays vomiting and laskes, and provokes urine: it
is very profitable against the suffocation or strangling of the matrix, if ye
cause the woman to sit over the fume of it in a close stool, for that purpose
this oil being eaten in Manus Christi, staieth the yexe or hiquet.

This oil heals hollow and moist ulcers, and especially in the share or
pvivie parts, this oil does digest and resolve and swage pain, and ripeneth
all raw and unripe humors. This oil may not be too much used inwardly, for
it diminishes the sight, and the seed of generation.

To make Oil of Parcely seed.
THis oil is made in the aforesaid order, and his virtues is to open
obstructions of the liver and kidneys: it provokes menstrue, if it be drunk
with convenient liquors: it causes a good appetite and disgestion, and
comforts the stomach: it drives forth the stone and gravel, and provoke
urine, and is a remedy against all poisons: it drives away all blastings and
windiness: it is also good against the Cough, if it be made with medicines
made for that purpose.

To make Oil of Rue, or Hearbgrace.
THis oil is made of the seed of Rue being putrified in wine.

Cardanus, writes, that this Oil being perfectly made, is of great vettue
against poison being drunk with wine, for it causes the patient to avoid it
by vomit, at the first time he takes it: and at the second time it expels
the other evil humors that are infected therewith: and at the third time it
cures the patient, and makes him whole: and this is done in three or four
days: it helps all diseases of the eyes, of what cause soever it be, so that
the apple of the eye be not perished. The use of this oil to the eye, is to
anoint it therewith twice a day, or wash the eye with the water of Rue, and
drop one or two drops into the eye.

This oil being drunk, suffers no poison to remain in man that day: if a
man drink thereof fasting which is sore wounded, and that the other cure be
had accordingly, he shall easily escape. This oil being drunk, takes away
the gowt and dropsy sprung of a cold cause: it restores all nummed members
taken with the Palsy, if you annoint them therewith.

Cardanus also affirms in his second book de Subtilitate, that there are
certain poisons which slay with their only touching, against which poison,
says he, the best remedy is, not to tarry in any place until thy hand wax
hot, but often bathe the parts with warm water, and annoint them with oil of
Rue perfectly distilled.

To make Oil of Ivy.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaid, and is good against these Diseases
following.

Against gripings or wind in the gutts: against Gonorheam, and pains in the
neck coming of a Catarre: this oil may be compared to Balm, three or four
drops being drunk, it does prevent the resolution of Sinews, the Falling
sickness, and other Diseases of the brain: It preserves the body from all
poison and pestilent airs, it comforts a cold stomach: It stays vomiting:
it purges the reins: it breaks the stone, it provokes Urine: it helps the
Colic, and pains of the guts: it helps pains in the Stomach and Lungs:
it is good against the Dropsy, and water between the skin and the flesh: it
kills worms: to be short, it helps all sick members: by the virtue of
his piercing, being anointed outwardIy, it stays Consumptions: it helps
Scabbes, and old evil Ulcers: it: helps pains of the hippes, the Gowt, and
Collicke: It helps the choppes in the hands and feet.

Philippus Harmanus writes, that if this Oil be rectified again, it will
be an hundred times more purer, and more piercing, for I have seen those that
could not make water in three or four days: and after they have drunk four
or five drops of this oil, and anointed therewith the Region of the bladder,
presently they have made water without any tarying.

This Oil is so excellent against the Pestilence, that if any drink thereof
oftentimes, he shall not be infected: although he were in the house where the
Pestilence is. But if any have the Plague already, let him drink three or four
drops in Wine, and lay him down to sweat, and the next day he shall be well
again.

This oil is so excellent against poison, that if a man use it, there will no
poison remain with him: It strengthens the Maw and all inward parts, and
principally it warmeth the heart: it stops the bloody flux: It is also good
against all diseases of the Kidneys and Bladder: If ye drink it with Wine, it
stops women's terms: this oil being anointed from the navell of a woman to
the privy parts and reins of the back, it strengthens the Matrix, or
Mother, and dries up the moisture therein, and prepares it to conception.

This said Oil of Ivy being made up with Sugar in Manus Christi, has the
foresaid virtues.

To make Oil of Rosemary Flowers.
TAke Rosemary Flowers, and stamp them, then put it into a glass with strong
Wine, and stop it close, then set it in the Sun five or fix days, and then
distill it with a soft fire, and thou shall have both water and oil, the which
you shall separate, and keep close in a glass, and his virtues are these.

It helps against all pains in the head, although they have continued seven
years: it comfort the memory, and also preserves the eyes, if you drink
thereof now and then a drop or two, and put another into the eyes. It helps
those that are deaf, if it be put into the ears, and also drunk with good
wine: It opens all stoppings of the liver and milt, and helps against the
dropsy and yellow Iaundize: it breaks wind and helps the Cholicke, and
rising of the mother: it is also excellent for those that have drunk poison,
or that are infected with the pestilence, if you drink thereof a little and
lay you down to sweat: It comfort the heart and cleanses the blood, and
makes a man merry, and causes a good color, and this Oil is most excellent
for those that are full of Itch, and scabbes. And to be short, it helps all
the disease of the body, that come of cold and moist humors, although they
were never so evil: It helps the Canker and Fistulaes, and such like.

To make Oil of Wild Time.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaid.

This Oylebeing eaten in Tablets of Sugar, or drunk in Wine, brings to women
their flux natural, and drives out the front and gravel, and provokes
vomit: the same taken in like manner stops the Laske, and cures Gripings
or gnawings, and is excellent against Crampes, and the contraction of Sinews.

This Oil being taken in meats or broaths, is a sovereign Medicine against
all poisons, and against the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts and
serpents. This being applied unto the forehead and temples with oil of Roses
and vinegar, swageth headache, and is very good against raving and frenzy: the
fume of this Oil drives away venomous beasts.

To make Oil of Time.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these.

Three or four drops being drunk with honied water, helps a painful cough
and shortness of breath: it provokes urine, and expels the secondine and
dead fruit from the matrixe: it provokes menstrue, and dissolveth clotted and
congeled blood in the body: being taken with oximell and a little salt, it
purges tough and clammie phlegm, and sharp choleric humors, and all the
corruption of the blood* being taken in the said manner, it is good against the
Sciatica, the pain in the side and the breast: it is also good against
blastings and windiness in the side and belly, and of the stones and genitors:
it is good for those that are fearful, melancholy, and troubled in spirit and
mind.

This oil being often used, helps bleered eyes and pains of the same: being
drunk in wine, it is most profitable for those that are troubled with the
Gowt, but if it chance that their pains be on them, ye shall give them 5 or 6
drops with a dram of oximell: if ye use this oftentimes with honey, it will
cleanse the breast, and ripen phlegm, and causes it to be spit forth with
ease: the smell of this Oil is most comfortable for those that have the
Falling sickness.

To make Oil of sweet Margerom.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these.

Being drunk in White Wine, it is most wholesome for those that begin to
fall into a dropsy, and for such as cannot piss but drop after drop, and that
with great difficulty. It is also good for those that are troubled with
griping pains and wringings of the belly: being taken in the said order, it
provokes women's terms.

If ye convey this Oil with Oil of bitten Almonds up into the nostrils, it
will purge the head of moist humors, and cause them to sneese. It is most
excellent for those that have lost their smelling, and against all pains of
the head, being used as is aforesaid: It is good against poison, and the
stining of Scorpions.

To make Oil of Sage.
This oil is made in the aforesaid order: And helps congealed blood within
the body, and cures inward wounds and bruses, either by a stripe or fall if it
be drunk with wine: it provokes urine and breaks the stone: it comfort
the heart, and takes away the head ache. It is also good for women with child,
to use it now and then, for it closes the matrixe and comfort the fruit.

This oil being often drunk causes women to be fruitful: If ye drink it
with wine it helps the cough, and opens the stoppings of the Liver, and
swageth the pain in the side: if it be drunk with worme-wood wine, it
stops the bloody flixe: It is also good against the biting of venomous
beasts, for it cleanses and helps them.

To make Oil of Peneriall.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these.

Being drunk in Wine, it mooveth monthly terms, brings forth the
secundine, the dead fruit and the unnatural birth: it provokes urine, and
breaks the Stone, especially in the Kidneyes, being used with purified Honey:
It cleanses the Lungs and Breast from all gross and thick humors. This oil
being mixed with Honey and Aloes, purges the melancholic humor, and
prevails much against Crampes, and the contraction of Sinews.

This oil being drunk with water and Vinegar, stays the inordinate desire
to vomit, and the gnawing pains of the stomach; being drunk with Wine, it
helps the biting of venomous beasts: it is also good against the Falling
Sickness: the temples and nostrills being anointed with this oil, it takes
away the swimming pains and giddiness of the head. It is most excellent for
those that have cold and moist brains: it takes away the pains of the Gowt,
The fume or smoke of this Oil being at the secret parts with a fonnell, is
good against ventositie, windiness, and blastings, and also against the
hardness and stopping of the Mother.

To make Oil of Mint.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid.

This oil being either eat or drunk, is most profitable for the stomach,
for it warmeth and strengthens the same, and dries up all moist and
superfluous humors gathered in the same, and takes away all pains thereof,
and causes good digestion: it staieth also vomiting in those that have a weak
stomach, being drunk with vinegar, it stays those that vomit blood, and
kills the round worms.

This oil being drunk four or five times with some convenient liquor,
helps the griping pain and gnawing in the belly, with the Collicke, and
stops the inordinate courses of the menstruall issue, being drunk with
wine, it eases women which are too much grieved with hard and perilous travel
in child bearing: being dropped into the ears it takes away the pain: the
smell of this oil causes a man to be merry.

This oil is singular good against the gravel and stone in the Kidneys, and
against the strangury, which is when one cannon piss, but drop after drop, if
ye use to drink it in wine.

To make Oil of Isope.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid of Camomill. If ye use to eat this oil
either mixed with honey, or made into Manus Christi with Sugar, it will help
those that have obstructions or stoppings of the breast, with shortness of
breath, it is also good against an old difficult and hard cough: ye must use
this morning and evening for a certain space.

This oil being drunk with sirope of vinegar, purges downe-ward tough and
clammie phlegm, and kills and drives forth worms: it has the like virtue
if ye eat the same with figs.

To make Oil of Radish seed.
TAke the seed of Radish and stamp it small, then take for every pound of
seed, two ounces of good Wine, then stamp it again until it be mixed, then
put it into a vessel of Iron or Copper, and set it over the fire, and stir
it continually, until it be as hot as you may suffer your hand therein, and
then put it into a canvas bag, and press it forth, and thou shall have both
oil and water, the which you shall separate one from another.

This oil causes good digestion, and provokes urine, the which is stopped
through wind and ventositie: it dissolveth wind in the stomach, and breaks
the gravel and stone in the bladder.

To make Oil of Mustard seed.
THis oil is made by impression as is said before, and is excellent for those
that have the stone, and causes them to avoid gravel: it provokes women's
sicknesses, if you anoint the body and reins, and within the neck of the
Matrixe, and also take it inwardly, it dissolveth the pains of the side and
mother, if you eat it with a little Sinamon and white Honey mixed together.

To make Oil of Colewort seed.
THis oil is made as is said before, and of nature is hot and windy, and is
used much of lecherous persons, because it makes elevation of the yard, and
causes them to be lusty, being used in meats it causes good digestion: it
preserves armor from rusting a long time it is good against inflammations in
all parts of the body, and is also good against worms.

To make Oil of Linseed.
THis oil is made in the aforesaid order, and is good against the plurisie: if
ye give thereof four ounces to drink, for it dissolveth the impostume
presently, and so preserves life. It is good against Emerods in the fundament.
This oil of Linseed being distilled with Frankencense and wax, is most
excellent to dissolve all contusions. With this oil they make vernish.

To make Oil of Saint John's Woort or Seed.
THis oil is made of the seeds by impression, and is excellent to help
wounds, because it defends them from alteration, and maturation, and will not
suffer humors to run thither. It is also excellent against poison, and the
pestilent fever, and all evil dispositions of the stomach: it is good against
the flux of the body and Emerods, and for all manner of scabs. It helps the
rupture newly done, if you annoint it therewith, and wear a trusse fit for the
purpose, and let him keep his bed, and walk as little as he can for a
certain time: it helps against all manner of sores, as well old as new, and
that it does by his proper quality, for it is neither hot nor cold, but
temperate.

To make Oil of Quinces seed.
TAke the seed of Quinces and stamp them, then put them into a frying pan with
a little wine, and stir them well together, until it be so hot that you can
scarce abide your hand therein, then put it into a canvas bag, and press it
out in a press, and thou shall have both oil and water, the which thou shall
separate.

This oil is excellent against all pains in the stomach, and helps the
digestion and dissolveth wind: It provokes venerous acts. It is also good
against Emerods and Fistulaes that come in the lower parts.

To make Oil of Acornes.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid, and is very restrictiue and driving, and
helps those that are troubled with the flux, if ye drink thereof a little
and anoint the belly therewith: you shall note that this oil is not to be
occupied much inwardly: this oil is excellent to make Vernish

In this manner ye make oils out of all manner of feeds.

To make Oil of Tartare by distillation.
Take white Tartare beaten in powder, four pound, and put it into a strong
vessel of stone well luted, with a head and receiver, and give it first a
small fire, and then increase it according to art, and at the last give it
extreme fire until all the moisture be come forth, then put the liquor into a
glass, and distill it in Balneo, and the oil will remain in the bottom: the
which thou salt distill or rectify in sand, and then the oil will have the
color of gold.

It is most excellent to cure ulcers caused of the pox: for it takes away
their malice in such order, that it can hurt no more: being drunk with wine,
it breaks the stone in the raines and bladder, it provokes urine, it purges
ulcers.

Another way to make Oil of Tartare.
TAke Tartare and stamp it small, and then put it in a new earthen pot
ungla^ed, and set it in a potters furnace, or furnace of reverberation until
it be white, then lay it upon a smooth stone in a moist place, and it will
turn into oil: the which is corrosiue: but one part thereof mixed with ten
parts of pure rectified Aqua vitae, heals ulcers quickly, if ye touch them
therewith: it makes the face fair: if ye wash the hair therewith it makes
it yellow: it takes out black spots in linen cloth, and fixes the medicines
alchimicall, with diverse other virtues, the which I will leave until another
time.

To make Oil of a Hearts horn.
Ye shall take a Hearts horn in the month of August, and file it to powder,
then boil it in water until it be sufficient, then draw away the water in
Balneo, and take that which remains in the bottom, and put it in a glass
with little pieces of tiles, and distill it, and thou shall have a fair oil,
the which serves for sundry purposes.

To distill Oil of a man's Excrements.
TAke the doung of a young sanguine child or man, as much as you will, and
distill it twice in a Limbecke of glass. This helps the Canker, and
mollifieth Fistulaes: comfort those that are troubled with Allopecia.

To make Oil of the Skull of a man.
TAke the skull of a man that was never buried, and beat it into powder, then
distill away the fleg^ with a gentle fire, and put it on again, and distill it
again, and this you shall do three times upon the feces, and at the last give
it strong fire, until the Oil be come forth: the which ye shall separate
by Balneo, and keep it close shut in a glass. The dose is three grains,
against the falling sickness. Ye shall understand, that there is also a salt
to be drawn forth of the feces, the which is of great virtue against the
aforesaid diseases being drunk with wine, as is aforesaid.

FINIS.
SECRETS OF PHYSIC AND PHILOSOPHY.

The second Book, CONTAINING The ordering and preparing of all Mettalls,
Mineralls, Allumes, Saltes, and such like, for medicines both inwardly and
outwardly, and for diverse other uses.

Printed at London by A. M. for Will. Lugger, and are to be sold at the
Posterne gate at Tower Hill. 1633.

To the Reader.
IN this present Book (welbeloved Reader) I have taken upon me to set forth,
the true and worthy cunning of the distillation of Mineralles, that is, of
those things which are found in the Mines, as all manner of Salts, Allums,
Vitrioll, Sulphur, Mercury, and such like Mettalles, as Saturnus, Jupiter,
Mars, Sol, Luna, Venus. And how you shall get the liquor or moisture out of
them. And all that which appertains to the health of man. The which I mean
by the grace of God to set forth in this Book, with a number of Alchy mistes
preparations of the said things, the which works wonderfully in man's body: so
that it seems to diverse persons myraculous.

Therefore (gentle Reader) peruse this Book with discretion, and then if thou
see it stand to thy mind, set thy hand to the plough and be diligent in the
work, so that thou may know the proof, and feel the ready commodity
thereof, for ye shall understand that there is no medicine in the world that
can be found of so quick operation as the Mineralls are, if they be truly
prepared and as I will show you hereafter: but if they be not well prepared
they are very hurtful, and not to be allowed. Therefore look that ye prepare
them as I shall show you, and then you shall wonder at their working.

And although the worthy science of Alchimie is come in such disdain through
lewd persons, that it seems lies and fables, and no true science: Yet that
ought not to hinder or derogate any thing to our purpose, as long as our matter
is against the abuse of it, as for example:

The Alchymistes have wrought in this work, to the intent they might have of
Lead and Copper, Gold and Silver, or the mean to make them of all other
simples or slight mettalles. But whether God has given them that gift I know
not: therefore I leave it to the Masters of that Art. And albeit we have
seen many wonderful things in that Art: yet will I not affirm that it is
possible to be done, for it seems unreasonable, that a man in so short time
should do that thing the which nature does in many years. And that men should
presume to do that which God does only himself, and not any of his creatures.
We therefore will not affirm it to be true or possible, nor yet will we
deny it utterly or condemn it as untrueth. But we will leave the answer to
those that take it to be done.

But here in this treatise we will set forth that which we have seen and
wrought, and prooved, and are expert therein: And although it be sprung out of
the Art of Alchymie, yet it is not to that intent, for it serves not to
transmute Mettalles, but it serves to help those diseased both inwardly and
outwardly, who of the common sort of Chirurgions are counted uncurable, and
also given over of the Physicians. Those Patients shall be helped through the
hidden mysteries and heavenly secrets of this science.

And forasmuch as it is unpossible to prepare these things without the Art of
Alchymie: therefore we must praise this art through our preparations above al
other sciences, that makes for the health of man, for they preserve a man only
touched and afflicted with slight wounds and griefs on his body, and that with
much pain and much ado. But this Art gives unto man his health again in
short time, and with small pain unto the patient, be he never so desperately
sick, and to man's thinking past cure: for I have seen miracles therein.

And insomuch that it is all prepared with fire: the mean man calls it
Alchymia. Howbeit the intent of the Alchymist is far from our intent. But
call it what you will, it makes not much matter of the name. For I am sure
there is nothing in all Physic that ministers either better or readier help
to cure man's body, then this science of preparing metals with fire rightly. I
say rightly prepared, not as the unskilful Apoticaries have ordered them, or
as the unlearned Physicians have occupied them, for the Apoticary is no other
then a servant in the kitchen (as I may term him) and no master Cook, so long
as he knows not these preparations, which I will show you.

In like manner it is to be thought of the Physician that has no skill in these
preparations. For we have seen and prooved diverse times, that the first
vapor or smoke of any Herb or Spice is the best that is therein, and yet our
learned Physicians command it to be boiled until half be consumed, etc. Then
note if the best fly away in boiling, what strength can the Medicine have.
Therefore I say that the Physician without this Art of preparation is little
or nothing worth, although they take the patients money. For he goes to work
blindly with a blind leader, which is the Apoticary. But the Physician that is
expert in this Science, and does prepare his Medicines truly, he is to be
praised above all other. For a man cannot buy with any money that which is got
by long careful travel. Therefore is the Art of Alchymie worthy to be
praised, and the Alchymist to be praised also, although they attain not to
their first intention, yet they have opened the way through the which this
excellent cunning of preparation was known and found, and through the which
there are a number of wonderful secrets opened, the which without this Art
were all unknown, to the great hinderance of the sick and diseased persons.
Therefore I will not speak against it, but hold it in great estimation to our
intention, that is the help of the sick and diseased person, and to prepare
the Mineralles wherewith you may do that which cannot be done with any other
Herbs, or simples, or spices And heerewith will we finish this preface, and
write of the names of the simples, which are occupied in this Art.

The names of the Metals, Simples, or Medicines of this Science.
HEre will I welbeloved Reader, show thee for good will that thing which many
have sought with their money and labor, and yet could never find it:
especially for that I will not have this worthy Science trod under feet.
Therefore we will write first of the names of the Simples, and then of the
names of the preparations, and what they are.

Sal Armoniacke, that is a salt so called, the which ye shall find at the
Apoticaries. Sal Gemme, is stone salt, found in the Mine as clear as the
glass. Sal Commune, is common salt that we eat. Vitriolum, is green coperas.
Calcantum, is yellow Coperas, a matter like Oker. Alumen is Alum: but there
are diverse kinds. Sulfur Vive, is the stone whereout the other Sulfur is
melted, and is green of color. Antimonium is a certain Mineral so called
that ye shall find at the Apoticaries. Carrabe that is yellow Ambre or
Sucinum. Tartarum, that is Argil or wine leese. Saturnus that is lead. Jupiter
that is tin. Mars that is iron. Sol that is gold. Luna that is silver. Venus
that is copper. Mercury that is quicksilver.
The names of the preparations.
CAlcinatio that is to make any of these mettalles as it were lime, with great
fire sometimes, and other sometime with small fire. Solutio that is to dissolve
and make as it were liquid like unto water, the hard or tough substance of any
thing. Sublimatio that is a driving up, or ascension of the metal by force of
heat into the top of the Limbecke, so that it may hang in the top of the
vessel hard and dry. Distillatio that is to take away the moisture by the
heat of the fire. Digestio that is to set the matter in hot water or in horse
dung. Fixatio that is to sublime a matter, so long that it will sublime no
more, but remain fixed in the bottom. There are a number of other
preparations, but we will leave them because we have written sufficient for our
purpose already.
To prepare Crocum martis and such like which are prepared through calcination.
CRocum Martis, or Crocum Veneris shall be made in this manner: Take the
limmall of iron, as much as you will, and wash it with fair water so long
until that the water run as clear as it was put out, then put it in a glass,
and put thereon strong Vinegar until it be covered, and let it stand so two
or three days close shut: then pour off the Vinegar and dry the limmall well,
then put it into a new earthen pot with a cover, and lute it very well round
about with lime and hair mixed together: then set it in a furnace of
calcination eight days and eight nights, so that it may continually stand red
hot, then take it forth and grind it on a stone, and if it grind very smooth
without any hard matter that ye can either see or feel, then it is calcined
enough: but if ye feel any hard matter, put it into the furnace again two or
three days, and then grind it again, and this order ye shall use until it
be fine as can be possible.

This Crocum Martis being so prepared, amongst all other medicines in the
world, it is the most excellent that can be found against the bloody flixe,
giving it in this order. Take conserve of roses one ounce, crocum Martis one
scruple, mix them together, and let the Patient eat it in the morning, and
fast thereon two hours, and it will help him although he had had it never so
long, or never so sore. It is also given above all other medicines in the later
end of a dropsy, and also against the flux of menstrue, and against bleeding
at the nose, and all other fluxes. It helps those that spit blood: it is
excellent to stop the flux in wounds, and to help them and dry them, if ye
strew the powder thereon, etc. Ye shall make Crocum Veneris in the self same
order aforesaid: but where ye took limmall, ye shall take the scales of
copper: and ye shall note, that this Crocum Veneris is not to be used
inwardly, but only outwardly.

Of the preparation of Alumes and Salts
TAke sal Gemme, or common salt, and set it in a calcining furnace with a small
fire, until it be red hot the space of half an hour, and that it crake no
more, then let it wax cold and beat it to powder and let it melt, and let it
stand till it be clear; then power it in a pot well nealed, and set it on the
fire, and let it boil till it be dry, and ye shall find the salt on the ground
as white as snow, the which ye shall neale once more in the fire, and then it
is prepared.

The preparation of Alum.
TAke Alum and calcine it in an open vessel till all his moisture be gone,
then make it red hot, and after a while put it into an other pot with strong
vinegar, and set it on the fire and let it sees dry, then set it on the fire
again till it be red hot, and as white as snow, then keep it to thy use.

This is very excellent to dry up old sores if it be mix^ with honey, and
takes away dead flesh without pain, etc.

To calcine Vitrioll.
TAke Vitrioll and beat it to powder, and put it into a new earthen pot that
is unneiled, and set it in an oven somewhat warm till it be dry, then cover
the pot close and lute it well, that no air may come forth: then set it in a
calcining furnace the space of two hours, so that it may always be as red as
the coals, and then it will be as red as blood, then grind it on a stone, and
keep it to thy use.

There is no Corosiue the which works like this vitrioll calcinated, for if
ye mix it with any Unguent, and lay it on a ill Ulcer, it makes an Asker the
which in all corosiues must be loosed with fat or butter: but this corosiue
needs not, for ye must still lay more therein, and leave the Asker in the
sore, for the virtue of this Vitrioll is so great, that it causes the flesh to
grow under the Asker, and when the flesh is enough the Asker will fall off, and
then ye shall need nothing but to skin it, the which is not commonly seen of
other corosiues: therefore I praise this for the best of all corosiues.

To calcine Quicksilver.
TAke Aqua fortis. ii. Mercury. i. and put them in a glass, and set it on the
fire in a scarvell with sand or ashes, till the Mercury be dissolved, then put
it into an earthen pot well glased, and set it on the fire to boil till it be
dry, and stir it always with a stick that it may dry the better, and when
as it is well dried, put it in an other pot with a kever that is very well
glased within, then lute it very well that no air may come forth: but ye must
note that the pot must be top full, then set it in a calcining Furnace with a
good fire four days and four nights, then grind it to small powder on a
stone, and keep it to thy use. For thou have Mercury calcinated, of the which
we have spoken much in our pearl of Chirurgerie.

This is excellent in all old sores, although they be never so evil, for it
cleanses without pain and heals them, that is, it cleanses as long as it is
needful, and then it heals, which is most strange to see: this eats away
all dead flesh, and preserves that which is good and sound, and causes the
ulceration to heal in short space. Ye shall note that when we speak of
Mercury calcinated or precipitate in any place, ye shall take this.

To calcine Tartare.
TAke good Tartare that is clear and without filth, and stamp it to powder,
then put it in a scravell that never was occupied, and set it in the calcining
furnace, so that it may stand but even red hot, and there let it remain until
it be as white as snow throughout, then take it forth and keep it in a glass
close shut, until you read more how that ye shall make this Oil.

To calcine Tin or Lead.
TAke Tin or Lead and melt it on the fire, and when it is molte set it very
hot, then take an Iron Scummer and stir it therewith so long, till it come to
ashes, then take that ashes and wash it so long till that the water runs
dear off as ye put it on, then dry it in a calcining Furnace till that it
smoke no more, then put it into another new pot with a cover, that is unglased,
and lute it very well, then set it in the calcining Furnace again one whole
day with a good fire, then take it forth and ye shall find a Calxe in manner
white, but somewhat inclining to yellow. The Tin ye shall calcine in the
self same manner as ye did the Lead, but when ye burn it to ashes ye must
give it great fire, but in calcining it shall not need greater fire then it was
for thy Lead, and so keep your fire until it be as white as snow, and then it
is prepared to make his Oil as we will show you hereafter.

To Calcine Silver.
TAke Silver and dissolve it in Aqua fortis, then cast a piece of Copper into
the glass where the water is with the silver, and straitwaies power thereon a
good quantity of rain water, and then the silver will fall to the bottom in a
Calxe: then let it stand so one night, or as long as ye will, and then power
away the clear water, and dry the Calx on the fire, then wash that with warm
water so long that it have no bitter taste of the Aqua fortis, and when ye have
so done, ye shall take common salt prepared as I have showed you before, and
lay it in a Crusible the thickness of a straw, and then lay thereon your Calx
of Silver, and cover it with the same salt again, then lute your Crusible with
a cover that no air may come forth, then set it in a calcining furnace with a
reasonable fire six hours long, then take it forth and put thereon fair
water, and let it sees two or three Pater Nosters, and then the salt will
sees away, and the Calx will remain sweet, which ye may prove upon the
tongue: but if it be not sweet, wash it again till it be sweet, and then keep
it in a glass, for it is prepared to make his Oil.

To calcine Gold.
TAke gold and Mercury, and make thereof amalgamie as the Goldsmithes do use
to gild their silver Plate: the which is made thus.

Take twelve parts of Mercury, and one part of gold, the which ye shall beat
into very thin plates, and then cut it in as small pieces as ye can, then take
a Crusible and put therein the Mercury, and set it on the fire till it begin
to smoke, then put thereto the gold and take it from the fire, and stir it
together so long till that ye may see no more gold, then set it on the fire
again, and stir it so long that the Mercury be flowne all away, and then ye
shall find your gold in the Crusible like sand, then take that and put thereto
as much prepared salt, and grind them together on a stone as small as is
possible, then put it in a glass, and wash it with warm water so long till
that ye see the Calxe fair and yellow and sweet upon the tongue, so that it
taste nothing of saltness, then it is prepared: and herewith will we make an
end of Calcination, and write of Sublimation.

To sublime Quicksilver.
TAke Mercury and wash it with Vinegar and salt a pretty while, then put
thereon very hot water and wash it therewith, till that the water run as
clear off as ye will put it on, then dry it with a cloth and grind it with
vinegar and salt again, and wash it with warm water as ye did before: this
grinding and washing ye shall use till that the Mercury be no more black, and
that it be as clear as a glass, then take of that Mercury one pound, Salt
prepared two pound, Sall Armoniack sublimed as I will show hereafter one pound,
grind these saltes together with the Mercury, so long till that the Mercury
cannot be perceived: then put all the substance in a subliming vessel with his
cover, the which has a hole in the top: as I will show thee hereafter in the
next book, if God permit me life. Then set it in a calcining furnace, and give
it first a small fire till that the moisture be flowne out through the hole of
the cover of the Sublimatory, the which ye shall know by this means: ye shall
now and then hold a knife over the hole of the instrument, and then if the
knife be wet there is moisture in the vessel, but when ye see that the knife
is still dry, stop the hole with a stopple of paper, and increase the fire a
little bigger, and let it stand so four hours long, then increase the fire
yet bigger, and let it stand four hours: then make the fire so hot that the
bottom may be all red, and that continue six hours, but let not your fire
slake, then let it wax cold and take that which is sublimed, and grind it on a
stone with two pound of salt prepared, and sublime it again as ye did before
in all points, then let it wax cold, and grind it again with Salt prepared,
and sublime it again. This grinding and subliming ye shall use until the
Mercury be as clear as Crystal, and as white as Snow and then it is
prepared, then keep it in a glass till that I write more thereof.

To sublime Sulphur.
FIrst before that ye will sublime Sulphur, ye must prepare him thus.

Take Sulphur vive and grind it to fine powder, then searce it finely, then
put it in a pan with strong vinegar, and set it on the fire, and let it sees a
whole day and a night, but ye must put thereto always more vinegar as it
consumes away, and still ye must skum off the skim or filth as fast as it
rises, and when it has sodden so in Vinegar, ye shall sees it two days in
the Urine of young children, and always skum off the froth, and put thereto
more Urine always as it consumes. This seething and skumming ye shall
continue until there rise no more froth, then put it in a glass, and wash it
with warm water till all the stink of the piss be gone, and that it remain
as white as any Snow: then dry it well for it is well purged, then take of that
purged Sulphur half a pound, Vitriall calcined one pound grind these very fine
together, so that the Sulfure cannot be seen, then put them in a subliming
vessel, and set it in the furnace, and give it first a small fire till the
moisture be gone, the which ye shall know with a knife as I showed you before:
then stop the hole and increase the fire a little, and so keep it six hours,
then let it wax cold and take that which is sublimed, and grind it with fresh
Vitrioll and sublime it again as ye did before: this subliming and grinding
with fresh Vitrioll, ye shall use till that the Sulfure be as white as Snow,
and so clear as a glass, and then it is sublimed enough: therefore keep it
in a glass close shut with Wax, till that we write more thereof.

To sublime Sal Armoniacke.
TAke Sal Armoniack l'i. and as much limall of Iron and grind them together on
a stone, then put them in a subliming vessel, and sees it in the furnace
first with a small fire, and then increase it so that the bottom of the pot
may be red hot, and so let it stand half a Summers day, then let it wax cold
and take that which is sublimed and grind it on a stone, with as much salt
prepared and sublime it again: This grinding with new salt and subliming, ye
shall use so long till that it be sublimed as white as Snow and then it is
prepared: then keep it to sublime thy Mercury with.

To sublime Copper, which is a great secret.
FIrst ye must calcine it with Sulphur thus.

Take plates of Copper beaten as thin as is possible, and cut them in little
pieces as big as a penny or thereabout, then take a crusible and put therein
Brimstone beaten a finger thick, then lay thereon a bed of these plates and
cover them with Sulphur, and then lay another bed and cover it with Sulphur
again, and this do till the Crusible be full, then set it in the calcining
Furnace half a day long with a good fire, then let it wax cold and grind it
upon a stone, and then put it into Aqua fortis and let it dissolve: and distill
away the water and make the powder very dry, the which remains in the bottom
of the glass land grind it on a stone with salt prepared: then put it in a
subliming vessel, and set it in a Furnace, and give first a small fire, and
then give it a very strong fire four and twenty hours: and then let it wax
cold, and in the vessel ye shall find a green powder light and subtle, but
nothing like the Copper, the which ye had to sublime. Then keep that in a
glass close shut with wax, for there is no better medicine in the world then
this for the Canker, the Wolf, Fistulaes, and all such like sores, for this
does help them quickly: and when ye will occupy it in such sores, ye must
straw it thereon, and lay upon it a wound plaster: of the which I have written
a number in my pearl of Surgery, and it shall heal them how sore soever
they be.

To sublime Lead and Tin.
THese two are sublimed with less labor then the Copper: nevertheless when
ye shall sublime them, go to work as thou did with Copper, saving that ye
may not calcine them with Sulfur, but as I have showed you before. And when it
is so calcined ye shall dissolve them in this strong water following: and when
it is dissolved distill the water away till it remain dry: then dissolve it
again, and distill the water away again, so that it remain scant dry: then
take that, and put thereto twice so much salt prepared and sublime them
together with a strong fire, and ye shall find a white powder sublimed in the
top, the which serves to the same use that the copper serves for: that is in
all foul Vlcerations and filthy sores, etc.

How to make the said Aqua fortis to dissolve Lead and Tin.
TAke salt Peter, Vitrioll Roman and Sal Armoniack, of each one pound, beat
them well together and put them in a glass, the which is very well luted: then
set on the head with a great receiver, and lute the joints well that no air
may come forth, then give it a very small fire twelve hours long, and then
encrcase it according to Art: but take good heed that ye be not rash with
your fire at the first, lest that all the glasses fly in pieces: then keep it
to thy use, and when ye will dissolve your Lead, ye must take for every pound
of Lead, two pound of water, and dissolve it cold, for otherwise it would blow
the glass in pieces.

To make Oil of Sulphur, the which is a great secret.
THis oil is made in this manner. First ye shall have a bell of earth, or a
head of glass like the common Stils of Tin, the which ye shall hang up by a
string: then take a plate of Iron of a finger thick, and two fingers broad,
and make it red hot in the fire, then lay it under the bell or head, and cast
thereon Brimstone, and let it burn, so that the fume may go within the bell,
and this ye shall continue, possible a whole day, before that one drop will fall:
but when ye see it drop, then continue till ye have oil enough, and then have
thou a great treasure, the which keep in a glass, for it will help the pox
and all outward sores and ulcerations. And also stinking and filthy sores, the
which will not be help. It is also excellent against the Rose, and against
the pestilence, the which ye must use in this manner. Take water of Sorell, of
Roses, of Cardus Benedictus of each. i. oil of Sulfer. i. mix them together,
and give it the patient as soon as he feels himself sick, and lay him
down to sweat one hour, and let him not stir that he may sweat the better,
then dry him well with warm clothes, and let him rest two hours, and then if
he have list to eat, let him have a cullus made of a Hen in this order. Ye
shall boil the Hen or chicken so long, that the flesh fall from the bones,
then stamp the bones and all, and strain it with the said broth, then put
thereto a good deal of Sugar, and a little Wine, and let the patient eat it
with a very little bread: and then two hours after, ye shall give him the
aforesaid receipt with Oil, and let him sweat thereon two hours, as is said
before, and this ye shall do the next day once, and by the Grace of God the
Pestilence shall not hurt him. But when ye will occupy it to the Pox, or any
other filthy sores, ye shall give it with water of Hops, of Cicorie, of
Germander, of each. i. water of Fumetorie. ii. Oil of Sulphur.i. these ye
shall mix together, and let the Patient drink it at seven a clock in the
morning, and let him sweat thereon two hours: then dry him with warm clothes,
and then at night ye shall give him that portion in manner as ye did before,
and let him sweat thereon other two hours: and this order ye shall use till
that they be whole, the which will be in very short time, so that it shall
seem miraculous, for his sores will presently be healed, although they were
never so evil.

Against the Rose ye shall take the water of Sorell, of Purselene, and put
thereto.i. of oil of Brimstone, and let the Patient drink it, and lie down
to sweat thereon, and in one day he shall be help, although he had it a long
time.

To make Oil of Vitrioll.
FIrst ye must have an earthen pot, the which holds about a gallon, and must
be about a foot, or fourteen inches high, the^ ye must have a head of glass,
the which comes just over the pit, then take vitrioll and put it in the pot,
and then set on the head, with a great receiver, and lute the joints well, then
give it small fire, as I have showed you before in the making of strong water,
and when ye see that it will drop no more, then increase the fire a little,
and so keep it till it drop no more, then take away the receiver, and pour
out the water, and set it to again, and lute it fast, then increase thy fire
by little and little, till that the fumes come forth: then keep it bigger and
bigger, so that the pot may stand as hot as the coals, and so keep it until
that the head and receiver wax clear again, but in any wise slack not thy
fire: for I have seen fire kept a whole day, after that the water was taken
away, and never a drop fell into the receiver, but at the last it came apace,
therefore leave not till it be done. Then keep this oil very close in a
glass, that the spirits fly not away, for when it has lost his spirits, it is
good for nothing, but to corrode and eat away dead flesh. But when this oil
has his spirits, there is no better medicine in the world, against the falling
sickness and Apoplexia being used thus: Take Aqua vitae perfectly rectified,
without fleme one pint, Oil of Vitrioll one spoonefull, mix them and let the
Patient drink thereof every morning one spoonefull, and he shall be helped,
although he have had it ten years, and fell every hour: and for Apoplexia
ye shall give it in the said order. But if he cannot drink it so, ye shall
give it as ye think good, so as he have it in his body, and presently he
shall mend, although he had it a long time, and were lame over all his body. It
is also excellent good against all hot fevers in the summer, for it helps them
in one day, as I have proved diverse times my self, and ye shall give it in
this order. Take bourage water as much as ye will, and put thereto so much of
this oil, till it be sour like veriuice, and thereof let the Patient drink
as much as he will, and then ye shall see the Patient help, and his thirst
shall slake, and also his heat. This oil is also good against all foul and
old sores, and to take away their stink, if ye do mix it with water of
Egremony, till it be very sour, and then wash the fore therewith. If ye mix
more oil with the said water, until it be as sour as vinegar, it takes away
warts if ye wash them therewith, and causes them to fall out without pain. It
helps all scabs if ye wash them therewith, mixed with Egremony water as is
aforesaid. If ye mix it with bourage water, buglosse water, and mellise
water, it helps the beating of the heart, which has continued a long time.

To make water of Mercury, which Paraselsus writes of in his book of
Surgery.
TAke Mercury that is sublimed, as I have showed you before, and put it in a
glass, and set it in a furnace, and give such a temperate fire, as you may
hold your hand over it Paster noster while, and that degree of fire ye shall
keep, the space of six weeks, but look that ye increase not the fire, nor
yet diminish it: then take that Mercury and grind it fine, and pour it into a
bag, like unto an Ipocrasse bag, and hang it in a moist place, and set a
glass under it, and the Mercury will turn into water, which keep well: and
when thou will occupy that water, thou shall wet a linen cloth therein, and
lay it on such kind of sores, as will not be help by no other kind of means:
for it will take away their corofiues, and cause them to heal, although they
were never so ill. And moreover, because that thou shall know wherefore it
serves, ye shall note that it is good against all Cankers, Fistulaes, the
wolf, and such like, for it helps them al, though they were never so evil,
as Paraselsus writes in his great Surgery in the chapter of the Canker, and
such like.

To make water of sal Armoniake.
TAke Sal Armoniake that is sublimed seven times, and grind it to powder, then
put it into a glass, that has a hole in the bottom on the one side, and then
set that glass in another, and set them in a moist sellar, and then the Sal
Armoniacke will dissolve into water, and run into the nether glass, the
which ye shall keep close: in the aforesaid manner ye may make water of
Alum, the which is excellent to dry up all filthy wounds, etc.

The order to fix all things that are flying.
TO fix any thing, is to be understood thus. Ye shall sublime it so often, as
it will sublime no more, but it will lie in the fire, so as the fire cannot
consume it, and when ye will fix any thing, as Sulphur, Quickesilver, or
Arsnicke, or such like, ye shall do it in this order: ye shall take Mercury
sublimed, or Sulphur sublimed, or Arsenicke, or such like, and put it into a
subliming glass, which I will show you diverse Paternes, in the next book (God
willing) and set it in a Furnace with a small fire, and then increase it
according to Art, the space of a whole day, and then at Evening ye shall turn
the glass and let it sublime up into the other end: and this order ye shall
use with subliming, from one end unto another, till that it will sublime no
more: the which ye shall prove in this manner. Ye shall take a little thereof
and lay it on a red hot coal, and look whether it smoke or no, for if it smoke
it is not fixed, but if it smoke not it is fixed: but to know the very truth, ye
shall take thereof and grind it to powder, and then put it into a Crusible,
and give it as great a fire as though ye would melt Copper, and then if ye
see there comes no smoke from it, it is fixed: but if it smoke away, ye
shall put it into a new subliming glass, and sublime it again, then keep it
to thy use, till I write more thereof: for when you have your spirits fixed, ye
have a great treasure, not to be bought with money, and principally of Sulphur
fixed, for therewith ye may do what ye list, for there can no sickness come
unto man's body, but it may be help therewith. Also Mercury being fixed, is
such an excellent medicine against the pox, that the like cannot be found in
the world. But ye shall note, that it must not be occupied alone, but with
other things which I will show you in an other place. The Arsenicke and the Sal
Armoniacke may not be occcupied in any wise inwardly, but only outwardly, as
ye shall hear hereafter, and especially of the salt of Arsenicke.

To make Oil of Antimonie.
IF you will make this oil, ye must look diligently to your fire, lest ye
spoil all: then take a retort of glass, and lute it very well, and put
therein three pounds of Antimonie, and three pounds of Sal gemme calcined,
beaten together, then increase your fire according to Art, three days and
three nights, and lute thy receiver very well, which must be of the quantity
of five or six gallons, or more, the greater the better, and then thou shall
have an oil as red as blood, which is not to be sold or bought for money: for
it helps the Canker, the Wolf, Noli me tangere, and Fistulaes, if ye
annoint them therewith: first the dead flesh will fall out without pain, and
then it will heal, how sore soever it be, although it were forty years old.

In summa. It is a most excellent oil against all sores and venomous Ulcers,
for if ye annoint them three times therewith, it helps them, although they
were so venomous as they did eat a hand broad in one night, as is diverse times
seen of the Wolf, and such like ulcerations, that eat so, as it seems a
dog had bitten out a great piece. These and all other ulcerations, which will
not be help by any means, ye shall help them with this oil in short
space, so as shall seem mavelous to behold.

How ye may draw forth Salt out of all mettalles and first out of Gold, which
is called Sal sapientium.
FIrst if you will make sait of Gold, you shall take gold filed into powder,
and dissolve it in the before written strong water, and when it is dissolved,
ye shall boil away the water, till it remain dry, then thou shall put
thereon fair water, and let it sees therewith three or four hours long, and
then pour it away, and put more thereon and let it sees again, and then
pour it off again: this pouring on and off ye shall use till the water have
no taste of the strong water, but is sweet: and when it is so, give it great
fire that it may dry well, then put it in a glass and set it in a calcining
Furnace, and there it shall calcine a whole month long, so that it remain
always red hot and at one degree of fire, then take and grind it on a stone,
until it be as fine as is possible: then pour thereon good distilled vinegar,
and lay a cover over the glass, and let it sees in Balneo Mariae a whole day
long, putting thereto always fresh vinegar: then pour off that vinegar into a
glass and put thereon more, and boil it a whole day as ye did before, and this
ye shall do three times: then take that vinegar that ye poured off and
distill it by Balneo Mariae till it remain dry, and in the bottom ye shall
find a salt as white as snow, which ye shall take and put thereon more
vinegar, and set it in the Balneo Mariae that it may boil the space of two
hours, then let it settle a whole day, and then pour off that which is
clear, and then if there remain any thing in the bottom it is not enough
prepared: then shall ye dissolve it in vinegar again, and distill the vinegar
again as I have showed you, and ye shall find a whiter salt in the bottom of
the glass, which ye shall put in vinegar again, and let that boil in Balneo
Mariae two hours, as I have before showed you, and then let it stand and
settle, and then pour off the clearer part, and distill it in Bailneo Mariae,
and the salt will remain in the bottom as white as snow. But if there remain
any in the other glass ye shall not do as I have showed you, till it be all
dissolved.

Then dissolve that salt in rain water three or four times, and look whether
there remain any salt in the bottom undissolved, and if there remain none,
it is well prepared, or else not, and it is called Sal philosophorum, or
sapientiae, and when it is dissolved into clear water, that the salt may
remain very dry in the bottom, the which ye shall keep in a glass close
there, for it is a mod excellent medicine against all diseases of the body, for
it will leave nothing in a man's body that shall hurt him, but it does drive it
forth by sweat, and makes the Patient as sound and whole as ever he was in all
his life. It helps all outward sores, as the Canker, the Wolf, Fistulaes,
and such like.

This being taken inwardly does help those outward diseases most wonderful:
for it helps them in three or four days, and when ye will occupy it
against such diseases, ye shall use it in this manner.

Ye shall take a Vial full of wine, and put therein two or three grains of
that salt, for it is sufficient for any sick person, for any kind of diseases,
then stop that Vial and set it in warm water, until the salt be dissolved,
then give the sick person thereof to drink warm, and lay him down to sweat,
for it will cause him to sweat wonderfully, therefore keep him from the cold
in any wise, for that sweat will bring him to health again, although he were a
Leaper, so that it come not by nature of his mother, for if it come by kind,
there is no help that I do know, yet nevertheless this medicine can not
hurt, nor yet it cannot help him. But other sicknesses, although they were
never so evil or sore, it will help them. It helps the Pestilence
miraculously in one day, and likewise the pox in short time, giving it as is
aforesaid in wine, and lay thereon and sweat, and when thou will help any
outward sore, thou shall lay thereon a wound plaster, and let him drink the
said salt with wine morning and evening, as is said before, and in short space
they shall be helped,

The order to distill vinegar to make the aforesaid salts.
TAke good strong renish wine vinegar, and distill it in a Limbecke of glass,
and give it first a small fire till half be distilled, then take it away, for
it is nothing worth to our work, then taste it on thy tongue whether it be
sharp or no, if it be not sharp, it is not good: if not, keep that small
fire till the liquor come forth sour: ye shall note that the worst of the
vinegar distilleth first, then distill that which is last with a reasonable
fire till it be almost distilled, but ye may not distill it all quite out,
lest it should stink of the fire, and wax red, for then will it not serve our
purpose. Moreover ye shall note that it may not drop faster, but that a man
may say a Pater noster between.

To draw forth the salt of Arsnicke.
THe salt of Arsenicke is a mavelous salt, but it is sharp and corosiue, and
the order to make it is thus.

Take Arsnicke i. which is fixed, and dissolve it in Aqua fortis made of salt
Peter and Alum, and when it is dissolved put thereon rain water, till it
sincke to the bottom, and when it is suncke to the bottom let it stand to
settle, then pour off that part which is clear, and put on more fresh water,
and let it sees, and then let it settle and pour off the water again, and
then pour on more: and this order ye shall use until the water come off as
sweet as ye put it on, then calcine it six days and six nights, then pour
thereon distilled vinegar and sees it in Balneo Mariae to dissolve, and at
night let it settle and wax clear: then pour off that which is clear and
put on more, and let it stand a day to dissolve as I said before, and then let
it wax clear, and then pour off the clear parts. This ye must do three
times as is said of gold, and then dry it very well, and put thereon fair
rain water till it be dissolved, and when it is dissolved ye shall make no
more fire under it, but let it wax cold, and then pour the clear parts off
and distill it in Balneo Mariae until it be dry: and then you shall find your
salt in the ground as white as the snow: which is most excellent against the
Canker, the Wolf, and such like as comes of wounds, etc. Ye shall help
them thus. Take of this salt. j. and put thereto. j. of Vnguentum fuscum, and
therewith dress the sores, and they will heal in short time, though they were
never so old: and therefore if thou will understand wherefore it serves: look
in my pearl of Surgery, and also in the Surgery of Paraselsus.

To make Oil of Metals, and first of Lead and Tin.
IF you will make oil of these two Mettalles, ye must first calcine them, as
I have showed you, and then dissolve them in the aforesaid strong water, and
when they be dissolved let them stand till it be as clear as a glass, then
distill away the water by a Limbecke till it remain dry, and when it is dry,
put thereon good distilled vinegar, and set it in Balneo Mariae to dissolua a
whole day, and let it boil, and then let it wax cold and settle, then pour
off that part which is clear and distill it in an other glass, and when your
matter is dry, put thereon other distilled vinegar, and let it sees so long
until it be dissolved, then distill away the vinegar, and then put on more
vinegar: this dissolving and distilling ye shall use so long until the matter
remain in the bottom like oil, then put it forth whilst it is yet warm,
for when it is cold it is so tough as ye cannot get it from the glass: This
oil so made is most excellent, for it helps wounds and sores in very short
time: and moreover, there is no oil amongst all the secrets of Physic or
Surgery that heales a wound sooner then this oil does, for it helps them in
four and twenty hours, so as there be no bones broke or cut, etc. There is
an other manner of making of this oil which is better, whereof we will not
write in this place.

To make Oil of Copper, and of Crocum Martis, or Iron.
THese mettalles ye must first calcine, and then dissolve them in strong
water, then put thereon rain water till the metal sincke to the bottom,
then put to so much rain water till it have no taste of the strong water, then
dry it well and put thereon distilled Vinegar, and set it in Balneo to
dissolve, then distill away the Vinegar till it remain dry, then put thereon
fresh Vinegar, and distill that away till that the matter remain dry: and this
order ye shall use till that the matter remain moist in the bottom like
oil. This oil is of like virtue as the other, and therefore we will write no
more thereof in this place.

To make Oil of Quicksilver.
IF thou will make this oil, ye must have Mercury fixed or else it will not
serve for our use: therefore take that which is fixed and put it in strong
water, and set it in Balneo to dissolve, and set thereon a head, and when it is
dissolved let it settle, and then pour off that part which is clear, and
distill it in Balneo Mariae, and your Mercury will remain in the bottom, then
put thereon rain water, and wash it so long that the water have no taste of
the strong water, but remain as sweet as ye put it on: then put thereon
distilled vinegar, and set it in Balneo Mariae a whole day till it be
dissolved, then distill the vinegar away, and put thereon fresh, and set it in
Balneo Mariae again to dissolve, and then distill it away again: and this
order ye shall use till that it remain like an oil in the bottom, then take
it forth and keep it in a glass close shut, lest it should loose his
strength. This oil is of as great operation in fresh wounds as the other
aforesaid are: it is above all other against the Pox to be used outwardly, for
it helps all sores that come of the Pox, if ye annoint the sores therewith
and in the foresaid manner: Ye may make oils of all Metals, but they are not
to be taken inwardly, and therefore I will show thee another order how you shall
make oils of all the Metals to use inwardly.

To make Oil of Gold, the which is distilled through the helm, and it is to
be used both inwardly and outwardly.
IF thou will make oil of gold, ye shall take his salt of the which we have
made mention before, and put it into a glass with a long neck, and mix the
glass fast with hermes-sel, that is with a pair of gloing tongs as I will
show you hereafter: then ye shall set the said glass in a calcining Furnace,
with a fire so temperate as though it stood in the sun, and there ye shall let
it stand eight days, and then increase the fire other 8. days, till that ye
see it begin to wax yellow, and then keep thy fire in that heat till that
thou see thy glass all yellow, and then increase thy fire a little till that
ye see it wax a browner yellow: and when ye see that: ye shall keep it in
that heat eight days, and then if ye see it change no color, increase your
fire a little more eight days, and then ye shall see it wax red, and when it
is indifferent red, ye shall increase your fire again eight days, till that
ye see it a brown red, then ye may give it a greater fire, for it is fixed, and
no fire can consume it: and when ye have kept it 8 days in such a great heat,
ye shall let it wax cold, and if ye will make this oil, ye shall grind it
in fine powder, and put it into a stone pot, and put thereon distilled vinegar,
and set it in Balneo Mariae to dissolve 4. days long, then let it settle and
pour off the clear parts, and put thereon more vinegar and stop the pot very
close, and set it again other four days in Balneo Mariae to dissolve, and
every day ye shall stir it two or three times with a stick, then let it wax
cold and settle, and pour off the clear parts, and then put thereon fresh
vinegar, and set it to dissolve again, and let it stand and settle until the
fifth day in the morning, then let it wax cold and settle, and then pour off
the clear parts, and if there remain any thing in the pots bottom, cast it
out, for it is not profitable for our work, then wash the pot very clean, and
put therein the said Vinegar, that ye boiled before, and distill it per Balneo
Mariae until it be dry, and ye shall find the powder fairer then it was
before, and then put thereon fresh Vinegar, and set it to dissolve in Balneo
Mariae, as is said before. And when it has stood four days, ye shall pour
it clear off, and look if there remain any feces or powder in the bottom,
and if there be any you shall pour it out, and make the pot clean, and put
therein the said Vinegar which ye poured off, and distill it away per Balneo
Mariae, until that it remain dry: then put thereon fresh Vinegar, and
dissolve it as I have showed you, and then pour off the Vinegar and distill it
again, and this ye shall use, until you find no more sand in the bottom.
But that it is all dissolved, and then it is prepared to make his oil of, then
distill that last vinegar away per Balneo Mariae, until that it be very dry,
then put it into a glass with a head and a great receiver, the which ye must
lute together very well that no air may come forth, then give it small fire
four hours long, and then increase it a little stronger, and so keep it
other four hours, and then ye shall see certain yellow fumes rise up into
the head, then keep thy fire in that degree, until that thou see the head
wax red, then increase your fire a little, until that the head be as red as
blood, then keep thy fire in that state, until thou see the color begin to
slake. Then make thy fire greater, until that the bottom of the vessel be
red, and then keep it in that stay one hour, and then the head will seem to
be full of Snow. Then make the fire as great as thou can, until the head
wax clear again as it was at the first. Then let it wax cold, and thou
shall find an oil in the receiver, the which is not to be bought for any
money: For because it helps all diseases in man's body, both inwardly and
outwardly: although they be never so evil, as the Pestilence, the Pox, the
Wolf, the Canker, Consumptions, the Dropsy, and the Leaper, if so be that it
came not by nature of the father and mother. And the order to take it is thus:
Ye shall take a pot of wine and put therein.j. of this oil, and give the
sick thereof to drink in the morning, and let him lie in his bed and sleep,
and then thou shall see his wonders. And if so be that the Patient be full of
evil humors, and that he shall need purging, it will cause nature to cast
forth either by sweat, or urine, or by vomit, or downward, as long as the
Patient shall have need, and then straight ways amend and wax stronger, then
if he had eat a whole Capon: and then if the Patient do purge no more by any
of the said means aforesaid, ye shall give it him but three days. For if he
do purge more then one day, it is a token that he is full of corruption, as
of the Leapry, and the Pox, for those are so full of corruption, so that he
cannot be help in one day by nature. Therefore ye shall give it more then
three days, that is thus to be understood, ye shall give it him so long that
nature purges no more, and that ye may see that the Patient waxes very
strong, for this medicine works with the help of nature a long tim^ after,
and therefore this medicine is precious, and of too quick operation to give to
any sick person, where no need is. But as for the wolf and the Canker, and
such like outward sores, ye^ shall understand, that there is need of no other
help then the aforesaid drink as is said before: and ye shall lay upon the
sore a cool Leaf or Lint, and you shall fee great aboun-dance of foul and
rotter blood and such like come forth: The which is scant to be believed, and
then those holes or sores will incarnat, and heal of themselves without fault.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST Book of the Secrets of Physic and Philosophy,
wherein is showed how.
1. TO make Oil of Masticke. fol. 1. 2. To make Oil of Mirra. fol. 5. 3. To
make oil of Storax Liquida. fol. 8. 4. To make oil of Storax Calamite. fol. 9
5. To make oil of Benjamin, fol. 11 6. To make oil of Galbanum, fol. 12 7. To
make oil of Sagapenum, fol. 15 8. To make oil of Opoponax, fol. 16 9. To make
oil of Euphorbium, fol. 17 10. To make oil of Ambre or Succinum, fol. 18 11.
To make oil of Amoniacum, fol. 20 12. To make oil of Sorcocolla. fol. 22. 13.
To make oil of Castoreum fol. 23. 14. To make oil of Frankincense. fol. 25
15. To make oil of Turpentine, fol. 27 16. To make oil of Wax, fol. 29 17.
To make Quintessence of Honey, fol. 32. 18. To make oil of Lignum Vitae or
Guai^um. fol. 38 19. To make Oil of Butter, fol. 42 20. To make Oil of Eggs.
fol. 43 21. To make Oil of Sinamon. fol. 44. 22. To make Oil of Cloves. fol.
48 23. To make Oil of Nutmegs. fol. 50 24. To make Oil of Mace. fol. 52 25.
To make oil of Pepper. fol. 53 26. To make Oil of Saffron. fol. 55 27. To
make Oil of Anniseed, fol. 57 28. To make Oil of Fennellseed. fol. 59 29. To
make Oil of Cumminseed. fol. 60 30. To make Oil of Carrawayseed. fol. 62 31.
To make Oil of Dill seed. fol. 63 32. To make Oil of Parcelie seed, fol. 64
33. To make Oil of Rue or Hearbgrace. fol. 65 34. To make oil of Ivy. fol. 68
35. To make oil of Rosemary flowers. fol. 72 36. To make oil of Wild Time.
fol. 74 37. To make oil of sweet Margerom. fol. 78 38. To make oil of Sage.
fol. 80. 39. To make oil of Peneriall, fol. 81. 40. To make oil of Mint. fol.
84. 41. To make oil of Hyssop, fol. 86 42. To make oil of Radish seed. fol.
87 43. To make oil of Mustard seed. fol. 88 44. To make Oil of Colewort seed.
fol. 89 45. To make oil of Linseed. fol. 90 46. To make oil of Saint John's
wort or seed. fol. 91 47. To make oil of Quinces seed. fol. 92 48. To make
oil of Acornes. fol. 93 49. To make oil of Tartare by distillation. fol. 94
50. Another way to make Oil of Tartare. fol. 95 51. To make Oil of
Harts-Horne. fol. 97 52. To distill Oil of Man's Excrements. fol. 98 53. To
make Oil of the skull of a man. fol. 98
The Table of the second Book, showing
1. The Names of the Metalls, Simples, or Medicines spoken of therein. fol. 117
2. The names of the Preparations. fol. 120 3. How to prepare Crocum Martis, and
such like as are prepared through calcination. fol. 122 4. To prepare Alumes
and Salts. fol. 125 5. Toprepare Alume. fol. 126 6. To calcine Vitrioll. fol.
127 7. To calcine Quicksilver. fol. 129 8. To calcine Tartare. fol. 131 9. To
calcine Tin or Lead. fol. 132 10. To calcine Silver, fol. 134 11. To calcine
Gold. fol. 136 12. To sublime Quicksilver. fol. 138 13. To sublime Sulphur fol.
141 14. To sublime Sal Armoniacke. fol. 144 15. To sublime Copper, which is a
great secret. fol. 145 16. To sublime Lead and Tin. fol. 148 17. How to make
Aqua Fortis to dissolve Lead and Tin fol. 149 18. To make Oil of Sulphur, the
which is a great secret. fol. 151 19 To make Oil of Vitrioll. fol. 155 20. To
make water of Mercury, which Paraselsus writes of in his book of Surgery.
fol. 160 21. To make water of Sal Armoniacke. fol. 162 22. The order to fix
all things that are flying. fol. 163 23. To make oil of Antimony. fol. 167 34.
How you may draw forth Salts out of all metalles, and first out of Gold, which
is called Sal Sapientium. fol. 169. 35. The order to distill Vinegar to make
the aforesaid Salts. fol. 176. 36. To draw forth the S^^^ of Arsnicke. fol* ^8.
37. To make Oil of Metals, and first of Lead and Tin. fol. 181. 38. To make
Oil of Copper, and of Crocum Martis, or Iron. fol. 183. 29. To make Oil of
Quicksilver. fol. 185. 30. To make Oil of Gold, the which is distilled through
the belme, and is to be used both inwardly and outwardly fol. 187.
FINIS
LONDON, Printed by. A. M. for William Lugger, and are to be sold at the
Posterne Gate at Tower Hill. 1633.


