Trial brings truth to light: OR, The proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
A dainty new ditty of many things treating,

To the tune of the Begger-boy.




THe world has allurements and flattering shows,
to purchase her Lovers good estimation,
Her tricks and devices he is wise that well knows,
the learned in this science are taught by probation:
this truth when I find,
it puts me in mind,
Among many matters which I am conceiting,
of one homely adage,
that is used in this mad age,
The proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
Although this my subject seem homely and mean,
yet you that with judgment will confirm the matter,
Some ears of good documents from it may gleane,
Which I from this sheafe of invention will scatter:
now cunning and fraud
winnes greatest applaude,
And under wits cloak many shelter their cheating,
but try and then trust,
for the world is unjust,
And the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
The know and the honest man both are complete,
in gesture, in words, and in company keeping,
Nay commonly they who do mean most deceit,
more easily into men's bosoms are creeping:
with counterfeit tales,
which too much preuailes,
And proffers of courtesy often repeating,
but speak as you find,
and still bear in mind,
That the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
Men's promises may be compared to snow,
or ice at the best, by cold weather congealed,
They Are hard in the morning, at noone nothing so,
though with protestations their minds are revealed:
yet when the hot beams,
of disasterous streams,
Does melt their intentions* then they will be fleeting*
their words differ clean,
from what they do mean,
But the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
There be of both sexes that have fair outsides,
like Iayes with the feathers of Peacocks adorned,
A fair fute of Scarlet, or Plush, often hides
a carcass infirm with diseases deformed:
and now in these times,
men cover their crimes,
With shadows of virtue, their brains still beating,
which way to do naught,
and yet hide their fault,
But the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
There Is many thrasonicall prattling Jacks,
that upon their Ale-bench will tell brave discourses,
Were Ajax alive they would not turn their backs,
their tongues shall supply the defect of their purses:
^ut take them at their words,
they will scant draw their swords,
Instead of brauadoes they fall to entreating:
but give me that blade,
that does more than he said.
For the proof of a pudding is all in the eating
The second part
To the same tune.




WHen I do want nothing I have store of friends,
I mean friends in shadow but nothing substantial:
If I will believe every one that pretends,
I shall have more courtesy than any man shall:
But when I have need
to use them indeed,
Like cowardly soldiers they fall to retreating,
but he is my friend,
that helps me in the end,
For the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
There Is many in company boast of their skill,
in wonderful mysteries secret and hidden,
You may give belief to their words if you will,
upon winged Pegasus often they have ridden:
if any in place
will unto their face
Oppose them with boldness, their proiects defeating,
their courage will quail,
and they I tell a new tale
For the proof of a pudding, etc.
I have seen a Gallant attyr'd like a Lord,
yet often through want he is inforct to be spareing:
He Is daily a guest at Duke Humphryes board,
and sometimes he fills his belly with swearing:
I have seen likewise,
a plain man in frize,
Or good mutton-veluet that glisters with sweating,
he calls and he pays,
and he means as he says,
Thus the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
There Is many that when they affliction do feel,
as poverty, sickness, and other disasters,
Then unto their friends they will humbly kneel.
and say, under heaven they are their best masters:
but when through those friends
their misery ends,
Ingratefully all former kindness forgetting,
they them do disdain,
who did them maintain,
Thus the proof of a pudding, etc.
There are many men when they first come a wooing
to Widows or Maidens with great protestations,
Such wonderful courtesies they will then be showing,
and they silly creatures believe their relations:
their love's very hot,
until they have got
The thing that they wish by their subtle entreating,
then they prove unkind,
and poor women do find
That the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
Thus briefly and plainly I have here expressed,
my mind and conceit of this proverb so homely,
Wherein at the truth very n^^re I have guessed,
and decked it in ornaments decent and comely:
I hope it will sell
abroad very well,
With those who love truth, and abhor all cheating,
till trial be made,
no more can be said,
For the proof of a pudding is all in the eating.
M. P.

FINIS.
Printed at London for Thomas Lambert.


