A hundred and fourteen Experiments and Cures of the famous Physician
Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Paracelsus; Translated out of the Germane
tongue into the Latin.

Whereunto is added certain excellent and profitable Works by B. G. a Portu
Aquitano.

Also certain Secrets of Isacke Hollandus concerning the Vegetall and Animal
work.

Also the Spagericke Antidotarie for Gunne-shot of Josephus Quirsitanus.

Collected by John Hecter.



LONDON Printed by Vallentine Sims dwelling on Adling hill at the sign of the
white Swanne.

1596

(...) that the inquisition of some one part is the occasion of searching out
of an other, so ^^finitely, that the bluniest wit cannot (...) of (...) to
train him on, (...) the deepest head of want of variety to entertai^^ him
still, so large occasion of subject, or circumstance is (...) offered to
^^n^^der of. Of these writers I have made choice of two or three such as in
their country (by their deserts) are held very de^re: these, not for their
method, which I middle not with, but for their medicines, which I ^sually
make, I have translated, for the benefit (I hope) of my (...), and as
heretofore in some of the translations Printed, I have (...) held to cover my
r^denesse with the authoriti^ of other men's counte^^nces, so here I presume
(right Worshipful) under the comfortable shield of your favor, to shadow the
slenderness of this my simple work, beseeching you of your bountiful
(...)tesie, for the which you are commended of the most, to pardon my
rashness, and to accept of this enterprise, proceeding from him that amongst
your bound^^ well willers is not the least.

Your Worships in all dutiful service. John Hecter.

An Apologeticall Preface of Master Barnard G. Londrada A Portu Aquitanus unto
the Book of Experiments of Paracelsus, wherein is proved, that sick bodies
stuffed and filled with the seeds of diseases, can hardly be cured without
metalline medicines: contrary to the writings of some which deny that Metals
(after what sort or manner soever they be prepared) may profit or help the
nature of man.
IN sacred Scripture (gentle Reader) among others we find this law full of
Christian Love and Charity: Thou shall restore again the wandering or
straying* Ox or Deuteron. 22. (...).
Ass of thy neighbors unto him: By which law the eternal God would as by an
evident argument confirm and establish amongst us mutual love and amity.
For if in this sort Gods laws do command us to take care of the straieng
cattle of our enemies: how much more then do they will us to help the
miserable ease and great dangers of the bodies of our friends, and to restore
their health? Wherefore when as I (together with Theophrastus Paracelsus and
other excellent men) understood the errors of many Physicians of our time, I
began to devise with my self by what means I might attain to the knowledge
of true physic, which is derived out of the light of nature, not out of the
dark writings of the heathen. And I judged it to be necessary to travel, and
to go unto far places, to seek out learning and knowledge, and not to hope or
look for it, sitting at home idlelie. I prepared my self therefore to my
(...), and with long travel and labor have searched out and learned those
things, which for christian love sake I can no longer keep silent, that I
might call back the wandering children into the path of true doctrine, and
having declared my journey and labors, they also being excused and defended,
which are laid open unto al manner of slanders, by those which so greatly
commend the heathenish physic, whose deceits in some part I will endeavor to
disclose; I will afterward declare what those that are desirous of true and
natural physic, are to look for at my hands, and what Books of true
physic I have gathered together in sundry places, being moved with
compassion toward those that go astraie, I will communicate and set forth for
their public profit and commodity. But first the matter so requires, that to
avoid the hatred of the common sort, as well from my self, as from al other
favorers of the Art of Separation, I should duly answer unto the
adversaries, whose frowardness and malice is such, that they will with proud
words annihilate, reject, and condemn others inventions, which they
themselves see and perceive they may use with great success and profit. And
yet they in the mean season arrogate unto themselves the commendations due
unto the Authors, and with a lying kind of st^alth rob the inuenters of
Arts of their due honor; which is a subtle kind of craft, springing out of
the deceits of the old serpent. For when as reports are spread of the strange
cures of sundry grievous diseases, which are wrought by the benefit of
tinctures and vegetall and mineral spirits, by the cunning and labor of
those whom the common sort at this day call Chemists or Alchimists: by and by on
the contrary part they cry out that those colliar physicians can do no good
but kill al men that put themselves into their hands with their venomous
medicines, so that they ought to be driven out of the commonwealth, and that
they are deceivers, and that their extractions and preparations, their subtle
and thin spirit will profit nothing, and that the spirit of Vitriol is poison,
the essence of Antimonie and Mercury is nothing, the extraction of Sulphur is
nothing worth, neither the liquor of gold: and to be brief, that al things are
contrary to the nature of man, and more to be avoided then the eyes of a
basiliske. And yet they in the mean time like cunning and crastie thieves
privily, and with fair promises pick out from the poor Chemists the secrets
of Physic, and secretly learn those things that they forbid the common
people as poisons, afterward challenging them for their own practices. And
by this wicked injury they derive unto themselves the favor, friendship,
praise, gifts and rewards of men, which by good right are altogether due unto
those that by their labor, sweat, watching, and diligent search in natural
things by Vulcans art have found out such things, and published them for the
common commodity of man. And yet not contented therewith, they also publish
great volumes filled with toys, lies, and sophistications; going about as much
as in them is, to suppress, overthrow, and utterly to extinguish the light
with darkness, and the truth with lies, and practice (the most plain and
manifest workemistresse established even by truth it self) with a vain
fained theoricke, devised by their own subtle brain. I say to thee (thou
notable Doctor, that so backebitest Paracelsus) how can thou by any means
with thy trifling words deface the work it self, or with thy theoricke
refell the practice? Art thou so great a doctor and know not, that thou
have profited so much, as by thy work thou can bring aught to effect?
Paracelsus teaches that the falling sickness is to be cured with the spirit
of Vitrioll, and performed it, and the work it self declares it daily: prove
thou the contrary, and cure the same disease with thy pills, sirropes, and
electuaries, then shall thou have the victory. It is not sufficient for thee
by bringing thy reasons, to prove that metalline medicines are not agreeing for
man's nature, neither that metals may be so prepared that they may heal. Why?
Thou deniest that which indeed is performed, and openly seen with eyes. It is
a foul thing to be ignorant in that that every man knows. For out of all
doubt you have all heard, that most dangerous diseases have bin cured with
metaline tinctures, yea, with such as have not been rightly prepared by
counterfeit Paracelsians, as with Vitrum Antimonij, which does pluck up
suddenly at once by the roots the impurities of the fever, although not
without great weakening of the powers, yet it heals: And yet we allow not such
perilous cures. And so likewise of others. N(...) Mineralles work this, not
being rightly prepared, what think you will they do being rightly prepared
and purged from their venom and poison?

And how can you with a safe conscience reject those things whereof you have no
knowledge? It is not sufficient to affirm an^e thing except it be confirmed by
probable and grounded reasons. Every man will play the Censor of Paracelsus,
whom it is more easy to reprehend, then to follow. And whilst every man
desires to seem, or to be thought more learned then other, no man will learn
of another. I say every Paracelsian which does but only carry coals unto the
work, can show you by eye three principles of Theophrastus physic. Have you
tasted the most sharp salt? or the most sweet o^le? or the balm that most
delicate li^uor? All those being hidden in every thing that is created, you
have not once perceived. The metalline spirits, in whom physi^ke does
consist, by no means can be found out, neither what force they have or
fellowship with man's nature, but only by fire, for as fire did first show that
the smoke of Mercury was poison to man's nature without an^e subtle
speculation, but thou did never handle coals, neither can draw any so small
a baulme out of the Vegetals therefore being ignorant in metalline physic,
thou can not so much as once guess what it is* and therefore do judge of
things unknown, as the blind man does of colors. Is it not a great folli^
to write against a thing, and not to understand it well before? Such as are
addicted to Paracelsus doctrine, when they perceive you have no stronger
weapons then those you have hitherto gathered, they will conclude that you
rather confirm and establish Paracelsus physic, then confute it. It is not
enough to say a thing is false, except there be more probable and better
showed. Hereby it appears that ye nourish a secret ignorance of natural
things in your selves.

What, (...) you those great physicians and excellent philosophers? How comes
it then to pass that the force of drugs are hidden and unknown unto you? Do
you not in this point come ^eere unto the empericks, whom you with great pride
and brag of knowledge r^iect, when as you say; the Chemist, be he never so
excellent, is no physician, but he that with judgment and reason has learned
to make and v^e all r^^^dies for diseases: For in those points consists the
chiefest glory and commendation of a Physician, and the only safety of the
sick. How vain is this reasonable physician, which prepares his medicines
with reason and not with the hand? He is the very physician that with his own
hand purges his medicines from their venom, and being so prepared, with
sharp judgment does apply them to their proper diseases, that the seed of
the disease may be pulled up by the roots, and so must the speculation and
practice, reason and the work concur and join together, because judgment
without practice is barren. Tell me, how comes it to pass that mercury
heals the French pox and the filthy scabbe? Why do you command the
miserable sick persons to anoint themselves with quickesiluer as shepheardes
grease their sheep? How happens it (I say) that mercury is the special
best remedy against these diseases* Do you d^^^^ that met^als ^o an^^ (...),
y^^ and the greatest p(...)e cures? Why do you co(...) such as (...) infected
with leprosy to swallow gold* ^hi^ do you boil it in bro^^^^ with cap^^^? Why
do you mingle (...) gold in your (...) and (...)ries? You know that the force
of the ^epro^^^ is of^ delaied that it break^^^ not out into the upper part of
the skin by taking of crude gold^ into the stomach: Then if gold that is
compact and not resolved do^ work this effect, what will not the spirit of
gold work being ^oosed from his gross substance?

If you will not believe Paracelsus, that the cure of m^st dangerous discases
(...)eth hidden in mettalles, at the least, (...) those that lived long before
him, amongst whom Arnoldus de villa (...) is chief, who in his book of the
prese^^ation of youth says th^^: Pearls (...) into liquor, comfort the
natural heat, help the (...)embling of the heart, and those that are
fearful, and properly they clarify the blood of the heart* and many diseases
are cured by them. For i^ is a salt of the (...) which the wise call their
Animal stone, and some the Mineral C(...), and all the maisterie in the
preparation of it, is, that it may be resolved into a most pure and potable
water with such things as do not destroy his nature. This says Ar(...), who
speaks (...) of stamping, but of solution: but to what purpose d^^l all^^dge
thy(...) Verily, that you may see how with your own swords you cut your own
throats, you use pearls, corals, and pr(...) (...) in your elect^aries and
broathes, and those you bea^e into powder. You (...) as it were a certain
medicinal virtue in precious stones, but you deal as naughty cooks and rude
country wo^^^ do, that when pa(...)ges o^ ha^^s come to their hands, they
(...) the^ (...) the po^tage pot, or else ^eethe them in water: even so stamp
and break your pearls which should rather be dissolved. Alb^it you should
make powder as subtle as the air, you should nothing profit: for as you put
it into the stomach, so shall you see it pass away again, and hereupon of
very necessity were the rules of Chy(...) preparations brought into physic,
which you do hate worse (...) (...) serpent^r a dog, with the practisers of
their.

What (...)ll need many words? If you will not yet gra^nt that (...) special
(...) of diseases consists in minerals, hearken what (...) Math^^lu^ says
in the fourth book of his Epistles: the bodies of (...) sick being (...) of
seeds of diseases, will hardly be healed without m(...) ^alline medicines. And
in his treatise of Antymonie he says: A^tymonie does no less purge the
diseas^s of the bodies, then metals, from super(...)uities. This did that
learned (...)an understand when as yet he (...) not the true prepration of
Antymony. Likewise he greatly esteems the potable ^olde, the preparation
whereof, as the sa^e M(...) used it, I will de^^a^e unto you. because you shall
not be ignorant. Take gold twice or thrice purged with Antymony, make it into
thin plates and in a ^it vessel, hang the plates that they touch not one
another, and let i^ be burned and calci^ed in a ^^rnace duly (...) by the space
of half (...) out and laid open in the air, they do dissolve, and there
flow from it a certain oilie humor red of color, and of taste sw^^^ish. He
drew out two ounces of oil of gold, but out of that which was not so well
bu^nt, the liquor did not so readily run out. Sometimes he used to pour on
the spirit of wine rectified, and that so long, and so much, until the whole
red color was drawn out. You shall rectify those spirits or essence of wine
very subtly, if you put it into a glass cucurbite under a limbecke with a
receiver, and set it in most cold or snowie water, and cover the head round
about with a linen cloth stieped in warm water, for then the subtiler parts
will rise up, leaving the waterie substance in the bottom. Gold calcined and
often infused with the spirit of wine with many imbibitions, and again
distilled by a Limbecke, leaves in the bottom behind a reddish liquor. That
Physician used first to purge the body, and then to shave and heat the crown
of the head, and them to pour on a dram of that oil, and to give so much
also to be drunk (...) maluesey. The like is to be wrought with fine silver
for the diseases of the head, and so likewise of other mettalles, for being
duly prepared, they do dissolve, because they are saltes.

This man has many other mynerall medicines, which were never known, either
to Galene, or to Hypocrates, but brought to light by our Theophra^tus
Paracelsus, of whom you great Philosophers and Phy^itions only in name do
vndis^reetely write. Do you think all things utterly impossible unto other men
which you your self know not, or can not do, or that you cannot compass with
your divine knowledge? What will you say to this? I know a man that within
three, or at the most six days, can heal the French pox with his Turp^tum
minerale, not with that which is made with oil of vitrioll, but with another
far more excellent which shall not come to your hands or knowledge except
you lay aside your frowardnes, and cease to bring the Paracelsians in suspicion
with the common people and noble men, and to defraud them of the fruit of their
just labors. You say, What have you brought to pass? what have you found out
whereby you should look for praise or profit? Then do we demand of you, What
have you found out whereby phy^icke is the better furnished? We have brought
into physic, essences, oiles, balmes, and saltes, all which the Alchymists
schools have found out. And how great light is come unto physic only by
true distillation, it is known unto all men, and daily experience teaches,
how great commodity has redounded thereby unto the sick. In the mean time,
if you so much detest the labor, yet at the least spare our good name. But it
is no marvel, does it not so always happen, that the best labor is worst
accepted and recompensed? Every good man ^^clined to virtue, wisdom, and
fidelity can witness the same, what reward they have often received for their
fidelity and opening of the truth. So so^e men when they can say no more, they
object unto the searchers of nature, their poverty, filling the ears of the
common people with glorious lies, always chanting upon th^se things which
follow upon the abuse and ^^ungerous cu^es of the cou^terfeit Paracelsians,
judging all things by their contempt poverty, vile estate, and baseness, but
they will quickly avoid that d^spised poverty, which willingly they sustain,
that the nature of things might daily more and more be known unto men, whereby
the unaccustomed cures of most grievous diseases, might at length be found out,
with the which such as are diseased, might through your sluggishnes all die, if
God having compassion upon them now at the end of the world had not provided
wholesome medicines, even by most contemned men. The lepers and gowty, the
infected with the physic, falling sickness, and French poxes, devoured with
the canker, fistula, and gteedy woolfe, with the dropsy, and palsy, and that
with the plague and other diseases, are thrust into their graves. These (I say)
and many other more, whom you through ignorance with your naughty and corrupt
potions and purgations, like butchers have buried alive, will rise up against
you. These (I say) will call you to answer, and accuse you, even the poor,
whom you have robbed of their goods, will require your blood for the loss of
their bodies, and consuming of their money. Then what a madness and cruel
foolishnes is this, that in the time of any great plague, such as are infected,
you shut up in houses, set marks ^ppon them, keep them in prison, strangle
them with cares and solitarines, and kill them for hunger: Is the plague so to
be cured? Or whether do you not think that all men may be infected from
whence the first man was infected? why do you not preserve the whole with your
antidotes or defensiues being so famous physicians as you are? but you have
tried almost all your medicines to be of no force in this disease. Do you in
this sort love your neighbor as your self? or thus spend your life for your
fellow, when as at no time (if help be required) there is greater need of
fellowship, company, comfort and help than in the time of plague? O what
great punishment have you deserved that refuse those that are forsaken of their
friends, far from their kindred, and as it were thrust into exile, whose
solitariness has been more violent unto them then the disease, and grief of
mind has killed rather then the sickness? what I pray you is true and
christian friendship? does not this complaint of the sick stir up unto
pity? When I was in health thou were my friend, thou did visit me, and
help me, but now that I am sick, thou do abhor^e (...), and lie from me,
when fortune laughed upon me, thou did also laugh: but now that with
grief and tears I ^raue comfort, thou do deny it. What do you call
visiting and helping? You will not only not help your selves, but will persuade
princes to stop the passages, that no travelers shall pass unto those places,
when as you ought with courage to relieve them of their grief, and willingly
to go thither to try your cunning. But when any plague begins, you are the
first that tremble, are afraid and despair. The sick are committed unto you
as children and infants which lack diligent cure, you ought to help them as
the father does his children, and not to rob them of their money. Then would
the sick man smile upon you, if you would refresh his languishing life with
some gentle balm: then would he rejoice in the sight of you, and call you his
father. Every natural physician of necessity ought to make his medicines with
his own hands, and not to commit them unto an unskillful Cook, not to fill
great volumes with receipts, with the which I see those that are studious in
physic are in a manner overwhelmed, that they be ready almost to fall down
and die under so heavy a burden of receipts, physic is not so learned but
with the labor of the hands, practice being workemistre^^e where Vulcan day by
day does show new and pleasant remedies which nature teaches the good steward
her workman, daily to purge better and better from their superfluities. Do you
look for a rich harvest, and do not first plow nor sow? Look for knowledge
of the secret natural powers, and do not first seek it out by labor with the
fire? for the most part of you all are dainty and slothful, and he that is
slack in his works, goes like a blind man unto his practice. If you did not
so much abhor the Chymicall Art you would learn to separate the pure from
the vnpure (which is the cause of the corruption of things) by long digestions,
distillations, and imbibitions, whereby you should make your medicines pure and
clean before you minister it to the sick, so upon the sudden receiving, the
sick nature should be refreshed, whereas the weak stomach cannot concoct,
digest, and separate gross matters. But these great doctors will not be
scholars, or young soldiers, no more then an old dog will be brought to hunting
with whips, and g^aw his line and show his grinning teeth to him that leads
him, rather then he will be ruled: even so you will rather openly gainesay the
truth, and like dogs bark and bite at it, then you will confess your
errors. What, ought this to be a reproach unto the Chemists, that for the true
preparations of medicines whereof you are ignorant, and for their great labor
and pain which you do eschew, they should be accounted beggars, poor, and
ragged? do you not think that the common people will at length find out your
deceits? You have been sufficiently warned of many doctors of physic, who
truly have not allowed your childish cures. Amongst whom Conr^de Gesner is one,
and many other ^o, which if they were living most certainly would deny your
fained Art. Likewise John Woz of Cullen which flourished 1510. does sharply
reprove the Physicians of his time, who in his writings upon the plague and
labyrinth of Physicians most plainly and excellently entreats of metaline
medicines and quintessences, and shows their use. What will you answer to
those things which that doctor Gorreus has written in the fifth book of the
extraction of the Quintessence out of herbs, where in his comments he so
excellently extolleth metalline medicines, and did use them, little esteeming
your medicines: for he says the distillations of waters out of herbs and
other such like things, wherein the Apothecaries do boast, are almost of no
force, for it is nothing else but the sleame of the thing, whose principal
liquor consists in the oil of salt.

But that I may stir up in you an earnest desire to know the marvelous
property of things, I will repeat unto you the judgment of Fernelius
Ambian^^ in his second book and eighteenth chapter De Abdi(...) (...) causis.
When first (says he) I gave my self unto the study of that sensible and
metalline philosophy called Chymia, through long travel (as many other had,)
I getting a most perfect master or teacher, did draw out of every plant and
other living things very diverse and sundry substances: First water, and that
very plentiful if the plant were green^, more scarce if it were dry: then
oil, but not that fat and filthy substance, which by press is drawn of our
men, but the workemanshippe of a more excellent Art, which neither easily
corrupts nor ^owreth by age, and that of two sorts, one thin and white, an
other drier and read, etc. Then it follows I will tell you by your leave,
not uttering this whole secret, but teaching you upon what true grounds it
does consist. But lest the strange obscurity of the name might offend you,
which the fathers have covered under a shaddowe or dark kind of speech, I
will most plainly and openly show it i(...) his place. And yet you can not
away with them that give you good counsel, as also you will not suffer learned
and excellent men, neither Gerard Dorne Doctor of Physic, whom, no doubt,
God has raised up unto us. This most excellent man is worthy of eternal
memory, because that he by no injury, neither perilles could be te(...)ified,
but that by his last writings he has made ^aracelsus more famous, who does
excel with a most ancient granitie and authority, that at the least he might
help the children or learning, for whose defense as a valiant soldier he
contendeth by word and deed even to the death, the fellow and companion of
that learned physician I^se^hus Quirs^tan^^ famous in physic, who has
excellently deserved for physic: and in his books has uttered many
excellent philosophical secrets unto the posterity, and opened many hidden
spagyricall medicines, and would have brought to light greater things, if the
ingratitude of some had not stopped his willing mind, and specially of a
perfumer, which goes about to reprove many things, and to allow but few in
his writing, and yet not able to show better. Whereby it comes to pass, that
through one man's ingratitude, al feel loss and lack. Proceed therefore with
courage, drive away those drones and sluggish beasts from the ^acke, so shall
your head be crowned with perpetual praise. In the mean time, whatsoever we
have gotten by many travels, and found out and learned with labor, we will
here annex, praying out adversaries, that if they need them not, they will not
contemn or ^launder them, or terrify others, which with willing mind would
embrace these our labors: or else, to teach them some better things;
considering yet that something in the mean time ought to be given and granted
unto him, which for physickes sake has put himself in so many dangers.

After the great murder and fury of our countrie^en the French men, when I
went with D. Charles of Chambray, D. of Pansay into Italy, traveling through
^^^ria, Ragusium, Sclauonia. Macedonia and Bizantium, ^i^cessantly applied my
whole study to understand and know some certainty touching the philosophers
stone or chy^ical matters. But I could find no true philosophers, only false
Physicians and Chemists every where, which had either altogether none, or else
very little knowledge of natural Arts and preparations. At the length (by Gods
good will) I happened upon a very learned man Daniel Bishop of Dalmatia. Unto
this most excellent man I directed my letters, the which together with his
answer, alittle after sent to me, I will hereafter publish, wherein you shall
see many philosophical points delectable to be read and understood.

At the length, when I had sufficiently searched over the East countries, and
could gather no certain point in natural sciences, I determined to take my
journey toward Germany with the most courteous prince Cabaneus Vydam of
Ch^rtres, still employing my mind to the earnest study of Chymicall physic.
And there I understood that Kings and Princes were deceived by unskillful
practisers, which did utter and sell their sophisticate Chymicall arts, which
they had begged and scratched together out of all corners, with a pompous show
deceiving the princes of their money, whereby it comes to pass, that daily
a great number of sophisters, and sophisticators do daily rise and spring up,
through which, not only the most commendable art of Alchymie receives great
detriment, is oppressed, and adulterate, and the Chymistes themselves made
hateful unto all men, consuming their life, time, and goods upon vain works
and practices: but also there redoundeth most great hurt and damage unto the
common wealth. For there are many deceivers so crafty, that with a dissembled
experience in the Chymicall art, and with fained friendship and great promises
they do craftily learn of others their cunning, which they challenge for
their own, esteem of great value, and carry them about to be sold. As upon
a time certain knaves by craft got from me certain written books, and
sold them for a great sum of money. Common wealths and the Chymicall art
should be very well provided for, if that such knaves might be punished and
restrained by the magistrate, so should the studious of the Art be less
deceived, and in short space the true and pure Art would appear from those
shadows and sophistications. Wherefore to the end that such as be desirous of
the Art may have some pledge from me, wherewith they may make this science
more plain, I will shortly (God willing) set forth three books of the
philosophers stone, written by diverse Authors, whereof the first was drawn
out of certain characters by a noble Brytaine, wherein all the dark speeches
of the philosophers are most plainly expounded, whereunto I will annex two
hundred certain infallible and true philosophical rules, whereby those that
do err and doubt touching the matter of the stone, shall be confirmed. The
second book is, I^hannes de ^ouill^sco Pedomonta(...), which treats of the
philosophers mercury, and how it is drawn, together with an Epistle of John
P(...)anus of the same argument. But there is a more certain excellent
Treati^e of an uncertain Author, which does explane many doubts in that
sacred Phy^icke.

And because that all nations, specially the Germans, have written books in
their own language, I will also write two books in the french tongue for the
help of such as are studious of Philosophy, wherein I will intre^te of many
preparations and special medicines tried by me, and others, also of diverse
elyxirs of the philosophers, extractions of mercuries and mercuriall waters, of
many and diverse dissolutions, I will also add the interpretations of sundry
Characters wherewith the books both of the old and new writers are written
to cover and hide the Art. Also the exposition of a certain Alphabet, without
the which the work can hardely be understood. And two treatises, the one of
the virtues of the vegetall and mineral oiles, the other of the saltes and
properties of many vegetals and minerals: whereunto I will also join two
treatises of philosophical mines, and of making of vinegers, the which my
labor and study, if I see it acceptable unto those that are studious of that
Art, I will shortly set forth greater things, which many with their whole
hearts do wish and desire. In the mean time, take in good part this little
work. That which we have hitherto spoken, is spoken only unto those that do
so deadly hate the Chymicall physic, which think nothing can be well or
profitably taught in Physic that the old harp ^oundeth not. As though that
nature were not more then Galen, or that all the learning of Physic were to
be drawn from the heathen, or that they alone had published the art, and
established it with such sound arguments. Why do you not out of those authors
confute those excellent men which are folowers of Paracelsus, amongst whom that
great Doctor Petrus Seueri^us a Dane is chief, who in his Idea has opened the
invincible foundation of Paracelsus Physic. Why do you not answer to the
monarchy of the Trinity of that learned doctor and Physician Gerard Dorne?
Why do you not confute the volumes of that famous Physician Turnesser, being
confirmed with the truth of practice. But for your sakes which daily call Galens
doctrine unto examination, and with exact judgment do consider of it, giving
place unto Paracelsus, acknowledging and exercising his preparations and
practice, I do rejoice, and shortly more shall come out against the
adversaries, which shall bite them better. In the mean time with your word,
deed, and w^iting, defend the truth from injury.

Farewell.
B. G. Londrada A Portu Aquitanus unto the gentle Reader, health.
THis treatise of Paracelsus (friendly reader) came unto my hands by the gift
of a certain nobls Prince of Germany, and because it is sufficiently evident
to be Paracelsus work, I thought it not good to reserve it to my self, but to
publish it abroad, seeing there comes no commodity or profit of hidden
treasure. This therefore such as it is (loving Reader) embrace: and shortly,
God willing, look for more and greater matters. But this one thing I would
have you understand, that when you do minister those exalted essences of
Paracelsus and his precious oils, think not that they are to be ministered by
themselves, but with some other mixture to carry or lead them: and they must be
used, the stomach first being purged with some special medicine of Paracelsus:
as for example, if you will minister oil of Vitrioll, mingle five or six
drops with an ounce of conscrue of Roses, so shall you safely give it; the
like you must judge of other things; use these happily.

Farewell.
An hundred and fourteen Experiments and Cures of Phillip Theophrastus
Paracelsus a great Philosopher, and a most excellent doctor of the one and the
other Physic, Written With his own hand in the Germane tongue, which Conrad
Steinberge his servant found among other loose papers and scrolles of
Paracelsus.
A Certain Baron being diseased with a wonted grief, By drinking our Quinta
essentia Mercuriale, cast out a stone downward, and became whole.

2 A certain woman was long sick of the Passion of the heart which she called
Cardiaca, who was cured by taking twice our Mercurial vomit, which caused her
to cast out a worm commonly called Theniam, that was four cubits long.

3 One Bartholmew, had for two years space a pain in his side, whom I cured
by giving him the oil of Vitrial, in a drink comforting the stomach.

4 A man that had his Nauill standing out like to a man's yard, was healed with
a third dipped in the oil of Uitriol, by tying the thread hard about it every
day. After the same sort I healed a great swelling or ouergrowing of the flesh
called Parotis, which grew out of a woman's thigh waying five pound.

5 A soldier was shot through in the breast to the left shoulder with a two
forked arrow, so that the head stuck fast in the bone, the which I drew forth
with my two fingers, and powered Kissed into the wound and so he was healed.

6 A Physician being astonished with a clap of thunder and Lightning, so that he
seemed to be sick of the (Apoplexia) or of the disease which they call
Syderacio, and of us, blastings or taking, was restored to his former health
with Oleum auri in aqua Melissae.

7 A young man which for three year had on his chinne a great outward
swelling or apostume, with the often chawing of the herb called Persicarie,
was cured.

8 I cured hard apostumes, swellings, and crustie ulcers, and stinking in the
nostrels, with our Medicamentum mu^dificatiuum, and with our Emplastrum
Stipticum.

9 A woman who was in manner consumed with the French Pox, was cured with a
drink or potion of Essenti^ Melissae, and she lived eight years after.

10 One had his stomach swollen and standing out bigger then a Pomegranad, and
that without any pain, whom I cured with a drink or potion of the oil of
Vitriol.

11 A boy of fifteen years old falling down a stone stairs had his arm
and leg benumbed and void of moving, whose neck with the hinder part of the
head, and all the back bone I anointed with this Unguent, R. of the fat of
a Fox, ij. oil of the earth wo^mes, j. Oleum Philosophorum ss. I mixed them
together and anointed therewith, and in short space no wound nor swelling
appeared in him so hurt.

12 One after an agew fell into such a dead sleep that he felt not himself
being pricked, nor could open his eyes, nor speak any thing; he was sick of
the Leth^rgi, whom I cured with the oil of Salt.

13 a woman that gave a child suck, having her terms stayed long before, at
the length the menstruous blood ran a pace out of her breasts, whereupon when
she felt no grief or pain, I healed her by extracting blood out of the vain
of the foot called S^phen^.

14 A boy having his finger eaten to the bone with a disease called Impetigo or
Lichen, I cured in short time with the oil of Lead.

15 In a place where the bones wrere cankred and consumed, with good success I
used Quinta esse^tia serpentum.

16 A young man had his thigh made filthy with red Pushes of the bigness of
Grommell seed, which I cured with the water of Tartar and Theriacle.

17 The growing out of the flesh in the Fundement, as also Any Rhagades, which
are certain cleftes or chaps in the flesh, I cured by the taking away of those
fleshly parts by incision with Filum Arcenicale, and by the unction of Oleum
Saturni.

18 One that spit blood I cured by giving him one scruple of Laudanum
Precipitatum in the water of Plantaine, and outwardly I applied a linen cloth
to his breast, dipped in the decoction of the bark of the roots of Henbane.

19 One had two Pushes as it were wartes upon the yard, which he got by
dealing with an unclean woman, so that for six months he was forsaken of all
Physicians, as incurable, the which I cured by giving him Essentia Mercuriale,
and then mixed the oil of vitriol, with Aqua sophiae, and laid it on warm
with a supositorie or tene four days.

20 One fifty years old after he was healed of the French pox, had every
month the flux of the Hemeroides breaking and flowing out as fast as the
terms do in a woman, whom I cured by purging him first with Pillule
Pestilentiales Ruffi mixed with our Essentia Mercurial^s, afterward he drunk
oftentimes, Aurum Diaphoreticum, but last of all, by giving him Crocus martis
in drink he was perfectly cured.

21 A Goldsmith of Stuburg had his skull perished until the innermost skin, or
pellicle, which they call, Meniux tenuis: which also swelled up, whom I
cured by opening the skull, and by purging the skin or pelliele, as it
commonly falls out in the wounds of the head with Unguentum Fuscum, and
afterward with Bl^samum Hiperici, and with the flowers of herbs a propriate
for the head applied to the place painted inform of a plaster. But in the
mean time he drank thrice every day of the oil of Vitrioll with the water
of Basell and Lauerder: Note that this disease is called Talparia, or Talpa.

22 A girl of the age of fifteen years before she had her flowers, was very
sore sick, whom I cured with the Oil of Camomell, in the water of Melissa
and Ualenian.

23 I cured a woman that for thirty years had a canker in her breast, by
giving her Essentia Mercurialis, with the water of Plantaine.

24 A boy had his face and stones swolen whom I cured with the extraction of
Rhabarb^.

25 One Jonas falling in love with one Sabian, fell besides himself, whom I
help by giving him in drink Lapidem sieve calculum microcosmi.

26 The daughter of one Oliver being very pale did greedily eat small stones,
chauke, lime, dust, and such like, (as they commonly do which have the longing
sickness called Pica or Mal^chia) through the lothing of the stomach, whom I
cured by purging her with Essentia Mercurialis for the first vomit, afterward
for certain days I gave her oil of Uitrioll to drink with the water of
minte.

27 One was sick of the Lousie evil called (Pthiriasis) whom I cured with
these pills. R. Essentia mercurialis, ss. Aloes Hepatice and Mirha ana. ss.
Saffrana half a scruple, make thereof pills with the oil of Staphisaegriae,
afterward he drank a draught of wine of Centuarie or Perficaria.

28 A boy of eighteen, years old had a tooth drawn, and three months after a
certain black blather appeared in the place of the tooth. The which I daily
anointed with oil of Vitrioll, and so the blather was taken away, and the
new tooth remained.

29 A young Gentlewoman, called Ascania had great pain in her head, and was
clean over all her body, because she had not the due course of her terms,
who after she had often vomited, the pain abated: but when she could not
abide any longer to vomit, I cured her by drawing blood out of the vain which
is under the ball of the foot, and afterward the terms had their natural
course, and she was helped.

30 I oftentimes cured the falling sickness with Essentia Ueratri Nigri
prepared after our order.

31 One that had the Flux of blood by means of an Arter that was cut, I help
with Kissed Stipticum.

32 A Knight being in an assembly was sodenlie astoned and diseased over all
his body, as if he had had the Apoplexy, whom I cured by anointing the
hinder part of his head with Balsamum Helenij, and Essentia Mercurialis.

33 A man of the country being stung with a Viper or adder, fell presently into
a cold sweat, to the great danger of his life, who was restored to his health
presently by drinking Theriaca Nostra with strong wine.

34 A woman who had not her natural courses, was troubled with a very sore
cough: the which I cured by opening the vain beneath the ball of the foot.

35 A fat drunken Tauerner was in danger of his life by a surfeit, who was
restored to his health by letting of blood.

36 A woman called Sabina had a long time the flixe of the belly, by reason of
the looseness of the stomach, the which I cured by giving her oil of
Uitrioll, with conserve of Anthos.

37 A man that was wounded in the pellicle or tunicle of the heart, was cured
with Essentia Solis.

38 A young man being vexed with a continual and violent cough, I cured by
giving him oftentimes the juice of Horehound with our Oximell, and after that
he voyded a worm upward and was helped.

39 A young child had after a sickness a swelling in his breast by reason of
the abundance of humors, the which I cured only with Theriaca Nostra.

40 A certain man had a disease called Carcinomate, or ^angrena, the which was
cured with Oleum Ueneris.

41 A certain woman was so troubled with a disease in her secret parts, that
what moist or liquid meat she did eat, presently she vomited again, the
which was cured with Oleum Margaritarum.

42 One Eligus had a great pain in his stomach, the which was help with
Essentia Mercurialis Uomitoria, the which shortly after vomited a piece of
flesh wherein was h^d a worm.

43 One Vermundus, was so troubled in his head and brain, that he stagered
hither and thither, as though he had been drunk, whom (...)help by giving
him Pillulas Pestilentiales, with the which I mixed Essentiam Mercurialem, that
caused him to vomit a hundred and fifty worms.

44 A certain man was sick of the spleen, whom I cured with Crocus martis, in
the water of Tamaris and Enul^ Campane, and by outwardly applying Balsamum
gummi ^moniaci.

45 One was troubled with a corosion or gnavving of the intralles, whom I
cured by ministering unto him Flores Veneris in wormevvood wine.

46 One was troubled with pains in the stomach through weakness, who took
Oleum salis in his drink, and caused him to have many seges or stools, and
so was restored to his health, as we have written in our book called
Parastenasticon.

47 A man that was troubled with the headache I purged by the nostrels,
casting in the juice of Ciclaminus with a siring.

48 Against the falling sickness I gave often to drink the juice of the herb
called Lanceola, the which is called Herba Uernalis, or the less plantaine
with an empty stomach for the space of thirty days, mixing it with the
extraction of the shauings of iuorie, and the blood of a pigion, for the man,
the male, and for the woman, the female, in the Essence or oil of Craneum
Humanum.

49 In diseases of the eyes termed Catharacta or stili^idium and (called in the
Greek Epiphora) and in swellings and pains of the eyes, I have used
Medicamentum sieve Collirium nostrum made of Tutia Magistralis, wherevvith we
did not only cure watering eyes, but also the great pain of the eye liddes,
and also where there was flesh growing over the sight of the eye, that it
seemed to be past the cure of those common Physicians that profess to be
skillful in theeies.

50 A certain disease called Palipus the which is a stinkng in the nose, I
cured with oil of Uitrioll and the water of wax.

51 One falling from a hie place pissed blood, the which is short space I
cured, giving him to drink j of a powder of our invention with iij. of the
flovvers of Tiliae.

52 In the great scab I have often used ths Unguent, made of Mercury mortified
ij. Ceruse i. Euphorbium j Staphisagre, Lita^ge, Sanders, ana ss. mix them all
together with as much grease of a red hog as will suffice.

53 A certain man being long sick of the pox had two rumou^s and an ulcer in
his nose, at the which every day there came footth great quantity of stinking
and filchie matter, in whose nose I cast this decoction with a siring. R. Honey
iiij. the juice of Calendine, Common salt prepared ij. Aloes washed ss. mix
them together. Inwardly he was purged with Oleum Mercurij.

54 In hard and knottie impostumes of the govvte, I used Amoniacum dissolved in
vinegar mixed with ehe oil of Turpentine, also oil of Cristall, only
disperceth and consumes those knottes, as I have oftentimes proved, or
Cristall calcined with the oil of Turpentine, also the oil of salt does the
same.

55 In curing of pains in the mouth of the stomach, entralles, and belly, I
used the water of the flowers of Camomel iii. honey of Roses i.

56 One Ioannes Babtista a fair young man was infected with the pox two years
through the filthy sin of Sodomites, so that there grew a piece of flesh in the
inward part of the neck of the great gut with such extreme pain that he was
almost dead, whom I cured by sweating many days, with a Malgamie made of
Mercury and Jupiter, and opening his fundament with an instrument called
Specillum Ossicularium, and laying on oil of Uitrioll, upon the said
superfluous flesh, and afterward I cured that flesh eaten away, with a
suppositorie Incarnatiue.

57 One called Gallenus had lost his speech by means of a hole that he had in
the palate of his mouth coming of the pox, the which I cured with Mercurius
Dulcis diaphoreticus cast in by a siring, and so the flesh grew again and was
made whole.

58 One was troubled with great burning of the urine the which I help in this
order R. dry Roses, Pug, semis, Linseede, the seed of Coucumbers, Gourdes,
Melons, Mallows, Purcelane, Populeon, ana two of the fruit of Alkekengi,
numero x. fair water l. i. fs. make thereof a decoction according to Art: then
strain it, and put thereto Troshiscorum Alkekengi ss. white sugar ij. Camphire
j. mix them and cast it into the yard with a siring or other instrument.

59 One being sick of a thisicke, which is an vlceration of the lunges, with a
consumtion of all the whole body, the which he took by the infection of his
own wife. I cured with the oil of Perrelles.

60 A certain woman had the course of her terms so long, that many times she
was ready to give up the ghost, whom I cured with the oil of Vitrioll, in
Plantane water, and j. of Carniola.

61 Pustules or Wheles in all parts of the body, and especially in the head
coming of the Pox, I cured only with the potion of Lignum Vitae or Gu^icum,
and his purgative Salt, without any other outward medicine.

62 A Fistula being between the testicules and fundament of a certain man
troubled with the pox, I healed by applying Oleum Arsenicale fixum.

63 A Hernia or Rupter which some call Ramex, in the with the bowelles fall
into the coddes, I cured by the extraction of white sanicle, digested in bread,
and afterward taken in drink, keeping up the gut or entralles with a trusse
made fit for the purpose, and laying upon the place offended, the Fesses
that remained of the extraction.

64 Intolerable pains in the legs, Ex morbo Venere^, I cured with the oil
of Lignum Vitae, mixed with old Theriacle.

65 A certain maiden through want of her monthly sickness was so vexed, that
sometime thrice a day she seemed to be haunted with an evil spirit, whom I
presently cured with the extraction of Rhabarbe, with the spirit of Tartar in
drink, with the water of Melissa arthemisiae and pulegi, in Oleo Uitrioli.

66 Pains in the teeth I cured by the juice of the nightshade and Persicariae
made warm in a Gargarisme burying the herbs afterward in a dunghill.

67 I prepared a powder of the ashes of Rosemarie, the which makes the yellow
teeth white, and heals tumors in the Gummes very quickly without blood.

68 In tumors of the vuule Gummes and jaws, I have used Oleum Uitriolli in
water of Persicariae.

69 In tumors of Scrophules, or hard impostumes of the breasts, I have used
the oil of Terpentine mixed with Misselto of the Oak in form of a unguent.

70 At Ingoistad a city of Germany, a certain man had the consumption of
the lungs, whom I cured with the extractiou of Consolida mayor in bread.

71 A certain woman the which after childbirth was not well purged of her
terms, presently fell beside her self, with other grievous pains in her
breast and reins of the back, whom I help only with the Essence of
An-timoni.

72 A maiden of ten years old after bathing her self fell into an Apoplexia,
which proceeded of the Flux of gross humors into the vessels and into the
parts of the head wherein consists the feeling and moving of the whole body
yet she snorted much in her sleep and trembled over all her body whom I
cured with Oleum cranij Humani, giving it with the spirit of Vitrioll in water
of Lauender.

73 A young sucking child had his palate and lips full of Pustules or wheles
called Aphtas, whom I cured by bathing them with a linen cloth wet in this
water. R. Consolidae maioris and minoris, ana one handful, white wine ^j ss.
boil them together and put thereto Sal Gemae, (...) ij. clarified honey l ij.
and make thereof a mixture.

74 A certain woman who wanted her natural courses, was thereby so tormented
that she abhorred all men, yea her very companions, whom I cured by opening
the inward vain of the arm, because I could not find the vain of the leg
called Saphena.

75 A man of three score years being full of Melancholy humors, had
crustie scabbes over all his body, the which I cured with the medicine, R. the
juice of Plantane, Semperuiui, and nyteshad ana Oleum Lithargirij, as much as
will suffice, make thereof an unguent wherewith thou shall anoint all the
parts of the body.

76 One was troubled with a distillation or Cataract of the eyes, whom I cured
in this order. R. Tuti^ prepared and put into a fine linen cloth, and dip or
wet it well in Vino cretico, wherewith wash the eyes oftentimes and they shall
be help.

77 A certain woman after childbirth was troubled with great pain and chops
in her breast, which I cured washing them often with wine mixed with Oleum
saturn^^ and afterward the child did suck.

78 A young maiden being troubled with a grreuous vomiting that she could
neither retain meat nor drink that she took, the entrals moreover swelled
exceedingly, whom I cured by applying a plaster of the leven of bread with
the juice of mint.

79 A certain woman that three months after she was conceived, feared
abortion or birth of her child before the time, whom I cured with the
Extraction of Rhabarbe with the spirit of Tartar, and afterward she drunk
oftentimes Essentia Melissae with Oleum Solis.

80 One Gotius, had a bone out of joint for three days, which afterward
swelled maruellously, the which swelling I help with Oleo Uerbasci and
Prunella, otherwise Primule with the juice of Camomilla, and Agrimonie, and
Oleum Petroleum, these being mixed together warm, I anointed the place being
grieved, and so the bone was restored to his place again: then afterward to
strengthen and comfort the joints, I used the said unguent mixed with M^sselto
of the Oak, and Consolida Mayor, until the cure was perfectly done.

81 A woman being almost dead of the Chollicke, I cured with the red oil of
Vitrioll, drunk in Aniscede water, and a while after that potion, she voided a
worm and was cured.

82 A certain man called Barthelmew, having carnal company with his wife,
could void no sperme at his yard but only wind, the which by often using of
Oleum Vitrioli with the spirit of Tartar in distilled wine, and afterward the
Extraction of Satirion he performed the act very well.

83 A child of ten years old was troubled with a stone in the bottom of his
yard, the which I cured by giving him Oleum Vitrioli to drink in Aqua
Aqualiae, and then I applied outwardly oleo cancrorum with the oil of
Turpentine, and so within one hours space the stone came forth and he was
help.

84 A woman of twenty years old being married could have no children, who by
the use of taking the extraction of Satirion she conceived, and within nine
months she had a strong child, but lest that after her childbirth she
should become barren again and dried away with a leanenesse, I gave her to
drink Oleum Margaritarum with Roman coleworts.

85 A certain woman being troubled with great abundance of her natural
sickness had great swelling and pains in her hands and feet, and fell many
times into a sound, whom I cured by taking often the Extraction of Rhabarbe.

86 To cause nurses to have abundance of milk, I have taken the fresh branches
or tops of fenell and boiled in water or wine, and given it to drink at
dinner, or supper, and at all times, for it greatly augmenteth the milk.

87 One had in the a^mepit a sanguine impostume, upon the which impostume I
a^plied a linen cloth wet in man's blood, being warm, and so in short time he
recovered his health, not without great admiration.

88 One called Ambrose, while he yawned, suddenly the lower law remained with
great grief and pain, whom I cured with the decoction of Camomel, Uerbascum
Perforata, and such like, as before in Number. 80.

89 One was troubled three years with a disinesse in the head, whom I cured
within a month by drinking Oleum Uitrioli, in Betoni water.

90 A man being vehemently troubled a years space with pains in the head, I
cured only by opening of the skull, and in the same manner I cured the
trembling of the brain, taking therewithal, Oleum saltis in water of Basell.

91 A certain maid for want of her monthly sickness, was svvollen all the
body over, and had red Pustules, which always at certain hours of the day
appeared seven times, and vanished away with great pain of the stomach, and
sounding, whom I ^ured giving her in drink Essentia Splenis, extracted out of
the Spleen of an ox in the water of Melisse and Artemisiae.

92 I help one of the plurifie by drawing away blood of the inward vain of
the arm on that side, giving him also in drink Spiritus Tartari, in A(...)
Melissae and anoin^ing the outward par(...) the mouse of the mountain.

93 A certain woman having a coroding ulcer in the left breast with great
pains, by means that she had not her natural sickness, she had also in the
right breast, neck, and arm^pit, certain kernels, and hard tumors, and
chiefly the left arm was astonished or taken, to whom I gave fundrie times a
purgation of the extraction of Rhabarbe, and the oil of Gold by the space of
a month, outwardly I washed the breast with the decoction of the roots of
Celandine in wine: also I laid thereon plegetes wet with Oleum Veneris, mixed
with honey and rooled it, and afterward I laid it on our common Opodeltoche,
and so she was perfectly cured.

94 One Rosina, was troubled with a quartane Agevv the space of twelve months,
with induration and swelling of the Spleen, whereof she fell into a kind of
dropsy which is called Ascitem, the which I purged first with Essentiae, and
Trochiscis Alhandali and Serapionis. The second day I commanded her that she
should lick in Diacubebe for the space of a month.

95 One had a hard swelling in the flesh of his leg caused of (Morbus
Hispanicus) whom I cured with Oleum Antimoni, (...). Mercury mortified
according to our order i. mixed into an vngent.

96 A noble woman was troubled with Empiema the which is a spitting forth of
filthy matter, whom I cured with Oleum Sulfuris drunk in water of
Ciclaminus M^lissa and Betonie.

97 in grievous pains of the joints I have used, Oleum Uitriolli in water of
turpentine, or water of vvormvvood.

98 A priest was troubled with the running govvte and with great pains in
his Kidneis, whom I cured only with oil of turpentine according to our order.

99 A certain Queen through the Retention of her menstrues, had her tongue so
inflamed and svvollen that she could not speak, and had a lamenesse
throughout the whole body, and also fell besides her self, whom I cured by
dravving blood from the urine called Saphena.

100 A child of twelve years old had suddenly a great swelling in his head the
which was soft, whom I cured in four days with this medicine, R. oil of
Camomil, Tapsi Barbati, Hipericon, and mix them, and therevvith anoint the
tumor.

101 A young man that was troubled with Spasmus Caninus, so that his mouth was
drawn awry, I cured by anointing the reins of the back with Balsamum
Helenij and Hederae, and by little and little drawing the place being avvrie to
his form with the gentle rubbing of my hand: Moreover, I gave him in his
drink Oleum salis.

102 One had an impostume behind his ear, the which I cured in purging him
with our Essentia Mercurialis, and applying our Apodeliae.

103 I cured the inflation and hardness of the spleen, with my plaster made
of gummes, and oleum Philosophorum, with the juice of Ciclaminus.

104 A certain woman being awake was vexed with Litargia, so that her eyes
were alvvay shut, and if any had called her, she could scarce open her eyes,
and no man could understand what she said, not yet answer any man, the
which woman was brought to her perfect health only by the use of oleum
vitrioli.

105 A noble man in Carinthia was sick of the plague whom I cured by giving
him every morning electuariu(...) i^niperorum, wherevvith I mixed one sc^uple
of oil of vitrioll.

106 A Prince in Germany that was troubled with the frenzy, by reason of a
sharp fever, whom I cured with giving him five grains of Laudanum nostrum
which expelled the fever, and caused him to sleep six hours afterward.

107 A Gentlevvoman of name was troubled with the suffocation of the matrix,
whom I cured with specifico nostro corticis ficus, being laid upon hot
coals, and taking the sum thereof at the lovver parts, and presently she was
help.

108 A Lawyer of Augusta was long sick of the collicke, and was forsaker of
other Physicians, whom I cured by giving him Laudanum nostrum.

109 A Barber of Argentine was greatly troubled with the headache, to whom I
gave the oil of sweet margerome to smell, and put a drop thereof into both
ears, and as soon as it was done he was help.

110 A certain woman at Colmaria, was troubled with the falling sickness, in
whose nose I put the oil of Gargates, and within a little while after she
recovered again; then I purged her with Elle^oro nostro, and the next day I
gave her certain drops of the oil of Cranei humanae, who afterward was
troubled no more.

111 A certain Baron was sore infected with Morbus Hispanicus and miserably
anointed with Vigoes unguent, and left off the school doctors, whom I first
purged with our Specificum Torpetum, and then I gave him oleum solis and
Margaritarum, in aqua guaici rectificate, and so he was perfectly cured.

112 Many that were troubled with the quartane fever I have cured with our
Turpeto, and also those that had the pestilence and plurisie.

113 A certain man of fifty years old was vexed with a cramp that his head
and neck was drawn down to his breast, and could not lift nor stir it,
unto whom I applied Arcanum magnetis and oleum salis, and so he was cured.

114 One was troubled with a palsy, whom I cured only with the essence of
Cheri drawn with the spirit of wine.

The end of the Experiments of Philip Theophrastus Paraselsus a most excellent
Doctor of the one and the other Physic: enjoin thereto the praise of Jesus
Christ, and farewell.
B. G. L P. Penotus Londrada a portu santae Mariae Aquitanus, greeting.
I Thought good (gentle Reader) to publish and make thee partaker of these
four particular things, which, if at the first fight they shall not seem to
agree with thy work and practice, thou must remember to impute that unto thine
error and ignorance; for, a light error does mar a whole work, which thou
must amend by reading of Philosophers books. For which cause the sayings of
Philosophers are much and long to be searched, examined, and thought upon
before thou can get out the hidden meanings of them. If then in reading
Philosophers Books thou play the sluggard, thou can never be perfect in
preparing thy matters, and therefore I might not by the authority of the laws
of Philosophy, interpret all things openly, word for word to thee. Something
are to be left for industrious wits, wherein to exercise themselves by
studying and searching. Notwithstanding if thou be not unthankful, all these
things shall be opened and declared unto thee in my Galliae portu; where very
many workings hitherto known of few, shall faithfully be set forth. In the
mean season know thou, that I am not the deviser of these particular things;
for some of them I had of gift, and some other for money and rewards came to my
hands. To thee I give them freely, which use well. Farewell.

A Treatise of certain particulars, whereof the first entreats of the
preparation of the Markasite of lead, as well for the transmutation of metals,
as for the alteration of man's body, etc.
THe philosophers Saturn, is properly the markasite of lead, and in deed
does excel Sol and Luna, in so much that Raymond says, that in this inferior
world, there is no greater secret, then that which consists in the Markasite
of Lead, insomuch that they which have thoroughly sought out the force and
nature of it, have bound themselves together by oath never to utter those
secrets of nature unto the end of their lives. For so much as his operation is
of such kind, as truly it has many and sundry uses, which being duly
prepared, does not only alter and change the filthy and corrupt humors of our
bodies, but also can change and transmute by sundry experiments, Luna into Sol.

Take of the Mineral markasite of lead xii. pound and grind it into sine
powder upon a Marbell stone, as they grind colors with vinegar: being well
ground and tempered, put it into a strong glass, and put thereon a good
quantity of distilled vinegar, and stir it well with a stick. and so let it
stand in Balneo Mariae: then set thereon a blind head, and there let it stand
eight days together, stirring and moving it every day six or seven times:
then let it cool: and the vinegar will be of a yellow color, the which ye shall
power forth into another glass, taking heed that ye stir not the pheces:
then put thereon more vinegar, and stir it well with a stick, and s^t on the
blind head and set it in Balneo Mariae other viii. days, as ye did before, then
power forth that vinegar being colored into the other glass. And this order
ye shall use so long until you see the vinegar no more colored, for at the last
the pheces will remain in a white mass, like white earth.

Distillation of the colored Uenigar.
THen take all that vinigar being colored, and distill it in Balneo until it
will drop no more, and there let thy cucurbit stand three days with the pheces
that it may dry well, then take it fourth, and thou shall find in the bottom
of the glass a white matter, the which take out, for in that whiteness, the
rednes of the Markasite is hidden, which being prepared, avails much to make
aquam philosophorum that they call ardentem.

The preparation of the Pheces.
Take the white pheces or matter, and put it into a distilling vessel with a
great recipient very well luted, that the spirits go not forth, and set it
in the hot ashes, and give it a gentle fire, and then increase it according to
art a day or two, and there will come forth first a white water, and then a
red or golden yellow oil, the which is to be kept close with great care.

The pheces to be taken again.
Then take those pheses and set them in a calcining furnace eight days, then
take them forth and grind them finely, and put them in a glass with a good
quantity of distilled vinegar, and stir them well together; that being
done, set it again in Balneo for eight days together, and stir it every
day seven or eight times, the more the better, then let it wax cold and
settle, and power away the clear part from the pheces, but take heed that ye
stir not the dregs or bottom. Then power on fresh vinegar, and set it in
Balneo again, and do as ye did before, and then power away the vinegar again,
and cast away the pheses, for they are nothing worth.

The distillation of the vinegar.
Then take the vinegar which you reserved, and distill it with a gentle fire,
and in the bottom thou shall find a salt, in the which remains all the
force and strength. Then calcine the said salt again in a reuerberatorie loure
and twenty hours with a great fire, then take it forth and put it in the
glass wherein it was before, and put thereon fresh viueger and set it in
Balneo. And this thou shall do so often until the salt leave no pheces in the
bottom: that being done, distill thy vinegar as at the first, and thou shall
find thy self prepared liquid and clear as Cristall.

Coniunctio spiritus corporis, scilicet olei and salis.
Take the aforesaid salt, and grind it upon a stone dropping thereon his red
oil by little and little: that being do one, put it into a cucurbit luted with
Hermes seal, and so set it upon a treuet in an Athanor twenty days, and it
will be fixed into a red stone, so that ye have the true government of the
fire. Then take it forth and grind it upon a stone, and according to the
weight put thereunto as many Letones of the Calex offine gold, and upon all
these put on as much of the white water which ye distilled before the red oil as
all the whole does weigh, and close it up with Hermes seal, and set it in
ashes in an Athanor with a soft fire until it be fixed, but after it be fixed
there will appear many colors, the which will turn into perfect oil and true
Elixer. Rejoice in this, but before ye begin the work, consider of it and
pray.

The second particular that is called Torpetum sieve diaphoreticum minerale,
purgiug without loathsomeness or difficulty, helping the plurisie, the plague,
and especially the French pox.
Take Leonis a dracone repurgatissimi one part, aquilae mineralis
repurgatissimae twelve parts, mix them together according to Art, then put
them into a cucurbit of glass, and put thereon twice so much of the liquor of
red Colc^thor without fleme, as the matter weyeth, and then nourish it in warm
sand with a gentle fire three days taking heed that the matter ascend not
into the head. That being done, distill it that the pheces may remain dry,
then increase thy fire that the sand and glass may be red hot the space of
three hours: then let it wax cold, and take out the matter and beat i^ finely,
and wash it with fair distilled water, until it have lost his sharpness,
and that thou shall do diverse times till it be well purged: then dry it and
put it into a glass, and put thereunto the spirit of wine that it may be
covered three fingers hie, and set it on fire, and thus thou shall do three
times, and th(...) (...)t thou without any doubt a greater secret to heal his
proper disease, so that within six da^es he shall be quite whole. The dose is
about five grains in conserve of roses drunk with wine or Sacc^ro Ros^to as
well in the morning as at night when he goes to bed, and let the patient
sweat thereon two hours at each time. It is a most sovereign medicine
against all contractions, and you use it (as before) according to the nature of
the disease. But the patient must use it six days. If there appear any
pustules ye shall cure them by touching them with oil of Sulphur. Moreover
those that have the dropsy or such like moist diseases in the body are cured
by giving them six grains in water of Cardus Benedictus, letting them sweat
thereon as is aforesaid and keeping the order before set down. Against the
Plu^isie, ye shall give four grains in the said water. And against the
plague in rose vinegar. Against the falling sickness with water of black
che^ies or Pionie. Furthermore, if any have had the same disease by nature,
ye shall give them every day a little pill in Aqua Pionia, putting thereon six
drops of the spirit of Vitrioll. If I would show or express all the virtues,
I should write a book there of, but that which remains I will show more at
large in my book called Portus G^sconicus with the order to draw the spirit of
wine.

The third particular called Laudanum. Anodinum, the which is most excellent of
all other secrets in as(...)ging griefs and pains in diverse disease^.
TAke Liquor is aquae inexpert^ and inspissati ij and put thereto the spirit of
wine, and set it in Balneo to digest, until it have drawn away the Tincture:
then power it forth into a clea^e vessel, and put on more, and so set it to
digest again so long as it will give any Tincture or color. Then take the
gum of Henbane dried in the ^unn^ j. and draw away his Tincture with the
spirit of wine, as thou did out of the liquor aforesaid, then take Di^mber
ij. and likewise draw away his Tincture with the spirit of wine, and keep it
very close until such time as I shall show thee: then take momia ss. and
draw away his Tincture with the spirit of wine, and when thou have done mix
it with the other, then take Crocus Orientalis iij. and draw forth his
tincture and mix it with the rest, and every day sti^re it, and keep it in a
warm place close stopped fifteen days; that being done, distill it in Balneo,
and there will remain a little matter in the bottom, then put thereto a
little of the Tincture of Di^mbrae, the which ye reserved before, and so let it
stand in digestion until it be thick, stirring it 3. or 4. times a day until
the smell of the licour be in a manner consumed, the which will be in six
weeks. Then take these that follow, the licour of Currall, clear Ambre o^
Succinum of each j. Unicornes horn 6. grains, Magisterium Perlarum one
scr^ple* Ossis de Cord C^rui half a scrupple, Aurum Potabile, or his Tincture
ss. All these being finely beaten and mixed in a stone or glass mortar, with
the spirit of Diamber, put in with the residue being thick, and so stirring it
sundry days afterward distill all the spirit of wine away, then put thereon
the residue of the spirit of Diambrae, and when it is almost dry, put thereto
Olei succini, olei masi and Cinamoni of each about one scruple. Then take one
part and reserve it for women without musk, for it hurts them. But to the
other part for men, put in half a scruple of the extraction of musk made
with the spirit of wine, and set it in a warm place that it may dry, and so
keep it to thy use. Ye may give it in form of pills or dissolve it in some
convenient licour, inconvenient Dose, as iij. grains or fix grains, for
those that are of strong nature. It comfort much against the chollicke, the
frenzy hot Fevers, Arthritide P^dagra, the weakness of the stomach, the
yex, and comfort against vomiting, provoke sleep. Against the falling
ficknes ye shall give iij. grains with the spirit of Vitrioll and Essentia
Camphora that is drawn with oil of sweet Almondes, the which is made in this
order.

The order to draw the Essence of Campher.
Take Campher (...) oil of sweet Almondes ss. macerate them in the sun or
in Balneo, or in a dry warm furnace four and twenty hours, then draw
forth his Tincture or essence with the spirit of wine, and put thereto j of
Laudanum, and ii of the spirit of vitrioll, and six of the water of pionie
flowers, and stir them together, and give thereof one spoonful at the time of
the fit. It is a most excellent remedy against all incurable diseases.

The fourth specificum called Panchimagogon, the which does purge in small dose
all noisome spirits that are mingled with the humors.
Take Specierum Di^rhodon abbatis ii. and draw forth the tincture with the
spirit of wine, and keep it by it self. Afterward take the Pulpe of
Colocinthides vii. Turbit v. Agariei i ss. Heleborinigri vii. Dyagredi vi.
Foliorum seen iiii. Rhabarbari ii. El^teri ss. beat them and mix them
together, and put thereon Sinamon water, the which is made in this order. The
Sinamond ^i. and stamp it grossly, then infuse it in white wine four and
twenty hours close stopped, then distill it with a gentle fire being close
luted, for with this sinamond water or spirit of wine, thou may draw forth
the tincture of all the aforesaid drugges. Always provided, that ye keep
them a month in a warm place to macerate, stirring them three or four times
in a day, and at the end of the month power forth the licour, and put the
pheses into a Retort, and distill forth the oil and water, the oil ye shall
rectify, and reserve. The pheses that remain ye shall calcine, and make
thereof a salt, the which ye shall put to the oil that ye rectified. Then take
that licour which ye reserved first, and distill it in Balneo, and in the
bottom there will remain a matter thick like honey. Then take the tincture
of Di^trodiou Abbatis, and power it upon that thick matter, and stop well thy
glass, and set it in a warm place eight days, stirring it every day. That
being done, draw it away the spirit in Balne^, until it remain thick like
honey, unto the which ye shall put his oil that ye distilled, mix them and let
them digest-vntil it be so thick that ye may make thereof pills, the which ye
may do so soon as it feels the cold: for in the cold it will wax hard, and
in heat it will wax liquid: the dose is from one scruple to two scruples
where there shall be need of purging in the powder of Licores, for so it works
without pain.

Four principal diseases whereunto almost all other diseases may be referred.
THe Leprosy is the first, whose badges all manner of ulcers do bear, as
itch, seabs, Alopecia, scurffes, scabs, choppes in the skin, foulness, the
dead evil, and such like diseases.

To the gowt does belong the chollicke, pain in the reins, Orexes pain in
the teeth, running gowtes, painful flixes* pain of the head Cephalea and
Himecrania.

To the dropsy are referred all manner of fevers, appostumes, the iaunders,
and evil digestion.

To the falling sickness belongs Cathares, beating of the heart, cramps,
giddines of the head, Apoplexis and suffocation of the matrix.

If any of the principal of those diseases be healed, all the other inferior be
also cured.

For the cure of the gowt three things are required, that is, resolving,
mitigating and strengthening.

Wherefore, if thou be of any quick judgment, the four particulars before set
down are sufficient for thee.

The chiefest point of health consists in this, not to fill thy self with
meat, nor to be slow in labor.

Barnardus G. Penotus Landrad^ a Portu S. Mariae Aquitanu^ unto the singular
learned man John Aquill^ the hammer of the Ethnickes, wishes much health.
NOt only in these our days (friend John) but also in the old time amongst
the learned, this proverb has taken place, that ignorance is the mother of
maruelling. Who in these days would not marvel to see men utterly void of al
manner of learning to be preferred before learned men and such as are most
skillful in the Latin and Greek tongues, and those are to be embraced of kings
and princes, and revvarded with most liberal gifts, and most famous and
learned men expert in all the tongues to be rejected and contemned? You which
excel in judgment and learning will answer that every perfect gift comes
down from the Father of light. Therefore God does in these latter days
stir up these Idiots and Empericks, to stir up every physician that he
should rightly prepare his own medicines with his own hands, and being so
prepared, with sharp judgment apply them to their proper diseases, that the
seed of the disease may be pulled up by the roots, and not to commit it to an
unskillful cook. And therefore of necessity from hence must both the theorike
and the practice, the reason and the work concur and join together, because
judgment without practice is barren. The greatest number of them will answer,
we know not your works and preparations which require so great and hard
labor, we are now old and doctors, we will not be made yonglings and
scholars again. If this answer might take place, the Jew, the Pope and the
Tu(...) would not change their superstitions. which notwith^^anding we know to
be most contrary to the sacred scripture. But we sufficiently and daily prove
by calcining, subliming, dissoluing, putrefying, distilling, congealing and
fixing by this most laudable art of Al^himie, how the pure may be separated
from the vnpure, and the corruptible from the incorruptible, and that which is
venomous and deadly be changed and made wholesome and good, and as Paracelsus
says concerning this art, we shall first consider that al things are created
of god, for he created of nothing something, and that something is the seed of
all things, and that seed works that effect hereunto ordained and appointed.
Al things notvvithstanding are so created that they shall come unto our hands,
and begin to be in our power, but so, as things not perfect, but to be made
perfect: as things not finished, but to be finished. The matter in them truly
is perfect, but the middle and last matters remain to be made perfect. As for
example, God created iron, earth, and clay, but not such as they should be,
for the clay grows, yet not like a pot or other earthen vessel: so he
created iron lying in a rude mass, and has given it so rude unto us:
therefore we with our labor must make thereof shoes for horses, sithes, and
spears. Even so is it in Physic, for that is also created of God, but not so
that it should be utterly perfect, but as yet hidden under the earth, not
purged from his unclean matter, but that which remains to be made perfect in
it, is committed to the Chimist, that is, to the physician to be purged and
cleansed. For herbs, trees, stones, and iron, and whatsoever is seen with the
eyes, is not true medicine, but is rude and impure, wherein as yet the pure
part lies hid. And therefore Alchimie teaches to purge the medicine to
dissolve it, and to separate things of contrary kind from things of the same
kind, otherwise rotten things would be mingled with rotten, and the corrupt
with the corrupt, and so conspire to one effect, so that of one disease many
other should spring or arise. Briefly, every man loves not that whereof he has
no understanding or knowledge, but flies from it, contemns it, and thinks
it not meet to be learned. The body only cares for that which is outward,
but the mind worshippeth his God. By how much more the knowledge or
understanding of any thing does increase or grow, so much the more is the love
of the fame augmented. For all things consist in the true knowledge of them,
and out of that springs all the good fruits that redound to knowledge.
Knowledge also brings faith, for he that knows God, begins straitway to
put his trust in him. For such as every man's faith is, such is also his
knowledge.

And contrariwise he that does otherwise work about nature, works like a
Painter that painteth an image, in the which is neither life nor strength:
wherefore those which you call Emperickes shall rise even before your faces,
and take in hand and help grievous diseases, the cures whereof are impossible
unto you: and you together with your consolations and reasonings shall be made
laughing stocks. As lately B. in Germany it happened of a certain noble and
famous woman which was vexed with the pain of the matrix. Some physicians
said it was the gravel and the stone; but an Empericke passing by affirmed
that it was neither the grauel nor the stone, wherefore he commanded a remedy
to be prepared for the matrix, the which being done, she was straitwayes
healed. Oh what a rumor was raised by and by of him! stirring up others also
to rumors and tales, saying, that her husband does contemn us that will
rather use the advice and counsel of an Empericke, then ours. Yea and others
that seemed wiser did finally regard him that would every hour use the help of
an Empericke man most unlearned. Mark I pray you (my friend Aquilla) how the
enemies inflamed with envy go about to oppress the truth: but at the last,
will they, nill they, they shall be enforced to confess that that cannot be
denied. But you may object unto me; He that speaks all, excludes nothing.
For there be many worthy learned men masters and professors of Physic, that
do not deny or refuse this art. In the which number are those most excellent
and singular masters and doctors Petrus Seuerynus Danus which has written
marvelous things of this Chimicall Art, that worthy and godly man Michael
Neander professor of humanity, Theodorus Zuingerus of Basil a man practiced
in this Art, and also Theodorus Brickmannus a physician of Cullein, which both
by word and deed daily excels with most deep judgment in these matters,
whom I wilneuer ouerpasse with silence.

Hereafter follows three particular treatises, the first of the sulpher of
gold and other metals, then of stones, and the extraction of Coral.
R. Purged and fine gold made in plates j. the powder of pomise stone iiij. lay
them Stratum Superstratum, and reuerberate it with dry wood five days and
nights together, then take the powder and keep it in a glass. Then melt the
gold again, and make it in plates and lay it Stratum Superstratum as ye did
before, and that ye must do until the gold have lost his yellow color, after
take al thy powders together, and put it in a glass with distilled vinegar,
and there let it remain until the vinegar be colored yellow, then power it
forth and put in more, and that thou shall do so often, until the vinegar be
no more colored, then vapor away the vinegar, and thou shall find an
inpalpable powder in the bottom. If thou be wise, look where thou made
an end, there begin; the like is of other mettalles. But they are not to be
reuerberated so long; you shall have of silver a bluish color, ofyron a
reddish color, of copper a darkish color. There is drawn out of Coral a red
tincture. All which things are to be corrected with the spirit of wine being
often powered thereon, there cannot be a shorter or profitabler way found out
for this. Iron plates for one time are of force, but after the first
Cimentacion they serve no more. His tincture being rightly prepared is used in
stead of gold. If it be drawn out of the best steel, it will fix the
mercury of Saturn.

The second particular is of the marvelous preparation of the markasite of
Lead, tincting water or other licour into his red color.
R. Salt common prepared vitrioll Roman of each i vi. set them in a fire of
calcination ten hours, then take it forth and beat it to powder, then put it
into a stone pot vnglased, and give it fire 15 hours according to Art, then
will distill forth both the oil and the spirit together, the which ye shall
rectify in a pelican, then being rectified put thereunto the markasite of lead
in powder, being in a strong cucurbit well luted, and then set it in ashes in
a furnace, under the which ye shall set a burning lamp for the space of a
month, and then the Markasite will dissolve into a red matter: afterward take
common foun^aine water and power thereon, then set it to dissolve in a moist
place or cellar, and the flower of the Markasite will turn like to a red
crystal: the which take to thy work. It purges the leprouse blood in
plurisies, the plague, Contractures, the lungs and liver the quantity of one
piece in greatness, does serve to dissolve the same.

The third particular, and the sum of the whole work.
R. Album. Albius, Albo as much as ye will, Aqua Soluens vi. times as much, and
set them in Balneo three days, then take it forth, filter it, and dry it:
then again dissolve it, and that do three times: being dry, dissolve it by it
self, of the which solution, take three parts olei permanentis and
incombustibile one part, Aeris four parts, shut thy vessel, and in that heat
nourish it, and in few days thou shall have a universal medicine to expel
all diseases. Rejoice, and give praise unto Jesus Christ.

A Fragment out of the Theorickes of (...). Iscaacus Hollandus.
Amongst all things that were created of God, water was the first, whereunto
God joined his proper earth, and of earth, whatsoever has essence or life has
his original. Therefore there are two manifest elements, that is, water and
earth; in which the two other lie hid, the fire in the earth, and the air in
the water: and they are so knit together, that they cannot be separated. Two of
them are fixed, as the earth and fire. two are flying, as water and air.
Therefore every element does participate within other elements. Moreover, in
every element are two other elements, one decaying, putrefying and combustible,
the other eternal and incorruptible as the heaven: besides iu these natures
lies hid an other nature which is called by the name of stinking Pheces, which
hinder and take away the strength of the rest, so as they have very little force
or none, and thereby make the other elements stinking and subject to
putrefaction. There is also two kinds of waters, the one elementall, the other
of rain and river waters; as there is also two kinds of earths, one
elementall, clear, shining, and white, the other black, stinking, and
combustible. Like as also there be two fires, one elementall and natural, the
other stinking and combustible: the like is also to be said of the air. The
base things are so mingled with the rest, that by and by they corrupt al
things, so that nothing can continue long, for they bring death and weaken all
nature be it never so noble. This is to be understood of all things both
vegetall, animal, and mineral. Therefore it is necessary by Art to separate
the elementall nature from the corruptible, that the matter may be brought to a
medicinal quality. There be three most subtle spirits in all things, that
is, color, taste, and smell, these fly away inuisibly, the Philosophers call
them wild spirits, because they are not fixible, yet the industry of the
artificer may fix them. They always grow in the bodily substance until they
come to perfection and end. The herb therefore is to be taken when it is fully
grown, and take heed that you loose none of those three spirits, as the
ignorant use to do, with their putrifactions and separations of elements. For
none of those spirits consists of the three elementall elements: but God
has adorned elements with those three spirits, and of them the fire is
animal, the water air elementall, and no man but God can separate them
asunder. But the water of the clouds may be separated from them. Also all the
pheces may be separated from them which are mingled with them, which are the
stinking and corruptible elements, and the four elementall elements may be
brought to a christalline shining: but these three elements, fire, air, and
earth are inseparable. My son, know this, that Mercury is the first of all
things, for before time there was water, and the spirit of the Lord rested upon
the water, but what was that water, the water of the clouds, or a moisture
which might be powered out? No: but it was a dry dusty water, and God had
joined his earth unto it which is his sulphur, and so the earth congealeth the
water, and thereof sprung the four elements included in these two by the will
of God. Therefore Mercury congealeth sulphur, and sulphur Mercury; neither
can one of these be without the other, as also they cannot be without their
salt, which is the chiefest mean by whose help nature ingendreth and brings
forth all vegetals, minerals, and animals. Wherefore these three, mercury,
salt, and sulphur can not be one without another, for where the one is found,
there the other are found also, neither is there any thing in nature wherein
these three are not found* and of these three whatsoever is in nature has his
original, and are so mingled with the four elements, that they make one body,
and the salt is drowned in the bottom of the elements, for it is necessary
that the salt should keep them united by his sharpness and d^inesse,
notwithstanding it is a flying spirit, but because it sticks in the botome of
the mixture, and is overcome of the fatnes and combustible oil, in which it is
found, as the yolke within the white of the egg, and the combustible oil
lives of the earth with the ^alt and pheces, and the salt is buried in the
bottom of the pheces of the combustible oil and earth, therefore it cannot
fly away from the earth, but by great force of fire. These three spirits
whereof we have spoken, are said first to be separated from the mixture of the
elements which is the soul of all things, or their quintaessence, which holds
together the whole mixture of the elements, for when the spirits are gone cut,
then the mixture is dissolved by it self and divided, neither is there need
of fire to expel the salt from the earth, when the elements are separated from
the pheces, then is the salt also separated with it. This salt is unknown to
the ignorant. Therefore salt is the mean between the gross earthly parts,
and the three flying spirits resting in the natural heat, that is, the taste,
moist smell, and color: which three are the life, soul, and quintaessence of
every thing, neither can these three spirits be one without the other, as the
Father, the Son, and the Holie-ghost are one, yet three persons, and one is
not without the other. The ignorant laugh, neither understand they these three
spirits, when as they are tied to the gross earthly fixed parts, and are made
subtle, and their salt is joined and mingled with them, it must transform
them all together, and fix them into a cristalline body Diaphanes and red of
color, whereof we will speak hereafter; he that knows not this salt, shall
never bring any to pass in Art. The philosophers call this salt a dry water
and a lively salt, but the ignorant thought they meant mercury, but the
Philosophers called the three spirits Mercury, and the earth Sulphur, which
the ignorant understand not. Either of them can not be without the other,
neither is there any thing in nature, in which these three are not, and they
are so mixed with the four elements that they make one body and mixture.
Whatsoever God has created is in these three stones, wherefore all may be
reduced into a cristalline cleernesse by Art, given by God unto the
Philosophers, for in the latter days God will separate all the unclean pheces
and corruption that is in the elements, and bring them to a cristalline
cleerenesse and redness of a carbuncle. Afterward there shall be no more
corruption, but they shall endure for ever. Do you think that all things
which God has created in these lower parts, should utterly perish in the
latter day? No, not the least hair of those things which God has created no
more then the incorruptible heaven, but God by his will will change all things,
and make them christalline, and the four elements shall be perfect, simple,
and fixed in themselves, and they shall be all a quintaessence. Demonstration
of these things may be made here on earth by Art, for whatsoever God has
created may be brought to a cristalline cleerenesse, and the elements gathered
together into a simple fixed substance, which being done, no man can alter
them, neither the fire it self burn or change them, but they shall continue
perpetually as those things which have attained eternity.

The order to draw forth the Quint^essence of Sugar, collected out of the
vegitable and animal works of Isacke Holander.
Here will I show thee a great secret, how thou shall draw forth the
quintaessence of Sugar, the which truly excels all vegitable works, by
mean of his temperature like unto the incorruptible heaven, the which is
neither hot, cold, nor dry, but most temperate, nevertheless compounded of the
four elements, but they strive not one with another, for if they are so joined
together, that they can never be separated one from an other, but for ever
remain simple and fixed in unity. But this heaven does distribute and give
unto the earth whatsoever is necessary for it, although that it self be
neither hot nor cold, moist nor dry, the which like effects has the
quintaessence of sugar, the which in it self has the four elements, as gold
has: as gold is pure, so sugar is impure, gold outwardly is hot and moist,
inwardly cold, and dry, and white: sugar is the contrary, for it is
outwardly cold and dry; and inwardly hot and moist and red, and fixed both
outward and inward. Neither is there any thing wanting, but that the inward
quality may be brought, that his redness may appear outwardly, and that his
pheses be separated, then is it prepared, and shall not need to be fixed, for
it is fixed already, and does retain with it self al outward and inward
spirits, and whatsoever is volatill, it does retain. Now what his kind is I
will tell thee, and from whence he has his original, that is, even out of the
red, but if thou will be further satisfied, read the three and thirty chapter
of the generation of those things that grow in the seas, and other waters,
where we write largely of the nature thereof. Here it shall be sufficient for
us to show the order how to prepare it, and in what order it should be used
in medicine, and also to other things where it may be applied. His nature is to
retain or hold all flying spirits, and to fix them into a stone, as shall be
showed hereafter. First ye shall understand that ye cannot separate the pheces,
except ye bring the inward parts outward, that is to say, that his inward dark
golden color do appear, the which when it is so di(...)d, his redness is
seen, and this fire passing the yellowness of his air, or his in^o^bustible
oil, then may thou first separate the pheces from the Quintaessence. Take
therefore hard and white Sugar, for it is not needful that ye travel much
in dissoluing and congealing of it, although there be much impuritie therein,
that hinders not, but that the inward part may be brought forth, for it
must be purged when as the rednes does show it self outward. Take therefore
ten or twenty pounds of sugar more or less, as ye shall think good, that
being beaten, put it into a cucurbit^ of hard stone, and put thereon Aqu^
vitae, that it may stand covered viii. fingers, then distill it in Balueo with a
strong fire until it will distill no more, then let it wax cold, and power on
the said Aqua vitae again and distill it again, and this shall thou do six
or seven times: at the last open the head and take forth the sugar, which thou
shall put in a strong glass, and set it in fine ^ifted ashes, and put thereon
the Aqua vitae, and distill it until the half be come forth, then power on
again the Aqua vitae which thou distilledst away, first being made warm lest
the glass should break: ye shall note that the head would have a hole in the
top, by the which ye may power in the Aqua vitae with a funnel; this thou shall
repeat often with a strong fire, that the wine and the sugar may boil in, and
because the half part of the wine will come away quickly, ye shall presently
put on the other part, for if ye should distill forth all the wine, the sugar
would burn through too much heat, because it must continually be boiling in
the glass, and it would smell of the burning, for it has always his
combustible sulfure, wherefore ye must always have half the wine in the
vessel, and when thou see the half is distilled forth, make the same warm
and put it in again with a funnell, and that thou shall so often repeat,
until the sugar remain as red as blood, the which thou shall perceive through
the glass. Thou may bring that to pass in viii or ten days according as
thou rulest thy fire. Note, that when thou perceiuest the matter to be red let
it cool, and take away the vessel with ashes, and set the vessel in Balneo,
and with a strong fire distill away the Aqua vite until the Sugar remain dry,
and when it will distill no more, yet shall thou let it stand 4. or 5. days
very hot in the said Balneo that the sugar may be perfitly congealed, then let
it cool and take out the matter or stone, the which will be black like pich,
that is to be understood when it is congealed, then take the said stone and
put it into a great quantity of common water twice distilled and set it in
Balneo five or six days, with a great heat slightly covered, stirring it
every day five (...) six times with a wooden ladle, then let it cool* and
^ake it forth and let it settle three or four days, then power of that which
is clear into another vessel, and keep it close, then power on those pheces
the sublimed water as a fore, and set it in Balneo to digest three days,
stirring it with a ladle as ye did before, then let it cool and settle, and
power of the clearest part, as ye did before and put it to the roast, then power
on more water upon the Pheces and digest it in Balneo as before, and this ye
must so often repeat until the water be no more colored, then thou may
cast away the pheces for they are nothing worth, for the Element of the earth
is with the Element of fire and water, neither can they be separated any more
but are fixed together. Make thereof a trial, for there will remain nothing
but a light ashes. It will burn like oil or fat, neither does there any thing
remain more then of oil or fat. Take the glass wherein is all the red of the
solution and distill it in Balneo, or let it vapor away if ye have store of
distilled water until it be dry, then let it cool and take off the head, and
power thereon more sublimed water, and set it in Balneo again, and stir it
about with a wooden ladell as ye did before, then let it settle as before and
power out of the clearest part, and that thou shall do so long until there
remain no more pheces, at the length put it in a glass that may abide the
fire and boil or vapor it away so long until there appear a certain scum
thereon, then take it forth and set it in a cold and dry, or hot and dry
place, and it will grow into a great red mass or lump and transpirant like a
ruby or other philosophers stone, the which if thou wile bring to powder, set
it in a warm dunghill in a large wide glass open and let it vapor away,
until it be come into a yellow powder like unto gold, and so thou shall have
the Quintaessence of Sugar fixed, the which will retain al flying spirits.
Neither is it sweet but a heavenly taste, the which if ye put it in your
mouth it will melt without any feeling. If it be winter or cold thou shall
seem to feel a certain natural heat throughout the whole body and shall
seem so temperate and light as though thou could fly. If thou be ouerhot,
swallow a little, and presently thou shall cole easily as though thou wentest
into a cold bath, and thus it works in heat, moist, cold, and dry, by an
incredible miracle, when ye will use it, drink it with rectified aqua vitae,
or rose water, Endive or Scabiowes, or by it self if ye will* and thou shall
see maruels: if any be diseased outwardly with scabbes or ulcers, let him
drink of this, and wash the ^ores with wine wherein this Quintaesse^^^ is
dissolved, and he shall presently wax whole, most miraculously. If any be
wounded or thrust in with any weapon so that it be not deadly, let him drink j
of this Essence with warmed wine, and wash the wound with wine wherein the
Quintaessence is dissolved he shall be presently cured, so that those which
shall hear or see it shall be amassed thereat. It helps also the falling
sickness, pestilence, and all such diseases as may happen, unto man: if ye
have Aurum Potabile ye shall mix lij, with lj^ of this Quintaessence in a
glass, and set it on a treuet or in a dry Balneo 30. days in an Athanor and
they will be s(...) together, and then it will work miracles in man's bod(...)
ye may also when ye have drawn the Quintaessence of any herb, Coagulate and
fix it with the same as I said before with Aurum Potabile, and thou shall see
thereof (...)les. Furthermore if ye will have it to pass the helm ye must put
thereon as much vinegar or aqua vitae and distill it, and again power on fresh
vinegar or aqua vitae and draw it away again vnti^l the Quintaessence does
ascend in a red golden color, as we have showed in many places how to distill
those matters that are fixed by vinegar or aqua vit^, for when it is distilled
by the Limbecke, his virtues are angmented a thousand times, and will work
strange cures: keep this as a secret, for it is a great mystery in nature.

Here begins a manuel or handy work, how the Quintaessence may be drawn
out of honey.
NOw will I open unto you a great secret in the vegetall work of honey, to wit,
a marvelous nature, for it is drawn out of the most noble and pure part of
the flowers. The nature of Bees is such, that they draw out the best of every
thing, as in the Animal work is more at large described, wherein there is
taught how to extract the nature of al beasts, and specially in the 84.
Chapter. Wherefore (my son) know this, that all that God has created good in
the upper part of the world, are perfect and incorruptible, as the heaven: but
whatsoever in these lower parts, whether it be in beasts, fishes, and all
manner of sensible creatures, herbs, or plants, it is endued with a double
nature, that is to say, perfect, and imperfect: the perfect nature is called
the Quintaessence, the imperfect the Pheces or dregs, or the vene(...)ous or
combustible oil. Therefore you shall separate the dregs and combustible
oil, and then that which remains is perfect, and is called the
Quintaessence, which will endure continually even as the heaven, neither can it
be dissolved with fire or any other thing. For when God had created all
things, and looked upon them, they were all perfect good, there was nothing
lacking to any, and therefore for loves sake, I say unto thee, that God has
put a secret nature or influence in every creature, and that to every nature of
one sort or kind he has given one common influence, and to every one of
several kinds their several influence, and virtue, whether it be on
Physic, or other secret works, which partly are found out by natural work
manship. And yet more things are unknown then are apparent to our senses:
what, do you not think that an herb that is appointed for one disease which
it will cure, does not contain in it many more virtues then are known unto
us? Yes truly many more. This also Iadde, that if the pheces and combustible
oil be taken away from this thing or herb, which in all things is the poison,
that should be taken away that brings death unto us, and the elements should be
purified, and so burned together by Art, that they shall pass together by a
Limbecke, and be joined together, as it were coupled in marriage, that it may
root out al manner of disease from every thing, be it herb or living thing, or
be drawn from his venom, as in the 14. chapter of the Prologue of this book
is declared, and also in the Prologue of the Animal work, whereas the manner
of drawing the Quintaessence out of all venomous beasts, birds, worms, and
flies, is plainly declared, that it may help all the griefs of man, but that
specially is drawn out of the blood of man, and there is likewise declared,
that there is no need of things without man or beast to help such as are
infected. For every creature contains in himself the remedy of his disease,
which remedy may be drawn without the hurt of man or beast, that the disease
may be miraculously cured, as is there most excellently taught in the
the^ricke and in the practice. Therefore I would write this, that thou soon
might understand what marvelous force is in honey, which is taken out of
all flowers, and gathered into one mass, which truly is endued with sundry
virtues. For if GOD has given unto other things the gift of healing, what then
is there not in honnie, which is gathered out of so many flowers, and every
herb endued with his own proper virtue? Truly if it be brought to his height
and excellency, it will work maruellously. Now consider what lies hidden in
this Quintaessence, and esteem it not lightly, but keep it secret as the most
excellent thing of all the animal work, the which being obtained, you shall
need no other medicines to put away all the accidents of the body.

The second Chapter.
NOw I will set in hand with the practice. Take twelve quartes of the best
virgin Honey, and put it in a great earthen vessel with a Limbecke well luted,
and set it in Ealneo, and lute a recipient to the neck of it, and distill that
which will distill of it in your Balneo boiling. My son know this, that there
is no common water in honey but only Philosophical and Elementall, for the
Element of air does first pass with the Element of fire, in the which the
air is contained, and the air when it rises resembles the savor of aqua
vitae distilled, and at the first can not be known from aqua vitae, neither by
sight, neither savor: distill it until there will no more arise. Then leave
the vessel in Balneo five days with a Limbecke and receiver, let it boil
night and day that the matter may be dried, then let it cool and take it out
and take away the receiver and Limbecke, and that which is in the receiver
power into the vessel again upon the d^ie matter and set it in Balneo and
cover the mouth of the vessel with a clean dish well luted, and let your
Balneum be only luke warm. My son understand that it may thus be done, for
it is good that the fire be drawn with his proper air, so as a man would stay
so long, for it would be of the greater force. The ancient Philosophers wrought
in this sort, but the danger is when the vessels shall be opened lest the
water fly away, for it is as su^till as wine. For every time the air is to
be drawn away and again to be powered on, making putrefaction in a warm
Balneo, but first it must be well luted, and a Limbecke being set on with a
receiver, you must reiterate the work until the fire rise like unto red
blood. There is another method or rule of working found out in these our days
which is in this sort.

The third Chapter.
THey are thus drawn out and the matter dried, as is aforesaid, then take
common water twice distilled in Balneo and power on as much as is sufficient,
and set it in Balneo, cover the mouth of the vessel: but let not the Balne^^
boil, and so let it stand three days and three nights, moving it day and
night* with a spattle of wood: let it cool and be poured out and strained.
Then take a clean vessel and pour out that which is clear, and power upon
the pheces fresh distilled water as you did before, and set the vessel in
Balneo, and do as you did before: let it be cleared and put aside with the
first water, and put on again fresh water distilled and set it in Balneo as
aforesaid, and do this so often until the water be no more colored, for then
have you the fire separated from the earth, but reserve the earth or Pheces
until I tell you further what you shall do with it, for there is yet a
combustible oil in it.

The fourth Chapter.
TAke the vessel wherein is the colored water, and set it in Balneo with a
Limbecke and receiver well luted, and distill all the water with a boiling
Balneo and let the matter be well dried and cool, then take away the Alimbicke
and let the vessel remain in Balneo and power on the water again upon the
matter and make a fire and set a dish upon the mouth of the vessel and let it
stand so in Balneo three days, every day moving it with a spattell of wood
3. or 4. times, then let it cool and be taken out and strained. Then take a
clean vessel and softly power out that which is clear into it, and upon the
pheces straightwaies pour on fresh distilled water stirring it about with a
woden ladle, and let it stand to clear one day, and the Pheces which remain
put unto the first Pheces. Then take a vessel and set it in a boiling Balneo
until it be dry and reiterate this work until there remain no Pheces in the
bottom of the vessel, so shall you have the pure Element of fire: and the
Element of the air also must be so often distilled until there remain
nothing in the bottom: and in this sort you shall have the pure Element.
Separate then the water from the fire, and let it dry, so shall you have a
clear shining matter like to Camphere: keep the fire well in a glass, and
the air with the water in another glass^ well closed until you have your
earth prepared.

The fifth Chapter.
TAke all the earth with the Pheces, and draw out the combustible oil by a
discensorie that is with two vessels joined and luted together until the
combustible oil do pass, which is profitable for all cold diseases and other
passions which were too long to rehearse: if you desire not the combustible
oil, suffer it to fly away. Then tak^ your earth, and calcine it in a furnace
of reuerberation gently, until it be al white as snow, then take a great
earthen or stone vessel, and put your white calcined earth into it, and power
out a good quantity of common water distilled, and stir it with a wooden
ladle, and set it three days in a boiling bath, and cover it with a dish, and
stir it every day ten or twelve times. Let it cool, and the vessel take
out, and let it clear one whole day: then take an other clean vessel, and
softly pour out that which is clear, and upon the pheces power again fresh
distilled water, and set it in Bal^^^, and do as you did before. Take it out
again, and let it clear one day and night, and that which is uppermost clear
power out to the first water: Then put to fresh distilled water the third time
unto the pheces, and set it in Balneo, and do as you did before, and power out
the clear the third time unto the first water, then cast away the pheces of
the third water, for they are of no value. Then take the vessel into which the
water was put, and set it in Balneo with a lembecke, and a receiver: and with a
boiling Balneo draw out the water until the matter be made dry. Let it
cool, take away the Limbecke and pour in the water again upon the earth, or
salt. and set it one day in boiling Balneo. Let it dissolve and clear, and
take out that which is clear. And put in a little distilled water upon the
pheces, and let it stand two or three hours in a warm bath: take it out, let
it clear by the space of one hour or two, and power out the upper part to the
first water, and cast away the Pheces, for there is nothing in them. Let the
vessel be set again in Balneo with the earth or salt, and distill away the
water until all be dry, and do as before reiterating the work, until that no
pheces remain in the bottom, then draine away the water from the earth, and
you shall find a fair earthlike Cristall: and so you shall have pure elements.

The sixth Chapter.
TAke a great glass that will bear the fire, and put into it your earth and
your fire, and power your air upon it, and set it to distill in a furnace, in
pot or with sand or ashes, with a Limbecke well luted, having a hole in the
uppermost knottie part, that a funnell may be put in when there shall be
need of infusion: when as the humiditie that it has received be half
consumed, then fortify your fire by little and little increasing it until you
see the water boil, and keep the fire in that state still, until it be
consumed even to a pint. Take away the fire, let it cool, take away your
receauer and open the hole of the Limbeck and put in your glass funnell, and
pour in all the distilled water in the recipient upon the earth, and stop
the hole of the Limbeck, and set the receauer unto the neck thereof well luted
and distill again, and observe the manner aforesaid of drawing and making
infusion, and do thus ten times. The tenth distillation finished, let all
pass together: for then the earth is made flying. So the air, the water, the
fire, and the earth will ascend together by the Limbeck, and be brought into
one substance which were in four. One together in nature and now simple as the
incorruptible heaven, yet are they not fixed: but notwithstanding they are so
coupled together between themselves, that by no means they can be separated,
but will continue one simple body for ever: even as the christalline and
incorruptible heaven which notwithstanding is compounded of the four elements.
What think you of this my son? Can not this quintaessence help every
disease that does infect man through his most excellent temperature whether it
be in heat, cold, moist, or dry, for all are in it that he may distribute
unto every one that which is necessary, even as the heaven, when need
requires, gives unto the earth all things, as coldness, heat, or moisture:
And yet is neither hot, cold, moist, nor dry, but of one simple essence, and
that endued with such a nature that is gives unto every thing that which is
necessary? In like manner does this quintaessence. Therefore my son rejoice,
and give the almighty God thanks which has opened these things unto the
Philosophers.

The vii. Chapter.
NOw my son, if thou will bring this quintaessence yet to a greater
perfection. Take a great circulatory, or Pelican, that is a glass that has a
great head like to a Limbeck, and in the top of the head a hole by the which
the matter may be powered in by a funnell. Let the hole be stopped, out of the
head comes forth ij. arms bending round unto the belly, by the which that
which does ascend up may fall down again, by those arms of glass into the
belly of the Pel^^cane. This is the form of the vessels that distill one into
an other, or Pelican. Take then your quintaessence and put it in a Pelican in
ashes, but better in salt prepared and dried, and make your fire like unto the
extreme heat in Summer, and the quintaessence will rise like unto a red oil,
and fall down again by the arms of the Pelican: and by often ascension, the
quintaessence will wax thick that it will tarry in the bottom and rise no
more, then fortify the fire that it may ascend and descend again. Then keep
the fire in that heat until it ascend no more, but rest in the bottom. Then
make your fire stronger that it may ascend and descend again, and keep the
heat in the same degree until it rise no more. Observe this manner in
augmenting your fire until the water be fixed, and the glass be red hot
four and twenty hours together: if the quintaessence do not then ascend, it
is fixed and brought unto his highest virtue, and take it out of the glass
being yet hot, for if it be cold it will wax hard that you must break the
glass. For at the fire it does wax liquide, and being set open in the air,
it does congeale and pearceth every hard thing, as oil does any dry leather,
and in color is like unto a rubine, and through shining like a crystal, it
gives light in the dark sufficient to read by. What do thou think of
this my son? are there not many strange bodies created of God? Truly he
has endued the Philosophers with no less gifts: For they that can look into
the secrets of nature, shall see it to be of an incredible operation, for this
is gathered by the Bees of the subtilest part of all plants, trees, flowers,
and fruits, and at that time when flowers break out and trees budde. It is
worthily called the Philosophers stone. for it is fixed and lyquable as wax,
and as the mineral stone transmuteth the impure metal, so does this alter
diseases. Hereby it does appear that this does bear the bell amongst all
vegetals. Whereas it being yet in his grosenesse and vnpure, it is but of small
value for any use in Physic by what mean soever it be boiled or scummed, but
does always retain his nature. For it consists of all the fruits of the
earth, plants and trees. Whereof one herb is hot, another cold, another
dry, another moist, one astringent, another laxatiue, some corrosiue, others
venomous: and so diverse herbs have their diverse qualities. Thirdly it comes
to pass if it help one disease, by and by it hinders an other. For every
thing works according to his property when as there is separation made in
the body. And of this separation it ingendreth blood and other humors. And they
are lykened unto gunnepouder, which so long as it lies still there comes no
hurt of it, but if it be brought unto the fire, it straight utters his secret
nature, and is kindled with a venomous fire which cannot be quenched with
water. For the cold and dry, hot and moist, do strive amongst themselves, a
wind is stirred up that breaks al things that is near unto it. The like
happens unto honey, that when it comes to the region of the liver that it
should be there separated, then it shows his nature to pass up and swell
with wind, that it is no marvel if that through contention the veins of the
liver be broken, as oftetimes it happens, whereupon Apostomes are caused in
diverse places, and brings forth such inflammations, that the veins are
easily broken. Although many do greatly commend honey: but they are not the
children of philosophy, neither do they understand the nature of it. But when
it is brought to a simple fixed as wine, then is it the chiefest medicine
amongst all the vegetables, neither is the like unto this found in all the world.
Give God thanks, and be liberal unto the poor. The dose of this is one
grain, and it must be taken every morning with an empty stomach, likewise in
the evening, until the end of the disease. For every disease will be cured in
short time, even after the same manner, as the Mineral stone makes his
proiection upon metals, Praise God and labor diligently.

The manner and order how to draw the Quintaessence out of the herb called
Rose solis.
NOw my son, I will teach thee the greatest mystery or secret amongst all
vegetable things, whose force and strength has been kept secret amongst all
the ancient workmen, and they have bound themselves one to another by oath,
that they should not utter in their books or writings the strength of this
herb, which is caled Rose solis, and in the Germane tongue Sindawe. Whosoever
therefore has not the whole vegetable work, he cannot attain to the strength
of this herb. For in that work is comprehended all the force of medicinal
things, And this work of vegetables is not come to the hands, but only of
the ancient sworn artificers which were skillful in the liberal arts. But
now my son, I will open it unto thee with ad(...)ration, that thou shall
keep this hidden knowledge secret. First, my son, you must understand, that
this herb is the herb of the sun, upon the which the sun spreades his
beams and influences as he does upon gold in the veins of the mines. And he
powers out his influences more upon this herb then upon any other which is
created of God, as it is evidently known of the ancient philosophers, and this
herb does so far surmount al other herbs which spring out of the earth, as the
sun does all other planets in the heaven, and has greater force and power
of influence then any other thing created of God in the firmament. So this
herb does excel al others in virtue, and therefore this herb is decked with
another color, other leaves, and stranger shape then all other herbs. And his
nature is such, that the hotter and d^ier the country is in the time of the
year, and the heat of the sun, and the more that the sun does heat and
burn him, this herb is the more moist and filled with deaw, insomuch that
upon one branch will hang above a thousand drops. Make a trial and strike this
herb with a slender twig, that the drops which fall from it may fall into a
large glass vessel, and you shall see the vessel filled with a marvelous
dew, and if the sun be vehement hot, those branches in short space, that is,
within the space of half an hour will be more full of dew then before, and if
you strike the dew twenty times with a rod, yet will it again be laden with
drops; it were enough if we did see no other miracle then from whence this
dewie humor should rise, which in so short space does so abundantly flow
from it, and how much the more the burning sun does scorch up the other
herbs so much the more is this moist and filled with drops even as though it
had been sprinkled over with water, hereupon may we gather his marvelous
qualities, and judge that there is some secret operation hidden in it; if thou
do keep this water thus gathered in a glass, therewith thou shall cure all
the diseases of the eyes, whether they come of ru(...)es or of inflammation, it
helps moreover all the pains and diseases of the heart, it cools the liver
and stomach that is inflamed and does mittigate all the pain of the head that
comes of heart and drives away all dreams and fantasies, it is good also to
kill the canker and the woolfe, against the biting of venomous beasts, against
poison drunk, if it be taken by the mouth, it helps also the pestilence, it
is good for many other diseases which were too long here to rehearse. This herb
has the color of the sun for his color is red dark divided with yellowe
lines, and his shape is like a star and his proportion like a heavenly planet
and consists of seven branches, in the utter part broad, near the ground
narrow, and it is as though it were heavy, of a tender substance, outwardly
hot and moist, inwardly cold and dry. The left side of it is cold and moist,
the right side hot and dry, and it is most temperate as gold. Wherefore his
elements cannot be separated one from another as in other herbs, but it may be
purged from his pheces, for his fixing lets that the Elements cannot be
separated, for the fire will ascend with the air by the Balneum as we will
hereafter teach. The earth may be separated from his Pheces and the Pheces
likewise from the fire and air, although it has not many dregs. Some latin
writers call it Lingua auis or Birds tongue, some call it Solaria of the
sun, of Lunaria is called the moon; the Flemming calls it Sindow. But the old
Philosophers have kept secret the qualities as yet for the marvelous effect it
works. And it is marvel says Arnold de Villa nou^ that a man should die
that eats every day some of it in his gross substance, what will it then
work when it is brought unto his finenesse and cleansed from his pheces? It
has this great virtue in it, that if it be put into a glass wherein there is
poiso^ mingled with wine or any other cup that is poisoned, straightwaies the
glass will fly in pieces, but if it be a stone pot of aleblaster or such like,
the wine will so boil as though there were a violent fire under it and all the
wine will run out until there be nothing left in the vessel: also if any man
carry this herb about him and happen on his enemies, they shall have no power
to hurt, but contrariwise, to show him all kind of duty. Also if any man be
bewitched either in body or in his art, that is, in Cookerie, Bruing, or
Baking, or by any other means, this herb carried about him makes him free from
the witchcraft. If it be also tied upon the belly of a woman with child,
she shall straightwayes be delivered although the child were dead and rotten
within as it has been oftentimes proved by experience. This herb carried
about one or a little thereof every day eaten as long as it is used,
preserves man from the falling sickness. Moreover, if a man be taken with
the Apoplexy, that his mouth be drawn aside, and his speech and senses taken
from him, they shall be all restored again if the sick drink the juice of
this herb strained, as has been oftentimes proved. Moreover if it be hanged
about the neck of one that is possessed of a spirit, so long as he carries that
about him, he shall be quiet as a Lamb, and the power of the spirit shall be
taken away. Make a proof, and you shall find it true. The bleeding at the
nose is by and by stayed, if you hold that herb in your mouth. They that are
wearied with travel, if they drink the juice thereof in wine, they are by and
by so refreshed, as if they had not labored or gone no journey, it does
comfort the synowes, muscles, tendons, and all the whole nature. Wounds are
also cured therewith, if it be drunk ten days together in wine or ale, if
the wound be washed with the same drink, and bound up with a cloth wette in
the same. The pain of the teeth is by and by apeased if that herb be laid
unto it. All these things have been often proved and found true. If it will
do such things whilst it is yet hindered with his gross matter, what will it
work when it is brought to his perfection? My son, know this for a truth,
that there is no herb that grows upon the earth to be compared unto this in
strength and goodness, therefore take heed that you do not neglect it, but
diligently remember and keep the secret close from them that are not of the
nature of our children, and from the ignorant. For if this herb did not grow
so plentifully and the properties thereof were known, it would be more
esteemed then gold or precious stones, for the effects of the quintaessence
are marvelous, as hereafter shall appear. Now there remains that we must
teach how to bring this herb to his highest degree, and to his
quintaessence. First it is to be gathered the same having his course in his
own house, that is, in the lion, and the moon behold him with a sinister
quadrate aspect. It is to be gathered whole with roots, leaves and flowers, so
that there be neither earth, dirt, nor other herbs mingled withal. Neither
must it by any mean touch any water or be made moist. Therefore you must take
heed that you gather it not in rainie wether, or moist wether: but rather when
the sun does shine hottest upon it, gather great store of it, and stamp it
well in a mortar of Marble, and put it in a Cucurbite of stone with a head and
receauer luted, and set it in balneo, and distill away all the water until it
be so dry like powder, and there will rise together with the water of the
color of most fine gold, which only happens in this herb, and in none
other: and when there remains no more liquor, yet leave the cucurbite for
three or four days in Balneo, and boil it night and day that all the
moisture may be perfectly separated and drawn away, then let it cool and take
away the receauer and stop it diligently, then take off the head and take out
the matter and beat it in a Marble mortar into most fine powder that it may
pass through a thick sieve, put this powder again into an earthen cucurbite,
and pour on your water and air, and stir it with a wodden ladle, and cover
the mouth of the cucurbite close with a tyle, and set it in a warm bath by the
space of nine days to putrify, every day stirring it with a wooden ladle
four or five times, and cover the cucurbite again with a tyle, setting a
weight of lead upon it; at the nine days end take your vessel out of the
Balneo, and that which is in it strain it into an earthen vessel glased, and
strain it hard until the matter dry. Then take this dry powder and put into
his cucurbite and cover it with a tyle, and keep it in a warm place until I
teach you what you shall do with it. The moist liquor which is drawn from it
will be red, for the element of fire is there present with the air and the
water, put that liquor into a cucurbite of stone and put on a head and lute it
well, and set it in Balneo with a receauer well luted, and distill away all the
water with the air severally from the fire in a boiling bath, until there
will no more distill, and the fire will pass away in the bottom, then take
away the vessel out of the bath and stop it well until I teach thee what is
further to be done. Then take again the stone cucurbite wherein your powder is
contained, which I bad you before to keep, and pour on the fire and the air,
and stir it well with a woden ladle, and set it in a warm bath nine days
more, and cover it with a tyle, and stir it four or five times every day
with a (...)adle as you did before. And when the nine days are past, strain
our that which is in the vessel, and pour the liquor in a glased vessel, the
residue of the powder put into another vessel as you did before, and keep it
so long until I teach thee how to draw out the combustible oil. Then take
again the vessel wherein your fire is, and mingle your liquor with it which
you keep in your glased vessel, where your fire and air is, and set a head
upon the vessel wherein your matter is, and lute it, and set it in Balneo, and
set a receauer to the bill of the head, then distill out the water and air
with a boiling bath until no more will distill, and you shall have in the
receauer water and air, take them away, and take the vessel out of Balneo,
and you shall find remaining in the bottom like thick Turpentine, and that is
the element of fire mingled with many Pheces. Now the fire is to be separated
from the Pheces on this manner, pour on your water and air upon that from
whence you draw it, and stir it with a spoone, and cover it with a tyle, and
let it settle four days, and the Pheces will fall into the bottom, and pour
out softly that that is clear into a clean^ cucu^^it, that no pheses pass
with all stop the vessel wherein the pheces are, and set it by. But that vessel
that contemet^ the water, fire and air, set it in balneo with a head and
re^^auer fitted and well luted, and distill the water and air in that same
degree. And when it will distill no more take away the receauer. Let the vessel
cool, and you shall find in the bottom^ your fire, which keep in his vessel
well stopped and p^ure in your water and air again upon the pheces from
whence you did draw them and stir them with a spoone, and let it settle
four days, then pour it out softly from his pheces into the vessel that
holds your fire so that no pheces be mingled withal, cover your vessel
wherein your pheces remain and set it up. But your vessel wherein your water
air and fire is, set again in B^lneo as I showed you, and distill away the
water and air, for they two do always pass away together and the ^ire
remains in the bottom. Pour on the water and air again upon the Pheces,
and stir it with a spoone, then let it settle four days, (this is now the
third repetition, whereby you have separated the water and air from the
pheces,) and that which is clear pour out into the vessel that holds you^
fire. Then put your Pheces unto the first which I bad you keep, in the which
your combustible oil is. For now yo^ have drawn your fire out of your
Pheces: therefore distill your water with the air, and when it will distill no
more take away your vessel, and you shall find in the bottom the element of
fire not yet pure, but foul and full of dregs, pour on therefore the water
and air again, and stir^e it well with a spoone or ladle, cover it, and let
it stand and settle sour days, then pour out that which is clear into
another clean vessel, and set aside the vessel wherein your pheces are. But
the vessel where in your fire water and oil are, set in Balneo to distill as
long as it will di^^^ll then take it out, and pour the liquor distilled into
the vessel where your Pheces are, and do as (...) taught you to work with
the pheces, until you have your element of fire without any feculent or gross
substance. When you have distilled away the water and a^re from the fire, and
suffered it to settle four days, and that all be clear without any Pheces,
then shall you have your pure fire. Therefore put all your Pheces together unto
your first pheces where your combustible oil is. Afterward take a great
cucurbite of glass and put all your three elements into it, and set it in
ashes with a Limbecke and a receauer fitted and luted, and kindle a gentle
fire, first in your furnace, and increase it more and more, until the fire and
air be passed, and that your Limbeck begin to wax red within. Then make the
heat of your fire moderate, until all your element of fire be passed, and the
head red like blood, and the water and air shall swim upon like oil. By this
means these three elements shall be brought to their highest essence, and be
perfectly rectified. Take away the receauer and stop it diligently, until
your earth be prepared, and know that in the dust and pheces there remains
yet a combustible oil which you may extract by a discensory if you will. It is
good against the cold gout, for members benommed, and si^owes too much
mollified. If thou be weary of this labor, put this powder or pheces into a
reuerberatory that they may be mingled with a gentle fire until it be as white
as snow: which being done, put it into a large cucurbite of stone o^ pour on a
great quantity of water twice distilled, it is not material how much water you
pour on, and sti^ it well with a wodden ladle or spoone sieve or six times,
always cover it diligently with a tyle, and after four days suffer it to
cool and let it stand four days and settle, then pour out the clear from
the pheces warily into another ^leane vessel, and pour on fresh distilled
water as before, stir it with your spoone, and keep it two days in Balneo as
before, then suffer it to cool and settle, and pour out the clear from the
Pheces, and put it to the first water: Do this the third time, and then cast
away the Pheces for they are good for nothing. All your waters that you have
drawn, distill by Balueum, or for the more speed, by ashes that all the water
may rise, and that there remain in the bottom a dustie matter, pour on
distilled water again, stir it, and keep it in balneo, by the space of four
and twenty hours, then let it cool and settle, and pour out that which is
clear gently from the Pheces. Pour on again more common water upon them,
and stir it, set it in balueo ten or twelve hours, take it out, let it
settle, and pour the clear unto the first water, and cast away the Pheces,
they are nothing worth. Repeat this work so often until there remain no
pheces after it has set ed. Then shall you have your earth rectified from all
his pheces which you shall congele and dry, that it may be like powder or
dust. Then join that with your other elements in the glass, and it will
straight resolve into his element, for the element of water is there present.
Set them all together in a furnace upon ashes, put on a head with a receauer
well luted, the head must have a hole in the top, that with a funnel the liquor
may be poured in and always stopped safely. Make your fire in your furnas,
first gentle, afterward greater, until that that is fermented do pass. But
all is not to be drawn out, but about half a sextary of the liquor with the
water, that the matter may remain moist. For if you should drive out all, it
would congele into an hard mass and break the glass in the furnace. Then
open the hole which is in the top of the head, and with a funnell pour in that
which is in the receauer. But first it must be made warm, lest by pouring in
the cold liquor the glass do break, but if you suffer the glass to cool,
you may pour it in without any danger. Repeat this inbibition ten or twenue
times, afterward distill out whatsoever will be distilled so long as any thing
will pass by the neck of the Limbecke. For after this tenth distillation, the
earth will be no more congeled but will rest in the bottom like a red golden
oil. Inbibe it again, pouring on the liquor, and distilling it until all the
elements pass together by the Limbecke, and that nothing at all do remain in
the bottom of the vessel. Then give thanks to God for his maruelons gifts
which he has distributed unto his Philosophers, and has given them so great
knowledge of things as they uttered in this work which is altogether heavenly,
and rather divine then humane. For it is a great marvel in this life that man's
understanding can bring these inferior things to so great perfection, that they
have a^tained even to the highest degree of virtue. Truly it is the work of
the holy ghost which has put it into the minds of men. For I do affirm, that
whosoever has this hear^ so prepared, that he may help all the iufirmities of
man's body, whether they be curable or incurable, except natural death which is
ordained before unto every man of God. Yea this dare I be bold to say, that if
a man do use daily the weight of one scruple of this quintaessence, or the
quintaessence of sugar and potable gold wherein pearls are dissolved, or the
quintaessence of Selandine. That man by Gods help shall not die before the day
of the great judgment. For the humors in man's body can by no means
predominate one over another, as in the thirty six chapter of Uegetales is
taught, where is entreated of the quintaessence of al medicinal things, and
there it is showed, that by Gods help the life of man may be prolonged even
until that day, void and free from all diseases and sickness. And further, that
man may be preferued in the state he was in at thirty years of age, and in
the same strength and force of wit. And upon that do all the Philosophers
agree, that a man may continue in the same state as long as in an earthly
paradise. This is so plainly and at large showed in that chapter, that will
you, nill you, you shall be enforced to conceive it in your mind, to believe
it, and to confess it to be true. Therefore it is not needful to reason much
of the force and qualities of this quintaessence: but whatsoever disease man be
infected withal, give him to drink with wine so much of this quintaessence as
a nutte shell will hold, and in short space he shall be healed as it were
miraculously, according as the disease is violent or gentle. But if you give
this quintaessence to drink mixed with the quintaessence of ^^gar with potable
gold wherein pearls are dissolved and with the Quintaessence of Selandine,
within one day you shall cure all the diseases whatsoever they be. Hereby it
does appear, that it is rather a divine work then humane. Therefore give god
the praise, and take heed that you do not utter this secret. For tyrants
would by that mean; prolong their lives that they might bring to pass their
wicked purposes, whereof both you and I should be the occasion. Therefore
keep it secret, for it is one of the greatest secrets amongst all the
vegetals, whereunto no treasure may be compared. Work therefore and distribute
liberally unto the poor, and God shall give thee eternal felicity.

Often times great force lies hid in bodies low,
Of book in few lines, not much, but apt does show.
Virtue increases by exercise.
The Spagericke Antidotarie of the preparation and making of medicines against
Gunneshot, taken out of the Chir^^gerie of Josephus Quirsitanus.
IT is an old and true saying of the poer; that there is nothing more
imperious than an ignorant man, which thinks nothing well done, but that he
does himself, which thing as it may be seen in many other arts, yet most
specially in this, which is called the Spagericke art. For we see every where
certain men, I know not what they be, puffed up with a certain barbarous and
foolish pride, which with great scorn inuey against those medicines which are
drawn out of the metalline mines. Which notwithstanding it is apparent were in
use and had in great estimation with the chief ancient Physicians, as we have
declared in that book which we have set forth of the Spagericke preparation of
medicines. And what, I pray you, is the cause of this anger, or rather madness,
but that (as they themselves confess) they know not the preparation of them? O
happy arts, if only artificers might judge of them, as Fabius is reported
sometime to have said. Then are they unhappy of whom the ignorant and
unlearned fear not so rashly to give judgment, which never yet understood from
whence or why, this is called the Spagericke art, which learned men of two
greek words have so named, because by that art a certain subtle and
spiritual nature is drawn, gathered, and pressed out, wherein the force and
effect of the medicine does chiefly consist. The great and incomparable
commodity whereof, as it appears in many other diseases, so shall it chiefly
be known in curing wounds by gunshot. As I trust (God willing) it shall much
more happily be tried and found out by the preparations of medicines animal:
vegetable, and mineral, and by other essences drawn out of (...), sulphur,
vitriol, arsenicke, iron, copper, lead and (...), and also out of antimonie,
and such other min^^alles, as also out of the gross and fatt bodies of simple
metals, of whom it is far off, that the force should be so great (although
the ancient Physicians have used the (...) cure wounds and vleers, as their
writings do testifi^) (...) the force of their spirits, which may be called, as
it were their souls. But peradventure some of those backebiters will say, why
are not we content with those medicines o^ remedies which the learned
antiquity has delivered unto us, and that Hypocrates and Gallen the ancient
pillars of our art and others have set forth in their monuments? why seek we
new ways never heard of before, specially unknown to the Apotheearie^^ But
some of us will answer that the only remedy of Mercury precipitate, is the
only remedy (to pass over other) which very lately they have begun to use,
in curing of wounds by gunshot, and other malig^e vulcers, were sufficient to
answer this their question, yea and to reprove their folly joined with
intolerable pride. But if authority be asked for. I think Gesner, Guinter,
Andernacke, Seuerine (to pass over a great many other) will be for us great
authority with the learned: as these standerers. Specially because the
learning of these famous men is confirmed by their learned writings and
monuments, that those tongues might count it a great honor unto them to
confess themselves their scholars. It were easy for me to bring forth many
other arguments, if I did not see the folly of these ^^ckbiters to be so
great, whereof truly I am ashmed, specially when I behold some of their hooks
lately set forth, wherein contrary to the purpose of the treatise, strange
things are enforced, that (as the old proverb says) the ointment seems to
consist in nothing, as though they pertain to the purposed entreating of
curing the gowte, certain inuectiue digressions I know not what, of the
beginning of things, of the original of metals and Philosophers stone (which
of them is called Morosophocus) or did in any point seem to agree with it.
Therefore again and again I am enforced to cry out, O happy ar^^s, if only
artificers might judge of them. How far unlike was the purpose of many old
men, the which if they were ignorant of any thing which they understood, was
known of other, even in far distant countries they spared no labor to go
see them. Pl^to inflamed with desire to learn those things which he knew not,
went into Egypt, and after to Tarentum to Architas, and over al Italy to hear
the other Pythagoricall philosophers, Apollonius Tyanius traueled through the
kingdom of Persia, and passed over the mountain Caucasus, and visited the
Albanes, Scythithians Massagetes, and all the rich kingdoms of India.
Afterward was carried unto the Brachmanes, and heard Iarehas in his chair of
gold disputing of the hidden causes of things, and of the hidden mysteries of
nature. From thence by the Elamites, Babylonians, Chaldees, Meedes, Assyrians,
Arabians, and Palestines, he returned to Alexandria, and from thence went into
Ethiopia to hear the Gymnosophists, and to learn their secret and hidden
arts. This virtue is truly to be followed, and not the sluggishnes of those
slothful followers, which having searce once moved their foot from their
country fires, yet will d^sallow this Spagericke art, and think no (...)there
labor to be taken in searching of the truth, when notwithstanding that art
does make open unto us the marvelous and hidden secrets of nature: neither in
my judgment are they unworthily co^^^ (...) of those which with their mamfold
perilles and trauel^ have (...) out those secrets of nature. But I pray you,
what foolishnes is this, to forbid us to use any other medicines then those
which were known in old time? As though (...), then which (...) more in use
this day, the^ were known to the old physicians. Further, to what purpose is
it that they object unto us the sulphurie (...), vene^ mou^stinckes (a^ they
(...) them) by whose (...) and drawn breath (for these are their contume house
words) they be almost (...) cophants, that the old Physicians made very many
medicines of most filthy things, as of the filth of the ears, sweat of the
body, of women's menstrues (and that which is horrible to be spoken) of the dung
of man and other beasts, spi^tle, urine, fl^es, mice: the ashes of an owls
head, the hou^s of goats and asses, the wonnes of a io^ten tree, and the scurfe
of mules, as may be gathered out of the writings of Galen, Aetij, Aeginet^,
Dioscor. Marcel. Plin. Serap. Gal. simpl. 10. cap. 18. 9, 10, 12, 13. Act.
Tetr. 1. ser. 2. cap. 110. Aegin. libr. 7. Dioscorid. libr. 2. cap. 90. Marcel.
cap. 4. and 26. Plin. libr. 28. 4. 15. Serap. simpl. (...). 453. and 466.
to pass the metallines which it is evident they did also use. Truly, when I
consider with my self the pride of these fools which disdain this metalline
part of Ph^sicke (which after their manner contumeliously they call (...), and
therefore can neither help their own nor many other diseases. I call to min^e
a storle, peradventure known unto them, of Herachto Ephesio, which being sick
of a drop(...), (...) the help of Phy(...)ons, annoynting himself over with
cow dung, set (...) in the sun to dry, and falling asleep was torn in
pieces of dogs: but these are more then sufficiently answered (...). Now I
will declare what is my purpose and scope in the (...): ve^^ly to prescribe
plainly hereaf^er, not those things which are already common, or (as it is
commonly said) known to blind men and barbe^s. lest I might seem to
immitate those that use to write ^hapsodias and heaps, but the method and way
of preparing medicines by Spagericke a^^e, that pertain unto Gunneshot, which
I know are yet unknown unto many Physicians and Surgeons. And this I can
truly confess, that I am induced for two causes to do it: first to provoke
those that are better learned, if they have any better medicines to utter them,
as also that I might specially help my country and mankind: unto the which
(the more is the grief) the^e is too much need of those kind of medicines in
these most lam(...)ble and cruel times wherein it has so long been bloodied
with domestical and civil wars* but to encounter with their (...)aunders
which cry out, that these kind of medicines do not only require long and
diffic^l^ preparation, but also that they are so dear that every one cannot
easily use them. I have thought good therefore first to set down common
medicines, and then to come to those which I do far more esteem, as indeed
they are far more excellent then the other, as by their preparation you may
know. Albeit also I have, determined to have consideration of the poor and
common soldier and to set down them apart that shall help the rich.

THerefore the Surgeons are to be admonished that when they go into the
wars, that they take with them these things ready prepared which are to be
had at most Pothecaries.

Supp^rantia.
(...) ^^sili^um* of ^oth s^rt^^*
(...) (...).
Tetraphramac^m Galen^.
(...) Resumptiuum.
The emplaster of Mucilages which may be dissolved with oil Olive if need be.

Deterg^nti^*
U^guentum diap^mpholyg^s Nicolal.
Unguen^^^ ^iride Andr(...):
Empla(...) disolued with oil of Roses,
V^gue^^um Apo^^olicum A(...).
U^gu^^tum Egyp^iacum of the same.
Sarcotica.
Unguentum Aureum.
Ung(...) c^r^seos Mes^^ vtrunque.
Empla(...) Grati^ De^ and de Ia(...).
C^catricem inducentia.
U(...) de Minio.
Desiccatiuum rubrum.
Emplastrum de cerusa.
(...) and res extran^^^.
(...)ntum (...) Nicolai.
Vnguenta Magistralia of the Physicians of Florence described by (...).
Vnguentum de calce viua.
Rep^llentia and aringentia.
Vuguentum de bolo co(...)e.
Vuguentum ^osatum Mesu^.
OR for the said intentions medicines may be made which need no other then
common preparations.

Suppurantia.
Take of new Butter and oil Olive, anna, ii. ounces, wheare meal cleansed from
his bran, half an ounce, fair water iiii. ounces, boil all together.

Or take the leaves of Tussilage and Mallows, ana. M. ii. ^ost them under
ashes and mingle them with butter.

Or take of the juice of the roots of Lillies first roasted under a^^es, iiii.
ounces, of the grease of a hen^^ goose or swine, ii. ounces, with oil of
Linseed or olives, the yolke of an egg and a little wax, make an ointment.

Detergentia.
Take of honey iii. ounces, of bean meal* and barley meal ana, ii. drams,
boil them with wine to the height of an ointment.

Or take of Plantaine leaves and Smalege ana, M. i. red Roses p. ii red wine
(...)ces, boil it to half: strain (...)solue (...) ii. ounces, Turpentine,
i. ounce. Meal of (...) and O^obus, ana, i. dram, Alloes and Mirre, ana, half
a dram, boil it again, putting to so much wax as shall suffice to bring it
into the form of an ointment.

Or take of the juice of plantaine and Agrimonie ana, ii. ounces, Rose ho^^*
iiii. ounces, of the root of ^^^os and Bean meal, ana, half an ounce,
mingle them toward the end with Turpentine i. ounce, make thereof* an
ointment.

Sarcotica.
Take of Manna; of Frankinsens ana, ij. drammes of Meal of Fenegreke and
Orobus ana, ^j. dram let them be wrought with honey and the yolke of an egg.

Or take of Sarcocollae dissolved in milk, iii dramm^^, Mastick, Olibanum,
ana, i dram, Liquid pitch, and Turpentine ana, i. ounce(...)le them and make an
ointment.

Epo(...)
Take of white chalk ij. ounces, of ashes of burned leather iij. drammes,
work them with oil of Roses.

Or take of quick Lime so often washed in water until it have lost, all his
(...)nesse ij. ounces, of Ter^ae Armeniae i. ounce, boil them with oil of
Mirtilles.

Of (...) Lead, burnt Stibium (...) Pompholyge may also be made medicines most
fit for that purpose.

Ad ven^nata vulnera.
Take of the juice of A^agallidis p^rpure^, of Cyclaminis, ana, i. (...), (...)
Vi^e mingled with man's spitle, half a ounce, (...)em.

Or take of (...)ge, ii. ounces* Ga(...)um half a ounce, G(...)h and
Turpentine, ana ^i. ounces, oil as much as shall su^^ice.

Or take of oil iiii. ounces* of Sagapenum, Mumiae and Amber, ana, ^^i. dra^s,
Frankinsens, Mastick* ana, ii. drams of the best Terrae Sigillatae and red
Coral, ana, i. dram, pitch. ii. ounces, wax as much as shall suffice to make
an (...)meant.

Or take ii. onions, of the leaves of Unicae peruince scabiosae Risini of each
a handful, roast them under the ashes, and put thereto of Treacle half an
ounce, and with Turpentine make an ointment.

Ad ambusta.
Take of the juice of Onions roasted under ashes, ii, ounces, oil of Nuttes i.
ounce mingle them together.

Or take of the leaves of black juice stamped with plan^ine water M. ii. of
oil i. pound, boil them together with iiii. ounces of white wine until the
wine be consumed, the^ put to wax as much as shall suffice to make it a salve:

Or take of Larde molten in the flame ii, ounces, and pour it into the juice
of Beetes and Rue, the cream of milk i. ounce, Mucilege of the seed of
condonioru^ and Tragacanthae ana, half a ounce, mingle them.

Repellentia, and sanguinem cohibentia.
Take of the juice of the leaves of Woodbine and of Oken leaves, ana, i. ounce,
red Roses i. dram, Boli Armenae and Sanguis Draconis, ana, ii. drams, oil of
Roses iii. ounces, wax as much as shall suffice*

Or take of the Pulpe of Apples boiled in milk iii. ounces, of Mucilage, of
the seeds of Psillij and Cydones, ana, half a ounce, of the juice of Bursae
Pastoris and Poligonum ana, i. ounce, of Acaciae and Sanguinis Dr^conis, ana,
iii. drams, of Terra Sigillate half an ounce* oil of Mirtils, iiii. ounces,
white wax as much as shall suffice to make an ointment.

But these medicines following are not so much used among the Apothecaries
neither known unto the Surons, yet most profitable for wounds by shot and all
other whose fit preparation the Spagericke art does partly declare.

Suppurantia:
Take of the root of holy Oak, and Lillies, ana, iiii. ounces, Beetes with the
roots. M i. fresh Butter half a pound, worms prepared in wine, iii. ounces,
yolks of eggs 12. the marie of a Calfe, of Turpentine, ana, v. ounces, oil
Olive cleansed from the Phe^^s i. pound stamp those that are to be stamped,
mingle al well together and digest them in warm doung, one month after press
it out, and with a fire on ashes boil it to the substance of a salve.

Or take of the juice of the herb Tus^ilage and Oxalidis ana, iij. ounces, fat
dry figs, 20. Frankasence, ii. ounces Rosen of the La^ixtre, i. ounce and a
half, grease of a Goose and a hen, ana, ii. ounces, fresh Butter half a
pound* Olei visci pom^rum compos. i. pound al mingled toge there, let them boil
in a double vessel luted with Luto Sapientiae for the space of six hours and
strain it warm and set again in the sun or boil it to a fit substance,
these medicines do quickly move matter and are anodina very commodious for
wounds by shot.

Det^rgentia.
Take of the Juice of Centari^ and Selandine, ana, iiii. ounces, of honey iii.
ounces, of flowers of Uerbascum p. ii. of Frankensence, Myrre and Masticke, ana
half an ounce, oil of Turpentine vi. ounces, good white wine i. pound,
putrify them al in warm dongue and boil them as before with a fire of ashes
until the wine and juice be consumed and it be brought to the form of an
ointment, then put to i. ounce of this ointment, i. dram of mercury
precipitate dulcified. If there be need of greater clensing.

Or take Visci herbarum s^niculae Pirolae, Aristoloch, and Vincae peruincae,
ana, ii. ounces, of turpentine washed iiii. ounces, Crocus Veneris half a
ounce, Balsami Taertari, ii. drams. Sulphuris Antimoni, i. dram and a half,
set them upon a fire of ashes until it have the substance of a salve.

Saercotica.
Take of the Mucilage of the seed^ of F^rnigreeke ii, ounces, of the juice of
hounds tongue Perscicaria and the great Comferie ana, i. ounce and a half,
oil of Frankincense and mirre, ana, iii. drams* oil of Hipericon simple ii.
ounces, Turpentine washed with white wine, ii. ounces, let them stand in the
sun or at a soft fire until they wax thick.

Unguentum depaet^.
Take of the juice of P^^um, i* pound. Turpentine v. ounces, of common oil of
Hipericon viii. ounces, good white wine half (...) pound, digest all viii.
days, after sees them until the wine be consumed, then put to Colopho^iae
and wax, ana, iii. c^nces: Muni^ and Amber ana, ii. drammes, melt them again
at the fire and make an ointment according to art.

Take of the juice of the Petum and Comferie, ana, iiii. Another of (...)
description.
ounces, oil of Turpentine i. pound, flowers of Hipericon and Verbascus, ana*
M. ii. apples of an elm tree iii. ounces, the buds of the Popla^trec, iiii.
ounces, the spirit of wine i. pound and a half, digest al these in horse
dongue or in a warm bath in a glass vessel well stopped one whole month,
then wring it out and strain it and put to it of Frankensence, Masticke, and
Mirre ana, i^* ounces, Sanguis Draconis, half a ounce, Muniae, vi. drams,
Turpentine half a pound, Benioini j. ounce, circulate them together in a
Pellicane viii. days, after with a moderate heat distill away the spirit of
wine and there will remain in the bottom a most precious balm.

Cicatricem inducentia.
Take of burnt Alum i. ounce, Crete Vitrioli iii. drams, Crocus martis, Crocus
U^ncris, ana* ii. drams, mingle them and make a powder which you may use by it
self, or mingled with honey.

Or take of Bole A^menae prepared after our manner, ii. drams, c^lex of egshels
half an ounce, the juice of unripe. Damascens, iii. ounces. boil them with a
soft fire to a perfect substance.

Ad V^^en^.
Take of oil of Amber and Turpentine* ana, i. ounc^ oil of Juniper, ii.
drams, ^ettle seed and the root of Gentian, ana, ii. drams, oil of Sulphur
Vitriolat, i. dram and a half, red. Coral, i. dram, mingle them together.

Or take of the juice of Pentaphillon, Scabious and Ru^ ana, ii. ounces. Olei
sulphuris Rubei i. ounce, oil of mi^re, (...) drams, Colophoni and gum of
juice, ana, vi. drammes, mingle them,

Adambusta.
Take of lard molten and washed in water of nightshad ii. ounces, Olei Saturni
half an ounce, mingle th(...)*

Or take the juice of the roots of Henbane and flowers of red popie, ana, i.
ounce, Salt Peter. i. dram, Mucilage of Seminis Cidoniorum, iii. drams, and
with oil of Champhire make an ointment.

Repellenti^ and sanguinem cohibenti^.
Take of Bole Armenae prepared after the Spag(...) manner ii. ounces, Crocus
Martis and Crocus Veneris, ana, i. ounce, mix them with oil of Roses.

Or take of Colcotharis Dulsifieati, ashes of frogs burned, ana, half a
ounce, mingle them with the white of an egg.

There be made other remedies for the fore said intents, the making whereof
we have described in their proper places which I commit to the judgment of
the skilful Surgeons to use wisely as the disease and party affected dotis
require. Now there remains to speak of drinks for wounds before we teach
the preparations of medicines.

De potionibus vulnerarijs.
THese potions for wounds, although they drive not out the humors downwards,
yet prevail they very much to cleanse wounds, because they cleanse superfluous
humors and the blood from all filth, and by a certain mar^eious quality where
with they excel, they knit the broken bones and help the sinowes that are hurt
by wounds, and helping nature, they at the last fill the wound with flesh and
close them up without using any other remedy: when as I saw in Germany the
marvelous and almost incredible effect which came by the use of these potio^s
even in curing desperate Ulcers, I thought it not meet to pass over the
mention of them, and that so much the rather, because I knew the use of them in
time past was allowed, but now through the necligence of Physicians to be
almost grown out of use. Also I have experie^ced those potions to be taken,
not only as medicines, but also as norrishments, and to help all the passions
and incommodities whereunto wounds are subject. The simples whereof the
medicines are made, are these:

Cyclaminus. Consolida mayor. Consolida mediae, quam Sophiam nonnulli vocant.
Sabinae. Galangae. Vinca peruinc^. Centaur^um. Ophioglosson. Betonica.
Aristolochia. Ueronica. Agrimoniae. Uerbenae. Serp^n^ariae. Persicariae.
Arthemisiae. Lilium conuallium, Zedoariae. Pyrola. Sperma ceti. Cancri
fluniatiles. Nux vomica, Astaci. Mumiae. Macis. Bolus Armena.
You shall much better draw out the strength of those simples then the common
sort, if you put them into a tun of white must, and digest them there ii.
months, or if you cut the green bearbes very small and wring out the juice
of them into a Pelicane or blind Limbeck, or circulate them three or four
days in Balne^ Mariae. This last way is most convenient for them that are
forbidden the use of wine, specially if they be wounded in the head. The
distilled waters of the^ be also good if they be taken driely by themselves
morning and evening with dose and manner convenient: Or if white wine be
delaied with them (if it be granted to the wounded) here follows the
composition of the vulnerarie potions.

A Vulnerarie potion to be given the first seven dais.
Take of both Conferies Veronica, S^wbread, ana, M. i. Astacos purged number,
iiii. white wine two measures, circulate them in Balneo, three days, strain
it, and give every morning one spoonefull.

Or take of the eyes of Crabs in powder half a ounce, Mumia, ii. drams Bole
Armenae, i. dram and a half, the herbs of Agrimoni Ophioglosson. Ueronica, and
Sowbread ana, M. (...) Sperma Ceti, i. dram, infuse them in white wine (...) a
night in Balneo, take of this ii. spoonefulles morning and evening if need be,
it puts away the inflammations very much, and helps the burning.

Take of Macis, the eyes of Crabbes, Zedoarie ana, iii Potions to be given
other timer of the grief.
drams, Mumia, Ga'ingale the less, ana ii. drammes, Nucis vomicae, i. dram and
a half, beat them grossly, and put them in a glass vessel pouring thereto
of white wine i. measure and a half, macerate them in a soft heat ii. days.
The dose is one spoonefull in the morning and as much at night. The force of
this potion is so great that it cannot be sufficiently commended.

Take of the flowers of Uinca Peruinca Lilium Co^^alium, A potion apt for
poisoned wounds by Gunshot.
ana, p. i. Galanga Zedoariae ana ii. dams. Mumia and Bole Armenia ana, i.
dram, Sperma Ce^^, half a dram, white wine i. measures, digest and circulate
them in Balneo 4. days the dose is one spoonefull morning and evening.

A potion vulnerary where the bone is broken with gunshot.
Take of Aristolochi, Sowbread, Adders grass, both conferies, Geranii ana, M.
i Sauin* M. ss. maces, Zedoariae, the eyes of Crabbes ana, half a ounce, Mumia
Galingale the less, ana, i. dram and a half, being cut small and bruised and
the other things brought into a gross powder boil all in a double vessel
four hours with one measure of wine use it morning and evening. This medicine
is much better then so many splents wherewith many are tormented.

R. of flowers of Lilium Conualium, Betonie ana, p. i. (...) potion f^r the
wounds of the he^d.
Galingale Macis, ana, iii. drams, Persica^ia, Selandine, Vinca Peruinca,
Veronica and Centauri, ana, M. ^s. macerate themas before, and referue them to
your use.

A potion for wounds of the breast.
Take of the (...)ice of Veruen, Betonie Veronica, ana, ii. ounces, cinnamon
water i. pound macerate them.

Take of Bole armeniae half an ounce of both the Comferies For wounds of the
(...)macke.
ana, M. i. Galingale ii. drams, temper them with wine as aforesaid reserve
them to use. Diverse discriptions of ^otions may be made of the foresaid simples
which I have to the judgment of the expert physician notwithstanding this one
thing I will add, that the use of them has many oportunities to cure wounds by
gunshot as also the Canker and al malign desperate and eating ulcers, of al
which the Physician shall take very great profit if he prepare the potions with
the essence of the vulnerarie simples spagetically extract as we have taught
in another.

A brief declaration of Spagericall medicines.
FOr as much as now remains to declare the Spagerick preparation of those
simples which pertain to the cure of wounds by gunne shot, we will use the
same method we have before used whereby this our treatise may be the plainer.

Superantia sunt igitur and Anodyna Oleum ouorum. Oleum butyri. Oleum refinae.
Ol. visci pomorum compos. Oleum hyperisi simpl. Olea omnium axung.

Detergentia Oleum myrrhae. Oleum mastiches. Oleum terebinthinae. Oleum mellis.
Viscus centaurij. Viscus vincoe petuincoe. Viscus aristolochioe. Sal foecum
aceti. Balsamus martis. Crocus veneris. Mercur. praecipitat. vulgaris Mercur
praecipit. dulcific. Oleum guaiaci. Balsamus veneris. Balsamus Saturni.
Balsamus tartari.

Sarcotica Balsamus hyperici. Oleum thuris. Oleum sarcocollae. Ol mannae.
Viscus consolidae vtriusque Viscus cynoglossi.

Epul^tica Calx testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacum. Bolus armena
praeparata. Alume^ adustum and praepar. Crocus Martis. Creta vitrioli flaua.
Ol. salis tartari. Ol. talci. quae etia^ cicatrices decorant.

Repellentia and sangui(...) cohibentia. Ol. visci pomorum simplex. Oleum
Martis. Crocus Veneris. Colcothar simplex. Colcothar dulcisicarum. Bolus armena
praeparata. Calx testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacum.

Ad venena Butyrum arsenici fixum. Praecipitatus dulcificatus. Balsamus
tartari. Ol. Mercur. corporale. Oleum antimonij. Oleum sulphuris vitriolatu^.

Ad ambusta Oleum ouorum. Oleum lardi. Oleum butyri. Aqua gammarorum. Aqua
spermatis ranarum. Aqua florum papauer. rubri Viscus rad. hyoscyami. Oleum
Saturni, eiusque Sal. Oleum Lithargyri.

Attrahentia Viscus aristolochiae. Viscus corticis med. tiliae Succinum
praeparatum. Magnes praeparatus.

Sunt rursus illorum simplicium singula, quae singulis partibus vulneratis
conducunt, vt Ossibus corruptis. Oleum myrrhae. Oleum caryophyllorum. Oleum
tartari foetens. Oleum vitrioli. Oleum sulphuris simplex. Oleum sulph.
vitriolatum. Oleum antimonij. Sulphur rubjcu^dum antim. Oleum salis. Oleum
Mercur sublimati.

Neruis vulneratis. Oleum cerae. Oleum iuneperi. Oleum euphorbij. Oleum ouorum.
Oleum terebinthinae. Oleum sulphuris terebinth.

Carni putridae ac corrupta. Sal fuliginis. Sal vrinae. Sal tartari. Sal
mellis. Oleum frumenti. Oleum mellis. Oleum sulph. acidunt. Phlegma vitrioli
acidum. Phlegma aluminis acidum. Balsamus Martis. Balsamus Veneris. Balsamus
Mercurij* Balsamus tartari.



But because regard is always to be had of the noble part in whose action the
life does consist, there be certain medicines, which being given can defend
them.

Roborant enim. C^rebrum. Oleum succini. Oleum saluiae. Oleum caryophyllorum.
Spiritus vitrioli.

Cor. Aurum vitae. Tinctura auri. Essentia margaritarum.

Hepar. Tinctura Bals. natural. Tinctura corallorum. Oleum Martis.



The Spagericall preparation of medicines before rehearsed.
THe dregs of wine or crude Tartar brought into Oleum Tartar^ (...).
powder, put into a Retort of glass or earth with his recipient, make fire by
degrees as is done to the making of strong water, there will rise great
plenty of white spirits which will turn into water and thick stinking oil,
separate the oil by a funnel and keep it to your use.

But the salt of Tartar you shall draw out of the Pheces The Salto Tartar.
(which they call the dead head) which are left in the Retort. Those you shall
dissolve in warm water, and after filter that which is dissolved twice or
thrice, coagulate it at the fire by vaporing away the water, and the salt will
remain in the bottom of the vessel, which if you again dissolve and
coagulate diverse times, you shall purge it clear like Cristall.

This Cristaline salt if you put it into a glass and set it Oil of Tartar.
in a wine seller or other moist place, within few days it will resolve into a
clear oil very excellent to cleanse the spots and ulcers of the face.

Take crude Tartar ii. pound, salt Peter. Salt of Soote, The balm of Tartar.
of the Pheces of vinegar, ana, iiii. ounces, Calcis V^uae, vi. ounces, all
broken very small put into a vessel, not glased, but well stopped. Calcine it
xii. hours, dissolve that is calcined in warm water, and distill it by filter,
after coagulate it, and clen^e it again, repeating three times your
calcinations, dissolutions, and coagulations: then put all into a Limbecke and
put on distilled vinegar, that it be ^^uered iiii. fingers. Distill the vinegar
in balneo M. and there will come forth a sweet liquor, then pour on the
vinegar again to distill, this do so long until it be no more sweet but
sower, as when you poured it on first and so rise in the Limbecke. Then distill
all in a strong fire by a Retort, and there will come forth a hot oil, the
commodities whereof can scarcely be declared.

After the same manner if you will you may distill all the salt of Tartar by a
Limbecke: whereof you shall make a most excellent and wholesome oil.

Vinegar being distilled by a Limbecke, the pheces remain Oil of Vintg^^.
in the bottom of the vessel which first dried, afterward with a violent fire
if they be driven out by a Retort, there come forth a very red and sharp
oil. Then if you do again dissolve the dead head or Pheces in Salt of
Vinegar
warm water, filter, and coagulate it, the salt of Vinegar will rest in the
bottom, the which is very profitable for all eating ulcers.

Soote brought into fine powder, dissolve it in distilled Sal^ and oil of
S(...).
Vinegar in Balneo, and separating all the mensture, that which remains in
the bottom dissolve and coagulate again so long till it come to white salt
which in a moist place will dissolve into oil, very apt to cure the Gangraenam
and all malign ulcers.

Bole Armonack made into fine powder, dissolve it in the The preparation of
B^ls Arm(...).
sower fleame of Alum, then separate the fleame by Balneum and pour on other.
Do this three times, and then the Bole will be turned into a very fat oil
which with a very soft fire is dried and brought into powder most apt to
staunch blood wheresoever it break out.

Take of Cloves beaten in powder one pound, simple Oils of spices (...), (...)
and (...).
water, or Aqua Vitae which is better, vi. pound, infuse them to digest in
Balneo or dung four days, then put them in Limbecke with his refrigatorie,
distill it according to art, and separate the oil from the water by a funnel,
and keep it for your use. After the same manner shall you draw the oils of
Sage, Juniper, Amber, Turpentine, Mirre, Frankinsens, Sarcocolla, Masticke and
Euphorbium. We have written another better way to draw oils out of the
foresaid things in the Spagericke preparation of medicines.

Wheat being put into a retort with the spirit of wine, digest it viii. days,
then distill it with a violent fire, that Oil of wheat^*
which is distilled power again upon the dead head, digest it again and
distill it again, if you reiterate this iii. times there will come forth a
most excellent oil of the Gangraena and Carcinomat^.

Take of the flowers of Hipericon small ^utij. pound The s^^ple Bal^e of
Hipericon.
oil of Turpentine i. pound, yolks of eggs, 20. Aqua Vitae half a pound,
mingle them all together and let it putrify in hot dung one whole month, then
wring it out and set it in the sun two months.

After the same manner is the Balm of Visci pomorum Bals(...) vised pomorum.
The compound b^l^e of hyp^^icon.
made or with oil Olive, first purified in Balneo.

Take of the flowers of Hipericon, i. pound of the Muslage of the root of the
great Conferie, iiii. ounces, flowers of Camomil, Verbascum, ana* pug ii* oil
of eggs and turpentine, ana, half a pound, Aqua Vitae one pound, Mirre,
Frankensence, Mastick, Mu^iae, ana, ii ounces, red sugar vi. ounces, putrif^e
all in dung one month in a vessel diligently stopped, then wring it out and
circulate it in Balneo three days, afterward with a soft fire boil it to the
substance of a Balm.

Take of the leaves of the Mysselto of the Apple tree The (...) balm of (...)
pomorum.
cut small, ii. pound, put them into a vessel of gla^le, putting thereto buds of
the Popler tree half a pound, oil of the grease of a Badger and of Butter,
ana, iiii. ounces, turpentine vi. ounces, oil of worms ii. pound and a half,
good white wine, ii. pound, digest all well stopped in very hot dung, ii.
months, then press it and circulate it, and with a soft fire boil it until
the liquors be consumed, there can not be found a more excellent medicine to
assuage ache^ and pains.

The juice of the leaves and roots of herbs you shall How the flime or
^uslege is drawn out of herbs.
purify until it be clear: pouring to it so much Aqua Vitae and digest it
in Balneo in a glass xv, days, then separate that water by distillation, and
there remains in the bottom the slyme or muslage of the herbs.

Steep the leaves and roots of herbs in common Another method.
water filtred or that which is better, in white wine eight days, then let
them boil iii. days with a soft fire under them. Then w^ing them out and
purify it, then boil them with a softfire, until they come to the thicknes
of honey which we call the slime of muslage. By this rule you shall draw out of
both Comferies Cynoglosso, Centaurie, Vinca peiuinca, Aristolochie, the root
of henbane and the middle bark of Tillia their muslage very profitable for
the foresaid medicines.

Out of the flowers of red Poppie or their juice you shall draw a water by a
Limbeck very profitable to cool,

The salt of man's urine has an excellent quality to Salt of ^^ine.
cleanse. It is made thus. First the urine is to be filtred, then, coagulated,
after with distilled vinegar dissolved, and again coagulated, these must be
reiterated 3. or 4. times.

Melt wax at the fire and boil it with wine till it be consumed: do it so
long until it crack no more. Take i. Oil of Wax.
pound of wax thus prepared, Alum calcined half a pound, Sage leaves M. i. put
al into a Limbeck, with his receauer and distill it with a mean fire. First
there will come forth a gross oil, thick, hard, and white, which must be
distilled again as before, and iii. times reiterated, and so you shall make an
excellent oil of wax for all griefs of the synowes. In like manner is the
oil of Rosen and pitch made.

Out of honey you shall first draw an excellent water The water and oil of
honey.
by Balneum, afterward you shall put unto the dead head or pheces that are
left, sand or flint stones calcined that the matter boil not up, which you
shall drive out by a (...) of glass giving fire by degrees, and so you shall
distill a yellowish clear oil, together with a gross impure oil. Let all
digest again 4. or 5. days, after distill it again by a Limbecke in sand,
and there will come out a pure red oil swimming upon the water. This water is
sower almost like vinegar distilled, and is very good against the Gangrena: but
the oil which burns like Aqua Vitae has maruai^ous qualities, specially if
it be circulated certain days with the spirit of wine: for the spirit being
after separated there remains a sweet oil of pleasant savor, good for
wounds by gunshot and eating ulcers.

Out of the pheces which remains is drawn a salt, first The salt of honey
being calcined with a fire of reuerberation, dissoluing it with his proper
menstrua or common water distilled, filtering and coagulating it three times.
It is good for all* rotten ulcers. This salt you shall mingle with his proper
burning oil according to art, and you shall reap greater commodity thereof,
then is lawful to be spoken.

Take of honey not separated from his wax ii pound, Tartar made into powder
i* pound, let them putrify together Another oil of honey more precious.
in dung xv. days and distill it by a retort, and there will first come a
clear water, then a yellowish. Put these again upon the dead head, and
putrify it again other xv. days, after distill it again, and this do three
times, and you shall have an excellent oil of honey.

Take butter first molten in white wine, and then distill Oil of butter (...)
larde.
it with a mean fire, and there will distill out a oil greatly swaging pains
and supplying. So shall you make oil of Larde and all greases.

Take 100 yolks of eggs first sodden hard, put them into a Cucurbite and make
fire by degrees, first there will ^yle of y^lks of Eggs.
come out a water, after a yellowish oil swimming upon the water* last a
thick oil. The water is good for all spots in the face, the oil to appease
all griefs and aches.

Boil C^eue^es in water of Orphine in a double vessel Water of(...)* ^eses.
well stopped one whole day. After distill it, pouring the water 3. times upon
the pheces, then let it be kept, it is ve^ie good for inflammations, burnings,
and the Carcynomata Water of the sperme of frog^


The sperme of eede of frogs is gathered in the month of March, and i^
distilled by a glass Limbecke, and thereof is drawn a water very commodious
for inflammations and burnings.

Eggeshels or the shells of snailes are reuerberated in a ^al^ of ^gs^el^ and
s^^iles.
sharp fire three days until they be brought into a ve^ie white Calce. But
if they be sprinkled with vinegar whilst they are calcined, the Calce will be
the lighter and apter to work his force.

Mercury first washed and prepared, according to Gebers The common Mercury
precipitate.
prescription dissolve with the duble weight of common strong water, then
distill it (...) times and pour it so often again upon the pheces; and so it
is brought into a very red powder, cut of the which being ^eue^berate at the
fire and drawn away, the spirits of the strong water which otherwise would
move geeat pain. But it were better if it were washed with the sleame of
Alum and vinegar distilled, and the water of Eggs, for by that mean the
sharpness is taken away.

But it is better to prepare Mercury with often sublimations, Mercury
precipiat fixi and d^lci^ied most profitable for the ^^re of (...)ds.
and to fix it being quickened again and purged from his filthy earth and
superfluous humiditie with the water which we have described in the book by
me published of the Sp^gerick preparation. But if al men do not understand that
disc^^ption for the dark words of Art, it shall not be incommodious to fix
the Mercury with common strong water three times powered on and drawn away,
and to bring it into a red powder, and that with a sufficient violent fire that
all the sharpnes and venom of the menstrew may be drawn away, which shall much
the better be done of this water following be min(...)led with it, and by often
distillation sep^^ated.

Take of distilled vinegar (...) pound and a half, the fleam (...) Alum, i.
pound and a half, calce of eggeshels vi. oun(...)es, distill al til it be
dry. Take of this water (...) pound, of Mercury precipitate as ^fore i.
pound, mingle all well according to art, distill it by a Limbeck, pouring the
water again unto the p^eces three times. Last of al drive al out until it be
d(...) and there will remain a powder in the bottom, which grind upon a
marble and put it into a Limbeck, pouring on the water aforesaid, which you
shall three times distill from the pheces as before, Lastly the Mercury
precipitate must be circulated with a alcool of wine 24. hours. Then distill
away the spirit of wine that the matter may dry, then pour on new again and
circulate it and distill, as before and that do 4. or 5. times, and then you
have attained the perfect preparation of Mercury, whose qualities cannot be
sufficiently commended in curing of sundry diseases, specially of the Pox,
whether it be taken by mouth, or applied to the place grieved.

Make Amalgama with iiii. ounces of Mercury, c^ude, oil of Mercury corpo(...)
and i. ounce of the best tin. Spread this upon a plate of Iron, and set it
in a moist place, and all will dissolve into oil, it is also made with
Mercury alone, and a plate of Tynne.

Mercury, as the manner is, three times sublimed with Oil of mercury subblimed
Salt of Vitrioll, at the last is mingled with the like portion of sal^*
Armoniack, and again subblimed three or four times, all that subblimat is
dissolved into oil, out of which the spirit of the salt Armoniack is to be
drawn away, circulate all with the essence of wine and distill it so long until
the oil have lost his heat and sharpness and the Armoniacke be separated.

It is also reduced by it self into an oil with a very soft heat of an
Athanor by long distance of time.

Sublime Mercury so often with the simple Calce of The balm of Mercury.
eggs well prepared until it be utterly extinct. To this mixture power
vinegar distilled alcoole sated that it may cover it 4 fingers, distill the
liquor from the pheces 4. or 5 times until the Mercury be come into a very red
powder which you shall circulate with a alcoole of wine in a pelican 8. days,
separate the alcool by a limbeck and there will remain in the bottom the most
precious and sweet balm of Mercury. It heals al desperate ulcers and also
^^r^ucula^ i^ ^^sica, and greatly helps these wounds by gunshot. Al other
preparations of Mercury and the manner of using it you shall gather out of the
book which we lately set forth.

Upon the filings of Iron often washed with salt water, (...) martis
pour sharp vinegar that it may cover it four fingers, set it upon warm
ashes 8. days, every day moving the matter and separating the vinegar which
will be colored, and pouring on again new, and that so long till the vinegar be
no more colored, which being vapoured away take the powder that remains in
the bottom, and subblime it with like portion of Armoniacke: the same
sublimate you shall return again so often upon his pheces, and subblime
again until there appear the color of a Rubin: then cast al into scalding
water, that the salt may dissolve them, by and by put to cold water, and the
balm of Mars will rest in the bottom like the calx of gold. Pour away the
water and put to fresh again that the balm may be made sweet.

Of this with the spirit a wine alcolizat by circulations, Oil of Mars.
you shall make a red oil most excellent for all inward Hemerodes or issues
of blood, and to strengthen the bowels, if one drop be mixed with conserve of
Roses or Conferie or given with wine.

The filings of Iron first well washed, you shall calci^^ ^ro^us marti^.
with the flower of Sulphur or dissolve with strong water, then pour on very
sharp vinegar, and set it in a warm place certain days, then reuerberate it
with an open fire, as Art commands one whole^ day, gathering always the
flowers which remain above, until all be converted into a ver^e red and light
powder.

After the same manner you shall make the balm, oil and The balm oil, Crocus
and Vi^rio^ium Ven^^is.
Crocus of copper, out of the which with the sour flame of Vitrioll,
circulating all artificially, you shall draw a bleweshing Vitriol whose
qualities we have discribed in another place.

Out of Saturn calcined is drawn a sweetish salt in balneo with distilled
vinegar, pouring it so often upon the ^alt of saturn.
Pheces until it draw no more. The menstrew euaporated, the salt remains in
the botome, which by often dissolutions and coagulations is made Cristaline:
and afterward easily dissolved into oil being set in a moist place. But if
(...) (...).
you circulate this cristaline salt in a Pelicane with the alcool of wine 15.
days, and after take away the menstrew by distillation, and put to new wine
and circulate it, putting to a fit dose of cristaline salt of Tartar, you shall
make a Balm sweeter then sugar which will maruellously prevail Balsamu^
Saturni.
against all malign ulcers and diseases of the eyes.

Decoct Antimonie made in powder with a capital lie Sulphur of antimoni.
prepared of Tartar calcined, and Soap ashes and quickelime the space of one
hour, then let it cool, pouring upon it a little Vinegar, and there will
appear a certain rednes swimming upon, which you shall gather: then again let
it boil for one hour or two, again let it cool and gather that which
swimmeth up. Do this so often until there appear no more rednes. For it is the
sulphur of antimonie which dried at a soft fire, you shall keep it to good
uses.

Mingle Antimonie with Sugar and Alum, and put all Oil of antimonie.
into a Retort of glass, make a soft fire for 4. or 5. hours, afterward
increase it, and there will come out an oil red like blood: It is also done
with mercury sublimate, but great ^eede is to be taken lest any error be
committed in the degree of fire.

Boil Sulphur prepared with oil of Linseede with a very soft fire, and it
will be like blood congealed. Let the oil of Sulphur
matter cool, put it into a retort and give it fire, and there will distill
out a very red oil of Sulphur. It is also done, if you mingle bran with your
Sulphur and distill it.

Take of Sulphur Vinae P. i. with which mingle with a oil of Sulph(...)
vitriolate.
soft fire so much pure v^trioll molten that it may be one body. Distill this
by a discentorie and there will descend a red oil into the receauer.

If i. pound of the flower of sulphur be mixed with ii. or iii. pound of oil
of turpentine in a dry heat, the flowers oil of Sulphur terebinthina^.
will dissolve into a red oil. Then the menstrew rightly and artificially
separate, circulate the rubin of Sulphur, with the Alcoll of wine eight days,
and you shall have oil of Sulphur that has the qualities of the natural Balm.

The sower oil of Sulphur is made by Sulphur, by setting it on fire, and
hanging over it a bell or a large glass Sour oil of Sulphur.
head to (...) the (...) which (...) (...) into that (...).

Put* Vi^^ioll bea^en into powder into a Cucurbite, giving The (...) of
V(...)ioll.
it a fire of the second degree, and there will issue a sower water which is
called the ^leame of Vitrioll.

Take the Pheces which remains in the bottom of (...) of Vitrioll.
the vessel which is called Colcothar, stamp^ that, and if you mingle flyntes
withal with a violent fire, there will come out a red oil.

It is also made with the simple Colcothar driven out Another (...).
with a violent fire three days space, and there will come forth a very hot
oil, which is made sweet by circulation with spirit of wine Tartarizated.

But if the Colcothar be dissolved in warm water and (...) dulcifi(...) (...)
(...) of (...).
the redness in it separated and the water euaporated, the Colcothar will
remain sweetish, that which remains the redness being taken away is called
Creta Uitrioli.

But if Vitrioll be drawn by the ninth, a limbeck pouring on always the
liquor upon the dead head, and after Spirit of Vi^^i^ll.
circulating all by the space of eight days, you shall have the spirit of
Vitrioll very profitable for many things.

The ^leame of Alum is made like the fleame of Vitrioll.

But Alum is prepared if the ^leame be 5. times powered Tled(...) of al(...)
and the preparation.
upon the pheces out of which it was drawn and distilled, last of all dry out
all the fleame until it be dry.

Make brine of salt, into which cast hot burning stones that they may be
imbybed, those stones so imbybed put (...) of salt.
into a retort, giving fire by degrees, there will come forth a very hot oil of
salt.

I said before that there was great force in Butyro Arse^ici fixo, to cure al
v^n^mon^ and malign vlce^s, it is made (...)
in this manner. Mingle cristaline Arsenick first subblimed with only colcothar
(which does keep back his poison) with like weight of salt of Tartar and salt
Peter, put al into two glasses and fix it, giving fire the space of xxiiii.
hour^^* first very gentle, then of the highest degree. You shall find the
matter very white fixed, resembling the color of pearls* which dissolve in
war(...) water, (...) may draw the A(...)ly from it. And the powder which
^emaineth imbybe with oil of Tartar or of Talcum which is better, and dry it
at the fire, and do this thrice. Again dissolve the matter in warm water that
you may take away his salt and there will remain a very white powder and
fixed, which will dissolve in a moist place into a fat oil which is (...) like
Butter.

Out of Talcum rightly and artificially calcined is oil of (...)
drawn the spirit with distilled vinegar. This is dissolved into a precious
oil being set in a moist place.

Take of the juice of Aristolochia Rotundae, and Sauin, The (...) (...) of
Mag(...)
ana, iii. ounces, Serpe(...), ii. ounces, spirit of (...) i. pound* circulate
them first the space of xxiiii. hou(...) then distill them, of this water take
i. pound of elect Magnes made into powder iiii. ounces* circulate them
together, and distill away the water from the Ph^ces, (...) this three times,
and by this means you shall obtain the preparation of Mag(...).

But because (^s we have said) the noblest (...) are to Cordial(...)
be strengthened, and the heart the principal ^^gan of life, must alwaie be
defended, these preparatio(...) following are to be used.

Take of The^incae of Alex(...) (...) ounces and a half, The (...) on of (...)
c^ll (...) (...)
the best M^rre i. ounce and a half, Saffron ii. drams, the spirit of wine vi.
ounces, mingle al these, and in ashes with a very soft fire distill it,
circulate that which is distilled in Ba(...)o eight days, and then distill it
again. The water has a most excellent quality against the plague and all
venomous things, and does maruellously strengthen the heart.

We have she(...)ed the (...) (...)ncture of gold Corals, natural Balm, and
the es(...)ence, of P^^rle in the book which I wrote of preparation now rests
for (...) to speak of the gold of life, which (...) shall know to be the most
excellent and extreme (...) in curing (...) do but consider (...) excellency
(...)


