A brief dissection OF Germans Affliction: With War, Pestilence, and
Famine; and other deducable miseries, Lachrimable to speak of; more lamentable
to partake of.

Sent as a (friendly) monitor to England, warning her to beware of, (Generally)
Ingratitude, and Security; as also (Particularly) Other greevous sins, the
weight whereof Germany has a long time felt, and at this present does (and
England may fear to) feel.

Written from approved intelligence, by M. Parker.

Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Printed (...) London by T. Cotes, for Francis Grove, dwelling on Snow hill*
near the Sarazens head. 1638.

To the tender hearted Reader.
REader should this ensuing discourse happen to be read (or heard) by the most
adamantine heart in the world; (I persuade my self) it would (like Goats
blood) dissolve it. For here in this small volume is briefly disected (or
anatomized) the largest subject of misery that the lantern of time ever
showed to the world. It is a lamentable tragedy; so lamentable, that the like,
all precedent times were ignorant of. Germany is the Stage; the Actors are
merciless extortioners, bloody homicides, luxurious ravishers, sacrilegious
robbers, (and spoylers) of Churches and other holy places Canibalian
man-eaters, and their attendants. And because no play is held complete unless
some women's parts be in it; behold here are Virgins ravished and murdered;
women eating their own children: nay, one woman devouring another. The Scenes
are War, Famine, and Pestilence, with other miserable calamities deduced (or
derived) from thence; the spectators or audience are men who have seen their
houses robbed, their wives and daughters carnally abused in their own sight,
their young sucking babes dashed against the walls by the heels, or thrust
upon spear points: Nay, some of them also eaten by barbarous Croats. Women
likewise that have beheld their loving husbands, some miserably tortured to
death; others shamefully abused, and even gelt in their (enforced) presence;
others have had their noses and ears cut off to make hat-bands for the
deriding tormentors. Now loving Countrymen hear me, this has long been (and
yet is) the case of afflicted Germany, that it never may be our own case, let
us pity hers, and leave off those sins which have drawn these plagues upon
her, though we (by Gods mercy) are yet spared, that still we may, and that our
merciful Lord will continue his blessings, (health, peace and plenty) among
us, is the daily prayer of

Martin Parker.

A BRIEF DISECTION OF GERMANIES AFFLICTION.
1.
THis Paper (white before) has reason just,
In Sable weeds (these lines) it self to dress,
For what may here be read (if we may trust
Old Natures doctrine) shows such heaviness,
That senseless things may mourn, why should no^ the^
White Paper mourn, that bears black deeds of men
2.
Such strange (unheard of) mischiefs miseries,
Disasters, Murder, Sacrilege and Rape,
That he who reads, (or hears) it with dry eyes;
Shall pass over what the Writer could not escape.
These are the Scenes of this sad Tragedy;
These make my Paper mourn, and so do I;
3.
Germany, Sovereign of the Europian part,
^eate of the Sacred Christian Empire, has
^ull twenty (late past) years, bin pearc'd toth'heart,
and still destruction keeps his beaten path,
Nor will be stopped, O that my prayers could stay
His journey, I Would (and so will) ever pray.
4.
Millions of millions in these forenam'd years,
On either part has fallen by the sword,
By too well proov'd experience this appears,
Time in his brazen book does all record,
O pity it is that Christians thus should spill
The blood of Christians, but alas, they will.
5.
We have a saying that is more true then old,
He best knows where the shoe wrings that does wear't
^o we who here enjoy even what we would,
And have no war among's, nor do we fear't.)
Cannot discern aright the direful plight,
Which the Commons suffer under wars affright.
6.
Let Us with their least of miseries begin,
^magine now a man over night with wealth
Great store, which toil, and care has brought him in,
And that his wife, and children all is in health,
See him ere morn, behold the rape of's wife,
And daughter first, then with his goods lose life.
7.
The cruel Soldiers void of all remorse,
Take share of each man's labor at command,
And what is denied or hid, they will by force
Of horrid tortures purchase out of hand.
The Commons (though in substance equilent)
To be the Soldiers slaves must rest content.
8.
Rest content said I, there is two golden words,
Which every man would happy be to find
True at his wish; but restless war affords,
Rest nor content to any, none in mind,
Can be secure of what they do possess,
Where Soldiers can, they take all more and less.
9.
Yet don't mistake me, I Am not general
In censuring of Soldiers; for I know,
Some whose due praise for valor is not small,
Who in the martial course will mercy show.
But Germany has had (and still retains)
An army whom the devil (their captain) trains.
10.
These are the Crabats (crabbed curres indeed)
Vulgarly called Croats (barbarous slaves)
These like to Canibals on babes will feed,
No quarter they will allow to him that craves.
I quake to set the deeds down (with my pen)
Done by these fiends of hell it he shape of men.
11.
Of other Nations (that have such hard hearts)
Great numbers be, yet all are Croats named
Because in barbarism they take their parts,
By such as these, true honor is defamed,
He who from Mars is borne Legitimate
In loving honor, tyranny does hate.
12.
These salvage (not true) Soldiers neither care
For God, nor man, nor devil, where the gain
The conquest, neither age nor sex they spare,
To kneel, or beg, with tears to them's in vain.
The lives, of women, men, and infants sweet,
They weigh no more then worms under their feet.
13.
No Pagan, Turk, Tartarian, nor Jew,
Amongst all their Tyrannies against Christians used,
Such Stratagemes of villainy ere knew,
Both Male and Female they have so abused.
It Is terrible, and odious to unfold
What has (by them) been done to young and old.
14.
Some have with match (or cord) so hard been tied,
That from ears, eyes, and nose, the blood did spring
From many of them (as it is testified)
Their eyes have started out (O horrid sin)
Some flead off skins alive, as Butchers will,
Do to those Sheep, or Oxen which they kill,
15.
Others with chisels had their faces plaind,
From th'fingers ends the blood from some did start,
To eat their excrements some were constraind,
Thus every one did strive to act his part,
In cruelty, all others to excel,
Thereby to gain a place of note in hell.
16.
But one thing more is to be wonderd at
Then all the rest (O note this hellish art,
A Reverend Channon tortured with a cat,
Fixed to his naked belly never to start,
Till man and cat (through horrid pain and hunger)
Yielded to death, when they could live no longer.
17.
Some had their privy parts, with powder filled,
And blown up intoth' air, have dyed so,
Others by a more strange device were killed
Hanged up on high, a fire was made beloe,
Of stuff combustible, no flame but smoke,
And with this policy they many choke.
18.
Now Reader if tha'st read or heard what is told,
Of Dioclesian, Neroe, Phaleris,
Do think they to these monsters might not hold
The candle for invention; Surely yes,
These outstrip them all, and that can be named
Although the world for Tyrants them proclaimed.
19.
For rape with Sacrilegious murder, and
Robbing and spoiling Churches and the like,
We from no ancient times can understand
Such actions perpetrated that may strike
Men unto terror, and amazement both,
To read of that which I to write am loath.
20.
Priests praying at the altars it is truth,
Nuns ravished and with sore tortures killed,
^itch Burgers daughters in their blooming youth
Have so been served, nay when their blood was spil'd
And life departed, those (who naught regard)
Have carnally abused them afterward.
21.
One villain having ravished a Maid,
Cut her alive in quarters with his sword,
While on his knees her aged Father prayed,
To save her life, but got no other word
To comfort him, but this, if thou will save her.
Pray to the Saints, and try if they can save her.
22.
^ome Mayds and Wives (as sad experience tells,
^o save themselves from sordid villainy
Have headlong leaped into Lakes, and Wels,
^mbracing death to save their honesty,
Though verity condems such desperate facts
Woe be to them who cause such dismal acts:
23.
Women with child, nay women in childbed,
These miscreants, insatiately have used
Their husbands, and their friends they have tortured,
Praying with tears to have their wives excused.
O hateful to be spoke, as bad to hear,
What I could write manhood bids me forbear.
24.
So much of that, too much ift pleased our Lord,
Is It wonder if more plagues from this do spring,
These mischiefs all were brought in by the sword,
Now what succeeds all this, a worser thing.
Grim meager famine, through decay of tillage,
Does fiercely rage, in City, Town, and village.
25.
Learned Josephus in's Iudaicke wars
Treating of proud Jerusalem her siege;
Writes that by famine more then by the scars
O'th Roman swords, the draught of death did pledge
That story has from me extracted tears
And so may this from any he that hears.
26.
If any difference be (in my conceit)
It rests in this which after shall ensue,
Weighing each circumstance this is more great,
And might dissolve the heart of any Jew
A woman there I read her child did eat,
Two women here did of their babes make meat.
27.
One was a Widow in the Palatinate
Who had a daughter some nine years of age
A Lamentable story to relate,
Hunger so furiously amongst them did rage,
They at contention fell one with another,
Which should be killed, the daughter or the mother.
28.
To render their sad talk would be prolix,
But thus (in brief) the girl (with famine pind)
Her ghastly eyes did on her mother fix.
Mother said she, I would you would be ith mind
To kill me, that my misery might cease.
Or let me kill you, you of pain t'release.
29.
The woman looking wishly on the child,
Says what would do with me if I were dead,
Quoth she I Would eat you, she with hunger wild
Upon a sudden caught the girl by the head
Pulled off her hairelace; no long time she wrangles,
But with the same her daughter dear she strangles.
30.
Wanting a knife, (O note what shift she made)
Famine in her maternall love exild)
She cut the flesh in gobets with a spade,
Then dressing the head and some part of the child.
She filled her belly, and what did abound,
Her neighbors bought (for porke) four sti^ers the pound.
31.
Now what became of her when th'childe was mist,
How she imprisoned was arraigned, and freed,
There Is no necessity to manifist,
And to my self I have proposed speed,
Therefore I Will end this tragical discourse,
And tell another tale as bad or worse.
32.
At Hornebash a woman had a child
Of which she had lain inn not long before,
Hunger that wild things tames, makes tame things wild,
Oppressed this woman and her babe so sore,
That she food lacking, milk it needs must want,
And both for nutriment did feebly pant.
33.
The woman seeing in what deep distress
Her tender Infant was through want of food,
And famine did her body so oppress,
That what to do she in amazement stood,
Motherly pity for the babe did plead,
Necessity cries out it must be dead.
34.
Necessity prevails, she takes a knife,
(My heart does tremble while I write of it)
Wherewith she rest the Innocent of life,
And of the flesh made many a savory bit.
O famine there is no plague compares with thee,
Thou art (by ods) the worst of all the three.
35.
This being known, she was to the Magistrates
Brought and examined about her deed,
To whom (in decent order) she relates
The motive; 'twas she wanting food to feed,
Her self and it, to rid it out of pain,
She murtherd it, her own life to sustain.
36.
Quoth she 'twas my own fruit, and in that plight
Ready to perish both my self and it,
I thought to use it, I had the most right,
Yet Law (for all this) would not her aquit,
She was condemned to dye (for examples sake)
Least others to do the like should undertake.
37.
This woeful story, which succeeds in place,
Is full as Lamentable as wonderful,
Three Mayds that equal friendship did embrace
Together dwelt, this famine did so pull,
That mauger former love, which had been shown
They sought each others lives to save their own.
38.
This to effect, two of them did conspire,
To kill (and eat) the third, (O pittious case)
And quickly they accomplished their desire,
Fierce hunger swiftly followed the chase,
Between these two, the third in bed they killed,
And with her flesh their empty bellies filled.
39.
When this was done and past, note the event,
Hearts once obdur'd and hands inured to ill,
Once fleshed in mischief; soon the minds assent,
Is won to any thing be it what it will.
So hapn'd it with these two, the third was slain,
Want wrought conspiracy between those twain.
40.
One strangled the other in her bed,
(Thus mischief multiplied, no love, no fear)
And as they served the first (cut off her head)
This she alone performed to her compeere,
And having eaten't, she proceeded further,
Her heart was hard, she made no bones of murder.
41.
She goes one day unto a village near,
A friend to visit (as she did pretend)
Whose husband was from home; she loved her dear,
And bad her welcome, (like a loving friend)
But in the night (lying with her in bed)
This murtherous maid cut off the woman's head.
42.
And binding the dead body on a board,
Brought it toth' place where she did dwell.
Fierce famine would not so much time afford,
To let her cut it out (like joints to sell)
She took both hands and head, which washing clean
When they were boiled to eat them she did mean.
43.
The good man coming home his wife did mis,
And for her amongst his neighbors did demand,
Who could give no intelligence but this,
That such a Maid was with her: out of hand
To her he trudges, asks if she did kno
What was become of's wife? she answered no.
44.
But such things cannot be hid, murder will out,
A guilty look betrays a guilty heart,
He goes into the house and all about
He pryeth (narrowly) in every part,
And in this Inquisition 'twas his lot
To spy one of the hands stick out o'th pot.
45.
Then being (no marvel) in impetuous rage,
He threatens her, who soon the fact confessed,
Saying, it was harsh hunger to assuage,
Made her do that and more, then told the rest,
And straight to Stiltzy (by three Musketeers)
She was conveyed before the imperial Peers.
46.
While she before the Judgment seat did stand
To be arraigned, according to the Law,
The Sodden hand she held within her hand,
And that all other might be kept in aw.
Her head was cut off with a sword of steel,
Her body was fast bound unto a wheel.
47.
There for a spectacle still to remain
That all may shun murder (that crying crime)
Although necessity did her constrain,
She tasting the affliction of the time,
Yet having dipped her hands in blood so often,
It Was fit that death her flinty heart should soften.
48.
A woman in the village of Steinhause,
A girl of twelve years, and a boy of five,
Did kill and eat for which inhumane cause,
(Being found) the Law did her of life deprive,
And at her execution she told plain,
That she last year killed other children twain.
49.
In The Parish of Swegbruggen there a brother,
And sister did survive their Paren^s dead,
The sister dies, he eats her and of's mother,
Devours the thighs, Oh horrible to read,
A woeful spectacle to them who see it,
Where starved people fall down dead ith street.
50.
And of the dead, the living make their meat,
Out of their bellies, they the intrailes pull
Hearts, Livers, Lungs, o'th dead the living eat
(A story true woeful, and wonderful)
Snayles, Frogs, and Carrion, dead six weeks before
To this distress, what can be added more.
51.
A woman in the streets that was found dead,
Between her teeth a humane rib did hold,
And hard by her lay roasted a man's head
A wondrous tragic tale it is to be told;
Children cry in the streets and dare not go
Home, fearing killing, hunger rages so.
52.
^ome eating mad dogs have themselves run mad,
And raging died in Lamentable plight,
A ministers wife that six sweet children had
^aw them all starved to death in her own sight,
So many wanting food to taste, have tasted
Of death, that all the Palatinates devasted.
53.
The Countries turned into a wilderness
For in three hundred Parishes (O strange)
Not one is left alive such deep distress
That Country feels; an admirable change;
It Was once the Eden of all Christendom,
Yet now to utter ruin it is come.
54.
^n the whole Dukedom of Swegbruggen are
A live two hundred ninety two, no more
^n all that spacious Province death did spare
But these (to mourn for them that went before)
A wondrous story it is alas (too true)
Of milions left two hundred ninety two.
55.
So furiously this monster (Famine) raves,
(That it is no marvel if they eat it fresh)
That people dig'd dead bodies out of graves,
And to sustain their lives have eat the flesh,
This is a misery, mystery't may be sed,
When by the dead the living must be fed.
56.
At Worms, and diverse other places, want
Does tyranniz so over the common sort,
That in high ways and streets they lie and pant,
What shifts they make it is wondrous to report.
In Saxony and also on the Rhine,
This Plague of Plagues does many people pine.
57.
Horse flesh is common, that I count good meat,
(Taking the place and season as it haps)
But here they (vermin) Rats, and Mice do eat,
For which with diligence, they set their traps:
Nay dogs and cats, are at the market sold,
And glad is he that first of it lays hold.
58.
A Bushel of corn (with difficulty brought)
Eighteen Rix dollers, there will easly yield
And glad are they by whom the same is bought,
It Is food (not money) that is hungers shield,
It is in English coin, four pounds, twelve pence
To save their Lives they will not spare expense.
59.
Our meaner sort in England are so nice,
(Unless by chance there be some dearth of corn)
I have observed it more then once or twice
How in the markets, they Rye meal will scorn,
And other things, which I must overslip,
For fear some Scold should take me on the hip.
60.
But take heed England, least when thou art full fed
Thou do forget thy God (I doubt thou do)
While thou have foul and fish with fill of bread,
Think on poor Germany who once could bost
Of plenty more then all the Christian world,
Yet see into what misery she is hurld.
61.
It Is now her case why may not thine be next,
Thy sins are equal if not more then hers,
And since our Lord, at every sinner's vexed,
What is the reason that he thee prefers,
And her dejects, be humble least thou feel
What she has felt, think on Sapora's wheel.
62.
Heaven gently has scourgd thee not long since,
With a small Plague to make thee fear a biger,
But Germany has had such pestilence,
That it appears the viols of his riger
Are powered on her, O miserable state,
Woe is me if thee I don't compassionate.
63
In Switzerland the City Bassile there,
In Anno sixteen hundred thirty three,
Buried full twenty thousand in that year,
Of the swift pestilence which none can flee;
And in the next year following, that in Trent,
Full thirty thousand the same journey went.
64.
And diverse parts in Belgia are distressed,
With this contagion whose expansion wide,
Claims Sovereignty (though an unwelcome guest)
He Will lodge with wives even by their husbands side,
Where ere he comes, he either all does take,
Or else division among friends he will make.
65.
This foul infection did so overspread,
All Germany that scarce a place was free,
Potentates from their usual places fled,
Yet safe in any part they could not be.
Nimegen, Guelders, Emericke and the Hague,
Antwerp, and Bruxels, all have had this Plague.
66.
In Bavier so many people fell,
The living could not bury all the dead,
But Rats, and Mice, (a misery it is to tell)
Familiarly upon the bodies fed.
A lamentable spectacle to see,
Chiefly for they who tender hearted be.
67.
And unto such I dedicate my labors.
(As in th'Epistle they may read who please)
Who with compassion think upon their Neighbors,
And in their minds do seek Gods wrath to appease,
For Charity, and Verity, does call
Upon us, that we should do good to all.
68.
^f we do not lament with them that mourn
And weep with them that sorrow, is it not just,
That if it (as God forbid) should be our turn
To have our glory buried in the dust,)
That others should not pity our estate,
How can we love God, and our brother hate.
FINIS.
The Epilogue or Postscript to the Reader.
THus (tender hearted Reader have I set
Before thine eyes (what thou should nere forget)
The misery which neighbor Nations feel,
Through war, famine, and pestilence, the wheel
Of Fortune's still in motion, though we sit
In peace, and plenty, yet ith midst of it,
It Is fit we should on Joseph's troubles think,
Least of the cup of wrath, we also drink,
Let Us all consider it is the Almighties hand,
That strikes others, and does spare our land,
And that his love, (not our deserts) are cause,
Why from our Nation he the stroke withdrawes,
We are as wicked (if not more) then they
On whom he does his rod of anger lay,
And therefore though as yet we live in mirth,
(Enjoying all the blessings upon earth,
A Gracious King, under whose Government
We live, in peace, and for our more content
Are fortified with Royal Offspring which
Our land with future blessings may enrich,)
Yet if this peace and plenty which we have,
Do make us proud, forgetting him who gave
Us all these comforts, which our neighbors want,
We well may fear, least he his love transplant,
Into another people, that will yield
A larger crop of thanks; O let the field
Of each ones heart, receive the seed of grace,
And with true gratitude prevent his face,
Lets hate our loved sins, our vain excess
Of (Luciferian) pride, sloth, drunkenness,
Extortion, avarice, and luxury,
Let Us feed and cloth Christ in necessity,
I mean in's little ones, what is done to them,
His own words ratify, as done to him,
This is his will, to do it lets all endever,
And he (no doubt) will give us peace for ever.
Amen.
FINIS.

