SAINT BERNARD HIS MEDITATIONS: OR Sighs, Sobbes, and Tears, upon our
Saviors PASSION: In Memorial of his Death. ALSO His Motives to Mortification,
with other Meditations. The third Edition, much amended. By W. P. Mr. of Arts
in Cambridge.

1 COR. 2.2. I esteem not to know any thing amongst you save Jesus Christ, and
him crucified.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Francis Burton, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the green Dragon. 1614.

TO THE Right Worshipful, Mr. JOHN BVLLOCKE, of the Inner Temple, ESQVIRE.
SIR, it was my purpose when I first undertook to translate these divine and
comfortable Meditations on the Lords Passion, and Motives to Mortification,
(selected out of the works of S. BERNARD, and other ancient Writers, not
verbally turned into English, but augmented with such other Meditations, as it
pleased God to infuse into my mind) to have dedicated them unto your worthy
Father, who (both in respect of his near alliance, and other reasons of
moment) might by his own right have challenged that duty at my hands.

But since it seemed good unto the Divine Majesty, to remove him from earth,
out of the society of mortal men, to live for ever in the company of the
blessed Angels in Heaven, before I could attain to the accomplishment of my
wished desires: I could find none more near and dear unto me then your self,
who might vouchsafe to give the first kind entertainment to my well-intended
labors, when they should come forth into the light. For as the Lord has
blessed you with a peaceable fruition of your Fathers possessions: so no doubt
you are also a true heir of his commendable Virtues.

My desire is to profit all, yet I am obliged by many private respects, to
commend my labors, (such as they are) in a more special manner unto your
self, that thereby I might seal unto you, a true assurance of my grateful
affection toward you, For far be it from my thought, that either I should
forget your kind speeches, or bury your good deed in the dark grave of
Oblivion, expressed to me, and extended toward me at my last conference with
you.

I know you cannot but kindly accept my small mite, if you balance it with
the willingness of my mind: and I am assured you will not mislike it, in
regard of the matter, though happily you may find some distaste in respect of
the style. For what can be more fit for these times, then Motives to
Mortification? or more comfortable to the soul of a sorrowful sinner, then a
serious Meditation of the bitter Passion of our Crucified Redeemer, who being
God, became man for our sakes: suffered a most cruel death on the Cross for
our sins: and being buried, rose again for our justification?

But it is not my purpose here to relate what sweet streams do flow from
this crystal and pure Fountain, what wholesome fruits may be gathered from
this fruitful Tree, or what rich Treasure may be found in this golden Mine. I
desire to contain my lines within the bounds of Mediocritie: especially when
the Current of my words turns toward One whom God has blessed with
capacity, able to conceive the great commodities which do proceed from such
Christian exercises: Yet before I make a full period, give me leave (I pray
you) to let you understand, that I have much endeavored, so to express the
grievous Passion of our gracious Redeemer, as if it were now in present action
before our eyes, that I might the better stir up fervent motions of Piety in
the mind, and kindle the sparks of true devotion in the heart of the Reader.
For indeed, the full scope of my desire is, to glorify GOD, and benefit my
brethren. And that your own soul, (as also the soul of every religious
Reader,) may be the more nearly and deeply touched, and wounded with a
feeling consideration of our Saviors death, I suppose it the best way, after a
due preparation thereunto by prayer (without which nothing can be sanctified
unto us,) to begin at the first Meditation, and so taking the History of his
Passion before you, to proceed until you come unto the yielding up of his
Ghost upon the Cross.

In the progress whereof, it may please God so to touch your heart with
sorrow, that your eyes, (with those in the Gospel, who came to see his death,
Luke 24.48.) may gush forth Tears for grief, that so innocent a Lamb should
be so despightfully and cruelly tortured, tormented, and crucified. Where also
you (in whose person I speak unto all) may justly conceive a double grief.

First, that Jesus Christ (the Righteous,) was killed for sin.

Secondly, that he was killed for our sin.

The consideration whereof, should move all, with weeping Peter, Luke 22.62. to
shed salt and brinish tears of contrition, in remembrance of our offenses,
that being therewith pricked at the heart, Christ Jesus may say unto our
sorrowful souls, as sometimes he did unto the Israelites, I have heard your
groaning, and will have compassion on you, Judge 2.18. And may also thereunto
add, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, Matthew. 9 2. Come
hither and taste how sweet I thy Lord am: with me there is plenteous
redemption.

And as in matter of sorrow, it more deeply pierces the soul of the hearer
with grief, or in matter of delight, more affects the mind with joy, to
hear the particular relation of some Tragical event, or the parts and
particles of some delightful accident reported, then only to hear a bare
narration of either in gross, without expressing the parts thereof: so
likewise it cannot choose, but more deeply wound the soul of every Christian,
to hear, or read, the special and several sufferings of Christ in his
Passion, then if it were only said thus, Christ died for us.

But least I draw my lines beyond the limits of due measure, I here conclude:
desiring the LORD to bless you, and the rest of your Fathers issue, with many
happy days upon earth, and when they are ended here in peace, to receive you
all into his heavenly Kingdom of everlasting Glory.

Yours ready at command, W.P.

A Table of the Meditations upon the Lords PASSION.
1 A Meditation of the coming of the Lord JESUS into Jerusalem, riding upon
an Ass, etc. page. 1 Med. 2. Of the returning of the Lord Jesus into
Jerusalem, and of his often preaching in the Temple, etc. page. 30 Med. 3. Of
the preparation of the Lords Supper, and washing his Disciples feet, etc.
page. 57 Med. 4. Of the institution of the blessed Sacrament, of the body and
blood of Christ, etc. page. 72 Med. 5. How the Lord Jesus told his Disciples,
that one of them should betray him, etc. page. 89 Med. 6. Of the going of
Christ into the Mount-Oliuet, and of his praying thrice in the Garden, etc.
page. 104 Med. 7. How Jesus arose from prayer, and went to meet Judas, who with
a multitude came to apprehend him, etc. page. 130 Med. 8. How the Lord Jesus
was led to Annas, and how he was there beaten and buffeted, etc. page. 152 Med.
9. How the Lord Jesus was led from Annas to Caiphas, and of his scourging
there, etc. page. 172 Med. 10. How Peter denied his Master thrice, and of his
repentant weeping, etc. page. 184 Med. 11. How Jesus was sent unto Pilate, and
of his usage there. page 205 Med. 12. How Pilate caused Jesus to be scourged,
and then pronounced sentence of death against him. page 213 Med. 13. How Christ
bearing his cross on his shoulders, is led to Mount Caluarie to be crucified.
page. 250 Med. 14. Of the cruel and bitter crucifying of our Lord Jesus,
performed on Mount-Caluary. page. 285 Med. 15. Of the derisions and scornful
speeches uttered to the Lord Jesus, when he was nailed on the Cross. page.
319 Med. 16. Concerning the lamentation of the Virgin Mary, beholding her Son
upon the Cross. page. 331 Med. 17. Of the Eclipse and obscuration of the Sun
about the ninth hour, and of the fourth speech which Christ used upon the
Cross. page. 343 Med. 18. Of the fifth and sixth words which the Lord Jesus
spoke upon the Cross, to wit, I thirst, and it is finished. page. 355 Med. 19.
How Christ gave up the ghost, and of the wonders then wrought and his death.
page. 369 Med. 20. Of Jesus Christ his burial, and of the lamentation of his
Mother, and other women for his death. page. 381 Med. 21. Of the Lord Jesus his
Resurrection, of his appearance to his Disciples, of his ascension into heaven,
and of his coming to judgment. page. 397
FINIS.
engraving of two Garden of Gethsemane scenes from the Passion of Jesus Christ
O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me.

He kneeled down and Prayed, but being in an agony, he prayed more
earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trikling down to the
ground. Luke. 22.44.

Sit ye here, whil I go and Pray yonder.



MOST DEVOVT MEDITATIONS, upon the most holy and bitter Passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ.
MED. I. A Meditation of the coming of the Lord Jesus into Jerusalem, riding
upon an Ass, and the bringing in of him into the City, with Songs and
Praises, and of his return into Bethany the same day.
Into Mat. 21.5.
Jerusalem our Savior rides
Upon an Mat. 21.7.
Ass, (a simple harmless beast:)
The people spread their Mat. 21.8.
clothes and boughs besides,
Crying Mat. 21.9.
Hosanna, Thou in Heaven highest.

THe time approaching, which the Divine providence had from eternity prefixed,
in which my most kind and loving Jesus should come to his preordained Passion,
and cruel death of the Cross, which he willingly came to undergo, being the
only begotten of God, incarnated in the womb of the Virgin, as through the
whole course of his life he showed exceeding great humility, so toward the
hour of his Passion, coming to the place where he should endure the torments
of a most shameful and cruel death, he took his entrance from humility, when
riding meekly upon an Ass, he came to the City, where he should sustain the
undeserved punishment of the Cross.

Therefore when the Lord Jesus, six days before the Passover, had made his
Supper with his Disciples in Bethanie, the town of Marie and Martha, in the
house of Simon the Leaper, which was a friend to the said Mary and Martha,
(where Mary also had powered an Alablaster box of precious ointment upon his
head) the morning following very early, most kind Jesus calling two of his
Disciples, said, Go into the town which is over against you, where you shall
find a she-Asse tied and her Colt, loose them and bring them unto me: And if
any man shall say any thing against you, say that the Lord has need of them,
and strait-way they will let them go. The lowly, and loving Disciples obeying
the commandment of their Master, license being freely granted to them by the
Lord of all creatures, they presented the shee-Asse and her Colt, to their
beloved Redeemer. Then Jesus riding upon the Ass, directs his journey
toward Jerusalem: And when he came to the going down of the mount Olives,
many people which were come thither, having heard of the strange miracle of
Lazarus, whom Jesus raised out of his grave, went forth to meet him: And that
they might do him the greater honor, some spread their garments upon the
ground, others cut down boughs from the Trees and strewed them upon the earth,
and all of them, some going before, and some coming behind, cried, Hosanna to
the Son of David, blessed is he which comes in the name of the Lord. And
with these praises and Iubilies they brought loving Jesus, even to the Gates
of Jerusalem, following after him with his Disciples.

And after Jesus beheld the City, he now fore-knowing the destruction of it to
come (moved with compassion) powered forth tears over it, but the Pharisees and
Scribes enflamed with the fire of envy, seeing Jesus to be extolled with
admiration and honor, rebuked (...) sole redemption, to deliver us out of the
bondage of eternal death, and from the intolerable pains of everlasting
damnation, to be made coheires with him of a most blessed life in the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Learn therefore (oh my soul) to imitate thy blessed Savior, who abstained
from meat to do the will of his heavenly Father, by seeking by all means to
win their souls, who being void of all humanity, sent him fasting out of
their City. Oh hard-hearted Jews, to give such unkind entertainment to my
bountiful Lord and loving Jesus! But be thou kind (oh my soul) like Lazarus,
and ready like Mary and Martha, to receive thy Savior, that he may give thee
everlasting bread for thy food, and water of eternal life for thy drink.
Come and suppe with me (my sweet Savior,) vouchsafe to enter into my simple
cottage: I confess I am unworthy that thou should come under my roof, yet
I know that thou art always willing to come, where thou art kindly and
friendly invited. Open thou the door of my heart, that thou may enter and
dwell with me for ever: then salvation shall come to my whole house, then I
shall lie down to sleep in peace, and rise again without any dread of
danger: for I shall be safely covered under the shadow of thy wings, and
remain in peaceable security under thy mighty protection.

Consider (Oh my Soul,) and meditate often in thine inward thoughts, of the
strange ingratitude of the stony-hearted Jews toward thy Savior JESUS, who
would not afford him so much as a meals meat at night, for his great pains
he took with them all the day; but he was constrained to return hungry with
his Disciples, from so oppulent and populous a City, to Bethanie, a poor and
small village, there to refresh his weary and weak body: where he made so
small a supper, that he returned hungry to Jerusalem the next morning; and
spying a Fig Tree which had only fair leaves, Beware of hypocrisy.
but no fruit to slake his hunger, or to afford him any refreshing in his
journey, he was so highly displeased, that it made so fair a show, and bare no
fruit, that he cursed it, and so it withered, and became barren for ever.

Were thou (oh my gracious Lord) so highly displeased with this fruitless
Tree, and were thou not grieuouslie offended with the unthankful Jews? No
doubt but thou had just occasion to have cursed that ungrateful Nation,
whose hearts were so barren, that they did bear no fruit, and their minds so
deuoid of all common humanity, that although they ever stood in need, yet
they did never deserve any drop of thy sweet and comfortable mercy.

Oh Lord, who can worthily land the immeasurable largeness of thy infinite
mercy? who can thoroughly taste the sweetness of thy most excellent bounty?
It was thy desire to have won them by mildnes: it had been thy delight to
have converted them by kindness: thou did curse that barren tree which
had store of leaves, but no profitable fruit: to teach that graceless Nation
what thou did dest expect at their hands, and what thou might have justly
inflicted upon them, for the hardness of their hearts, whose mouths were often
filled with religious words, their hearts and hands being evermore empty of
charitable works.

Be thou wise therefore (oh my soul) think not that thou have done enough if
thou utterly condemn those inhumane and hard-hearted Jews, who had not so
much kindness, as to offer thy Savior a crum of bread, or a cup of cold water,
unless thou thy self make some provision to entertain thy loving Jesus,
whenever he shall vouchsafe to come into thy Cottage, to visit thee in
kindness: Oh how happy shall thou be, if thou art provided to welcome so good
a Guest, whose acceptance shall bring thee eternal blessedness, and who is so
kind, that he will dwell with thee for ever: and where he remains, their
store is always increased, their riches are multiplied in abundance: he
cannot, he will not be chargeable unto thee, if thou will show him infallible
tokens of thy true love, and make any provision, be it never so mean, to
receive him with cheerfulness: he expects no sumptuous preparation, he
longs for no dainty cates, he regards no magnificent pomp, he hates
vain ostentation and outward glory, he can never abide to make any abode in
that house which is not furnished with true humility. Oh happy is that soul
that is not unprovided at his coming, but stands always ready at the door
to open unto him, whenever he knocks, and is willing to enter.

Consider also, o my soul, the great pains and diligent labors of thy
industrious Savior, who continued the day time in the Temple, preaching, and
teaching the people; and in the night, praying, or instructing his Disciples:
therefore if thou will show thy self a faithful servant to so good a Lord,
and a loving Disciple to so kind a Master, set him always before thine eyes,
as a perfect pattern and lively example, to imitate him in the careful
execution of thy lawful calling.

Wear not out the moment of thy poasting life in carnal delights, fulfilling
the lewd desires of the wanton flesh, accounting worldly pleasure thy chiefest
treasure, and making thy belly thy God, for the end of such is eternal
damnation.

God has given man an upright countenance, that he should lift up his head,
and look toward Heaven, therefore derogate not so much from thy dignity, as
to have thine eyes, and thy thoughts, still fixed upon the earth, like unto the
bruit beasts, never well pleased, but when (like a Mole) thou art turning over
thy silver and golden heaps.

Thou see (oh my soul) that thy loving Savior Jesus, did seek by all
means to benefit the Jews, his unnatural Countrymen, and to do them all
good, but they were always so froward, that they were evermore forward to do
him nothing but mischief and hurt, who having exiled tender pity from their
eyes, and all humane compassion from their hearts, had not only so much
kindenes, as to offer him a morsel of meat to refresh his weary body at night,
when he had labored all day to feed their souls with spiritual bread: but
most unkindly their chief rulers and the Scribes, held a Council against
him, complotted many strange inventions, forged many odious calumniations, and
imagined many false crimes, cruelly to deprive him of his harmless life, and
to accelerate his speedy death: because the good deeds which Christ did daily
to the people, were unwelcome news to their ears, and bred nothing else, but
sorrow in their envious minds.

Therefore they raged with fury, and conspired in bitterness of their malice,
how they might entrap Christ Jesus by craft and subtlety, and so like an
innocent Lamb, lead him away to the slaughter: for so fell was their hatred to
the life of our Savior, and so greedy were they to hasten his death, that had
they not feared that the people would have hindered their wicked purposes,
interrupting the course of their malicious practice, they would have vented
their swelling spite, and disgorged their full stomachs, surcharged with
malice against him, on the feast day: but they suspected their cruel deed, at
that time, would have stirred up greater tumults amongst the people, which did
reverence Jesus, as a Prophet: for if they might have had their own will, and
satisfied the longing of their envious humor, they would have spared no day,
nor regarded any place, so they might have split his innocent blood.

Oh with what damnable counsel and devilish devises, do I hear thy furious
enemies consulting against thee, my innocent Jesus, thou Lord of eternal
glory?

What false imaginations, what monstrous inventions, what hellish stratagems,
what forged accusations, did they coin against thee, their hearts burning, and
their hands itching, to cut off thy blessed life, to stain the earth with thy
precious blood, and to work (as they wickedly wished) thy final destruction?

How cruelly do these faithless Jews conspire against thee? those impious
wretches said within themselves (carried away with the violent current of their
irefull imaginations) let us oppress that righteous man, let us swallow him up
in our rage, let us suddenly devour him in our madness, let us set traps to
take him, and lay snares to entangle him: let us root him out from the land of
the living, that his name may never be remembered any more, because he is
obstinate in contradicting our words, and peremptory in carping at our works.
We cannot, we may not tolerate his arrogancy, we will not brook his
oppositions.

He lays open our sins, to increase our shame, he professes that he has
the knowledge of God, and names himself the Son of God: He discloseth our
secret thoughts, he is loathsome to our eyes, we cannot abide him in our
sight, the course of his life is opposite to our Laws, he is an open adversary
to our Decrees, he abstaineth from our ways, as though they were wicked,
defiled with uncleanness, and polluted with vices.

We are reputed of him as men of no worth, he stands not in awe of our
authority, he esteems our threatenings of no moment, and he arrogantly
boasts, that he has God for his Father.

Let us see if his protestations be faithful, and if his speeches be true: and
let us assay and make trial what things will happen unto him.

If he be the true Son of God, he will receive him into his protection,
deliver him out of the hands of his foes, and keep him safe from danger: Let
us examine him churlishly, and torment him cruelly, to make trial of his
meekness; let us condemn him to a most shameful death, that we may prove his
patience.

Such were the bitter words of the cruel Jews, who sat in counsel to kill
my Savior Jesus, the true Lord of life, whose good deeds were so odious to
their vicious sight, and his sweet breath so noisome unto their stinking
nosthrils, that they would not suffer him to live any longer.

Oh that hellish envy should so pervert the understanding, and enrage the
minds of men to do such mischief!

Why did the Jews so furiously rage together? why did they imagine a vain
thing against the Lord and his anointed? saying, Let us break their bonds
asunder, and cast away their cords from us: But, the Lord had them in dirision:
he spoke unto them in his wrath, and vexed them in his sore displeasure, and
placed his King upon his holy hill of Sion for ever.

Now, although the bloody minded Jews longed for the death of my innocent
Jesus, yet they were loath he should suffer on the day of their Feast, not for
any favor they bare unto him, but for fear of the people.

But thou my loving Lord, did make choice of that time to offer up thy self
a Sacrifice for our sakes, that thou might receive greater reproach, and
that thy death might be acted with more shame, suffered only for our sins.

Thy righteous life being not only always free from any evil action, but
evermore so pure, that it never was tainted with evil cogitation. And also
that thy death might be known unto many (although lamented of few which did
behold thee) the concourse of people being great, that flocked from many
bordering towns and villages to Jerusalem, at the day of that great
solemnity: who seeing with their eyes, had not Grace been wanting, might have
understood in their hearts, that thou were the true substance, whereof the
Paschall Lamb was but a figure.

Oh Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, sprinkle my soul
with some drops of thy precious blood, that although it have lien long buried
in the grave of sinful iniquity, yet at last it may be revived and live
again by virtue of thy quickening mercy.

Now the bloody Jews holding a wicked consultation, how they might deprive my
beloved Savior of his life, even then came cursed Judas, and offered them (for
money) to betray his loving Master to death: saying, What will ye give me and
I will deliver him unto you?

Nor was he a more greedy Traitor, to set his kind Masters blood to sale,
then they ready chapmen to entertain so bloody an offer, seeing one of his
own family so forward to deliver him up into their hands, whom they had
already murdered in their hearts: So they proffered him thirty pieces of
silver; Oh cursed Judas to make such an offer! Oh execrable Jews to accept it.
But most damned Judas to perform it.

Had Malice (oh ye bloody Jews) so hardened your hearts? had Fury so blinded
your eyes? had Envy so fired your grudging affections, that contrary to the
law of God and Nature, you should animate such a damnable Traitor to perpetrate
so horrible a treason, against your Messiah, your master?

For what could be more hateful to God, more odious to good Men? what more
opposite to Nature? what more contrary to good Nurture, then that one of a man's
own household should prove so unfaithful, as to sell at so vilde a price the
dearest blood of his loving Lord? or that any men should be found so monstrous,
as to allow and like of such a damnable offer? Oh thou most wicked traitor! oh
thou most ungrateful and graceless Servant! Oh ye generation of Vipers,
cursed Jews, damned Judas! Oh thou dissembling Disciple by name, but indeed a
most bloody enemy! are these the thanks thou do give to thy Master for
his kindness? is this the requital of his love? are these the most worthy
rewards that thou can spare him for his liberal bounty? are these the best
arguments of thy gratuitie, for all his benefits bestowed upon thee? Oh thou
Son of perdition, execrable Traitor, and damnable Merchant, to sell the
sacred blood of thy faithful Master! Had my kind Jesus committed any offense
against thee? or had he discontented thy mind, and vexed thy heart, that thou
should treacherously betray him into the hands of his foes, to be tortured
and put to a most cruel and shameful death? nay rather, what large
liberality had he not used toward thee? what store of benefits had he not
heaped upon thee? Oh thou ungrateful wretch! Oh thou hateful traitor! my
loving Jesus made thee one of the little number of his Disciples: admitted thee
into the blessed society of his elected, and made thee Steward of his family,
to keep the bag, and bestow the money which was given to him and his
Disciples: and do thou in requital of his favorable love, and in recompense
of his extraordinary kindness, post to the cruel Jews, whom thou, thou I
say, knew did always prosecute him with deadly hate, and eagerly sought his
innocent life) to offer them open sale of the blood of thy loving Master,
allured with the insatiable desire of money, (a pleasant bait to take a
covetous mind) bewitched with Satan's enticements, and instigated with the
unquenchable thirst of damnable lucre, that distempered thy understanding, and
clean put out the eye of thy natural reason?

Oh how does covetous lust tyrannize over our souls, and captiuate our senses,
if it once seize upon our hearts, and take possession in our breasts! It makes
us violate our Faith toward God, our Fidelity toward Men: it makes Parents
unkind to their Children, and Children undutiful toward their Parents: it
armeth the wicked to commit bloody murder: it makes Subjects disloyal to
their Prince, it eggeth and edgeth them to attempt the utter ruin of their
Country: it kindeleth the fire of civil and intestine Seditions: it blows up
the sparkles of horrible Treason: it excludes kind Hospitality, it is the
Cut-throate of Christian Charity: it pampereth all vices, it starueth all
virtues. What is it but a Hellish Fury, the author and actor of humane
misery? Oh how happy is the heart that is not affected to it! Oh how
peaceable is the conscience that is not infected with it! Tell me thou bloody
Traitor Judas, did thou not see many wonderful Miracles done by thy loving
Master before thine eyes? did thou not hear many divine speeches uttered
by his blessed mouth? did not thou attend upon him preaching in the day?
did thou not accompany him praying in the night? had thou so soon forgot
his blessed Sermons? went all in at one ear and out at the other? did thou
remember no better his heavenly Exhortations? had thou quite raced out of thy
memory his general compassion toward all, and his particular goodness
toward thee? why was thy soul starued for want of food in the midst of
plenty? why were thy spirits dried up with thirst, being so near a pure
fountain? It was because thou had no grace to taste of that sweet
celestial Manna, or to drink of that rock of living water. Could thou
esteem so rare a Jewel, as my Savior Jesus, at so base a rate? would thou
sell his precious blood at so low a price that was sufficient to pay the
greatest price of our Redemption? What base opinion might thou think the
high Priest might have of thee, proving so vilde a Traitor, (although to serve
their own turns they allowed thy Treason?) Did thou not think the whole
World would daily hate thee, when being a Disciple, thou had so vildely
betrayed thy loving Master, and craftily plotted the death of thy gracious
Benefactor? But woe be unto thee, and to all of thy condition: it had been
better for thee thou had never been, then being, to have been an
instrument of such heinous, such detestable, such horrible Treason: Keep my
soul (oh Lord) set a Watch before the door of my heart, that no covetous
desire may have passage into my bowels, or enter into my breast to get dominion
over my reason, to wound my conscience, to inflict my mind with noisome lusts,
and to confound my understanding with greedy desires. Let the memory of this
sorrowful day, wherein thy covetous and damnable disciple Judas sold thee, my
innocent and loving Savior Jesus, unto the murmuring and murdering Jews,
draw out floods of tears from mine eyes, and fetch out sorrowful sobs and
deep sighs from my repenting heart, to bewail the horror of my
transgressions, and to lament the innumerable multitude of my many most
monstrous iniquities, which brought thy most sacred body to the market, there
to be sold, and from thence to be led to the slaughter, cruelly to be slain;
that with thy most precious blood thou might pay the price of my Redemption,
which am a most wretched and sinful creature: yet let the sweet recordation of
thy immutable love, and the joyful remembrance of thy immeasurable mercy, so
comfort me in the midst of my misery, that although I find much matter in my
self to make me fear, yet that I may never despair, knowing that thou art
always willing to apply a sovereign salve to a wounded soul, and sweet
consolation to a woeful conscience, whenever (oh blessed Savior) we
acknowledge our malady, and faithfully desire thy saving help in our misery.

Of the Preparation of Christ's last Supper by the Disciples on Thursday: of the
washing of the Disciples feet, performed by Jesus himself: and of many
exemplary actions of Jesus at the Supper. MED. III.
Christ Jesus John 13.5.
washed his Disciples feet;
They loath, John 13.8.
refuse; but he enforces it:
For John 13.2.
Supper done, to Simon thus said he,
Unless I do it, thou have no part with me. John 13.8.


THe first day of the sweet bread, that is to say, the fifth day of the week, in
the evening of which day the Paschall Lamb was slain, and sweet bread was
eaten, according to the custom of the Jews, the Disciples came to Jesus,
seeing it was the time of the Feast, and that their Master had no resting
place of his own, where he might lay his head, and said unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Paschall Lamb? Teach me here (my
sweet Savior, by thy example) so to live in the world, that I may be prepared
every day to leave the world, esteeming my self as a Pilgrim, still
traveling, and every day removing, and not to build my palace of pleasure here
in this transitory world, where all things are uncertain, subject every
moment to misery, changes and mutabilitie.

Let neither the pleasant baits of prosperity, nor the bitter brunts of
adversity, hinder me in my journey, whilst I travail toward the heavenly
Jerusalem.

Let thy humility be my greatest honor in time of prosperity; let thy
poverty be my chiefest riches in time of adversity; and let thy patience be
my only comfort in the sorrowful day of affliction: let thy quiet contentment
calm the tumults of my grudging mind, and bar out all repining thoughts,
seeing thou the Lord of all, had not so much as a Cottage, to cover thy head
from the dew of heaven, or to shadow thy face from the beams of the Sun. But
my sweet Savior, although thou were poor in respect of thy Humanity, that
thy poverty might be our consolation in time of our distresses, and to teach
us to bear with patience the heavy burden of our afflictions, yet thou did
show the bright beams of thy Divinity to thy Disciples, when they saw that
performed indeed, which thou had told them in word, when they met with the
man in the City, a mere stranger unto them, whose heart thou had prepared
to make provision for thee and thy Disciples, to celebrate the Feast of the
Paschall Lamb.

Oh happy man (whom thou did vouchsafe to choose for thy Host! Oh blessed
house prepared to receive such a Guest! Send thy holy Spirit (my loving
Savior) as a Harbinger, to prepare a lodging for thee in my heart, and so
furnish my mind with thy heavenly graces, that I may be able to give thee
such entertainment, that thou may like and love to dwell with me for ever.
Now, when the Table was prepared, the Paschall Lamb made ready (with other
necessaries) at evening, Jesus came thither with his disciples, and when the
hour was come, he sat down to the Table. Oh happy feast! blessed are they
(my loving Savior) which sit down to meat at thy Supper. Most happy and
blessed are they (oh most merciful JESUS,) who are so dearly beloved of thee,
and so highly honored by thee, as to be made worthy to sit at thy Table.

Thou will give them everlasting food for their meat, and water of life for
their drink, so that after thy bountiful Feast, they shall never know any
hunger, nor feel any thirst.

Grant me (Oh bountiful Lord) to taste of that heavenly food, and to drink
my fill of that Celestial water, so that my body may be thy holy Temple, and
my soul thine everlasting habitation. Behold (oh my soul) how thy loving
JESUS sits amongst his Disciples; a meek Lamb among meek sheep, except
cruel Judas, who although he were a devouring Wolf, sat down to the Table
in their holy society. Oh most holy society of thee, and thy faithful
Disciples! Oh most glorious company of all but one, who had a Devil!

These thy children, my most loving Jesus, do sit like Olive branches round
about thy Table: They sat down with thee lincked together with the bond of
perfect love, the minds of all them being faithful unto thee, and all their
affections longing after thee, only Judas was an odious Traitor, and thou
knew well enough that he should betray thee.

They all eat with thee the meat set before them, and they eat the pure
Paschall Lamb, after the manner of the Jews.

Oh blessed house, oh happy supping-parlour, worthy of great honor, in which
my gracious Lord vouchsafed to make his blessed Supper.

Wherefore was not I there then, my sweet Savior, to attend upon thee, and thy
faithful Disciples? I would have esteemed it as my greatest honor, to have
done thee any service. Certainly, I would have gathered up some of the crummes
which fell from the Table of my Lord.

Oh how joyful would it have been to my heart! Oh how would it have pleased
mine eyes, to have had but a view of thy amiable countenance! I would have
fallen down flat at thy feet, and with Mary Magdalene, I would have washed
them with my tears. And thou oh my most merciful Lord, which did not
despise the tears of a sinful and a sorrowful Woman, would not have
rejected me, a poor Publican, and grievous sinner: and as thou were
compassionate toward her, so thou would also have been merciful to me.

Oh how comfortable would thy most pleasant speeches (my sweet Savior) have
been to my sorrowful soul? how quickly would thy most wholesome words
wherewith thou did refresh thy loving Disciples, have healed the wounds of my
grieved conscience? What did my Lord begin to speak? what were thy first
words when thou were set at the Table? Thou say, I have earnestly desired to
eat this Passover with you before I suffer: Oh how great is thy Charity? how
immeasurable is thy love, my loving Jesus? Thou did earnestly desire to eat
with thy Disciples, but it was not to slake thy hunger, or to refresh thy
feeble nature: thou had no such need of corporal food, but it was thy meat
to do the will of thy Father: Thou were desirous to leave some tokens of thy
exceeding love, with thy loving Disciples, before thy departure, and to seal
them an everlasting assurance of thy continual providence over them.

let the precious balm of thy sovereign mercy, heal the deep and deadly
wounds of mine iniquity: Oh my God, open thy pitiful ears to hear my
petition, answer me graciously, and despise not my prayer.

Command my wandering heart to come out of the broad way that leads to Hell
and damnation, and to return into the narrow path, which conducteth to heaven
and everlasting salvation: so that being once again returned into it, it may
never hereafter wander out of it.

Shut all worldly cares and wicked cogitations out of my heart, that neither
the heavy burden of them may so depresse my mind, that the devotion of my
Prayer cannot ascend up unto thee, nor so stop the passage of my soul, that
the comfort of thy grace cannot descend down upon me.

Draw me unto thee, my most loving Jesus, thou which art mine assured
salvation, in the day of my greatest misery, and my only comfort and
consolation in the last and latest hour of my deadly agony: for I am wounded,
and my heart is consumed, because I have forgotten to eat my bread, which
should have nourished me to everlasting life.

Indeed, I have been altogether forgetful of thee, my beloved Jesus, for I
have not called to my mind thy most holy Passion with any zealous or serious
meditation: I have had no delight to think upon thy precious wounds, which
thou did suffer to heal my sores: neither have I found any comfort in the
pure streams of thy innocent blood, powered out to wash away my sins, and to
purge my corrupted soul: I have not looked after my beloved in the day, I have
not longed for my Bridegroom in the night.

I confess my gracious Lord, I have not been mindful of thee, my thoughts
have been wandering abroad, my mind has not been exercised with any sweet
meditation of thy mercy: my spirit has not been troubled with sorrow for my
sins, mine eyes have shed no tears, nor my heart sent forth any sighs for
my manifold transgressions. Therefore what shall I do? I will return to the
Lord my God, and I will call upon him, I will not cease to reiterate the most
holy Name of Jesus, until thy voice sound in mine ears, there, there. Come
therefore (oh good Jesus) and have mercy upon me. Hear (oh sweet Jesus) the
prayer of thy servant: infuse and dip my heart in thy blood, and diffuse thy
grace into my soul oh most merciful Jesus: let my heart oh most loving Jesus)
be like wax melting in the midst of thy bloody side. Cloth my mind with
the mourning garment of thy Passion, and let my zealous affections burn like
fire in my serious meditation.

Lead me (oh my most mild and kind Jesus) to thy most holy Supper, where I
may hear thee speaking to thy Disciples, sitting at thy Table, after thou
had washed their feet.

Tell me (oh my soul) if thou have read what the Lord my Jesus did when he
sat down again to the Table, after the washing of his Disciples feet.
Verily, while they were yet eating, Jesus took bread, and giving thanks, he
blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said: Take and eat
this is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. And
when he had given every one a morsel, he took the cup, and pouring wine
into it, giving thanks, he likewise gave it to them saying: Drink ye all of
this, for this is my blood of the new Testament which is shed for you, and for
many, for the remission of sins, and they all drank of it. Let us pause a
while (oh my soul) and with devout meditation ponder in our minds, and
treasure up in our hearts, the wonderful things which our blessed JESUS has
done for us; for our merciful and gracious Lord has made a memorial of his
wonders, he has given meat to them which fear him. Oh wonderful Supper, in
which so many admirable things were done and effected! This was thy last Supper
(oh most sweet Jesus) which thou did make when thou were about to depart out
of the world to thy Father. How many admirable wonders of thy exceeding love?
how many miracles of thy infinite mercy are presented unto us in this thy
blessed Supper: but thou have most specially ordained this mystical, sweet,
delightful, and heavenly sacrament of thy body and blood, that the memory of
thy Passion might remain for ever in the minds of the faithful: Oh
wonderful Sacrament, in which is contained such abundance of all kind of
sweenesse! no sweetness be it never so dilicious can come near it in
goodness; no pleasure, be it never so incomparable, is worthy to be compared
unto it.

Oh most sweet Jesus, how pleasant, how sweet art thou, if we might have a true
taste of thy exceeding sweetness? In this thy wonderful Sacrament, thou do
feed us with corporal bread, but after a spiritual manner. What therefore can
I want to satisfy my what may I wish to augment my joy, if I have my Jesus
present with me? Though now I see thee darkely through a glass, yet hereafter
I shall see thee face to face. I cannot satisfy my mind (oh my most
bountiful Jesus) with admiration of thy unmeasurable liberality: I cannot
wonder enough at the exceeding largeness of thy bounty.

What greater gifts could thou have bestowed upon us? what more excellent
benefits could thou have derived unto us? For in this thy blessed Testament,
thou have bequeathed great and precious Legacies to all thy Brethren that
faithfully love thee, and constantly believe in thee: In very deed thou
have left them a rich inheritance, we cannot estimate the price, we can make
no true account of the greatness. Some at their death leave to their heirs,
Cities and towns, great possessions and store of money: some build them
sumptuous houses, and erect stately Sepulchers, that their name might remain
among men, and their memory continue upon earth. But thy bounty, my most
kind and loving Jesus, does far exceed and surmount them all: for thou have
left thy own self unto us, that we should have a continual spectacle of thy
most holy Passion in our minds, and often think upon thy innocent death in
our repenting hearts. And in thy blessed Sacrament, which is so highly to be
honored of us, and most reverently to be celebrated by us, thou do give thy
self for food to be received of us by faith, which may nourish us to
everlasting life, and deliver us from the doom of eternal death. Oh my most
bountiful Lord, oh exceeding, admirable, and incomparable love of my loving
Savior, my beloved Jesus! But how odious is mine ingratitude, my kind and
loving Jesus, how great and grievous is my forgetfulness, that I do not
continually remember the pangs of thy Passion, and evermore meditate on the
pains of thy bitter death, when I participate thy wonderful Sacrament, and
celebrate thy blessed Supper, seeing by thy death thou have merited for me
everlasting life, and by thy Passion have purchased for me eternal redemption.

Why do I not remember that thou were wrongfully accused, scornefully derided,
spitefully reviled, cruelly scourged, and crucified as a heinous malefactor,
and put to a shameful death as a wicked doer: and how patiently thou did
endure the bitter pains of the cross, to deliver me a most wretched sinner,
from the curse of eternal death, justly pronounced against me, and ready to
be inflicted upon me, if thy obedience had not appeased the wrath of thy
heavenly Father, and thy gracious mercy salued the wounds of my misery.

Oh my dry head, why do thou not draw water with joy out of the fountains
of thy Savior, for he is a Well of living water? Oh tears, why do ye not
stream forth in great abundance, with exceeding joy and exultation, while I
call to mind the exceeding sweetness of mine everlasting liberty, and
meditate upon the greatness and goodness of my eternal Redemption, in this
most sacred, holy, and wonderful Sacrament represented unto me? Why do not
my spirits faint with exceeding joy? and why is not my mind ravished with
excessive mirth, when I consider the immeasurable greatness of thy love; and
the incomprehensible largeness of thy bounty, whereby thou have been moved
to give us thy self for everlasting meat, to nourish us to eternal life?
Have mercy upon me (oh my most merciful Lord) because by reason of the
imbecillitie of my dull understanding, and by the hardness and dryness of my
heart, I am notable to relish the goodness, nor taste the sweetness of the
wholesome fruit of thy holy and blessed Sacrament: yet I (most vilde wretch)
presume to come to thy Table, and to receive this holy food, though most
unworthy of so great a mercy.

But woe be unto my conscience, and horror unto my wounded soul, because I
have approached unto thy holy Table, and taken of thy sanctified meat with
polluted hands, and unwashed feet, and yet I have not blushed for shame, nor
bewailed the folly of my intolerable Presumption. For I consider my most
sweet JESUS, that in this thy most glorious Supper, before thou did
institute the most blessed Sacrament, as a memorial unto us of thy bloody
Passion, thou the true Christall-glasse of Humility, taking the shape of a
Servant, did wash the feet of thy Disciples, saying moreover unto Peter, If
I shall not wash thee, thou shall have no part with me. Shall it not therefore
be my great presumption, and shall I not incur the danger of a most grievous
offense against thee, if I would have any part with thee, when I approach unto
thy holy Table with unwashed feet, and participate thy blessed Sacrament with
defiled hands?

I know therefore (my gracious Lord) who, and what a one I ought to be, when I
come to such an excellent Sacrament.

I know my loving Lord that I should first wash my feet, heart and hands, and
purge all my corrupted affections, before I should presume to receive thy pure
and holy Sacrament. I know my good and gracious Jesus, that it is needful for
me every night to wash my Bed, and water my Couch with my tears: Yea, and to
wash my feet with tears of true compunction, and with streams of sorrow,
flowing from the inward devotion of a relenting and repenting heart.

But woe be unto me (most unhappy wretch) because that I a most vilde
creature, do not fear to approach unto such an excellent Majesty, infected
from the crown of my head, to the sole of my foot, with sores and loathsome
diseases, and being a most wicked sinner, wholly ouer-spread with corruption,
and stained with filthy pollution: do not blush to come into thy presence,
but presume to intrude my self into thy blessed society, and to sit down at
thy holy Table, which art a divine Spirit, always pure from the spots of
sin, and stains of iniquity. I come unto thee my meek and loving Jesus,
puffed up with pride, and lifted up with rebellious thoughts, and I presume to
eat with impure hands, and unwashed feet.

Notwithstanding my most merciful JESUS, I know that thy clemency is far
greater then mine indignity, and thy mercy far exceeding my misery. And
therefore confident in thy great benignity, and relying wholly upon thy
immeasurable mercy, I am bold to receive thee, and being infected with so
many dangerous and deadly diseases, I come unto thee, being a skillful and
loving Physician: that I may be cured from my grievous maladies, by thy
sovereign medicines. For by how much the more weak I am, and by how much the
greater the malady is which does afflict me, by so much the more I stand in
need of thy help, that the infiniteness of thy mercy may appear the clearer
in the cure of my grievous malady, and the beams of thy glory shine the
brighter by my deliverance.

Therefore I will come confidentlie unto thee (my most mild and merciful
Jesus) because thy mercies are infinite, that I may enjoy with thee, the
everlasting delights of the blessed.

Give me therefore thy heavenly bread, oh my good Jesus, thou which art the
life of the world, and grant (oh bountiful Lord) that I may be enabled by thy
grace, to eat worthily, that I may remain in thee eternally, and thou in
me everlastingly: for I desire this one thing, it is the joy of my heart, and
the contentment of my longing affections, that I may dwell inseparably with
thee for ever, and I will cleave unto none other but only unto thee, oh my
sweet Jesus, because with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light, I
shall see light.

A Meditation how the Lord Jesus foretold his Disciples that he should be
betrayed by one of them that same night. MED. V.
Amongst the Mat. 26.20.21.
twelve, as Jesus sat at meats,
At his Mark 14.14.
last Supper; thus to them he said;
Who Luke 22.22.
dips his hand in dish, and with me eats,
By John 18.5.
him the Son of man shall be betrayed.

AFter our most loving and most gracious Jesus had fed his Disciples with his
precious Body, and refreshed them with his Blood, he was troubled in spirit,
and said to his Disciples: Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me, which eats with me, that the Scripture may be fulfilled:
he which eats my bread, shall lift up his heel against me: Oh how hard is
this saying, my blessed and bountiful Savior! Oh how harsh and bitter meats
had thou reserved for thy Disciples, at the end of thy Supper? Thou did
feed them with sweet milk in the beginning, and thou gave them delicious
honey in the middle, when thou did wash their feet; and refreshedst them
with thy precious body for their meat, and with thy royal blood for their
drink.

But now in the end thou had reserved gall and Wormwood, sour sauce for
their sweet meat, when these sorrowful words did pass out of thy blessed
lips, and that dreadful speech was uttered, by thy honie-flowing mouth.

Woe is me (my sweet and loving Jesus) I seem to see the cheerful
countenance of thy dear disciples suddenly changed, their hearts ouer-whelmed
with floods of sorrow, their minds perplexed with excessive grief, the heat
of their desires quite extinguished, and all their hopes wholly dashed so
soon as those fearful words had passed through their ears, and pierced
their hearts; who of so sweet a beginning, little expected so sour a
conclusion.

Had they not much matter of mourning, and was it not a world of sorrow unto
them, that thou being their Master, Captain, Governor, Guardian, and Ruler,
should be betrayed to death? and it did much more augment the matter of their
woe, and increase the heaps of their grief, that one of them should contriue
this horrible Treason, and be the Author of this bloody attempt.

The first was a violent motive, to move them to exceeding sorrow, because they
so dearly loved and were so entirely beloved of their loving Master: But the
latter was so horrible to their ears, and so terrible to their hearts, that it
quite abated all their former joy, and utterly amazed their perplexed minds,
maruelling in their troubled cogitations, who amongst such a little flock of
Sheep, should prove so woluish, as to devour so good a Shepherd: admiring
that any one in their holy society, should so far degenerate from his
faithful fidelity, as to betray the life of so bountious, so mild, and so
merciful a Master. But hear oh my soul, what his faithful Disciples
answered, when they heard those lamentable words pronounced. They looked one
upon another, their faces being pale with fear, and their hearts full
fraughted with sorrow, and scarcely could their tongues utter any part of their
inward grief, the flood of their woes did flow fast, and rise to so high a
tide in their hearts, and they said with a trembling voice, what sorrowful
words are these which our dear Master does utter? Who amongst us shall prove
such a cursed wretch, as once to imagine or such a horrible traitor as once to
complot such a detestable deed and execrable fact?

Such a heinous intention, said every one of them, was far from my thoughts,
such a hellish motion did never enter into my breast. For how should such a
Devilish cogitation enter into our minds, or find any harbor in our hearts?
but our Lord cannot be deceived. Wherefore every one of them turning to the
Lord, said: Is it I Rabbi? to whom blessed Jesus answered, One of the twelve
which dips his hand with me in the dish shall betray me.

But peradventure many of them shouing their hand in the dish at that time,
they were not able to discern who it should be.

Wherefore Judas said: What is it I Rabbi? But loving Jesus, otherwise not
discovering him, answered, Thou have said: as though he should say, thou have
said and not I: for we may think truly, that if my loving Jesus had plainly
discovered that cursed man to the rest of his loving and beloved Disciples,
they (if we should compare their affections with other men's passions) had not
been able to have contained their hands, but with one accord would have
assailed that most wicked traitor, and have ended his hateful days, with a
speedy death, who allured with the baits of the Devil went about to make
sale of the blessed life of their dear and best beloved Master. For how
would thou have been able, oh bold and courageous Peter, to have cooled the
heat of thy fury, and to have held thy hands from taking vengeance upon such
a damnable Traitor, when as thou did not fear to make resistance against a
great band of Soldiers, in the defense of thy beloved Master? For as their
love toward loving Jesus was without mean, so their hatred toward hateful
Judas would have been without moderation, if his treacherous plot had been
openly discovered unto them. But I pray thee stay here a while, (oh my soul)
and ponder within thy inward thoughts, with devout meditation, the sacred words
and divine speeches, more sweet then honey and the honie-combe, which my most
sweet Jesus uttered to his faithful Disciples, as he went to the place of his
unjust apprehension, which the Evangelist John retaining in his memory,
through the holy Ghost, has faithfully recorded in his heavenly and most
sacred Gospel. Meditate there seriously upon the wonderful love which he
had toward his loyal Disciples: he was their Lord and Master, yet he did not
disdain to eat meat, conforting with the meanest of them: he washed their
feet, he gave his body and blood unto them: and after all these things, did
not cease to teach them the way of truth, and to feed their souls with the
spiritual food of his celestial doctrine.

Oh most merciful and blessed Jesus, thy words are spirit and life, which thou
do speak to thy Disciples: and that knew thy Servant Peter, when he said;
Thou have the words of eternal life: For thy words are pure and sweet to the
taste of them that love thee; yea, more sweet then honey and the honie-combe.
They also knew, that those who were sent by the chief Rulers, to lay hands
upon thee, were taken with such wonderful admiration at the gracious words
which did proceed out of thy blessed mouth, that they were constrained to
proclaim thy worthy praises, telling them, That never any man spoke so
graciously: Oh most eloquent Orator! streams of sweetness do flow from thy
lips, Honey and Milk are ever plentiful under thy tongue: Oh how powerful,
how eloquent, how wonderful were the words which my Lord uttered to his
Disciples in the end of his sweet Oration! He exhorts them to sow the seeds
of true love in their hearts, and to show forth the fruits thereof one to
another.

After, he admonishes them, that they should be constant in their love, and
permanent in their Faith toward him their loving Savior. For he that is
destitute of the former can never be possessed of the latter.

And after those things, he fore-telleth them what great dangers they should
pass, what tribulations, troubles, afflictions, and calamities, they should
suffer after his departure, that being forewarned, they might be better armed.

Lastly, he powers forth his prayer unto his heavenly Father for them, that
they might not shrink back like cowards in the day of their trial, nor their
Faith fail them in the bitter storms of affliction, but above all things, oh
my most sweet JESUS, I am not able to wonder enough at thy earnest
Exhortations, which thou did use to kindle the sparks of fervent love
toward thee in the hearts of thy faithful Disciples, thou do specially
above all things, charge and command thy Disciples, that they love thee, and
covet after nothing but thee! Oh how great is the excellency of true love! Oh
how fervent is the vehemency of a devout spirit: Oh how forcible is the
pre-eminence of a charitable affection! Thou did commend, and leave love (my
beloved Jesus) as a most rare and precious Jewel to thy dear Disciples.

Therefore this is highly to be extolled of us, and chiefly to be desired by
us, as our greatest riches, and only treasure: Let him oh loving Jesus, be
abiected out of thy gracious favor, let him have no taste of thy kindness, that
does not honor thy name, and possess his heart with thy love.

Truly, many rivers of water, have not been able to put out the fire, nor
quench the flame of true love: for love is as strong as death.

Verily, if I should give all my substance, were it never so great, I would
regard it as nothing, rather then I would want or forgo my true love: for he
that loves thee faithfully (my most loving Savior) will leave all things
willingly, take up his Cross chearefully, and follow thy steps constantly.

Therefore, who shall separate me from thy love, Oh my most sweet Lord? What
shall divert the current of my affections from thee?

Shall tribulation or anguish? shall persecution or hunger? But because I can
do nothing without thy grace (my gracious JESUS) nor perform any thing
without thy power, set such a deep stamp of thy love in my heart, that the
print of it may never be raced out, but abide in it for ever; yea, so wound my
heart with thy sweetest love, that all my desires may be turned toward thee,
and that I may find no ease, but when I think upon thee, that I may love thee
with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength: and that my whole
will, desires, and affections, may covet nothing but thee.

Let all my cogitations be only occupied in the meditation of thy love.
Separate and remove from me all other desires of the flesh, oh my sweet Jesus,
that my whole heart may be solelie conjoined to thee in the day, my soul
humbly attend upon thee in the night, and that my spirit and body may
chearefully seek after thee when I awake early in the morning: for my soul
thirsts after thee, oh God, which art a living fountain, oh when shall I
come before thy face? when shall I appear in thy presence?

And I doubt not oh most merciful Lord, but that I shall be loved of thy
Father, if I shall love thee as thou have taught thy Disciples; and that thou
and thy Father will come to me, and make your dwelling place with me!

And what do I crave more, what do I covet so much as that my Jesus may dwell
and remain in me? Oh how happy were my state, how blessed were my condition,
if I could truly say, my beloved (as a bundle of Mirrhe unto me) will remain
between my breasts.

If I could embrace my beloved Jesus, I would hold him fast betwixt mine arms,
I would never let him depart any more from me, his presence should be my
pleasure in the day, his society should be my solace in the night. Kindle my
reins, oh most loving Jesus, with the burning sparkles of thy love, inflame my
heart with the fire of an ardent devotion toward thee, so that I may long
after thee alone, my dear beloved Christ Jesus, and evermore search for thee,
and never cease to seek thee, until I find thee, which by the vehemency of
thy love, and compassion of thy mercy were willing to be cruelly crucified
for my grievous transgressions, and to dye a shameful death for my sins:
Ingraue the memory of this thy great love, so deep, in the Table of my heart,
that it neither decay by length of days, nor be worn out by the iniquity of
the time.

A Meditation concerning Jesus his going up into Mount-Oliuet, and of his
praying thrice in the Garden. MED. VI.
My Mark 14.34.
soul is heavy, even unto death:
Man's sin does Luke 22.44.
blood and water from me draine:
For sin I feel my Fathers angry Mark 14.35.
wrath;
For sin I drink this cup Luke 22.42.
of deadly pain.

IT was the custom of our loving Jesus, to ascend up often unto the Mount
Oliuet, which was distant the space of a mile from Jerusalem, that he might
pray. There also was a Town named Gethsemani, where there was a Garden,
situated on the Mountains, into the which, beloved Jesus was accustomed to
enter, specially at night time, with his Disciples to pray.

Wherefore after he had ended his glorious and blessed Supper, and also his
sweet and comfortable exhortations made to his beloved and faithful Disciples,
he resorted toward this place, late in the night, accompanied with them.

Here (oh my soul) behold thy Jesus, look upon that innocent Lamb, which
goes of his own accord to the slaughter.

Take a view of his Disciples which follow him, having their faces pale with
fear, their minds perplexed with doubts, and their hearts drowned with floods
of sorrow.

Oh that thou might be so happy as to have a little taste of the sweetness
of his words, and to have some relish of his comfortable Admonitions, which
he made by the way to his sorrowful Disciples, to refresh their fainting
spirits, and to establish their doubtful minds.

What plenty of bitter tears did the Apostles pour down by their cheeks,
when they saw and heard their Lord and Master speaking so gently unto them?
He propounded unto them (as I suppose) all things which he had done with them
at his last Supper, and the words he had spoken unto them, and also after what
manner he should be delivered to death that night.

Behold, his Disciples amazed at his woeful words, and hearing with attentive
ears, the sweet admonitions of their careful Master: They all gave heedy
attention to every word that came out of the mouth of their beloved Lord,
communicating so gently with them.

Oh woeful separation! oh lamentable departure! Now a most kind and loving
Master shall be separated from his beloved Disciples, a wakefull Shepherd from
his harmless sheep, yea, a loving Father from his beloved Children.

What marvel is it then if their mirth be changed into mourning, their joy
into sadness, and their solace into sorrow? They knew well by experience, how
joyful, how pleasant it was to remain with their beloved Jesus, and to enjoy
his blessed society: therefore they had good cause to be amazed with sadness,
and to be wounded with sorrow, for the loss of their loving Redeemer.

Oh what pitiful words (as I suppose) what lamentable voices did they utter,
saying; Will thou leave us (our most gracious Master) like silly Orphans
deprived of comfort? Will thou leave us in a Sea of sorrow without a Pilot?

Where shall we hope for consolation? where shall we seek for help in thy
absence?

And as they could not refrain themselves from sorrow, so he their most
loving Shepherd was ready to give them sweet comfort, chearing up their
drooping minds, with assured hope of his powerful help, and comforting their
sorrowful hearts with his neuer-failing promise of his everlasting love;
telling them, that although he were absent from them in body, yet he would
always be present with them, by his holy Spirit.

I think our most merciful LORD could not contain his tears, he had such
tender compassion toward his sorrowful Disciples, so kind was his affection
toward them, so great was their reciprocal love toward him.

Cleave thou also (oh my soul) to this most holy and heavenly company, and
follow thy Lord, weeping and sighing, sorrowing and lamenting for him which
goes to die for thy transgressions, and to be sacrificed for thy sins, say
unto him faithfully, Lord, I will follow thee wheresoever thou go, I am
ready to go with thee into prison, and to death.

Now alas, (oh my loving Jesus) thou do arm thy beloved Disciples with
spiritual weapons, and do labor by comfortable exhortations to expel
cowardly fear out of their hearts, and to settle a constant courage in their
doubtful minds, that they might not be dismayed in the day of peril, nor
falsify their Faith for dread of any worldly affliction.

But most wicked Judas was busied to furnish the Jews with deadly weapons,
that they might wrongfully apprehend thee, and cruelly condemn thee to a
shameful death.

What damnable deed have thou done thou detestable Traitor? What infernal
Frenzy possessed thy mind? What hellish fury perverted thy understanding?

Thou did leave a most gentle Master, sitting at the Table with his
Disciples, friendly eating, and familiarly talking with them (the KING OF
HEAVEN, and sovereign Lord of the whole earth) who was able to have made thee
partaker of his eternal kingdom, where thou might have lived in happiness
without measure, and joy without end: and thou did follow the Devil, who led
thee to the Jews, to bargain with them, to betray into their hands thy
gracious Lord and bountious Master.

And as thou have been obedient to his will, so shall thou be partaker of his
reward, who abides in the prison of everlasting darkness, tormented in the
fire, whose flame is never slaked, nor shall ever be extinguished.

But now (oh my soul) let us leave damned Judas, a fearful spectacle for all
horrible Traitors, and let us return to innocent JESUS, entering into the
Garden with his Disciples, where he exhorted them to watch carefully, and to
pray earnestly that they might not fall into temptation, nor run into danger.

Here my Savior began to taste of the bitter Cup of sorrow, and to feel the
pangs of humane affliction, his spirits wearied with heaviness, and his mind
tired with sadness, so that he craved comfort of his Disciples, saying: Can
ye not watch with me one hour?

Stay here (oh my soul) strain forth tears from thine eyes, and throng forth
sighs from thy heart: draw near and express thy compassion toward thine
afflicted Jesus.

Behold how his countenance is changed, and his face covered with palenesse, he
is scant able to utter in words, the sorrow of his heavy heart. And what does
he say? My soul is heavy, even unto death.

Thy words (oh my most merciful Jesus) do not a little amaze my mind, and
affright my perplexed thoughts. For, what do thou fear? why art thou
touched with sorrow? why art thou pressed with heaviness? From whence (oh my
loving Lord) does arise the cause of thy sadness? do thou fear any imminent
danger? Do thou dread the punishment which thou art about to suffer?

But for what other thing (oh sweet Lord) did thou come into the world? For
what other end (most blessed Savior) did thou assume flesh unto thee in the
womb of the blessed Virgin, but that by thy death thou should destroy our
death, and save that which was lost?

What benefit had we reaped by thy birth? how could we have rejoiced for the
happy day of thy blessed Nativity, if our condemned souls had not been
redeemed to life by thy most precious death? If thou (oh my loving JESUS) had
refused to die for me, who should have satisfied for my sins? what could have
cured my loathsome Leprosy, but the drops of thy Blood? What could restore me
to life, but thy innocent death?

What did move thee to dye for me, but thy exceeding mercy? whereas (my
loving Savior) thou were subject to fear, and heavy with the terror of
death: there appeared unto us the verity of thy Humanity, not exempted from
the passions of our nature, yet always free from the infection of sin, and
clear from the spots of iniquity.

Wherefore we may the more boldly, be most earnest Suitors, unto thee, to
obtain thy succor in the time of our necessity, and to call for thy sweet
mercy in our bitter misery, because we are assured, that thou in thy
Humanity, have had a sense of our sufferings.

Behold also now my soul, his faithful and sorrowful Disciples! look upon
them, and view what store of tears do fall from their eyes; hear what
pitiful sighs and grievous groans do come from their hearts, while they see
their loving Master vexed in his body, and afflicted in his soul, suffering
the wrath of his Father for the guilt of our sins. After my loving JESUS had
told his sadfull Disciples the heaviness of his soul, pressed with the
ponderous weight of our sins, he departed from them about a stones cast, and
kneeling on the earth, prayed unto his heavenly Father, saying: My Father, all
things are possible to thee; if it be possible, remove this Cup from me, yet
not my will, but thy will be done.

Learn here (oh my soul) of thine afflicted Savior, where to seek a salve
for thy wounds, and from whence thou may hope for help, when any fearful
danger does hang over thy head, or any present anguish torment thy heart, pour
forth thy prayers in his holy Sanctuary; let thy devotion ascend up to him,
that his benediction may descend down upon thee: learn always to submit thy
wish to his will, for if it be not his will to deliver thee, it will be his
will always to comfort thee, if thou continue thy prayers with perseverance,
and attend his appointed time with patience.

Consider how thy Savior prayed three times, uttering the same words, when his
pangs in his Agony were so grievous, and his pains so dolorous, that his
sweat ran down like drops of blood: so heavy was the displeasure of his
Father against him for our sins, so great was the burden of our iniquities
imposed upon his shoulders.

But in the extremity of his passions, and sorrow of his soul, his heavenly
father sent down an Angel from heaven to comfort him, for the Lord will never
leave them forsaken in their sorrow, that call upon him faithfully: he has
commanded us to call upon him in our trouble, and he will deliver us; and as he
has commanded the one, so will he never fail to perform the other.

Draw me (oh my loving Lord) to the Garden where thou were, that I may see thee
praying, and suffer with thee in thy afflictions: call me and say, Come into my
garden, my sister, my spouse: make have oh my Soul, to come to thy Beloved,
because thy Beloved is gone up into his garden, to his bed of spices, that he
may feed there, and gather Lillies.

Let us consider, oh my Soul, and meditate attentively upon all things which
our Jesus has done, let us ruminate his feuerall actions, which may afford us
consolation, and tend to our instruction. For we may take many examples from
our loving Master, which should evermore be proposed before our eyes, that we
might always imitate them in the course of our life.

Thou see how our most gentle Master has commanded his Disciples to lincke
their hearts together with the bands of true love, and to arm themselves with
patience against the days of danger, when he went to the mount Oliuet to pray.
Wherefore being about to enter into a fearful fight, to begin a dangerous
battle, and to encounter many deadly foes, he animateth his courage, and
armeth himself with prayers.

Learn thou also by this his example, in the day of thy tribulation, and hour
of thy affliction, to have thy speedy recourse unto Prayer: We can find no
better weapon wherewith to offend our foes. We can use no better shield
wherewith to defend our friends.

Thou see also my soul, how thy Savior Jesus preparing himself to Prayer,
did leave the company of his Disciples, and he only selected three out of his
number, so that they three which before had been spectators in mount Tabor, of
his glorious Transfiguration, might now be companions and eyewitnesses of his
grievous Passion: that in the mouth of two or three every word might be
established.

Learn thou also to leave the society of men, when thou do address thy
self to talk with God. When thy Savior did pray, he ascended up into a
mountain, to teach us that although our bodies do remain upon earth, yet our
cogitations should mount and soar up into heaven by the wings of devout
prayer: he poured forth the compassion of his heart, he being a good Shepherd
does diligently watch over his flock: the extremity of his own passions do
not make him forgetful of his Brethren.

Oh great love! how constantly, even unto the end, did he tender and love the
little flock of his faithful Disciples, being indeed their most kind and
loving Pastor, when in the most grievous fits of his heavy Agony, and greatest
pangs of his Passion, he was careful to procure their rest in that little time
which was limited unto them.

Teach me (my merciful Jesus) not only to be tenderhearted toward my poor
Brethren, in the bright days of my flourishing prosperity, but breed also
within my bowels, such a feeling compassion toward them in the hard time of my
clowdie adversity, that I may not only wish mine own ease, and labor for
mine own cause, but also that I may be mindful of others afflicted, and do
for them what I may, which are in the like woeful case.

Attend also to the lowly demeanor and humble gesture of thy gentle Lord when
he prays, who kneeling meekely on his knees, and falling flat on the earth
with his face, Luke 22.41. Mark. 14.35. does plainly discover by the
submissiue humiliation of his body, the sincere humility of his mind.

Oh great, worthy, and wonderful humility! when as he being equal and
coeternall with God, does prostrate himself to the earth, when he prays his
father, as though he were a most base and wretched creature, and submits
the issue of his Petition, to the pleasure and will of his Father.

Oh how should I learn to humble my soul, and prostrate my body, which am
indeed nothing else but a sink of sin, and an unsavory lump of iniquity!
When I address my self unto holy prayer, and come to put up my petition to a
God of such infinite glory, should I not cast down my high looks; should I
not curb mine aspiring thoughts; should I not lay aside my proud attire, and
put on the mourning garment of sorrowful and true Repentance?

Oh how should I which am but dust and ashes; yea, indeed nothing else but a
very mass of grievous misery, humble and cast down my self, when I approach
to speak to such a glorious Majesty? I confess I must stand aloof off with
the poor publican, terrified with the horror of my sins, which lie so
heavy upon my head, that I cannot lift up mine eyes unto heaven. Teach me (oh
Lord) for none but thou can teach me to learn this hard lesson of true
humility. This is the Ladder by which my prayers must ascend up unto thee, and
thy Graces descend down upon me: I cannot enter into the Palace of thy most
joyful and glorious Eternity, unless I pass through the strait door of
selfe-debasing humility.

But now (oh my soul) turn thine eyes from thy Saviors humility, and take a
survey of his bitter pangs in his grievous Agony; whose heart was inflamed
with heat, and all the parts of him so vexed with pain, that streams of
sweat, mixed with drops of blood, ran down from his sacred body, Luke
22.44. Oh would my head might be turned into a fountain or tears, and my
bowels melt with tender compassion in this my sorrowful meditation, when I
think upon the dolorous pangs, and doleful pains which pressed drops of
blood out of the innocent flesh of mine afflicted Jesus.

Oh how was thy body pained? how was thy mind perplexed? how were all thy
senses tired in this great work of our Redemption? How heavy is the weight of
my sins, that dissolueth the blessed body of my Lord unto such a wonderful
sweat? How is the beauty of thy face, which the Angels do behold with joy and
gladness, changed with redness, through excessive heat? how immoderately is
it moistened with showers of watrish and bloody sweat? Thou did but speak
the word, and thy word was a work at the first Creation, Genesis 1.3. But now I
see thee sweating, toyling, yea, thy heart aching, while thou art acting the
work of our Redemption.

Oh wretched man, why am I so careless of the health of my soul, when it cost
thee so dear a price to redeem it? What shall I say? what shall I do (my
good Jesus) my heart is as hard as iron, and my bowels no softer then brass, I
have no sense of tender compassion, nor any feeling of sorrowful compunction:
mine eyes are as dry as the Pumise stone, I cannot shed one tear, to weep for
my sins, which were the source of thy sorrow, and the cause of thy passion.
Indeed, my heart should distill drops of blood, and mine eyes should trickle
down tears, when I meditate in my mind on the intolerable pains which thou
did suffer to satisfy the Justice of thy Father for my grievous sins, and to
save my guilty soul. Oh how can I excuse; nay rather, how should I but accuse
my wretched and vile ingratitude?

Where shall I hide my head for shame? where shall I shroud my self from thy
presence? My conscience is a continual witness against me, that I am an
unclean and polluted creature: I may not, I dare not approach unto thee,
unless thou wash me in the sacred Lauer of thy precious blood, for then I dare
and may appear before thee.

Wherefore, have mercy upon me, show me some pity, my compassionate Jesus:
give me a Fountain of tears, that I may weep for my forgetfulness toward
thee all the day, and water my bed for mine ingratitude, with my weeping, all
the night: and so deeply imprint in my mind, the pains of thy Passion, that
I may account all the time ill spent, and the day quite lost, wherein I do not
meditate on them: teach me to imitate thee, my merciful JESUS, that with
bended knees, and an humble heart, I may make my earnest prayer before thee;
inspire my mind with thy holy Spirit, and then tears of true Repentance shall
flow from mine eyes.

Send thy Angel (oh Lord) to bring me consolation in the distressefull time
of my tribulation, for thou have ordained them to assist us in our prayers, and
to comfort us in our sorrow.

And as thy Angel appeared to comfort thee, Luke 22.43. so also thou will
never fail to send thine Angel to comfort us, if we pray unto thee with true
humility of mind, and sue unto thee with hearty sorrow for our sins.

Instruct me also, after thine example, (my blessed Savior) not to despair
of thy mercy, although it be long before I receive any comfort.

Thou did pray three times before thou had any consolation in thine Agony,
or any answer from thy heavenly Father; and as the fierceness of thy grievous
Passion was augmented, so the feruencie of thy most holy prayer was increased.
Mat, 26.44. that by thy patience, our courage might the better be cheared, and
our Christian Magnanimity more firmly resolved to tolerate Famine,
Nakedness, Persecution, or any affliction whatsoever, with constancy and
meekness: building our hope upon a firm rock of a steadfast resolution, that
we shall either have deliverance out of trouble, or comfort in our
tribulation, all in good time, day, hour; yea, minute and moment, which the
Lord has appointed.

It is thy own work, it is thy only mercy, my merciful Savior, to
corroberate our minds, and confirm our hearts, with this constant and
Christian resolution.

Wherefore I beseech thee for thy bountiful mercy, for thy mercy is my only
merit, to work such a resolute constancy in me, that in the bitter brunts of
affliction, I may depend upon thy wakefull providence, and wholly submit my
self unto thy divine will, knowing that nothing can happen to thy Children,
but that which thou have determined to be most expedient for them, whether they
live at rest in prosperity, or be tried like gold in the fire of adversity.

A Meditation how JESUS arising from Prayer, went to meet Judas, and of the
multitude which came to apprehend him, and how Peter cut off one of their
ears. MED. VII.
The Prince of peace, the Lamb of God Math. 26.47.
betrayed:
Exposed to murderers, by a traitors Matthew. 26.49.
kiss:
Judas Matthew. 27.3.
restores the price the Priests had paid:
Despairing Matthew. 27.5.
hangs himself. Traitors mark this.

AFter JESUS had received consolation by his Prayer, he went forth to meet
false-hearted Judas, who had sold him for a prey to the bloud-thirstie Jews,
for he knew that the time did approach, and that the hour drew near, wherein
he should glorify his heavenly Father, and accomplish the wonderful work of
our Redemption.

Here (oh my Soul,) the first matter of our Meditation, is the monstrous
ingratitude of a graceless Disciple toward his gracious and loving Master:
how odious is his deed unto my thoughts? how does his hellish madness torment
my mind?

Oh that my tongue might be more bitter then gall, to exclaim against the
dissembling hypocrisy of such a deceitful Disciple: and my speech more sweet
then honey, to proclaim the singular sincerity of so loving a Master, that
our souls might abhor the infidelity of the one, and our hearts for
evermore, embrace the faithfulness of the other.

Oh thou most wicked wretch, thou wretched, stubborn, and obstinate Traitor,
thou Child of the Devil, thou Son of perdition, what furious malice
hardened thy heart?

How were thou brought to such raging madness? how could the light of thy
reason be so darkened? how could thou be so grossly seduced, that thou
should betray thy most loving Master, and my most gracious Lord?

Was there no spark of grace left in thy breast? had impudence so blinded
thine eyes, and cruelty taken such sure possession in thy heart, that nothing
could change thy bloody mind, and stay the rage of thy frantic mood,
wherewith the Devil had bewitched thy soul, and poisoned thy affections?

Thou go about in thy monstrous madness, and unbridled fury to kill the
immortal Lord, who is Truth it self, to direct us; and Life it self to
quicken us: and to bring him to the slaughter, who only is able, and none but
he, to bring all men to death, and to restore all men to life.

Tell me (I pray thee) thou wicked and foolish madman, were not thou also, as
well as the other Disciples, with the Lord JESUS, when he revived the maiden
which was dead; when he cured the Son of the Ruler; when he raised Lazarus
out of his grave; when he cleansed the Lepers, healed the man sick of the
Palsy; delivered them which were possessed with Devils; when he made him to
see, which was borne blind, and restored many others to their sight?

Tell me I pray thee, had he been able to have done these miracles, if God
had not been with him? What Aegiptian darkness had blinded thine eyes, that
thou could not see his divinity? what Ignorance had blinde-folded thy
understanding, that thou could not know him to be the Son of God by his
admirable works? Where were thou, when at two sundry times, he fed a great
multitude of people, with a little bread and a few fishes?

But to let these merciful and miraculous works pass, which he did for
others; why did not these gracious and charitable deeds which he performed
toward thee, so move thy mind, that although thou had imagined, yet thou
might not have practiced thy horrible intended mischief against him?

Remember thou most wretched creature, and ungrateful Disciple, how thy humble
Master washed thy feet. John 13.5.

How should this wonderful humility of so great a Master have humbled thy
mind, being so base a Servant? Remember how he always extended the tokens of
his love to thee, as he did to the other Apostles, yet no kindness could
restrain thy wicked will, nor change thy covetous mind.

Consider thou most ungrateful and cruel Traitor, how often my loving Jesus
did mildely admonish thee, that thou should retire from thy wicked purpose,
whose all-seeing eye was able to penetrate into the darkest corners of thy
heart, and to search the secrets of thy inward bowels.

It might have checked thy guilty conscience, when he said (after he had
washed his Disciples feet) Ye are clean, but not all: John 13.11. And
again, I speak not of all of you, I know whom I have chosen, John 13.18.

But although these general reprehensions were motives of small moment, to
mollify thy stony heart, yet he spoke unto thee particularly, saying: Do
that quickly which thou art about to do, John 13.27. Did thou not clearly
see that he knew thy inward thoughts, and the secret plot of thy wicked
counsel?

And who but God is able to know the secrets of the heart, and to discover our
hidden cogitations?

But was not thy heart as flintie as an Adamant, that it did not relent with
sorrow? was not thy forehead as hard as brass, that thou did not blush for
shame? Were not thine eyes more dry then a rock, that they could shed no
tears, when thy loving Master, and my beloved Lord said mildly unto thee,
What Judas, do thou betray the Son of man with a kiss? Luke 22.48.

Oh great humility! exceeding meekness! most admirable clemency of my
Savior Jesus! Yet neither the mildnes of his words, nor wonderfulnesse of his
works could soften thy obdurate heart, or reclaim thy obstinate mind, oh thou
pernicious Traitor! My Savior called him friend, Mat. 26.10. whom he knew to
be a direful foe, that the meekness of the name, might have a little calmed
the fury of his nature: but the Devil had sowed such naughty seed in the
furrows of his covetous heart, that he became a wicked guide, to deliver his
loving Master into the hands of his bloody enemies, who hating his innocent
life, had longed for opportunity, to put him to a cruel and shameful death.

Tell me thou damned Judas, what brought thee into such an hellish Frenzy,
that thou did complot with the bloody Jews to betray thy gracious Lord with
a token of kindness? Had thirsty Covetousness so inflamed thy mind that
thou did run headlong to sell thy soul for a little piece of money.

If thou had come like a foe, thy crime had not been so heinous, nor thy
cruelty so odious: But thou like a cousening hypocrite, did cunningly mask
thy deadly hate with the vizard of counterfeit love.

Thou did salute my loving Jesus with no friendly, but a deadly kiss, that
with this token of peace and kindness, thou might cast a mist before the
eyes of his faithful Disciples, that they might think thou had nothing to
do with those wicked persons who came to apprehend their Lord and Master: thou
thoughtest thou had complotted so cunningly, and contrived thy matters so
carefully, that all should have been hidden in darkness, and no man have
known thy damnable practice, but only the cursed crew of thy confederates:
but the Diuill who was the author to allure thee to this mischief, did beguile
thee with a deceitful imagination, and so he will do all others that follow
thy crooked steps, and walk in thy cursed ways. Such iugling hypocritical
tricks may often be hooded from the dim sight of men, but they can never be
hidden from the all-seeing eye of Almighty God: thou came with a word of
peace in thy mouth, when thou did pretend nothing but war in thy heart: thy
speech was as soft as Butter, but thy inward thoughts were more sharp then a
Raisor: thou did presume to offer a Traitors kiss, Mat. 26.49. to my blessed
Savior, when thy lips were full of poison, and thy throat an open Sepulcher:
thou came like a subtle Fox to salute him with a word of health, when thou
were a wicked guide to a hand of cruel Soldiers, who meant him nothing but
hurt; so strong was the desire of filthy lucre to hale thee to mischief, so
eager was thy greedy appetite to bite at this pleasant bait, that thou
could not see the killing hook. For when thou did sell the precious life
of thy loving Master, thou did give thy damned Soul to the Devil, to be
tormented with him for ever, in the fire which flameth continually, and burns
so extremely, that the pains of the least sparkle of it are more then
intolerable: wherefore my sweet Jesus, so mollify my heart, and moderate my
mind, which am thy most unworthy Servant, that I may not give such direful
and deadly kisses unto thee, which art my most kind and loving Master. And
grant unto me by thy gracious clemency, that I may offer unto thee the sweet
kisses of loyal Obedience and constant Love, that my Soul may say unto thee,
Kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, Cant. 1.1. for thy love is better then
wine. Run (oh my soul) and neither let the baits of terrene pleasure, nor the
brunts of worldly sorrow hinder thee in thy way, when thou go to kiss thy
sweet and loving Jesus. But first of all kiss his blessed feet, and bathe
them, as Mary did, with the tears of true repentance, sighing and groaning
with sense of thy sins, that the comfort of his mercy may be extended unto
thee, when such welcome tokens of thy love are bestowed upon him. Prostrate thy
self (oh my Soul) on the earth, that thou may cease to be wretched. Embrace
the feet of thy IESV, pacify them with thy tears, who spared not to pour
forth blood out of his feet, hands, heart, and side, to cleanse thy pollution,
and to wash away thy sins: so that after thy sorrowful contrition, thou
may hear him pronounce unto thee, the joyful word of salvation; saying, Thy
sins are forgiven thee. And now my Soul, after we have fallen down before
the Lord in true humility, and have powered out before him the tears of an
unfeigned contrition: let us arise with a comfortable heart, to kiss his
blessed hands. And then do we kiss his gracious hands with a reverent and
lowly heart, when our mouths are filled with his worthy praises, for his
bountiful benefits freely bestowed upon us, proclaiming his wonderful mercy,
and disclaiming our unworthy merit, whose hand has raised us up out of the
mire, and has advanced us to everlasting honor. Lastly, after we have
reverently kissed his hands, we may more boldly approach to kiss his blessed
mouth; to behold the glory of our Creator, that the bright beams of his
countenance may illuminate our obscure understanding, and that his sweet breath
may so inspire our souls, that all our cogitations may be consonable, and our
actions conformable to his most holy will.

Show us the light of thy countenance, oh my loving Jesus, and then our hearts
shall be filled with gladness, and we shall be satisfied with the abundance
of thine everlasting goodness: for to see the beauty of thy face is our
chiefest felicity, and to be banished from thy face is our endless misery.
Therefore kiss the Son lest he be angry, for if his wrath be kindled (yea
but a little) blessed are all they that trust in him. Psalm. 2.12. Thou have
heard, oh my soul, how traitorous Judas betrayed my innocent Jesus: consider
the cruelty of the one, wonder at the mildness of the other.

Oh that all treacherous persons and bloody minded Traitors might have a view
of desperate Judas, strangling himself with an Halter; that the horror of his
cursed death upon earth, and the terror of his continual pains in hell, might
stay the rage of their furious minds, and manacle their bloody hands: For
although desperate Judas was so tormented with horror of a guilty conscience,
that he could have no peace in his fearful thoughts, nor choose but cry in
his tormenting miseries, deprived of all hope of comfortable mercy, I have
sinned in betraying the innocent blood, Matthew. 27.4. and could find no other
medicine to cure his desperate malady, but the help of an halter, being his
own Hangman, to shorten his woeful days upon earth, that he might make the
more haste to abide everlasting torments in hell: yet there are many whose
hearts are so sore infected with his venomous humor, and their thoughts so
poisoned with greedy desires of unlawful gain, that they make no conscience
to betray their Prince and Country, to prove disobedient and cruel to their
natural Parents, and faithless to their dearest friends: yea, to sell Heaven,
their souls, and themselves, for a base piece of money: but woeful is their
inheritance which buy Hell for their purchase. Yet let me not so bitterly
inueigh against the monstrous fact of cursed Judas, that I forget the
mildness of my merciful JESUS, who did not rate and revile him, calling him
in name (as he was indeed) a damnable Traitor, saluting his Master with a
kiss as a token of his love: but (alas) it was only to betray him.

My patient Savior Jesus called him by the name of a friend, Mat. 26.50. whom
he knew to be a deadly foe, that the mildness of the name might have bred
remorse in his heart, but that the Devil had taken full possession in his
mind, and ruled powerfully over his thoughts.

But why did my loving Savior use such affable words to such a detestable
Traitor? It was to teach me to repress mine affections from raging fury,
when any of his wicked brood lie in wait to take away my life, and secretly
seek to contriue my death.

Teach me my Jesus, to imitate thy patience, when my courtesy is rewarded with
cruelty, when supposed friends prove faithless, and when my kindness is
recompensed with bad words, and rewarded with worse deeds. Thou have willed us
to bless them that curse us, and to pray for our persecutors, Mat. 5.44. But
our flesh is wayward, and it cannot away with this doctrine, wherefore I
beseech thee my gracious Lord, to lend me thy helping hand, it is thine own
work to conform my mind to thy blessed will, that I may be made obsequious
and obedient to thy sacred Law.

But now (my Soul) turn aside thine eyes from hateful Judas, to look upon
loving Peter, who began to be touched with the heat of true love, when he
saw his Master attached by the hands of his enemies, and did boldly object his
own life unto danger, that he might deliver his harmless Master out of
peril, and that he might perform in deed that which a little before he had
professed in word, Mat. 26.35. Ioh. 18.10. As his love was much, so his courage
was great in the defense of his dearly beloved Master, he regarded not the
multitude that came against him, he respected not how well they were armed,
his true heart dreaded no danger.

But so soon as he saw his dread master Iudasly betrayed, and cruelly
apprehended by his malicious foes, he drew out his sword and laid about him,
and cut off Malchus his ear.

Thy love was strong, loving Peter, although thy strength was feeble, to resist
so many, so ill-minded, and so well armed: I cannot but commend thee for thy
love, although thy loving Master does not praise thee for thy deed; thou
did show a token of thy fervent love and affection, although (alas) he
stood not in need of thy weak protection: my loving Savior came to fulfill
the will of his Father, to suffer death; yea, to suffer a cruel and shameful
death on the cross, that we might be restored to life, be freed, and delivered
from the curse.

It was the feruencie of thy love, that had inflamed thy aged heart with
courage, thou could not hold thy hands, when thou did see thy beloved
Master so violently apprehended, so currishly handled, and haled to the
slaughter.

For whosoever (my loving Savior) has his heart knit unto thee with bands of
true love, he dreadeth no danger for thy sake, but will be more willing to
forgo his life, then to leave his true love. But thou did not desire (my
loving Jesus) nay, thou did not allow that Peter should show his manhood, or
attempt by any force to rescue thee out of the hands of thy cruel foes: thou
did disclose unto thy faithful Disciples, the dangerous days that were to
come, and tell them of the bitter afflictions which were to ensue, and that
they should be like Sheep scattered without a Shepherd. But it was not that
they should arm their bodies with weapons, but their heads and souls with
patience. So indeed the love of thy Apostle was full of zeal, but yet it was
barren and void of knowledge, who had been often forewarned that thou
should suffer a cruel and shameful death to fulfill the scripture, and do
the will of thy Father.

Wherefore (oh my most merciful Jesus) so inflame my heart with thy love, that
I may freely confess it with my mouth, and so perform it with my heart, that
I may not only be prepared to loose my liberty, but to forgo my life for the
name of my Lord Jesus, who is blessed for ever.

A Meditation how the Lord Jesus taken and bound, was led to Annas his house,
where he was buffeted, and how all his Disciples fied from him. John 18.13.
MED. VIII.
To Ioh. 18.15.
Annas first is Christ in Io. 18.12.20
fetters lead:
From thence to John 18.24.
Caiaphas, where he beaten is,
And Mat. 26.67. Mark 18.22.
scourged, and mocked, spit on, and almost dead:
All which h'endur'd to bring us unto bliss.

SO soon as false-hearted Judas had saluted his faithful Master Jesus with a
deadly kiss, the hard-hearted Soldiers laid violent hands upon my kind
Savior, and did cruelly bind him.

Oh ungentle cords! oh cruel hands and cursed hearts, that did bind my Lord
Jesus!

Come hither therefore (oh my Soul) and with inward sorrow of heart, and with
weeping eyes, lament with tender compassion for the currishnesse in words, and
cruelty in deeds, used against thy merciful Savior, which patiently
suffered so many bitter words and cruel blows, for thee and thy sins: for
it was now the hour of darkness, and they began to act with their
merciless hands, that which was conceived in their malicious minds, reuiling
him with blasphemous speeches, and afflicting his precious body with deadly
blows.

And thus they never ceased all that night long, both with their venomous
tongues and villainous hands to torment my meek and patient Jesus.

Tell me (my sweet Savior) what were the contumelious words, what were the
outrageous deeds which thou did suffer of those dogged Soldiers, when they
had laid their tormenting hands upon thee?

For truly, the wicked rose up against thee, and the Sinagogue of the mighty,
they sought thy life, and set not God before their eyes.

They compassed thee about like Bees, and burnt with fury against thee, like
fire among the Thorns.

Oh let some spectacle of their barbarous cruelty be presented unto me, that
mine eyes may wax dim with weeping, that my heart may be wounded with sorrow,
and all my senses afflicted with mourning: for my guilty conscience does tell
me, that my sins were as fuel to kindle their rage, and mine iniquities,
like wood to maintain the fire of their fury.

Behold, Oh my Soul, with attentive devotion of mind, and with store of
tears flowing from thine eyes, how furiously they rush upon thy loving
Savior, and how cruelly with their bloody hands, they torture and vex his
blessed body.

One tuggeth him by his garment, another haleth him by the arms: one takes
hold of his neck, another pulls him by the hair: and least he should get
from them, they bind him, and drag him like an untamed Bull to the shambles.

Oh most meek Lamb! Oh most mild sheep! how currishlie, how cruelly art
thou handled like a wicked thief?

Yea, was ever any common thief so inhumanely and shamefully used, although
his life was odious, and his deeds never so desperate?

Some hale him on this side, some thrust him on that side, some buffet him on
the face, others thumpe him on the back: After they have reviled and railed
against him with most opprobrious words, they pass from devilish words, to
deadly blows, so that they never cease by word nor deed to grieve and vex
mine innocent Jesus, but employed all the faculties of their mind, and all the
forces of their body, to do him all hurt, who never meant them any harm.

I am not able to tell thee, my sorrowful soul, one half of the odious
words, nor one moitie of the horrible deeds which those damned wretches used
against thy harmless and loving Savior: my tongue does falter for grief,
and my speech does fail me for sorrow, for all of them bitterly cursing him,
and cruelly beating him, void of all mercy, and raging with hellish fury,
they hale him (like a most innocent Lamb) to the slaughter.

And amongst all that cursed crew, there was none so softhearted, that either
would pity the woeful case, or speak in the cause of my gracious Lord.

Oh how should mine eyes have been watered with tears, and my heart have
been wounded with sorrow, to have seen my merciful Jesus so vnmercifullie
abused, so ignominiouslie and hatefullie misused, whiles they hurrie him in
their madness, and hale him in their fury toward Jerusalem; who went as an
innocent Lamb, among a company of devouring Wolves, not once opening his mouth
to reprove them for their barbarous cruelty, but did willingly sustain the
extremity of their malice, with a patient mind, sometime haled by one, and
sometime thrust forward by another, thinking the time long, till they might
bring him where they would have him: so greedy was their desire to do a bad
deed, and they made such post-hast, to hasten the death of the Lord of life.

Oh my most sweet Jesus, what have thou done? What have thou deserved, that thou
should endure the sting of their malice, and abide the tempest of their
madness?

Verily my Lord, thou did never offend them in thought, but thy exceeding
love did move thee to suffer all things with patience, that thou might
redeem me a most wretched sinner, and all others, that with a contrite heart
and a broken spirit, sue unto thee for grace, having an assured hope in thy
blessed word, and confidently believing in thy gracious promises.

I am that woeful man, which have been the occasion of thy torments, and the
cause of thy grievous Passion. The wicked man has sinned, and the righteous is
punished. The guilty has trespassed, and the innocent is tormented. The
ungodly has offended, and the godly man is condemned.

Oh my most loving Lord, I have eaten a sour grape, and thy teeth are set on
edge. I have committed the trespass, and thou have suffered the punishment.

Blush therefore (oh my soul) for shame; smite thy heart for sorrow: let thine
eyes be dissolved into tears, and sacrifice thy self upon the Altar of true
repentance, because thou have been so forgetfully ungrateful toward thy
loving JESUS, for his marvelous kindness, and so excessiuely unmindful of
his excellent love.

Oh my (good Jesus) what shall I render unto thee, for thy great bounty? What
shall I yield unto thee, for thy gracious mercy?

I have nothing, O Lord, thou know my poverty; I acknowledge my needy
necessity: I have confessed my most heinous sins and grievous offenses
before thy face.

I have not hidden mine unrighteousness out of thy sight.

Wherefore (oh my most bountiful Lord) supply that by thy infinite
liberality, which is wanting by reason of my vile ingratitude: And thou which
art only able, create a thankful heart in me, thy poor unworthy servant,
that it may evermore be delighted with the remembrance of thy goodness, and
still be joyful with the sweet meditation of thy mercies.

But now, oh my Soul, meditate a while, how sudden fear had quailed the love
of the Disciples of my distressed Savior. For being terrified with his
unexpected and cruel apprehension, and dreading their own danger, they fled
away, leaving their Lord and beloved Master. Mark. 14.50.

Then thou might truly say (oh most sweet Jesus) They which saw me, fled
from me, I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind.

And again, Thou have put my friends, my neighbors, and acquaintance far
from me. Also, that was verified which the Prophet had fore-tolde, All my
friends have forsaken me, and they that lay in wait have prevailed against
me: He whom I loved has betrayed me. For so were thou left alone my loving
Jesus, and they which were near unto thee made have to be gone, and would
tarry no longer with thee.

Consider further, oh my soul, the disciples of my Savior flying for fear,
and lamenting with sorrow, when they saw their most beloved master traitorously
betrayed, ignominiously abused, and led like an innocent Lamb to the shambles.

Attend to their sighing and groaning, to their weeping and moning, for loath
they were, to leave so loving and so well beloved a Master.

But why should fear of danger have bin so violent, or dread of death so
strong, as to pull them from so dear a friend?

They professed they would remain constant, and that no affliction should
abate their courage, but their words proved no deeds, and all was but vain
presumption: Self-love of their own security, made them forsake their
distressed Master in his captivity.

But tell me bold-hearted Peter, why did thou like a coward forsake thy
faithful Master? Did thou profess so much, and perform so little? Was thy
manhood so soon quailed, when thou was put to thy trial? I know thou did
show some sign of courage, and thou beganst to play the man when thy Master
was first apprehended, but it was but done in a fit of thine anger, and thy
heat was soon cooled: thy promise great, and thy performance little: when
thou were in mount Tabor, and saw but some beams; yea, rather some sparkles of
the eternal glory of thy blessed Master, then thy senses were so ravished,
and thy mind so amazed, that thou did cry out, Bonum est esse hic, Mat.
17.1. Mark 9.2. Luke 9.28. It is good to be here, let us build three
Tabernacles: but now thou do not say, Bonum est esse hic: It is good to
tarry here with my poor disgraced Master.

Say thou did love thy Master well, yet it appears thou did love thy
self better: oh why did thou make such a vain ostentation of thy courage,
and yet afterward show thy self such a coward?

But take heed, oh my soul, that thou do not so vehemently inueigh against
faint-hearted Peter, and the rest of his fearful fellows, that thou forget
thy self, and pass by thine own infirmity.

We all love Christ, when our cups may ouerflow with wine, and our bellies be
filled with the finest wheat, but the heat of our love is quickly cooled, if
but a small blast of stormy persecution do bluster against us.

We all desire to dwell with him, as did ravished Peter, when his eyes were
dazeled with the beams of his glory, appearing unto him on Mount Tabor.

But all of us fly from him, or follow him a-loofe-off, when we see him going
to Golgotha: We dare presume to say with forward Peter; Lord, if all leave
thee, I will not forsake thee. Mat. 26.33. Mark. 14.29. John 13.37. But alas
when we come to the trial, we are ready to fly and leave the field, at the
first alarm.

We could all be content to eat pleasant honey, and to feed our selves with
sweet milk: but our mouths are filled with murmuring, and our hearts with
grudging: the time is long, and the journey tedious, while we travel in the
wilderness of this world toward heavenly Canaan. Exodus 17.2.

Alas, were the Disciples of my Savior, so fearful at the first encounter,
who had been so often fore-tolde of that day, and had been so well instructed
by their loving Master, to arm themselves against the assaults of affliction?

Then how can I poor worm boast of my strength, and vaunt of my manly
courage? How should I hold out unto the end, when such stout Soldiers begin
to shrink at the beginning of the battle?

I know mine own imbecilitie, my powerful Lord, I confess mine infirmity, I
feel my heart quake, and I perceive my courage to quail, so soon as I see
but a dark cloud of affliction, and stand in dread of every storm of
persecution.

Strengthen my heart, oh Lord, with Christian Fortitude, that my mind may not
be dismayed with fear, nor my senses drowned with the streams of immoderate
sorrow, whenever I must drink of the bitter waters of affliction for the
profession of thy name, or feel the pricking thorns of persecution in my
sides, for the confession of thy truth.

Teach me to take up my cross, and to follow thee, and that I may not be
ashamed of this noble badge of true Christianity.

Instruct me to know that affliction is the lot of thy Children, and that thou
vvilt have their Faith tried in the fiery furnace: and grant me (oh Lord)
such a plentiful measure of thy quickening grace, that although my frail flesh
begin to tremble, and my weak heart to faint at the first assault of danger,
and I seek a corner to hide my head in, in the time of trouble, yet that I may
not fly so far from thee, but that I may quickly return to thee as Peter
and John did, who loved, and were so dearly beloved of thee, and as the rest
of thy Disciples did, after thy glorious resurrection, and in the sorrowful
time of calamity, trouble and persecution, so mittigate the dolor of my
passions, that I may endure all extremities with Christian patience, knowing
that all the afflictions of this world are but momentarie, and that the joys
prepared for the faithful after this life, are innumerable, and shall endure
eternally.

Now let us leave the sorrowful Disciples, and come to our loving Jesus, who
being bound was presented to Annas by the wicked Jews, who examined him
concerning his Disciples, and concerning his doctrine. Ioh. 18.19. And although
the humility of my Savior was great, and his modesty no less in returning a
gracious answer unto him: yet Malchus (whose ear he had a little before
restored, which Peter cut off) gave him a blow on the face, saying, Answerest
thou the high Priest in that manner? John 18.22.

Here my soul thou have good occasion to eat thy bread with tears, and to
mingle thy drink with weeping, when thou do meditate of this cruel blow,
given by a most wicked ungrateful wretch, to my innocent Jesus.

And here thou may admire at the incomparable mildness, and wonder at the
wonderful patience of my gentle Savior, who did modestly bear so great an
injury, that he gave not him an evil word, who had done him such a cruel
deed, but said to him mildly: friend, if I have spoken euilly bear witness
of evil: but if I have said well, why smitest thou me? John 18.23. Oh how
great was thy humility always my good Jesus? how exceeding was thy patience
in all things even unto death?

But what shall I say, oh thou barbarous and ungrateful wretch, how shall I
speak bitter enough of thy monstrous cruelty, which did smite him on the
face contrary to all humanity, who of his own accord did speedily heal the
hurt, and salve the wound which his disciple had given thee? Oh monster amongst
men, unworthy of any pity, whose name shall be odious to all that are good,
when they hear of thy cruelty! Behold, oh my sweet Jesus what plentiful
matter is offered unto me, to breed a serious meditation in my mind, and to
engender a sincere compassion in my heart, when I remember (oh that I could
continually remember it) what clemency, what benignity thou have used toward
me, what calamity, what indignity thou have suffered for me: for thou were so
treacherously betrayed, so wrongfully apprehended, so injuriously bound, so
currishly haled, so cruelly tormented, and so unmercifully beaten for the
sins of my guilty soul. But I pray thee, my merciful and gracious JESUS,
that as thou did yield thy self a captive to the Jews, so thou will grant
me thy grace to subiugate all my senses to do thy blessed will, and to keep
them in true subjection, to obey thy holy law, and that I may captiuate all my
understanding, to perform the duties of thy happy service, which shall
redeem me from bondage, and bring me an everlasting freedom as thy faithful
Apostle has taught me.

A Meditation how the Lord Jesus was led from the house of Annas to the house
of Caiaphas, and also of the derisions, railing speeches, and cruel scourging
done unto him there by the Jews. MED. IX.
To Mat. 26.57.
Caiaphas house (where Scribes assembled are,
And Mark 14.55.
Priests, and Elders,) Jesus Christ is led:
After to John 18.28.29.
Pilate, where he meekely bare
Their scoffs, and John. 19.2.
thorny Crown upon his head.

A Wake now, (oh my Soul,) sleep no longer in the bed of wanton sensuality,
drive away drowsinesse from thine eyes, and careless sloathfulnesse out of thy
mind, and turn thy self wholly to thy most sweet JESUS, disdainefully
despised, scornefully derided, cruelly tormented, and unmercifully scourged. Oh
how should thy heart be fraughted with sadness, and thy mind be filled with
sorrow, when thou shall find thy Lord thy God subject to pains and
afflictions, blows and reproaches? For he was whipped all the night, and he
was chastized in the morning.

Therefore let thine eyes wax dim with weeping, let thy joy be turned into
mourning, and the voice of melody into woeful lamentation; when thou do
meditate upon the sorrowful miseries, and scornful reproaches which thy
innocent Savior did suffer for thy sake.

Let all vain cogitations, and idle thoughts be chased out of my mind, by
which it may be fondly distracted, and vainly shiuered in this godly
Meditation, so that it may be wholly reflected toward thee, and think upon
nothing but thee, my most merciful Jesus.

Let it think upon the contumelious reproaches, odious raylings, and grievous
blows, which thou did suffer, being under the hands of the wicked Priests,
as a harmless Sheep amongst ravenous Wolves, or in the midst of devouring
Lions.

And grant me, oh my sweet Lord, that while I ponder these things in my mind,
tears of true repentance may fall from mine eyes, and sighs of unfeigned
sorrow arise from my heart, to bewail the horror of my sins, which were as
cruel tormentors to afflict thy body, and as sharpe-pointed needles, to enter
into thy tender flesh.

Lastly, let us meditate devoutly (oh my soul) how my kind Jesus was posted
over unto Caiaphas, after he had been derided and buffeted in the house of
Annas.

Behold how this innocent Lamb was haled to the shambles, by the hands of
those bloody Butchers!

Behold thy beloved JESUS, brought with his hands bound before Caiaphas the
high Priest, environed with a great multitude of Scribes and Pharisees: all cry
out against him: the base people rail upon him, with vile and odious words:
banning and cursing him for his blessed deeds, they maliciously accuse him,
and wrongfully charge him, but their testimonies were found to be false, and
their witnesses untrue.

Truly thou may say that which the Prophet spoke of thee, They delivered
me into the hands of the ungodly, and they cast me forth among the wicked, and
they have not spared my life. The strong were gathered against me, and they
stood like Giants against me.

But although their demean our toward thee (my loving Savior) was without all
piety, and their words and deeds without all pity, yet thou did not
open thy mouth, to utter any word of reproof, but thou did hear their
spiteful taunts with patience, and answer their malicious calumniations with
silence: and therefore the high Priest began to be displeased: and rising up
from his seat, asked thee in his anger, why thou did not answer to those
things which were objected against thee? Mat. 26.62.

Attend (oh my soul) and consider the unspeakable mildness of my sweet
Jesus, how patiently, how humbly he holds his tongue, as one that were
dumb, and could not speak, and remains as one that were deaf, when they
revile him in their madness, and rail upon him in their fury, sustaining with
patience their false calumniations, and forged objections.

And therefore his wonderful patience did make them more mad, and his silence
did the more exasperate them in their fury, when they saw him so meekely to
digest the venom of their virulent tongues, and so mildely to suffer the
blows of their violent fists, so that being transported with choler, beyond
the limits of modesty, and carried with rage, beyond the bounds of reason,
they belched out such impious and clamorous speeches against him, Have thou no
tongue, thou most wicked wretch? Behold, art thou dumb, and can not speak
one word? What is become of thy babbling? Where are thy long discourses, and
plausible speeches, which thou did make to the multitude in the Temple, and
to the seditious people in the streets?

Then thou were full of words, and thy tongue did not cease to prattle, when
multitudes did flock after thee through the Cities, and when the base people
did swarm after thee, through the villages and deserts.

And art not thou he which preaching to the rude multitude in the Temple, and
pleasing their giddie humor with thy long orations, was so impudent to inueigh
against us, Pharisees, Doctors of law, and Rulers of the people, calling us
hypocrites? checking us rudely for our Manners, and reproouing us rashly for
our Doctrine, neither respecting the dignity of our persons, nor dreading the
force of our authority?

Now behold, we have thee sure enough, thou can not escape our hands, thou
art bound for fear of starting, we are no babes, to be won with fair
words? Now we have thee, thou wretch, as thy wicked deeds have deserved, such
shall be thy recompense.

We are none of the rude and base multitude, thou can not gull us with thy
flattering speeches, nor beguile us with false apparitions.

Suppose (oh my woeful soul) that thou do hear the cruel Jews, bellowing
out such bitter taunts against my harmless and innocent Jesus, in the heat
of their rage, adding more cruel deeds, to their cruel words, for all of them
like madmen rush upon him in their violent fury: Some thumpe him with their
hands, some spurn him with their feet, some strike him on the neck, and as
their hands were nimble to load him with blows, so their tongues were not
idle, from railing and reuiling him, with scornful words.

Oh how wonderfully is my Lord derided, how unworthily is he scorned! Yea,
some (so barbarous was their minds, and so brutish was their manners) do spit
in his face: Who ever did see such gross inhumanitie? who does not abhor such
beastly inciuillitie? They all strive who should do him most hurt, and contend
one with another, to do him most mischief, seeking by spightfull words, to
vex his mind, and by cruel blows, to wound his body.

Oh my loving Jesus, how bitter are their speeches, direfullie breathed out
against thee?

How terrible are their practices, so bloodilie inflicted upon thee?

Why are not my vital spirits damped with woe? why are not mine eyes drowned
in a flood of tears? and why is not my soul ouer-whelmed with the waves of
sorrow, in this my sad Meditation of thine afflictions, and devout
contemplation of thy humane miseries?

Wherefore gush forth, oh ye tears, from the inward fountain of my heart,
and ouerflow mine eyes with your plentiful shewers.

But art thou made of flint, Oh my hard heart, that thou do not break into
pieces? Is thy substance of marble, that thou do not cleave asunder, when I
meditate upon these cursed inuectiue reproaches, and wicked deeds, done to my
innocent Jesus, by the stony-hearted Jews.

Alas for me, a most wretched sinner, that my Lord should suffer such great
and grievous affliction for my sake, and yet, that I should still remain
senseless in my sins, and have no remorse of conscience for my heinous
offenses?

Have mercy upon me, most merciful Lord, because I call all these things to
mind, and have them in my meditation: but for want of true love, I am deprived
of true devotion, and my hard heart is without all sense of sorrowful
contrition. Therefore wound my heart, my loving Jesus, that I may be grieved
with thee, and suffer for thee, that thou may vouchsafe to show me mercy,
and that I may with more boldness approach unto thy Majesty. Thou were
humbled, and I disdain my brethren with pride: Thou were pinched with
hunger, and I surfeit with abundance: thou were afflicted with torments, and I
spend my days in wanton pleasure. Thou did weep, to think upon the woeful
destruction of Jerusalem, but I am not touched with any tender affection of
mercy, when I see thousands oppressed with misery.

I can find no place, my sweet Jesus, to hide my face from confusion. I can
find no remedy for my deadly malady, but in the virtue of thy comfortable
mercy.

Oh, cure my disease with this excellent medicine, and salve all my vvounds
with this precious Balm, that all mine affections may be so kindled with thy
love, that I may rejoice to suffer, and suffer with rejoicing, for thy
glorious name, who were content to be scorned and scourged, to be accounted
as an abject amongst the vile and wicked, that I might be raised out of the pit
of endless misery, to be exalted for ever with thee, in the Palace of
eternal glory.

A Meditation how Peter denied his Master three times in the house of Cayphas,
and of his weeping for the same. MED. X.
Trembling with fear, caused by a silly John. 18.17.
Maid;
Once, twice, yea Luke 22.60.61.
thrice, Saint Peter does deny
His blessed Lord: Mar. 14.72.
Remembering what Christ said,
Goes forth, repents, and Mat. 26.75.
weeps most bitterly.

NOw let us cease a while to meditate on my Savior, and consider how Peter
carried himself in the afflictions of his Master.

He was loath to leave him, because he did love him, and therefore although at
the first he fled, yet he returned again with the other Disciple, who by
friendship brought him into the Palace of the high Priest: and as Peter stood
there by the fire, a maid looked upon him, and said to them that were by, This
man also was with Jesus of Nazareth. But Peter, who not long before had made
such great brags of his love, was now so daunted with fear, that he flatly
denied his service, saying: I know not the man. And a little after, another
said unto him, Art not thou also one of his Disciples?

So that now Peter was not content simply to deny him, but he began
earnestly to forswear him.

Now within a while after, another came and said: Verily, thou art one of them.
And then Peter began to curse and swear, saying: I know not the man whom thou
speak of, and immediately the Cock crew. And the Lord who stood not far off
in the hands of the wicked, looked back upon Peter, not refusing faint-hearted
Peter to be his servant, although he had denied, and abiured him for his
Master.

Then Peter remembered the words which Jesus had spoken to him, and he went out
and wept bitterly. Mat. 26.

Now let us seriously meditate on the frailty of Peter, that seeing so stout a
Soldier so soon daunted with fear, we may take heed, not to presume too much
upon our own weakness, lest we play the cowards, and start back as he did,
when we are put to our trial.

Consider (oh my soul) the feruency of his love, and greatness of his fear,
the willingness of his mind, and weakness of his might.

I dare not say but that Peter did love his Lord, and was sorry for the
distressed estate of his master, although his heart fainted, and his stomach
failed in the time of danger: he thought he should have been able to have
performed in deeds, that which he had so boldly boasted in words: but alas,
he did not know his own imbecilitie, his eyes were blinded that he could not
see his own infirmity, the spirit indeed was willing, but the flesh was
weak.

He began to show some courage when he drew his sword, and cut of Malchus his
ear, but alas, it was soon abated, and he fled from his Master, when he saw
him in the hands of his enemies, and surprised by his cruel foes. And albeit
he was so bold spirited then, that he durst resist a multitude of men, yet
he was so timorous now, that being terrified with the voice of a Maid, he
did renounce his gracious LORD, and flatly deny his loving Master, so soon
were his boasting words turned into cowardly deeds, and the professed
constancy of his love found most inconstant in the day of trial.

So we may note, that Peter presumed he was able to have done great exploits
while he was with Jesus, but we see the vigor of his courage was soon
diminished, and the heat of his love cooled when he was separated from his
Lord Jesus: so long as he did enjoy peaceably his blessed society, so long he
dreaded no danger, he lived in security. In time of peace, he thought of no
war: In time of calm weather, he feared no sudden storm: But when he
entered into the house of the high Priest, where he saw his poor Master
spightfully derided, mocked, and cruelly scourged, then his courage was cooled,
his haughty words proved no deeds, and he became a stark coward.

Learn thou also (oh my soul) by the example of Peter, to love thy Lord
Jesus, but so to love him, that no affliction or calamity may compel thee to
leave him. But say with the Apostle, Who shall separate me from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation or anguish? shall persecution or hunger? I am ready
not only to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus. Learn likewise by the example of Peter, not fondly to vaunt of thine
own courage, or to boast of thy strength: let the remembrance of his fall be
as a bridle, to restrain thee from running headlong into the like fault.

Say not in the prosperous time of thine abundance (when all things succeed
happily according to thy wish, and nothing falls out contrary to thy desire)
I shall never be moved, least afterward thou be constrained to change thy note,
weeping with bitter tears for thy folly, and lamenting for thy presumption,
with sorrowful sighs: saying, Thou did turn away thy face from me, and I
was troubled.

Teach me, oh Lord, to know mine own weakness: open the eyes of my
understanding, that I may see the frailty of my flesh, and fickleness of my
mind, when any cloud of persecution does appear over my head, or any dread of
future affliction trouble my heart.

I often presume with Peter, that I could go to prison with thee, abide any
torment for thy sake, yea lose my life for thy love, my loving Savior: but
(alas) I see by the frailty of thy beloved Disciple, that I should prove but a
dastard, when I come to fight thy battle, and begin to seek some couerture,
to hide my head from danger.

For how can I boast of my valor, or brag of my manhood, when as one of thy
stoutest Soldiers, who had been so long trained up under thee, and had
received so many encouragements by thee, began to faint, at the word of so
weak an enemy, that he did deny the service of so good a Master, only for
fear, before he felt the bitterness of affliction: What is man that he may
boast of his strength, or be proud of his virtue, when the best is so unable to
perform a good action, that he is altogether unable to conceive a good motion?

Lighten thou (oh my gracious Lord) my dark and obscure understanding, that I
may not fondly run into the snares of temptation, through a vain confidence
of my own power, or through a fond presumption of my own strength, seeing I
am so weak that I cannot conceive any good thought in my heart, nor do any
good deed with my hands, unless thy divine grace do govern mine affections,
and direct the course of my actions. But oh my most merciful Savior, although
the allurements of the flattering world should so entice me, the pleasures of
the wanton flesh so overcome me, and the fear of persecution so terrify me,
that I should be ashamed of thy liuerie, and deny so gracious a Lord: yet
vouchsafe oh my sweet Jesus, to turn thy favorable eyes toward me, that my
faith may not utterly fail, though it begin to quail, and that thou will
never leave me when I begin to shrink from thee. Oh let me not presume of
thy love, nor despair of thy mercy.

Let remembrance of thy words wound my heart, and awake my sleepie conscience,
that my soul may be cast down with true sorrow, and that I may weep, yea
weep bitterly with sorrowful Peter. Luke 22.62. for my sins, that I may
be made partaker of the benefit of thy comfortable mercy, and obtain
remission of my grievous transgressions, by true Repentance as he did.

Thou have left this example of the fall of thy loving Disciple, recorded in
thy holy word, not to animate us to commit the sin of presumption, but to
comfort us that we run not into the pit of woeful desperation, when we are
overtaken with the like fault, and have committed the like folly: therefore
teach me (oh Lord) so to presume of thy mercy, that I may always stand in awe
of thy Justice.

I am not assured that thou will turn thine eyes toward me, as thou did
toward him, so that my heart may be smitten with sorrow, and mine eyes stream
forth bitter tears of true Repentance, and that thou will receive me into thy
blessed service again, as thou did him, after I have denied thee to be my
Lord and Master.

It was thy free mercy to afford unto him such an unspeakable grace of thy
extraordinary love: he could plead no worthiness of words, nor merit of
works to deserve thy favor.

But (oh most gracious Lord) if my guilty conscience do at any time tell me
that I have or do commit the same offense, yet vouchsafe, that I may resort to
the everlasting fountain of thy plentiful mercy, that there my thirsty
soul may be refreshed with the sweet waters of comfort, so that it may
neither be drowned in the Sea of excessive sorrow, nor wounded with the Darts
of curelesse despair.

Now consider thou, (oh my soul) the place where Peter was, and the conditions
of the people who were with him, when he made such a fearful defection,
from his gracious Lord, and failed in his love, toward his kind and loving
Master: He was in the Palace of the high Priest, who sat in counsel with the
Scribes and Pharisees, against the Lord and his anointed, amongst a wicked
crewe of these cruel Ministers, whose minds were incensed with fury, and
hands armed with cruelty, to torment my innocent Savior.

Mark how soon he was infected by their wicked manners, how soon his soul
was corrupted with their naughty conditions: for now he began to protest with
swearing, and to affirm with cursing, that he knew not his loving Master, to
whom not long before, he had made a solemn vow, not only to forgo his
liberty, for his cause, but also to loose his life for his sake. Luke. 22.33.

Oh fearful downfall, of so great an Apostle! for if his loving Master, and
merciful Savior, had not been more constant toward him in his love, and
tenderly compassionate toward him by his mercy, he had never recovered
himself, but had perished for ever.

No man can touch Pitch, but he shall be defiled: no man can tread upon
thorns with barefeete, but he shall be pricked, nor any man hold his hands
amongst fiery coals, but they will be burned: Even so, no man can remain
amongst lewd persons, and converse in the company of the wicked, but his mind
shall be stained with the spots of impiety, his conscience wounded with the
thorns of sin, and his soul made loathsome with the botches, and blaines
of iniquity.

But so soon as my beloved Jesus had turned his eyes toward Peter, and with
his looks had awakened his drowsy memory, then perplexed Peter remembered the
words of his Master, so that his heart being surcharged with sorrow, and his
eyes flowing with tears, he left that wicked company, and went out and wept:
yea he wept bitterly. Luke 22.62. Teach me oh Lord, to leave the dangerous
society of the wicked: neither let me desire, or delight to dwell in the
Tents of the ungodly: Let me also learn, by the example of thy sorrowful
Disciple, to go into some secret place, and withdraw my self from the
people, when I call my self to reckoning for my transgressions, (but alas, I
am negligent in casting up this account) and begin to sorrow for my sins, and
to shed tears for my grievous offenses, that all impediments may be removed
from mine eyes, and as much as is possible, all vain and wicked cogitations
out of my heart, when I come before thy presence (oh Lord) to prostrate my
self before thee, in submissiue humility, desiring thee to pass over mine
offenses, and to forgive me my sins, through thy infinite mercy.

Then (oh my good Lord) so deeply vvound my conscience with horror of my
detestable sins, that I may offer up a broken and contrite heart unto thee,
because thou art always well pleased with such a Sacrifice, and it sends
up a sweet savor into thy nosethrils.

Now consider (oh my soul) that as the trespass of Peter's denial was great,
so his sorrow was grievous: as the remembrance of his fall was sour, so the
streams of his tears were bitter: yet they were not so bitter unto him for
fear of punishment, as they were bitter, because he had denied so sweet and
so loving a Master: the remembrance of his horrible ingratitude was more
bitter unto him then gall, and more unpleasant then wormwood: his tears were
bitter unto him, in respect of his presumption, who promised so much, and
performed so little: and they were bitter unto him, when he thought upon the
sweet love of his Master, and the great benefits he had received of him.

And yet their bitterness was mixed with sweetness, because they were
signs of his hearty sorrow, and tokens of his true repentance, for where true
repentance goes before, remission of sins always follows after. Eze.
33.19.

Thou see also, that the looks of the Lord, did draw out tears from Peter's
eyes; Neither is it any wonder, for the eyes of the Lord were as a flame of
fire, and the eyes of Peter as Ice, which began to melt into tears, by the
influence of their heat, as true tokens of his sorrowful, relenting, and
penitent heart.

Oh happy are thine eyes, my blessed Savior, which do so warm the
coldness of our hearts, that they may be able to have some sense of thy love,
and do so illuminate our dim understanding, that we may see our errors, and
seeing, may sigh and weep for our transgressions. Oh how soon do they
dissolve the Ice, and melt the frost of our hard hearts, and turn it into the
waters of bitter lamentation, and sorrowful devotion!

Oh my most bountiful Jesus! oh my most merciful Lord, have mercy upon me,
pity my woeful case, shut not the door of thy compassion against me; oh let
me taste of the sweetness of thy wonted clemency, which have so often, so
stubbornely renounced thee, through the peeuishnes of my will, so often denied
thee by my wicked words, and most often forsworn thee by my wretched deeds.

Have mercy upon me, oh my most sweet Jesus, let the beams of thine eyes make
their reflection toward me, that mine eyes may melt into tears, as the rock
did gush forth water, when Moses smote it with his rod, Exodus 17.5. that I may
weep for my sins, and bewail my transgressions, which have so often refused
thy service, because I was loath to leave the vanities of the wicked world, or
to forsake the pleasures of the wanton flesh.

Heal me (oh Lord) for I am full of sores, and my bones do rot away with
corruption. Stay me up (oh Lord) when my feet begin to slide, and lift me up
when I am down: unless thou support me I cannot but slide, and unless thou
do lift me up, I cannot rise again when I do fall: I can do nothing
without thee, thou only do heal those that are bruised, and thou alone
do raise them up that are fallen.

Therefore look toward me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and
poor.

Neither turn away thy face from me, but let thine eyes be fixed upon me. If
thou will vouchsafe (oh my most kind and loving Lord) to show me this mercy,
and to regard the woeful estate of me a most wretched creature, then oh Lord,
I shall call my transgressions to remembrance, and mourn for my grievous
offenses that I have committed against thee.

Raise me up (oh Lord) out of my dead sleep of careless security, as thou
did Lazarus out of his grave: Ioh. 11.43, 44. open the eyes of my
understanding, that I may see to tread in the paths of thy commandments.

Be thou as a strong Pillar, to support and stay me in my weakness, for I am
so feeble that I cannot stand without thy help, and every moment I shall be
overwhelmed, unless thy strong hand do support me.

Let thy eyes (oh my loving JESUS) be evermore turned toward me, that I may
every day return unto thee, by true and hearty repentance, sorrowing for my
sins that are past, and endeavoring by thy grace to take better heed to my
ways in time to come, so that I may do that which is agreeable to thy sacred
law, and acceptable to thy holy will.

Oh my GOD, let thy servant Peter his falling, put me in continual mind to
take heed to mine own standing, and his Repentance, arm me with strong
confidence in thy mercy, against desperation. AMEN.

A Meditation, how Jesus was sent unto Pilate. MED. XI.
Like an offender Jesus Christ is Mat. 27.2.
bound,
And Mark. 15.1.
sent to Pilate: Pilate does confess
That Christ is Math. 27.24.
guiltles: Nothing could be found
To prove that Christ their Luke 23.14.
law, did ere transgress.

NOw let us return from weeping Peter, to meditate upon my loving Jesus, who
remained all night in the house of Cayphas, where he was scorned with
opprobrious words, and buffeted and beaten with cruel blows, no man spoke in
his cause, no man pleaded his case, he sustained their injuries with
meekness, he did bear their intolerable reproaches with mildness.

Now in the morning, my innocent Jesus was brought before the high Priest and
others, who sat in counsel, to examine him as a pernicious traitor, not
worthy to live, but worthy of a most cruel death.

And after they had reviled him with proud words, and haled him too and fro
with cruel hands, they cried out in their madness, and roared out in their
fury, he is worthy of death, let him be led bound unto Pilate, that he may
pronounce judgment against him, to die a most shameful and cruel death.

Oh how was my sweet Savior molested for my sake! how was his soul afflicted
for my sins! I was the cause that thou were conuented before the counsel of
the high Priest, and my sins did send thee to Pilate.

Oh let me weep in the morning when I awake out of sleep, and make my bed to
swim with tears, when I lie down to rest, because I have been delighted
with that, as my chiefest felicity, which caused thee to abide the bitterness
of all their cruelty, and will be the cause of mine own endless misery,
unless my wounds be healed, and my sores salued with the precious balm of thy
saving mercy.

Teach me, oh Lord, to suffer any affliction for thy sake, with alacrity, and
to sustain the malice of persecution with cheerful humility, which shall be by
Satan raised against me, or by his instruments inflicted upon me for thy cause.

Let the pattern of thy perfect humility, be always placed before mine eyes,
let the memory of thy patience, never depart out of my mind. Oh ye wicked
Jews! Oh ye false accusers! oh ye lying caluminators! oh ye perjured wretches!
How maliciously, how unjustly, how spitefully, how impudently do ye accuse my
Lord? ye rail upon him as if he were a most damnable traitor, ye revile and
curse him, as if he had complotted some horrible treason, or invented some
notable mischief, when as his hands were never stained with any evil action,
nor his heart tainted with any wicked cogitation, his words were nothing but
verity and truth, and there was no guile to be found in his mouth: who alone is
good, the author of goodness, and the fountain of everlasting happiness. Tell
me ye deceitful and spiteful accusers, what evil has he done? what wicked
deed has he committed? Enquire of them whom he delivered from the unclean
spirits wherewith they were miserably tormented? ask the blind whom he had
made to see? demand of the deaf whom he made to hear? ask the Leapers whom
he cleansed, and the dead persons whom he revived? let them answer your false
accusations, and overthrow the forged testimonies of your criminal objections?
Are ye so vvilfull that ye will not acknowledge his mercy? are ye so blind
that ye cannot see his miracles? If an ungodly man can perform such merciful
deeds, then you may justly accuse him as a wicked doer, and condemn him as a
dangerous malefactor. Thou see my soul, what cause thou have to water thy
cheeks with continual tears, and to ouerwhelme thy heart in deep streams of
woeful sorrow, when thou do think upon the afflictions of thy blessed
Savior, and meditate on the cursed torments executed by the cruel Jews
against thy innocent Jesus.

Was there ever any Traitor so execrable to men for his bloody deeds? or any
vile wretch so odious for his vicious life, which sustained so many
opprobrious words, scornful derisions, bitter taunts, and grievous torments,
as the furious Jews inflicted upon my merciful Jesus?

Oh my blessed Savior and loving Redeemer, what did move thee to sustain such
a heavy burden of afflictions? what was the cause that thou did submit thy
self to so many miseries? I know my most gracious Lord, it did flow from the
fountain of thy unmeasurable love, in tendering the woeful estate of me a most
wretched sinner: and because thou were moved with the bowels of compassion
toward me, a most forlorn and miserable creature.

Thy exceeding love was the cause of thy admirable humility: and thy
unspeakable mercy, the sovereign medicine to cure my misery. Therefore
grant me, my humble and lowly Jesus, which am thy poor and most unworthy
servant, that I may suffer any contempt with humility for thy cause, and
endure any vile reproach with alacrity for thy sake, esteeming it my chiefest
honor to be scorned for thy love, and accounting my self most happy, when I
suffer any persecution for thy holy name.

Possess my heart with true humility, that my thoughts may not thirst after
vain glory, nor mine affections hunt after worldly honor. For I know (oh
Lord) that thou do resist the proud, and that thou give grace to the
humble: James. 4.6. Pro. 15.25. and I know (oh Lord) that he which desires
to ascend to the place of everlasting glory, must ascend unto it by the steps
of humility; Therefore thou (which art only able) teach me that I may be
truly humbled, so that my mind may not swell with pride in time of my
prosperity, nor any ambitious thoughts find any harbor in my heart in the
time of my peaceable tranquillity, that I may sing with the sweet singer David,
It is good for me that thou have humbled me. And that I may more easily learn
to level my thoughts by the rule of humility, inflame my heart with thy love,
for if my heart be incensed and kindled with thy love, my desires will be ready
to perform thy will, and I shall be cheerful to walk in thy vvayes, which
do teach me to be lowly in mind, and humble in heart.

A Meditation how Pilate caused Jesus to be scourged, and how afterward he
pronounced sentence of death against him. MED. XII.
Though Pilates mouth did Jesus Luke 21.4.14.
justify,
And Pilates Mat. 27.19.
wife the like did testify,
Yet Mat. 15.15.
scourged he is: therewith not pleased, they cry:
His blood on Mat. 27.25.
us and ours, him crucify.

When Pilate had strictly examined my innocent Jesus, and could find no cause
why the cruel Jews should so grievously accuse him, but knew that they had
delivered him for envy, and did spite him for malice: he was vvilling to have
set Jesus at liberty, but the furious Jews did so greedily thirst after his
innocent blood, and so eagerly desired to have him put to a shameful death,
that they cried out in a rage, and exclaimed in their fury: Set Barrabas at
liberty, and crucify Jesus.

But when Pilate perceived that nothing could calm the storm of their rage,
and repress the violence of their madness, but effusion of his innocent
blood, then he commanded that my harmless Jesus should be cruelly scourged,
thinking that the streams of blood running down from his sacred body would
have allaide the heat of their malice, and quenched the flame of their fury.
But alas, it was his life that they only sought: nothing but his innocent
death could satisfy their bloody minds: yea, nothing but cruel death could
tame their brutish rage, Matthew. 26.

But stay here my soul, that thou may reuiew again thy innocent Jesus,
accused unjustly, reviled maliciously, spitefully scorned, and cruelly scourged
by the commandment of Pilate: they crowned his head scornefully with pricking
Thorns, and did tear his tender flesh with their cruel whips. Oh my most
loving Lord! oh my most merciful Jesus! mollify my hard heart that it may be
wholly dissolved into streams of sorrow, with the memory of thy bitter
scourging, and that my soul may be wounded so that it may send forth deep
groans at the meditation of thine afflictions. Grant me oh my most merciful
LORD, that my thoughts and affections may be so seriously affected with the
remembrance of thy tedious Passion, that my senses may be made partakers of thy
grievous pains: for I my self, most loving Lord, am nothing able to perform
that indeed, which I do desire, and conceive in my mind.

I do often times purpose with my self to meditate on thy Passion, and to
think seriously upon thine affliction, and to ruminate in my secret thoughts,
what ignominious cruelty was acted against thee, when thou did finish the
work of my redemption: But (alas) my senses are replenished with such
stupiditie and dullness, that I am not touched with any sensible compassion,
because my understanding is distempered with vain and fond cogitations, and my
heart is become so hard that it is unapt to conceive any tender affection,
while I meditate upon the grievous pains, and muse on the great afflictions
which thou did sustain, and patiently endure to satisfy the wrath of thy
Father, due unto me for my sins. I cannot taste the sweetness, I cannot
relish the goodness of thy passion, because the matter is tedious to my
corrupted thoghts, and unpleasant to my carnal desires. For so unconstant and
instable is my heart, so mutable and variable are the motions of my mind, that
they are both soon distracted, alienated and divorced from that heavenly
meditation by swarms of idle fantasies, and foolish cogitations. But from
whence, oh Lord, do these noisome weeds grow up in my heart? how is it that
they find such a fertile soil in my mind? truly, because my heart is not
planted with thy love, nor my mind furnished with thy graces. For I can never
have my fill of those things wherein I take too much delight: my mind cannot
be drawn from their society, because they have won my favor, and have
gotten my love. Wherefore, oh my most merciful Jesus, because I love thee so
little, and dote upon worldly vanities so much, my heart slideth away from thee,
and mine affections are diuerted from thee; and I know oh Lord, how prone and
ready I am to consent to every wicked motion, and how impotent and feeble I am,
to go about any good action.

Therefore I pray thee, not to correct me in thy wrath, nor to proceed against
me with severity of thy Justice, but to have pity on me a most miserable
sinner, and to confirm my unconstant heart with a steadfast delight in thy love,
and to establish my wandering mind, according to the multitude of thy mercies:
so that no pleasure, be it never so sweet, may be able to allure me to leave
thy blessed love: nor any tribulation, be it never so bitter, constrain me to
forsake thy happy service: drive all idle cares out of my mind, and purge all
corrupt thoughts out of my heart, and draw me wholly unto thee, that I may
remember with a devout compassion, and call to mind with a serious meditation,
how many, what great and grievous torments, what scornful derisions thou
did suffer in thy most precious body, by the commandment of Pontius Pilate,
who contrary to the equity of thy cause, and testimony of his own conscience,
Ioh. 19.4. commanded thee to be scourged without all pity, when as he
himself with his own words had justified thy innocence.

Oh what a flood of tears should stream from mine eyes, what groans and
sorrowful sighs should arise from the depth of my heart? how should all my
senses be ouer-whelmed with a sea of sorrow, when I meditate on the flinty
hearts, and cruel hands of those tormentors, who scourged my loving Redeemer?

My heart cannot conceive the outrage of their tyranny: my tongue is too weak
to express their barbarous inhumanitie: Who were as eager to lay violent
hands upon my poor Jesus, as ravenous Wolves are greedy to devour a tender
Lamb, or hungry Lions to ceaze upon their prey.

They make haste to unbind his arms, and to untie his hands, but it was not
done to release him of his cruel bands, or to afford him any little ease: but
that they might strip him of his garments, to scourge his naked body with their
tormenting whips, and to make his veins spout out blood with their cruel
stripes.

Ah ruthful spectacle to pitiful eyes, and able to have made a deep
impression of tender compassion in their hearts; if they had not been more
heard then Marble! What savage thoughts reigned in their murdering minds? What
monstrous indignity was done unto my loving Redeemer, to be stripped of his
garments, and to stand naked before such vile and base vassals, who clothed
the Heavens with exceeding glory, and adorned the earth with admirable beauty?

Now, when they had stripped him of his clothes, they bound him to a pillar,
to endure their cruel stripes, having banished pity from their hearts, and
embraced cruelty with their hands: sometime they lash him on the back, sometime
they scourge him on the breast: Now they let their smarting whips fly on his
shoulders, anon they strike him on his arms: they suffer no part of his body
to be free from blows, and they grieve his righteous soul with bitter words,
whilst yet they are executing their cruel deeds.

But what Tigers heart harbored in their breast (oh my innocent Savior) which
robbed them of grace, and they disrobed thee of thy clothes? What hellish fury
armed their hands which bound thee to a pillar, and scourged thy blessed body?
how exceeding execrable is their savage cruelty? How rare and admirable is thy
silent patience? It was I, it was I, oh my most sweet Jesus, which deserved to
be scourged with the whips of everlasting torments.

And thou my most merciful Savior, looking upon my miserable, woeful and
distressed estate, with thine eye of pity, were willing to be scourged for me
a most wretched sinner, and being innocent, to suffer for mine offenses, that
the streams of thy precious blood, might wash away the filthy stains of my
heinous sins: Alas, how is the wonderful glory, oh my most sweet Lord, of thy
super-excellent beauty decayed? how is the graceful decency of thy amiable
feature diminished? And how much is the delightful comeliness of thy most
sacred body disgraced? Oh let mine eyes send forth a sea of tears, and let my
perplexed heart break into pieces with exceeding sorrow, to see my beloved
Savior stained with his own blood, and leopard-like bespotted with
deformity, who did far excel all the sons of men with his glorious beauty.

Now thou see oh my soul, how the snow-white skin of the body of thy
Savior, is changed into a bloody tincture: Thou may see, and sigh when thou
see how his tender flesh is made black and blew with the cruel blows which
cruel tormentors inflicted upon him, whose stony hearts had no sense of his
grievous pains, when they saw with their eyes (and yet alas they would not
pity his woeful case) how the blood ran out of his veins, as water flows
out of a fountain.

Mourn and lament, oh my soul, send forth deep groans and sorrowful sighs
at so pitiful a sight. For now thou can not say, My beloved is white and
ruddy, Cant. 1.14. as sometime thou might: But rather say, my beloved is
black and blew, his precious blood gushing out of his veins, and his tender
flesh mangled with grievous wounds.

Who is so cruelly minded, and so stony-harted, which cannot be moved to shed
plentiful tears, when he vieweth my sweet Savior Jesus so sauagely abused
without any pity, and so spitefully taunted, and maliciously tormented without
any mercy?

Now when those cursed Tormentors had almost tired their hands, but yet not
tamed the cruelty of their hearts, they cloathe him with a vesture of purple
color, set a crown of sharp thorns on his head, and put a Reed for a Scepter
into his hands, calling him King in derision with their blasphemous mouths,
whom they accounted more base then the meanest abject in all the world, Mat.
27.2. Is it possible for thee, my sorrowful soul, to keep back the tide of
thy streaming tears, when thou do meditate in thy perplexed mind, and as it
were, view within thy secret thoghts how cruelly thy harmless Savior was
tortured by those bloody tormentors: how spitefully he was tanted, and
shamefully mocked by those blasphemous wretches?

There was no man, oh my sweet Jesus, that did afford thee so much as a sign of
pity in thy greatest pains: thou might not have a Surgeon to stanch thy
bleeding wounds, no man sought to ease thy smart, nor to bathe thy scourged
body: no man offered thee a cup of water to refresh thy fainting spirits:

Oh let shewers of tears trickle down my cheeks, and let a sea of sorrow
ouer-flow my heart, when I enter into a serious meditation of the grievous
pains, derisions, and afflictions, which my innocent redeemer patiently
endured. Oh then let mine eyes send forth a flood of tears, because my
merciful and loving Jesus suffered all those intolerable extremities for me,
a most wretched sinner, that he might pay the price of my redemption, and
deliver my soul from everlasting captivity!

Oh how should I, my bountiful Jesus, sound the bottomless profunditie of thy
unspeakable mercy?

And how can I search the endless depth of mine own wretched misery?

Touch my heart oh Lord, by the virtue of thy holy spirit, and teach me by the
sacred documents of thine unsearchable wisdom, so that the affections of my
heart may be faithfully affianced, and for ever affixed unto thy immeasurable
love, and my mind evermore employed in the divine meditation of thy holy law.

Instruct me to lay up in the storehouse of my perpetual memory, how many,
how great and grievous pains thou have endured for me. What should I render
unto thee in requital of thine immeasurable love? how should I be able to
demean my self thankefully unto thee, when of my self I am so vile a
creature, that I cannot think dutifully of thee? Wherefore open mine eyes (oh
my sweet Jesus) that I may see the inestimable riches of thy bounty.

Infuse thy working grace into my understanding, that I may know and
acknowledge the greatness of thy love, and goodness of thy gracious benefits.
Grant me such a portion of thy grace, that in the highest degree of my
prosperity, I may meditate on thy poverty, so that my mind may be brideled
from ambitious thoughts, and my actions never transgress the bounds of
moderate humility.

And when I deck my body with costly attire, let me think of thy nakedness,
that it may assuage my swelling pride, and induce me to abate somewhat of my
superfluity, to cloathe and relieve my poor brethren in their naked
necessity.

And when my Table is furnished with delicate meats, and my cup filled with
delicious wine, then oh my loving Savior, let me remember thy hunger. Oh let
me not forget thy thirst, that I may be sober in my diet, and temperate in my
drink, and remember to refresh poor hungry Lazarus, when he lies crying and
craving at my gate.

When I enjoy my liberty, let me think of thine imprisonment, that I may not
let mine affections run riot, but tame their wild motions before they break
forth into desperate actions. Let not worldly pleasure have such sovereign
dominion over my peaceable thoughts, but that I may always have some taste of
the pains which thou did suffer for my sins with patience, and sustain
for my transgressions with silence.

Lastly, let me never despair of thy potent mercy, though by my own merit I
find I have deserved nothing else but hell and damnation. Now that this
blessed work of thine excellent goodness (oh my gracious Lord) may be
affected in me, make a deep impression of thy love in my bowels, and ingraue
the true character of thy kindness on my heart, so that nothing may please my
taste, nothing breed my delight, nothing affect my desires, but only thou my
King and God, my Savior and my Redeemer. Kindle the fire of thy love within my
bones, that my ardent zeal may never be quenched toward my beloved Lord
Jesus, who did willingly abide the curse, and die on the cross to pay my debt,
and to deliver my soul out of the prison of eternal death.

But stay not here my soul, turn thine eyes toward thine afflicted Jesus,
view him harmless and innocent, and see in what scornful habit injurious
Pilate does present him to the bloudy-minded Jews: his body is arraied in a
roabe of purple: his cheeks bedewed with blood, running out of the veins of
his head, wounded with a Crown of sharp thorns: A ruthful spectacle, which
might have made their stony-hearts have melted with compassionate pity.

But (alas) what can mollify those hearts which are full fraughted with
cruelty? think oh my soul, thou do hear Pilate that unjust and wrongful
judge, uttering these or the like words unto the muttering Jews.

Behold, I bring him forth unto you, that ye may know I can find no cause to
pronounce judgment against him, but because ye pretend some matter: Behold
how I have punished the man, to calm the tumults of your enraged minds.

Look upon him with your eyes, see how miserable, woeful, base, and
contemptible he appears in your sight! You need not stand in fear that he
will seek to rule over you as a king: you may see his power is too weak to
compass a kingdom: you may see how bitterly he has been scourged, scoffed
at by the people, scorned of the multitude, rudely haled, and roughly handled
by the Soldiers: you need not dread him as a man dangerous to the State:
though he had a mind, yet he has no might to raise up any tempest of sedition:
Wherefore, ye may now set him at liberty after he has been scourged,
without any fear of peril, and let him go without any dread of danger.

But consider here my soul, that although unjust Pilate, contrary to equity
of law, testimony of his own conscience, and sentence of his own mouth, had
extremely punished my loving Savior, and had authorized his basest officers
to use him at their pleasure, and to abuse him in their jesting humor: And
although their taunts were bitter without mean, their derisions intolerable
without any spark of modesty, and their torments excessive without measure,
yet none of them, nor all of them could once delay the fury of the hasty
executioner, nor allay the heat and fiery hatred of the envious cruel Jews,
kindled in their burning breast without cause against my innocent Jesus: but
although they saw him so deformed, so ignominiously disgraced, and grievously
afflicted, yet it could not satiate, no it could not so much as slake the
thirst of their bloody minds: they were so far transported beyond the limits
of reason in their chollericke mood, and fretting without measure, to see his
life prolonged the space of a moment, that they exclaimed in their madness,
Crucify him, crucify him: his very breath is odious unto us, If thou let him
go, thou art not Caesar's friend, Ioh. 19.12. Oh ye perverse and peevish
nation! Oh ye wicked and viperous generation! was it not enough to have
stopped your clamorous mouths, to have mollified your flinty hearts, and to
have stayed your bloody hands, when ye saw my meek and kind Savior so
cruelly scourged, currishly scorned, and pitifully tormented, as though he had
been a man dangerous to your state, and a pernicious foe to your country?

But although all those insupportable injuries, and opprobrious indignities
were contrary to all piety, and without any pity inflicted upon him, when as
by the testimony of Pilate, a stern and severe Judge, he was pronounced to
be innocent and clear from all offenses, Ioh. 19.6. yet ye supposed that al
those torments were too little, and nothing too much, which was unjustly done
to that innocent Lamb, who opened not his mouth once to murmr or mutter
against his cruel persecutors.

Here have thou cause (oh my soul) to admire the unspeakable mildness of my
Jesus, and to stand amazed at the implacable cruelty of the Jews. When Pilate
perceived that his words could not prevail to slake the flame of their envious
minds, but rather added more fuel to their boiling fury, and that delay of
his death did so mad, and vex their confused thoghts, that they would not be
quieted before they had shed his innocent blood: then he willing to satisfy
their frantic humor, and to show himself a friend unto Caesar, presumed
against the contradiction and care of his own conscience, to pronounce
sentence of death, yea of a most vile and shameful death against the innocent
Lamb, my loving Lord Jesus.

Nevertheless he would make a fair show to the world, that he did acquit him
in his heart, although he condemned him with his mouth: And taking water, he
washed his hands before the people, saying: I am innocent from the blood of
this just man, look ye unto it: Mat 27.24. Then all the people cried out aloud
with open mouths and bloody minds, His blood be upon us and our children,
Mat. 27.25.

And indeed at last they found the woeful effect of their bloody vvish, they
felt the smart of their bloody desire, though then in the heat of their fury
they dreaded no danger, nor dreamed on the day of their sorrow, wherein their
City was filled with slaughtered bodies, and the channels of their streets
streamed with blood. Although my tender hearted Savior had foretold them of
their woeful desolation, and with weeping tears forewarned them of their
doleful destruction: but they stopped their ears and would not hear his
voice, flattering themselves in their deceitful security, and laughed at his
words in the fair days of their prosperity.

But here cease a while my sorrowful soul, to meditate on the malicious
madness of the bloud-thirstie Jews, whose clamorous voices could not be
pacified before the corrupted Judge (cursed Pilate) had condemned my dear and
innocent Jesus: and consider the heinous and hateful condition of Pilates
sin, and view the woeful horror of his vvretched soul, who for fear of
Caesar, and favor of the people, did contrary to the knowledge of his
conscience, and custom of law, pronounce sentence of death against my poor
Jesus, who never meant hurt, nor thought any evil.

Tell me (thou wicked Judge) how could thou pretend any shadow to cover thy
sin? where could thou think to find a place of refuge for thy guilty soul?

Did thou more dread the displeasure of the people, then the horror of a
guilty conscience? did thou stand in more awe of mortal men, then of the
Eternal God? did thou more regard to protest thy self a friend unto Caesar,
(who although he were a great King, was but a feeble creature) than thou
had care to discharge thine office to God, thine omnipotent Creator?

Tell me, did not thy heart ache, and all thy body tremble, so soon as
wrongful judgment had passed out of thy lips against my innocent Savior?
Were thou not tormented with the sting of thy vvounded conscience? Or were
thou deprived of all thy senses, so soon as thou had uttered that
vvrongfull sentence? Thou did know that the Jews had delivered him of envy:
Matthew. 27.28. and would thou be an instrument to satisfy their wicked
malice? Thou were ordained a Judge, to execute Justice, and to give righteous
judgment, wherefore how horrible was thy sin? how woeful was the state of
thy guilty soul, when thou had condemned my innocent Jesus.

Bitter and sweet water does not flow out of the selfsame fountain: yet
thou (with the selfsame mouth) did justify my Savior, as an innocent
person, and by and by (with the selfsame mouth) condemn him, as an heinous
malefactor?

How odious should the crying voices of murdering Jews have been to thy
ears? how should thou have hated their bloody hearts, detested their
unlawful requests, and loathed their malicious desires, when they cried out
unto thee in their fury, and exclaimed in their madness: Let Barrabas go free,
let Barrabas go free: Crucify, crucify Jesus? Matthew. 27.21.

Thou knewst well enough, that wicked Barrabas had made an insurrection,
disturbed the peace, and committed murder, and that thou could find no
fault, nor ferret out any offense in the life of my blessed Savior, but that
the spiteful Jews had accused him for envy, and sought his death, to
satisfy their malice, for indeed his whole life was a Mirror of excellent
virtues, his hands were clean from evil actions, his heart was pure from
sinful cogitations: Say thine eyes were so blinded that thou could not see
the bright beams of his Divinity; yet thou did see, and thy mouth did
testify, that thou did see the apparent Virtues of his innocent humanity.

What did move thee to pronounce false judgment, to shed his innocent blood?
Were thou so fond to purchase favor of the high Priests? Did thou so dote
after the love of the people, whose minds are more mutable then the wind,
altering their affections every moment, that contrary to the sense of Law,
testification of thy conscience, and approbation of thy own words, thou were
seduced to condemn such an innocent person?

Thy wife did admonish thee that thou should have nothing to do with that
Righteous man, who suffered many things because of him in her sleep, and
therefore forewarned thee by her fearful dream. Matthew. 27.19.

But neither the Caveat of thy wife, nor chastisement of thy own conscience,
could stay thy false judgment, but at last the envious Jews had what they
would at thy hands, and thou did give them thy consent, to execute the
extreme malice of their wicked hearts.

What had thou gotten, if thou had gained the whole world, with lose of
thy soul? Woeful is the purchase which is bought at so dear a rate.

Before thou would vouchsafe to give Judgment against my harmless
Redeemer, thou did make a solemn protestation before the multitude, that
thou would not be guilty with them in the shedding of his innocent blood,
thinking by washing thy hands with a little water, to take away the deep
stains of thy conscience. Oh how may all the world wonder at thy madness? How
may all posterities condemn thee of folly? Well might a little water clear
the spots of thy hands, but all the water in the Ocean could not vvash away
the blots of thy soul: Such pretty slights may pass without contradiction
amongst men, but alas, they cannot blind the all-piercing eyes of the Eternal
Judge, who knows the secrets of every man's heart, searches the reins, and
understands all our thoughts: It was horrible cruelty, yea, it was a
cursed deed, void of all common humanity, to command my Lord Jesus to be
stripped out of his clothes, and to have his naked body wounded with stripes,
when thou saw he could not be convicted of any wicked act, nor justly
reproved for any evil word: and to license thy lewd Officers to gibe at him,
at their wills, and to jest at him like a fool at their pleasure, and by
aggravating his miseries to make themselves merry: yet so popular was thy
mind, and thine affections so glewed to the humor of the people, that when
thou saw that those streams of his precious blood, could not extinguish the
flame of their fury, thou did doom him to a most scandalous and ignominious
death, who was honorable above all the sons of men for his righteous life,
and declared to be faultlesse, by thy voluntary confession, after thy strict
examination.

Oh happy are the eyes of those which sit on the seat of judgment, which can
see the deformity of thy sin, that their hearts may be replenished with
integrity, and their hands with innocence, not stained with the spots of
Innocent blood.

Curb thou oh Lord the furious passions of my mind, and quench the flame of
bloody wrath, when it begins to be kindeled in my breast, that my heart
may not imagine to slay the innocent, nor my hands be defiled with their blood:
Keep me that I walk not in the counsel of the wicked, when they lay
snares, and dig pits for the destruction of any of thy dear children. I know
oh Lord, that I am ready every moment to wander astray, unless thou direct
my feet by thy holy Spirit, and guide me in thy path, by the light of thy word.

I confess my heart is tainted with original vices, and my hands are stained
with actual offenses: all my parts are defiled, yea my whole body is nothing
else but a vessel full of corrupted liquor.

I am prone to commit all euilnesse with greediness; But alas, I find in my
self not so much as a motion to do any goodness.

I am forward to persecute thee, with the cruel Jews, and to give my consent
to shed thy innocent blood, with cursed Pilate: yea, I daily crucify thee by
my sins, and pierce thy blessed side, with mine iniquity: I caused thee to
be unjustly accused, and wrongfully condemned: Have not my cursed words, and
bloody oaths been like sharp spears to wound thy heart, and my cruel
deeds, like nails, to fasten thee to the Cross? Wherefore wound thou my
heart, that I may not lie still snorting in the bed of careless security, and
continue senseless in the lethargy of sin.

Purge the dross of my vicious heart, with the fire of thy holy spirit, and
purify my corrupted cogitatious, by the bright beams of thy grace.

Oh let this holy fire be still burning in my breast, that it may consume the
corruption of mine infectious sin, that cleaneth so fast unto my bowels! Bow
down thine ear (oh my merciful Savior) unto my humble petition, and give a
gracious answer to my earnest supplication; then I shall be emboldened to
come before thy Majesty, and to approach near unto thy seat of mercy. Oh
let my morning and evening Sacrifice of thanksgiving (my loving LORD, and
bountiful Jesus) send up a sweet savor into thy nosthrils, which did
suffer thy self to be scorned, scourged, and condemned, by the sentence of
wicked Pilate, only for my sake, and my sins, to set my captive soul at
liberty, and with the effusion of thy most precious blood, to pay so dear a
price, for the purchase of my Redemption.

Grant that the remembrance of such a worthy, and more then wonderful
benefit, may evermore be fresh in my memory, and laid up as a most precious
Jewel, in the safest closet of my thankful mind. And at the day of thy last
judgment, and general Assizes, when thou shall come to judge the quick and
the dead, enter not into judgment with thy servant, nor remember mine
iniquities, but judge me with thine elected, according to thy mercy, that I
may possess the kingdom with them, which thou have prepared for them from
the beginning of the world. Oh let my Prayer come before thy presence, let the
zeal of my heart, and lifting up of my hands, toward thy Throne of mercy,
move thee to grant the request of my humble petition. Amen.

A Meditation how the Lord Jesus carrying his Cross on his shoulders, is led
to Mount Caluarie to be crucified, and of those things which happened by the
way. MED. XIII.
Our blessed Savior (Christ the perfect John 19.17.
gain)
Does Matthew. 27.32.
bear the cross whereon himself must die:
Simon of Luke 23.26.
Cyrene sometimes they constrain
To do Mark. 15.21.
it. So says the truth that cannot lie.

HE which will come after me, let him deny himself, take up his Cross, and
follow me. Matthew. 16.24. Run and make have, oh my soul, at the voice of our
most sweet Redeemer, who bearing his Cross on his own shoulders, Ioh.
19.16.17. does inuit thee to carry thy Cross, if thou desire to follow his
steps. Oh how sweet, how delectable, how delightful is it to carry the Cross
after my Jesus! His happiness cannot be uttered, his blessedness cannot be
imagined, which does follow thee, my Lord Jesus, in thy blessed paths: he
walks not in darkness, he comes not near the shadow of death, but shall
have the light of life.

Come therefore oh my soul, let us follow our Jesus, bearing his Cross on his
own shoulders: let us leave all and follow him with alacrity, let nothing
stop our passage, let not any thing hinder us in our course: Look upon thy
Lord, thy Creator, thy Redeemer.

Consider his tedious labor, his grievous afflictions, his intolerable
torments, all of them without any mean, none of them having any moderation:
let thy whole mind be pondering on them, let them be the continual matter of
thy daily meditation.

Let thy heart be wounded with the sword of sorrow, and let thine eyes be
drowned with a flood of tears: let thy heavy groans and sorrowful sighs
begin in the morning, and let them not cease in the evening: Oh let the
feruencie of thy lamentation, demonstrate the burning zeal of thy compassion,
which thou do bear to mine afflicted Jesus.

Mourn with true contrition of heart for thine iniquities, and weep with
hearty sincerity for thy sins, which caused thy Christ to carry so heavy
a cross.

Here is plentiful matter for thy meditation: here wants no motives to
stir up in thee a feeling compassion, for thou see how he is scorned and
despised, how cruelly, how currishly he is abused by the perfidious Jews.

Who is so obdurate in heart, oh my most patient Jesus? who has his
affections so barren of compassion, that he has no sense of sorrow, when he
enters into a serious contemplation of the multitude of thine afflictions,
and meditateth on the bitterness of the passions which thou did suffer to
pay the ransom of our sinful souls, and to deliver them out of the bands of
eternal captivity?

For all the night thou were wearied with the outcries of contumelious
tongues, and tired with the violence of cruel hands, hurried and haled from
the Garden, where thou were with thy loving Disciples: and although thou were
vvilling to go of thy self, yet the churlish crew of hard-harted Soldiers
were so froward, that their sturdie hands were always ready to tugge and
pull thee forward, to vex thy feeble body, and to grieve thy righteous soul.
For it was their solace to procure thy sorrow, it was their pleasure to
augment thy pain, and they thought every moment a month before they did
present thee to Annas, where thou were rebuked with taunting checkes, and
buffeted with ungentle blows on thy tender cheeks, and after that thou had
with exceeding patience, endured the bitter tempest of their fury, they
brought thee from thence to the house of Caiphas, there to abide another storm
of their malicious cruelty. Sometime they rail upon thee with their cursed
tongues, sometime they thumpe thee with their cruel hands, their speeches were
full of odious spite, their words were infected with malicious venom which
they belched against thee my loving Savior: their deeds were nothing else but
deadly cruelty, their words sauoured of nothing but barbarous inhumanitie, they
scoffed and derided thee with bitter jests, they defiled thy comely face with
their filthy spettle. Then without any pity (alas how should they show any
pity, whose hearts were hardened with bloud-thirstie cruelty?) they bring thee
in have to the Court of King Herod, where thou were flouted at, reputed as a
sottish fool, scorned, contemned, and derided like a simple Idiot: their mirth
was Bedlam-madnes: their iestes were full of gall and bitterness.

Now when they had acted their outrageous villainies against thee, and executed
their devilish devises upon thee my innocent Jesus, yet all of them were too
little to calm the tempest of their hateful fury, but then this cursed crew
does hurrie thee from the ungracious Court of proud Herod, to the graceless
house of Pontius Pilate, where thou were taunted and checked again with
cruel quips, and sharply scourged with smarting whips, stripped naked,
contrary to all humanity, and beaten with bitter blows without any pity:
their whips were sharp to tear thy flesh, their tongues were as keen as
rasors to wound thy soul, they pierced thy head with a crown of thorns, and
putting a feeble reed in thy hands, flouted thee with the name of a King; and
bending their knees, did worship thee in derision, offending thy sacred ears
with their cursed words, and afflicting thy vvounded body with their bloody
hands, and when thou had been so spitefully scorned, bitterly scourged, and
vilely contemned, at last thou wast wrongfully condemned to suffer a most
shameful and doleful death.

But (oh my sweet Jesus) who did afford thee any comfort in thy exceeding
sorrows? who did approach to cure thy bleeding wounds? Alas, there was no man
by, which was moved with any sorrowful compassion for thy undeserved
calamity, but every man was forward to augment thy misery. Now they lay a
most huge and heavy cross upon thy wounded shoulders, the weight of it does
make thy knees to tremble, thy legs to fail, and thy whole body to faint.
And thus thou do go forward to the place of execution, guarded with a band
of armed Soldiers, and hemd in on every side with a rabble of bloody
tormentors, multitudes of the base and rude people do flock together out of
every quarter, they crowd and thrust one another to see thee, but (alas) it was
not to afford thee any compassionate pity, but to laugh and rejoice at thy
misery. They proclaim out the malice of their heart against thee in their
madness, and rail and revile thee in the heat of their fury: They all strive
like Bears and fierce Lions to approach near unto thee: oh what opprobrious
speeches, what hateful and odious railing, what cursed words, what
uncharitable deeds, did my most humble and patient Jesus suffer by those
wicked and desperate people, whose eyes were more hard then a rock, that they
could not yield forth one tear for pity, and hearts more unapt then Adamant
to relent with any tender compassion, when they saw so woeful and doleful a
spectacle?

But for all the venomous speeches uttered out of their railing mouths, and
for all the brutish deeds done unto thee my loving Jesus with their cruel
hands, thou did not once open thy mouth to contradict them in their raging
madness, or once to blame them in the heat and hate of their greatest fury,
but did go forward with meekness to the doleful place of their bloody
execution, to suffer the painful pangues, not for thy own faults, but for
mine iniquities, and that with thy precious blood thou might make a wholesome
Bath, to cure the spots, and heal the blaines of my sinful soul.

Teach me, oh my sweet Christ and loving Jesus, by thine example so to master
mine affections, and to direct mine actions, that when mine enemies do insult
over me with slanderous words and slavish deeds, I may walk and tread in
thy paths with meekness of heart, and trace out thy steps with humility of
mind, hearing their devilish curses with silence, and bearing my heavy
Cross with patience, committing my cause unto the GOD of vengeance, who
hears the cries of the silly orphane, puts the tears of the weeping
vvidow into his bottle, and delivers poor captives out of prison when they
call upon him.

But tell me oh ye generation of vipers, tell me oh ye bloodie-hearted, and
bloodie-handed Jews, why were ye so bloody minded against my innocent Jesus?
what horrible conspiracy had he plotted or practiced against you, that ye
were so eager to undermine his life, and so greedy to hasten the bloody day
of his death? Is this the honor that you give to my Savior? Is this the
glory you vouchsafe my Redeemer? Is this the kind entertainment you afford
to your Prophet, whom the day before you received with such joy, spreading your
garments on the ground, and covering the earth green boughs, when he entered
into Jerusalem. Oh most ungrateful, unconstant, ungracious and graceless
people! Is your love so soon changed into deadly hate? is your late courtesy
converted into cruelty? were your favors so quickly turned into frowns? Is
your honor altered to shame? are your plausible speeches changed into bitter
curses?

Do ye to day lift him up as high as Heaven, and to morrow throw him down as
low as Hell? Do ye bless him to day, and curse him to morrow? Do ye flock
after him to day (that your tongues may sing forth his praises) and to morrow
do ye crowd after him to fill his ears with reproaches? Do ye to day
entertain him into the City (as desirous of his life) and to morrow do ye
lead him out of the City as a malefactor, to suffer a shameful death? Did
ye but now like him, and by and by do ye loathe him? Is the mild complexion
of your love, altered in a moment, into deadly hate? What was the cause of your
mutabilitie? What was the occasion of your instabilitie? Were the affections of
your hearts so mutable, and your unconstant desires so moneable?

So soon as you perceived that my loving Jesus began to be hated of your
envious magistrates, and cruelly handled by their wicked ministers, scorned and
scoffed at by the Soldiers; tanted with proud and malicious words, beaten and
buffeted with cruel blows, scourged with whips, spitted upon by the scumme of
the people, disdainfully contemned of the high Priests, and lastly, condemned
by Pilate: then ye began to like of their chollericke humors, and to play the
executioners of their bloody hate: This day ye misuse and abuse him most
vilely, whom but yesterday ye honored and exalted so highly: Now your malice
toward him is without mean, and your cruel deeds without moderation. The
cruel Envy of the high Priest kindled the fire, and ye cast Oil into it, to
increase the flame.

Oh what extreme cruelty? what cruel extremity? what ignominious
indignity, was done unto my afflicted Jesus? Was not the edge of your malice
yet rebated? Did the stream of your hatred grow to be more violent? Was
there no little corner left for pity to lodge in your breasts? Was there no
motion of compassion within your bowels?

Tell me then, how could ye be so harsh-harted, and hard-handed, as to lay so
heavy and huge a cross upon the shoulders of my poor afflicted Christ, whose
blessed body was disquieted for want of sleep, being cruelly tormented all the
night, faint with loss of blood, and sore with store of cruel blows?

Had Envy so robbed your hearts, and dispoiled all your senses of common
humanity, that you were now so poor, that ye were not able to bestow upon
him so much as one mite of mercy?

What infernal Frenzy, what Tyrannous impiety, what execrable Tyranny can
be compared to this Jewish cruelty?

But alas, was there not one amongst so many, which was so kinde-harted, as
to lend a helping hand to ease the weary shoulders of my Savior Christ, when
his knees bended, and his legs trembled under the burden of his heavy Cross?
Oh let the lamentable relation of their furious ferocitie to my Jesus, be so
odious unto our ears, that it never find any harbor in our hearts.

Behold oh my sorrowful soul, the monstrous Atrocitie of the stiff-necked
Jews, and the miraculous mildness of thy lowly Jesus! Consider his humble
obedience, view his obedient humility, who was ever truly obedient even unto
death, and ever was willing to offer up his life, as a sure pledge of his
infinite love, toward his beloved.

Behold, thou see how mine afflicted Lord, wounded with the teeth of Envy,
and pierced with the darts of malice, grudgeth not at the pain, nor refuses
the tedious labor, to carry the heavy burden on his feeble neck, contrary to
all humanity, and without any pity, so spitefully imposed upon him.

But how should my sinful tongue divulgate the incomparable merit of thy
admirable patience, my most kind, sweet, and humble Jesus. How should my
unworthy words utter the worthiness of thy unspeakable humility, which were
willing to undergo the burden of so heavy a Cross, to deliver me a most
wretched sinner from a bitter curse, when the vigor of thy natural faculties
was decayed, thy humane strength weakened, and thy whole body wearied, with the
grievous pains, torments and afflictions, which the wicked Jews (not fleshy,
but flinty-hearted) without any mercy of theirs, and merit of thine, did
cruelly heap upon thee?

Oh let my heart be deeply wounded with ceaselesse compunction. Let mine eyes be
darkened with continual weeping: Yea, let all my senses be afflicted with
mourning: that my sorrows may be great, because my sins are so grievous: For
they indeed were the Tyrannical tormentors that laid so heavy a Cross on thy
tired shoulders: who out of the abundance of thy infinite love, taking pity on
my wretched misery, did willingly submit thy self to such slavish cruelty,
not sparing to shed thy most precious blood, to compound of it a most
sovereign Medicine, to cure my desperate malady.

Now what measure of words can be so great, or what voice so vehement, as may
fully express the extreme impiety of the bloody Jews, toward my blessed
Jesus. When such hellish fury did rule and revel in their fiery hearts, that in
the midst of so many bitter pains and pangs of his body, and insupportable
anguish of his soul, they did impose so ponderous and heavy a Cross, on his
faint and feeble shoulders, being framed extraordinarily in respect of the
matter, and also vnvsually in regard of the form.

More gently were the two Thieves used, which were led along with him; who were
constrained to endure no such labor: for we may well think they would use more
kindness to those wicked persons, then to my holy Jesus.

For we do not read that they were put to the toil to bear their Crosses,
whose bodies were more able, because they had not felt one fit of the grievous
pains, nor suffered one jot of the great tortures wherewith my sorrowful
Savior had been all the night before extremely vexed and cruelly tormented.

Here thou have just cause oh my soul, to cry out against the monstrous
inhumanity, and brutish cruelty of the Jews, acted against thy despised Jesus.

What imagination can sound the bottom of their savage tyranny? What tongue
is able to make a perfect relation of their horrible fury? Was it not a most
ruthful Spectacle, forcible enough to have drawn streams of tears out of
the dryest eye, and to have incited a multitude of heavy groans out of the
hardest heart, to see my beloved Lord carry so heavy a burden upon his
painful shoulders, yet bleeding with cruel wounds, lately, without any
mean, or mercy inflicted upon them: was there ever cruelty like unto this?

Oh my loving Lord! Oh my most beloved Jesus, thou art now become a
laughing-stocke to the barbarous Gentiles, and matter of derision to the
perfidious Jews.

They scorned, despised, flouted and derided thee, bearing thy heavy Cross
with patience toward the place of execution, whereon thou should suffer a
most bloody, bitter, and shameful death.

And so went my Lord Jesus, with constant humanity toward the place where he
was to suffer the deadly pangs of their extremest tyranny, whose knees were so
weak, and legs so feeble, that they were not able to support the weight of so
heavy a burden, which with such disdainful indignation they had imposed upon
him, that thereby they might so much the more increase his derision, and
multiply his dolorous affliction. Oh ye most cruel tormentors, do ye never
cease to molest and vex my humbled Lord Jesus? Could not one cruel death have
quenched the flame of your blood-thirsting malice? Oh why do you abuse his
meeke-minded patience, by compelling him to feel so many deadly passions?

Now when those malicious persecutors saw that my vvearyed Christ was so
surcharged with his heavy Cross, being so weighty in respect of the
ponderous substance, and also so cumbersome, in regard of the extraordinary
length, that although he had a willing mind, yet that he had not sufficient
strength to carry so heavy a load: then they compelled Simon of Cyrene (the
father of Alexander Rufus) to ease him of his burden, and to follow my tired
Christ with that painful Cross. What, did their stony hearts now begin to
relent, with any motive of compassion toward my poor afflicted Jesus?

No, for the Curres were more courteous, that licked the loathsome soars of
hungry Lazarus, that lay crying, and dying for want of food at the gate of
their churlish master, then those uncircumcised Gentiles, and stiff-necked
Jews were to my innocent Jesus.

For how should their minds be affected with any spark of pity, whose hearts
were drowned in so deep a sea of impiety?

But because they were loath that my Savior should end his tedious life before
he came where he should suffer a most painful, pitiful, and shameful
death, they granted him a little ease, that he might go with better speed,
and make a little more haste to the place of execution, where they should play,
like the infernal Furies, the last act of their bloody Tragedy.

Oh my sad and sorrowful soul, how can thou calm the waves of thy
flowing sorrow? how can thou how can thou assuage the pangs of thy
turbulent passions, when thou do meditate how many miseries, and mischiefs,
calamities and distresses, were violently inflicted upon my beloved Jesus, by
the hateful hands of those bloody tormentors?

Oh my most merciful Jesus! Oh my most loving Lord! Oh why was not I with thee
at that time, my sweet Christ, that I might have carried thy heavy Cross?

Oh, how happily should I have shut up the last evening of my short and gloomy
days?

Oh how blessedly should I have finished my restles course, if I had died with
thee on thy sacred cross?

Oh how sweet had the sharp deadly pangs and dolorous pains been unto me,
how joyful had doleful death been unto me a sorrowful sinner, if I had died
with thee my bountiful Lord, and blessed Redeemer!

It may be thou would have bequeathed me some liberal gift of thine
indulgent mercy: as thou did unto that true, though late repenting thief,
which was crucified with thee. For at that hour thou did franckely bestow
the riches of thy bountiful mercy, and then thou gave the treasure of thy
merciful bounty.

Then sweet streams of pure water did flow out of the clear fountain of
thy mercy, comfortable to cool the heat of a thirsty tongue, and medicinable
to cure the spreading malady of a leperous soul, infected with sin. Oh
would I had been there to have had some sweet taste of that blessed fountain!
If I had drunk never so little, it would have been enough to have quenched my
thirst, and yet I should still have thirsted to drink more, although I had
drunk never so much: If the cursed churl and damned glutton had had but one
drop of this caelestiall water, it had bin sufficient, not only to have cooled
the tip of his flaming tongue, but also to have extinguished the fire of his
ever and neuer-dying soul, and of his continual burning and never consuming
body, tormented in Hell: fill my soul, oh my sweet Christ, with this
comfortable water that may cure my sinful soars, and mittigate my deserved
sorrow.

But as thou did go toward the place where thou should offer up thy self
for a complete sacrifice to appease the wrath of thy angry Father, and to make
an everlasting atonement between him and us his disobedient children: thou
saydst unto those mourning women, who could not contain their trickling
tears, nor deteine their sorrowful sobs, to see their loving and dearly
beloved Lord so doggedly haled and currishly handled: Weep not for me ye
daughters of Jerusalem, weep for your selves, and your children. Luke 23.28.
And now thou say unto me, Weep for thy self, bewail thy sins, lament thy
transgressions, for they indeed were the tyrants that compelled thee to bear
so heavy a Cross, they urged thee to abide the penalty of so bitter a curse.
Touch my heart oh Lord, touch my heart with the sting of a serious and
restless compunction, that I may no longer lie lulled a sleep in the lap of
careless security: fetter my feet that I may run no more in the broad way of
iniquity. Mannacle my hands that they may be detained from cruel and impious
actions: Snaffle the unbridled motions of my mind, that it may be restrained
from all idle, scelerous, and wicked cogitations: keep the door of my lips,
and hedge in my tongue that it may not run without the bounds of reason: Stop
the passage of mine ears, when they are allured to listen to any loose or lewd
discourses.

Dispell, and disperse the thick clouds of blindness from mine eyes, take
away the gross scales, that darken my sight, so that now I may see the ugly
and deformed shape of my sins, that I may cease to love them, begin to
dislike and to loath them, which caused my Savior to endure the heavy wrath of
his Father, which lay so heavy upon his soul and body, that the weight of it
pressed blood out of his veins mingled with water, Luke 22.44. so ponderous
was the burden of our iniquity, so dolorous was the extremity of his bitter
agony: for never was there sorrow like unto this sorrow.

Let my sweetest music be continual mourning, let my songs of joy be turned
into woeful lamentations, let it be all my pleasant melody to muse on the
misery of my soul, and multitude of my sins, which made thee descend from the
highest heavens, and will throw me down to the lowest hell, where the fiery
lake burns that shall never be extinguished, whose flames is so fierce that it
cannot be greater by any augmentation, neither is it subject to any diminution.

If all the torments which bloody Tyrants have invented could be inflicted
upon me at one time, and my body were able to feel the pains of all them at
once, yet all of them would not be so horrible, as one sparkle of this
terrible fire: it needs no fuel to nourish the flame: as it self never is
wasted, so nothing iniected into it is ever consumed. No tongue is able to
express the horrible pangs of the damned souls which are tormented in this
everlasting and unquenchable fire.

Let the horror of it be fresh in my memory, and the meditation imprinted in my
thoughts, so that my hands may tremble and shake for fear, and my whole body
quiver and quake with terror of it, when any evil imagination is hatched in
my heart, or any wicked deed should be acted with my hands, that I may be
terrified from nourishing sin within my bosom, that laid so heavy a Cross
upon thy shoulders: yet when fear has cast me down, let the gentle hand of
thy mercy raise me up, so that in my last deadly agony, I may still lift up my
heart and hands toward the seat of thy mercy: and though remembrance of my
heinous transgressions do present nothing unto me but cause of fear and
terror, yet al my unfeigned repentance cause me to taste of thy infinite love,
and boundles mercy.

Teach me (oh my sweet Savior) to follow thee with fearefulnes to the place of
execution, and to take up my Cross with alacrity on my shoulders. But if thou will have me to follow thee (oh my most gracious Lord) then draw me after
thee: For unless thy Father and thou do draw me, I am not able to follow
thee, John 6.44.

I see mine own infirmity, I feel the defects of my great imbicility, the cup
of affliction is bitter unto my taste: if it do but once touch my lips, I am
ready to refuse it, I will none of it, I am loath to feel any pain, I covet
nothing but wanton pleasure.

Oh how do I begin to storm if I be but crossed with an unkind word? much
less am I able to bear the cross of a malicious deed.

How is my mind troubled, and the temper of my senses distempered, if any
thing fall out cross to mine expectation, or contrary to my desire, so that
oftentimes my mouth is filled with cursing, my heart with grudging, and all my
words savor of nothing else but bitter repining? I am willing to be thy
disciple my blessed Savior, so long as I may dwell in peace, and reap a
plentiful harvest of prosperity, but alas, I am weary of thy company, if I
feel but a little blast of adversity: teach me oh my sweet Jesus (and I shall
learn if thou be my schoolemaister) to know that it is the lot of those which
will be trained up in thy school, to be under the rod of correction, and
that none are worthy thy to receive a Crown, unless they be willing to take
up thy Cross, those that belong unto sweet spices, which send forth always
the most odoriferous smell, when they are brayed and bruised in the mortar, they
are like unto stones which must be hammered, hewed, and squared, before they
can be fit for the building of thy holy Temple: yea they are like unto gold
mixed with much dross, and can have no glory before they be fined and refined
seven times, yea seauenty times seven times, in the fire of affliction.

Arm thou my heart with christian fortitude, and my mind with constant
patience, oh thou which art mine omnipotent Redeemer, that no torment may be so
great, no affliction so grievous, no misery so unmeasurable, but I may
courageously suffer it to publish the glory of thy name, and constantly endure
it, to manifest the fidelity of thy love.

Teach me so to carry thy Cross in my heart, and let the remembrance of it be
so deeply imprinted in my mind, that I may daily crucify my carnal
concupiscence, wanton vanities, and worldly desires. Oh let my soul be so
ravished with joy, by the sweet meditation of thy mercy, and all my senses so
well pleased and joyfully delighted with the odoriferous sent of thy love; that
I may seek nothing, think of nothing so much, or speak of any thing so
often, as of my crucified CHRIST, who, only of his free mercy and gracious
bounty, died a most vile, painful, and ignominious death for me a most
vvretched, miserable, and desperate sinner, that by his precious blood, and
blessed (though bitter PASSION) I might be made partaker of Everlasting
Salvation.

Grant me, oh my sweet CHRIST, some taste of it here upon earth, that I may
patiently wait for the full fruition of it, hereafter in HEAVEN. Amen.

A Meditation, declaring the bitter and cruel crucifying of our Lord Jesus
Christ, performed on Mount Caluarie. MED. XIIII.
View here the wounds of Christ upon the Luke 23.33.
Cross.
His head, his hands, his feet, also his Ioh. 19.33.
side
Bleeding amain. Consider eke the loss Luke 23.46.

Of his dear life; What more could he Ioh. 19.30.
abide?

NOw blessed Jesus, and my beloved Savior, is come unto Mount Caluarie, where
he was to make the last period of all his humane misery, by suffering a most
bloody, vile, and violent death, being cruelly nailed to that Cross, which of
late lay so heavy upon his shoulders, that his whole body did shake and
tremble under the burden.

Oh blessed Mountain! happy for thy dignity, happy for thy fertility,
because it pleased the Lord Christ to suffer upon thee. But who shall ascend up
to the Hill of the Lord, where the Lord Jesus is crucified? Truly he that has
innocent hands, and a clean heart.

He which loves the Lord Jesus, with all his heart, with all his soul, with
all his strength, he shall ascend up to his Mountain, and shall be crucified
with the Lord Jesus. He which has crucified his flesh, and the concupiscence
thereof, shall be crucified and suffer with his beloved Jesus. I desire to be
crucified with thee, (oh my most sweet Jesus) I long to suffer on the cross
with thee, that I may be crowned by thee, but I know that first it is needful
for me that the world be crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Gal. 6.14.

But now let us see (oh my sorrowful soul) how my innocent Jesus was used by
the rough-handed and cruel hearted tormentor, when he was come to the place
of execution, where malefactors did suffer grievous punishment for their
heinous offenses.

First, having exiled all compassion and pity from their heart, they lay hold
upon him with their bloody and polluted hands, and then they hastily rob and
disroabe him of his garments, before a rude multitude of the basest and meanest
of the people, yea, they strip him stark naked, that he might appear more
vile and contemptible in their eyes.

Here have thou good cause, and just occasion my perplexed soul, to ouer-flowe
thy cheeks afresh with a flood of tears, and to dilate and open thy heart,
that thy heavy groans, and sorrowful sighs, may have their free passage,
when thou see thy loving Jesus stripped naked by the hands of such dogged and
cruel tormentors, exposed to the eyes of the pitiless people, and extreme
coldness and roughness of the weather.

Oh how was the beauty of thy excellent composed body obscured with spots of
blood? how was the pure-white color of thy skin made black and blew with
bitter blows, my most beautiful Jesus?

Oh how spiteful and unappeasable was their indignation! how bitter was the
misery? how great, yea exceeding great was the ignominy of thy grievous
passion, my loving Christ, my merciful Jesus? For so sharp was the edge of
their cruelty, so eager was the malice of their hearts, and inhumanitie of
their hands against thee, that thou art laid naked upon the Cross, when as
such extremity was not used, but to most wicked, vile, and abject persons, who
for their notorious crimes deserved no pity: such was their damnable impiety.

But what a spring of bitter tears might arise in the weeping eyes of thy
sad and mourning Mother? what sword of sorrow did pierce her tender heart,
when she saw her deerely-louing, and dearly beloved Son, so roughly
disrobed of his clothes, and nakedly exposed to the view of the rude, base,
and common people, who came not with relenting hearts to show any sign of
sorrow at the execution of such bloody cruelty, but rather to solace
themselves, and to laugh, deride, and rail upon thee, in this extremest
misery?

Now when those cruel tormentors had speedily turned my innocent Jesus out of
his clothes, they laid his naked body upon the Cross, and first they nailed
his innocent hands, and after his blessed feet, with long and strong nails; So
that the streams of blood, spouting out of his veins, changed the hew of his
Cross, into a crimson color. Oh what grievous pain, what horrible tortures,
did those wicked vvretches procure to my blessed Savior?

Oh what infernal fury had incensed their bloody minds? what devilish
madness enraged their hearts so far to degenerate from the civil nature of
men, into the savage nature of beasts? Oh spectacle full of sorrow! oh sight
full of ruth, how grievous would that pitiful sight have been to mine eyes,
when the very Meditation of it does so deeply wound my heart.

Though I know that the immaculate Lamb was sacrificed on this wooden Altar,
that he might wash and cleanse my polluted soul with his precious blood, take
away the foul stains of my defiled flesh, and by suffering so vile a death on
the Cross, to deliver me from a bitter curse, due unto me for my great and
grievous sins: Yet needs must mine eyes have melted (like Ice) into tears,
my heart have been consumed with sobs, and all my bowels pained with
compassion, if I had been a woeful beholder of his doleful Passion; unless
mine eyes had been more dry then a flint, my heart more hard then iron, and
my bowels composed of brass.

But indeed, what rivers of streaming tears should water my cheeks? what
heavy groans, and lamentable sighs should sound out of the bottom of my
heart? How should all mine affections be drowned in the waves of afflictions,
when I contemplate the hidious deformities of my ugly sins, and seriously
meditate on the cruel tyranny of my traiterous transgressions, which indeed
were nothing else, but cruel hands, and a hard hammer, to drive the ironnailes
into thy blessed hands, and innocent feet, and to crash their tender bones into
pieces.

Wound my soul (oh my sweet Jesus) pierce my heart, that it may stream forth
blood, let nothing but mournful sighs be pleasant unto my weeping eyes: let
nothing but voices of horror and lamentation be delightful unto my doleful
ears, so that all my senses may be true mourners, to bewail the cruelty of
my sins, and to show some tokens of true repentance for the multitude of my
transgressions, which so pitifully wounded thy sacred body, and so grievously
vexed thy righteous soul.

Crucify my heart, that it may die to wicked cogitations: Crucify my hands,
that they may have no power to commit evil actions: Crucify mine eyes, that
they may want light (in taking delight) to gaze upon vvorldly vanities:
Crucify mine ears, that they may be dull and deprived of hearing, when they
should listen to fruitless and frivolous words, unsavory speeches,
lascivious, and wanton discourses: Crucify my tongue, that it may have no
motion to utter any opposite thing to the pure Law of my God, or hurtful to
the commodity of those which are godly and good. Crucify my Taste, that it
may not be allured with the wanton enticements of delicate meats, nor so
overcome with the baytes of pleasant wine, that the eyes of my understanding be
dark with the fumes of gluttony, or my soul be polluted, or my body defiled
with filthy adultery.

Crucify the old man (sin) that has been my Tenant so long, and has had
his habitation in my bosom, that being dead, he may be carried out to his
grave, that my soul may be infected no longer with his carnal impiety, and
that I may no longer wilfully love, but willingly loath, and for ever leave his
damnable company.

But now (oh my sorrowful soul) turn thine eyes toward thy crucified Jesus,
meditate seriously in thy mind, and let it be the perpetual matter of thy
thoughts, to think how thy loving Savior was most pitifully martyred, and
cruelly mangled, tortured without any pity, scorned at his death with vile
indignity, and thought unworthy of any mercy or kind humanity, that thou
may mourn for thy sins in the morning, and repent for thy misdeeds in the
evening, which were hard-hearted, and bloudie-handed executioners, to crucify
thy innocent Jesus.

Cry out, oh my vvretched, and wicked soul, trembling at the ugly sight of
thy grievous sins, and troubled with the horror of thy guilty conscience.
Cry out saying: Oh my sweet Jesus! oh my mild and merciful Jesus! how exceeding
painful are the pangs of thy Passion? how violent are the streams of thy
afflictions? how cruelly is thy body wounded, and thy soul pressed with the
heavy weight of my sins? Oh how horrible, how detestable, how innumerable
are my transgressions, that tormented my Savior with so many heavy
afflictions? What a dear price did thou pay for my Redemption? At what a
high rate have thou bought me a most wretched sinner? no sums of gold had it
been never so much, no heaps of silver had they been never so great could
rid me out of Captivity: It was only thy precious blood that might pay the
price of my ransom. It was only thy innocent death that was sufficient to
purchase my freedom.

How is the naked body of my loving Redeemer and kind Reconciler, stretched
out upon the Cross, to deliver me from the bitter curse which was due unto
me for my monstrous impiety, and the execution of it ready to be served upon
me for my intolerable iniquity?

How firm are thy harmless hands fixed unto thy Cross? how hard are thy
innocent feet nailed unto it? Thou have only liberty to move, but (Alas) no
where to lay down thy weak, and vvearie head. Thou lie naked, objected to
the blasts of the vvinde and storm of the weather, thou have no clothes to
keep thee warm, thou have no shelter to keep thee from harm.

Thou were poor indeed at thy birth, but now thou art more poor at thy death:
for at thy birth thou had a Stable for thy Chamber, and a Manger for thy
Cradle: thou had swathling clothes (although they were course) that might
defend thee from cold, and cherish thy tender body. But at thy death thou art
cruelly robbed of all thy garments, thou have not so much as a ragge to lay
upon thee, the sharpness of the air nippeth thy skin, the fury of the winds
stormeth against thy naked body, thou have no roof to cover thy head from the
blustering winds: thou have no place of harbor to protect thy body from the
stormy weather: Oh how hard is the bed thou lie upon at the hour of thy
death? How hard is the pillow that lies under thy head, when thou art ready
to yield up thy breath? How is thy blessed body debased by wretched men here
upon the earth, which is so highly honored by the Angels in Heaven? Oh how
should my heart faint with bleeding vvounds of sorrow for my sins? How
should mine eyes make my bed to flote with a flood of tears, when I begin to
call to an audit my heinous trespasses, and to cast up the infinite sums of my
transgressions, which caused my Lord to pass through such a great Camp of
miseries, and to abide the bitter brunts of so many calamities? for what had
thou done, oh my most sweet Lord? what had thou done, that thou should be so
spitefully despised, so maliciously martired, so extremely tortured, and so
cruelly tormented? What wicked action had thy pure hands committed, nay what
good deed had they omitted, that they should be so pitifully wounded? How had
thy innocent feet transgressed, that they should be so severely punished? How
had any little particle of thy blessed body offended, that it should be so
grievously tormented? Truly, thy deeds, my blessed Savior, were always acted
with integrity, and thy words did utter nothing but truth and sincerity: thy
hands were always clean from sinful actions, thy heart was always pure
from wicked cogitations: It was thy marvelous love, thy miraculous mercy,
thine unspeakable pity, that did induce thee to suffer those torments which
were due unto me for mine offenses. It was I my sweet Savior, it was I my
self that had so grievously sinned: It was thy wonderful charity, it was thy
charitable mercy, to shed thy precious blood, to cure the desperate disease, of
my deadly misery.

But such, oh such, and so vile is the horrible ingratitude of my mind; such,
and so great, is the dullness of my memory, such and so hard, is the
stupiditie of my heart, that I am unthankful for thy mercy, forgetful of thy
bounty, senseless without any compassion, yea quite cold, without any zealous
meditation of thy grievous Passion.

Have mercy upon me, oh my most merciful Lord, have mercy upon me, Oh let
the sweet dew of thy infinite mercy, distill down upon my head: yea rather
let it be infused into my heart, that it may mollify the hardness of mine
affections, moisten the dryness of my bowels, and fructify my mind with the
fruits of thy love because I cannot, yea rather because I am unwilling to
suffer with thee, and love thee so little, who has always loved me so
much: for I freely confess, I have no sense of thy innarrable, and innumerable
sorrows, which thou did suffer for the multitude of my sins. Alas mine
eyes are dry without tears, my kind Jesus, my heart is so dead, that it cannot
breath forth any heavy groans: mine affections are stark cold, without any
heat of true devotion, so often, yea rather so seldom, as I enter into a
meditation of thy bitter Passion, and ruminate thy tedious pains and terrible
pangs which thou did feel in thy most precious body, to reuerse the
sentence of damnation pronounced against me for my sins, and to purchase a
gracious pardon for my condemned soul.

But pardon me, forgive me my most merciful Lord, I have a heart of Iron, my
bowels are more hard then Marble, unless thou mollify them, they are unapt to
receive any print of thy mercy, or any impression of thy grace.

Take away from me I pray thee my stony heart, give me a fleshie and tender
heart, that may be vvounded with the thorns of sorrow for my rebellious
thoughts, yield forth doleful groans for my grievous sins, and bleed with
the vvounds of compunction, when my mind does meditate on thy heavy Passion.

Oh why should not my heart, my vvretched heart, be pinched with some pain for
the love of thee, which did willingly vouchsafe to die for the love of me?
Wherefore have the sparks of my love lien so long covered in the embers? Or
rather why are they almost extinguished? Oh what severe punishment should I
take of my self, for my monstrous ingratitude? How is my tongue able to utter
one word, yea one syllable of a word, to excuse the coldness of my love? How
may I blush, nay how may my face be confounded with shame which am so
vvayward, and unwilling to suffer any little affliction for thy sake, who
endured so many extreme torments for my sin? I lie on feather-beds, covered
vvarme with clothes, and thou did lie naked, nailed to a wooden Cross,
and that in the time of cold weather, when others do vvarme themselves at a
fire.

If my head begin to ache, I lay it down upon a soft pillow, to ease my pain,
and lessen my grief: But thou oh my loving Lord, have not so much as a bolster
of straw vvhereon thou might lay thy dying head, pierced with sharp
thorns, and bleeding with many wounds.

When I am sick, my friends about me bestirre themselves to ease my diseased
body, and to revive my fainting spirits. But alas (my sweet Savior) there was
none about thee at the hour of thy pitiful and painful death, which
would proffer thee any kind deed, no, not so much as a comfortable word.

They offer thee bitter wine mixed with mirrhe, and mingled with Gall. But
although thy thirst was great, caused by the extremity of thy pains, and
immoderate effusion of thy blood, yet when thou had tasted of it, thou did
refuse to drink of their bitter potion.

How hard were their hearts? yea how dead, without any feeling of common
compassion, that could give unto my sweet Savior no better then such a bitter
Potion?

Such was the succor that they would afford thee at the hour of thy death:
This was the best Cordial they would give thee a little before the parting of
thy breath.

What just occasion had thou my merciful Redeemer? yea, what admirable
patience had thou, that thou did not bitterly inueigh against the bloody
Gentiles, and unbelieving Jews, who were so maliciously madded, and bloudily
minded against thee, that all which they sought, and all which they wrought,
was to augment thy sorrow?

But whilst their hearts were inflamed with malice against thee, and their
hands laboring to crucify thee, thou were so far from accusing them for
their sauadge cruelty, that thou did pray unto thy heavenly Father, that he
would remit and forgive their iniquity, saying: Father pardon them, because
they know not what they do. Luke 23.34.

And this oh my sweet Christ, was the first words which thou spakest upon
thy bitter Cross: Indeed they knew thee not, for their eyes were blinded that
they could not see, and their hearts were hardened that they could not
understand.

Here may thou meditate (oh my soul) with exceeding comfort upon the
wonderful patience, admirable mercy, and sweet words of thy loving Savior,
who was not so much grieved with pain of his own afflictions, as he was
earnest to pray for the remission of their sins. He did not once open his
mouth, to make any just Apology, for his own innocence, nor to denounce any
deserved malediction: No, not one bitter word against them, for their dogged
cruelty. But in the extremest pangs of his bitter Passion, his tender heart was
moved with pitiful compassion toward them, he opened the fountain of his
mercy, that the sweet streams of his Benediction might flow upon them. He
blessed them that cursed him, he showed them a true token of his entire love,
for their cruel hate, he prayed for them as if they had been his dearest
friends, when indeed they were his deadly foes.

How should my feeble tongue, like a trumpet (oh my bountiful Jesus) sound
forth the wonderful worthiness of thy surmounting mercy? How should mine
unable and barren heart, conceive the dignity of thine incomparable meekness?
How should the weak sight of my dark understanding pierce into the hidden
mysteries of thy gracious mildness, which surpasses all understanding.

How affable and ineffable is the sweetness of thy charitable prayer? how
bottomless is the depth of thy clemency? how vnexhaustible is the treasure of
thy benignity?

How large and spacious, yea how infinite are the bounds of thy mercy? For with
what tranquillity of mind? with what piety and pity of heart? with what
sweet, mild, and perswasiue words did thou sue for their pardon, who now
were breathing out nothing else but curses against thee, with their malicious
tongues, and even now acting the extremity of their Tyranny against thee with
their bloody hands?

Thou were not discouraged by their injuries, thou were not hardened with their
reproaches: thou did not rebuke them for their evil words: thou did not
check them for their wicked deeds: thou did seek to salve their soars, who
gave thee deadly wounds: thou did make intercession for their life, who
cruelly put thee to death: thou were full of pity toward them, whose hearts
were empty of all compassion toward thee. Oh with what wonderful mildnes of
mind, with what great devotion of spirit, in what abundance of love did thou
cry, Father, forgive them? Oh wonderful work of thy worthy mercy! oh rare and
memorable example of exceeding pity! oh perfect pattern of excellent charity!
oh let me poor wretched sinner, taste the sweetness of this honey, revive my
dying heart with this cordial compassion, relieve my sick soul with this
comfortable confection. Cry out so for me, my sweet Lord, and kind Mediator:
commend my woeful case, and plead my cause unto thy Father, saying, Father
forgive him.

For in truth, I know not what I do: love of the world has blinded mine eyes,
desire of carnal pleasures, is rooted in my heart, and all manner of wanton
vanities are rife in my mind: I run headlong in the broad way of
destruction: I cannot find the narrow path, which leads to Salvation.

Open mine eyes (oh Lord) that I may see to walk in thy ways, and direct my
feet, that I may tread in thy paths.

Teach me to follow the pattern of thy excellent patience, so that I may not
wish well only to my dearest friends, which dearly love me, but also pray
for my cruel enemies, who deadly hate me.

But alas, how soon am I displeased? how long is it before I will forgive, if
I be once offended? I am prone with envious Cain, to stain my hands with
horrible murder. I long for a day with rough Esau, wherein I may slay my
innocent brother. I oftentimes fall out with my friend for a cross word, so
that oftentimes in requital, I seek to do him a mischievous deed: I think
my self the worse when I see him: Oh how do I disdain to speak unto him?

Teach me to learn this hard lesson of patience: purge the seed of malice out
of my mind, mellow the ground of my heart with the deaw of thy graces, that it
may not only be tender, to give my beloved poor Friends, but that it may also
be pliable to forgive my hateful Foes: seeing that thou were not so much
touched with the sense of thy own afflictions, (and no doubt the pains of
them were most grievous unto thee) as thou were moved with zeal to pray for
thy bloody enemies, when they made a prey of thy garments, and cast lots for
thy unseamed vesture, Ioh. 19.24.

Now though Pilate gave wrongful judgment against thee, to take away thy
innocent life, yet he seemed to honor thee at the hour of thy death, when he
wrote on the Cross, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, Matt. 27.37. Mar.
15.26. Luke 23.38. John 19.19. It pleased him to entitle thee a King by name,
but alas, he had no such conceit of thee in his secret thoughts. But indeed
thou were worthy of a far more honorable Title, being not only King of the
Jews, but also of the Gentiles: Yea, Creator and Governor of every creature.

Nevertheless, thou did not clothe thy self with the vesture of our
Humanity, that thou should be honored with any worldly dignity.

It was thy chiefest honor to do the will of thy heavenly Father; Ioh. 14.31.
thou came not to deprive Herod of his Kingdom, nor to gather any forces to
deliver the Jews, as they fondly dreamed of their Messiah, and vainly
expected at the coming of their King.

Thou came to deliver the people from the Captivity of their sins, and by
shedding thy precious blood to save their souls. Grant me oh my sweet
Savior, that I may set open the door of my heart, that thou may enter,
which art the true King of glory, and that I may still desire (although I am
unable) to show my self a loving and loyal subject to receive thee.

Send thy holy spirit, as a Harbenger before thee, to give me warning of thy
coming, and then I shall be prepared to entertain my gracious Sovereign;
with humility of mind, and tokens of sincere love.

I long (oh my King) for thy coming, for I am assured if thou vouchsafe to
enter into my cottage, thou will bestow such a royal gift upon me, that I
shall begin to disdain the pomp of the world, and account nothing so dear
unto me as thy love.

Oh would my loving Savior would embrace me between his blessed arms! Oh I
vvish to live, I long to die betwixt thy loving imbracements: thy arms were
stretched out on the Cross, as if thou were ready to receive any penitent
sinner, refuse not to receive me a wretched sinner, who wounded with the horror
of my sins, do come unto thee as my Physician, who is only able and willing
to heal my wounds. Let thy precious blood stop the bloody issue of my
sins: thy mercy, and nothing but thy mercy can cure my malady: that one, and
that alone, is all my remedy.

Grant me (oh my sweet Jesus) that I may be able to say with thine Apostle,
I am crucified with thee. Crucify my wanton flesh with the nails of thy
fear: mortify my rebellious thoghts with dread of thy Justice, and Meditation
of thy judgments. Let it be the joy of my heart: let it be the daily exercise
of my mind: let it be the object of all my thoughts to think on my Lord
Jesus, and him crucified.

I cannot wonder enough, though I never cease to wonder at thee, my Jesus, my
Savior, and my Redeemer: yet let me never cease to marvel at the wonderful
work of thy Passion, which thou did so patiently suffer, that by thy
innocent death, thou might cancel the obligation of our infinite debt, and
affixe it to thy Cross, that thou might deliver us poor and miserable
wretches, from the danger of the curse, which was gone out against us: Oh how
can my meditations attain to the length of thy admirable love? how can my
cogitations measure the breadth of thy clemency? how should my deepest
imaginations diue into the depth of thy mercy?

My eye is too dim, to perceive the beauty, my ear is too dull, to hear the
greatness, my heart is too gross, to conceive the goodness, my taste is too
weak, to relish the sweetness, my tongue is too feeble, to declare the
worthiness of thy love: no words, be they never so many, can express the
quantity, no eloquence, be it never so excellent, can relate the quality.

Oh with what humility of mind, with what exceeding patience, with what kind
and tender affections did thou suffer the extremest pangs of thy bitter
afflictions?

How is my mind amazed with the bright beams of thy love? How are all my
thoughts confounded with the greatness of thy clemency?

How is my soul ravished with the goodness of thy mercy? What did move thee,
oh my sweet Savior, but thy unspeakable love? what did induce thee, but thy
incomparable mercy, to pay so dear a price for my Redemption?

Oh let the remembrance of thy infinite bounty never depart out of my mind:
Let all my affections be inflamed with the fire of thy love: Let the sweetness
and greatness of thy mercies be my chiefest Meditations: Mortify my
disobedient cogitations with thy fear, and crucify my rebellious actions on
thy Cross: that although sin must dwell and remain in me, yet it may not
reign and rule over me.

A Meditation concerning the derisions and scornful speeches, uttered to the
Lord JESUS, (when he was nailed on the Cross) by the Jews, and one of the
Thieves which were crucified with him; and of the second words he spoke on the
cross. MED. XV.
Twixt Mat. 27.38. Mark. 15.27.
Thieves Christ suffered. For no fault he shed
His precious blood. The Mark. 23.4. John 19.6.
Sun thereat ashamed
Mar. 15.33, Matthew. 27.45. and 27.52.
Ore-uaild his face. The graves gave up their dead:
With wonders more, that cannot here be named.

NOw ruminate (oh my sorrowful and lamenting soul) what scornful speeches,
what spiteful derisions, and bitter reproaches, were breathed out of the
mouths of the envious Jews against my patient and silent Jesus, after they
had nailed his pure hands, and blessed feet to the Cross.

Call home all thy wandering cogitations, that they may be soly and wholly
intentive to this heavenly and divine meditation.

Let streams of tears gush out of my melting eyes, let them penetrate into my
bosom, that they may mollify my stony heart, so that it may be so deeply
wounded with sorrowful compassion, as if I had been an eyewitness of his
painful Passion, when his innocent hands, and blessed feet streamed forth
precious blood: yet the streams of it could not quench the fire of their
malice, they could not calm the rage of their stormy minds, nor breed any one
thought of pity in their cruel hearts: It was not sufficient for them to
torment him with their bloody hands, but now at his undeserved death, they
rail and revile him with their blasphemous mouths: for as their hearts were
stony, not apt to take any print of compassion, and their hands filled with
savage cruelty without mercy, so their words and speeches were uncivil, void of
all modesty. Some cry out, He saved others, let him save himself if he be the
Son of God the Soldiers disdainfully deride him, and scornfully mock him,
saying: If thou be king of the Jews save thy self. Also they that pass by,
nod their heads at him, revile him bitterly, and blaspheme him, saying: Ah thou
which do destroy the Temple of God, and in three days do build it again,
save thy self: If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross: Oh how
cruelly was my innocent Savior tormented with their unmerciful hands? oh how
was his righteous soul wounded with their malicious tongues? their words do
savor of Gall, and their speech is more bitter then wormwood. But so great was
their malice, so grievous was their indignation, so deadly was their hatred
against my loving Jesus, that they thought all their cruel deeds were too
little to be inflicted upon him: and that all their words were not half bitter
enough, which their venomous mouths did spue out against him.

But as my blessed Redeemer did patiently suffer the extreme tortures of their
merciles hands, so he did meekely bear the bitter taunts of their reuiling
tongues. Oh let the memory of this thy exceeding patience be so deeply sealed
in my mind, that my thoughts may still meditate on thy infinite love! let my
tears (often flowing out of my eyes) be true tokens of my inward sorrow, and
let my grievous groans be as faithful messengers to declare my true
repentance: For it was my horrible transgressions and heinous offenses, my
kind and loving Savior, that made thee to abide the tyranny of their bloody
and murdering hands, and to feel the sting of their sharp and malicious
tongues.

But (alas) mine eyes are so dry, that they cannot shed a tear, and my heart
so hard, that it cannot yield a groan, unless thou moysten the one with the
gracious rain of thy graces, and mollify the other, by the virtue of thy
spirit.

Now not only the irreligious Gentiles who were actors of this bloody Tragedy,
and the envious Jews who were authors and Spectators of all their cruelty, did
disgorge the bitter choler of their malice against my crucified Jesus, but
also one of the malefactors having no remorse of conscience for his own
offenses, nor pity on my Savior, so grievously taunted, and spightfully
scorned of the basest of the people, began to rail upon him without modesty,
and to use these terms against him, full of vile indignity: If thou art
Christ, save thy self and us, Luke 23.39. But his other fellow touched with
sorrow for his sins, and freely confessing that they had both worthily
deserved, and did justly suffer death for their transgressions, began to
reprehend him for his blasphemous impiety, and to justify my Jesus for his
blameless innocence.

And when he had rebuked his fellow for such great inhumanity, he turned to my
Savior to implore his mercy, that he might be made partaker of the joys of
his heavenly Kingdom, uttering this short and sweet prayer: Lord remember me,
when thou come into thy Kingdom. And he had scant ended his short
petition, but my merciful Savior made him this gracious answer; Verily I say
unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43.

But now let us consider, oh my soul, with devout attention, and behold with
attentive devotion, what riches of infinite bounty, what large promises of
unmeasurable liberality, what a blessed inheritance, my bountiful redeemer
does promise unto this poor, naked, and true, though late repenting sinner.

How might this blessed promise mittigate the sorrows, (Oh thou sorrowful
sinner,) of thy perplexed mind? How might it ease the soars of thine
afflicted body? for as faith bred in thy heart a true contrition, and opened
thy mouth to make that humble petition, so no doubt it sealed such an assurance
unto thy wounded conscience, that thou did steadfastly believe his promise,
and faithfully look for the performance. But how may my speech extend it self
to the length of thy boundless liberality (my most liberal Redeemer?) How
may my words measure the breadth of thy unlimited mercy? yea how can my thoughts
sound the bottomless Sea of thy benignity? in thy first words uttered on the
Cross, thou do pray thy Father to forgive thy cruel tormentors, and in thy
second words thou do bountifully give Paradise unto a sorrowful sinner.

Oh who can worthily estimate the dignity of the gift? who can sufficiently
extol the bounty of the giver? although (my sweet Jesus) thy whole life was the
merit of our salvation, yet at thy bitter death thou did pay the full price
of our redemption. Oh happy thief that had such a sweet taste of thy mercy! Oh
blessed soul, that were made partaker of such infinite bounty! Oh what great
graces and excellent virtues were infused into thee, that thou did believe my
Jesus to be the true Son of God thy Creator: whom thou did see to die the
death of a miserable creature?

As thy faults were intolerable in thy dissolute life, so thy faith appears
admirable at thy sorrowful death. For what but faith was the motive to move
thee to sue to him to be remembered in his kingdom of eternal felicity, who to
thy outward eyes appeared nothing else but a spectacle of woeful misery? and as
thy confidence was great, and thy love much, so thy Jesus does speedily assure
thee to enjoy a bountiful reward.

Therefore I pray thee my most bountiful Jesus, so to inspire my mind with thy
grace, and so to kindle thy love in my breast, that I may be contented to be
crucified with thee here upon earth, that I may be received by thee into thy
kingdom of heaven.

And grant that I may so truly lament for my trespasses, and shed such bitter
tears for my sins that I may faithfully say with this penitent thief: Lord
remember me when thou shall come into thy Kingdom. For I confess O Lord, I
have been no better then a Thief, for I have robbed thee of thy honor, I have
been untrue unto thee concerning thy glory. My lips are defiled with lying, my
hands have wrought the works of deceit, I have often beguiled the widow, and
defrauded the Orphane. I have sought to make my self rich by oppression, I
have been disobedient to my governors, and would not live under their lawful
subjection. Oh Lord remember not my great and grievous offenses, let thy mercy
blot them out of thy memory, that they may not be laid against me, when I shall
be summoned to appear before thee: Remember me according to the multitude of
thy mercies, as thou did this late-repenting malefactor, whom thou have left
unto me as one rare example of thy infinite mercy, that I should not despair
in regard of thy justice, and that I should not presume to sin in respect of
thy mercy. Oh let me remember this rare example of thy extraordinary
goodness, so that I may neither despair with the heavy burden of my sins,
nor presume without fear to transgress the bounds of thy holy law: that
although I have run long the wild race of unbridled iniquity, yet at last
I may return home unto thee out of the way of impiety, with this faithful
and true repenting offender, and be a companion with him in thy Paradise of
everlasting felicity.

A Meditation, concerning the lamentation of the Virgin MARY, beholding her
Son, lifted up upon the Cross, standing by it, accompanied with John the
Evangelist, and Mary Magdalene. MED. XVI.
The blessed Virgin John 9.25.
standing by the Cross
Of Christ our Lord; Behold thy Ibid. 26.
Son, said he
Unto his Mother; Oh most grievous loss,
That he must die, who from all Luke 23.14.
faults was free!

NOw turn thy thoughts (Oh my sorrowful soul, from the blasphemous
reproaches, scornful derisions, and malicious slanders of the wicked Jews,
insulting against my innocent JESUS.

And now thou have heard how bountiful thy Savior was unto the penitent
Thief, that was sorrowful for his own iniquity, and courageous to justify
my merciful Redeemer, for his unspotted innocence: Meditate a while on the
Lamentation of his blessed Mother, whose heart was wounded with sorrow, to see
her Son so cruelly tormented, when he had never offended in word, nor
imagined any evil in thought.

How sharp was the sting of dolor to wound her heart? how intolerable was
the grief that did trouble her mind, when she saw his body bleeding with so
many wounds, before her woeful eyes, and heard their bitter words and devilish
reproaches cast out against him, in the audience of her doleful ears.

As she had cause to rejoice at his blessed Birth, so now she had good
occasion to mourn for his cruel death.

For though no doubt she was anointed with oil of graces above her fellows,
yet we may not think she was quite exempted from the passions of a woman, or
void of the tender affections of a Mother, when she saw the harmless head of
her loving and beloved Son bleeding with a Crown of Thorns, and his innocent
hands, and blessed feet, fastened to the Cross with iron nails.

Certainly she knew that his Conception was so sanctified by the holy Ghost
in her womb, that his most blessed body was always free from the infection
of impiety, and his flesh never tainted with the corruption of iniquity.

But yet she knew he did not suffer without sense of his pains, and although
he was endued with a supernatural patience, yet she knew that he felt the
pangs of his bitter Passion, subject by his humane nature to many infirmities
as we are: yet ever having a pure heart and clean hands, from the spots of
sin, wherewith our souls are polluted, and our bodies continually infected.

Wherefore think oh my soul, that as her afflictions were grievous, so her
lamentation was great: suppose that thou do see her, with her face
discolored with palenesse, discovering her motherly sorrow to thy outward eyes,
and that thou did hear her mournful tongue, telling this doleful tale to
thy attentive ears, which should cause thee to be a partner with her in her
woe, and sigh for thy sins, which were the cause of her sorrow, to see her
beloved Son so cruelly crucified by the Gentiles, and so disdainfully derided
by the Jews.

Think (I say) that thou do see her watering her eyes with store of
tears and uttering these or the like words, with her sorrowful lips to her
dearly beloved Son, (which words should draw out tears from thine eyes, and
drive out groans from thy heart) which she pronounced with a doleful accent
in this or the like manner.

Oh what medicine, (be it never so sovereign) can assuage the rigor of my
malady? what salve (be it never so precious) can heal the wounds of my
bleeding heart? what words (be they never so comfortable) can cheer up my
doleful mind, when I see thee my beloved Son, so cruelly tormented, and so
ignominiously taunted? Alas for me poor wretch thy sorrowful Mother.

How intolerable is the pain? how grievous is the punishment that is
inflicted upon thee? Thy death is not so bitter unto me, (and yet how loath I
am to forgo thee,) as these cruel torments which I see, do torture thy
innocent body, and do greatly augment the sorrow of my perplexed mind. As thy
blessed life was the cause of my chiefest felicity, so will thy bitter death be
the beginning of my misery.

Who shall afford me comfort in the time of my calamity? who shall give me
counsel? who shall be my succor in the time of my necessity, when I am
separated from thee? How shall I spend the days with sorrowing, and pass
through the teadious nights with mourning?

But thou oh my GOD omnipotent, which art his eternal Father, who can not
shut thine eyes of compassion from thine afflicted Son, comfort me his
sorrowful Mother.

Thou see the wounds of his body, thou know the sorrows of my heart, and
because thou art a Father of mercies, and a GOD of all consolation, look down
upon me out of thy holy Sanctuary, and as thou have proved me to be thy
faithful Handmaide, so let the sweetness of thy Fatherly love, temper the
bitterness of my grief, that although I be deprived from the humane society
of my Son, yet the vvings of thy providence, may still ouershadow me, and
thy omnipotent arm safely protect me.

But as the Virgin Marie did bewail the cruel and bloody death of her
innocent Son, so Marie Magdalene, with many tears gushing out of her eyes,
began to lament the woeful case of him her loving Master, on this or such like
manner.

Oh my dear Master! oh my gracious Lord! oh my blessed and bountiful
benefactor! I cannot live without thy loving company: I cannot abide, without
thy amiable Society: What tongue, though it speak never so doleful, can
truly relate my sorrow? What words, be they never so rhetorical, can ease my
inward grief, when I see I shall be separated from so loving and so kind a
Master?

Oh how tyrannous are the torments wherewith the bloody tormentors do torment
thine afflicted body? How sharp are the arrows of their malice, wherewith
they vvound thy righteous soul? How grievous is the sight of their cruel
deeds unto mine eyes? How odious are their dogged words unto mine ears? Yet
my constant love unto thee, will not give me leave to leave thee, (though it
be a death unto me to see thy calamity) so long as mine eyes may behold thee.

The sight of the bitter pangs of thy Passion does affright me with horror:
The signs of thy approaching death, does confound my senses with continual
terror: I see thy head which I anointed with precious ointment, cruelly
pierced with Thorns, and pitifully bleedihg with many wounds.

I see thy harmless hands pierced with iron nails, and thy innocent feet
stained with blood, which I bathed with the tears of mine eyes, and wiped
with the hair of my head.

Oh how should I sufficiently bewail the innocent death of my loving Jesus?

How does my heart faint with sorrow, and my senses fail me for grief, when I
see the torments of his body, and when I think upon the affliction of his
soul? But alas, the waves of sorrow do stop the passage of my words, my
speech fails, and my voice faints for grief.

Now thou have heard (my sorrowful soul) the lamentation of the Virgin
Marie, as a kind Mother, sorrowing for the death of her dearest Son: and the
pitiful mourning of Marie Magdalene, sighing for the loss of so loving and
kind a Master; Cease not thou to shed tears, with thy weeping eyes, and to
sob with a broken and contrite heart, for the cruel and shameful death of
thy loving Savior, who died for thy heinous sins, and suffered for thy
horrible transgressions.

Grant me, oh my most gracious Lord, that my head may flow with water, and
that mine eyes may be turned into a fountain of tears: For where shall I go
to draw water, but to the fountain of my Savior?

Oh why should I cease to weep for thy sake, when thou did weep so often,
because of my sins? Thou have told me, that they are happy, and blessed, that
mourn for their sins, and lament for their offenses, and that they shall be
comforted in the day of their trouble, and receive consolation at the hour of
their affliction.

Draw me (oh Lord) unto thee, that I may behold thee, and take such hold of
thee, that thou may never depart from me.

Receive me into the little number of thy loving and faithful friends, who
would not leave thee in thy extremest misery, but did weep and sigh to see
thy calamity: so that being partaker with them of their sorrow, by my
meditation of thy bitter Passion, suffered here upon earth, I may be made
copartner with them of thine unspeakable joys, in thy blessed Kingdom of
heaven. Oh let thine ears be open to the petition of my lips, and let thy
mercy grant the desire of my heart.

A Meditation concerning the obscuration and Eclipse of the Sun about the
ninth hour, and of the fourth speech which the Lord spoke on the Cross. MED.
XVII.
When Christ upon the Mar. 15.20.
Cross for us was nailed,
And that his Ghost was ready to Mat. 27.50.
depart.
The Luke 23.45. and Math. 27.45.
Sun ashamed his splendant beams ore-vaild,
As blushing to behold so vile a part.

NOw call to mind my sinful soul, how the firmament was darkened, the Sun
eclipsed, and his beams obscured at the bitter Passion of thy Savior. And
marvel not that the brightness of the Sun was dimmed, and that his golden
beams, did not show forth their glory, when as the Son of righteousness,
my innocent Jesus had his beauty obscured, and his glory darkened with the
clouds of his grievous and bitter Passion. And if thou consider the cruelty of
his enemies, and the malice of his foes, so virulent in the devilish
cogitations of their hearts, and so violent in the bloody actions of their
hands: thou may think that the Sun did as it were disdain to afford them
his comfortable heat, or deny them his cheerful light, that so their eyes
might be ouer-shadowed with darkness, as the light of their understanding was
obscured with malice.

But meditate not only oh my soul, on the horrible cruelty of the barbarous
Gentiles, and on the execrable spite of the bloody Jews, and that their facts
were so odious, and their deeds so detestable, that they seemed to deprive
the Sun of his splendant brightness, and to rob the earth of her chiefest
comfort: but more often think seriously of thy sins, and meditate sincerely of
thy transgressions, which darken the light of thy mind, and eclipse the beams
of thy understanding, so that thou do not see to tread in the path of
harmless piety, but do wander beside it, into the dangerous ways of
damnable iniquity.

Wherefore let the light of thine eyes be obscured with weeping, and thy heart
ache with groaning, as outward signs of thy inward sorrow, as faithful
witnesses of thy serious and true repentance: so that the bright beams of the
comfortable love of thy Redeemer may still enlighten thy heart, and the light
of his cheerful countenance evermore shine upon thee. Oh let not the mistie
vapors of my gross offenses, my merciful Savior, so obscure the beams of
thy mercy, but that their gracious influence may still have their powerful
operation in my mind, and revive my dead heart with the lively motions of
fervent and true devotion. Let the virtue of thy Spirit so dispell and
dispierce the thick clouds of my sins, that my soul may be cherished with
the heat of thy love, and see the brightness of thy glory.

But now cease thou my soul, to behold the darkened Sun with thine amazed eyes,
and attend to thy voice of thy crying Savior with thine attentive ears. What
mournful tongue can utter the sharpness of his agony? what thought can
conceive the greatness of his pain? Oh how grievous was the extremity of
his pangs, which made him lift up his eyes unto heaven, and his earnest and
loud voice unto his Celestial Father, crying out in this woeful manner: Eli,
Eli, lammazabatani? my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh how vehement
was the wrath of thy angry Father against thee my merciful Jesus, my loving
Savior? how violent were the torments that vexed thy body? How grievous were
the afflictions that pressed and perplexed thy mind, groaning under the heavy
burden of our sins, imposed upon thine innocent shoulders? Indeed our
heinous sins, our horrible transgressions, moved false-hearted Judas to
betray thee, and induced the stubborne-minded Jews to reject thee: they made
thy Disciples to fly for fear, and to leave their loving Master in time of
danger: they compelled thy head to be crowned with pricking thorns, thy face
to be defiled with spettle, thy body to be scourged with vvhippes: they pierced
thy hands, and nailed thy feet, they were the hammer and nails that fastened
thee to the Cross. These caused thy Father to punish thee with the severity of
his justice, that thou being innocent, might make satisfaction for our
trespasses, suffering a shameful and cruel death to finish the great work of
our redemption, and to deliver our bodies and souls from eternal destruction.
These made thy loving Father seem to withdraw his cheerful countenance from
thee, because thou did appear so deformed to his eyes, and ugly in his
sight, having put on the filthy rags of our iniquity: although he did
always love thee, and could never leave thee, being always beautiful with
the true ornaments of thy own integrity. Oh how should mine eyes water my bed
with flowing tears, and my heart labor with continual groans, to weep for
the cruelty of my sins, and to lament for the tyranny of my transgressions:
which were such cruel tormentors, to torture thy body, and such furious
tyrants to vex thy soul? how great oh my sweet Jesus, are the tortures which
thou do patiently endure for my sake? how painful, how shameful, and
cursed was the death which thou did suffer for my sins? the punishment
was great wherewith thy body was afflicted, the anguish was grievous, wherewith
thy soul was affected, the thorns were sharp, that wounded thy sacred head,
the whips were terrible that scourged thy naked body, the nails were painful
that entered through thy hands and pierced thy feet: nothing but marks of
cruelty appeared to thine eyes, nothing but scornful reproaches of thine
enemies sounded in thy ears. But as thy outward afflictions were unspeakable,
so thy inward sorrow was more intolerable, when thou did think how
forgetful we would be of thy mercies, and how unthankful we would be for
thy benefits.

And as thou, my most dear Jesus, in the fiercest fittes of thine agony, and
sorest pangs of thy Passion, did call, and cry to thy heavenly Father for
succor, so teach me to lift up my devout heart, pure hands, and a loud
voice, toward the seat of mercy, when any outward affliction does pinch my
body, or any inward tribulation press my soul: teach me oh Lord in the
stormy days of my greatest persecutions, to meditate on thy wonted
goodness, and when my soul is most perplexed with the horror of my guilty
conscience, to think on the multitude of thy mercies.

But forsake me not, my sweet Jesus, when my strength fails: uphold me when
my feet begin to slide, and raise me up when I begin to fall: thou do
never leave them without comfort in time of their trouble, who come unto thee
with confidence of thy promises, and faithfully crave thy succor: Oh suffer
not my soul to be cast down with immoderate mourning, or my mouth to be
filled with murmuring, when thy hand lies heavy upon me. Comfort my
drouping heart with some taste of thy heavenly consolation, when either the
sword of persecution does vvound my body, or sorrow for my sins does afflict
my mind. Let me remember that thy children are in this world as the
Israelites were in the Desert: they shall have many cruel foes, abide hunger
and thirst, run through many dangers, and drink of the bitter waters of
Mara, before they can come into heavenly Canaan, and chaw the Wormwood of
affliction, before they can eat of the fruit of the tree of life, more sweet
then milk, and more delicate then honey. Let me remember, that Abraham the
Father of the faithful, was often afflicted: that Jacob thy beloved, was
constrained to fly for fear of Esau, his rough-handed, and hard-harted
brother, and then ungently entreated, and unjustly rewarded for his faithful
service, by Laban his churlish Uncle. That David thy chosen was often in
danger of his life, pursued and persecuted by furious Saul, before he was
advanced to his Kingdom. Oh let me not forget the many miseries, and bitter
afflictions, which tumbled in heaps upon Job thy faithful servant: Let their
patience calm the turbulent motions of my repining mind, and let the
remembrance of their deliverance arm my heart with a confident and steadfast
resolution, that the eye of thy careful providence never sleeps nor
slumbreth, but continually watches over thy faithful and beloved, and that
thine omnipotent arm is then stretched out to rid them out of peril, when
they seem to be in a desperate case, past all hope, and farthest from succor.

And let me know that affliction is the best hope that thy children may expect
in this worldly Lotterie, but yet let the anchor of my hope take such sure hold
on thy promises in the time of my misery, that I may always be assured, that
thou art able, and never unwilling to cure my malady, if I call faithfully
upon thy name, and wait thy appointed time with patience, abiding constant in
thy love, and confident in thy word. Grant me oh my Lord Jesus, to cry out
unto thee in the days of my trouble, and to crave thy strong aid in the hour
of my tribulation. O let me drink a deep draught of the fountain of thy
mercy, when my poor heart is parched with thirst, in this world of misery:
Hear me from Heaven, and let my voice sound in thine ears, that I may receive
comfort when I am distressed, help me when I am oppressed, and peace of
conscience when my soul is afflicted, that when I feel the sweet taste of thy
mercy, my lips may show thy praise, and my tongue declare thy glory, saying:
With my voice I cried unto the Lord, with my voice I prayed unto the Lord, and
he heard me.

A Meditation, concerning the fifth and sixth words, which the Lord Jesus spoke
on the Cross; to wit, I thirst, and It is finished. MED. XVIII.
When Christ our Lord, the Zach. 13.1.
fountain of all bliss,
Had said, I Ioh. 19.28.
thirst; and that the hour was come
That he to Death must yield for our Romans 4.25.
amiss,
He said: It Is Ioh. 19.30.
finished now; and all is done.

Here (Oh my soul) consider not only the woes, but mark the words of thy
dying Jesus: thou did hear him cry unto his heavenly Father, with feruencie
of his affection, uttering the vehemency of his affliction, and now hear thy
woeful Jesus, speaking unto the wilful deafe-eard, and dead-hearted Jews,
saying, I thirst.

And although envy had so parched up their hearts, that they had no sap of
relenting pity, yet let his words pierce so deep into thy tender heart, that
it may be wounded with true compunction, and stir up active and lively
motions of compassion within thy bowels, so often as thou do think on his
necessity, and so often as thou do meditate on his calamity: but alas, thou
do seldom or never meditate on his humane misery.

Oh what grievous infirmities, miseries, distresses, and calamities, did our
frail assumed nature bring upon thee, my loving, sweet, and merciful Jesus?

How many great and unsupportable torments did our sin, (yea my sins, made
thine by imputation) compel thee to suffer?

What did cause thee to do it my blessed Savior, but the ardent fervor of
thy exceeding love? What worthiness of merit was there in us, as a motive to
move thee? it was thine unspeakable mercy, and nothing but thine inestimable
mercy, which did induce thee.

But can thou (oh my sorrowful soul) contain thy tears within the little
cave of thine eyes, and suppress thy groans, and repress thy sighs within
the hollow corners and cauernes of thy heart, when thou do think on the
extreme thirst of thy loving Jesus, and of the small compassion that was
showed unto him by the unmerciful Jews? wherefore cry out with the voice of
mourning, and lament in thy crying, and say unto thy beloved Jesus, Oh my most
loving Lord, oh my most gracious Reconciler, oh my most merciful Redeemer, how
should my sad and sorrowful soul be afflicted with heaviness? how should all
my senses be afflicted with mourning, when my mind does contemplate the
wounds of thy body, and meditate the sorrow of thy soul, afflicted with the
deadly pangs of thy bitter passion, which inflamed thy heart with excessive
heat, and dried up the moisture of thy bowels, with immoderate thirst? And how
should mine eyes swell with weeping, and my heart be wearied with groaning, to
bewail my sins, which so sharpened the hearts of the Gentiles, with the
eagerness of cruelty, and so shortened the hands of the Jews, with the
malice of impiety, that they retained no spark of pity in their hearts, nor
would extend their hands to give thee any comfortable refreshing in thy
greatest extremity? But as their hearts and bowels were filled with sharp,
sower, and malicious humors, so they give thee a sour and bitter drink,
compounded of Gall and Vinegar.

Oh nefarious and horrible impiety! oh detestable cruelty of the perfidious
Jews, to be so stony-harted, as not to afford so much as a draught of cold
water to my dying Jesus, who is able to give water of life, which shall so
plentifully satisfy the longing desire of those that drink of it, that they
shall never after be molested with thirst, nor have any necessity to drink.

Oh would I had been there my bountiful Jesus, that my weeping eyes might
have afforded thee store of water, to have slaked thy dryness, and quenched
thy thirst. Oh how extreme was the grief of thy tenderhearted Mother! Oh
how sorrowful was the sadness of John thy loving Disciple, who loved thee so
tenderly, and was beloved of thee so entirely?

Oh how dolorous was the lamentation of Mary Magdalene, mourning for thee her
kind distressed Master, who had forgiven her many sins, because she had
showed thee much love! Who all did behold thee with their woeful eyes, and did
hear thee with their doleful ears, complain that thou were dry and thirsty,
and no doubt but they did all wish with sighs, and desire with heavy groans,
that they had been able, (but alas, they might not be suffered) to give thee
some comfortable refreshing.

When the Devil our ancient enemy did tempt thee in the Wilderness, thou were
pinched with hunger, and at thy death thou were parched with thirst, thy
moisture dried up like a pot-shard, and thy tongue cleaving to the rooffe of
thy mouth.

Now what are these natural wants and weak infirmities found in thy body, but
strong arguments unto us of thy true manhood, and true testimonies of thy
humane nature, that we might know, that although thou were endued with
exceeding patience, yet that thou being man, were subject to our passions: but
as thy sacred Conception was free from all carnal corruption, so thy pure Life
was always free from all sinful infection.

Thou had great cause (my loving Savior) to be molested with dryness, and
grieved with thirst, when as thy body was distempered with watching, bruised
with cruel blows, and thy blood exhausted with thy bleeding wounds: yet such
as was the inhumanity, such was the cruelty of the pitiless Jews, that in
this extremity they would not afford thee a cup of cold water. But is it
credible, yea, is it possible, that my Savior should be afflicted with thirst
at his death, who has told us (and it is true that he has told us) that he
has the water of life?

Tell me my bountiful Jesus, how was thy moisture consumed? what caused thy
thirst? art thou not he which cried, If any man thirst, let him come to me and
drink? Ioh. 7.37. art thou able to satisfy others that are thirsty, and art
thou thy self oppressed with thirst? art not thou he my loving Savior, which
said to the woman of Samaria, that thou had the water of life, and that he
which should drink of this water, should never thirst any more, but that it
should be a well of water in him, springing up unto everlasting life.

Thy speech (my Savior) is verity: and thy words are truth: thou have the
water of life, thou art able, and as thou art able, so thou art most willing,
to refresh our thirsty souls, with this blessed water, if we will resort
to drink of thy pure and Crystal fountain: I will come unto thee (my sweet
Jesus) that thou may satisfy my soul with thine everlasting bread, and
quench my thirst with this Water of life: for my soul thirsts after God,
which is a living Fountain.

I will cry unto thee, the Lord my God, my Savior, my protector, and I will
say, I thirst, I thirst, my bountiful Jesus: Oh that I might have but so much
as a little taste of this Caelestiall water: Oh how do I long to drink of
this fountain! quench thou my thirst, oh my sweet Jesus, with this living
Water, for thou only art able to quench my thirst, because with thee there is
the fountain of life.

And grant that my soul may still thirst with such a longing after thy love,
that it may make haste to these waters of comfort.

Oh how dangerous and deadly were my malady? how insufferable were my misery?
how damnable were my state? how desperate were my case, if I should not drink
of this heavenly Fountain?

But as the spring of these blessed and wholesome waters does ever flow, and
as thy vnstinted bounty (oh my merciful Savior, ever abounds) so thou do
never deny any thirsty soul to drink of this living water.

Wherefore let the feruency of thy love so inflame my soul, that it may
thirst, and thirsting, may run unto thee, to be refreshed with this
comfortable water.

I know, oh my blessed Redeemer, that thou were not only afflicted with thirst
in thy body, but that thou were more affected with thirst in thy spirit.

Hear thou, (oh my thirsty soul) the sweet word of thy Savior! Oh with what
exceeding mercy is it replenished? with what inestimable Charity is it uttered?

He says, I thirst: but he says not, I am pained, grieved, or afflicted: And
what do thou thirst for so much, oh my loving Lord? Thou do not thirst so
much for wine which is pressed out of the grapes of the Vine: or for water
which flows out of the River: but thy thirst is my salvation, thy meat is my
redemption. Thou do thirst for my faith, my salvation, my joy: this
spiritual thirst did more affect thy soul, then any natural or humane thirst
could afflict thy body: Therefore thirst thou (oh my soul after thy loving and
merciful Savior) as the thirsty Heart desires the water. Oh how can thou but
thirst after him, who has thirsts so much after thee? Let all things (be
they never so sower) be pleasant unto thee for his sake: let all things (be
they never so bitter) be most sweet unto thee for his love. Refuse not to
drink of the bitter cup of affliction for his cause, and he will not fail to
refresh thee in the time of thy calamity, his hand shall be stretched out to
deliver thee in thy necessity.

Grant me my Lord, that I may offer unto thee the wine of my true devotion,
with the Mirrhe of mortification, and gall of hearty contrition. But as it
might be doleful unto thee my soul, to hear thy loving Jesus cry out, Sitio,
I thirst: so let it be joyful unto thee, to hear him take his farewell with
Consummatum est, It is finished, Ioh. 19.30. Oh let the Meditation of this word
be more sweet unto me, then the honey which Sampson found in the carcass of
the Lion, when he was hungry, Judge. 14 8. and more delectable unto me, then
the water which he found in the Iawbone of the Ass, when he was thirsty,
Judge. 15.19. For now had my blessed Redeemer fulfilled the sacred decrees of
the holy Scriptures, concerning my salvation, and appeased the wrath of his
Father, kindled against me for my sins.

Now he had cancelled the Obligation of my infinite debt, and not with silver
and gold, but with his own most precious blood purchased my Redemption: And by
his death, conquered death, hell and the devil.

Oh happy death that has redeemed me to eternal life! Oh glorious victory,
although my Savior obtained it so dearly! Therefore let me not be careless
to sell that so cheap, which my Savior has bought so dear. Let me
consecrate my soul and body wholly to him, for they are his own, he has
dearly bought them.

Direct my spirit, oh Lord, by the level of thy perfect word: let the
meditation of my heart be day and night in thy sacred law, that I may offer up
unto thee daily the calves of my unfeigned lips, speaking of thy marvelous
kindness early in the morning, and telling of thy manifold mercies late in the
evening: send down a gracious rain of thy holy Spirit into the furrows of my
heart, that the memory of thine innumerable benefits, may perpetually flourish
in my mind, and thine everlasting praises evermore sound in my mouth, for thou
alone art my Redeemer, oh Lord God of my salvation.

A Meditation how CHRIST gave up the Ghost, and of the wonders which were seen
at his death. MED. XIX.
Strange Mar. 15.38.
wonders at our Saviors death were wrought,
The graves did Matt. 27.51.
open, and the dead came forth:
The Temple rent in Luke 23.45.
twain. Dumb creatures sought
TO express to blinded Luke 19.40
Jews, their makers worth.

LIft up thine eyes, oh my soul, and behold how the countenance of thy Savior
is covered with a deadly palenesse, his sight begins to fail, and his heart
to faint, yet a little before the departure of his soul, and in his greatest
pangs, he cried out with a loud voice, as if he had felt no pain, saying:
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and when he had said thus, bowing
down his head, and closing his eyes, he gave up the Ghost, Luke 23.46. Now so
soon as his blessed soul was dissolved from his breathless body, the veil
of the Temple was rent into two pieces from the top the bottom, the earth did
quake, the stones were rent, the graves opened, and many bodies of the Saints,
which slept, arose out of their graves, came into the holy City, and appeared
to many.

Awake thou now oh my soul, lie no longer snorting in the bed of careless
security: what will thou say? what will thou do, oh my soul?

Thou see that the earth trembles, and quaketh, that the stones do cleave
in pieces, and that the beholders are all amazed at the death of the Lord Jesus.

Oh! why art thou so senseless oh my soul, and as it were dead without motion
at the recordation of the death, and meditation of the Passion of thy Savior?
Oh let the sinful veil of the Temples of thy head rend into pieces, which
covers the eyes of thy understanding! let thy earthly body tremble with
horror, and thy stony heart cleave in sunder with terror of thine impiety: and
now arise thou out of the grave of thine iniquity, let thine eyes waste and
consume away with weeping, and let thy heart melt away with sighing, that thou
may show some signs of sorrow for thy sins, and some tokens of true
repentance for thy transgressions, which caused the bitter Passion, and
procured the cruel death of thy innocent JESUS: and cry out with the
astonished Centurion, Verily this man was righteous, He was the Son of GOD,
Mat. 17. Lift up thy hands and cry out with a faithful heart, Oh my gracious
Lord, my sweet Savior, and loving Redeemer, how terrible were my trespasses,
how heinous were my transgressions, that nothing but thy precious blood could
wash out the stains of mine iniquity? and nothing but thy death deliver me
out of the chains of everlasting captivity? What shall I do to gratulate the
greatness of thy love? how shall I perfectly relish the goodness of thy mercy?
how shall I thoroughly taste the sweetness of thy compassion? For how does thy
love exceed in greatness? how does mercy abound in goodness? and how does thy
compassion excel in sweetness, that thou being the true and natural Son of
God, should be made man, that we being sinful men, should be made the sons
of God? yea, when we were thine enemies, vessels of sin, and vassals of
Satan? And that thou being man, should be made subject to the same
passions, to the same affections, to the same afflictions, that we are? yea,
obnoxious to death to pay our debt: but yet thy life was never infected with
any sinful action: no, not so much as affected with any evil cogitation.

Oh my kind Jesus! Oh thou innocent Lamb! Oh my most loving Lord! by how much
the more I consider thy calamity, by how much the more I ruminate thy mercy, by
so much the more cause I find to be faithfully affected toward thee for the
greatness of thy love, and to be afflicted with thee for thy grievous torments.
Oh let me behold in my serious meditation, and see with the eye of mine
understanding, how thy most sacred body is bruised with cruel blows, thy
tender flesh mangled with bleeding wounds, thy venerable head perfored and
pierced with a Crown of pricking thorns, thy beautiful forehead spotted, and
thy comely hair knotted with coniealed blood, thy nosthrils offended with
stinking spittle, and thy blessed mouth distasted with gall and vinegar, thy
most bright eyes obscured with a veil, thy amiable face buffeted with fists,
and defiled with dust, thy chaste ears filled with reproaches, thy naked body
scourged with whips, thy weary shoulders shrinking, and thy weak knees
failing under the heavy burden of the cross, thy most holy hands pierced, and
thy blessed feet bored with sharp iron nails, thy blessed side opened, and
thy heart wounded with a spear. Oh let the remembrance of thy grievous
torments my loving Jesus, let the memory of thy bleeding wounds and scornful
reproaches, wound my heart with woeful compunction, and pierce into my
hardened bowels, that they may relent with tender compassion, that I may feel
some sense of painful sorrow for thy sake, seeing thou have suffered so much
for my sins.

But before thou pass any further, (oh my soul) do thou not let it pass
without earnest meditation, how that although the hearts of the tormentors of
mine afflicted Jesus, were so poisoned with impiety, and their hands so
polluted with cruelty, that they grieved his righteous soul with their
scorns and reproaches: killed his innocent body with their tortures, yet that
the fury of their malicious hearts was so restrained, and the violence of their
cruel hands so repressed, that they could not break one bone of his blessed
body, as they did of the malefactors, which were crucified with him, because
the sacred scripture had said they should not, and therefore their hands were
fettered that they could not: Exodus 12.46. Number. 9.12. Zach. 12.10. Wherefore
let this meditation comfort thy drooping heart (oh my soul) and consolate thy
fainting spirits in the sowrest fits of any worldly misery, and in the sorest
conflicts of any affliction that can betide thee: that no Tyrant, be he never
so mighty, or his heart never so malicious, can imagine more in his cruel
thoughts, or act any more with his bloody hands against thee, then the Divine
providence has predestined, and the counsel of the highest has always
determined.

Let this resolution be as a precious Balm to heal the wounds of thy sorrow,
and as a sovereign Salve to cure thy soars, that they may not fester with
dispairefull repining, or rancor with impatient mourning.

Let no dread of danger throw down the Fort of thy hope: let no Tempest of
persecution shake the foundation of thy Faith, and let no waves of affliction
quench the flame of thy love toward thy Savior, but let the oil of his
sufficient grace so strengthen the sinews of thy Faith, when it waxes feeble,
that thy heart never fail, nor thy courage quail, when thou art molested with
any sickness, or affliction of body, or moved with any malady of thy mind,
being faithfully persuaded, that no calamity can betide thee without his will,
nor no danger can come near thy dwelling without his good pleasure: and that
no Tyrants, (although they be never so mighty) can do but so much, and no more
against thee, then he in his wisdom knows to be profitable for thee.

For neither the profane Gentiles, nor the superstitious Jews, could do any
more unto my innocent Jesus, then he was willing to suffer, who came to die
for the sins of the people: they could not do one jot more then was enacted
in the highest Court of the Caelestiall Parliament, determined by the secret
Counsel of the Trinity, and confirmed by the everlasting Statutes of the sacred
Scriptures.

Confirm my mind (oh Lord) with a steadfast persuasion of thy power, and
comfort my weak nature with a resolute confidence in thy word, that in the
time of my adversity, and day of my tribulation, yea, at the hour of my
death, I may commend my spirit into thy hands, as thou did thine into the
hands of thy heavenly Father.

Oh what a consolation and comfort may it be unto me in my greatest misery, to
commend my soul into thy custody, for there it shall remain in the safe harbor
of eternal tranquillity, no more subject to misery, no more obnoxious to vanity:
the joy that it shall possess is unspeakable, the felicity incomparable, the
continuance of it never decaying, but always durable without any change, or
ending.

Receive my soul (oh my loving Savior into thy hands, that it may be safe,
under the shadow of thy wings: it is thine own, it came from thee, and
therefore let it return unto thee: receive my gift, my bountiful giver.

But because (oh Lord) nothing that is impure may appear in thy sight, neither
can thou behold any unclean thing with thine eye, purge my soul with the
fire of thy spirit, and wash away the spots of it with thy precious blood, that
being beautified with the pure white robe of thy mercy, Reu. 12.18 it may
confidently approach unto the Throne of thy Majesty.

Oh let the affection of my love be never defective toward thee, and infuse
that into me, by the gift of thy grace, which I am not able to obtain by my
own strength, captiuate all my senses, that they may be obsequious to do thy
will, and frame all the members of my body, to perform thy law, that being
partaker of thy death, by true mortification of my flesh, I may also be made
partaker with thee of thy glorious Resurrection, by the vivification of thy
blessed Spirit.

A Meditation, how the Lord Jesus was buried, and of the lamentation of his
Mother, and other women, for his death. MED. XX.
Within a Mar. 15.46.
Tomb, which in a Rock was wrought,
Joseph Mar. 27.90.
enshrines the body of our Lord.
Wrapped in a Luke 23.53. Mark. 15.46.
cloth, which he of purpose bought.
Oh happy man, that did such love afford!

AS there was a wicked and covetous Judas, (oh my soul) amongst the faithful
Disciples of thy loving JESUS, to betray him to a cruel death, so there was a
kind Joseph found among the Jews, who brought him honorably to his grave.

Oh who is able to relate the lamentation, to express the sorrow, and utter
the grief of the Virgin Marie, mourning for the death of her dear Son, and
other women, who did behold him with their compassionate eyes, when (like
an innocent Lamb) he gave up the Ghost, and bewailed his departure from them,
with floods of tears!

Now think that thou do hear the Virgin Marie discovering the inward
sorrows of her heart, (of her grieved and wounded heart) uttered out of her
doleful mouth, passionate, as she was a tender hearted woman, and more
compassionate, as she was a loving Mother, when she saw the vvounded and
breathless body of her Son, taken down from the Cross.

Let her sorrowful words penetrate thine ears, and pierce thy heart, that
thou may bewail the debts of thy sins, as she lamented the death of her
Son, in this or the like manner.

Oh my most sweet Son, what is my felicity, which I had by thee in thy life?
Is it any thing else but extreme misery at thy death? how is my chiefest joy
changed into sorrow? my mirth into mourning? how is my rejoicing turned into
lamenting, my cheerfulness turned into heaviness? nothing can mittigate my
calamity, nothing can ease my malady.

What had thou done (oh my most dear Son) what heinous crime had thou
committed? what odious treason had thou perpetrated, that thou were
condemned to die such a shameful and bitter death?

Thy pure hands were never defiled with any evil actions: and thy harmless
heart did never harbor any wicked cogitations: thine eyes were never
bewitched with worldly vanities, nor thine ears delighted with lewd
discourses: thy mouth did utter forth wisdom, and thy tongue spoke nothing
but the truth: thy whole life was a Mirror of piety, thy words deserved no
reprehension, thy deeds were without all exception. Oh how bitter was the
malice? how horrible was the envy? how blind were the eyes? how bloody were
the hearts of the cruel Jews, to crucify my dear Son, my innocent Jesus?
how doleful is it to mine eyes, and dolorous to my heart, to behold thy bright
eyes obscured with deadly darkness! thy blessed hand deprived of action, and
thy beautiful feet senseless without any motion! to see thy cheerful
countenance covered with an ashy palenesse, thy skin black and blew with
blows, and thy flesh mangled with wounds.

This spectacle is so woeful, that I can no longer behold thee with mine eyes,
and the waves of sorrow do ouerflow my heart so fast, that they stop my words,
and stay the current of my mournful speech.

Now as Marie Magdalene did behold the blessed body of my Savior with his
mourning Mother, so she did not cease to lament his death, who had been so
kind a Master unto her in his life: What a plentiful stream of tears ran
down her cheeks? What a spring of sorrow arose in her heart? How did her
sorrowful sighs second her heavy sobs? How did her doleful sobs prevent her
lamentable sighs? Think thou do see her kiss his senseless hands: think
thou do see her kiss his breathless feet, speaking unto her loving Master,
with her trembling voice being dead, as if he did hear her, and were alive,
bathing them with her tears, and giving a little ease to her sore diseased
heart, by uttering these or the like words, with her feeble lips.

Mary Magdalens lamentation for the loss of her Master.
Alas (my sweet Master) alas my most loving Lord, the staff of my stay, the
only joy of my heart, the sole comfort of my perplexed spirit; Alas for me,
how comfortless do thou leave me? how sorrowful shall I be by being
without thee? To whom shall I have recourse for comfort in the straightness of
my sorrow? To whom shall I go for succor in time of my trouble?

How lamentable is the view of thy vvounded head unto mine eyes? How grievous
is the view of thy sacred hands and feet unto my sight, pierced with
iron-nailes and deprived of sense, which I so carefully anointed, bathing them
with the tears of mine eyes, and drying them with the hairs of my head? Ioh.
11.2. and 12.3. Mat. 26.7. But now alas, in stead of odoriferous ointment, they
are mangled with wounds, and spotted with blood: Oh wretched woman, oh
miserable creature, because I am deprived of such a loving and well-beloved
Master.

Where shall I find one who will love me so dearly, and regard me so entierly?
Thou art he which did often vouchsafe to come into my cottage, and to sit
down at my Table, and did vouchsafe to honor my poor house with thy
gracious presence, when alas I was not able to afford thee any such
entertainment as might in any sort requite thy kindness, or recompense thy
love, John 11.28. Oh my most sweet Jesus, thou did defend me from the Pharisie
who disdained me for my trespasses, and loathed me for my sins. Thou did
kindly excuse me, speaking in my cause, and pleading my case, when my sister
began to be angry with me, and to conceive displeasure against me: Thou did
commend me when I did annoint thee with a precious ointment, washing thy feet
with my tears, and wiping them with my hair, thou did mittigate my sorrow,
thou did remit my sins, thou did kindly ask for me when I was not
present with thee, and commanded my sister to call me unto thee.

Oh what great, and how many demonstrations of thy love, how many tokens of thy
kindness, how many signs of thy charity, how many arguments of thy mercy, Oh
my most sweet Lord, have thou showed unto me? what a rich treasure of thy
bounty, have thou conferred upon me? When thou did see my mourning for the
death of my Brother, thou did comfort me in my sorrow, thou did assuage my
grief, thou did weep with me, such was thy kind affection toward my
loving brother, such was thy tender compassion toward me his sorrowful
sister: and thou did not only shed tears, as signs of thy love, but thou
did raise my dead brother out of his grave for my consolation, and restored
him to life again for my comfort: John. 11.35. Ibidem, 43. As nothing was more
sweet and pleasant unto me, then to enjoy thy blessed company, so nothing can
be more sour and sharp unto me, then want of thy comfortable society.

But alas, sorrowful words are too weak a medicine to cure my malady: and
although I have cause to say much, yet extremity of grief will suffer me to
say no more.

Now thou have heard oh my soul, the lamentation of a tender Mother, deploring
the death of her Son, and also the pitiful mourning of a faithful servant,
bewayling the want of him, who was her loving Master, and bountiful
benefactor: can thou be so stonie-hearted, that thou art moved with no
feeling compassion? Is thy heart so hard that it cannot give a groan? Are
thine eyes so dry, that they will not yield a tear, at the meditation of the
death and burial of thy Savior, who died for thy sins, and was slain for
thine iniquities?

I fly unto thee my most merciful Lord, that thou may mollify and moysten,
my hard, and dry heart with plentiful showers of thy graces: turn my head
into a spring of water, and change mine eyes into a fountain of tears.

I know not how to excuse my self, because I have been so unthankful for thy
benefits, so forgetful of thy mercies, and so unkind unto thee for thy love.

What shall I say, but woe and alas for me, a most wretched and wicked sinner?
Who can measure the quantity of mine infelicitie? Who can describe the horror
of my misery? Who can quiet the troubles of my mind? Who can pacify my
troubled conscience, because my hard heart has not been touched with any
compunction, nor my bowels moved with any compassion, when I did think on thy
cruel death, and meditate on thy bitter Passion?

Oh wretched man that I am! oh miserable creature! for when others do mourn
at the meditation of thy Passion, shed tears, and send forth sighs at the
remembrance of thy death: my heart is so ouer-growne with hardness, that it
cannot be touched with sorrow, and mine eyes are so dry without moisture, that
they will not send forth a tear. Oh why do I not sigh, sob, and weep in my
Meditation of the bitter Passion of my Savior, my gracious and bountiful
benefactor, who did abide so many painful torments and reproachful taunts
for my sins, and suffered a most shameful and cruel death on the Cross for
my transgressions? How can I excuse the coldness of my love? How should I
clear my unthankful mind? If Death take away my Father, or deprive me of my
Mother, I water my cheeks with tears, and vvearie my heart with groaning. I
can weep for the death of a Brother, and wring my hands for sorrow at the
burial of my sister: I cannot but mourn when I follow my friend to his grave,
my tears do testify my love, my voice does utter words of lamentation, my
heart is sad with sorrow, and all my senses are disordered with grief.

But alas, how is the moisture of mine eyes consumed, that they cannot yield
one tear? How obdurate is my heart that it will not groan when I think on the
deadly pangs of my Savior, and when I meditate on the grievous passion, and
bitter death of my Redeemer, who has been more beneficial unto me then any
loving Father! and more kind then any tenderhearted mother: what kindness of
a Brother, or mild affection of a Sister, can equal his love? What friend can
be so glad for my prosperity? who of mine acquaintance can be so sad for my
adversity? Who can be so constant unto me in affection? Who can be so
faithful unto me in compassion, as my merciful Savior? My Parents gave me my
flesh, polluted with sin, and defiled with vices: I receive from my Savior,
Memory, Will Understanding, and Reason: yea, what is there in me which is good,
but it comes from my GOD? My Parents have been an occasion to throw me down
into hell, but my Redeemer did shed his precious blood to bring me into the
Kingdom of heaven: Therefore why do I not sigh and lament for the death of my
Lord, my Savior, my Redeemer, who is my solace in time of sorrow, my
consolation in my misery, and my refuge in the hour of my necessity? But oh my
most bountiful Jesus, father of mercies, I mourn with sorrow, and lament with
tears, when death does rob me of my (...) receive them to dwell in thy
Caelestiall City, which is stored with all abundance: But who can describe the
beauty, or demonstrate the glory of this heavenly Jerusalem? for it is made of
pure gold, the foundation of precious stones, the walls of Jasper, and the
gates of pearl. In needs no Sun to give light unto it in the day, or any
Moon by night, for the glorious presence of the Lord does fill every place
with his shining brighssetne. Revel. 21.18.19.20.21.23.

What eye has seen one spark of the glistering cleerenesse? what ear has
heard one title of the greatness? what heart can conceive so much as a grain
of the goodness of this eternal City? Oh happy are the people that shall enter
into thy beautiful gates! Oh happy are the Citizens that shall dwell within
thy precious walls! for they shall live with the Angels in eternal peace and
security, and see God in his glorious Majesty. Entertain me (oh Lord) into
thy gracious service, and grant me grace, that I may serve thee all the days
of my life in fear, and honor thee with my love: that when I have served out
my time as thy faithful servant here on earth, I may be incorporated into this
heavenly City, and admitted into the freedom of this blessed society. Come
(oh my Lord IESV) come unto us quickly, and receive us to dwell with thee
eternally, Amen.

FINIS.
Soli Deo gloria.
MOST DEVOVT and Divine MEDITATIONS OF Saint BERNARD. Concerning the knowledge
of humane Condition. Serving as so many Motives to MORTIFICATION.

LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Francis Burton, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the green Dragon. 1614.

A Table of the Motives to MORTIFICATION.
Mo. 1. OF the similitude of man to God. page. 1. Mo. 2. Of the misery of man,
and of the examination of the last judgment. page. 10. Mo. 3. Of the dignity
of the soul. page 20 Mo. 4. Of the reward of the heavenly Country, the which
all Christians ought to endeavor to obtain. page. 33 Mo. 5. How a man ought
to examine himself. page. 44 Mo. 6. That a man ought to be diligent and
devout in performing of Divine exercises. page. 48 Mo. 7. A consideration of
death. page 59 Mo. 8. In what manner a man ought to pray devoutly. page 63 Mo.
9. Of the instabilitie and wandering of the heart. page. 66 Mo. 10. That Sin
is not to be excused. page. 74 Mo. 11. What a great evil it is not to correct
or reprehend others. page. 75 Mo. 12. How every man ought to consider himself.
page. 83 Mo. 13. Of the presence of the Conscience every where. page. 85 Mo.
14. Of the three Enemies of Man. page. 87. Mo. 15. From whence the flesh of Man
proceeds, and what it brings forth. page. 93 Mo. 16. Of the short life of
man. page 96
Other Additions.
A Most zealous and devout lamentation of blessed Anselmus, sometime
Archbishop of Canterbury, for the loss of his Souls virginity, appliable
unto the soul of every mortified Christian. page. 111 A Meditation of S.
Bernard, concerning the Passion and sufferings of Jesus Christ, divided into
twenty and one Sections. page. 139 The Authors deprecation or Petition for
himself. page. 236
FINIS.
engraving of two Garden of Gethsemane scenes from the Passion of Jesus Christ
O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me.

He kneeled down and Prayed, but being in an agony, he prayed more
earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trikling down to the
ground. Luke. 22.44.

Sit ye here, whil I go and Pray yonder.



Of the similitude of Man to GOD.
MOTIVE. I.
MAny know many things, False knowledge.
and know not themselves: they pry into others, and leave themselves. The ready
way how to know God.
They seek God by those outward things, forsaking their inward things, to
which God is nearer, and more inward. Therefore I will return from outward
things, to inward, and from the inward I will ascend to the Superior: that I
may know from whence I come, or whither I go; who I am, and from whence I am:
that so by the knowledge of my self, I may be the better able to attain to
the knowledge of God. For by how much more I profit, and go forward in the
knowledge of my self, by so much the nearer I approach to the knowledge of
God. Concerning the inward man, Three things in us, whereby we remember,
behold, and desire God.
I find three things in my soul, by which I remember, behold, and covet God.
But these three things are, the Memory, Understanding, Will, or Love. By the
Memory, I remember him: by the Understanding, I behold him: by the Will, I
embrace him. When I remember God in my Memory, I find him: and in him I am
delighted, because he vouchsafes to give himself to me. By the
Understanding, I view and contemplate what God is in himself, what he is in
the Angels, what he is in the Saints, what he is in Men, what he is in the
Creatures. In himself, he is incomprehensible, because he is the beginning
and end, and the beginning without beginning, the end without end. By my self,
I understand how incomprehensible God is, when as I cannot know, and understand
my self, whom he has made. In the Angels he is desirable, because they desire
to behold him. In the Saints he is delectable, because being happy in him,
they rejoice continually, in other creatures he is admirable, because he
creates all things powerfully; governs all things wisely, disposes all
things bountifully. In men he is amiable, because he is their GOD, and they
are his people. He dwells in them, even as in his Temple, and they are his
Temple. He disdaineth neither particular, nor universal. Whosoever is
mindful of him, and does both know, and also love him, Motives to move us to
love God.
he is with him. We ought to love him, because he has first loved us, and
has made us after his Image and similitude, which thing he would not impart to
any other creature. We are made according to the Image of GOD, that is,
according to the understanding, and knowledge of the Son, by whom we
understand, and know the Father, and have access unto him.

So great is the affinity between us and the Son of God, as that we are
the image of him, who is the image of God. Which affinity also, the similitude
does testify: because we are not only made according to his similitude, but
also to his likeness. Therefore it behooves, that that which is made according
to his image, do agree with his Image, and not participate only a vain name
of the Image. In which regard, let us represent, and express his Image in our
selves, in the fervent desire of peace, in the beholding of truth, and in the
love of Charity.

Let us hold him in our memory, let us carry him in our conscience, and let
us adore and worship him every where, who is present every where. For our
understanding in that same respect, is the image of him, in which it is capable
of him, and may be partaker of the same. The mind (or soul) is not therefore
the Image of him, because the mind remembers it self, How the soul is said
to be the Image of God.
understands and loves it self: but because it may be able to remember,
understand, and love him, of whom it was made. The which when it does it
becomes wise.

The three faculties of the soul, to wit, Memory, Will and Understanding:
resembling the Trinity.
For nothing is more like to that most excellent and highest Wisdom, then a
reasonable Soul, which through Memory, Understanding, and Will, consists in
that unutterable Trinity.

But it cannot consist and abide in the same, unless it remember, understand,
and love the same. Let it therefore remember her God, love and worship him,
after whose Image it was made, with whom it may always be blessed. Oh blessed
Soul, with whom GOD has found rest, in whose Tabernacle he dwells and
remains: How the soul is said to be truly blessed.
Blessed, which may say, and he which created me, rests in my Tabernacle:
For he cannot deny the rest of HEAVEN unto her. Therefore why do we forsake
our selves and seek God in these external and outward things, who is at home
with us, if we will be with him?

Verily he with us, and in us, but as yet by faith, until we shall see him
face to face. We know (says the Apostle) that Christ dwells in our hearts
by faith. How God dwells in us.
Because Christ is in our Faith, Faith in our Understanding, our Understanding
in the heart, the heart in our breast.

Through Faith I call God to mind (as a Creator) I adore him as a Redeemer, I
attend and wait for him as a Savior, I believe to behold him in all his
Creatures, to have him in my self, and that which is more pleasant, and
blessed then all these (unspeakable) to know him in himself. What life
everlasting is.
For to know the Father, Son, and the holy Ghost, is life Everlasting,
perfect blessedness, What life everlasting is.
chiefest pleasure.

The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, what great love, what great sweetness, and what great
pleasantness does remain unto us by that vision, when we shall see God face
to face. Which is the light of those which do inlighten, rest to the
laboring, a Country to them that return from exile, life to the living, a
Crown to the conquering. Therefore in my understanding, I find the Image of
that most high and supreme Trinity: to the which most supreme Trinity
always to be remembered, looked upon, and to be loved, that I may remember it,
be delighted with it, embrace and view it, I must refer and employ that time
which I live.

The mind is the Image of GOD, The faculties of the soul resembled to the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
in which are these three things, Memory, Understanding, and Will, or Love.
We attribute to the Memory, all which we know, although we think not of
it. We attribute to the Understanding, all which we find to be true in
thinking, which we also commit unto Memory.

By Memory, we are like to the Father, by Understanding to the Son, by Will
to the holy Ghost. Nothing in us is so like to him, as Will, Love, or Charity,
which is a more excellent will. For Love or Charity, is the gift of God.

So that no gift of GOD, is more excellent then this: For the love which is of
GOD, and which is also GOD, is called properly the holy Spirit, by whom the
love of God is disfused in our hearts, by whom the whole Trinity does inhabit
and dwell in us.

Of the misery of Man, and the examination of the last Judgment. MOTIVE. II.
COncerning the outward man, I proceed from those parents, which made me to be
worthy of damnation before I was borne. Sinners begot a sinner, and nourished
me with sin: the miserable brought a miserable creature into the misery of
the light. I have nothing from them but misery, sin, and this corruptible
body which I carry about me. And I hasten to go to them, which through the
death of the body, are departed from hence. When I look upon their Graves and
Sepulchers, I find nothing in them but ashes, worms, stincke, and
loathsomeness. What I am, they have been, and what they are, I shall be.

What am I? Man, proceeding from a liquid humor: For in a moment of conception
I was conceived of humane seed, afterward, that froth congealed, increasing a
little, was made flesh, Man's corruption.
and afterward crying and lamenting, I was delivered to the banishment of this
World: and behold, now I die, full of iniquities and abominations. Now, even,
now I shall appear before a severe and strict Judge, to render an account of
my works. VVoe be to me miserable wretch, when that day of Judgment shall
come: and the Books shall be opened, in which all my actions, and
cogitations shall be recited, in the presence of the Lord.

Then hanging down my head, with confusion of an evil conscience, I shall
stand in judgment before the LORD, trembling and sorrowful, to wit,
reckoning up my wicked deeds which I have committed: The conscience of the
wicked shall be their own accuser.
and when it shall be said of me, behold the man, and his works: then I
shall reduce and bring again before mine eyes all my sins, and offenses. For
it shall be brought to pass, by a certain divine power, that good and evil
works shall be recalled to the remembrance of every one, and shall be seen in
the view of the mind, with a wonderful speed and celeritie: that the
knowledge of them may accuse, or excuse the conscience; and that so both every
man severally and generally, may be judged together. Every man shall be judged
for his deeds. And all the secrets of all men shall appear and lie open unto
all. For that which we are ashamed, At the day of judgment, all things shall
be made manifest.
and blush at to confess now, shall then be manifest and apparent to all. And
there the revenging and devouring fire shall burn and consume whatsoever here
we cloak and flatter by dissembling. The swift fire shall rage, and reign
every where, having gotten free scope and liberty.

And by how much the longer the Lord does wait, and tarry for our amendment;
so much the more strictly he will judge us, if we shall abuse and neglect
his patience.

Why therefore do we so earnestly covet this life, in which the longer we
live, the more we sin? For by how much the more the days of our life are
lengthened, Nothing more mutable then humane condition.
by so much the more our faults and transgressions are augmented. For evil
things do daily increase, but good things decay and are diminished; Man's state
does never stand at a stay, but is continually changed by prosperity and
adversity, and he knows not when he shall die.

For as a blazing star in the sky runs swiftly, and vanishes away
suddenly; The shortness of man's life shadowed out by a double similitude.
or as a sparkle of fire is suddenly extinguished, and turned into ashes: so
we may see this life quickly ended, and suddenly consumed. For while man
tarrieth willingly, and lives most pleasantly in this World, and supposes
that he shall live long, and purposes many things to be done in long time,
he is suddenly snatched away by death, and the Soul is taken from the body,
before he beware of it. Yet the soul is separated with great fear, much
pain, and bitter grief from the body. For the Angels come to take her, that
they may bring her before the Tribunal seat of a most fearful Judge; then
she calling to mind her evil and most wicked works, which she has done
day and night, trembles, and seeks to shun and avoid them, and to desire a
truce of them, saying; Grant me the space, yea but of one hour.

Then her works, as it were, Our works will follow us to judgment.
speaking together, shall answer, and say; Thou have made us, we are thy
works, we will go forward with thee to judgment. Vices also shall accuse
her with many and manifold crimes, and shall bring many false testimonies
against her, although one suffices to her damnation. The Devils also shall
terrify her, with their ghastly countenance and horrible aspect they shall
persecute her, and take hold of her, as terribly, so also horribly, desirous
to retain her, unless there be one who can deliver her from them.

Then the Soul, finding the eyes shut, the mouth, and other senses of the
body, by which she was wont to have passage, and to be delighted in these
outward things closed, The state of a damned soul.
shall return to her self, and seeing her self alone, and naked, stricken
with exceeding horror, she shall faint in her self, and fall down with
desperation.

And because for the love of the world, and pleasure of the flesh, she
forsook the love of God, she wretched shall be quite forsaken in the hour of
such great necessity, and shall be delivered to the Devils to be tormented in
Hell: So the soul of a sinner, in the day wherein he is ignorant, and hour
in which he knows not, is snatched away of death, and is separated from the
body, and proceeds forward full of miseries, trembling and sorrowing; and
when she has no excuse, which she may allege for her sin, she faints,
and fails with dreadful fear, to appear before GOD; she is shaken, and
quaketh with exceeding horror, and is tossed and troubled with manifold
tempests of perplexed thoughts, and dispairefull cogitations; the dissolution
and separation of the flesh grieuing her, and all being removed out of her
sight, she considers her self, and that time to which she approaches, and
after a little while, she finds in that, that which can never be altered nor
reuersed. She considers thoroughly how severe the eternal Judge comes, and
what straight accounts she must make before the severity of such great Justice.

For although she have escaped all the works which she could understand,
yet for all that, coming before a strict and severe Judge, she dreadeth those
more, which she understands not in her self. Fear increases, when she
thinks she could not pass through the way of this life without a fault,
neither that time, which she has lived commendably is without offense, if it
be judged, pity and mercy excluded. For who is able to consider how many, and
how great evils we commit in moments of times, Sins are of two sorts of
commission and omission.
and what great good things we neglect to do? For as the commission of an
evil thing is sin, so the omission of a good thing is an offense.

For great is the loss and damage, when we neither do, nor think good
things, but suffer our heart to wander and stagger abroad, through vain and
unprofitable things.

Nevertheless, it is a very hard and difficult thing to bridle the heart, and
keep it from an unlawful cogitation. Also it is a thing ouer-hard, to execute
earthly affairs without sin. Wherefore no man can perfectly comprehend and
discern himself. But being busied and toyled with many thoughts, and
cogitations, he remains in some measure unknown unto himself, that he
knows not all those things which he tollerateth. Why man is at his death
fearful.
Wherefore, his departure out of the world being instant, and pressing him, he
is terrified with a more exact fear: because, although he remembers that he
has not omitted those things which he knew, yet he dreadeth those things which
he knows not.

Of the dignity of the Soul. MOTIVE. III.
OH Soul, sealed with the Image of God, adorned with his similitude,
Excellency of the Soul.
betrothed to him by Faith, endowed with the Spirit, redeemed by blood,
associated with Angels, capable of Beatitude, heir of Goodness, partaker of
Reason, what have thou to do with the flesh, of whom thou suffer so many
evils?

Because of the flesh, the sins of another are imputed to thee, and thy
virtues reputed as a stained and filthy clout, and thou thy self art brought
to nothing, and reputed as nothing. The flesh is no other thing, with which
thou have so great society, but a foam, become flesh, clothed with beauty,
frail, and every moment decaying. But it shall be truly, it shall be a
miserable and rotten carcass, and meat for the worms. For how much soever
it be decked and adorned, it is always flesh.

If thou do consider, what issues out by the mouth, nosthrils, and other
passages of the body, thou shall never see a more filthy dunghill. If thou
vvilt reckon up all her miseries, thou shall find how she is fraughted and
laden with sins, provoked with vices, itching with concupiscences, possessed
with passions, polluted with illusions, always prone unto evil, and bending
toward all kind of vices, full of all confusion and ignominy. By the flesh,
man is made like unto vanity, because from it he has drawn the vice of
lustful concupiscence, by which he is held captive, and abased, that he
loves vanity, and works iniquity.

Consider oh man, what thou art from the first beginning, The beginning of a
proud man.
and day of thy birth, unto thy latter end, and day of thy death, and what thou
shall be after this life.

Truly, thou have been that which in time before thou were not, afterward
made of base matter, and wrapped in a homely cloth, thou wast nourished with
unclean blood in thy mothers womb, and a thin skin was thy best Garment, thou
came unto us, being so clothed and attyred, neither art thou mindful of thy
base, vile, and contemptible beginning: beauty, favor of the people, youthful
heat and riches, have stolen from thee the knowledge to know what man is. Man's
vileness.
For man is no other thing but corrupt seed, a vessel of uncleanness, and
meat for the Worms. After he is a man, he becomes a Worm, after the
worm, comes stink and lothsomnesse: So every man, is turned into no man.
Wherefore is man proud, whose conception is sin, whose birth is punishment,
whose life is a turmoyling labor, and death an inevitable necessity? Why
therefore art thou proud, oh man? Consider what thou were in thy Mothers womb,
Means to pull down pride, to humble us.
how afterward thou were exposed and objected to the miseries of this life,
and to sin: and after that to become a worm, a d worms meat in the grave? Why
art thou proud, dust and ashes, whose conception is sinful, whose birth is
misery, life a punishment, and death, anguish and calamity? Wherefore do
thou feed, and pamper thy belly with delicate meat, and deck thy back with
sumptuous clothes, which within few days after, the worms shall devour in
the grave? But thou do not adorn thy soul with good works, which is to be
presented unto God, and his Angels in Heaven. Why do thou basely esteem thy
Soul, and prefer the flesh before her? That the Mistrisse should wait and
play the Maid, and the Maid bear all the sway, like the Mistrisse, is a great
abuse. The whole world verily cannot counteruaile the price and value of one
soul. Therefore the price of the Soul is far deerer, and is at an higher
rate, which could not be redeemed but with the blood of CHRIST.

What will thou give for exchange to redeem thy soul, which do give her
for nothing? Did not the Son of GOD, The soul of man invaluable.
when he was in the bosom of his Father, descend from his royal Throne for
her, that he might deliver her from the power of the Devil? The which when
he saw fettered with the ropes and chains of Sins, and forthwith to be
delivered to the Devils, that she might be damned to perpetual death, he
wept over her, which knew not to weep for her self. Neither did he only
weep, but suffered himself to be slain, that he might redeem her with
the precious price of his blood.

Behold oh mortal man, for whom such a Sacrifice is given. Acknowledge (oh
man) how noble thy Soul is, and how grievous her wounds were, for whom there
was such necessity, that the Lord Christ should be wounded. If her wounds had
not been to death, The haynousnesse of sin.
and to everlasting death, the Son of God would never have dyed to have cured
them.

Do not therefore carelessly esteem the passion of thy soul, to whom thou
see such great compassion to be yielded, from such a great Majesty. He
powers forth tears for thee, wash thou also every night thy bed with
compunction of thy heart, and continual streams of thy tears. He powered
forth his blood for thee, shed thou also thine, rather then for any worldly
affliction to start from thy Christian profession.

Do not regard what the flesh will, but what the spirit may: then shall the
soul be glorious, when she shall return to her God. Yet so, if she shall
carry no sin with her from the body, and shall wipe away all filthiness. But
if thou say, this is a hard saying, I cannot despise the World, and hate my
flesh. Tell me, where are the lovers of the world, which were with us a little
while ago? Motions to despise the flesh.
Nothing remains of them, but ashes and worms: mark diligently what they
are, and what they have been.

They have been men, as thou art, they have eat, drunk, laughed, and spent
their days in prosperity, and in a moment are gone down all to the Grave,
many to Hell. Here their flesh is bequeathed to the worms, and there their
Soul to the fire: until they two being bound again with an unhappy
conjunction, be overwhelmed in everlasting flames, which were before companions
together in vices. For one punishment does entangle them in the end, whom
before one love had bound together in a wicked deed. What has vainglory
auailed them, their short joy, worldly power and authority, the pleasure of
the flesh, deceitful riches, their great householde, and evil concupiscence?
Where is their laughter? Where is their boasting? Where is their pride and
arrogancy? Of such great mirth, what great mourning? After so little pleasure,
how grievous misery? They are fallen from that exceeding rejoicing, into great
misery, into great ruin and grievous torments. Whatsoever is happened to
them, A good catuion.
may happen to thee, because thou art a man of the same earth, slime of the
same slime.

Thou art from the earth, thou live of the earth, and thou shall return into
the earth. When that last day shall come, which will come suddenly,
peradventure it shall be to day. The certainty and uncertainty of death.
It is certain that thou shall die, but it is uncertain when, or how, or
where, because death does always attend and wait upon thee every where. Thou
also, if thou will be wise, Those which fulfill the lusts of the flesh, must
be punished with the flesh.
shall look for death every where. If thou will follow the flesh, thou shall
be punished in the flesh: if thou art delighted with the flesh, thou shall
be tormented in the flesh.

If thou shall require fine and costly apparel, in stead of thy brave
garments, the Worms shall be spread under thee, and the Worms shall be thy
covering. For the Justice of God can judge and determine no other thing, but
that which our works do deserve. For he which loves the world more then God,
a place of pleasure, The marks of a wicked worldling.
more then the House of Prayer; gluttony more then abstinency; letchery more
then chastity; follows the Devil, and shall go with him to everlasting
punishment.

What mourning do you think there shall be then? what lamentation, what sorrow
and sadness, when the wicked shall be separated from the fellowship of the
righteous, and from the sight of God, and shall be delivered into the power of
the Devils, and shall go with them into everlasting fire, and shall be there
with them always without end, in perpetual mourning and lamentation? Because
being banished far from the blessed Country of Paradise, they shall be
tormented in the place of neuer-ceasing torments, never to see the light any
more, never to obtain any releasement, or refreshing: but by thousands of
thousands of years to be tormented in Hell, never to be delivered from thence:
where the tormentors are never tired nor wearied: neither he which is
tormented ever dies. For the fire there so consumes, that it always
preserves. The torments are so acted, that they are always renewed. The
quality of the pain shall be fitted to the quality of the offense.
But every one shall endure pain of torment, according to the quality of the
fault and they that are guilty of the same sin, shall be sorted and joined to
their like, to be tormented. No other thing shall be heard there, but weeping
and mourning, groaning and howling, lamentation, and gnashing of teeth. And
nothing shall be seen there, but Worms, and the terrible faces of the
tormentors, and most hidious monsters of the Devils. Cruel Worms shall bite
the innermost parts of the heart, here shall be pain, there fears, sighing,
astonishment, and horrible terror. And they being miserable and wretched,
shall burn in everlasting fire for ever; The condition of the damned after
death of the body.
and besides, they shall be tormented in the flesh by fire, in the spirit by
the Worm of conscience, there shall be intolerable grief, horrible fear,
incomparable stink, death both of soul and body, without hope of pardon or
mercy. Nevertheless, they shall so dye, as they may always live, and shall
so live, as they may always die. The difference of a repenting and an
obstinate sinner.
So the soul of a sinner is tormented in hell for his sins, or being
converted from her sins, is placed in Paradise.

Now therefore let us choose one of the two, either always to be tormented
with the wicked, or to live in joy with the righteous. For good and evil,
life and death, are set before us, that we may put forth our hand to which
we will. If torments cannot terrify us, at least let rewards allure us.

Of the reward of the heavenly Country, the which all Christians ought to
endeavor to obtain. MOTIVE. IIII.
IT is a reward to see God, to live with God, to live of God, to be with GOD,
to be in God, which will be all things in all: To have GOD, which is the
chiefest good; where the chiefest good is, there is the chiefest felicity,
chiefest pleasure, true liberty, perfect charity, eternal security, and
secure eternity: there is true joy, full knowledge, all beauty, and all
beatitude. There is peace, piety, goodness, light, virtue, honesty, joys,
mirth, sweetness, everlasting life, glory, praise, rest, love, and sweet
concord. The exceeding joys of the righteous.
So the man shall be blessed with GOD, in whose conscience sin has not been
found.

He shall see God at his desire, he shall have him at his pleasure, he shall
enjoy him to his everlasting delight.

He shall flourish in eternity, he shall be glorious in truth, he shall shine
in glory, he shall rejoice in goodness, so he shall have eternity of
continuance, so he shall have facility of knowledge and wisdom, and
felicity of rest and quietness. For he shall be a Citizen of that Holy City,
of which the Citizens are Angels, God the Father the Temple, his Son the
glory and brightness, the Holy Ghost the love and charity.

Oh heavenly City, A description of the celestial City.
secure Mansion, fertile and ample Country, thou containest all which
delights, the people live without mourning, the Inhabitants are quiet and
peaceable persons, having no want, or necessity: How glorious things are spoken
of thee, oh City of God! So that the Habitation of all which rejoice, is in
thee. All rejoice with mirth, and exceeding joy: All are delighted and made
joyful by God: whose looks are beautiful, face fair and comely, speech
sweet, and delectable: he is delightful to be seen, pleasant to be drunk,
sweet to be enjoyed: He pleases by himself alone, he both suffices of
himself for desert, and also suffices of himself for reward: neither is any
thing sought without him, because it is wholly found in him, whatsoever is
desired.

I^ God is all good.
It is always pleasing and delightful to behold him, always to be delighted
in him, and always to enjoy him. In him the understanding is clarified, and
the affection is purified, to know and love the truth. And this is the sole and
whole good of man: namely, to know and love his Creator. Therefore what
madness of vices does move us, to thirst after the bitter Wormwood of this
World, to follow the shipwreck of this sliding life? To suffer calamity, to
endure the Dominion of a wicked Tirannie: and not rather to fly and flock
together to the felicity of the Saints, to the society of the Angels, to the
solemnity of supernall and heavenly joy, and to the pleasantness of a
contemplative life, that we may enter into the Dominions of the LORD, and see
the superaboundant riches of his goodness.

There we shall be freed from toyling cares, and shall see how sweet the Lord
is, and how great the multitude is of his exceeding sweetness. We shall see
the beauty of his glory, The happy estate of the just in heaven.
the brightness of his Saints, and honor of his Royal Majesty. We shall
know the power of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, the most liberal
clemency of the Holy Ghost: and so we shall have knowledge of the most high
Trinity.

Now we see bodies by the body, also we see the Images of bodies by the
Spirit: but then we shall see the Trinity with the pure sight of the mind.
Oh happy vision to see God in himself, to see him in us, and to see us in
him. In which vision, with happy pleasure, and pleasant happiness, we shall
have all whatsoever we shall desire, desiring nothing else besides, and we
shall love whatsoever we shall see: blessed with the love, blessed with the
sweetness of the love, and pleasantness of the contemplation. This shall be
the end of that contemplation, this shall be the sum of that felicity.
Because the sincere Divinity shall be understood to be in his purity, the
incomprehensible Trinity shall be comprehended in it.

The Mysteries of the Divinity shall be made manifest, God shall be seen, and
shall be loved. Also this vision and delight filling and satisfying the whole
heart of man, shall be the whole perfection, and summarie consumation of that
blessedness. All shall speak with one tongue and language: there shall be
rejoicing without wearisomnesse: one affection: Love eternal. Truth shall
appear openly, charity shall fill them immeasurably, and there shall be a
perfect and sound society of body and soul. The Humanity being glorified,
shall glister like the Sun, the fellowship of the flesh and Spirit shall be
quiet and peaceable, and there shall be one joy of men and Angels, one feast,
one speech and communication. Love shall not languish, nor charity melt away,
all good things being present. There shall be no affliction of delay, because
the blessed presence of the Divine Majesty, shall be all things unto all; and
there shall be a common omnipotency of wisdom, peace, righteousness, and
understanding unto all. There shall not be a diversity of tongues in that
eternal peace, but a peaceable and tuneable concord of manners and affections.

A description of perfect peace.
In that flood and stream of felicity, abundant saciety shall covet nor desire
nothing else: there shall be great happiness, for there shall be a heaped
store of felicity, glory evermore increasing, and joy superaboundant: but who
shall be fit for these things? Who is capable of heavenly happiness.
Verily, the true Penitent, the good Obedient, the loving Companion, and
faithful Servant. For a true Penitent is always in labor and grief, he is
grieved with things that are past, he labors to prevent and avoid evils to
come. What true repentance is.
For it is true repentance, without intermission of time, to be grieved for our
sins and offenses. And he repents truly, which does so bewail his
trespasses committed, that he does not afterward commit things to be lamented:
he is a scoffer, and not a true Penitent, which does that still, which he
may repent, and that may grieve him. If therefore thou will be a true Penitent,
cease from sin, and offend no more. Because that repentance is vain, which
afterward is stained with some ensuing trespass. Every good Obedient, A good
Obedient.
yields up his consent and denial, that he can say, My heart is ready, oh
God, My heart is ready. Ready to do whatsoever thou have commanded, ready
to obey at thy beck. It is prepared to attend upon thee, to minister to my
Neighbors, to keep and vvatch my self, and to rest and dwell in the
contemplation of heavenly things.

A loving Companion, A loving Companion.
is dutiful and beneficial to all, burdensome to none. He is dutiful to
all, because he is devout before God, kind toward his Neighbor, sober
toward the World, the Servant of the Lord, the Companion of his Neighbor, the
Lord of the World. He has things that are above him, for his solace; things
that are equal to him, for his fellowship; things that are beneath him, for
his service: he is a burden to none, but reduces those things which are
beneath, to the profit of the mean, and to the honor of the superior,
following superior things, drawing the inferior, possessed of the former,
possessing the latter: he is a faithful servant, in the Meditation and
contemplation of God, and in the care and custody of himself. Therefore first
use all diligence, to keep and watch thy self, afterward understanding that
thou can not be able to keep and preserve thee by thy own industry, humbly
entreat for the aid of the Divine clemency. Therefore that thou may behold
the good, We must fly unto GOD in the time of necessity.
vvell-pleasing and perfect will of thy Creator in thee, faithfully in thy
prayers solicit him, that his royal Camp of Angels may pitch their Tents
round about thee. Desire zealously the protection of Christ thy Redeemer.

Cry unto him and say, Behold a poor sinner stands at thy door of mercy,
open to him that knocks, open thou oh sweet Savior, which have said, Knock
and it shall be opened: that I may declare unto thee all my miseries and
necessities which I suffer. Power out the secrets of thy heart before him, and
crave pardon for thy transgressions, by a sorrowful and true Confession. Let
Jesus Christ keep the door of thy heart. For when Jesus Christ keeps the
door of the heart, and is the Porter, so that all of the Household of the heart,
enter in and come out by him, Thousands of Angels forthwith are present,
rejoicing at the gates of the outward senses: so that no Stranger dare break
into those terrible Armies, because of the reverence and Majesty of the
Dore-keeper, and the Watch and Ward of the Angels.

How a man ought to examine himself. MOTIVE. V.
THou being a curious and strict examiner of thy integrity, examine thy life
by a diligent and daily inquisition. Mark carefully how much thou do profit
and go forward, or how much thou do decay, and go backwards: what thou
art in manners, what thou art in affections; how like thou art to God our
Redeemer and Savior, or how unlike; how nigh, or how far, not by distances
of places, but by affections of manners.

Endeavor with all thy forces and all thy industry to know thy self;
because thou art much better, and more laudable, if thou know thy self, then
if thy own self being neglected and not regarded, thou should know the
course of the Stars, the virtue of herbs, the complexions of men, the natures
of beasts, and should have the science and knowledge of all celestial and
terrestrial things. Therefore restore thy self to thy self, and if not
always or often, at least sometime. Rule thy affections, direct thy actions,
and correct thy foote-steppes: let nothing remain in thee, which is not
rectified with necessary Discipline: place all thy transgressions before thy
eyes: place thy self before thy self, as it were before another, and so
bewail thy self. Lament thy iniquities and immeasurable sins, with which
thou have offended thy God, declare unto him thy miseries, show unto him the
malice of thy adversaries. And when thou shall humble thy self with tears
before him, I pray thee that thou be mindful of me. How we ought to be
mindful one of another in our prayers.
For I, since the time I have known thee in Christ, do love thee, and send up
mention of thee thither, where both an unlawful thought does deserve
punishment, and an honest thought is not unrewarded. For when (like a
spiritual Priest) I offer up the calves of my lips, and a sorrowful heart,
upon the Altar of God, I do remember thee.

Thou also shall do the like office for me, if thou will love me, and make me
partaker of thy prayers: I desire and covet to be present there with thee by
remembrance, when thou powrest forth devout Prayers before God for thy self,
thy familiar acquaintance, Parents, and Friends.

Neither marvel, The just are all the Image of God.
if I have said, I desire to be present, if thou love me; and therefore do
love me, because I am the Image of God, I am as present to thee, as thou art to
thy self, for whatsoever thou art, I am the same substantial.

For every reasonable soul is the Image of God: wherefore he which seeks the
Image of God in himself, does as well seek his Neighbor as himself. And he
which shall light upon it, and find the same Image by seeking, knows the
same in every man. For the sight of the soul is the understanding, therefore
if thou see thy self, thou see me, because I am no other thing then thou
art. And if thou love the most righteous and great GOD, thou love me, being
the Image of God: The love toward God, appears in the love of our brethren.
And also I, if I love God, do love thee. And so while we seek one thing,
and bend and incline to one thing, we are always present together, but in GOD,
in whom we love one another.

That a man ought to be diligent and devout in singing of Psalms, and in
performing other Divine exercises in the Church, or elsewhere. MOTIVE. VI.
When thou shall enter into the Church to pray, or to sing, leave the
tumultuous, and disquietfull motions of thy wavering cogitations without
doors, Cares of external things stop the passage of our prayers, that they
cannot ascend into Heaven.
and utterly forget the care of external things, that thou may be at
leisure to God alone. For it cannot be, that he can talk with God at any
time, which holding his peace, does also prattle to the whole World. Be
therefore earnest and devout toward him, which is earnest and intentive
toward thee, hear him speaking to thee, that he may hear thee speaking to
him. And this shall be effected, if thou shall be present at the performing of
Divine praises, and holy exercises, with due reverence, and diligent
carefulnes, and attend to the divine Scripture. I do not say that I can do
these things, but that I would, and it repents me, that I have not done
them, and it does not grieve me to do them. But thou, to whom greater grace
is granted, by vows and devout prayers, turn the kind ears of the Lord to
thee, with thy tears and sighs, and entreat him gently, for thy grievous
transgressions, and with spiritual songs, laud, and glorify him in his works.

For the heavenly Citizens are delighted in nothing so much as to behold it,
nothing can be performed more pleasant and delightful to the King of Kings, as
he does testify: The Sacrifice of praise shall honor me.

A Consort of heavenly Music.
Oh how happy should thou be, if thou might once behold with spiritual
eyes, how the Princes go before, joined to the Singers, in the midst of the
Damsels, playing on the Timbrels. Thou should see without doubt, with what
care, with what dancing and rejoicing, they are present among the Singers: with
what care and dancing they are present to them which are silent, to them
which meditate; They are present with them which are silent, they rule over
them which provide and govern all things in order. Angels rejoice for the
salvation of men.
For the supernall powers do love their fellow-Citizens, and they all do
seriously rejoice together for them, which receive the inheritance of
salvation: they comfort, furnish, defend, and provide for all. For they desire
our coming, because they expect the ruins of their City shall be thereby
repaired. They diligently enquire, and willingly hear good things of the
good; they run carefully too and fro, in the midst of us, between God and us,
carrying our sighs and groans to him most faithfully, bringing back again
to us, his grace and favor most devoutly. They will not disdain to be our
companions, which are made our servants, we make them to triumph with joy,
when we are converted to repentance.

Therefore let us make have to fulfill their joy by us. Woe unto thee,
whosoever thou art, which do desire to go again to thy vomit, and to
return to the mire? Do thou think thou shall have them pacified and
pleased at the day of judgment, whom thou vvilt deprive of so great, and so
long hoped for joy? They exceedingly rejoiced, when we came to the profession
of true Religion, even as for them whom they did see called back from the very
gate of Hell.

What will it be then, when they shall see us return from the gate of
Paradise, and that they should go backwards again, which had one foot in
heaven? For although we have our bodies here beneath, yet we may lift up our
hearts above. Therefore let us run, not with the steps of the body, but
with the affections, but with the desires, but with sighs of the soul, because
not only the Angels, but also the Creator of the Angels does wait for us.
GOD the Father does wait for us, as children and heirs, that he may put us
in possession of all his good.

The Son of God does wait for us as Brethren, and co-heires with him, that
he may offer us to GOD the Father, the fruit of his Nativity, and price of
his blood. The holy Ghost does wait for us, for he is love and benignity: Gods
election irreuocable.
in which we are predestined from Eternity, and there is no doubt, but he
will have his predestination to be accomplished. Therefore because all the
heavenly Court does expect, and desire us, let us desire it with as great
desire as we can.

For he shall come to it with confusion and blushing, whosoever does not
vehemently desire to see it. But whosoever is conversant in the same, by
continual prayer and daily meditation, he does both depart from hence without
grief, and is also received into it with great joy. Therefore, wheresoever
thou shall be, pray within thy self. If thou shall be far from the place of
prayer, thou thy self art a place. If thou shall be in thy bed, or in some
other place, pray thou: and where the Temple of prayer is, thou must pray
often, and the body being bowed down, the mind is to be lifted up to GOD.
What gesture is to be used of him which prays.
For as there is no moment, in which man does not use, or enjoy the goodness
and mercy of GOD: So there ought to be no moment, in which he should not
have him present in memory. Objection of a faithless petitioner.
But you will say, I pray daily, and see no fruit of my prayer: but as I come
to it, so I return from it: no body does answer me, no body speaks, none
gives any thing at all, but I seem to have labored in vain. So speaks
man's foolishness, nor marking what the Truth afterward promises: saying,
Verily I say unto you, that whatsoever ye ask praying, believe that you shall
receive it, and it shall be performed to you. Do not therefore make slight
account of thy prayer, because he to whom thou prayest, does not make slight
account of it, but before it passes out of thy mouth, God gives that he
knows to be best for us.
he wills that it should be written down in his Book. And we must
undoubtedly hope for one thing of two, that either he will give us that which
we ask, or that which he knows to be more profitable for us. Think
therefore the best, whatsoever thou can, of God, and the worst of thy self
that thou may; thou ought to believe of him more copiously and amply then
thou can think. Make account that thou have lost all that time in which thou
do not think of God. For all other things are none of our own, but the time
only is our own. Therefore find leisure to serve GOD, and wheresoever thou
shall be, there be thou safe without danger. Do not wholly deliver up thy self
to worldly affairs, but use the world as if thou use it not. In what place
or state soever thou do consist, cast thy thoughts upon God, and ponder
something belonging to thy Salvation, in thy mind. We must rely only upon
God.
Therefore with all facility, gathering thy mind together, dwell freely with
thy self, and walk in the latitude and breadth of thy heart, there prepare,
and make ready a large supping parlor for CHRIST: for the mind of a wise man
is always with God. We ought to have him always before our eyes, by whom we
are, live and understand. For we have him our Creator, that we should be, we
also ought to have him our Teacher, that we should be wise, and the giver of
inward sweetness, that we may be blessed, and in this we know his Image in
us, that is, the Image of the most high Trinity. For as he is, he is both wise
and also good; so also we, according to our small measure, both are, and know
that we are, and both love to be, and to know the same. Therefore use thy
self as the Temple of GOD, because of that which is in thee like to God. For
it is the greatest Honor which can be performed to GOD to worship and to
imitate him. Thou do imitate him, if thou art godly, for a godly mind is a
holy Temple to God, and the heart of a godly man, the best Altar. Thou do
worship him, if thou art merciful, He worshippeth God truly, that does the
deeds of charity.
as he is merciful unto all. For it is an acceptable sacrifice to God, to do
good to all in regard of God. Do all things as the child of God, that thou
may be worthy of him, who has vouchsafed to call thee child. But in all
things which thou do, God is present every where.
know that God is present. Beware therefore, that neither thy eyes, nor thy
thoughts, be fixed on that which breeds a sinful delight: neither say nor
do that which is unlawful, although it like thee, neither offend God by any
deed, or gesture, which being present every where, beholds whatsoever thou
do any where. Thou had need to watch and look to thy self narrowly,
because thou do all things before the eyes of a Judge, which sees all
things clearly. Nevertheless, thou need not to stand in dread of him, but
art secure with him, if thou prepare thy self to be such a one, as he may
vouchsafe in favor to be present with thee; but if he be absent by grace, yet
is he present with thee by reuengement. God corrects them whom he loves.
But woe be to thee, if it be so with thee: yea, rather woe be unto thee, if he
be not so with thee. For God is angry with him whom he scourges, not when he
sins, for he condemns him in time to come, perpetually, whom he does not
amend by scourging when he lives wickedly.

A Consideration of Death. MOTIVE. VII.
IT is certain that Death threatens thee every where, the Devil lies in
wait, that he may snatch away thy soul when it departs out of thy body,
but fear thou not, for GOD which dwells in thee (if he yet dwell in thee)
will deliver thee from death, God forsakes none but such as willingly forsake
him first.
and from the Devil. For he is a faithful friend, neither does he forsake
them which trust in him, unless he be first forsaken of them. But he is
forsaken when the heart, through wicked, vile, and unprofitable cogitations,
roaueth hither and thither with a wandering understanding.

Therefore thou must with all carfulness and vigilance watch and keep it,
that God may rest and remain in it. For in every Creature, which is busied and
toiled in the vanities of the world under the Sun, Nothing in the world more
noble then the heart of man.
nothing is more excellent then man's heart, nothing more Noble, nothing is
found more like unto God, wherefore he requires no other thing of thee, but
thy heart. How to purify the heart.
Therefore cleanse the same by pure and sincere confession unto God, and
continual Prayer, that thou may see God with a pure and clean heart, by a
continual looking upon God.

In every place be thou subject and intentive to him, and frame thy manners,
that he may be pleased in thee. Love all men inwardly, and show thy self
loving to all, that thou may be a peacemaker, and the child of God. So thou
shall be a good child, like unto thy heavenly Father, also holy, humble, and
righteous. And when thou shall be such a one, be mindful of me, to commend
me to GOD in thy prayers. Woe be to me which say those things, and do them
not, Good words must be seconded with good deeds.
and if I do them sometime, I continue not long in them, I have those things
in my memory, and do not observe them in my life; I have them in my words, and
not in my conditions; I ruminate and ponder the Law in my heart and my mouth
all the day, and do things contrary to the law; I read of Religion in it, and
I love Reading more then prayer.

Notwithstanding, the holy Scripture does teach me no other thing, but to love
Religion, to preserve Unity, and to have Charity. Some body waits and
attends for me, desirous to speak to me concerning his want and necessity,
but I take some idle book or other, Immoderate reading must not let the
practice of Charity, nor the exercise of Meditation.
which this man or that man commends unto me, I read in it, and by immoderate
reading, I loose the practice of the fruits of Charity, the affections of
piety, the lamentation of compunction, and hearty sorrow, the profit of the
holy Sacraments, and contemplation of heavenly things. Nevertheless, nothing
is found more sweet in this life, nothing is received more delicious, nothing
does so separate the understanding from the love of the world, nothing does so
fortify the mind against temptations, The profitable fruits of devout
meditation.
nothing does so stir up man, and further him to every good work and labor,
as the Grace and benefit of divine meditation, and heavenly contemplation.

In what manner a man ought to pray devoutly. MOTIVE. VIII.
Have mercy upon me, oh God, because I offend there most where I ought to
amend my sins. For while I pray often, in the place of prayer, I do not
mark what I say, I pray truly with the mouth, but my mind wandering abroad, I
am deprived of the fruit of prayer. With my body I am within, but with my heart
I am without.

And therefore I loose that I say. For it profits little to sing, or pray
with the voice only, without the devotion of the heart. Therefore it is great
foolishness, yea, rather great madness, when we do presume to speak with
the Lord of Majesty in prayer, It is presumption to pray without hearty and
true devotion.
and being without understanding, do turn our mind from him, and turn our
heart, I know not to what fooleries and toys. It is also great madness, and
grievously to be punished, when most vile and base dust, does disdain to hear
the Creator of the whole world speaking to it.

But it is an unspeakable grace of the Divine goodness, which does daily
behold us unhappy vvretches, turning away our ears, hardening our hearts, and
nevertheless cries out to us, saying: Return ye Transgressors with your
heart, attend and see, because I am God.

God speaks to me in a Psalm, neither yet when I say a Psalm, do I
consider whose Psalm it is. Wherefore I do great injury to God, when I pray
to him to hear my prayer, which I do not hear my self, who do utter the
same.

I entreat him that he attend to me, The prayer of the wicked is turned into
abomination.
but I neither attend to my self, nor to him, but that which is far worse,
by thinking filthy and unprofitable things within my heart, I bring an horrible
stink before his sight.

Of the instabilitie and wandering of the heart. MOTIVE. IX.
The heart of man is tossed to and fro in the stream of evil cogitations.
NOthing is more unconstant, instable, and fugitive in me, then my heart, the
which so often as it leaves me, flows and fleeteth away by evil
cogitations, so often it offends God. My heart, great heart, wandering,
unstable while it is led by his own will, cannot remain constant in it self,
but being more moveable then any moveable thing, is distracted and drawn
through infinite things, and runs up and down, hither and thither, through
innumerable matters.

And while it seeks rest and content by diverse things, it cannot find the
same: but continues in the labor and turmoyle of misery, void of rest and
contentment. (...) and seeks here and there, where it may rest, and finds
nothing which may suffice it, until it does return to him back again, who
gave it.

It is led from cogitation to cogitation, and it is altered and changed, by
diverse employments and affections, that at least it may be filled with variety
and change of those things, with whose quality it cannot any way possibly be
satisfied.

So the heart is troubled with it is own illusions and fantasies; The heart
reuolting from God, can find no rest, until it return to God. All that we
have is Gods own, yet he says, give me thy heart.
the Divine grace being removed and subtracted. And when it is returned to it
self, and discusseth and examineth that which it thought, it finds nothing,
because it was not a work, but an unsavory and unseasonable thought, which
compoundeth and frames many things of little or nothing at all.

And lastly, imagination deceives it, which the illusion of the Devil forms
and shapeth. God commands me that I give him my heart, and because I am not
obedient and subject to God, commanding, I am rebellious, and contrary to my
self. Whereby I cannot be brought in subjection to my self, until I shall be
subject to him, and serve my self with an evil will, which would not serve
him with a good will. Therefore my heart plotteth, endeavors, and goes
about more things in one moment, then all men are able to perform in a year;
I am not united with God, and therefore I am divided in my self. I cannot be
truly united with him, but by love: neither be subject to him, but by humility:
neither can I be truly humble, but by truth.

It is expedient therefore that I examine my self in Truth, and know how vile,
how frail, how unconstant and slipperie I am. Afterward, when I shall know all
my wants and miseries, it is needful that I cleave unto him, by whom I am, and
without whom I am nothing, and can do nothing: and because I have departed
from the Lord by sinning, I cannot return unto him but by true confession.
Therefore I must now confess in truth and sincerity, because I have never
confessed my sins, in that measure and manner, in which I have sinned,
neither have I remembered all; either because of the antiquity or multitude of
them. But if I have confessed them, I have not sincerely confessed them, but
have flattered the flesh in my confession, and have dealt falsely in casting up
the sum of my great and grievous transgressions. And it is a cursed
dissimulation, to make but a slight and counterfeit confession of our
rebellions toward GOD, and of our injurious and uncharitable actions toward
men, and only to pare the outside of sin away, and as it were, to wash our
hands with a little water, and not to pluck up sin by the roots, that it may
never afterward grow up in our hearts.

Our Confession must be true and sincere.
For confession is not profitable, but in the Truth and purity of the heart,
that there may be three which may bear us witness in Heaven: The Father, and
the Son, and the holy Ghost. And as men have been beholders of our manifold
transgressions, so let us make them witnesses of our humble repentance, and
hearty contrition. And although we must, and ought to acknowledge GOD alone to
be All-sufficient to grant us free pardon and absolution, yet we should not
refuse to show forth manifest testimonies to men, of our true and sincere
Humiliation. To which, the Apostle Saint James, does counsel and persuade us,
saying: Confess your sins one to another.

For it is very convenient, that we, which have been stubborn and
rebellious by sinning against GOD, should be humble also toward men, whom we
have offended, either by the evil example of our wicked life, or else by our
wrongful dealing and false deeds.

For it is most healthful to the soul, that a man repent in heart, and
acknowledge his fault with his mouth, so that God, which is present in Mercy
and Grace, may prick his heart by compunction and bitter repentance, and
afterward may be also present and ready to give him full pardon of his sins.
But if a sinner do truly repent, and yet by some accidental necessity be
prevented that he cannot make any acknowledgement to such men as he has
offended, we must confidently believe that whatsoever is defective in him
concerning such acknowledgement, is fulfilled by Christ, who has made a full
satisfaction. For GOD accepts that as done, which a man has been willing,
although not able to perform.

That Sin is not to be excused. MOTIVE. X.
IN the account of my sins, where I should have amended, I have augmented my
sins, and added sins to sins. When I have been accused of them, I have
either by some means excused them, An unrelenting sinner will either cunningly
excuse or flatly deny his sin.
or wholly denied them, or that which is worst, I have maintained and defended
them, and have answered impatiently, when indeed there is no sin with which I
am not, or may not be polluted. It is just therefore, all occasion being
removed, that I promise amendment, howsoever, or of whatsoever I am accused,
to the end that I may be delivered from sin committed or to be committed.

What a great evil it is, not to correct or reprehend others. MOTIVE. XI.
I Greatly dreading the multitude of my own iniquities, have been afraid to
reprehend the transgressions of others, By silence we make our selves guilty
of other men's sins, when we ought to admonish or correct them.
and therefore have been the Author of death, because I have not expelled the
poison, which I might have purged by crying out unto them.

I have stormed against others, and have been incensed with fury, when they
have reprehended me for my vices, and I have hated them whom I ought to have
loved: I desired that those things might not be, which did hurt or displease me.

Nevertheless, I did know that in their own Nature they were good, and made
of a good Maker; and therefore they did hurt me, because I was evil, and did
use them euilly. For nothing is contrary or hurtful to my self, Good things
are made evil by abuse.
but I my self. For that is with me and in me, whatsoever is able to hurt
me, and I my self am a burden to my self.

I wished also that God might not know my sins, or that he would not, or
could not punish them, and so I would have God to be foolish, unjust, and
impotent. Which if he were, he were not a God. There is no Pride above my
Pride, therefore the words of my transgressions are far from my salvation:
Pride and God cannot dwell together.
For Pride is suspected and hateful to GOD, neither can it be, that it may
return into favor with him. They lodge in diverse Innes, neither do they
dwell together in one and the same mind, which might not dwell together in
HEAVEN. She was borne in Heaven; but being as it were unmindful, by what way
she fell from thence, she has not been able to return thither afterward.

When as the Air has been at sometime troubled with Rain, or else with too
much cold or heat, I murmured wickedly against God. For all things which we
received for the use of life, we reuert, or rather pervert, to the use of
wickedness. Wherefore it is just, that we which have sinned in all things,
be smitten and wounded in all things. Oftentime in singing divine Psalms, God
more respects a true mourning heart, then a sweet melodious voice.
I was more delighted with the tune of my voice, then in the compunction of my
heart. But God, to whom nothing is hidden, which is wickedly committed, does
not so much require the sweetness of the voice, as the purity of the heart.
For while the Singer does tickle and delight the people with melodious voices,
he moves God to wrath, with his evil conditions.

I have oftentimes extorted of my Governors and Rulers license to speak, or
to do something by ouermu h importunity, or by crafty subtilty, not
considering miserable wretch, that he couseneth and deceives himself which
labors privily, or secretly that the Magistrate or Minister may enjoin him
that which may best sort and most please his corrupt desire. I have often
coueted and desired a Needle or a Knife, or some base thing, and I have not
been touched with any sense of sorrow for my covetous desire, because I did
not esteem it a sin, by reason of the baseness of the matter. Concupiscence
is not to be judged by the estimation of the thing, but by the corruption of
the desire.
But there is no great difference, what substance so ever be desired, base or
precious, if the affection be equally corrupted. For the Knife is not in fault,
but the covetous desire of the Knife is to be condemned. Neither is Gold in
fault, but the greedy desire of Gold is vicious and sinful.

In my labor, I have not labored so much as I should, or so much as I could.

In silence also I have been idle, which is a most great sin. For in silence
no man ought to be so idle, that in the same leisure he thinks not on the
profit of his Neighbor: nor so busied, that he require not the Meditation, and
contemplation of God. For he does not profit himself much, which does not
profit another when he may.

I have boasted my self of my Vices, thinking that to be a sign of Virtue,
which was a criminal Trespass. Of Virtues also I have made Vices. For
Justice, while it exceeds due mediocritie and measure, ingendreth the Vice of
all bad and hateful cruelty: and too much pity, brings forth the
dissolution and overthrow of discipline, and necessary correction, so
oftentimes that is vice which is supposed to be virtue. Vices are taken, (or
rather mistaken) for virtues.
So careless remissness, is supposed to be gentle mildness, and the vice of
sloathfulnesse does imitate the virtue of quietness. I fained my self to be
that which I was not, or that I would not do that which I would, said one
thing with my mouth, and willed another thing in my heart, and so under the
skin of a Sheep, I shrouded the conscience, indeed of a subtle Fox. Notes
of a deceitful Conscience.
For indeed a lukewarm conversation, and a more natural and corrupt
cogitation, joined with a fained confession, a short compunction, obedience
without devotion, prayer without earnest intention, reading without
edifying, speech without careful circumspection, are properties of a Fox-like
and crafty conscience. Oh how hard are these things to me which I speak,
because I smite and wound my self by speaking them: notwithstanding, because I
do not deny my self to be a sinner, but do acknowledge my sin,
peradventure the acknowledgement of my faults, shall be the obtaining of my
pardon with GOD, a merciful and pitiful Judge. The confession of sins is a
ready way to obtain remission.
Therefore I will declare my misery, if peradventure his kindness and pity
may move him, I will confess my sin, because the acknowledgement of sin is
the beginning of salvation. I carry my self kindly toward men, I exceed
not in my garments, I am careful to observe Ecclesiastical Orders, to pray
and sing at hours appointed, but my heart is far from my God. I looking upon
the outward part, think all things are safe and well to me, not feeling the
inward Worm which gnaweth the inward bowels. As it is recorded in the seventh
Chapter of Oseas, Strangers have eaten up my strength, and I knew it not.

And therefore, wholy occupied and employed about those things which are
without, and altogether ignorant of the things within me, I am powered out like
water, and brought to nothing, forgetting things past, neglecting things
present, not foreseeing things to come: I am unthankful for benefits
received, prone to evil, and slow to good.

How every man ought to consider himself. MOTIVE. XII.
IF I do not look upon my self, I know not my self, but if I look upon my
self, I cannot tolerate or endure my self: because I find such great things
in my self, which are worthy of reprehension and confusion: and by so much the
more narrowly and more often I examine my self, by so much the more are the
abominations I find in the secret corners of my heart. For from the very
first moment I began to sin, I could not let one day pass without sin.

Neither as yet do I cease to sin, but from day to day, I add sins to
sins, and I have them before mine eyes. When we sin without sense of sin,
our soul is sick, even unto death.
I behold them, yet I do not groan nor sigh for them. I see things to be
blushed at, neither do I blush: I look upon things to be grieved at, neither
am I grieved: which thing is a sign of death, and a token of damnation. For a
member, which feels not the pain, is mortified and dead: and a disease
insensible, is always incurable. I am unconstant, and dissolute, neither do I
reform my self, but I return daily to the sins I have confessed: neither
do I take heed of the Ditch, into which I wretched creature have fallen, or
into which I have made or seen another fall into. And when I should have wept
and prayed for the evils I committed, and for the good things I neglected (oh
grief) it turned to me into the contrary: For I was lukewarm, and I was
quite cold from the fervent heat of prayer, and now have remained cold
without sense; and therefore I cannot bewail my self, because the grace of
tears is departed from me.

Of the presence of the Conscience every where. MOTIVE. XIII.
I Cannot conceal my sins, because wheresoever I go my conscience is with
me, carrying with it whatsoever I have laid up in it, either evil or good. It
keeps the pledge which it has received from me, being alive, it will restore
the same to me being dead. If I do euilly, it is present: If I seem to do
well, and therefore am lifted up, it is present. Is present to me being alive,
it follows me being dead: there is inseparable confusion to me euery-where,
according to the quality of the pledge it has received. So, so, in my own
house, A sinner has his accusers within himself.
and from my own family, I have mine Accusors, Witnesses, Judge, and
Tormentors.

My Conscience does accuse me, my Memory is the witness against me: Reason,
the Judge: my Will, the Prison: Fear, the Executioner: and my delight the
Torment.

For how many wicked delights there have been to procure my carnal pleasure,
so many Torments there shall be in my grievous punishment: for we are thereby
punished, from whence we delighted.

Of the three Enemies of Man. MOTIVE. XIIII.
Help me oh my God, because mine enemies have besieged and compassed my soul
round about namely the Body, the World, and the Devil. The flesh, the first
enemy of man.
I cannot fly from the body, nor drive it away from me. I must needs carry
it about me, because it is fast tied and bound unto me, I may not destroy it,
I am compelled to nourish and sustain it. And when I make it fat, I nourish
mine adversary, against my self. For if I shall pamper my self, and that I
shall be lusty and strong, the health and strength of it does trouble and
molest me. The world the second enemy of man.
Likewise the world does hemme me in, and besiege me on every side, and by
five gates (to wit) by the five senses of the body; namely, the sight, hearing,
tasting, smelling, and touching, does wound me with his arrows, and Death
enters by my vvindowes into my soul.

Mine eye looks back, and turns away my Understanding. Mine ear hears,
and turns aside the intention of my heart. Smelling hinders my devout
cogitation. My mouth speaks, and deceives. By touching, the burning of Lust
is stirred up, by any small occasion, and unless it be quenched, it suddenly
possesses, burns, and inflameth the whole body.

First, it tickleth the flesh a little with thought, afterward it defiles the
mind with filthy delight, and at last it subiugateth and captiueth the mind
by consent unto wickedness.

Further, the Devil whom I cannot see, The Devil, the third enemy of man.
and therefore can the less be wary of him, he has bent his Bow, and made
ready his Arrows in it, that he may suddenly wound me: He has declared
that he would hide his Snares, and has said, The Devil uses gold and silver
for alluring baits, to procure the souls bane.
Who shall see them? He has laid a snare in gold and silver, and in all
things which we abuse, with them we are euilly delighted, and are
ensnared. He has not only laid a Snare, but also Birdlime.

The love of possessions is Birdlime, the affection of kindred, The Devils Bird
lime.
the desire of Honor, and the pleasure of the flesh, by which the soul is
glewed and entangled, that it cannot (...) through the streets of heavenly
Syon, with the wings of Contemplation. The Arrows of (...) Devil.
The Arrows and Shafts of the Devil are, Anger, Envy, Concupiscence, and
other vices: with which the soul is wounded. And who is he which is able to
quench his fiery Darts? Oh lamentable grief! a faithful soul is often
wounded with these Darts, and overcome with these temptations. Alas for me,
because I see wars prepared for me on every side, Darts fly about every
where, on every side assailements, on every side dangers, wheresoever I shall
turn my self there is no safety, no security: I fear both those things which
delight me, and also those things which make me sad, and molest me. I fear
all things: Hunger and refection, sleep and watching, labor and resting do
fight against me. Ieasting is no less suspected of me then anger: for I after
given offense unto many by ieasting: Neither do I less fear prosperity then
adversity: For prosperous things, with their sweetness, make me careless, and
deceive me: but adverse and contrary things, because they have some
bitterness, as bitter Potions, do make me suspicious and fearful. I fear
the evil more which I do privily, then that which I do openly. For the
Temptor comes boldly to the evil, which no man sees, which no man
comprehends, and where no man is feared which should find fault with it,
and so iniquity is more easily committed.

Truly, there is War on both sides, danger on both sides, to be feared on
both sides. And even as they which remain in the Land of their enemies, must
look on this side, and that side, and must turn their head about at every
noise: So the flesh suggesteth pleasant things to me, the world vain things,
the Devil bitter things, because so often as a carnal cogitation does
importunately move and assail my mind, concerning meat and drink, sleep,
and other like things, belonging to the care and provision of the flesh, the
flesh speaks to me. When a vain thought is busied in my heart concerning
worldly Ambition, bragging and boasting, it proceeds from the world: But when
I am provoked to anger and wrath, and to bitterness of mind, it is a
devilish suggestion, the which I must resist no otherwise, then the Devil
himself, neither must I any otherwise take heed and beware of it, then of
damnation it self. It is the office of Devils to bring in false suggestions:
it is our duite not to consent to them; For so often as we resist them, so
often we overcome the Devil, we glad the Angels, we honor God. For he does
exhort and encourage us that we may fight: he helps us, that we may
overcome: he beholds us fighting: he succoureth us fainting: he crowns us
conquering.

From whence the flesh of Man proceeds, and what it brings forth. MOTIVE.
XV.
MY flesh proceeds from the clay, and therefore I have voluptuous thoughts
from it, vain and curious cogitations from the world, Three cruel enemies of
man.
evil and malicious suggestions from the Devil. These three enemies do
assail and persecute me, sometime openly, sometime secretly, but always
maliciously: For the Devil trusts most in the help of the flesh, because a
domestical enemy does most hurt, and procures greatest harm. For she has
entered a league with him for my ruin, overthrow, and destruction: to wit,
being borne of sin, and nourished in sin, corrupted with vices from the
very beginning: Flesh is corrupted, be birth, nurture, and custom.
but made a great deal more vicious by evil custom. From hence it
proceeds, that she coueteth and lusts so eagerly against the spirit, that
she continually murmureth, and cannot abide good discipline and wholsome
correction, because she suggesteth unlawful things, will neither obey reason,
nor is brideled with any fear. That wretched Serpent approaches to her, he
aydeth her, he uses her being the old and deadly enemy of mankind: who
has no other desire, no other business, no other exercise, but to destroy our
selves. The continual practice of the Devil.
This is he which imagines mischief continually, speaks subtly,
suggesteth artificially, deceives craftily. He inspireth wicked and unlawful
motions, raises wars, nourishes hatred, stirs up gluttony, incenseth
lust, pricketh forward the unbridled desires of the flesh, and prepares
baits and occasion of sin, and also assaulteth without ceasing, the hearts
of men with a thousand slights, to hurt and destroy them. From hence it falls
out, that he beats us with our own staff, binds our hands with our own
girdle, and cutteth our throat with our own knife, so that the flesh which is
given to us for a help, becomes to us ruin and hurt, and is as a block in
our way, to make us to stumble. It is a grievous combat, and a great danger to
fight against such a domestical enemy, especially, seeing we are strangers,
and he a Citizen; he inhabiteth his own Country, we are banished men and
strangers. It is also great peril and danger to endure so often, yea rather
such continual conflicts of his devilish policy, whom, as well subtle
nature, as long exercise of his inueterate malice, has made so politic and
crafty.

Of the short life of man. MOTIVE. XVI.
THe day of man is as it were a shadow, or rather a shadow upon earth, it has
no continuance: and then it is properly nothing, and more vain then any thing,
when it seems to stand surest, and to rest upon a sound foundation.

Therefore why does a covetous man hoord up treasure here upon earth so
greedily, The folly of rich men.
when both he himself must pass away so suddenly, and also the treasure
which he has stored up so carefully? And in truth (oh foolish man) what fruit
can thou expect in the world, whose sweetest fruit is utter ruin; whose end
is death and woeful destruction? Would to GOD thou were wise, could understand
and carefully provide in thy short life, against the day of thy certain and
uncertain death. A notable description of the old man, or sin.
I know one who many years has lived familiarly with thee, has sat down at
thy Table, has received meat from thine own hand, has slept in thy bosom,
and when he would, has had private conference with thee.

He by hereditary law is but thy servant. But because from his tender years,
thou have pampered him delicately, brought him up very wantonly, and have
spared the rod foolishly, he is now become stubborn and rebellious against
thee.

He has lifted up his heel above thy head, he has brought thee into
slavish bondage, and does cruelly tyrannize over thee. But peradventure thou will say; Who is he? It is thy old man, which treads and trampleth thy
Spirit under feet, who disdaineth, contemns, and reputeth less then nothing
that blessed Land, which is solely and wholly to be desired, because nothing can
give a sweet taste, or procure a pleasing relish to his corrupted humor, but
only such things as may please the wanton flesh, and her intemperate desires.
This man is blind and deaf from his Nativity, dumb, ancient with days many
and evil, rebellious against virtue, opposite to verity, an Enemy of the
Cross of Christ. He scorneth, derideth, and flowteth the innocent, and that
man which walks uprightly in truth and sincerity. He busieth himself, and
intermedleth with great and wonderful matters, which do far exceed his
weak capacity, and much surpass the short reach of his dull and doltish
understanding. His arrogancy and impudent boldness, is more then all his
fortitude and forces: he dreadeth none, nor stands in awe of any: but says
proudly in his doting foolishness, There is no God. He pineth and consumes
with good things, he is also fed and nourished with other men's evils, he is
fatted and cherished with unclean thoughts, and impure cogitations, he is
never tired, nor wearied with them, rebelling and transgressing even unto the
end: he disperseth and scatters abroad his own, like an unthrifty and
wasting Prodigal: he coueteth and raketh to himself other men's goods, like a
covetous and greedy Miser; he heapeth up to himself Ignominy and foul
reproach, by his odious fraud and dissimulation, and through his malicious
subtilty, kindles the wrath of God against him, and daily adds more fuel
to augment the flame.

This man was conceived, bred, and borne in sin, and so being nurtured, and
nusled in sin, is become a friend of iniquity, the child of death, the
vessel of wrath, exposed to contumelious reproach, and final destruction.
Who, although he be so corrupted with wicked manners, depraved with vile
conditions, and deprived of all commendable virtues, yet he utters forth the
sacred Justice of God, with his dissembling words, and takes his holy covenant
in his profaned mouth. He hates discipline, and scorneth correction, he
dishonors his sovereign Lord, and casts his commandments contemptuously
behind his back.

When he spieth a Thief, he enters a league of society, and runs to
mischief with him, he shareth and has his portion with filthy and unclean
Adulterers, he is wholy delighted with their scandalous amity, he always
frequenteth their damnable society. He forgets many false accusations and
criminal objections against the son of his own and only mother; he also
treasureth wrath upon thee against the day of wrath and vengeance, to work and
contriue thy woeful and eternal perdition: he would rob and quite deprive thee
of thy rich and royal inheritance, and would banish thee for ever from thy
heavenly and most happy Country, to dwell in a land of perpetual darkness,
full of everlasting woes and lamentations.

Yet thou art so blinded with selfe-conceited folly, and so besotted with thy
doting affections, that thou will not lift up so much as thy little finger, to
revenge so great, so notorious, and grievous an injury, but are content to
dissemble thy hurts, and to put up all his wrongs he has done unto thee, to
hold thy tongue, and so to let them pass away in silence; neither do thou
speak an unkind or froward word, nor show him a frowning or sour look, but
thou smilest upon him with a joyful face. When he flattereth and sootheth
thee in thy dangerous follies, thou do sport, play, dally, and solace thy
self with a scornful mocker, thou know not that it is a deriding Ismael,
which sporteth and plays with thee.

This is no Childish sport acted in simplicity, and qualified with harmless
innocence: but the beginning of it is bloody persecution, and the end of it
everlasting death and damnation: he has tumbled thee down headlong into the
deep pit which he dug and made for thy eternal destruction: now thou art
become an effeminate Coward, and have lost the vigor of thy manly forces: now
thou being a wretched Captive, pressed down with the grievous yoke of most
miserable and slavish bondage art basely dejected, trampled, and trod upon
under his feet.

O wretched, woeful, and miserable man, who shall deliver, rescue, and redeem
thee from the heavy band and bondage of this ignominious, and opprobrious
Nickname? Let God arise, and let that armed man fall down to the ground, If
God be on our side, we need not care who be against us.
let him fall flat on the ground, and let that direful foe, and bloody Tyrant
be beaten into pieces, as small as the dust, to be scattered abroad with the
violence of the stormy winds. A proud contemner of God, and all that are good;
a worshipper of himself; a friend of the world, a servant of the devil. What
think thou? What is thy opinon? How inclines thy mind and affection? If
Reason be thy Pilot to direct the course of thy opinion, and Wisdom the
Master to stir the helm of thy Understanding, thou will say with me, He
has committed most vile and horrible treason against the highest Majesty, he
is guilty of death, let him be crucified, and let him suffer (as he has well
deserved) the extreme rigor of most bitter and painful Torments of the
flesh.

Do not therefore play the Hypocrite, and mask thy counterfeiting affections
with the vizard of dissimulation, defer not his execution from day to day,
by a fond repriuall, spare him not for foolish pity, but speedily, boldly, and
instantly crucify that sinful and guilty Traitor.

But on the Cross of Christ, by whose death we are restored and raised to
life, made coheyres with him of his glorious Kingdom, and of everlasting
Salvation: to whom if thou shall cry with a sorrowful compunction of a
groaning heart, and with the deep sighs of a grieved and penitent mind:
then thy crucified Christ will hear thee speedily, answering thee kindly: To
day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Oh wonderful pity of Christ, a most loving Savior! oh undeserved, nay
unexpected Salvation of a great and grievous Sinner! So bountiful, so
graceful, and so delightful is the exceeding love of God: so admirable is his
sweetness, so far beyond our opinion is his favorable kindness, so
immeasurable is his meekness, that his ears are always open to hear the
complaints of his pleople: he is always at leisure to receive with kindness,
and to answer with speediness, the humble petitions of those which in time of
their distresses, will faithfully call upon him, and with contrite and
relenting hearts, will reverently approach near unto him, because his mercy
toward us, is without measure, and his tender compassion knows no bounds.

Oh how great, worthy, and wonderful is the mercy of our gracious God! Oh how
unutterable is the powerful alteration of the right hand of the highest?
Yesterday I was fast fettered in the Prison of darkness, under the check of
a cruel and merciless Murderer: How pleasant is the freedom of sin.
to day I am in the hand of a pitiful and merciful Mediator. Yesterday I was
in the gate of devouring hell, on every side affrighted with fear, and
afflicted with misery: to day I am in the pleasant Paradise, of eternal
delights and pleasure, totally replenished with neuer-decaying joy, endless
delight, and everlasting felicity. But how may these Letters of admonition
prevail? how may they profit? unless thou race out of the Book of thy
Conscience, the black letters of thy bloody death, and sinful debt? How can
these sentences afford thee any solace, procure any profit, or bring any
comfort when they are read and understood, unless thou read thy self truly,
know and understand perfectly? Do thy best diligence, afforde thy chiefest
endeavors to internal and mental reading: The true end and use of reading
books.
that thou may read thy self truly, look into thy self circumspectly,
and know thy self thoroughly.

Read, that thou may love God unfeignedly, that thou may fight, and hold
out until the end of the battle courageously, and that thou may overcome
the world, and every cruel enemy victoriously: so that thy toyling labor may
be turned into eternal rest and quietness: thy woeful mourning into mirth and
gladness, thy streams of tears, into rivers of comfortable waters: and that
when Death has quite put out the twinkling Lamp of thy daily consuming life,
thou may see the bright and glorious appearing of that euer-shining Morning;
whose euer-glistering Sun shall never set, nor his golden beams be ever
obscured with any cloudy Evening.

And that thou may also see with thy cleere-sighted eyes, never wearyed in
beholding, to thy Souls eternal solace, to the infinite joy of thy triumphing
mind, and constant delight of all thy purified senses, the resplendant and
radiant beams of the gliftering Sun of conspicuous righteousness, in which
thou may behold the bountiful, the beautiful, the glorious Bridegroom,
the Lord Jesus Christ, united with his everlasting, most dear, best, and
only beloved Spouse, whom he has decked with his rich and royal Robes,
adorned with super-excellent and admirable beauty, having with his own
precious Blood, yea, We are cleansed by Christ's blood.
his Heart-bloud, vvashed, cleansed, and rinced her from all the foul stains,
spots, and blemishes of her former sinful deformity: He that is one, and
the same Lord of Eternal glory, who lives and reigns, by Times which are
without any bounds of measure, and whose euer-durable continuance shall never
have any ending.

FINIS.
A most zealous and devout Lamentation of blessed Anselmus, sometime
Archbishop of Canterbury, for the loss of his Souls virginity, appliable
unto the soul of every mortified Christian.
OH my soul, sorrowful soul! Job 14.1.5.7. Eccles. 1.13 and 3.10.
Oh miserable soul, of a miserable, wretched, and contemptible Creature! Arise
out of the bed of senseless security, and narrowly examine the particulars
of thy great and grievous transgressions, Great sins desire and deserve great
sorrows.
rouse up thy drouzie understanding, let the sense of thy heinous sins wound
thy heart with such a doleful compunction, that thy deep fetched sighs may
pierce the skies with the sharp accent of thy sorrows. Let the greatness of
thy Ezech. 18.4.5.
wickedness affright thee with dismaying horror, and deeply wound thee with
intolerable dolor. The terror of a wicked conscience.
Thou, I say, which some-time being made as white as Snow with the Ephesians. 2.22
Rom 3.25. and 5.10.
celestial Fountain and Lauor, endowed with the holy Spirit, bound by a
sacred oath to maintain thy Christian profession, being a Virgin have been
obedient, espoused to Christ thy glorious, Mat. 19.15 and 25.1.5.6.
Bridegroom.

Alas! too well I remember it. Oh whom have I named? verily not so kind a
Spouse, of my chaste Virginity, as a terrible Wis. 17.1. Mat. 16.27. Romans 2.1.
Judge of my odious impuritie! Alas, woeful is the remembrance of my decayed
pleasure. Why do thou more and more increase the sorrow of the possessor?
How miserable is the lot of wicked and heinous offenses, to whom both good and
evil, do breed nothing else, but torment and torture? For an evil Wis. 17.10.
Conscience does trouble and vex me, and horror of that unquenchable fire
does terrify me, in which I fear I shall burn continually, and never be
consumed. The remembrance of a good Conscience, and of the rewards of it, does
afflict and affright me, which I know I have lost, and shall never repossesse
or recover.

Woe is me to lose, to lose that without hope of recovery, which should have
been carefully Acts 23.16.
preserved for ever. Oh comfortless sorrow, to lose that which does not only
deprive me of good things, but does also multiply my torments? Oh Virginity,
now not beloved of me, but lost and departed from me, thou art now not my
only solace, and felicity, but alone my only sorrow, and incurable misery;
how is thy former beauty changed into disdainefull deformity? Into what deep
pit of calamity have thou dejected me?

Oh thou hateful Fornication, which have defiled my mind with thy contagious
uncleanness, and infected my soul with deadly diseases; how and from whence
did thou creep into my wretched bosom, to vex and molest me? From what
glorious and delightful state of Felicity have thou tumbled me headlong, to
languish in continual misery? On this side bitter sorrow does sting me, on
the other side extreme pangs and terrible fear does torment me, while my
mind is distracted with heavy meditations upon my unrecoverable losses.

And as my losses are void of hope and consolation, so my torment will admit no
moderation; and a Sea of woes does ouerflow me. But if that which is good, and
that which is evil do both alike punish, and justly afflict me, so that I
often feel the horror of death, while I live in this wretched life, my guilty
conscience does tell me, and my perplexed thoughts teach me, that I have
worthily deserved it.

For thou my Soul, disloyal, perjured against God thy Creator, and become a
filthy strumpet, to the dishonor of Christ thy loving Lord and Redeemer; art
woefully thrown down from thy glorious and high estate of unspotted
Virginity, into the bottomless lake of loathsome Adultery. Thou, sometime
espoused to the King of Heaven, art now become an Harlot to the tormentor of
Hell.

Alas, for thee that art cast out of the favor of God, who did so kindly
regard thee, and art exposed to the malice of the devil, who will most
cruelly torment thee! Nay, rather thou which have cast away God, and embraced
the devil. For thou being changed most miserably from a virtuous Virgin, to a
vicious strumpet, and an impudent Harlot; thou first have offered an unkind
refusal of thy first love to God, thy gracious Creator: and wilfully and
willingly have prostituted thy self to the lust of the devil, a cunning
deceiuer, and thy cruel murderer.

Oh damnable exchange, most miserable, and more then most miserable alteration!
Alas, from what high seat of blessedness art thou thrown down? into what
deep dungeon of cursednesse art thou overwhelmed? Alas, how kind and loving a
Husband have thou treacherously rejected? how malicious, merciless, and
dreadful a Tyrant have thou accepted! Ah, what have thou done, thou furious
madness of my doting understanding, thou doting uncleanness, and unclean
impiety, what have thou done? Thou have utterly forsaken thy chaste and
faithful Spouse, who gloriously raineth in Heaven, and have eagerly followed
the Author of thy odious uncleanness into hell: and in that deep gulf of
everlasting darkness, have not prepared for thy self a Bridechamber, to
solace thy self with thy true and chaste beloved; but a filthy Brothel-house,
where thou may be defiled, and polluted with incurable uncleanness.

What wonderful horror does attend upon thee? what perverse will and lustful
desires has bewitched thee? Oh horrible wonder, oh voluntary madness!

How, oh God, am I fallen into the corruption of such great impiety? How oh
Lord God, shall I make satisfaction unto thee for my grievous iniquity? Throw
thy self down, thou miserable and cursed Creature, into the depth of
immoderate mourning and misery, who have willingly cast thy self down into
the Gulf of immeasurable and horrible iniquity. Let the weight of thy
wickedness ouerwhelme thee, let the heavy burden of thy unsupportable sorrow
wholly depresse thee which art willingly tumbled into the filthy Mire of
infernal stincke, and hellish savors: be thou overwhelmed with the horrible
darkness of comfortles and in consolable sorrow, which have wittingly cast
thy self down into a gulf of such beastly and luxurious pleasures. Wallow
thou in the whirepoole of bitterness, which have sported and delighted thy
self in the puddle of lascivious filthiness. Oh ye horrible terror, terrible
sorrow, uncomfortable mourning, muster your selves against me, assault,
ouerwhelme, vex, cover, trample upon me. It is just, it is just, my wicked
deeds have deserved it.

I have with impudent boldness disdained and contemned your forces, and with
shameful sensuality have procured your displeasure: yea, rather I have
provoked God, and not you, and now with lamentable repentance I desire you to
pour your full measure of vengeance upon me. Torment and torture the guilty,
that my sovereign Lord may be avenged, whom I have so highly offended. Let the
vicious Fornicatour feel before hand the Torments of Hell, which he has
deserved: let him taste before hand, that which he has prepared: let him have
some smacke of those tormenting pangs and passions, which he shall abide and
suffer hereafter.

Extend and augment, (thou immoderate and insatiable sinner) thy sorrowful and
doleful repentance, which have so far enlarged the leprous uncleanness of
thy odious and detestable vices. Tumble thy self, and throw thy self again
into the vvhirle poole of ceaseless sorrow, bitterness, and doleful
distresses, which have so often thrown down thy self into the filthy pit of
thy lustful desires, and carnal pleasures. Consolation, security,
delightful pleasure, and joy, do ye now no more approach near unto me, I
hate and loath your delectable company, unless pardon of my sin shall
reconcile and restore you. Let heavy pensiveness and bitter mourning, be
still at hand, like cruel Tormentors, and bloody executioners, to vex me in
my growing youth, and to trouble me in my vvearisome age. Would to God,
would to God it may be so, I vvish, pray, desire it may be so. If I be not
worthy to list up my eyes toward HEAVEN, when I put up my humble
supplication, truly I am not unworthy to obscure them, and to put out their
light with the streams and fountain of tears, and lamentable weeping.

If my mind be confounded with great shamefulnes of my guilty Conscience,
that it cannot pray and crave for mercy: it is meet that it should be
overwhelmed with the tempest of exceeding sorrow and doleful sadness. If it
fear to come in the sight of God grievously offended: it is just that the
insufferable torments prepared for rebellious sinners, should always appear,
and be presented before it. Therefore let my heart think, and think again,
what heinous treason it has committed, what endless torments it has deserved.

Let my understanding descend into itself, and make a privy search in every
corner, before it go down into the land of darkness, which death obscureth
with his gross and mistie vapors, and meditate who does attend and wait there
for my wicked soul: let it behold and view, see and be troubled. What is it,
oh God, what is it, which I behold in the Land of misery and darkness?
Horror, Horror. What is it which I do view, where no order, but woeful
confusion inhabiteth?

Woeful are the outcries of some, howling out with lamentable voices: Woeful is
the noise of others, gnashing their teeth, tortured with intolerable torments.
Lamentable is the sight of the confused multitude, sobbing, and sighing out,
woe, woe! How many, and how many woes? Woe for that fire, which burns with
brimstone, whose flame is never extinguished: and woeful is that obscure and
dark Dungeon, where there dwells everlasting darkness! With what terrible
roaring do I see you, oh Worms, tossed and turned about, living in that
flaming fire which continualy burns? What direful and greedy desire does
inflame you to return out of it, whom yet that fire of fires cannot so burn,
as that ever ye shall be consumed? Oh ye Devils, burning together with them;
roaring with burning, and raging with fury; wherefore are ye so terrible and
cruel to them, which are tumbled, and rolled up and down among you? Oh
torments intolerable! Oh extreme sentence of Justice insupportable, shall no
mean, no remedy, no end mittigate or assuage you? Are these the things, oh
great and powerful God, which are prepared for filthy Fornicators, and wicked
contemners of thee, of which I am one? I, I am verily one of those.

Oh my soul, tremble thou with terror: faint and fail thou my understanding,
with quaking fear; and thou, oh my heart, cut and wound thy self with
immoderate sorrow. Whither do ye hale and tog may cruel tormentors, while
you execute your fury and wrath against me, for my great and grievous
offenses? Whither do thou deliver me, oh my sin? Whither do thou deliver
me, oh my God? whither do thou deliver me? If I have effected by my heinous
and detestable rebellions, that I should be thy guilty offender, could I also
bring it to pass, that I should not be thy Creature? If I have robbed my
self of my chastity, have I also robbed thee of thy Mercy? Oh Lord, Lord, if
I have lost that, for want whereof thou may condemn me a grievous
offender, have thou also lost that, whereby thou art wont to save a penitent
sinner?

Do not, Oh LORD, do not so narrowly attend to my wickedness, that thou
forget thy wonted goodness. Where is it true, oh true GOD, where is, As I
live, I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be converted and
live?

Oh Lord, thou which do not lie, Lord, what is, I will not the death of a
sinner: If thou do bury in Hell a sinner which cries unto thee? or is it
to throw a sinner into the Lake of neuer-ceasing Torments, I will not the death
of a sinner? Or is this, I will that a sinner be converted and live?

I am a sinner, oh Lord, I am a sinner. If therefore thou will not the death of
a sinner, what does compel thee (which thou would not) that thou deliuerest
me to death and destruction? If thou vvilt that a sinner be converted, and
live, what does let thee to perform that which thou willest; namely, that I
be converted, live, and be saved?

If the enormitie of my sin does constrain me to do that which thou
hate, does it also hinder thee to do that which thou desire, when as thou
art a God omnipotent? Far be it, oh God, far be it oh Lord my God, that the
wickedness of a repenting and lamenting Sinner, should prevail more, then the
sentence the Omnipotent.

Remember, oh just, holy, and merciful God, that thou art merciful, and also
my Creator, and Recreator. Therefore good Lord, remember not thy Justice
against thy sinner, but remember thy wonted clemency, toward thy poor
creature. Remember not thy anger against a guilty offender, but be mindful of
thy accustomed commiseration, and mercy toward a miserable sinner.

It is true, that my conscience does merit damnation, and that my repentance
does not suffice for satisfaction: But it is certain, that thy exceeding
mercy, does surpass all my vile iniquity. Therefore good Savior, spare that
of which thou art the Salvation; yea, thou that desire not the death of a
sinner: Spare, oh spare, my sinful soul; for it being utterly dismayed,
flies from thy terrifying Justice, to thy comforting mercy, that because the
reward of her virginity being corrupted, (oh heart-wounding sorrow) is
unrecoverable: the punishment of hateful Fornication, to her repenting, at
least may not be inevitable; because it is not a thing impossible to thy
omnipotency, neither unseemly to thy Justice, nor vnaccustomable to thy
mercy: Both because thou art good, and because thy infinite mercy endures
for ever. Which art blessed, world without end, Amen.

A Meditation of S. Bernard, concerning the Passion of Jesus Christ. Divided
into twenty and one Sections.
SECTION. I.
LEt us who are true Christians, graced with so noble a name, so high a style,
and so glorious a title, honor and celebrate, with true, sorrowful,
relenting, and repenting hearts, the Funeral Obsequies of our noble Lord, Jesus
of Nazareth, that meek, spotless, innocent, and harmless Lamb, who did not
so much as open his mouth, being under the hand of the Shearer; maliciously
accused, odiously reviled, innocently and wrongfully condemned of the furious
and bloody Jews, extremely tortured, spitefully disdained, shamefully spetted
upon; and lastly, cruelly crucified, by the barbarous and brutish Gentiles.

It is an exployt full of honor, full of renown; it is most healthful and
wholesome for our sickly souls, that we Christians, dayned worthy of such a
gracious and honorable Name, should reverently adore, lovingly embrace,
valiantly imitate, the weak infirmities, scornful disgraces, base poverty,
painful labors, sore and sorrowful agonies, the deadly pangs of the bitter
Passion of our loving Redeemer, and sweet Savior, Christ Jesus the righteous.
For these are the powerful instruments, and most strong weapons, by which the
omnipotent virtue, and the infinite inuestigable, and unsearchable wisdom of
God, has mightily and wonderfully effected, and wrought the restoration, and
renouation of the decayed World, the eternal Salvation of us men; yea, of us
most miserable and wretched men, and the endless and utter destruction of
Hell, Death, and the Devil: Heb. 2.14. Luke. 1.71. And in the working of this
great work, and admirable mystery of our Salvation, the Lord Christ was made
lesser then the Angels, that he might make us equal with the Angels, he
descended from his Throne of glory, that he might deliver us from ignominy.
Heb. 2 9. He being Lord of Lords, took upon him the shape of a servant, that
he might make us honorable: he willingly dispossessed himself of all his
Royalties, that he might eternally possess us with the everlasting treasure,
and full inheritance of his heavenly Kingdom. 2 Cor. 8.9. And who is he if
he could taste his infinite kindness, (but alas, who is able to sound the
bottomless depth, of this more then marvelous, yea miraculous love?) but
would willingly forsake his goodly earthly possessions, leave all his worldly
honors and dignities, subject every moment to decay and vanity, as soon gone
as they are gotten, disroabe the stout Bride of her gay and gorgious apparel,
and strip her naked from all her borrowed feathers; cloth himself with the
sackcloath of lowly humility, cut off his curled locks, and sprinkle his head
with ashes, that he might truly humble, prostrate, and debase himself; cast
down his high looks, curb his proud aspiring and untamed thoughts: for
Christ Jesus, his meek and merciful Savior, who came down from Heaven, out
of the bosom of his Father, being coeternall, and coequall with him in
everlasting glory, leaving the joyful society of blessed Angels above, to
converse here below amongst cursed men; nay, to abide and patiently to bear,
the curses and bitter taunts of blasphemous and fiery-minded men.

SECTION. II.
THis Lord Christ, was tyrannically tortured, and cruelly crucified for our,
yea rather for my sins, and has sweetened his bitter cross to all that
zealously love him, and faithfully believe in him. He died a most shameful,
cruel, and cursed death on the Cross, that he might deliver us from the curse
of the condemning and killing Law, and taken us out of the jaws of the
devouring Lion, redeemed us from Hell, from infernal fire, and everlasting
perdition.

He shed, yea powered out his most precious blood, spouting out the same from
all the veins of his pierced and martyred body, that with his precious and
sovereign Balm, he might salve all our deadly wounds, and save our dying
souls. He died, and by his death, killed death, that we might live eternally
in him, and by him.

And who may not amazedly admire, the incomparable love of so mild, so
merciful, and so potent a Savior? Who cannot, at least, who ought not, with
ravished affections to love (and like joyful Simeon, with both arms to
embrace) so magnificent, but for us sinful men, and for our sakes, made so
humble and lowly, and yet a most powerful Redeemer? The dulcet taste of whose
love, does far exceed the Honey, and the Hony-combe in sweetness.

And although the least drop of it, be sufficient to fill all, and every part
of an hungry soul, yet it has in it such a sauourie relish, and an appetite
procuring quality, that the more the desirous soul eats, the more it
coueteth, the more it feeds, the more eagerly it longs and thirsts after
it. Why should we not patiently suffer, and constantly endure whatsoever the
inueterate malice of the Devil can imagine against us, or the furious madness
of wicked men, (his wilful Ministers) can lay, or impose upon us, for Christ
Jesus his cause, for the honoring of his truly and honorable name, and for
our constant profession of a true Christian Faith? Christ passed through the
ignominy, shame, and contempt of the Cross, to supernall dignity, infinite
Majesty, and endless glory, and all power and authority was given unto him,
for the advancement of his everlasting dominion, both in heaven above, and in
earth beneath, by God his heavenly Father: all the Angels, Gods heavenly
Heralds, with joyful humility, melodious Harmony, and with continual laud
and thanksgiving, do worship and adore his incomprehensible,
exceeding-glorious, and eternal Majesty, and at the honorable name of Jesus,
let every knee be bowed of things in Heaven above, and things in the darkest
Caves of Hell below: Where is thy glory (oh Christian?) Where is thy
rejoicing? Where is thy boasting? not in Nobility, honor and riches, but in
the glorious name of thy crucified Lord, thy eternal God, and everlasting
Savior, and in the gracious, graceful, and sweet name of Christ, which is a
name above all names, far surpassing all Noble, honorable, and glorious
earthly titles, and the highest style of vvorldly Majesty. And whosoever is
blessed in this name, shall be truly blessed here upon earth, and afterward
shall be eternally happy in Heaven.

Let us glory, rejoice, and triumph in the blessed Name of our mighty Redeemer,
and give all honor, jurisdiction, dominion, and majesty, to our merciful
Savior, which has done great, marvelous, and admirable things in us, and
for us, exalt, extol, and magnify his glorious Name, together with me, and
let our tongues tuned with one Harmonicall concord, like Golden Trumpets, sound
forth his meritorious, immeasurable, still increasing and neuer-diminishing
praises, saying; we adore and worship thee, oh Christ, King of Israel, and
also of all the Nations, Prince, and Monarch of Kings, Lord of the Earth, GOD
of the Sabbath, the most powerful power of GOD omnipotent. We adore thee
being the precious price of our Redemption, the all-sufficient Sacrifice of our
peace, atonement, and peaceable reconciliation, which alone with the
inestimable, most pleasant, and fragrant sweetness of thy odoriferous savor,
have moved and induced the Father of eternity, which dwells and resideth in
the highest Heavens, to turn his eye of providence, and compassion toward
base, vile, and contemptible things upon earth, and have reconciled and
pacified him toward the sons of wrath, Hell, and damnation: to enter a new
covenant of grace with them, to forgive and forget all their rebellious
trespasses, and treacherous transgressions, and to extend the tender bowels of
his most desired and euer-vndeserued mercy toward them.

We joyfully proclaim, oh Christ, the worthiness of thy merit, the
multitude of thy mercies, and magnificence of thy commisseration, we sound and
echo forth; we record the sacred memory of thy eare-delighting and
heart-pleasing sweetness.

We clearly offer unto thee, oh Christ, the Sacrifice of everlasting praise
and hearty thanksgiving for the innumerable multitude, and immeasurable
magnitude of thy goodness, which thou have vouchsafed, showed, manifested,
and extended to us, as a wicked seed and graceless generation, sons of
wickedness, and heirs of hell and damnation.

SECTION. III.
When as yet, oh gracious Lord, we were thy cruel enemies, by our treasonable
practices, and monstrous ungrateful unkindness, daily kindling thy consuming
wrath against us, and when as devouring death exercised his rage, fury, and
dominion against all mortal flesh, and upon every miserable creature, to which
all the seed of Adam was obnoxious and subject, tainted with the leporous
infection of his first deadly transgression: thou did kindly remember the
most infallible word of thy infinite mercy, when we were ready to be drowned
and swallowed up (like proud hard-hearted Pharo) in the bloody Sea of our
swelling, and ouer-flowing iniquities. Thou did look from thy holy and
high habitation, and cast down the pitiful eye of thy saving, tender, and
mellow-hearted compassion upon this valley, streaming with rivers of tears,
showers of ceaselesse weeping, and deluge of our ouer-flowing misery. Thou
saw the heavy affliction, afflicted condition, imminent danger, nay the
instant destruction of thy distressed people, and touched with a true-delicious
sweetness of thy inward love, and bountiful charity, did think and ponder,
to medicine, heal and recure the deadly-diseased state and desperate condition
of thy forlorn and languishing people. Mat. 9.13. 1 Timothy 15. moved and incited
toward them with amiable thoughts of a new perpetual peace and eternal
redemption. And thou being the only and dearly beloved Son of God, the very
true God, coeternall and substantial to God the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
enhabiting the light, to which no man may approach, dazeling the eyes of every
mortal creature with the super-excellent lusture, and governing all things
with the creating word of thy omnipotent power; thou have not despised to
subject thy self to the close and noisome prison of our base estate, where
thou might taste, and also swallow up our misery, and so restore us to
glory. It was enough, oh sweet Savior, to demonstrate thy incomprehensible and
unspeakable mercy, it was too little, Oh thou mirror of mercy, to cool the
ardent heat of thy burning love.

It was not sufficient for thee, our gracious Redeemer, to appoint a Cherubin,
Seraphin, or one of the Angels to consummate and finish the work of our
salvation: thou thy self being king of kings, and God of eternal glory, have
vouchsafed to come to us, thy poor vassales, and captive creatures, by the
commandment of thy supernall Father. Psalm. 40.8.9. Acts. 2.23. Whose unlimited
mercy, bottomless bounty, immutable love, we now plentifully enjoy in thee,
and hereafter shall joyfully, fully, and everlastingly possess by thee.

Thou came unto us I say, not by changing the place, but by yielding thy
presence unto us by the flesh.

Thou came from the regal Throne of thy most high Glory, into an humble,
lowly, and abject Maiden, in her own eyes, although indeed she was most
honorable for her chaste virtues, and of the blood Royal by her Noble birth,
whose life was adorned with the precious Iemme of undefiled virginity; in
whose sacred womb, the sole, wonderful, and unspeakable power of the
Holy Ghost, caused and effected thy sanctified and blessed conception, and that
thou should so be borne in the very nature of true humanity, that the
occasion and manner of thy pure Nativity should neither violate the Majesty
of Divinity in thee, nor the integrity of undefiled Virginity in thy blessed
Virgine-Mother. Oh amiable! Oh admirable favor! Thou being God of immeasurable
glory, infinite power, and most magnificent Majesty, have not disdained, nor
despised to become a contemptible worm, and to put upon thee the ragged
garment of our frail and miserable nature. Thou being God of all, did
appear as a fellow-seruant of servants, unto all. It was too little to
satisfy thy loving affection, and to quench the thirsty desire of thy love
toward us, to be a kind Father unto us, and a gracious Lord, but thou have
vouchsafed to be our dear and well-beloved brother. What mind is not
ouer-ioyed with the delectable meditation of thy vvonderfull favor? What heart
is not ravished with the sweet sent of thy admirable humility? And what soul
can ever be satisfied with the sweetness of thy exceeding mercy? When all our
obedience toward thee, be it never so great, or our praises, be they never so
many, cannot parallel and equal the least jot of thy infinite goodness toward
us.

SECTION. IIII.
ANd thou Lord of all things, possessor of the highest heavens, and sole
Commander of the whole earth, which have no need of any thing, because the
fowls of the air fishes of the Sea, beasts of the field, are all at thy
prudent and provident disposition: yea, the greatest worldly Monarch, is but
thy poor slave and submissiue Vassal: at the beginning of thy birth, and
first entrance into this transitory world (the sweetest joys whereof are
soon sowred with sudden misery, and the chiefest treasures liable every
moment, to wavering mutability) thou did not abhor to taste the bitter
gall of pinching necessity, and to feel the irksome discommodities of
beggarly, base, and abject poverty: so ill was thy entertainment, so bad was
thy welcome, and vile was thy estimation amongst ungrateful men.

For as the thrise-holy, and Divine Scripture testifies, when thou were
borne, there was no room in the Inn to receive thee, nor any Cradle,
wherein they might repose thy tender body, but thou were thrust unkindly into
a noisome Stable, in stead of thy Princely Chamber, and laid in a homely
Manger, for thy bed of honor, wrapped in swatheling clouts, and fettered like
a prisoner, whose greatness cannot be contained of the heavens, and whose hand
in the palm of it does comprehend the whole earth. And thy blessed Mother did
borrow this homely Chamber and hard bed, of brute beasts, who were more
willing to show her a kind favor, then any hardhearted men, though he came
to be their servant.

Comfort your selves, cheer up your dismayed minds, and banish away all
pensive thoughts, whosoever have had your drink mingled with tears, and have
bin long fed with the bread of affliction, being scorned, disdained, rejected
of the proud and wealthy, because you have been pined and pinched with needy
poverty, when as Christ, who as the neuer-dried Fountain of everlasting
plenty and abundance, did willingly undergo, and patiently bear the heavy
burden of needy want and grievous necessity.

In the time or his blessed birth he did not take his rest in a sumptuous
Chamber, adorned with carved Wainscot, or furnished with gorgious and costly
hangings, neither was he found in the land of them which solace themselves with
variety of pleasant delights, and spend their days in continual sport and
pleasure.

Why do thou boast, oh thou vvanton rich man, vvhen-thou stretchest thy
self upon thy bed of Iuorie, painted with the choysest colors that may please
the eye, beautified with the rarest devices that Art can invent, and garnished
with the most delicate furniture that may breed wanton and carnal delight:
when as the King of Kings did rather choose a noisome Stable, then a Princely
Palace; a homely Manger, then a stately Cradle; rather hard straw to lay his
tender body upon, then a bed stuffed with Down, or soft feathers? Luke 2.7.8.

Why art thou then so proud that thou scornest to lie upon straw, with
contented humility? when as this tender Infant, who had all things under his
hand and jurisdiction, preferred hard straw before thy costly silks, and soft
feathers?

SECTION. V.
But this thy tender and weak infancy, oh Christ, was not safe from the
malice of thy furious foes, nor murdering swords of bloody persecutors, who
craftily complotted, greedily sought, and would have most grievously wrought,
thy cruel, bloody, and sudden death, so soon as thou beganst to draw thy
breath. For as yet thou were sucking the sweet breasts of thy loving Mother;
when as an heavenly Messenger appeared to Joseph in his sleep, saying: Arise,
and take the Child and his Mother, and fly into Aegipt, and tarry there
until I shall bring thee word: For it shall come to pass, that Herod shall
seek the Child to destroy him. Matthew. 2.13.14.15.

Since that time, oh sweet Jesus, thou beganst to taste of the bitter Cup of
humane misery, to be touched with sense of our sorrow. and patiently to bear
the heavy burden of our infirmities. For when bloody Herod had heard unwelcome
news of the birth of an other King dreading he should be forced to forgo his
royal dominions, goodly kingdoms, and golden Crown (for Tyrants dream
always of their downfall, at the surmised noise of any little rumor) he
quickly unsheathed his cruel Sword, to make a speedy end of thy beginning
days, and to cut asunder the slender thread of thy Infant life, played the
bloody Butcher, and made a most cruel slaughter of many thousand of innocent
Babes, sucking the nourishing breasts of their loving and lamentable Mothers,
Matthew. 2.16. so that he dyed the streets with the streams of their guiltles
blood, mingled with the tears of lamenting mothers, Mat. 2.18. thinking to
murder thee in this great slaughter of so many harmless sucklings.

Oh miraculous immanitie! monsterous murder! more then brutish, yea, hellish
Tyranny! And when thou had escaped the sting of this Tyrants malice, being
appointed to be transported into Aegipt, to be safe there, without the bounds
of his bloody mischief, and not without care of thy Father, and sorrow of thy
Mother, were delivered from storms of thy persecuted Infant-age: thou did
meekely give us an example of truth, worthy to be praised of us, and to be
seriously practiced by us: for thou did not sit in the counsel of idle
vanities, nor follow the vile and wild affections of unbridled desires, but
were found in the midst of the Doctors, propounding questions to them, and
attentively hearing their discourses, although in thy breast did ever flow a
continual Spring of infinite knowledge, being the Lord of all hidden sciences,
and the most perfect and absolute wisdom of God the eternal Father.

Also thou have showed us a perfect pattern of due obedience, to be truly
performed, and duly observed of Children toward their Parents, when thou
being the great commander of the whole World, and Supreme head in all causes,
and over all persons within thy boundless Dominions, did yet humbly obey the
commandment of thy parents, in performing the deeds of willing obedience
toward them, in whatsoever the duty of a Child might inioyne thee, or the
just commandment of thy earthly Parents impose upon thee: But when by the
course of Nature, thou came to the fullness of a stronger age, about to take
in hand things of greater weight, to be acted with greater might, thou did
come forth for the salvation of thy people, like a valiant and stately Giant,
to run the way of all our misery, and pass through the race of humane
calamity.

And that thou might make thy self like unto thy brethren in all things,
and in thy self make a resemblance of their depraved nature, thou as it were a
sinner, did go to thy Servant, baptizing sinners unto true repentance, thou,
oh innocent Lamb of God, did require to be Baptized. Mat. 3.13.14.15. who
ever were free from the least stain of iniquity, and never subject to any
little spot of our sinful infirmity, but having put on thee the fleshly
garment of our weak nature thou did still continue pure, clean, and
undefiled. And being baptized in the waters, thou do not sanctify thy self
with the waters, but do sanctify the waters by thee, that by them thou
might sanctify us.

SECTION. VI.
AFter thy Baptism by the spirit of invincible fortitude, thou did enter
into the solitary desert, Mat. 4.1. that by thy example thou might teach us,
to depart as it were, out of the World, when we give our selves to divine
Meditations, that worldly impediments being removed from our outward senses,
the zeal of our Spirits might the better be inflamed, our prayers have freer
passage, and the devotion of our willing hearts less hindered. Thou did
constantly endure, and patiently bear what discommodities soever the uncouth
wilderness might bring, or the bitterness of fasting for the space of forty
days and forty nights breed unto thee, Mat. 4.2. Thou did mildely suffer the
temptations and illusions of the Devil, and at last with thy holy word, did
put him to a shameful foil, and forced him like a coward to fly the field,
Matthew. 4.10.11. to make such bickerments more tolerable and easy unto us, and
to instruct us, that whenever Christian warriors shall manage this
double-edged sword aright, that their common enemy will soon be danted, take
himself to flight, and they always obtain a glorious conquest.

SECTION. VII.
AT length thou came to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, lifting up
the bright lamp of thy divine word, openly to give light to the world, which
was obscured with thick clouds of sinful darkness, that men seeing their
sins, might then sigh for their forepassed iniquities, and seek by speedy
and true repentance to save their souls, Matthew. 5.1.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc. And thou
also proclaiming the Kingdom of God, to all obeying the word, did confirm
the verity of thy infallible words, with many wondrous and miraculous deeds:
thou did plainly declare the virtue of thy divinity, and manifest the
incomprehensible essence of thy Godhead in all things, to those which were
diseased, and were affected and grievously afflicted with many infirmities,
Luke 5.12.18. Performing all things of thy free mercy, without any merits, to
all nations, that by thy gracious words, and merciful works, thou might
gain the Salvation of all, truly repenting for their sins, and seeking by thy
only mercy to save their souls. But their foolish heart, oh Lord, was
darkened, their reason infatuated, and their understanding blinded, they
maliciously despised, proudly contemned, and carelessly rejected thy blessed
words behind them, neither did they, Oh Lord, admire, no, not so much as regard
thy wondrous works, which by the Finger of thine own hand, thou had
powerfully wrought among them, except a few Noble Champions, which thou did
choose among the weak and abject things of the World, that by them thou might
batter down strong holds, and throw down high Towers, that thy invincible
power might appear in their weakness, and so the glory of thy Majesty might
shine the brighter. Neither were they only unthankful to thee, for thy
gracious benefits and great kindness, but they did very spightfully reproach
thee, oh Lord of Lords, and spit out the Gall of their malice against thee,
plotting in their Devilish minds, and performing with their desperate hands,
whatsoever their unbridled lust did command them. For thou doing the works of
God, which no other has done, how malignant were their words? How malicious
were their speeches? For they said in their mad mood and furious folly, This
man is not of God, he casts out Devils by the Prince of Devils, he has the
Devil, he seduceth the people, he is a Glutton and a Drinker of Wine, a
Friend of Publicanes and sinners, Matthew. 11.9. Why do thou weep (oh man) why
are thy thoughts perplexed, and the peace of thy mind disturbed, when thou
do feel the sting of venomous tongues, or endure the stormy tempest of
injurious words? Do thou not hear what monstrous slanders, bitter taunts,
and opprobrious speeches were belched out against the Lord thy God, only for
thy cause and thy sins, yet he did patiently digest the extreme bitterness
of their cruel malice, and did always seek by gentle mildness, and works
of mercy, to mollify their hard hearts, and to induce them to true repentance:
If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more will they
call them of his household? Mat. 10.25. Luke 11.15. But thou, oh righteous and
innocent Jesus, did patiently hear, and constantly sustain their
blasphemous words, spightfull derisions, and taunting speeches; although
oftentimes they were carried with such a violent stream of raging fury against
thee, that they assailed thee with stones, hating nothing so much as thy
blessed life, and hastening nothing so much as thy cursed death. And thou
becamest before them as a man which hears not all, and as one that is dumb,
having no word of reproof in thy mouth.

SECTION. VIII.
LAstly, they valued thy righteous and precious blood, but at thirty pieces of
silver, betrayed unto them by thy unkind Disciple, the son of Perdition;
greedily desiring with extreme hate, without any shadow of just cause, to
hasten thy cruel death.

It was not a strange thing, or a concealed secret excluded from the search of
thy knowledge, (because the most covert cogitations of every heart, are open
unto thee,) that one of thine own Disciples should prove disloyal,
treacherously conspire against thee, and like a Traitor, sell thee his
gracious Lord and kind Master, for a small piece of money. When as at the
Supper, where thou did wash thy Disciples feet, thou did not disdain to
handle, wash, and wipe with thy most holy hands, the cursed feet of that damned
Traitor, swift to shed blood, kneeling down before him, John, 13.4.5. Oh
wonderful example of humility! oh patience most worthy of continual
admiration! But why do thou walk with thy outstretched neck, oh earth and
ashes? Does Pride still lift thee up? Does fretting anger evermore molest thee?
Behold, and look upon the Lord Jesus, the mirror of Humility and Meekness,
the Creator of every Creature, the fearful Judge of the quick and the dead,
bowing his knees before the feet of a man, that should traitorously betray him
into the hands of his deadly Foes, who long thirsted for his innocent blood,
loathed his godly life, and could never quench the raging flame of their fury,
until they had acted the lamentable Tragedy of his most cruel death.

Learn therefore of him, because he is meek in mind, and lowly in heart,
debase thy high and lofty looks, and let the feeling sense of thy scornful
Pride, confound and cast down thy haughty thoughts, and blush at thy furious
madness, and sigh at the inward sight of thy impatient folly.

This also (oh loving Lord) was a plain argument of thy marvelous kindness,
and extraordinary favor, that thou would not publicly detect the
mischievous malice, and openly disclose the horrible Treason of thy graceless
Disciple, and odious Traitor, but did only in the assembly of his
brethren, very slightly admonish him to hasten his intented purpose, John
13.27. Nevertheless, neither the sweet streams of thy mercy could quench the
burning fire of his fury, nor the graces of thy Humility, stay the rage of his
madness: but he departing out of the house, labored diligently to bring his
wicked designement into act, which as yet lay covered in his treacherous heart,
John 13.30.

SECTION. IX.
HOW did thou fall from Heaven, oh cleere-shining Lucifer, which did
appear so bright at thy rising in the morning? Thou once were beautiful with
exceeding glory, placed in pleasant Paradise, where all things were abounding
which might breed delight, whose happy state did stand still at a stay, subject
to no contrary change, having the Citizens of Heaven for thy loving companions,
and pure Manna of the Divine Word for thy daily food: How art thou now tumbled
down, and consorted with the sons of darkness?

Why have thou refused sweet Honey, to feed on Gall, and wholesome food to cloy
thy stomach with stinking dung?

At that time, oh sweet Christ, thy Family was cleared, and thy Household
purged, when such a leaprous person, and deadly diseased creature, went out
into the world, from the company of the Angels society.

For then at last were the thirsty souls of that blessed company, plentifully
filled with sweet flowing streams of thy Divine Word, and with the most
pleasant liquor of thy true celestial Nectar, (which thou art always able,
and evermore willing to give unto thy faithful Servants,) when he was
worthily cast out from thy most holy and blessed Family, whom thou did know
to be unworthy, to taste one drop of that living water which quenches the
thirst of all sinful souls for ever: when thou of thy free love, do afford
them to drink of that blessed Fountain, be their thirst never so great, or
the people never so many, which resort to receive refreshing by it.

SECTION. X.
NOW when thou had given a new Commandment to thy loving Disciples, that
they should knit their hearts together, with the true union of perfect love,
John 13.34. and arm themselves with patience against the approaching day of
their fiery trial; and also had disposed the kingdom of thy heavenly Father
to thy faithful Brethren, thou cammest to the place with them, well known
unto covetous Judas, that Traitor, which did betray thee into the hands of the
cruel Jews, who were as greedy to buy, as he was covetous to sell thy
innocent and precious blood.

Yet thou did not audaciously object thy self unto sudden danger, or
desperately throw thy self into peril, but thou were willing to offer and lay
down thy own life, to deliver us poor condemned vassals from the heavy doom
of eternal death; knowing all things which should come upon thee, John 18.4.

Oh unsearchable profundity of thy infinite love! Oh glorious beams of thy
gracious mercy! For like a tenderhearted Father, thou had willingly cast
thy self into sudden danger, to have delivered thy Children from some
imminent peril: or if thou had adventured thy life, to have rescued thy
friends from threatened death, this without doubt had been a deed of true
natural affection, and excellent love. But that thou should of thine own
accord offer thy self to death, to save thy deadly enemies, and willingly shed
thy blood, to ransom thy mortal foes: This, oh sweet Savior, is a miracle of
superadmirable kindness, beyond the compass of all understanding.

SECTION. XI.
When thou were come to the place where wretched Judas had bargained to betray
thee into the hands of the wicked Jews, thou were not ashamed to confess the
heavy pangs which thou did sustain by thy approaching Passion, in the
audience of thy Brethren, which thou were willing to endure, not for thy own
desert, but by thy own desire, for our sakes, and our sins, saying; My Soul
is heavy, even unto death, Mat. 26.38. So ponderous was the burden of our
iniquities; so heavy was the weight of mine, yea of all our sins, laid upon thy
shoulders. And there bowing thy knees on the ground, and falling down with thy
face on the earth, thou did in thy bitter agony offer up thy humble
petition to God thy Father, saying: My Father, if it be possible, let this Cup
pass from me, Matthew. 26.39.

Indeed that Cup contained a deep draught to be taken of thee, for the health
of our languishing souls; more bitter then Colloquintida to the mouth, or Gall
in the maw.

And no doubt but the bloody sweat, which trickled down on the earth by drops
from thy most holy flesh, did plainly declare the sorrows of thy perplexed
mind, and the anguish of thy sorrowful Soul, Luke 22.44.

Oh powerful Lord Jesus, what means, or what is the cause of thy lamentable
supplication? Did thou not wholly of thine own accord offer up thy self,
for a Sacrifice to thy Father, and willingly shed thy blood, to pay the price
of our ransom?

Yes verily, oh gracious Lord, it was thy exceeding great love, and only
mercy, that did move thee so patiently to undergo the wrath of thy Father,
that thou might deliver us condemned sinners, from his just and heavy
displeasure, that by thy stripes we might be healed, and that by thy free and
voluntary death, we might be restored to a second and everlasting life.

But we think, that thou did willingly taste the bitterness of our
miseries, and in thy self express unto us a true passion of our weakness,
for the comfort and consolation of all thy feeling members, that no man might
despair, or let go the Anchor of steadfast Hope, when our weak flesh
faints, and our natural faculties fails; but yet the spirit is ready to
abide the painful pangs of any passion, and to suffer the conflicts of any
affliction whatsoever. Truly thou did express the natural weakness of the
flesh in thy self, by those tokens unto us, that we might the sooner be
provoked to embrace thee with more love, and gratefully to yield thee greater
thanks. Whereby also we are taught, that thou did truly bear our diseases,
and infirmities, and that thou have not run through the thorns of grievous
passions without the sense of painful afflictions. For that voice seems to
be the voice of the flesh, not of the Spirit, by that which thou have added,
The Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak: Mark 14.38. And thou
did openly declare, that the Spirit was willing to suffer the deadly pangs
of thy grievous passion, when thou did go forth of thine own accord, to
meet those bloody minded persons, conducted by their damnable General
traiterous Judas, in the night time, furnished with lanternes, torches, and
weapons, seeking without any cause, raging with malice to destroy thy
harmless life, and cruelly to shed thy innocent blood, and there did openly
discover thy self to their eyes, and offer up thy self to their bloody hands,
least they might think themselves beholding to their bloody guide, and that by
his crafty policy, thou had been suddenly and unwillingly apprehended.
For thou did not repel, or put back that cruel monster, coming to kiss
thy most holy mouth; but did gently put thy mouth, in which there was found
no guile, to his mouth abounding with venom, and filled with malice, who under
token of love, pretended nothing but deadly hate; and with a dissembling kiss,
to betray thee into the hands of those, who were ready armed to kill thee.

And although desperate Judas became his own hangman, Mat. 27.5. yet many do
follow his steps, and desperately run to their wilful and woeful
destruction. Oh innocent Lamb of GOD, how could thou endure that such a
ravenous Wolf should come near unto thee, that came so greedily to devour
thee?

What fellowship has light with darkness? What agreement have thou with
Beliall? But this, oh Lord, was a deed of thy gracious benignity, and an act
of thy exceeding bounty, that thou might show unto him all tokens of thine
accustomed favor, which might mollify the hardness of his wicked heart, and
quail the malice of his covetous mind.

For, thou not forgetful that once he was sorted among thy Friends, and had
tasted of the sweet fruit of thy former love, admitted into the holy society
of thy faithful Disciples, did kindly admonish him, saying, Friend,
wherefore come thou? Mat. 26.50. And thou would have smitten the guilty
conscience, and wounded the hardened heart of that odious dissembler and
damnable Traitor, with the horror of his hellish deed, and detestation of his
execrable fact, when thou spakest to him, saying: Judas, do thou betray the
Son of man with a kiss? Luke 22.48. And behold, the Philistines are upon
thee Sampson.

SECTION. XII.
IT did nothing mittigate the rage of their furious minds, nor stay the
audacious attempts of their bloody hands, when in the hour of thine
apprehension, thou did throw them flat on the ground with thy omnipotent
arm, and make them to fall backward with the breath of thy mouth: yet it was
not done to defend thy self from the edge of their malice, or to make an
escape out of their cruel hands, but that humane presumption might know, that
it could devise nothing, nor act any thing against thee, but whatsoever was
permitted by thee.

And who can restrain his eyes from showers of tears, and his heart from the
ouer-flowing waves of sorrow, when he hears how violently they were carried
against thee, and how furiously they laid their murdering hands upon thee; and
how quickly binding thy tender and innocent hands, they currishly haled thee, a
most meek Lamb, not once opening thy mouth against them, to bring thee (who
never had offended,) to a most bloody slaughter: As if thou had been
(most innocent and loving Jesus) a cruel Thief, a cursed Traitor, or a
bloody murderer. Their outrageous usage toward thee was so far out of
measure, and their mischievous deeds so far void of reason.

And then (oh Christ) thou did not cease to power down showers of mercy, and
to let the honey-deaw of thy abundant sweetness to distill upon the head of
thy cruel enemies, when thou did with mild words and gentle speeches,
calm the burning zeal of thy forward Disciple, who drew forth his sword, and
began to lay about him in the defense of his loving Master. Luke. 22. verse
49.50. For he had no sooner given a vvound, but thou did miraculously
heal the hurt. Luke. 22. verse. 51. vvilling him to put up his sword, keep
the peace, and make no resistance.

But such cursed fury had blinded their eyes, such stubborn grosnesse
ouer-clowded their understanding, and such stony hardness had ouer-growne
their hearts, that neither the Majesty of the miracle, nor mercy of the
benefit, could chase away the hellish vapors of their frantic fury, or
soften the extreme hardness of their hearts; that seeing their Bedlam folly,
they might have relented with pity.

SECTION. XIII.
THou were brought before the Highpriests, John 18.24. who maliced and hated
thy unblameable life, wickedly imagined, and cruelly sought thy bloody death.

When thou were churlishly examined, and falsely accused, thy modest reply was
void of bitterness, and thou did confess the truth with much humility and
mildness: yet they cried out in their raging madness, He speaks blasphemous
words; What need we stand upon further trial? He is worthy of a shameful
death.

Oh most loving Lord, how shamefully were thou handled, how despightfully were
thou scorned, how cruelly were thou abused of thine own people? They polluted
thy amiable face with their noisome spettle. Mat. 26.67. which the Angels do
always desire to behold; and which has filled the heavens with joy; and shall
be desired of the most rich and Noble of the people: And which not long before,
shined more bright then the Sun, and appeared most beautiful in glory, they
did beat, and strike it with their sacriligious hands. They covered it with a
veil, to floute and deride thee, and did cruelly buffet thee with their fists,
being Lord of every creature, like a base and contemptible servant. Yea, they
delivered thee to be swallowed up, and devoured of the uncircumcised.

SECTION. XIIII.
FOr after they had railed upon thee with reuiling words, and buffeted thee
with store of blows, they brought thee bound like a Thief before the face of
Pilate, Mark. 15.1. requiring in their frantic fit, and heat of their fury,
that he would pronounce sentence of death against thee. And they would never
cease their clamorous voices, neither were their outrageous outcries appeased,
before thou were condemned to suffer a most cruel and cursed death of the
Cross, which never knew sin, or thought any evil.

And although that wicked Judge had certain knowledge, and his own
conscience did testify unto him that thou were falsely accused, brought like
an innocent Lamb to the slaughter, and that all these things were forged of
envy against thee, when those hard-hearted Jews earnestly desired, that a
Murderer might be given them, and have pardon for his bloody offense, and that
thou might unjustly be condemned, to suffer a most cruel death, preferring
a devouring Wolf, before an innocent Lamb, and dirty dross before pure gold:
yet his words toward thee were without any mildness, and his deeds quite
without mercy, filling thy soul with gall and bitterness, when as he could
find no cause, or ferrit out any occasion, whereby he might justly reprove
thee. Luke 23.14.

He received thee at their hands, after they had tauntingly flouted, bitterly
derided, and scornefully disgraced thee, and commanded thee to stand in the
midst of those malicious scoffers, who had used thee for a fool, to cause
their mirth, and to increase thy sorrow. Neither did he spare to tear thy
undefiled flesh with most bitter blows; multiplying stripes upon stripes with
excessive cruelty, and bleeding wounds upon wounds, without any humane pity.
Matthew. 26.67. Oh thou beloved Son of my God! what had thou committed
worthy of such barbarous immanitie? What had thou done worthy of such
woeful and bitter confusion? In very deed nothing at all. I wretched man, I
alone a most horrible sinner, have been the sole cause of all thy painful
sufferings: my grievous sins have hardened their hearts, and armed their
bloody hands against thee. I oh Lord, have eaten a sower Grape, and thy teeth
are set on edge; because then thou did make satisfaction when thou had
done no injury, and paid my infinite debt with thy most innocent death. But
all these injurious deeds, proceeding from malicious hate, and acted with
cruel hands, could not satisfy the insatiable impiety of the perfidious and
unfaithful Jews, against thee most righteous and innocent Jesus; who did
never cease to do them good, but evermore healed their incurable diseases:
making the lame to walk, the blind to see, the dumb to speak, and the deaf
to hear.

Thou did cleanse loathsome Leapers, cure dead Palsies, and raise from death
to life. Mat. 4.24. John. 7.23. Yet for all thy pains, kind benefits, and
store of good works, some for fear of their imperious Rulers, durst not, and
the greatest sort would not scarce afford thee a good word; For they that of
late sung joyfully, Hosanna, Hosanna, calling thee happy and blessed: soon
changed their note, and blasphemously termed thee Beelzebub, Prince of Devils.

SECTION. XV.
ANd lastly, thou were hurried and haled with the murtherous hands of the
bloody uncircumcised Soldiers, to die on the Cross, a most shameful,
cruel, cursed death.

But it was not enough for those unbelieving miscreants, and bloody wretches,
to torment thee without any pity, and to nail thee to the Cross with most
hateful cruelty, but before hand they vexed, and filled thy heavy soul with
blasphemous speeches, outrageous raylings, and despightfull disgraces.

For what says the Scripture concerning them? And they gathered about him the
whole Band: And they stripped him, and put upon him a purple garment, and a
roabe of scarlet, in their mad merriment, to flout, deride, and scoff him.

And platting a crown of Thorns, they put it upon his head, in steed of a
golden Diadem, that being pressed down with their buffetting hands, might
enter the flesh, and make the veins to spout out blood.

And then they put a feeble Reed in his right hand, (in stead of his royal
Scepter) and bowing their knees before him, saying: GOD save the King of the
Jews. And they did buffet him, and spetting upon him, took a Reed and smote
him on the head. And when they had mocked him, they put his own raiment upon
him, and led him away to crucify him, bearing his own Cross. And they
brought him to a place named Golgotha, and they gave him Wine tempered with
Myrrh, and mingled with Gall. And when he had tasted of it, he would not
drink. Then they crucified him, and also two Thieves with him, one on the
right hand, and another on the left, and Jesus in the middle. But Jesus said,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Afterward Jesus knowing
that all things were finished, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, he
said, I thirst: And one of them running, took a sponge, and filled it with
Vinegar, and put it on a Reed, and they gave it him to drink. When he had
received the Vinegar, he said, It is finished. And crying with a loud voice,
he said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. And bowing his head, he
gave up the ghost. Then one of the hard-harted Soldiers with a Spear pierced
his side, and forthwith there came out blood and water, for the redemption of
our salvation: John. 19. Christaline water, to wash away the stains of our
sins, and pure blood, to nourish our souls.

Awake now my soul, rise out of the dust, stir up all thy faculties, and
behold this memorable man in the Christall-Looking-glasse, of the Evangelical
word, as it were present before thee.

Consider (oh my soul) who he is, which comes, having the Image of a King,
and nevertheless is filled with the scornful reproaches of a most base and
contemptible servant: He goes with a Crown, but that Crown of his is his
cruel torment, and wounds his beautiful and blessed head with a thousand
sharpe-pointed prickles.

He is clothed with a royal roabe of purple, but is rather flouted and
despised, then honored by it.

He bears a Scepter in his hand, but his blessed head is cruelly smitten
with it. They adore him, bending their knees to the ground, and with loud
voices call him King, but they do disdainfully deride him, and proudly
contemn him, with their counterfeit worship, for by and by they spet upon his
amiable face, buffet his lovely cheeks with their merciless hands, and load
his neck with their cruel blows.

Behold (oh my soul) with what extreme cruelty, immeasurable impiety, and
barbarous inhumanity, that most holy and sacred person is vexed, tormented, and
despised of that irreligious people, who in all their odious actions, belched
out the Gall of most bitter malice against him with their venomous mouths: and
inflicted the most grievous torture of their damnable mischief upon him, with
their bloud-thirstie hands. He seems to faint, and his legs to fail him
under the burden of his heavy Cross, which they had unmercifully without any
compassion imposed upon him, while he bears the burden of thy shame, and is
pressed down, with the weight of thy ignominious reproaches.

Being brought to the place of execution, they gave him Myrrh, mingled with
Gall to drink, in stead of a comfortable Cordial, he is lifted upon the
Cross, and says: Father forgive them, because they know not what they do.
Luke 23.34.

SECTION. XVI.
What admirable spectacle of rare mildness, does he afford to our eyes? with
what courageous magnanimity does he animate our hearts? which in all the
horror of his intolerable torments, and in the midst of his painful
Agonies, and most bitter afflictions, did not open his mouth to utter forth so
much as one word, either to complain against them for their beastly cruelty,
to speak in his own defense, justifying his innocence, or to use any
bitterness of commination, or malediction against those cursed Dogs, for all
their monstrous and brutish immanitie?

But lastly, he powers forth such sweet words of blessed Benediction, for the
good of his deadly and devilish foes, as were never heard since time had a
beginning, or the world a foundation.

What may be conceived, more mild then this blessed Martyr, and our loving
Savior, the true mirror of vvonderfull meekness? Did thou ever see, oh my
soul, a more rare example of excellent bounty? Or was there ever presented
before thine eyes a more lively Image of exceeding benignity? And this may
teach thee to bear thy Cross with patience, and to follow the steps of
Christ with constant perseverance, to forgive and pray for our bloody
persecutors. For God will reject our petitions, if they be sowred with the
Leven of maliciousness, and our sacrifices of thanksgiving, can send up no
sweet smelling savor into his nosthrils, if we dare approach near his holy
Sanctuary with hearts affected with hate, or minds infected with malice.

As yet, oh my soul, turn hither thine eyes, and more steadfastly behold him,
how worthy he appears of wonderful admiration, and most tender compassion.
Behold him naked, beaten, bruised, and mangled with stripes, nailed to the
Cross with iron nails, most shamefully between two Thieves, having Vinegar
given him to drink without any compassion, in the extreme fits of his bitter
Passion on the Cross. Oh hard-harted wretches, to give such a sour Potion, to
so mild a Patient!

SECTION. XVII.
Look upon him, my weeping soul, being vvounded after his death with a
sharpe-pointed spear, thrust into his side, by the hand of a violent Soldier,
John. 19.33. View him, pouring out plentiful streams of blood, gushing out
from the five wounds of his tender hands, feet, and side, pitifully vvounded,
and cruelly pierced: so that in thy serious Meditation, thou may be touched
to the quick, with a patheticall compunction, and bathe his bleeding wounds
with the streaming tears of thy true and zealous repentance.

Weep forth showers of tears, and melt thou also my soul with the fire of
compassion, and sigh with hearty contrition, and make deep wounds in thy self
with a sharp point of sorrowful compunction, when thou do meditate of the
bitter Passion of this lovely and worthy person, whom thou see afflicted
with such terrible torments, and vvounded from the crown of the head to the
sole of his feet, that with the plentiful streams of his most precious
blood, he might wash away the multitude of thy sins. And now my perplexed
soul, thou have seen the sorrows, distresses, weakness, and misery of thy
loving Savior, as he was the seed of the Woman, ordained to break the head
of the Serpent: who clothed with the base garments of our frail humanity, was
subject to all our infirmities, (the infection of our sins only excepted)
and seeing him languishing on the Cross, tormented, flouted, scorned, and
villainously handled by the barbarous multitude, thou have had cause to groan,
sigh, and sob, moved with a sensible pity, and touched with a feeling and
woeful compassion.

SECTION. XVIII.
But now direct thine eyes from his lamentable misery, and seriously
contemplate the mighty power of his magnificent Majesty, and then all thy
senses will be amazed with sudden fear, and thy self astonished with
wonderful admiration.

For what says the Scripture? Now from the sixth hour was there darkness over
all the land, until the ninth. And the Sun was darkened. And the veil of
the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, and the earth did
quake, and the stones were cloven. And the graves did open themselves, and many
bodies of the Saints, which slept, arose. Matthew. 27.

What manner of man is he? what kind of Person? Because Heaven and Earth has
such a Sympathy of his Passion: The Sun mourning with his darkness, for
his woeful misery, and denying the light of his beams to the cruel
tormentors, at the execution of their bloody Tyranny.

How powerful? how potent? how available was his death? which opened the
Graves, raised and revived the dead conquering Sun, death, hell, and the
devil? Oh work of more then admirable wonder! Oh honorable conquest and
glorious victory! For in the thickest clouds of his darkest misery, there
appeared clear beams of his brightest Majesty.

Know my soul, know thou my soul, this is the Lord our God, Jesus Christ thy
Savior, the only begotten Son of God, Christ perfect God, and perfect man.
true God true man, who alone under the Sun was found pure from the spots
of sin, and only clear from the stains of iniquity, among the Sons of
men. And behold how he is sorted in the damnable rank of the wicked, excluded
like a loathsome Leaper from the fruition of common society, reputed as an
abject, and one of the worst among the basest people; cast out from the womb
of the unhappy Sinagogue his Mother, like an abortiue, proiected out of the
womb of a woman. How is he that was so beautiful above the Sons of men,
become so deformed and uncomely to the eyes of them that behold him? How are
the Ornaments of his amiable feature diminished? How is his royal dignity
disgraced? How is he become a subject of nothing else but of sorrow and
calamity, and a woeful object of lamentation and pity? He is wounded for our
iniquities, he is bruised for our wicked offenses, and is made an acceptable
Sacrifice of a most sweet smelling savor in thy sight, oh God of eternal
glory; that thou might auert thy indignation from us, and reuerse the
sentence of thy heavy displeasure gone out against us, and make us Co-heires
with him for ever, in his heavenly habitation.

Look down, oh Lord, holy Father, from thy holy Sanctuary, and from the high
Throne of thy infinite Majesty, and behold this holy Sacrifice, which our
great high Priest does offer unto thee, thy holy Child, the Lord Jesus, for
the sins of his brethren, and let thy wrath be appeased, which our iniquities
have most justly procured against us, removing far out of thy sight, the
multitude of our innumerable transgressions.

And let his innocent death pay the full sum of our heavy debt. Behold the
voice of the blood of our Jesus, does cry unto thee from the Cross, begging
mercy at thy hands for our many misdeeds, pardon for all our heinous sins, and
speaking better things then the blood of Abell. What means this, Oh Lord?
Does he still hang naked and nailed on the Cross? Are his veins newly lanced,
will his bleeding wounds never be stanched? Shall his side remain evermore
pierced, and his skin always dyed with blood? Did not his Disciples behold
him with their eyes, ascending above the Clouds, really and royally, into the
Mansion of eternal glory, and now has he not his residence in Heaven, sitting
at the right hand of thy Omnipotent Majesty, leading Captivity Captive, and
giving gifts unto men? We know oh Lord, and are certainly assured, that our
blessed Savior rules and reigns with thee in everlasting glory, and yet he
remains fixed on the Cross, his wounds still streaming out precious blood,
to wash away our sinful blots, All times are present with God.
because his painful passion, with thee is evermore in action, and things
long past are always present before thee.

And we daily see him crucified, paying the price of our Redemption, in our
spiritual contemplation and divine Meditations. Know thou, oh heavenly and
loving Father, the Coat of thy true Son Joseph. Alas, a most cruel Beast
devoured him, and has trodden his Garment under feet in his fury, and has
stained all the beauty, and disgraced all the glory of it, with spots of
gore-bloud.

Behold, that ravenous beast has left five pitiful rents in it. This, oh
Lord, is the Garment which thy innocent Child left in the hand of the
Aegiptian Harlot, choosing rather to loose his Cloak, then to forgo the
precious Jewel of his unspotted Chastity, by polluting his undefiled body with
filthy adultery, choosing rather being spoiled of garment of the flesh, to
descend into the prison of death, then to obey that adulterous voice, by which
it was very well said, All these things I will give thee, if thou will fall
down and worship me, Mat. 4.9. As Joseph did willingly forgo his cloak when
he was allured to have committed folly with his adulterous Mistress. And now
omnipotent Lord, and gracious Father, we know that thy Son lives and reigns
over all the land of Egypt, and in every place of thy universal Monarchy, for
he is brought out of the prison of death and hell, into thy glorious Kingdom,
crowned with the Emperial crown of eternal immortality, and having changed
his Garment of the flesh, immortality flourishes for ever, being received of
thee with exceeding glory. For he has subdued and conquered the kingdom of
Pharo, and with his own noble valor, with an honorable triumph has entered
the heavens. And behold, he being crowned with glory and honor, sits at the
right hand of thy Majesty, who being our Advocate, makes continual
intercession for us, that we being the children of wrath, and disobedience by
Nature, may be reconciled unto thee for ever, by the exceeding riches of thy
grace: For he is flesh, and he is our brother. Look, oh Lord, upon the
amiable face of thy sweet Christ, which became obedient unto thee, even unto
death, that thou being well pleased in beholding him, may send down the
comfortable dew of thy mercy upon us: neither let his scarres depart for ever
out of thy sight, that thou may remember what a great satisfaction thou have
received of him for our sins. I wish it might please thee to balance the
sins, wherewith we have deserved thy wrath and indignation, together with
the calamity and sorrow, which thy innocent Son has suffered for us.
Certainly the weight of his heavy misery, will more then counterpoyse the
weight of all our iniquities, and it has rather deserved, that thou should
rain down the sweet shewers of thy mercy upon us, then that our sins have
demerited to kindle the fire of thy devouring wrath against us, that we
should utterly be deprived of thy wonted clemency, which should slake the fury
of thine incensed ire, and put out the flame of thy burning indignation.

But; oh gracious and merciful Father, let every tongue proclaim immortal
thanks unto thee, and sound forth aloud thine eternal praises; for the
exceeding largeness of thine immeasurable bounty, which have not spared thine
only Son, which was as dear, and near as thine own heart unto thee, but
have delivered him up unto death for us all, that we might have him as a
faithful Advocate, and loving Mediator before thee in Heaven.

And to thee, oh Lord Jesus, a most courageous and constant Lover, and my
gracious Redeemer, what thanks be they never so many, can I return, or what
praises, be they never so great, may I utter, which might counteruaile the
least jot of thy worthy merit? when as I am but a base creature, made of dust,
and shaped out of the clay, whose breath is in my Nosthrils, and I subject
every moment to forgo it, (although I commonly forget it) and to return
again into the womb of the Earth, from whence I was taken.

SECTION. XIX.
FOR what, oh sweet Savior should thou have done, which thou have not
willingly done, to finish the great work of my salvation? Thou have diued and
cast thy self over head and ears into the troublesome Ocean of thy stormy
Passions, that thou might draw me wholly out alive, from those perilous
Waters, when the waves have entered even into thy Soul? For thou did
willingly subject thy self to the pains of Death, that thou might restore
my soul unto me, which I had so wilfully lost, Luke 1.71.

And now behold, I am obliged unto thee by a double debt, because thou have
twice given me my soul, once by Creation, and once by Redemption: what have
I, that I may more justly give thee then my soul? But for thy precious soul,
vexed, perplexed, and troubled with so many, and such heavy tribulations, I
find not what recompense man can be able to render unto thee, in any sort to
gratify the worthiness of thy desert. For if I should be able to give thee
Heaven and Earth, and all their beautiful furniture, and the glorious
ornaments of them, I could in no wise attain the measure, or discharge the
infinite sum of such an everlasting debt: But that I may render both that which
I owe, and also that which is possible for me, is a matter wholly belonging to
thy liberal bounty, and must only flow from the sweet fountain of thy
beneficial goodness.

Thou art to be loved, oh Lord, with all my heart, with all my strength, I
must tread in thy path, and follow thy steps, which have endured all the
extreamities of thy bitter Passions, with exceeding patience, and being Lord of
life, have of thine own accord, vouchsafed to yield thy self unto death, to
redeem me, and all faithful repentant sinners, to the joys of eternal
life. And how shall that thing be effected and wrought to me, but only and
wholly by thee, through thy mighty power, which is able to work all things in
Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath?

Let my Soul cleave unto thee, let it be united unto thee, with the bond of
everlasting love, because all the virtue and faculties of it depend only upon
thee, and because it must needs sink into a bottomless pit of endless misery,
if it be but a moment debarred from thy loving mercy.

And now, oh Lord, my gracious Redeemer, I worship thee as true God, I trust in
thee, I hope in thee, I covet and long to approach so near unto thee, as the
feeble wings of my mounting desires will carry me; Let thy strong hand support
my weakness: Let the rich treasure of thy mercy supply the wants of mine
infirmity. Let the greatness of thine unsearchable goodness never depart out
of my remembrance. Let a memorial of thy bitter passion, by which thou have
wrought mine everlasting Salvation, be perfectly written within the palms of
my hands, so that mine eyes may still be viewing it: and let it be deeply
engraven in my heart, that mine inward thoughts and cogitations may evermore be
meditating and musing upon it.

Let thy Crown of Thorns, thy red bloody nails, thy pierced side, thy
grievous vvounds, thy precious blood, thy death and burial, be evermore
presented before the eyes of mine understanding, that I may water my Couch,
and make my bed to swim with tears of true sorrowful repentance, that I
may duly and truly bewail the multitude of my heinous sins, which have
been like so many Iron-nayles, to enter through thy harmless hands and
innocent feet, and like so many sharp Spears, to pierce thy blessed side, to
make thy wounded heart send forth plentiful streams of thy dear and precious
blood.

Lastly, let the fresh remembrance of thy most glorious and victorious
Resurrection, and the blessed memory of thy triumphant Ascension, comfort the
fainting Spirits of my drooping soul, and with a sweet taste of joy, mittigate
the sorrows of my perplexed mind. For in all these, the sweet odor of life
does ascend up into my nosthrils. Raise thou, (oh Lord) my spirit, with their
reviving odor, from the death of sin, and out of the Grave of perpetual
darkness.

Touch my heart, oh Christ, that I may touch thee: yea, although it be but the
hemme of thy Garment, that Virtue may come out of thee, Matthew. 14.32. Mark
6.56. Which may keep me from the snares of Satan, and comfort me in the hour
of tribulation, so that the yoke of thy commandments may be made easy unto
me, and the burden of the Cross, which thou command me to carry after
thee may be light to my soul.

What am I a silly worm? What is my strength? What are mine united forces, to
sustain so heavy a burden of worldly miseries, with such an invincible mind,
and peaceable patience as thou have commanded? How can I sail in this
troublesome Ocean, but I must needs run against the rocks of woeful
Desperation, unless thou be my Pilot, and guide my stern?

It is fond to put any confidence in men; It is vain to put any trust in
Princes. For although thou have called them Gods, to teach them how high thou
have exalted them, (and they indeed are truly honorable, that remember thee to
be the author of their exaltion) yet by and by thou have given them a cooling
Card, to quail and qualify their haughty pride, telling them plainly, that
for all that, they shall die like men, and return, and be turned into dust, as
well as the meanest of the people.

SECTION. XX.
ARE my feet (oh Christ) like unto the feet of a swift Heart, that I should be
able to follow thee, so swift a runner, through the thorns and pricking Bushes
of thy painful Passion? Do I not walk upon the Water, always ready to
sincke with fearful Peter, unless thou put forth thy powerful hand to
succor me? Mat. 14.29.31. But hear my voice (oh thou Son of David) my
merciful Savior, infuse the precious Quintessence of thy celestial Graces
into my bosom, and then lay thy sweet Cross upon thy servant, which is the
Tree of Life, to them which apprehend it, then (as I hope) I shall run
forward cheerfully, and I shall carry that Cross after thee with great
willingness, which thy cruel enemies did maliciously impose upon thee.

Lay that most hard Cross (I say) upon my shoulders, whose breadth is
Chastity, whose length is Eternity, whose height is Omnipotency, whose depth is
unsearchable Wisdom. Nail my hands and my feet unto it, and make thy
servant, oh LORD, in all things conformable to thy Passion.

Grant me (oh Lord) to abstain from the works of the flesh, which thou
hate, and to do righteousness, which thou love, and in both to seek thy
glory. Nail my left hand with the nail of Temperancie, and my right hand with
the nail of Justice, upon that high Cross.

Grant my mind continually to meditate on thy holy Law, and to cast all my
cogitations upon thee; and fasten my right foot to the same tree of life, with
the nail of wisdom. Grant that the unhappy happiness of this life, sliding
away every moment, may not allure me like an enticing Harlot, to yield to the
wanton inducements of carnal sensuality, and to weaken his vigor, by the
intemperate abuses of unlawful pleasures. Neither let pyning cares, pensive
thoughts, and sudden unhappy chances trouble the peace of it, or procure any
turbulent motions: but let my Spirit, as well in the Sunneshine days of calm
prosperity, as in the blustering weather of stormy adversity, be fastened to
thy Cross with the nails of prudent moderation, and Christian fortitude, that
neither in prosperity I may soar too high, with the wings of aspiring pride,
nor in the adversity be depressed too low, with the weight of dispairefull
care: But that there may appear some similitude of the pricking thorns, which
pearcing the veins of thy head, made a passage for thy precious blood, to
run down to the skirts of thy clothing; grant I pray thee, that my mind
may be so deeply wounded, with the forcible compunction of healthful
repentance, that mine eyes may shewre down plenty of tears, to wash away the
spots of my defiled Conscience: So mollify the hardenesse of my heart, that it
may be pliaable to receive the impression of tender pity, so that it may
still have a feeling compassion of other men's misery.

Let an earnest zeal, to emulate and imitate that which is righteous before
thee, so prick forward my mind, that I may always place thy perfect Law
before mine eyes, and walk in the way of thy Commandments; and that in the
extremest fits of my greatest sorrow, I may turn unto thee for my consolation
and comfort; and that dispayring of my own merit, I may be relieved by thy
Mercy.

I am well pleased, that thou put a Sponge by a Reed to my mouth, and that
thou give sour Vinegar to my taste. It likes me, that thou should teach my
reason by thy holy Word, that the glorious pride of the World, is nothing else
but an empty Sponge, which appears more in show then it is in substance, and
that the sweetest taste of it, is more sour then vinegar, which exceeds in
sharpness, and all the concupiscence of it, more bitter then gall or
worme-wood.

Even so, oh heavenly Father, let the cup of Babylon be bitter unto me, let not
the pleasant color of the wine allure me to taste of that poisoned liquor,
neither let the deceitful sweetness of it overcome my understanding, nor drown
my reason, as it has done theirs, which think darkness to be light, and light
to be darkness, bitter to be sweet, and sweet to be bitter. I dare not drink
of the wine tempered with Mirrhe, and mixed with gall, because thou would
not drink of it, Mark. 15.23. For thereby appeared the bitterness of the envy
and malice which thy furious Foes did bear against thee, who would afforde
thee no humane pity in thy greatest extreamitie, no not so much as to give
thee a cup of sweet water. Fashion thy servant, oh Lord, like unto thy
quickening death, that according to the flesh I may die daily, crucifying my
carnal lusts, always loathing the thing that is evil, and that according to
the Spirit, I may daily be revived, embracing and loving the thing that is
righteous and good. And that I may rejoice to carry in me the perfect Image of
thee my Lord and crucified Savior, express also a similitude of that in me,
which the insatiable cruelty of the evil ones acted against thee, after thy
cursed and yet most blessed death: Let thy lively and powerful Word pierce
into my side, and wound my heart: For thy word, oh Lord, will sooner enter then
a double-edged sword, and penetrate deeper then the sharpest spear, even to
the division of my soul, and the marrow enclosed in my bones, that in steed of
blood and water, there may issue forth continual streams of love, toward
thee and thy brethren. So that as thou have not spared to shed thy heart blood
for me, I may always be willing to express my gratuitie toward thee.

Lastly, wrap my Spirit in the pure linen cloth of thy righteous garment, in
which I may safely rest, coming out, and going into the place of thy holy
Tabernacle, and wherewith thou may hide me until thine anger be appeased,
and thy heavy displeasure removed. But the third day, after the day of labor
and punishment, early in the dawning of the Sabbath day, raise me
everlastingly amongst thy children, that in my flesh I may see thy brightness,
and be filled with the joy of thy countenance.

SECTION. XXI.
OH my Savior and my God, let the time come I pray thee, let that blessed time
come, wherein I may see that with my inward eyes, which now I believe by faith,
which now I enjoy by hope, and apprehend a far off.

And that I may embrace that with mine arms, and kiss that with my joyful
lips, which I now long to have, with such thirsty desires, as will never be
satisfied, until they be wholly possessed of it, and that I be swallowed up in
the deep Sea of thine infinite goodness, oh my Savior and my God. But praise
thou, oh my Soul, my God my Savior, and magnify his Name. For it is holy,
replenished with store of most holy delights, whose quantity is stinted with
no measure, nor quality subject to any mutability.

Oh how good, how sweet art thou, Lord Jesus, to the soul that seeks thee?
Oh Jesus, the Redeemer of those which were lost, the Savior of those which are
redeemed, the hope of the banished, the strength of those that are troubled,
the liberty of a Spirit afflicted with bondage, the comfortable solace, and
sweet refreshing of a sorrowful Soul, which sheddeth tears, and sends
forth sweat, while it runs after thee; the Crown of the Tryumphing, the
only reward and joy of all celestial Citizens, the most plentiful Fountain
of all Graces, the glorious Son of the highest God, and also the highest God,
Roman. 3.25. Matthew. 9.12. Zach. 13.1. Psalm. 16.5. John 10.7.9. Let all things
praise thee, which are in Heaven above, and which are in Earth beneath. Thou
art great, and thy name is wonderful. Oh exceeding glory of the high God, and
most pure brightness of eternal light; oh life quickening every life; oh
light illuminating every light, and preserving them in eternal brightness. A
thousand thousands of glistering lights are before the Throne of thy Divinity
for ever.

Oh eternal and inaccessible substance, the most clear and sweet stream of a
Fountain hidden from the eyes of all mortal Creatures, whose water is without
beginning, profunditie without any bottom, depth without any end, amplitude
unsearchable, purity incorruptible. The heart of the highest God has sent thee
out from his bottomless deepenesse; life has sent forth life, light has sent
forth light, the Eternal has sent forth the Eternal, the incomprehensible
has sent forth the incomprehensible, and coequall to himself in all things;
all of us receive from thy fullness. For thou a most plentiful Fountain,
do send out from thy Treasures, a precious River of every good thing of thy
seauen-folde Graces; with whose pleasant sweetness thou do vouchsafe to
sweeten the saltness of the salt Sea of our infirmities. A river of the oil
of gladness, a river of pure Wine, a river of fiery courage. The holy spirit,
the comforter, is poured forth from thee and the Father into the World, equal
to both, filling all things, containing all things, the Spirit proceeding from
thee, proceeding from the Father; one Spirit proceeding from both, uniting
both; to wit, the inseperable connection; the glewe of perfect Union; the Cyment
that can never be dissolved; the everlasting knot of eternal conjunction of
both; and peace passing all understanding.

This is the flood, oh Lord, of abounding and exceeding pleasure, wherewith
thou do water continually that pleasant, and glorious City Jerusalem, which
is above, so that the furrows thereof are filled with the streams of eternal
delight: Where the bright and glistering Organs sound out sweet songs of
continual rejoicing, whose melody exceeds in sweetness, never cease, but
has an everlasting continuance. With the sweet drops of this pleasant river,
the thirsty jaws of thy banished people, oh Lord, do wait continually to be
refreshed by thee. Suffer, oh Lord, the whelps to drink up the drops that
fall from the Table of their Masters.

Let the Heavens send down from above, the comfortable deaw, and let the
clouds pour forth a gracious rain, oh Lord, of that righteous Spirit, which
thou did cause to stream down upon the famous first fruits of thy people;
an evident demonstration of our future tryumphing.

With the heavenly distillation of those fiery drops, we pray thee, oh Lord,
that thou will vouchsafe to purge, renew, illuminate, inflame, to make joyful,
confirm and unite the hearts of them which believe in thee, that they may be
one, savor one thing, require, and apprehend one thing, with one mind, that
they may see and laud thee the GOD of Gods in Sion. Glory, thanksgiving,
honor, and dominion be ascribed to the inseparable Trinity, now and for ever,
AMEN.

Daemona non armis, sed morte subegit Jesus.
The Authors deprecation, or Petition, for himself.
Deliver me from mine enemies, oh my God, and from them which hate me;
because of their multitude I dread them, and because of their might I am too
weak to encounter them. And I, which even until this day have lived against
my self, will even now begin, through thy grace, to live to my self.

For we ought to live so here in this World, that when the body shall be
devoured of the Worms in the grave, the soul may rejoice with the Saints in
Heaven. We ought to seek after the heavenly Jerusalem.
The Spirit is to be directed toward that place to which it shall go, and
we ought to make have thither, where we may always live, and never stand any
more in fear of our love.

If we so dearly love and highly esteem this sliding, fickle, and frail
life, in which we live with toil and labor, and yet by eating, drinking,
and sleeping, can scant satisfy the necessities of the flesh, and supply her
daily wants, we ought far dearer to esteem and fervently to desire, to
attain to eternal life in the Haven of rest, where we shall sustain no
labor, where is always the chiefest pleasure, greatest happiness, happy
liberty, and endless blessedness; where men shall be like unto the Angels of
God, and the righteous shine like the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.
How wonderfully and gloriously do thou think, that the souls of the just
shall excel in brightness, when as the light of their bodies shall equal the
splendor of the Sun, when as his golden beams do shine clearest?

There shall be no sadness, no pensiveness, no pain, no fear: there shall
be no labor, no death: but perpetual health dwells there, and abides for
ever: there breeds no spiteful malice, no misery of the flesh, no doleful
calamity. There is no grievous sickness, no pinching want, no careful
necessity. There is no hunger, no thirst, no cold, no heat, no wearisomnesse
of Fasting, no temptation of the enemy: neither is there any will to sin,
nor faculty to offend, but joy and gladness ouer-spreadeth all, rejoicing and
exultation possesses all. Men there also associated with the Angels, and freed
from all fleshly infirmity, shall remain and continue for ever. There shall
be infinite pleasure, everlasting blessedness, in which whosoever shall once
be happily invested, he shall surely and securely live, possessed with it for
ever. There shall be quiet rest, from our toyling and tyring labors,
perpetual peace without any dreadful fear of our enemies, delightful
pleasantness, proceeding from flourishing and continual newness: security
arising from Eternity: delectablenesse and sweetness, flowing from the
glorious vision of GOD, our omnipotent Creator. And who does not hourly long,
and daily desire, to dwell and remain in this heavenly Paradise, and
celestial Palace, of true and everlasting pleasure, both in regard of that
perpetual peace, delightful pleasantness, neuer-decaying eternity? and also
in respect of the glorious Vision and sight of God; who shall replenish us with
infinite joy and immeasurable gladness. No man shall be there a Pilgrim and
Stranger, but whosoever shall be admitted, as worthy to come and enter into
this celestial City, they shall dwell there for ever in their own Country,
secure from all fear of any dreadful danger, always joyful, always
satisfied with the most delightful sight of GOD their Creator.

And by how much the greater obedience any one shall perform toward God
here; by so much the more bountiful reward he shall receive of him there:
and by how much the more entierly and dearly he shall long after God, by so
much the nearer he shall approach unto him, and see him, whom so exceedingly
he coueteth to view, and desires to behold. To this Kingdom bring me oh
God, by the merits of thy Son Christ JESUS.

FINIS.

