A TRVE PATTERN OF Piety, meet for all Christian householders to look upon,
for the better education of their families, in the fear and service of
Almighty God.

Collected out of the fountain of holy Scriptures, for the especial use of
the faithful in the congregation of Malpasse in Cheshire. By JOHN PARKER.

GENESIS 18.17.19.



PSALM. 101.2.6.7.





ACT. 10.1.2.



Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop with in the
Popes head Alley in Lombardstreete, 1592

TO THE CHRISTIAN and well affected Gentlemen, together with the rest of the
faithful in the Congregation of Malpasse, who have given their names unto
Christ I. P. wishes al holy and perfect increase of Gods graces, with the
happy finishing of that good work begun in them, even through our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus.
GOod Christian brethren, my prayers to God on your behalf are, that you may
grow in all spiritual graces, and be established in the present faith. And if
I (though unworthy I confess) might in some measure be used as Gods
instrument and mean, for the furthering and building of you up in that worthy
work, I should surely account my self greatly favored of the Lord. So that
if I may know wherein to do you good, (beyond that which is done already)
assure your self of this, that according to my poor power, I will not fail
you. And hereunto I will willingly be led, not only in regard of worldly
kindnesses, and courtesies received lately and liberally from you, (for all the
which I rest greatly indebted) but especially for the holy bond of our
christian profession: whereinto, as we have through Gods goodness made some
entry, and in some sort well begun: So I hope we shall hold on therein, and
never be weary, until we come to the end of our faith and hope, even the
salvation of our souls. And because I have no better way yet to testify my
love unfeigned, then either by writing, or speaking: therefore: (though not as
I would) yet as I could, by reason of my manifold infirmities and sicknesses,
I have diligently labored to offer unto your Christian and courteous
acceptations, a few holy rules and brief observations, for the godly and well
gouering of your several families, by Catechizing them, and joining in
faithful prayers to Almighty God with them. The matter it self is collected
out of the sacred welspring of Gods holy word, and reduced into as short an
epitome as possibly I could, for memories sake. I have not taken this pains,
as one that would persuade you to accept of this direction and none other,
(knowing right well, that there are far better set forth by more learned and
godly Ministers) or for that I would tie you to one special form of Prayer in
your Families: whereas the spirit which is in you, will in due time teach you
abundantly to crave al things at Gods hands, according to your several
necessities. But my simple and unfeigned purpose herein is this; that for as
much as, that I am better acquainted with your estate and wants, then any other
can be who knows you not, and that the continual care which I have over you
for your good, can no better way be signified or manifested, than by provoking
you to well doing. I have therefore endeauored to frame this spectacle for you
to look upon, that you hereby finding out, and conceiving the order and manner
how to glorify God, by offering up holy and continnall sacrifice of prayers
and praises unto his majesty, as also how to occupy your selves in other
exercises of pure religion before him, might hereby in some convenient time
having learned both the matter and manner of the service of God: wholly bend your
selves to the careful and constant practice of all holy duties, unto so
merciful a Father, most to his glory and your edification and comfort. And if
I understand that you take that in good part, and esteem this little work.
though as a simple (I confess) yet as a sound signification of my unfeigned
love toward you, and care to do you good: then shall I not only think this
labor (though it be not worthy of that name) well bestowed for your sakes, but
also to accomplish some far better thing, if my poor talent will extend
thereunto for your better proceeding in that good race, whereinto you are
entered. You know the poor widows mite was accepted of God, not in regard of
the gift, but the mind of the giver, and I hope this shall be no less. Farewell
my good brethren, and the Lord Jesus be with you to confirm and enable you to
every good work, that you may be kept blameless until his glorious coming,
and so walk in this world in his fear, that we may in the conclusion of your
pilgrimage, end your days in his blessed favor, and at the last, live with
him for ever. Amen,

Your assured brother in Christ, yea your servant for Christ his sake to
further your salvation. I. Parker.

THE PREPAratiue to prayer.
1. Observation. To stir us up to prayer these things to be considered.
Prayer is a lifting up of the heart to God, with an assured faith to be heard,
as appears: Psalm. 25, 1.2. Psalm. 86.2. and Psalm. 143.8. 1. What prayer is,
viz.


Prayer is two fold. 1. either public 2. or private. 1. How manifold proser
is viz.


1. Conc. Public it shall suffice to read 1. King. 8. how Solomon built a
house of prayer at Jerusalem: 1. Public.
which was used of all the faithful many years after. And our Savor in his
time reproves them which abused the place of public prayer. Math. (...) and
in this respect a promise is made to two or three, being gathered together in
Christ's name, in the house of prayer Math. 18.

2. Conc. Private prayer, which we here entreat of. 2. Private
This is commanded by God Psalm. 50.15. and by Christ Math. 11.18. by the
Prophets Ierm. 10.23. Joel. 2, 32. Zecha. 12.12.13. etc. and also by the
Apostles, as appears: 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Ephesians. 6.18: Luke 21.36.

This private prayer was practiced not only of our fathers before the law: as
appears in Abraham Genesis 18.18. and Genesis 24. where we read, that his very
servant could frame a prayer to God, which no doubt he had learned of his
Master. Also by Isaac. Genesis 25.21. and Jacob: Genesis 32.9. but also by the godly
under the law: as we read of Moses: Exodus 33.18. Deuteronomy. 9.20. No. 12.10,
Joshua. 7.6.7.8. Judge. 3.9.7.

2. After the law in time of the Prophets: as appears, Dan. 6.10. and Chap.
9. totum. Isay. 37.15.16.17. Ier. 9.1.2, Chron. 20.18. etc. and David, in his
Psalms in infinite places, confirms the exercise of private prayer:
professing that he will prevent the morning watch to pray, and that he will
pray at morning, evening, and noonetide: yea, seven times a day, that is many
times.

3. This was used of the Apostles of our Savior: as appears, Acts. 2.42.
and 1.14. and 10.2. and 16, 13. and for this cause, both John Baptist and our
savior, gave to their disciples a form of prayer: as appears, Luke 11.1.2.

For this cause, vz. In that there was no greater comfort to the faithful then
to talk to God by prayer.

We read the Saints have prayed in all places: as Isaac in the fields, Daniel
in the Lions den, the Apostles in prison, and our Savior Christ himself in
the mountains and wilderness, and others in other places as occasion served.

1. 3. We are to observe the necessity of this duty of prayers Viz. Romans 12.1.
Regard of Gods command, who as he commanded the Children of Israel to offer
morning and evening sacrifice: so has commanded us by the blessed Apostle, to
offer up our souls and bodies, as holy and acceptable Sacrifices unto God,
(...). 12.1.
not only in prayer, but also in all other parts, of his holy service.

2. In respect of Gods promises made to them that call upon him: as Psalm.
50.15. Matthew. 11.28. Deuteronomy. 4.7.

3. Because of the threatenings denounced against those that do not pray. Ier.
10.23* Psalm. 79.6.

4. In respect of our own daily necessities and wants, he being the fountain
from whence we must fetch every good and perfect gift: Iam. 1.5, 17. John 3.27.
and for this cause, that we might see our wantes, he gave us a form of prayer.

4. We must be ^^^full to consider (...) what (...) must pray. viz.
1. That it be in the spirit, that is not with carnal, but with spiritual
hearts, our affections being lifted to heaven in so heavenly an action: as
also, that it be truth and sincerity, not in the lips only, or in hypocrisy
to be seen of men. Math. 7.5.6, 7. and 15.8, 9.

2. That we pray not for Gods benefits to consume them on our lusts and
concupiscences, but to employ the same to Gods glory, least our prayers be
unprofitable. Iam. 4.2.

3. That we approach before God, with a purpose to withstand and resist the
sins which we confess and pray against, or else we pray in vain. Psalm.
66.8.72. Tim. 2.19.

4. In prayer, that we be void of malice and envy, and commend the estate of
others as well as of our selves unto God, yea, to pray for our enemies, and
especially to be mindful to deal earnestly with the Lord for the
prosperous, Math. 5.23. and 4.44. Psalm. 122.6, 7. 1. Tim. 2.1.
religious, and happy estate of our Prince and governor, both in Church, and
commonwealth: yea, and although any Magistrate should be a wicked man, Prou.
27.27.
yet to pray for him.

Lastly, not to appoint God a time of hearing our prayers, Iam. 5.8.
but to tarry his leisure, who sees what is best for us.

5. We are to observe the end (...) prayer was ordained. viz.
1. To acknowledge our obedience unto God, and the greatness of his power, from
whom we receive al things, and to talk familiarly with him as one friend with
an other, always provided that we pray to none but him, and that only in
the name of Jesus Christ, Ioh. 16.23. and 16.23. Math. 6.9.

2. To acknowledge our thankfulness to his Majesty for all graces and mercies
both spiritual and bodily: as our election, redemption, sanctification, his
word and Sacraments, our creation preservation, health, life, liberty and
peace, and all good blessings whatsoever. Ephesians. 5.2.1. Pet. 1.3. etc.

3. Because by prayer we entertain God in our houses, and acknowledge our
selves to have renounced Satan, and to have opened the doors of our hearts,
that God may come and dwell with us, and we with him, as one friend with an
other Revel. 3.20.

6. and last thing, To prepare us unto prayer, is to mark, the effect of
prayer, viz.
That God never let the prayers of his seuantes go empty and return without a
blessing, as was expedient for his glory and their good: as appears by these
scriptures. Exodus 17. Ge. 35, 5. 2. King. 19.15.2. Chr. 20, 36. Josh 10, 12,
13. 1. Sam. 1, 10. to 16.2. Chron. 6, 18.

1. To conclude, let us remember, that if we will have God to hear our
prayers, we must be ready to hear him calling unto us by his word and the
ministry thereof, as we would have him to hear us when we call, and not to
turn back our prayers.

2. That if we will have God to hear us, Conclu. thus. Look. Prou. 1.27, 28.
ad finem.
that we be ready and willing to hear the cry of our poor and needy
brethren. Pro. 21.13. cap. 11.17.24.25.


Next to the preparatiue, before we come to lay down the forms of prayer it
self: this is to be considered of. vz.
THat every Christian who will rightly know and learn how to be thus
prepared and to serve God truly, provide by all means lawful, to procure and
purchase the sacred holy Bible, as the best and principal riches he can labor
for, according as God has commanded in Deu. where he teaches that not only
Princes, Deuteronomy. 17.9.10.11.
but Subjects must be acquainted with his laws, to know their duty, and both
David and Christ himself have showed the blessedness of them that meditate in
Gods law night and day, Psalm. 1.1. and 119 12. John. 5.39.
and search the holy scriptures, wherein everlasting life is contained, and to
move us hereunto, we have worthy examples in the primitive Church: of them
that not only did labor in the scriptures to find out the truth of the
doctrines of the Apostles, and to try the spirits as John commands: Acts 17
11. John 1.4.
but also traind up their children from their Cradles, in the knowledge of the
same. And fuxther, because this is the pearl, for the buying whereof, a man
must sell all he has, if his ability will extend so far: and that it is
the only fortress for the afflicted consciences. Math. 13.45. Prou. 23.23.
Let every man (though never so poor) constrain himself to be honored with
this Jewel, without the which he cannot know God, and not knowing him, Romans
10.14. ad 17.
can neither rightly nor truly call upon him, but perish in his ignorance,
Iam. 10.23.
and be numbered amongst the enemes of God. Therefore as thou love the Lord,
thy own soul, and the souls of thy family: delay not, defer not, but
procure and provide a Bible, above all things else whatsoever. God give thee
this grace.

3 The Scriptures of God contained in the holy Bible being thus provided: It is
next to be observed, that the word and prayer be always joined together. viz.
At al times before we humble our selves to prayer, to read one chapter, for
the better stirring us up to that holy duty: that is to say, Before morning
prayer, one Chapter out of the old Testament, beginning at Genesis, and at
night, also before evening prayer, a Chapter out of the new Testament. And if
any place as we read seems hard unto us, it is good rather with reverence
to let it pass, then with rashness to enterpret the same: waiting with
patience till that either by some learned expositor, godly preacher, or some
other place of scripture we can attain to find out the sense of the place,
always having a care to observe those places that seem hard unto us till we
have learned the true understanding of them.

Before the reading of the word, and Cathechising, use this short Prayer.
O Lord open our eyes, that we may see the wonderful things and excellent
doctrines which are written in thy word, and may receive comfort by thy
gracious promises contained in the same. Let us learn hereby more perfitly to
hate sin, and love righteousness, and grant that we may so understand the
things which we heare^ and so believe the things which we understand, and
praising that which we believe, that we may be more and more able to glorify
thy name in this world, and be fully confirmed in assured hope of that glory
prepared for the faithful in the world to come, Amen.

4 The word being thus read with reverence and care, then let the Governors,
Here ob^erue that (...) that will persuade us, that all (...) sport (...) Gods
(...) is too much, and so will breed tediousnes in us.
together with their whole family, humbly fall down on their knees, and the
Master himself, or one in his absence, whom he shall appoint to be the mouth
for all, and with a true heart, invoke upon God as follows.
Morning Prayer.

O Most glorious and blessed Lord God, who art the Father of mercy and
fountain of all grace and goodness. Thou Lord who have commanded us that in
all our distresses, we should come unto thee, and offering our prayers unto
thee with a right heart, and true faith in the name of Christ, have promised to
hear us, behold Lord even before thee, who have thus commanded and promised,
we sinful and unrighteous creatures do humble our selves at this time, both
in our souls and bodies: beseeching thy excellent Majesty to look from
heaven with thy merciful favor upon us, accepting our prayers, which we
shall power out before thee, and directing us so to prefer the same unto thy
holiness, that thou may accept them in Christ Jesus.

We confess O Lord God of heaven that we are most unworthy to appear before
thee, and more unworthy to obtain any favor at thy gracious hands, in
regard of the infinite and heinous offenses which we have committed against
the purity and excellent virtue of thy laws which condemn us in our sins,
and revealed unto us our rebellion and unthankfulness. For O Lord we have a
law in our members, resisting and fighting against the law of our minds,
whereby through the infirmity and vanity of the flesh: we find in our
selves no pronenes to that which is good, nor any courage to resist the things
which are evil: and this our untowardness is so much the greater, by how
much the more we violate thy will and transgress thy holy precepts, not only
in ignorance, but also in knowledge, and many times against knowledge, both
grievously and fearfully: so that thy authority on the one side, nor thy
mercies on the other, have neither moved, nor allured us to obey or serve thee,
as we ought to have done, and these our sins which are sufficient to
condemn us, go not alone but have too many companions: for O Lord our
infidelity, impaciencie, hardness of heart, abuse of thy patience, contempt of
thy word, and little profiting by it, are erdinarie sins into the which we fall
daily, we being such by nature, as esteem more of our own pleasures and
profits then of thy glorious and blessed service: our hearts as corrupt
fountains yielding forth nothing but distrust of thy providence, hypocrisy,
covetousness, carnal and worldly concupiscences, and neglect of all good duties
towwards thee and all men: the flesh continually rebelling against the spirit,
so that O Lord if thou should have dealt with us according to justice, we
had all perished in these our sins and ignorances before this present,
therefore obteining this favor to come before thee, we unfeignedly confess
that against thee O Lord, even against thee alone we have committed these
sins and wickednesses, beseeching thy Majesty to pardon our ignorance and
blindness, that we cannot see them more fully, and confess them more
penitentlye then now we do, wherein we must needs acknowledge our sins to
be the greater, by how much the less our repentance appears to be at this
hour. Yet forasmuch as that O Lord God thou have revealed thy self in thy
word, to be God of infinite mercy and goodness, to them that truly repent and
come unto thee, in the name of Christ Jesus. We are hereby imbouldned to
humble our selves before thy Majesty, beseeching thee for Christ his sake to
touch our hearts with unfeigned sorrow and true contricion, for all these, and
all other our sins, and grant we may both so see and abhor our guiltines
and filthiness, that we may obtain mercy and forgiveness through his precious
death and passion: which we beseech thee to accept, as a full satisfaction for
the same wiping them all out of thy book of remembrance, that they may never
be laid to our charge, nor rise up in judgment against us. Give us a lyuelie
and true faith, to lay hold on these thy mercies promises unto us in him, that
we may be able to resist all the fiery darts of the devil. And as we crave
this grace for that which is past, so let it please thee of thy Fatherly
mercy, to assist and strengthen us in the residue of our life, to perform and
accomplish all that obedience which thy Majesty requires of us, and as thou
art our Father, so regard us as thy children, and send down the power of thy
Spirit into our hearts, that we considering how thou sit in the heavens,
and searchest the secrets of all men's hearts, may have continual care to set
our affections on things which are above, and not on things which are
beneath: but if that thy wisdom, power, goodness, mercy and truth, or
whatsoever else thy Majesty is known by, may be truly reverenced and honored
of us, so that all profaneness of heart, all worldlynesse, and fleshly security
may be far removed from us.

To this end O Lord vouchsafe unto us that ordinary and happy means of the
faithful and sincere preaching of thy blessed word, that thy spirit working
therewith, it may effect in us all good graces both of faith and repentance:
Yea, we beseech thee send forth faithful laborers amongst us, and bless
those whom thou do send, with all graces necessary, both purity of
doctrine and sincerity of life, and so sanctify them, in all their studies and
labors, that by their ministry and example we may increase in all true zeal
and love to thee and thy word, and may have just cause to embrace them deerly
in our hearts, and account reverently of them, as of thy merciful instruments
sent unto us for our great good. Grant O Lord that we may not be hearers but
dooers of thy will, and that the like mind may be in us, that was in Christ
Jesus, and in all our godly forefathers, even with all willingness and readiness,
yea, to make it our meat and drink to do thy will. And for as much as Satan
is a continual adversary, seeking to choke the seed of thy word, and all
other good graces in us: therefore O Lord let it please thee, to take us unto
thy self: so that no temptation of the world, flesh, or devil, overtake us:
but deliver us from sin, and all the occasions of sin.

O Lord give us grace to stop sin at the beginning, before it come either
into action or consent, so that we aiming at thy glory in all our labor and
affairs, and walking as in thy presence. Endeavoring always to keep a good
conscience, both in thought, word, and deed, toward thy Majesty and all
men, all thy good blessings may follow and fall upon us, to the great joy of
our hearts, and glory of thy name, through Christ Jesus. And for these our
bodies, we only crave bread for the day, and true contentation with that thou
sendst, craving thy blessing upon us in our labors, that we may be able to
minister to our own necessities, and rather be helpful then chargeable to
others, and always to rest as well contented with adversity, as prosperity,
having assurance that al shall fall out for the best, to them that love and
fear thee: above all things keep us from using unlawful means to live by,
and let us be ready to supply the wants of our brethren, as we would have them
to fulfill our necessities. O Lord forgive our enemies, and turn their hearts
if it be thy will, and grant we may always be more ready to take then give
offense to any: we are this day to walk before, O Lord go before us, and so
preserve us from sin and the danger thereof, that at night we come before
thee again to give thee thanks for these and all thy mercies in Christ Jesus.

Thou Lord as duty binds, and as thou have commanded, we pray thee
remember thy Church universal, and more perticularly this Church of England.
Send thy word free passage throughout the world, and grant a good government
to be continued therwithall, Lord sanctify the hearts of all thy people that
enjoy it, and grant we may walk worthy of it in our lives and
conversation: bring to naught all their councels that are enemies unto it and
envy the prosperous passage thereof; of; preserve our gracious Prince, the
honorable Counsel, the godly and faithful bishops and pastors of thy Church
and all that fear thy name, and further or favor thy truth: defend us from
our enemies, and go forth with our armies against them: comfort the afflicted
with all true comforts, and turn their sorrow into joy. Have mercy upon us
and al thy people every where, espectallye in this land. Bless this whole
family with all graces necessary for our callings even for Christ Jesus sake,
in whose name for these and all other the testimonies of thy fouour, we pray
as he has taught us in his holy Gospel, saying: Our Father which art in
heaven, etc.

A short form of Morning prayer, to be used when want of opportunity and
urgent affairs do hinder us to use the other.
O Lord our God before whose pure and holy eyes, no uncleanness or sin can be hid
or covered, we wretched and sinful creatures, and yet by thy mercy thy
unworthy and poor servants, do humble our selves before thee, in the name of
Jesus Christ, acknowledging our selves to have grievously sinned against thee,
in thought, word, and deed, from our first enteraunee into this world, unto
this present time, and our repentance for the same we confess, has been
very little or nothing at all, so that we may justly fear and blush to
approach into thy presence, with so small contricion of heart, and wound of
conscience, as we now do, but that we know thy mercy exceeds thy wrath,
in which mercy we beseech thee to look down from heaven upon us, for Christ
Jesus sake, and so to work repentance in us, for our unthankfulness, abuse of
thy patience, ignorance, infidelity, neglecte of thy word, and all other our
sins, as our worldlines, carnal security, and the rest, that it may please
thee to accept us in the obedience of thy Son, and to account of the same as
a perfect ransom for us, assuring our Spirits by the testimony of thy
Spirit, that our sins are pardoned, and we reconciled to thy Majesty
through thy promised mercy in him. And to that end that the time to come may
be better employed then the time past: therefore let it please thee to give
strength unto us, that we may resist all sin, and the temptations thereof, and
consume our days in continual care to perform all good duties unto thy
majesty, both in body and soul. And as this day we are to walk in this
world among sundry and great enemies of the soul, so derect us by thy grace,
that we may be circumspect in all our thoughts, words and works, redeeming the
season, because the days are evil. O Lord give us grace in all our labors,
and enterprises, principally to aim at thy glory, preferring the same before
our own pleasure and profit, and suffer us not to start aside from the
obedience of thy will in any of our affairs, but give us grace sincerely and in
vprightnes of heart, to walk before thee, as becomes the Saints and
children of God, so that all prophanes, vanity, evil speaking, anger, malice,
impaciencie, covetousness, and all other corruptions of our nature may vanish
and die, and we by thy grace, and the power of thy holy spirit, may be made
more then Conquerours over them in Christ Jesus.

O Lord grant that al our labors taken in hand, according to thy will, may
have such issue and effect as may be for thy glory, the good of thy Church and
our own comfort, and because all good graces are wrought in us by the
ministry of thy word, O Lord vouchsafe this thy blessed ordinance unto us,
let us hunger after it, as after our appointed food, and in the light thereof,
let us walk as Children of light, and glorify thy name more and more, in the
pure and true obedience thereof, in all unfeigned love to thy Majesty, and all
our brethren for thy sake. Bless this whole family, and grant that the
governors may rule with wisdom and godly discretion, and those that are
governed may obey as those that are called by thy word, and sanctified by thy
spirit, so that we may all glorify thee, and in the end be glorified of thee.

Save thy whole Church we beseech thee, this Church of England especially,
beseeching thy good Majesty not only to scatter the testimonies of thy favor
and grace upon thy people every where, but especially upon these our dominions,
and every part thereof. Regard above the rest, the good and prosperous estate
of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, honoring her Royal person, with all
graces necessary for her worthy and high calling, and possess her heart with
a principal zeal for thy glory, so that by her holy government, sin and
superstition may be beaten down, and all virtue and godliness erected and
maintained to the further increase of thy kingdom, and overthrow of Satan's
dominions.

Bless the honorable counselors with wisdom and holy Judgment, that from
their heads and hearts, as from a happy fountain may flow all good
direction and orders for the sound and right government both of Church and
commonwealth. Bless all thy ministers and Church guides, with all increase of
graces fit for their places, and increase the number of those that be
faithful, whom thou will use to add souls to thy kingdom, and root out
those that are unfit and not able to discharge the charge which thy word lays
upon them.

O Lord, thou that art Lord of the Harvest, send faithful laborers into the
Harvest, in all places we beseech thee. Bless all inferior Magistrates with
all graces fit for their places. Bless this whole land, and all sorts of
people in the same, with the gift and grace of true repentance, both for the
preventing of thy judgments threatened, and for the removing of those which are
upon us. Fight for us against our adversaries, and through thy mercy let us
obtain at all times victory over them, that thou may still be our God and
we thy people, and thy name may be great in Israel. Confound Antichrist and
all thine enemies, comfort and in thy good time deliver all thy poor
prisoners that are in affliction and bands for thy trueths sake, and arm us
against the like trials: be merrifull to all thy people and give peace and
consolation of conscience to them that want it. These and all good graces for
our selves and al thy people wheresoever, we pray as our Savior Christ has
taught us, saying.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

5 At dinner time, this must be observed, that if there be any child or
servant which can read in the house: that the Master cause him to read a
Chap. in time of dinner, The like is always to be done at supper time.
or else if he be able when he has dyned, to read one himself before he rise
from table, which will help well to season the meat, if the things that be
read be rightly meditated of, always provided, that we give thanks both
before and after meat.
SIXTHLY. Here note that Evening prayer be done either before supper or shortly
after, because otherwise, the flesh will be very vna^^e to pray, but of the
two, the rather before supper.
O Lord God most mighty, our loving and merciful Father in Christ Jesus we
humble our selves before the throne of thy Majesty, humbly craueuing pardon
for all the sins which this day or any time of our life heretofore we have
committed against thee, beseeching thee to forgive our coldness in thy service,
our unthankfulness for thy mercies, and so to mollify our hard and barren
hearts, with the force of thy word, and operation of thy blessed Spirit,
that we may more truly and effectually both see and repent us of all our
sins heretofore committed. Yea, grant dear Father, that we may detest and
hate sin in all men, especially in our selves, and be affraide to be
stained and defiled with the corruption thereof, though it be but in
appearance. And because we find in our selves a willingness to do good (which
comes of thy grace) and yet have no power to perform the same: therefore we
pray thee O Lord reform this our nature, and make it more apt to the
obedience of thy will, so that all sin wherewith we have stained thy holy
Image in us, may be removed out of our hearts, and decreased, and the graces of
thy spirit increased in us as thou know them needful for us.

O Lord we are pilgrims here, hide not thy commandments from us, set the
fear of thy Majesty before our eyes, let us seek with all our hearts to set
forth thy praises by a holy and righteous conversation, as thou have
commanded, being always afraid to violate or break the least of thy
commandments, keep us safe from the contagions and manners of the worldly,
and make us a light of verity and holiness unto this perverse and crooked
generation amongst whom we live, give us grace good Lord to walk worthy of
our high calling in Christ Jesus, in all true zeal for thy glory, and
unfeigned love to thy Church, and grant that in all our studies and labors,
our care may be such to please thee, as that we may have the joy of thy
Spirit, and the happy peace of conscience to dwell continually in our hearts.
To this end let thy word be the lantern to guide all our steps by, and to
direct us to all our doings, and grant we may show forth the fruits thereof,
in all virtue and godlynes.

With favor regard our labors and enterprises, which this day we have
traveled in or hereafter shall prosecute according to thy will: and grant we
may so use this world, as though we used it not, and in all things and above
all things, let thy glory and the setting forth of thy praises, be most dear
unto us at all times.

Bless thy Church every where, especially here amongst us in this land: give
all true zeal unto our Prince, to gither, with a princely and wise heart: give
unto her Counselors the spirit of wisdom and counsel: unto our Judges the
spirit of judgment: and to all our Magistrates the spirit of courage and
godliness, to punish vice and maintain virtue: give wisdom and faithfulness to
our pastors and teachers and all holy obedience to all thy people: minister all
needful comfortes to the afflicted: give thy word a free passage, and grant
all things needful for the finishing of the number of thy elect people, even
for Christ Jesus sake.

Therefore Lord we thank thee for all thy mercies, and for this merciful
liberty we inioye to come before thee. We render from the bottom of our
hearts all unfeigned praises unto thy Majesty for our creation and continual
preservation: for our health, life, liberty and peace, for our food, raiment
and all other thy benefits, for the good of our bodies. But especially we
confess our selves infinitely bounden for those blessings which are greater,
as our election before all worlds, our redemption by Christ Jesus, our
vocation and calling by the gospel, our sanctification by the Spirit, for
calling us out of darkness, into thy meruellous light, and for seperating us in
such poor measure, from the love of this world, and worldly commodity. We
praise thee for thy word, for thy Sacraments, and all thy undeserved mercies,
not only upon our selves, but also upon our Prince and country: we thank
thee for her gracious Majesty, and the peace we enjoy under her: we thank
thee for the wise, and honorable Counselors, the godly Maiestrates, faithful
Ministers, and for all thy faithful people. Lord continue still merciful
unto us, in Christ Jesus. Confirm us in the Faith and obedience of thy Son,
as many as thou have already called: and call all those that go astray, and
having finished thy work: come speedely in the clouds for our full
deliverance we pray thee, yea come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Now Lord we commend our selves, our souls and bodies into thy good hands,
beseeching thee to keep and preserve us this night, to give quiet rest and
sleep to our bodies, and peace of conscience to our souls, that we being
preserved from dangers and restored to the use of thy favor: the next day we
may be careful to perform all good duties to thy Majesty, most to thy glory
and our comfortes in Christ Jesus. In whose name for the continuance of thy
favor, in granting all these and all other good graces: we pray as he has
taught us, saying.

Our father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name, etc.

7 Certain petitions to be used in morning or evening prayer, as occasion
shall serve.
In time of any general visitation, as war, sickness, famine, etc. Say this
petition.
O Lord our God, thou do justly correct us for our sins by this thy
hand: make it profitable unto us we beseech thee, and afflict not our land
above measure, least the enemy say, where is their God become? We are thy
people and the workmanship of thy hands: remember therefore thy ancient
mercies to our forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, and for Christ's sake suffer
not our enemies to prevail over us, but put an end to our miseries, that we
may live and dwell in peace, and enjoy our former liberty, to serve thee, and
the fruits of the earth in due time. Let us therefore see the sins that most
displease thee, and repent truly of them, that so thou may turn thy
favorable countenance toward us, in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

In any particular visitation of thy self or any of thy family, say this
petition.
O Lord our God, thou art righteous in all thy doings, but we are most
unrighteous, open our eyes to see our sins which thus displease thee, and
touch our hearts with unfeigned sorrow for the same, that we may no longer
provoke thy displeasure. And good Lord grant that we may see thy purpose in
thus afflicting us, that we may find out the cause, and repent us of it, lay
no more upon this thy servant then he is able to bear, let not the enemy have
power over him, but assist him with thy spirit, against all assaults
whatsoever, grant him patience, and deliverance out of this misery in thy
good time, which way shall seem best to thy Majesty. These and all good
graces, we crave for Christ Jesus sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

8 Note, That the night season must not be spent in idle and filthy talking,
which becomes not Christians, but shall be given account of. See Ephesians. 5, 4.
Math. 12.36. Therefore four nights in the week, let them be spent in honest
and virtuous conference, that tends to edification, in reading Gods word, in
singing of Psalms, as these scriptures command: vz. Ephesians. 4.29. Colloss.
4.6. Ephesians. 5.19. Collossians. 3.16.
The other 2. nights let them be passed away as opportunity and health shall
permit, in conferring with our family and examining them in four or five
questions of these principles of Faith, which follow: as the scriptures
command and exhort us: vz. Deu. 6.6.7.8.9. Eccle. 12.1. Dan. 12.3. 2. Tim.
3.14.15. He. 5.12. 1. Pet. 3.15. which Scriptures I pray you look over with
advise.

The Lords day must thus be spent, vz.
IN hearing the word, and joining with the Congregation in prayer and
thanksgiving. In receiving the Sacraments when occasion shall serve. In
visiting the sick, releeuing the poor, meditating on Gods word and his
works, avoiding all lewd company, as also carding, dycing, etc. and at night
to follow the example of the Church of Berea, in calling to mind the things
we have learned as these scriptures teach us, 1. John 4.1.1. Th. 5.21. Act.
17.11. And in thus doing the peace of God shall be upon you.

A brief Cathechisme Containing the principles of the Christian faith, meet
to be learned of all true Christian Families.
Question.

IS there any creature in heaven or in earth, which must not be subject unto
God?

Answer.

No, Genesis 2.1. and 1.27. and 2.7. Exodus 20.2. Joshua. 24.14.15.24. Rom 11.36.
1. Tim. 6.15. Apoc. 19.16.
for he has created both Angels and men, and all other creatures both in
Heaven and earth, and all places, to that end, that they should serve and
obey him.

Q. How is this service and obedience performed?

A. When we reverence his word and keep his commandments, Luke 12.47.48. and
17.9.10.
because thereby we manifest both our subjection and his authority over us,
as our Lord, and the God of power to require the same of us.

Quest. What call you the word of God, or which are his commandments?

Ans. I call that the word of God which is contained in sacred and holy
Scriptures, John. 5.39. Heb. 2.2, 3.4. Luke 16.29.31. Deuteronomy. 4.13. Exo. 19.18.20.
of the old and new Testament, commonly called the Bible, and those are his
commandments which he gave in Mount Sinay, which are as it were an
abridgement and sum of the whole scriptures.

Q. How many commandments be there?

A. Ten.

Q. Rehearse them?

Ans. Then God spoke all these words etc. Exodus 20.1. ad.


Q. How can these silly and dumb creatures bserue Gods word and
Commandments? for you say that al creatures must obey him.

A. In continuing in that first order and estate wherein the Lord first placed
them, Psalm. 148.5.6. Psalm. 104.9.
and whereto by his word he first enjoined them.

Q. How is man inferior to the unreasonable creatures in this obedience?

A. In that our first Parents having broken Gods Commandments, Genesis 3.6.16.1^
Romans 5.14, 15, ad 20.
in eating of the forbidden tree, they themselves became not only sinful and
accursed, Gal. 3, 22. Psalm. 14.1, 3.
but have left unto us who do succeed them, the inheritance of their sin
which we call original sin.

Q. What then shall we think of our selves that are thus corrupted?

A. Surely that by nature we are the children of disobedience and wrath, Ephesians.
2.1, ^, 3. To. 7.19.20, 23
prone to that which is evil, and untoward to that which is good, for this
original sin has so infected both soul and body, that we can do nothing
but transgress Gods laws.

Que. What call you transgression?

Ans. Transgression is the breathe of the Law, Romans 7.7. Deuteronomy. 5.21.
which the Apostle calls sin.

Q. Does God allow of this sin, or may we think our selves not to be any whit
the worse, or less blessed because we are sinful?

A. God forbid we should so think, for as we sin and break Gods laws daily
in thought, Psalm. 19.12. Genesis 6.5. Eccles. 7.22. 1. John. 1.8. Math. 5.19.22.
Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10. Iam. 2.10.
word, and deed: so by the justice of God, we deserve eternal death both of
soul and body for the least of our sins, though it be but in thought and
in all our life, as the due and deserved stipend thereof.

Q. This being so that we by nature can do nothing, and sin deserving
death: what are we to do for remedy in this case?

A. We are herein principally to observe four things, without the which our
estate is but miserable.

Q. I pray you rehearse them unto me, that I may discern whether you know
them or no.

A. First Romans 7.7.9.10.11.
I am to pray to God to open my eyes that I may behold my self, and see how
I am convicted of my sin by his law, and have incurred his wrath against me
for the same.

(2) I am to repent and to forsake this my sin, 2. Act. 3.19. Ioell. 2.12.13.
Ier. 3.14.15.22.
which has brought upon me this condemnation and misery.

(3) I must upon this repentance, seek only for remedy in Christ Jesus, 3.
John. 3.16. Math. 11.28. 1. John 2.1. Ephesians. 2.9. Act. 4.12. Gall. 2.21.
and not trust to any good works or deseruings of my own:

(4) And lastly, I must have assurance of faith, and be steadfastly persuaded
that Jesus Christ by his holy sufsufferinges, 4. Heb. 11.6. Iam. 1.6. Gall.
3.13. John 14.18.26.27. Romans 8.15. Heb. 4.16.
has appeased the wrath of his father, has eased me of the burden of my
sins, and will not only quicken me by his comforting spirit: but restore me
hereby from death unto life.

Q. How has Jesus Christ thus effected our peace and deliverance from so great
punishment?

A. Because as he was man, Ephesians. 5.30. 1. Tim. 1.15. Esaias. 53.5. 1. Pet.
2.24. Romans 4.25. Colloss. 1.19.20. and 2.15.
he suffered for sin in that nature in the which it was committed, vz. in
men's nature: and so satisfied Gods justice by that one oblation of his own
body and blood for our atonement: secondly being God, he was able to overcome
and break the bonds of death, and so wholly and fully to effect my salvation.

Q. Having thus escaped the terror and curse of death, tell me more plainly
how thou attainest everlasting life?

A. Christ Jesus having accomplished perfect righteousness, Psalm. 32.2. John
14.16, 17. John 17.13, 21, 22, 23, 24.
it is mine by imputation: and being sanctified by the fulness of his spirit
which he has received, he does offer and present us to the father, craving
that we may be partakers of everlasting life and glory with him.

Q. Shall all be pertakers of this life and glory?

A. John 1.12. and 3.18. John 20.8. Gal. 3.11. Habak. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Heb.
10.10.38.
Noe, not any but the true and faithful belieuers, who can apply Christ's
death to themselves, by a lively faith, the sum of which faith is contained
in the Apostles Creed,

Q. Rehearse the Creed?

A. I believe in God etc.

Q. What call you Faith?

A. It is the gift of God, John 6.29. 1. John 3.23. 1. John 5.12, 13
and as the hand of the soul, to lay hold on Christ and his merits, and all
good things which are offered and promised in him.

Q. How may we attain to this Faith?

A. First, 1. John 2.20. and 3.24. and 4.13.
by the inward means which God has appointed to work the same in us: and
secondly, by the outward, ordained for that purpose.

Q. Which is the outward means ordained?

A. The preaching of the word and ministration of the gospel, Romans 10.14 Gal
4.19. Ephesians. 4.11. and 1. These. 5.19.20.
which if we neglect to receive and practice, we shall be void of all says,
and so consequently of all salvation.

Q. Has GOD appointed any means to confirm this faith?

A. Yes, the blessed Sacraments, 1. Cor. 11.17.
of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

Q. How many Sacraments be there.

A. Two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, as appears, Romans 4.11. 1. Cor.
10.2, 3. Act. 2.26. Math. 21.25. and 28.19, and 26.26.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. An outward and holy sign, ordained by God himself, and by the
confirmation of the word applied thereunto, represents spiritual and
invisible graces unto us, to manifest Gods favor toward us, and to confirm
our Faith.

Q. What call you Baptism, and what benefit have you by it?

A. Baptism is the seal of my regeneration and uniting to Christ, Romans 4.6.
Acts 22.16. 1. Pet. 3.21. Colloss. 2, 11. Tit. 3.5.
whereas before I was a bond-slaue to fathan And it assures me, that as my
body is wached with water, so by the death of Christ my soul is washed from
sin in his blood, and from the guilte and punishment of sin. And to
conclude, it teaches me that by Christ's death I should learn to dye unto
sin, and by his resurrection, arise to holiness oflife, which is the new
birth.

Q. What are you to observe in the Lords Supper, and what does it represent
unto us?

A. It assures me by the operation of the spirit, Luke 22.19.22. John
6.53.54.55.56. and 58.
that now being received by Baptism into Gods family, I shall be nourished
with the living bread and water of the body and blood of Christ, as my body
is refreshed with the outward use of bread and wine, and that as surely as the
bread is broken and the wine is powered out, so assuredly the body of Christ was
broken, and his blood shed for my sin.

Q. How may a man know whether he have this faith, which is begotten by the
word, and confirmed by the Sacraments?

A. The principal and chiefest sign thereof, is the spirit of Christ, Romans
8.9.10.11.14.15.16.
which is the seal and pledge of our adoption, and the earnest penny of our
Salvation: and this spirit is in none effectually but in Gods elect.

Q. How shall we decerne, whether this spirit be in us, or no?

A. By the fruits thereof, Matthew. 3.11.
which will burst forth as a flame of fire.

Q. Which be those fruits?

A. They be these. First, love Math. 22.37. Mark. 12.29. Exodus 20.2. Deuteronomy. 6.2.
to the Lord and his word, worshipping him in soul and body, and Job 13.15.
John 14.15.
depending upon his providence both in prosperity and adversity: Secondly, a
full Romans 8.10. Luke 1.75. and 10.4.2.
alteration in my self: that I am dead to sin, and the manners of the world,
and that I am now given to delight in Gods word and the hearing of it, Heb.
3.12. 1. These. 5.14. Coloss. 3.16. Iam. 5.20.
to exhort others unto well doing, especially Josh. 20.15. Psalm. 101. Ephesians.
6 4.
those that are under my charge, being Psalm. 8.8. and 116.12. Romans 12.1. Psalm.
50.14.15. 1. These. 5.16.
thankful to God for all his mercies in Christ Jesus, using all exercises of
Christianity, which tend to a godly and new life, Math 6.2. 1. Cor 13.3.
having charity toward all men, and expressing the same by some signs of my
love, and to conclude holding fast the holy Heb. 25. Ephesians. 2.20.11.22.
communion, with the rest of the members whereof Christ is the head.

Q. How are these graces of the spirit obtained.

A. Even by the same means that the spirit it self is obtained, which is, by
faithful prayer unto God only, that he will not harden our hearts, and cause
us to err, but give the pledge of his spirit unto us, and the graces thereof.
vide. Psalm. 51.10, 11. Isai. 63.17. Psalm. 50.25.

Q. Must we pray for nothing but for our faith and the spirit?

A. Yes, Act. a. 24.29. Ephesians. 6.18.19. 1. Tim. 2.12.
we must pray not only for our selves, but also for the whole Church:
especially having a care to ask those things at Gods hands, which may most
set forth his glory, as we are taught in the Lords prayer.

Q. Rehearse the Lords prayer.

A. Our father which art in, etc.

Q. How way we be assured, that God will give an answer to our prayer? John
16.23. 1. John. 2.1. 1. Pet. 25. Mark. 11.24. Luke. 11.9.


A. First, if we ask the things we need, in and for Christ's sake. Secondly,
if we ask in faith.

Q. What say you then to the prayer of the wicked.

A. They are undoubtedly abominable to the Lord, Prou. 1.28.29.30. and 28.9.
not only in respect that they want faith, but also because they perform not
obedience to the Lords voice when he calls, but turn their ears from it.

Q. Rehearse now the sum of all that thou have learned?

A. The sum of all is this.

1 That I find my self to be most miserable, in respect of Gods law, which
condemns me in my sin: In that it requires I should love God above all,
and my neighbor as my self, and yet I violate the same, both in thought,
word, and deed.

2. That through Gods unspeakable favor, I find remedy for my sin, that
although ye Lord has given such a law as I cannot perform and keep, because
no other law then such a perfect rule of righteousness would agree with his
nature, therefore not by my own deserving, but by the mercy of our Lord God
in the death of his Son, and our Savior, the guiltines of my sins taken
away, and I am discharged.

3 And lastly, that I rest thankful all my life long, for this exceeding
benefit, and show forth the fruits of my redemption, by a righteous and
holy conversation, springing from a lively and true faith, which is begotten by
his word, and sealed by his Spirit. This is the sum.

FINIS.
A Card for Communicants to look upon, before they presume to come to the
Lords Table, fit to be learned of all that will not receive unworthily.
Question.

HOw many things are to be regarded and learned of them that approach to the
Lords Table, to receive the holy mystery of his holy Supper.

Answer.

Principally one thing, which is to examine themselves before they eat, least
not discerning the Lords body, they eat and drink unworthily, and so the
bread and wine be unto them of no greater force then the supper was to Judas,
even a seal of their condemnation.

Q. What mean you by discerning the Lords Supper?

A. I mean that we must not come to the Lords Table as to a common feast or
banquet, regarding only the outward elements, as though bread and wine were
become our spiritual nourishment, but that by the outward signs we be led
as it were by the hand to that which they signify, namely: that Christ Jesus
has suffered the death of the cross, to take away my sins which are the
cause of my condemnation, and to bring me unto everlasting life through that
fulness of grace which rests in him.

Q. You say the principal thing to be regarded, is to examine our selves:
wherein does this examination consiste?

A. In these four points especially which are not lightly to be considered
off.

Q. Which be they, tell me briefly?

A. 1. That I have some knowledge to discern the Lords body as is aforesaid,
and be able by a lively and true says, to apply Christ and all his merits to
my soul for my consolation and comfort, least otherwise by having no feeling
of Gods mercy and love toward me, the Sacrament do appear to be but a dead
letter unto me.

2. That I find my self inwardly and truly grieved for all my sins both
lesser and greater, yea for all my idle words and unprofitable works, and for
all sins whatsoever, whether actual, or original: and that I purpose not to
sin again for any pleasure or prosite whatsoever; but to behave my self
before him all the days of my life* in performance of all holy duties
according to his word.

2. That as I see by the breaking or cutting of the bread, and pouring out the
wine, that Christ's body and blood was divided, broken, and powered out for my
sin: so to find my heart lyfted up unto God, and prepared to give humble and
heavenly thanks unto him, as for all his mercies, so especially for those
present benefits which we see before our eyes, and partake at his holy Table.
And to conclude, to be as ready to be broken and slain for Christ's sake, as
he was for mine, by taking up his cross and following him.

4. And lastly, as I find by the vewe of all these mercies, that God loves me
undeservedly, so that I find and feel my self ready to love all men in like
sort, though they deserve it not, yea my very enemies,

Q. Are these sufficient rules to examine our selves by?

A. These being conceived in our heads, imprinted in our hearts, and expressed
in our lives, will further our worthy receiving, to our everlasting comfort.

Certain forms of Thanksgiving.
Grace before meat.
O Gracious and blessed Lord God who give al things abound antly to thy
servants, and feedest them in due season: we humbly beseech thee to sanctify
these thy good creatures provided for us, forgiving our sins, which have
deserved the contrary. Vouchsafing for Christ's sake, to give us a sober and
moderate use of thy creatures, so that whatsoever strength we receive from
them, we may bestow the same in thy service, to the setting forth of thy
glory in thy only Son our Lord and blessed Savior Christ Jesus.

Grace after meat.
WE thank thy Majesty most merciful and heavenly Father for these, and all
thy mercies upon our selves and all thy people, beseeching thee of thy
Fatherlye goodness, to continue thy favor upon us, and upon thy whole
Church. To send thy word into all places, and to grant a continual increase
of the faithful disposers thereof. To bless our Prince and country, to be
merciful to all our sins. Comfort all the afflicted members of Christ: arm
us against the day of trial. Shorten these days of sin, and increase our
faith evermore. Grant these and all good graces, even for Christ Jesus sake,
to whom with thee and the holy spirit, be al honor, praise and glory for
ever, Amen.

A thanksgiving, to be used after Cathechising.
WE magnify thy name O Lord our God, for thy patience and use of thy word, at
this and al other times, beseeching thy Majesty to pardon our vnreuerent
handling of the same, and to write in our hearts the things which we have
learned, and give us the practice thereof in our lives. Lord continue thy
favor still toward us, by giving a long and prosperous reign to our
gracious Sovereign, that under her godly and peaceable government we may
still enjoy this liberty to thy glory, and our comfortes, both now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

