A TREATISE OF THE PLAGUE, CONTAINING The Causes, Signs, Symptoms,
Prognostics, and Cure thereof.

Together with sundry other remarkable passages (for the prevention of, and
preservation from the Pestilence) never yet published by any man.

Collected out of the Works of the no less learned than experimented and
renowned Chirurgian

AMBROSE PAREY.

PSALM. 91. 5, 6. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, -- nor for
the Pestilence that walks in darkness.
LONDON, Printed by R. Y. and R. C. and are sold by Mich. Spark, in the green
Arbor Court in little Old Bailey, at the blew Bible. 1630.

To the Reader.
REader; for a public good, I have adventured to undergo a public censure,
in those times totally addicted to criticisme; induced thereto by thinking it
better to help with those small forces I have in this dangerusi nuasion, than
through fear of censures to be silent; chiefly seeing those, who at other
times show themselves prime leaders and soldiers to expel common and usual
assailants, become the first and chief fugitives in these cases of extremity.
And having found one whose knowledge and experience exceeds the greatest part
of our common practitioners, I make bold here to present him to thy eye and
use: he speaks plainly and honestly, and handles not nice controversies to
small purpose, nor tires with tedious and impertinent discourses; wherefore if
thou be destitute of counsel, it shall not repent thee to use his: In which if
thou find comfort, give thanks to him to whom only all praise is due, who of
his mercy divert, or if not, assist us in all times of his visitations*
farewell.

A Treatise of the Plague.
CHAP. I.
The description of the Plague.
THe Plague is a cruel and contagious Disease, which euerie-where, like a
common Disease, inuading Man and Beast, kills very many; being attended, and as
it were associated with a continual Fever, Botches, Carbunkles, Spots,
Nauseousnesse, Vomitings, and other such malign accidents. This Disease is not
so pernicious or hurtful, by any Elementarie quality, as from a certain
poisonous and venenate malignitie, the force whereof exceeds the condition of
common putrefaction. Yet I will not deny, but that it is more hurtful in
certain Bodies, Times, and Regions, as also many other Diseases, of which
Hippocrates makes mention. But from hence we can only collect, that the force
and malignitie of the Plague may be increased, or diminished according to the
condition of the Elementarie qualities concurring with it, but not the whole
nature and essence thereof to depend thereon.

This pestiferous Poison principally assailes the Vital Spirit, the
Storehouse and original whereof is the Heart, so that if the Vital Spirit
prove stronger, it drives it far from the Heart; but if weaker, it being
overcome and weakened by the hostile assault, flies back into the Fortress of
the Heart, by the like contagion infecting the Heart, and so the whole Body,
being spread into it by the passages of the Arteries.

Hence it is, pestilent Feauers are sometimes simple and folitarie,
other-whiles associated with a troop of other affects, as Botches, Carbunkles,
Blaines, and Spots, of one or more colors.

It is probable such affects have their original from the expulfiue Faculty,
whether strong or weak, provoked by the malignitie of the raging matter: Yet
assuredly diverse symptoms and changes arise according to the constitution of
the Body of the Patient, and condition of the humor in which the virulencie of
the Plague is chiefly inherent, and lastly in the nature of the efficient
cause.

I thought good by this description to express the nature of the Plague, at
this my first entrance into this matter, for we can scarce comprehend it in a
proper definition. For although the force thereof be definite and certain in
Nature, yet it is not altogether certain and manifest in Men's minds, because
it never happens after one sort: so that in so great variety it is very
difficult to set down any thing general and certain.

CHAP. II.
Of the Divine causes of an extraordinary Plague.
IT is a confirmed, constant, and received opinion in all Ages amongst
Christians, that the Plague and other Diseases which violently assail the life
of Man, are often sent by the just anger of God punishing our offenses. The
Prophet Amos has long since taught it, saying, Shall there be affliction,
shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? On which truly
we ought always to meditate, and that for two causes: The first is, that we
always bear this in mind, that we enjoy health, live, move, and have our
beings from God, and descends from that Father of Light: and for this cause we
are always bound to give him great and exceeding thanks. The other is, that
knowing the calamities, by sending whereof the Divine anger proceeds to
revenge, we may at length repend, and leaving the way of wickedness, walk in
the paths of godliness. For thus we shall learn to see in God, our selves,
the Heaven and Earth, the true knowledge of the causes of the Plague, and by a
certain Divine Philosophy to teach, God to be the beginning and cause of the
second causes, which well without the first cause cannot go about, nor
attempt, much less perform any thing. for from hence they borrow their force,
order, and constancy of order; so that they serve as Instruments for God, who
rules and gouernes us, and the whole World, to perform all his works, by that
constant course of order, which he has appointed unchangeable from the
beginning. Wherefore all the cause of a Plague is not to be attributed to these
near and inferior causes or beginnings, as the Epicures, and Lucianists
commonly do, who attributing too much, yea all things to Nature, have left
nothing to Gods Providence. On the contrary, we ought to think and believe in
all our thoughts, That even as God by his omnipotent Power has created all
things of nothing, so he by his eternal Wisdom preserues and gouernes the
same, leads and enclines them as he please, yea verily at his pleasure changes
their order, and the whole course of Nature.

This cause of an extraordinary Plague as we confess and acknowledge, so here
we will not prosecute it any further but think fit to leave it to Divines,
because it exceeds the bounds of Nature in which I will now contain my self.
Wherefore let us come to the natural causes of the Plague.

CHAP. III.
Of the Natural causes of the Plague, and chiefly of the Seminary of the
Plague by the corruption of the Air.
THE general and natural causes of the Plague are absolutely two, that is,
the infection of corrupt Air, and a preparation and fitness of corrupt
humors to take that infection; for it is noted before out of the Doctrine of
Galen, that our humors may be corrupted, and degenerate into such an
alienation which may equal the malignitie of Poison.

The Air is corrupted, when the four seasons of the year have not their
seasonablenesse, or degenerate from themselves, either by alteration, or by
alienation: as if the constitution of the whole year be moist and rainie by
reason of gross and black Clouds; if the Winter be gentle and warm without
any Northerly wind, which is cold and dry, and by that means contrary to
putrefaction; if the Spring which should be temperate, shall be faulty in any
excess of distemper; if the Autumn shall be ominous by Fires in the Air,
with Stars shooting, and as it were falling down, or terrible Comets, never
seen without some disaster; if the Summer be hot, cloudy and moist, and
without Winds, and the Clouds fly from the South into the North. These and
such like unnatural constitutions of the seasons of the year, were never
better, or more excellently handled by any, then by Hippocrates in his Book
Epidemion. Therefore the Air from hence draws the Seeds of Corruption and the
Pestilence, which at the length, the like excess of qualities being brought
in, it sends into the humors of our Bodies, chiefly such as are thin and
serous. Although the Pestilence does not always necessarily arise from hence,
but some-whiles some other kind of cruel and infectious Disease.

But neither is the Air only corrupted by these superior causes, but also by
putrid and filthy stinking vapors spread abroad through the Air encompassing
us, from the Bodies or Carcasses of things not buried, gapings or hollownesses
of the Earth, or Sinkes and such like places being opened: For the Sea often
ouer-flowing the Land in some places, and leaving in the Mudde, or hollownesses
of the Earth (caused by Earthquakes) the huge Bodies of monstrous Fishes,
which it hides in its Waters, has given both the occasion and matter of a
Plague. For thus in our time a Whale cast upon the Tuscane shore, presently
caused a Plague over all that Country.

But as Fishes infect and breed a Plague in the Air, so the Air being
corrupted, often causes a Pestilence in the Sea amongst Fishes, especially when
they either swim on the top of the Water, or are infected by the pestilent
vapors of the Earth lying under them, and rising into the Air thorough the
Body of the Water, the latter whereof Aristotle says, happens but seldom. But
it often chances, that the Plague raging in any Country, many Fishes are cast
up on all the Coast, and may be seen lying on great heaps. But sulphurous
vapors, or such as partake of any other malign quality, sent forth from
places under the ground by gapings and gulfes opened by Earthquakes, not only
corrupt the Air, but also infect and taint the Seeds, Plants, and all the
Fruits which we eat, and so transfer the pestilent corruption into us, and
those Beasts on which we feed, together with our nourishment. The truth
whereof, Empedocles made manifest, who by shutting up a great Gulf of the
Earth opened in a Valley between two Mountains, freed all Sicily from a
Plague caused from thence.

If Winds rising suddenly shall drive such filthy exhalations from those
Regions in which they were pestiferous, into other places, they also will
carry the Plague with them thither.

If it be thus, some will say, it should seem that wheresoever stinking and
putrid exhalations arise, as about standing Pooles, Sinkes, and Shambles, there
should the Plague reign, and straight suffocate with its noisome Poison, the
People which work in such places: but experience finds this false.

We do answer, that the putrefaction of the Plague is far different, and of
another kind then this common, as that which partakes of a certain secret
malignitie, and wholly contrary to our lives, and of which we cannot easily*
give a plain and manifest reason. Yet that vulgar putrefaction wheresoever it
be, does easily and quickly entertain and welcome the pestiferous contagion as
often as, and whenever it comes, as joined unto it by a certain
familiarity, and at the length, it self degenerating into a pestiferous
malignitie, certainly no otherwise then those Diseases which arise in the
Plague time, the putrid Diseases in our Bodies, which at the first wanted
virulencie and contagion, as Ulcers, putrid Feauers, and other such Diseases
raised by the peculiar default of the humors, easily degenerate into
pestilence, presently receiving the tainture of the Plague, to which they had
before a certain preparation. Wherefore in time of the Plague, I would advise
all Men to shun such exceeding stinking places, as they would the Plague it
self: that there may be no preparation in our Bodies, or humors to catch that
infection, (without which, as Galen teaches, the Agent has no power over the
Subject, for otherwise in a Plague time the Sickness would equally seize upon
all) so that the impression of the pestiferous quality may presently follow
that disposition.

But when we say the Air is pestilent, we do not understand that sincere,
elementarie, and simple as it is of its own nature, for such is not subject to
putrefaction, but that which is polluted with ill vapors rising from the
Earth, standing Waters, Vaults, or Sea, and degenerates, and is changed from
its native purity and simplicity. But certainly amongst all the constitutions
of the Air fit to receive a pestilent corruption, there is none more fit then
a hot, moist, and still season: For the excess of such qualities easily causes
putrefaction. Wherefore the South Wind reigning, which is hot and moist, and
principally in places near the Sea, there Flesh cannot long be kept, but it
presently is tainted and corrupted.

Further, we must know, that the pestilent malignitie which rises from the
Carcasses or Bodies of Men, is more easily communicated to Men; that which
rises from Oxen, to Oxen; and that which comes from Sheep, to Sheep, by a
certain sympathy and familiarity of Nature: no otherwise then the Plague
which shall seize upon some one in a Family, does presently spread more quickly
amongst the rest of that Family, by reason of the similitude of temper, then
amongst others of another Family disagreeing in their whole temper. Therefore
the Air thus altered and estranged from its goodness of nature necessarily
drawn in by inspiration and transpiration, brings in the Seeds of the Plague,
and so consequently the Plague it self, into Bodies prepared and made ready to
receive it.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the preparation of humors to putrefaction, and admission of pestiferous
impressions.
Having showed the causes from which the Air does putrefie, become corrupt,
and is made partaker of a pestilent and poisonous constitution, we must now
declare what things may cause the humors to putrefie, and make them so apt to
receive and retain the pestilent Air and venenate quality.

Humors putrefie either from fullness, which breeds obstruction, or by
distemperate excess, or lastly, by admixture of corrupt matter and evil
juice, which ill feeding does specially cause to abound in the Body: For the
Plague often follows the drinking of dead and mustie Wines, muddy and standing
Waters which receive the sinkes and filth of a City, and Fruits and Pulls eaten
without discretion in scarcity of other Corn, as Pease, Beans, Lentiles,
Vetches, Acornes, the Roots of Fern, and Grass made into Bread. For such
meats obstruct, heap up ill humors in the Body, and weaken the strength of
the Faculties, from whence proceeds a putrefaction of humors, and in that
putrefaction a preparation and disposition to receive, conceive, and bring
forth the Seeds of the Plague: which the filthy Scabbes, malign Sores,
rebellious Ulcers, and putrid Fevers being all forerunners of greater
putrefaction and corruption do testify. Vehement passions of the Mind, as
Anger, Sorrow, Grief, Vexation, and Fear help forward this corruption of
humors, all which hinder Natures diligence and care of concoction: For as in
the Dogge-dayes the Lees of Wine subseding to the bottom are by the strength
and efficacy of heat drawn up to the top, and mixed with the whole substance
of the Wine, as it were by a certain ebullition, or working: So Melancholy
humors being the Dregs or Lees of the Blood, stirred up by the Passions of
the Mind, defile or taint all the Blood with their feculent impuritie.

We found that some years agone by experience, at the Battle of St Dennis,
For all Wounds, by what Weapon soever they were made, degenerated into great
and filthy putrefactions and corruptions with Feauers of the like nature, and
were commonly determined by Death, what Medicines, and how diligently soever
they were applied; which caused many to have a false suspicion that the Weapons
on both sides were poisoned. But there were manifest signs of corruption and
putrefaction, in the Blood let the same day that any were hurt, and in the
principal parts dissected afterward, that it was from no other cause, then an
evil constitution of the Air, and the Minds of the Soldiers perverted by
Hate, Anger, and Fear.

CHAP. V.
What signs in the Air and Earth prognosticate a Plague.
WE may know a Plague to be at hand and hang over us, if at any time the Air,
and Seasons of the year swerve from their natural constitution, after those
ways I have mentioned before, if frequent and long continuing Meteors, or
sulphurous Thunders infect the Air; If Fruits, Seeds, and Pulls be Worme-eaten;
If Birds forsake their Nests, Eggs, or Young, without any manifest cause; If
we perceive Women commonly to abort, by continual breathing in the vaporous
Air, being corrupted and hurtful both to the Embrion and original of life,
and by which it being suffocated is presently cast forth and expelled. Yet
notwithstanding, those Airie impressions do not solely corrupt the Air, but
there may be also others raised by the Sun from the filthy exhalations, and
poisonous vapors of the Earth and Waters, or of dead Carcasses, which by their
unnatural mixture, easily corrupt the Air subject to alteration, as which is
thin and moist, from whence diverse Epidemiall Diseases, and such as eueriewhere
seize upon the common sort, according to the several kinds of corruptions,
such as that famous Catarrhe with difficulty of breathing, which in the year
1510 going almost over the World, and raged over all the Cities and Towns of
France, with great heaviness of the Head (whereupon the French named it
Cucuita) with a straitness of the Heart and Lungs, and a Cough, a continual
Fever, and sometimes rauing.

This although it seized upon many more then it killed, yet because they
commonly dyed who were either let Blood, or purged, it showed it self
pestilent by that violence and peculiar and unheard of kind of malignitie.

Such also was the English Sweating-sicknesse, or Sweating-Feauer, which
unusual with a great deal of terror invaded all the lower parts of Germany,
and the Low Countries, from the year 1525 unto the year 1530, and that
chiefly in Autumn.

As soon as this pestilent Disease entered into any City, suddenly two or
three hundred fell sick on one day, then it departing thence to some other
place, the people stricken with it languishing, fell down in a swound, and
lying in their Beds, swet continually, having a Fever, a frequent, quick, and
unequal Pulse, neither did they leave sweating till the disease left them,
which was in one or two days at the most: yet freed of it, they languished
long after, they all had a beating, or palpitation of the Heart, which held
some for two or three years, and others all their life after.

At the first beginning it killed many, before the force of it was known: but
afterward very few, when it was found out by practice and use, that those who
furthered, and continued their sweats, and strengthened themselves with
Cordials, were all restored. But at certain times many other popular Diseases
spring up, as putrid Feauers, Fluxes, Bloody Fluxes, Catarrhes, Coughes,
Phrenzies, Sqinancies, Pleurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs, Inflammations of
the Eyes, Apoplexies, Lethargies, small Pockes, and Measels, Scabbes,
Carbuncles, and malign Pustules. Wherefore the Plague is not always, nor
euerie-where of one and the same kind, but of diverse; which is the cause that
diverse names are imposed upon it, according to the variety of the effects it
brings, and symptoms which accompany it, and kinds of putrefaction, and
hidden qualities of the Air.

They affirm, when the Plague is at hand, that Mushromes grow in greater
abundance out of the Earth, and upon the surface thereof many kinds of
poisonous insecta creep in great numbers, as Spiders, Caterpillars,
Butterflyes, Grasse-hoppers, Beetles, Hornets, Waspes, Flies, Scorpions,
Snailes, Locusts, Toads, Worms, and such things as are the offspring of
putrefaction. And also wild Beasts tired with the vaporous malignitie of their
Dens, and Caves in the Earth, forsake them; and Moles, Toads, Vipers, Snakes,
Lezards, Aspes, and Crocodiles are seen to fly away, and remove their
habitations in great troops. For these, as also some other Creatures, have a
manifest power by the gift of God, and the instinct of Nature, to presage
changes of Weather, as Raines, Showers, and fair Weather; and Seasons of the
year, as the Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, which they testify by their
Singing, Chirping, Crying, Flying, Playing, and Beating their Wings, and such
like signs; so also they have a perception of a Plague at hand. And moreover,
the Carcasses of some of them which took less heed of themselves, suffocated
by the pestiferous Poison of the ill Air contained in the Earth, may be
euerie-where found, not only in their Dens, but also in the plain Fields.

These vapors corrupted not by a simple putrefaction, but an occult
malignitie, are drawn out of the Bowels of the Earth into the Air, by the
force of the Sun and Stars, and thence condensed into Clouds, which by
their falling upon Corn, Trees, and Grass, infect and corrupt all things,
which the Earth produces, and also killes those Creatures which feed upon them;
yet brute Beasts sooner then Men, as which stoop and hold their Heads down
toward the Ground (the maintainer and breeder of this Poison) that they may
get their Food from thence. Therefore at such times, skillful Husbandmen,
taught by long experience, never drive their Cattle or Sheep to pasture,
before that the Sun by the force of his Beams, have wasted and dissipated
into Air, this pestiferous dew hanging and abiding upon boughs and leaves of
Trees, Herbs, Corn, and Fruits.

But on the contrary, that Pestilence which proceeds from some malign
quality from above, by reason of evil and certain conjunction of the
Stars, is more hurtful to Men and Birds, as those, who are nearer to Heaven.

CHAP. VI.
By using what cautions in Air and Diet, one may prevent the Plague.
Having declared the signs fore-shewing a Pestilence: now we must show by what
means we may shun the imminent danger thereof, and defend our selves from it.
No prevention seemed more certain to the Ancients, then most speedily to
remove into places far distant from the infected place, and to be most slow
in their return thither again. But those who by reason of their business, or
employments cannot change their habitation, must principally have care of two
things: The first is, that they strengthen their Bodies, and the principal
parts thereof against the daily imminent invasions of the Poison, or the
pestiferous and venenate Air. The other, that they abate the force of it, that
it may not imprint its virulencie in the Body; which may be done by correcting
the excess of the quality inclining toward it, by the opposition of its
contrary. For if it be hotter, then is meet it must be tempered with cooling
things; if too cold, with heating things: yet this will not suffice. For we
ought besides, to amend and purge the corruptions of the venenate malignitie
diffused through it, by smells and perfumes resisting the Poison thereof. The
Body will be strengthened and more powerfully resist the infected Air, if it
want excrementitious humors, which may be procured by purging and bleeding, and
for the rest a convenient diet appointed, as shunning much variety of Meats,
and hot and moist things, and all such which are easily corrupted in the
Stomach, and cause obstructions, such as those things which be made by
Comfit-makers; we must shun satietie and drunkenness, for both of them weakens
the Powers, which are preserved by the moderate use of Meats of good juice.

Let moderate exercises in a clear Air, and free from any venomous tainture,
preceed your Meals.

Let the Belly have due euacuation either by Nature or Art.

Let the Heart, the seat of Life, and the rest of the Bowels be strengthened
with Cordials and Antidotes applied and taken (as we shall here-after show) in
the form of Epithemes, Ointments, Emplasters, Waters, Pills, Powders,
Tablets, Opiates, Fumigations, and such like.

Make choice of a pure Air and free from all pollution, and far remote from
stinking places, for such is most fit to preserve life, to recreate and repair
the Spirits, whereas on the contrary a cloudy, or mistie Air, and such as is
infected with gross and stinking vapors, duls the Spirits, deiects the
Appetite, makes the Body faint and ill colored, oppresses the Heart, and is
the breeder of many diseases.

The Northern Wind is healthful, because it is cold and dry. But on the
contrary, the Southern Wind, because it is hot and moist, weakens the Body by
sloth or dullness, opens the Pores, and makes them peruious to the pestiferous
malignitie. The Western Wind is also unwholesome, because it comes near to the
nature of the Southern: wherefore the Windows must be shut up on that side of
the House on which they blow, but opened on the North and East side, unless it
happen the Plague come from thence.

Kindle a clear Fire in all the Lodging Chambers of the House, and perfume the
whole House with Aromaticke things, as Frankensence, Myrrh, Benzoine, Ladanum,
Styrax, Roses, Mirtle-leaues, Lauender, Rosemary, Sage, Sauory, Wild Time,
Marierome, Broom, Pine Apples, pieces of Fur, Juniper Berries, Cloves,
Perfumes: and let your Clothes be aired in the same.

There be some, who think it a great preservative against the pestilent Air
to keep a Goat in their houses, because the capacity of the Houses filled
with the strong sent which the Goat sends forth, prohibits the entrance of the
venomous Air: which same reason has place also in sweet smells, and besides,
it argues, that such as are hungry are apter to take the Plague, then those who
have eaten moderately: for the Body is not only strengthened with Meat, but
all the passages thereof are filled by the vapors diffused from thence, by
which otherwise the infected Air would find a more easy entrance to the Heart.

Yet the common sort of People yield another reason for the Goat, which is,
That one ill sent drives away another, as one wedge drives forth another; which
calls to my mind that which is recorded by Alexander Benedictus, that there
was a Scythian Physician, which caused a Plague arysing from the infection of
the Air, to cease, by causing all the Dogs, Cats, and such like Beasts which
were in the City, to be hilled, and casting their Carcasses up and down the
Streets, that so by the coming of this new putrid vapor as a stranger, the
former pestiferous infection, as an old guest, was put out of its Lodging, and
so the Plague ceased. For Poisons have not only an antipathy with their
Antidotes, but also with some other Poisons.

Whilst the Plague is hot it is not good to stir out of door before the
rising of the Sun: wherefore we must have patience, until he have cleansed
the Air with the comfortable light of his Beams, and dispersed all the foggy
and nocturnall pollutions, which commonly hang in the Air in dirtie, and
specially in low places and Valleys.

All public and great meetings and assemblyes must be shunned.

If the Plague begin in Summer, and seem principally to rage, helped forward
by the Summers heat, it is the best to perform a Journey begun, or undertaken
for performance of necessary affairs, rather upon the night time, then on the
day, because the Infection takes force, strength and subtiletie of substance,
by which it may more easily permeate and enter in, by the heat of the Sun;
but by night Men's Bodies are more strong, and all things are more gross and
dense. But you must observe a clean contrary course if the malignitie seem
to borrow strength, and celeritie from coldness. But you must always eschew
the Beams of the Moon, but specially at the full: For then our Bodies are
more languid and weak, and fuller of excrementitious humors. Even as Trees
which for that cause must be cut down in their season of the Moon, that is,
in the decrease thereof.

After a little gentle walking in your Chamber, you must presently use some
means that the principal parts may be strengthened by suscitating the heat
and Spirits, and that the passages to them may be filled, that so the way may
be shut up from the Infection coming from without. Such as by the use of
Garlike have not their Heads troubled, nor their inward parts inflamed, as
Country people, and such as are used to it, to such there can be no more
certain preservative and antidote against the pestiferous Fogges or Mists, and
the nocturnall obscurity, then to take it in the morning with a draught of
good Wine; for it being abundantly diffused presently over all the Body,
filles up the passages thereof, and strengheneth it in a moment.

For Water, if the Plague proceed from the tainture of the Air, we must wholly
shun and avoid Raine-water, because it cannot but be infected by the contagion
of the Air. Wherefore the Water of Springs, and of the deepest Wells are
thought best. But if the malignitie proceed from the vapors contained in the
Earth, you must make choice of Raine-water. Yet it is more safe to digest every
sort of Water by boiling it, and to prefer that Water before other, which is
pure and cleerer to the sight, and without either taste or smell, and which
besides suddenly takes the extremest mutation of heat and cold.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Cordial Remedies by which we may preserve our Bodies in fear of the
Plague, and cure those already infected therewith.
SVch as cannot eat without much labor, exercise, and hunger, and who are no
lovers of Breakefasts, having euacuated their Excrements, before they go from
home, must strengthen the Heart with some Antidote against the virulencie of
the Infection. Amongst which, Aqua Theriacalis, or Treacle Water, two Ounces,
with the like quantity of Sack, is much commended being drunk, and rubbing
the Nose-thrils, Mouth, and Ears with the same; for the Treacle Water
strengthens the Heart, expels Poison, and is not only good for a preservative,
but also to cure the Disease it self: For by sweat it drives forth the Poison
contained within. It should be made in June, at which time all simple
Medicines, by the vital heat of the Sun, are in their greatest efficacy.

The composition whereof is thus: Take the Roots of Gentian, Cyperus,
Tormentill, Diptam, or Fraxinella Elecampaine, of each one Ounce; the Leaves of
Mullet, Carduus Benedictus, Diuels-bit, Burnet, Scabious, Sheep Sorrel, of
each half a Handful; of the tops of Rue a little quantity; Myrtle Berries
one Ounce; of Red Rose Leaves, the Flowers of Buglosse, Borage, and St John's
Wurt, of each one Ounce: let them be all cleansed, dried, and macerated for the
space of 24 hours in one pound of White Wine or Malmsey, and of Rose Water or
Sorrel Water, then let them be put in a Vessel of Glass, and add thereto of
Treacle and Methridate, of each four Ounces, then distill them in Balneo
Mariae, and let the distilled Water be received in a Glass Vial, and let
there be added thereto of Saffron two Drammes, of Bole Armenicke, Terra
Sigillata, Yellow Sanders, Shauings of Iuorie and Harts-horne, of each half an
Ounce, then let the Glass be well stopped and set in the Sun for the space
of eight or ten days. Let the prescribed quantity be taken every morning
so often as shall be needful. It may be given without hurt to sucking Children,
and to Women great with Child. But that it may be the more pleasant, it must be
strayned thorough an Hippocras Bag, adding thereto some Sugar and Cynnamon.

Some think themselves sufficiently defended with a Root of Elecampaine,
Zedoarie, or Angelica, rolled in their Mouth, or chawed between their Teeth.

Others drink every morning one Dram of the Root of Gentian bruised, being
macerated for the space of one night in two Ounces of White Wine.

Others do take Worme-wood Wine.

Others sup up in a rere Egg one Dram of Terra Sigillata, or of Harts-horne,
with a little Saffron, and drink two Ounces of Wine after it.

There be some that do infuse Bole Armenicke, the Roots of Gentian,
Tormentill, Diptam, the Berryes of Juniper, Cloves, Mace, Cynnamon, Saffron,
and such like, in Aqua Vitae and strong White Wine, and so distill it in Balneo
Mariae.

This Cordial Water that follows is of great virtue. Take of the Roots of
the long and round Aristolochia, Tormentill, Diptam, of each three Drammes, of
Zedoarie, two Drammes, Lignum Aloes, Yellow Sanders, of each one Dram, of the
Leaves of Scordium, St John's Wurt, Sorrel, Rue, Sage, of each half an Ounce,
of Bay and Juniper Berryes, of each three Drammes, Cytron Seeds one Dram, of
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, of each two Drammes, of Masticke, Olibanum, Bole
Armenicke, Terra Sigillata, Shauings of Harts-horne, and Iuorie, of each one
Ounce, of Saffron one Scruple, of the Conserues of Roses, Buglosse Flowers,
Water Lillyes, and old Treacle, of each one Ounce, of Camphire half a Dram,
of Aqua Vitae half a pint, of White Wine two pints and a half, make thereof a
distillation in Balneo Mariae. The use of this distilled Water is even as
Treacle Water is.

The Electuarie following is very effectual. Take of the best Treacle three
Ounces, Juniper berries and Carduus Seeds of each one Dram and a half, of
Bole Armenicke prepared half an Ounce, of the Powder of the Electuarie De
Gemmis, and Diamargariton Frigidum, the Powder of Harts-horne, and Red Coral,
of each one Dram: mix them with the Sirrupe of the Rinds and Juice of
Pome-citrons as much as shall suffice, and make thereof a liquid Electuarie in
the form of an Opiate, let them take every morning the quantity of a
Filberd, drinking after it two Drammes of the Water of Scabions, Cherryes,
Carduus Benedictus, and of some such like cordial things, or of strong Wine.

The following Opiate is also very profitable, which also may be made into
Tablets. Take of the Roots of Angelica, Gentian, Zedoarie, Elecampaine, of each
two Drammes; of Cytron and Sorrel Seeds of each half a Dram; of the dried
Rinds of Cytrous, Cinnamon, Bay and Juniper Berryes, and Saffron, of each one
Scruple; of Conserve of Roses and Buglosse, of each one Ounce; of fine hard
Sugar as much as is sufficient: make thereof Tablets of the weight of half a
Dram, let him take one of them two hours before meat: Or make thereof an
Opiate with equal parts of Conserues of Buglosse and Mel Anthosatum, and so
adding all the rest dry and in Powder: Or take of the Roots of Valerian,
Tormentill, Diptam, of the Leaves of Rue, of each half an Ounce; of Saffron,
Mace, Nutmegs, of each half a Dram; of Bole Armenicke prepared half an
Ounce; of Conserve of Roses, and Sirupe of Lemons as much as will be sufficient
to make thereof an Opiate liquid enough. Or take of the Roots of both the
Aristolochia's, of Gentian, Tormentill, Diptam, of each one Dram and a half;
of Ginger three Drammes; of the Leaves of Rue, Sage, Mints, and Peny-royall, of
each two Drammes; of Bay and Juniper Berries, Citron Seeds, of each four
Scruples; of Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each two Drammes; of Lignum
Aloes, and Yellow Saunders, of each one Dram; of Male Frankincense, i.
Olibanum, Masticke, shauings of Harts-horne and Iuorie, of each two Scruples;
of Saffron half a Dram; of Bole Armenicke, Terra Sigillata, Red Coral,
Pearl, of each one Dram; of Conserues of Roses, Buglosse Flowers, Water
Lillyes, and old Treacle, of each one Ounce; of Loaf Sugar one pound and a
quarter: A little before the end of the making it up, add two Drammes of
Confectio Alkermes, and of Camphire dissolved in Rose Water one Scruple: make
thereof an Opiate according to Art, the Dose thereof is from half a Dram to
half a Scruple.

Treacle and Mithridate saithfully compounded excel all other Cordial
Medicines, adding for every half ounce of each of them, one Ounce and a half
of Conserues of Roses, or of Buglosse, or of Violets, and three Drammes of Bole
Armenicke prepared: Of these being mixed with stirring, and incorporated
together, make a Conserve: It must be taken in the morning the quantity of a
Filberd: You must choose that Treacle that is not less then four years old,
nor above twelve: That which is somewhat new, is judged to be most meet for
Choleric persons, but that which is old for Flegmaticke and old Men. For at
the beginning the strength of the Opium that enters into the composition
thereof, remains in its full virtue for a year: but afterward the more
years old it waxes, the strength thereof is more abolished, so that at length
the whole composition becomes very hot.

The Confection of Alkermes is very effectual both for a preservative against
this Disease, and also for the Cure.

The quantity of a Filberd of Rubarbe, with one Cloue chawed or rolled in the
Mouth, is supposed to repel the coming of the pestilent Air: As also this
composition following.

Take of preserved Citron and Orange Pills, of each one Dram; of Conserve of
Roses, and of the Roots of Buglosse, of each three Drammes; of Citron Seeds
half an Ounce; of Annice Seeds, and Fennel Seeds, of each one Dram; of
Angelica Roots, four Scruples; Sugar of Roses, as much as suffices: Make a
Confection, and cover it with Leaves of Gold, and take a little of it out of a
Spoone before you go abroad every morning.

Or take of Pine Apple Kernels, and Fisticke Nuts, infused for the space of
six hours in the Water of Scabious, and Roses of each two Ounces; of Almonds
blanched in the forenamed Waters half a Pound; of preferued Citron and Orange
Pills, of each one Dram and a half; of Angelica Roots four Scruples: Make
them according to Art unto the form of March-pane, or of any other such like
Confection: And hold a little piece thereof often in your Mouth.

The Tablets following are most effectual in such a case. Take of the Roots of
Diptam, Tormentill, Valerian, Elecampaine, Eringoes, of each half a Dram; of
Bole Armenicke, Terra Sigillata, of each one Scruple; of Camphire, Cinnamon,
Sorrel Seeds, and Zedoarie, of each one Scruple* of the^ Species of the
Electuarie Diamargariton Frigidum, two Scruples; of Conserve of Roses,
Buglosse, preserved Citron Pills, Mithridate, Treacle, of each one Dram; of
fine Sugar dissolved in Scabious, and Carduus Water, as much as shall suffice:
Make thereof Tablets of the weight of a Dram, or half a Dram, take them in
the morning before you eat.

The Pills of Ruffus are accounted most effectual preservatives, so that
Ruffus himself says, that he never knew any to be infected that used them:
The composition of them is thus.

Take of the best Aloes half a Dram; of Gum Ammoniacum two Drammes; of
Mirrhe two Drammes and an half; of Masticke two Drammes; of Saffron seven
Granes: Put them altogether, and incorporate them with the Juice of Citrons, or
the Sirupe of Limons, and make thereof a Mass, and let it be kept in Leather:
Let the Patient take the weight of half a Dram every morning two or three
hours before Meat, and let him drink the Water of Sorrel after it, which
through its tartness, and the thinness of its parts, does infringe the force
and power of the malignitie, or putrefaction: For experience has taught us,
that Sorrel being eaten, or chawed in the Mouth does make the pricking of
Scorpions unhurtful. And for those Ingredients which do enter into the
composition of those Pills, Aloes does cleanse and purge; Myrrh resists
putrefaction; Masticke strengthens; Saffron exhilarates and makes lively the
Spirits that govern the Body, especially the Vital and Animal.

Those Pills that follow are also much approved. Take of Aloes one Ounce* of
Myrrh half an Ounce; of Saffron one Scruple; of Agaricke in Trochisces, two
Drammes; of Rubarbe in powder, one Dram; of Cinnamon two Scruples; of
Masticke one Dram and a half; of Citron Seeds twelve Grains: Powder them
all as is requisite, and make thereof a Mass with the Sirupe of Maiden Hair:
Let it be used as aforesaid.

If the Mass begin to wax hard, the Pills that must presently be taken, must
be mollified with the Sirupe of Lemons.

Take of washed Aloes two Ounces; of Saffron one Dram; of Myrrh half an
Ounce; of Ammoniacum dissolved in White Wine, one Ounce; of Honey of Roses,
Zedoarie, Red Saunders, of each one Dram; of Bole Armenicke prepared two
Drammes; of Red Coral half an Ounce; of Camphire half a Scruple: Make
thereof Pills according to Art. But those that are subject or apt to the
Haemorrhoides ought not at all, or very seldom to use those kinds of Pills
that do receive much Aloes.

They say, that King Mithridates affirmed by his own writing, that whosoever
took the quantity of an Hasell Nut of the preseruatine following, and drank
a little Wine after it, should be free from Poison that day. Take two
Wall-Nuts, those that be very dry, two Figs, twenty Leaves of Rue, and
three Grains of Salt: beat them, and incorporate them together, and let them
be used as is aforesaid.

This remedy is also said to be profitable for those that are bitten or stung
by some venomous Beast, and for this only, because it has Rue in the
composition thereof. But you must forbid Women that are with Child the use of
this Medicine, for Rue is hot and dry in the third degree, and therefore it is
said to purge the Womb, and provoke the Flowers, whereby the nourishment is
drawn away from the Child.

Of such variety of Medicines every one may make choice of that that is most
agreeable to his taste, and as much thereof as shall be sufficient.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Local Medicines to be applied outwardly.
THose Medicines that have proper and excellent virtues against the Pestilence
are not to be neglected to be applied outwardly, or carried in the Hand. And
such are all aromaticall, astringent, or spirituous things which therefore are
endewed with virtue to repel the venomous and pestiferous Air from coming
and entering into the Body, and to strengthen the Heart and the Brain. Of this
kind are Rue, Baulme, Rosemary, Scordium, Sage, Worme-wood, Cloves, Nutmegs,
Saffron, the Roots of Angelica, and Louage, and such like, which must be
macerated one night in sharp Vinegar and Aqua Vitae, and then tied in a knot
as big as an Egg: Or rather let it be carried in a Sponge made wet or soaked
in the said Infusion. For there is nothing that does sooner and better hold the
spirituous virtue and strength of aromaticke things, then a Sponge. Wherefore
it is of principal use either to keep or hold sweet things to the Nose, or to
apply Epithemes, and Fomentationsto the Heart.

Those sweet things ought to be hot or cold, as the season of the year, and
kind of the Pestilence is. As for example, in the Summer you ought to infuse
and macerate Cinnamon and Cloves beaten together with a little Saffron in equal
parts, of Vinegar of Roses, and Rose Water, into which you must dip a Sponge,
which rolled in a fair Linen Cloth you may carry in your Hand, and often
smell to.

Take of Worme-wood half a Handful; ten Cloves; of the Roots of Gentian and
Angelica, of each two Drams; of Vinegar and Rose Water, of each two Ounces; of
Treacle and Mithrid te, of each one Dram: beat and mix them all well
together, and let a Sponge be dipped therein, and used as aboue-said. They may
also be enclosed in Boxes, made of sweet Wood, as of Juniper, Ceder, or
Cypress, and so carried for the same purpose.

But there is nothing more easy to be carried then Pomanders: the form of
which is thus. Take of Yellow Saunders, Mace, Citron Pills, Rose and Myrtle
Leaves, of each two Drammes; of Benzoin, Ladanum, Storax, of each half a
Dram; of Cinnamon, and Saffron, of each two Scruples; of Camphire, and Amber
Greece, of each one Scruple; of Musk three Grains: Make there of a Pomander,
with Rose Water, with the infusion of Tragacanth. Or take Red Rose Leaves, the
Flowers of Water Lillyes, and Violets, of each one Ounce; of the three
Saunders, Coriander Seeds, Citron Pills, of each half an Ounce; of Camphire
one Dram: Let them all be Powders, and with Water of Roses, and Tragacanth
make a Pomander.

In the Winter it must be made thus: Take of Storax, Benzoin, of each one
Dram and a half; of Musk half a Scruple; of Cloves, Lauander, and Cyperus,
of each two Drammes; of the Root of Orris, i. Flower de Luce, and Calamus
Aromaticus, of each two Drammes and a half; of Amber Greece three Drammes; of
Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Rose Water and Aqua Vitae, as much as shall
suffice: Make thereof a Pomander.

And for the same purpose you may also use to carry about with you sweet
Powders made of Amber Greece, Storax, Orris, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Mace, Cloves,
Saffron, Benzoin, Musk, Camphire, Roses, Violets, Iuncus Odoratus, Marioram,
and such like: Of which being mixed together, Powders may be compounded and
made.

Take of the Roots of Orris two Drammes; of Cyperus, Calamus Aromaticus, Red
Roses, of each half an Ounce; of Cloves half a Dram; of Storax one Dram;
of Musk eight Grains: Mix them, and make a Powder for a Bag. Or take the
Roots of Orris two Ounces; Red Rose Leaves, White Saunders, Storax, of each one
Ounce; of Cyperus one Dram; of Calamus Aromaticus one Ounce; of Marierome
half an Ounce; of Cloves three Drammes; of Lauender half a Dram; of
Coriander Seeds two Drammes; of good Musk half a Scruple; of Ladanum and
Benzoin, of each a Dram; of Nutmegs, and Cinnamon, of each two Drammes: Make
thereof a fine Powder, and sow it in a Bag.

It will be very convenient also to apply to the Region of the Heart, a Bag
filled with Yellow Saunders, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron, and Treacle,
shaken together, and incorporated, and sprinkled over with strong Vinegar and
Rose Water in Summer, and with strong Wine and Muskedine in the Winter.

These sweet aromaticke things that are so full of Spirits, smelling sweetly
and strongly, have admirable virtues to strengthen the principal parts of the
Body, and to stir up the expulsive faculty to expel the Poison.

Contrarie-wise, those that are stinking and unsavory procure a desire to
vomit, and dissolution of the Powers, by which it is manifest how foolish and
absurd their persuasion is, that council such as are in a pestilent
constitution of the Air, to receive and take in the stinking and unsavory
vapors of Sinkes and Priuies, and that especially in the morning.

But it will not suffice to carry those Preservatives alone without the use of
any other thing, but will be also very profitable, to wash all the whole Body
in Vinegar of the decoction of Juniper and Bay Berryes, the Roots of Gentian,
Marigolds, St John's Wort, and such like, with Treacle or Mithridate also
dissolved in it. For Vinegar is an enemy to all Poisons in general, whether
they be hot or cold: For it resists and hinders putrefaction, because it is
cold and dry: Therefore in this, inanimate Bodies, as Flesh, Herbs, Fruits,
and many other such like things may be kept a long time without putrefaction.
Neither is it to be feared, that it should obstruct the Pores, by reason of its
coldness, if the Body be bathed in it: For it is of subtle parts, and the
Spices boiled in it have virtue to open.

Whosoever accounts it hurtful to wash his whole Body therewith, let him
wash but only his Arme-holes, the Region of his Heart, his Temples, Groine
parts of Generation, as having great and marvelous sympathy with the principal
and noble parts.

If any mislike bathing* let him anoint himself with the following Unguent.

Take Oil of Roses four Ounces; Oil of Spike two Ounces; of the Powder of
Cinnamon and Cloves, of each one Ounce and a half; of Benzoin half an Ounce;
of Musk six Grains; of Treacle half a Dram; of Venice Turpentine one
Dram and a half; of Wax as much as shall suffice: Make thereof a soft
Unguent.

You may also drop a few drops of Oil of Masticke, of Sage, or of Cloves, and
such like, into the Ears, with a little Ciuet or Musk.

CHAP. IX.
Of the signs of such as are insected with the Plague.
WE must not stay so long before we pronounce one to have the Plague, until
there be pain and a tumor under his Arme-holes, or in his Groyne, or Spots
(vulgarly called Tokens) appear over all the Body, or Carbuncles arise: For
many dye through the venenate malignitie, before these signs do appear.
Wherefore the chiefest and truest signs of this Disease, are to be taken from
the Heart, being the Mansion of Life, which chiefly, and first of all is wont
to be assaulted by the force of the Poison. Therefore they that are infected
with the Pestilence, are vexed with often swoundings, and fainting; their Pulse
is feebler and slower then others, but sometimes more frequent, but that is
specially in the night season; they feel prickings over all their Body, as if
it were the pricking of Needles; but their Nose-thrils do itch especially* by
occasion of the malign vapors rising upwards from the lower and inner, into
the upper parts, their Breast burns, their Heart beats, with pain under
the left Dug, difficulty of taking breath, Ptissicke, Cough, pain of the
Heart, and such an elation or puffing up of the Hypocondria or sides of the
Belly distended with the abundance of vapors raised by the force of the
feuerish heat, that the Patient will in a manner seem to have the Tympanie.
They are molested with a desire to vomit, and oftentimes with much and painful
vomiting, wherein green and black matter is seen, and always of diverse
colors, answering in proportion to the excrements of the lower parts, the
Stomach being drawn into a consent with the Heart, by reason of the vicinitie
and communion of the Vessels; oftentimes Blood alone, and that pure, is
excluded and cast up in vomiting; and it is not only cast up by vomiting out
of the Stomach, but also very often out of the Nosethrils, Fundament, and in
Women out of the Womb; the inward parts are often burned, and the outward
parts are stiff with cold, the whole heat of the Patient being drawn
violently inward, after the manner of a Cupping-Glasse, by the strong burning
of the inner parts; then the Eyelids wax blew, as it were through some
contusion, all the whole Face has a horrid aspect, and as it were the color
of Lead, the Eyes are burning red, and, as it were, swollen or puffed up with
Blood, or any other humor, shed tears; and to conclude, the whole habit of
the Body is somewhat changed and turned yellow.

Many have a burning Fever, which does show it self by the Pacients vlcerated
Jaws, unquenchable thirst, dryness and blackness of the Tongue, and it
causes such a Frenzy by inflaming the Brain, that the Pacients running
naked out of their Beads, seek to throw themselves out of Windows into the
Pits and Rivers that are at hand. In some the Joints of their Body are so
weakened, that they cannot go nor stand, from the beginning they are as it were
buried in a long swound and deep sleep, by reason that the Fever sends up
to the Brain the gross vapors from the crude and cold humors, as it were from
green Wood newly kindled to make a Fire.

Such sleeping does hold them especially while the matter of the Sore or
Carbuncle is drawn together and begins to come to suppuration. Oftentimes
when they are awaked out of sleep, there do spots and marks appear
dispersed over the Skin, with a stinking sweat. But if those vapors be sharp
that are stirred up unto the Head, in stead of sleep they cause great waking,
and always there is much diversity of accidents in the Urine of those that
are infected with the Plague, by reason of the diverse temperature and condition
of Bodies: neither is the urine at all times, and in all Men of the same
consistence and color: For sometimes they are like unto the urine of those
that are sound and in health, that is to say, laudable in color and substance,
because that when the Heart is affected by the venomous Air, that enters in
unto it, the Spirits are more greatly grieved and molested then the humors:
but those, i. the Spirits, are infected and corrupted when these do begin to
corrupt.

But Vrines only show the dispositions of the humors or parts in which they
are made, collected together, and through which they do pass.

This reason seems truer to me then theirs which say, that Nature terrified
with the malignitie of the Poison auoyds contention, and does not resist or
labor to digest the matter that causes the Disease.

Many have their appetites so overthrown, that they can abstain from meat for
the space of three days together.

And to conclude, the variety of accidents is almost infinite, which appear
and spring up in this kind of Disease, by reason of the diversity of the
Poison and condition of the Bodies and grieved parts: but they do not all
appear in each Man, but some in one, and some in another.

CHAP. X.
What signs in the Plague are mortal.
II is a most deadly sign in the Pestilence, to have a continual and burning
Fever, to have the Tongue dry, rough, and black, to breathe with difficulty,
and to draw in a great quantity of breath, but breathe out little; to talk
idely; to have the Frenzy and madness together, with unquenchable thirst,
and great watching; to have Convulsions, the Hickit, Heart beating, and to
swound very often and vehemently; further, tossing and turning in the Bead,
with a loathing of meats, and daily vomits of a green, black, and bloody
color; and the Face pale, black, of a horrid and cruel aspect, bedewed with
a cold sweat, are very mortal signs.

There are some which at the very beginning have vicerous and painful
weariness, pricking under the Skin, with great torment of pain; the Eyeslooke
crewelly and staringly, the voice waxes hoarce, the Tongue rough and shutting,
and the understanding decaying, the Pacient utters and talks of frivolous
things. Truly those are very dangerously sick, no otherwise then those whose
Urine is pale, black, and troubled like unto the Urine of carriage Beasts, or
Lie, with diverse colored clouds, or contents, as blew, green, black, fattie,
and oily, as also resembling in show a Spiders Web, with a round body
swimming on the top.

If the Flesh of the Carbuncle be dry and black, as it were seared with a hot
Iron, if the Flesh about it be black and blew, if the matter do flow back,
and turn in, if they have a laske, with greatly stinking, liquid, thin,
clammy, black, green, or bluish Ordure; If they avoid Worms by reason of
the great corruption of the humors and yet for all this the Pacient is never
the better; If the Eyes wax often dim, if the Nose-thrils be contracted or
drawn together, if they have a grievous crampe, the Mouth be drawn aside, the
Muscles of the Face being drawn or contracted equally or unequally; If the
Nails be black; If they be often troubled with the Hickit, or have a
Convulsion and resolution over all the Body, then you may certainly
prognosticate that Death is at hand, and you may use Cordial Medicines only,
but it is too late to purge or let Blood.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Prognostication that is to be instituted in the Plague.
WHen you thoroughly know the nature of the Disease, and accidents thereof, and
the condition, function, and excellency of the Body and grieved parts, you may
well foretell the future motions and events of Diseases: Although that this may
be spoken in general, that there is no certain prediction in pestilent
Diseases, either to health or death, for they have very unconstant motions,
sometimes swift and quick, sometimes slow, and sometimes choking or
suffocating in a moment while one breathes in the venomous Air, as he is going
about any of his necessary affairs, having Pustles rising in the Skin with
sharp pain, and as though the whole Body were pricked all over with Needles,
or the stings of Bees. Which I have seen with my Eyes in the Plague that was
at Lions when Charles the French King lay there. It many times comes to pass
that the accidents that were very vehement and raging a little before, are
suddenly assuaged, and the Pacients do think themselves better, or almost
perfectly sound. Which happened to Mary one of the Queene-Mother her Mayds in
that notable pestilent constitution of the Air that year when Charles the
French Kinglay at the Castle of Rossilion: For when she was infected, a great
Tumor or Bubo arose in her Groyne, and suddenly it went in again, so that the
third day of her sickness, she said she was without any grief or disease at
all, but that she was somewhat troubled with a difficulty of making Water,
and I think it was, because the Bladder was inflamed by the reflux of the
matter; but she was sound in Mind and Body, and walked up and down the Chamber
on the same day that she dyed. The strangeness of which thing made the King so
fearful, that he hasted to depart thence.

Although this Disease does spare no Man, of what age, temperature, complexion,
diet, and condition soever, yet it assaulteth young Men that are Choleric and
Sanguine, more often then old Men that are cold and dry, in whom the moisture
that is the nourisher of putrefaction by reason of their age is consumed, and
the ways, passages, and pores of the Skin whereby the venomous Air should
enter and pierce in, are more strait and narrow. And moreover, because old men
do always stay at home, but young men for their necessary business, and
also for their delight and pleasure, are always abroad on the day time in the
Air, wherehence the pollution of the Pestilence comes more often.

That Pestilence that comes by the corruption of the humors, is not so
contagious as that which comes by the default of the Air. But those that are
Flegmaticke and Melancholy are most commonly grieved with that kind of
Pestilence, because in them the humors are more clammy and gross, and their
Bodies more cold and less perspirable, for which causes the humors sooner and
more speedily putrefie.

Men that are of an ill juice are also most apt to this kind of Pestilence, for
in the naughty quality of the juice there is a great preparation of the
humors unto putrefaction: You may know it by this, that when the Pestilence
reigns, there are no other Diseases among the common People, which have their
original of any ill juice but they all degenerate into the Plague. Therefore
when they begin to appear and wander up and down, it is a token that the
Pestilence will shortly cease, or is almost at an end.

But here also I would have you to understand those to be of an ill juice,
which have no Pores in their Skin, by which, as it were by Rivers, the evil
juice which is contrary to Nature, may be euacuated and purged. And I have
noted and observed, that those are less in danger of the Pestilence which have
cancerous Ulcers, and stinking Sores in their Noses, and such as are infected
with the French Pox, have by reason thereof, Tumors and rotten Ulcers, or
have the Kings Evil running upon them, the Leprosy, or the Scabbe: And to
conclude, all those that have Fistulous and running Ulcers in their Bodies.

I think those that have Quartaine Feauers are the better privileged for the
same, because that by the Fit causing sweat, that comes every fourth day,
they avoid much of the ill juice that was engendered.

This is more like to be true, then to think that the Poison that comes from
without, may be driven away by that which lurketh within.

Contrarie-wise, Women that are great with Child, as I have noted, because they
have much ill juice, being prohibited from their accustomed euacuations, are
very apt to take this Disease, and do seldom recover after they are infected.

Black or blew Impostumes, and Spots and Pustules of the same color dispersed
over the Skin, argue that the Disease is altogether incurable and mortal.

When the Swelling or Sore goes or comes before the Fever, it is a good
sign, for it declares that the malignitie is very weak and feeble, and that
Nature has overcome it, which of it self is able to drive so great portion
thereof from the inner parts. But if the Sore or Tumor come after the Fever,
it is a mortal and deadly sign, for it is certain that that comes of the
venomous matter not translated, but dispersed, not by the victory of Nature,
but thorough the multitude of the matter, with the weight whereof Nature is
overcome.

When the Moon decreaseth, those that are infected with the Pestilence are in
great doubt and danger of death, because then the humors that were collected
and gathered together before the full of the Moon, through delay and
abundance, do swell the more, and the Faculties by which the Body is governed,
become more weak and feeble, because of the imbecilitie of the native heat,
which before was nourished and augmented by the light, and so consequently by
the heat of the full Moon: For as it is noted by Aristotle, the wainings of
the Moon are more cold and weak: and thence it is that Women have their
menstruall Fluxes chiefly or most commonly at that time.

In a gross and cloudy Air the pestilent Infection is less vehement and
contagious then in a thin and subtle Air; whether that thinness of the Air
proceed from the heat of the Sun, or from the North Wind and cold. Therefore
at Paris where naturally, and also through the abundance of filth that is
about the City, the Air is dark and gross, the pestilent Infection is less
fierce and contagious then it is in Province, for the subtletie of the Air
stimulates or helps forward the Plague.

But this Disease is mortal and pernicious wheresoever it be, because it
suddenly assaulteth the Heart, which is the Mansion, or as it were the
Fortress or Castle of Life: but commonly not before the signs and tokens of
it appear on the Body: and yet you shall scarce find any Man that thinks of
calling the Physician to help to preserve him from so great danger before the
signs thereof be evident to be seen and felt: but then the Heart is
assaulted. And when the Heart is so assaulted, what hope of life is there, or
health to be looked for? Therefore because Medicines come oft-times too late,
and this Malady is as it were a sudden and a winged Messenger of our death,
it comes to pass that so many die thereof. And moreover because at the first
suspicion of this so dire and cruel a Disease, the imagination and mind (whose
force in the diversely stirring up of the humors is great and almost
incredible) is so troubled with fear of imminent death, and despair of
health, that together with the perturbed humors, all the strength and power of
Nature falls and sinkes down.

This you may perceive and know, by reason that the Keepers of such as are
sick, and the Bearers which are not fearful, but very confident, although
they do all the basest offices which may be for the sick, are commonly not
infected, and seldom dye thereof if infected.

CHAP. XII.
Into what place the Patient ought to betake himself so soon as he finds
himself infected.
WE have said that the perpetual and first original of the Pestilence comes
of the Air, therefore so soon as one is blasted with the pestiferous Air,
after he has taken some preservative against the malignitie thereof, he must
withdraw himself into some wholesome Air, that is clean and pure from any
venomous Infection or Contagion for there is great hope of health by the
alteration of the Air, for we do most frequently and abundantly draw in the
Air of all things, so that we cannot want it for a minute of time: therefore
of the Air that is drawn in, depends the correction, amendment, or increase
of the Poison or malignitie that is received, as the Air is pure, sincere, or
corrupted. There be some that do think it good to shut the Patient in a
cloase Chamber, shutting the Windows to prohibit the entrance of the Air as
much as they are able: But I think it more convenient that those Windows
should be open from whence that Wind blows that is directly contrary unto
that which brought in the venomous Air: For although there be no other cause,
yet if the Air be not moved, or agitated, but shut up in a cloase place, it
will soon be corrupted. Therefore in a cloase and quiet place that is not
subject to the entrance of the Air, I would wish the Patient to make Wind, or
to procure Air with a thick and great Cloth dipped or macerated in Water and
Vinegar mixed together, and tied to a long Staff, that by tossing it up and
down the cloase Chamber, the Wind or Air thereof may cool and recreate the
Patient. The Patient must every day be carried into a fresh Chamber, and the
Beds and the Linen Clothes must be changed: There must always be a clear
and bright Fire in the Patients Chamber, and especially in the night, whereby
the Air may be made more pure, clean, and void of nightly vapors, and of the
filthy and pestilent breath proceeding from the Patient, or his Excrements. In
the mean time, least (if it be in hot weather) the Patient should be weakened
or made more faint by reason that the heat of the Fire does disperse and wast
his Spirits, the Floor or Ground of the Chamber must be sprinkled or watered
with Vinegar and Water, or strowed with the branches of Vines made moist in
cold Water, with the Leaves and Flowers of Water Lillyes, or Poplar, or such
like. In the fervent heat of Summer he must abstain from strong Fumigations
that do smell too strongly, because that by assaulting the Head, they increase
the pain. If the Patient could go to that cost, it were good to hang all the
Chamber where he lies, and also the Bed, with thick or coarse Linen Clothes
moysted in Vinegar and Water of Roses. Those Linen Clothes ought not to be
very white, but something brown, because much and great whiteness does
disperse the sight, and by wasting the Spirits does increase the pain of the
Head: for which cause also the Chamber ought not to be very lightsome.

Contrariwise on the night season there ought to be Fires and Perfumes made,
which by their moderate light, may moderately call forth the Spirits.

Sweet Fires may be made of little pieces of the Wood of Juniper, Broom, Ash,
Tamarisk, of the Rind of Oranges, Lemmons, Cloves, Benzoin, Gum Arabicke,
Orris Roots, Myrrh grossly beaten together, and laid on the burning Coals
put into a Chasing Dish. Truly the breath or smoke of the Wood or Berries of
Juniper, is thought to drive Serpents a great way from the place where it is
burnt. The virtue of the Ash Tree against venom is so great, as Pliny
testifies, that a Serpent will not come under the shadow thereof, no not in
the morning nor evening, when the shadow of any thing is most great and long,
but she will run from it. I my self have proved that if a circle or compass
be made with the Boughs of an Ash Tree, and a Fire made in the midst
thereof, and a Serpent put within the compass of the Boughs, that the Serpent
will rather run into the Fire then through the Ashes Boughs.

There is also another means to correct the Air. You may sprinkle Vinegar of
the decoction of Rue, Sage, Rosemary, Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, Cyperus
Nuts, and such like, on Stones or Brickes made red hot, and put in a Pot or
Pan, that all the whole Chamber where the Patient lies may be perfumed with
the vapor thereof.

Also Fumigations may be made of some matter that is more gross and clammy,
that by the force of the Fire the sum may continue the longer, as are Ladanum,
Myrrh, Masticke, Rosine, Turpentine, Storax, Olibanum, Benzoin, Bay Berries,
Juniper Berries, Cloves, Sage, Rosemary, and Marioram stamped together, and
such like.

Those that are rich and wealthy may have Candles and Fumes made of Wax, or
Tallow mixed with some sweet things.

A Spong macerated in Vinegar of Roses and Water of the same, and a little of
the decoction of Cloves, and of Camphire added thereto, ought always to be
ready at the Patients hand, that by often smelling unto it, the Animal Spirits
may be recreated and strengthened.

The Water following is very effectual for this matter. Take of Orris four
Ounces; of Zedoarie, Spikenard, of each six Drammes; of Storax, Benzoin,
Cynamon, Nutmegs, Cloves, of each one Ounce and a half; of old Treacle half
an Ounce: Bruise them into a gross Powder, and macerate them for the space of
twelve hours in 4 pound of white and strong Wine, then distill them in a
Limbecke of Glass on hot Ashes, and in the distilled Liquor wet a Spong, and
then let it be tied in a Linen Cloth, or closed in a Box, and so often put
unto the Nose-thrils. Or take of the Vinegar and Water of Roses, of each four
Ounces; of Camphire six Grains; of Treacle half a Dram: let them be
dissolved together, and put into a Vial of Glass, which the Patient may often
put unto his Nose.

This Nodula following is more meet for this matter. Take of Rose Leaves two
Pugils; of Orris half an Ounce; of Calamus Aromaticus, Cynnamon, Cloves, of
each two Drammes; of Storax and Benzoin, of each one Dram and a half; of
Cyperus half a Dram: beat them into a gross Powder, make thereof a Nodula
between two pieces of Cambricke or Lawne of the bigness of an Hand Ball, then
let it be moystned in 8 Ounces of Rose Water, and two Ounces of Rose Vinegar,
and let the Patient smell unto it often. These things must be varied according
to the time: For in the Summer you must use neither Musk nor Ciuet, nor such
like hot things: and moreover women that are subject to fits of the Mother, and
those that have Feauers or the Head ach ought not to use those things that are
so strong smelling and hot, but you must make choice of things more gentle:
Therefore things that are made with a little Camphire and Cloves bruised and
macerated together in Rose Water and Vinegar of Roses shall be sufficient.

CHAP. XIII.
What Diet ought to be observed, and first of the choice of Meats.
THE order of Diet in a Pestilent disease ought to be cooling and drying: not
slender, but somewhat full. Because by this kind of Disease there comes
wasting of the Spirits, and exolution of the Faculties, which infers often
swounding, therefore that loss must be repaired as soon as may be with more
quantity of Meats that are of easy concoction and digestion. Therefore I
never saw any being infected with the Pestilence that kept a slender diet that
recovered his health but dyed, and few that had a good stomach and fed well
dyed.

Sweet, gross, moist, and clammy Meats, which are altogether, and exquisitely
of subtle parts, are to be avoided; for the sweet do easily take Fire, and
are soon inflamed; the moist will putrefie; the gross and clammy obstruct,
and therefore engender putrefaction; those meats that are of subtle parts,
overmuch attenuate the humors and inflame them, and do stir up hot and
sharp vapors into the Brain, whereof comes the Fever. Therefore we must
eschew Garlike, Onions, Mustard, Salted and spiced Meats, and all kinds of Pulls
must also be avoided, because they engender gross winds, which are the authors
of obstruction: but the decoction of them is not always to be refused, because
it is a prouoker of Urine. Therefore let this be their order of Diet: Let their
Bread be of Wheat or Barley, well wrought, well leauened and salted neither too
new nor too stale: Let them be fed with such Meat as may be easily concocted
and digested, and may engender much laudable juice, and very little
excrementall, as are the Flesh of Weather Lambs, Calves, Kidds, Leuerets,
Pullets, Partriches, Pigeons, Thrushes, Larkes, Quails, Black Birds, Turtle
Doves, Moore Hens, Phesants, and such like, avoiding Water Fowls. Let the
Flesh be moystned in Veriuyce of vn-ripe Grapes, Vinegar, or the juice of
Lemmons, Oranges, Cytrons, tart Pomegranats, Barberyes, Gooseberryes, or red
Currance, or of Garden and wild Sorrel: for all these sour things are very
wholesome in this kind of Disease, for they do stir up the appetite, resist
the venomous quality and putrefaction of the humors, restrain the heat of
the Fever, and prohibit the corruption of the meats in the stomach. Although
that those that have a more weak stomach* and are endewed with a more exact
sense, and are subject to the Cough and Diseases of the Lungs, must not use
these unless they be mixed with Sugar and Cynnamon.

If the Patient at any time be fed with sodden Meats, let the Broathes be made
with Lettuce, Purslaine, Succorie, Borage, Sorrel, Hoppes, Buglosse, Cresses,
Burnet, Marigolds, Cheruill, the cooling Seeds, Barley and Oats cleansed, with
a little Saffron, for Saffron does engender many Spirits, and resists Poison.
To these opening Roots may be added for to avoid obstruction; yet much Broth
must be refused by reason of moisture. The Fruit of Capers being eaten in the
beginning of the Meal provoke the appetite, and prohibit obstructions, but
they ought not to be seasoned with overmuch Oil and Salt, they may also with
good success be put in Broathes.

Fishes are altogether to be avoided, because they do soon corrupt in the
Stomach: but if the Patient be delighted with them, those that live in stony
places must be chosen, that is to say, those that do live in pure and sandy
Water, and about Rocks, and Stones, as are Trowts, Pikes, Pearches, Gudgions,
and Crauises boiled in Milk, Wilks, and such like. And concerning Seafish, he
may be fed with Giltheads, Gurnarts, with all the kinds of Cod-fish, Whitings
not seasoned with Salt, and Turbuts.

Fagges potched and eaten with the juice of Sorrel, are very good. Likewise
Barley Water seasoned with the Graynes of a tart Pomegranate, and if the Fever
be vehement, with the Seeds of white Poppey. Such Barley Water is easy to be
concocted and digested, it cleanses greatly, and moystens and mollifies the
Belly. But in some it procures an appetite to vomit, and pain of the Head, and
those must abstain from it. But in stead of Barley Water they may use Pappe,
and Bread crummed in the decoction of a Capon.

For the second course let him have Raysons of the Sun, newly sodden in Rose
Water with Sugar, sour Damask Prunes, tart Cherryes, Pippins, and Katherine
Pears.

And in the latter end of the Meal, Quinces roasted in Embers, Marmelate of
Quinces, and Conserues of Buglosse or of Roses, and such like may be taken: Or
else this Powder following.

Take of Coriander Seeds prepared two Drammes; of Pearl, Rose Leaves, shauings
of Harts-Horne and Iuory, of each half a Dram; of Amber two Scruples; of
Cynnamon one Scruple; of Unicorns Horn, and the Bone in a Stagges Heart, of
each half a Scruple; of Sugar of Roses four Ounces: Make thereof a Powder,
and use it after Meats.

If the Patient be somewhat weak, he must be fed with Gelly made of the Flesh
of a Capon, and Veale sodden together in the Water of Sorrel, Carduus
Benedictus, with a little quantity of Rose Vinegar, Cynnamon, Sugar, and other
such like, as the present necessity shall seem to require.

In the night season for all events and mischances, the Patient must have ready
prepared Broth of Meats of good digestion, with a little of the juice of
Citrons, or Pomegranates.

This Restauratiue that follows may serve for all. Take of the Conserve of
Buglosse, Borage, Violets, Water Lillyes, and Succory, of each two Ounces; of
the Powder of the Electuarie Diamargaritum Frigidum, of the Trochisces of
Camphire, of each three drams; of Citron seeds, Carduus seeds, Sorrel
seeds, the roots of Diptamnus, Tormentill, of each two drams; of the broth of
a young Capon, made with Lettuce, Purselaine, Buglosse, and Borraged boil in
it, six pintes; put them in a Lembecke of glass with the flesh of two
Pullets, of so many Partridges, and with fifteen leaves of pure gold: make
thereof a distillation over a soft fire. Then take of the distilled liquor
half a pint, strain it through a woollen bag, with two ounces of white
Sugar, and half a dram of Cinnamon: let the patient use this when he is
thirsty. Or else put the flesh of one old Capon, and of a leg of Veale, two
minced Partridges, and two drams of whole Cinnamon without any liquor in a
lembecke of glass, well luted and covered, and so let them boil in Balueo
Mariae unto the perfect concoction. For so the fleshes will be boiled in their
own juice without any hurt of the fire; then let the juice be pressed out
therehence with a press: give the patient for every dose one ounce of the
juice with some cordial waters, some Trisantalum, and Diamargaritum frigidum.
The preserues of sweet fruits are to be avoided, because that sweet things
turn into cholor; but the confections of tart Prunes, Cherries, and such like
may be fitly used. But because there is no kind of sickness that so weakens
the strength as the Plague; it is always necessary, but yet sparingly and
often, to feed the patient, still having respect unto his custom, age, the
region, and the time: for through emptiness there is great danger, lest that
the venomous matter that is driven out to the superficial parts of the body,
should be called back unto the inward parts, by an hungry stomach, and the
stomach it self should be filled with choloricke, hot, thin, and sharp
excrementall humors, whereof comes biting of the stomach, and gripings in
the guts.

CHAP. XIV.
What drink the Patient infected ought to use.
IF the Fever be great and burning, the patient must abstain from wine,
unless that he be subject to swounding; and he may drink the Oxymell following
in stead thereof.

Take of fair water three quarts, wherein boil four ounces of honey until the
third part be consumed, scumming it continually; then strain it and put it
into a clean vessel, and add thereto four ounces of vinegar, and as much
cynamon as will suffice to give it a taste. Or else a sugered water as
follows. Take two quarts of fair water, of hard sugar six ounces, of cynamon
two ounces, strain it through a woollen bag or cloth without any boiling:
and when the patient will use it, put thereto a little of the juice of Citrons.
The syrup of the iuce of Citrons excels amongst all others that are used
against the Pestilence.

The use of the Iulep following is also very wholesome. Take of the juice of
Sorrel well clarified half a pint, of the juice of Lettuce so clarified
four ounces, of the best hard Sugar one pound, boil them together unto a
perfection, let them be strained and clarified, adding a little before the end
a little vinegar, let it be used between meals, with boiled water, or with
equal portions of the water of Sorrel, Lettuce, Scabious, and Buglosse: or
take of this former described Iulep strained and clarified four ounces, let it
be mixed with one pound of the forenamed cordial waters, and boil them
together a little. And when they are taken from the fire, put thereto of yellow
Sanders one dram, of beaten Cinnamon half a dram, strain it through a cloth:
when it is cold, let it be given unto the patient to drink with the juice of
Citrons. Those that have accustomed to drink Sider, Perrie, Beer, or Ale,
ought to use that drink still, so that it be clear, transparent, and thin,
and made of those fruits that are somewhat tarte; for troubled and dreggish
drink does not only engender gross humors, but also crudities, windiness,
and obstructions of the first region of the body, whereof comes a fever.
Oxycrate being given in manner following, does assuage the heat of the fever,
and repress the putrefaction of the humors, and the fierceness of the venom,
and also expels the water through the veins, if so be that the patients are
not troubled with spitting of blood, cough, yexing, and altogether weak of
stomach: for such must avoid all tart things. Take of fair water one quart;
of white or red Vinegar three ounces; of fine Sugar four ounces; of Sirup of
Roses two ounces: boil them alittle, and then give the patient thereof to
drink. Or, Take of the juice of Lemons and Citrons, of each half an ounce; of
juice of sour Pomegranats two ounces; of the water of Sorrel and Roses, of
each one ounce; of fair water boiled, as much as shall suffice: make thereof a
Iulep, and use it between meals. Or take of Sirup of Lemons and of red
Currance, of each one ounce, of the water of Lillies four ounces; of fair
water boiled half a pint* make thereof a Iulep. Or, Take of the syrups of
water Lillies, and Vinegar, of each half an ounce, dissolve it in five ounces
of the water of sorrel; of fair water one pint: make thereof a Iulep. But if
the patient be young and have a strong and good stomach, and choloricke by
natnre, I think it not unmeet for him to drink a full and large draught of
fountain water cold; for that is effectual to restrain and quench the heat
of the fever, and contrariwise they that drink cold water often, and a very
small quantity at a time, as the Smith does sprinkle water on the fire at his
forge, do increse the heat and burning, and thereby make it endure the
longer. Therefore by the judgment of Celsus, when the disease is in the chief
increase, and the patient has endured thirst for the space of three or four
days, cold water must be given unto him in great quantity, so that he may
drink past his satietie, that when his belly and stomach are filled beyond
measure, and sufficiently cooled, he may vomit. Some do not drink so much
thereof as may cause them to vomit, but do drink even unto satietie, and so
use it for a cooling medicine; but when either of these is done, the patient
must be covered with many clothes, and so placed that he may sleep, and for
the most part, after long thirst and watching, and after long fullness, and
long and great heat sound sleep comes, by which great sweat is sent out,
and that is a present help. But thirst must sometimes be quenched with little
pieces of Melons, Gourds, Cucumbers, with the leaves of Lettuce, Sorrel, and
purslane made moist or soked in cold water, or with a little square piece of a
Citron, Lemon, or Orange macerated in Rose water, and sprinkled with sugar, and
so held in the mouth, and then changed. But if the patient be aged, his
strength weak, phlegmatic by nature, and given to wine, when the state of
the fever is somewhat past, and the chief heat beginning to assuage, he may
drink wine very much delayed at his meat, for to restore his strength and to
supply the want of the wasted Spirits. The patient ought not by any means to
suffer great thirst, but must mitigate it by drinking, or else allay it by
washing his mouth with Oxicrate, and such like, and he may therein also wash
his hands and his face, for that does recreate the strength. If the Flux or
Laske troubel him, he may very well use to drink steeled water, and also
boiled milk, wherein many stones coming red hot out of the fire have been
many times quenched. For the dryness and roughness of the mouth it is very
good to have a cooling, moistening and lenifying lotion of the mucilaginous
water of the infusion of the seeds of Quinces, Psilium, id est, Flea-wurt,
adding thereto a little Camphyre, with the water of Plantaine and Roses, then
cleanse and wipe out the filth, and then moisten the mouth, by holding therein
a little oil of sweet Almonds mixed with a little sirup of Violets. If the
roughness do breed or degenerate into Ulcers, they must be touched with the
water of the infusion of sublimate, or Aqua fortis.

CHAP. XV.
Of Antidotes to be used in the Plague.
NOw we must entreat of the proper cure of this disease, which must be used
as soon as may be possible, because this kind of poison in swiftness
exceedes the celeritie of the medicine. Therefore it is better to err in this,
that you should think every disease to be pestilent in a pestilent season,
and to cure it as the Pestilence: because that so long as the air is polluted
with the seeds of the Pestilence, the humors in the body are soon infected
with the vicinitie of such an air, so that then there happens no disease
void of the Pestilence, that is to say, which is not pestilent from the
beginning by his own nature, or which is not made pestilent. Many begin the
cure with bloodletting, some with purging, and some with Antidotes. We taking
a consideration of the substance of that part that is assaulted, first of all
begin the cure with an Antidote, beeause that by its specificke property, it
defends the heart from poison, as much as it is offended therewith. Although
there are also other Antidotes which preserve and keep the heart and the
patient from the danger of Poison and the Pestilence, not only because they
do infringe the power of the poison in their whole substance, but also because
they drive it and expel it out of all the body by sweat, vomiting, scouring,
and such other kinds of euacuations. The Antidote must be given in such a
quantity as may be sufficient to overcome the poison; but because it is not
good to use it in greater quantity than neederh, lest it should overthrow our
nature, for whose preservation only it is used, therefore that which cannot be
taken together and at once, must be taken at several times, that some portion
thereof may daily be used so long, until all the accidents, effects, and
impressions of the poison be past, and that there be nothing to be feared.
Some of those Antidotes consist of portions of venomous things, being tempered
together, and mixed in an apt proportion with other medicines, whose power is
contrary to the venom: as Treacle, which has for an ingredient the flesh of
Vipers, that it being thereto mixed may serve as guide to bring all the
Antidote unto the place where the venenate malignitie has made the chief
impression; because by the similitude of nature and sympathy, one poison is
suddenly snatched and carried unto another. There are other absolute poisonous,
which nevertheless are Antidotes one unto another: as a Scorpion himself
cures the prick of a Scorpion. But Treacle and Mithridate excel all other
Antidotes: for by strenthening the noblest part, and the mansion of life, they
repair and recreate the wasted Spirits, and overcome the poison, not only
being taken inwardly, but also applied outwardly to the region of the heart,
Botches and Carbuncles: for by an hidden property they draw the poisons unto
them, as Amber does Chafe, and digest it when it is drawn, and spoil and
rob it of all its deadly force; as it is declared at large by Galen, in his
book de Theriaca ad Pisonem, by most true reasons, and experiments. But you
will say, that these things are hot, and that the Plague is often accompanied
with a burning Fever. But therereto I answer, there is not so great danger in
the Fever as in the Pestilence, although in the giving of Treacle I would not
altogether seem to neglect the Fever, but think it good to minister or apply
it mixed with cordial cooling medicines, as with the Trochisces of Camphire,
Sirup of Lemmons, of water Lillies, the water of Sorrel, and such like. And
for the same cause we ought not to choose old Treacle, but that which is of a
middle age, as of one or two years old: to those that are strong, you may give
half a dram, and to those that are more weak a dram. The patient ought to
walk presently after that he has taken Treacle, Mithridate, or any other
Antidote; but yet as moderately as he can: not like unto many, which when they
perceive themselves to be infected, do not cease to course and run up and
down, until they have no strength to sustain their bodies, for so they do
dissolve nature, so that it cannot suffice to overcome the contagion. After
moderate walking, the patient must be put warm to bed, and covered with
many clothes, and warm brickbats, or tiles applied to the soles of his feet;
or in stead thereof you may use swines bladders filled with hot water, and
apply them to the grindes and arme-holes to provoke sweat: for sweating in
this disease is a most excellent remedy, both for to euacuate the humors in
the Fever, and also to drive forth the malignitie in the Pestilence, although
every sweat brings not forth the fruit of health. For George Agricola says,
that he saw a woman at Misnia in Germany that did sweat so for the space of
three days, that the blood came forth at her head and breast, and yet
nevertheless she died.

This potion following will provoke sweat. Take the roots of China shaued in
thin pieces one ounce and half; of Guaiacum two ounces; of the bark of
Tamariske one ounce; of Angelica roots two drams; of the shauings of
Harts-horne one ounce; of Juniper berries three drams; put them into a vial of
glass that will contain six quarts; put thereto four quarts of running or
river water that is pure and clear, macerate them for the space of one whole
night on the hot ashes: and in the morning boil them all in Balneo Mariae
until the half be consumed, which will be done in the space of six hours;
then let them be strained through a bag, and then strained again, but let
that be with six ounces of sugar of Roses, and a little Treacle; let the
patient take eight ounces or fewer of that liquor, and it will provoke sweat.
The powder following is also very profitable. Take of the leaves of Dictamnus,
the roots of Tormentill, Betoni, of each half an ounce; of bole Armenicke
prepared one ounce; of Terra Sigillata three drams; of Aloes and Mirrhe of each
half a dram; of Saffron one dram; of Masticke two drammes: powder them all
according to Art, and give one dram thereof dissolved in Rose Water, or the
water of wild sorrel, and let the patient walk so soon as he has taken
that powder; then let him be laid in his bed to sweat as I have showed before.
The water following is greatly commended against poison. Take the roots of
Gentian and Cyperus, of each three drams; of Carduus benedictus, Burnet, of
each one handful; of Sorrel seeds, and Diuels-bit, of each two pugils; of
Ivy and Juniper berries, of each half an ounce; of the flowers of Buglosse,
Violets, and red Roses, of each two pugils, powder them somewhat grossly; then
soake or steep them for a night in white wine and Rose water; then add
thereto of Bole Armenicke one ounce; of Treacle half an ounce, distill them
all in Balneo Mariae, and keep the distilled liquor in a vial of glass well
covered or close stopped for your use: let the patient take six ounces thereof
with Sugar and a little Cinnamon and Saffron: then let him walk, and then
sweat, as is aforesaid: the Treacle and cordial water formerly prescribed are
very profitable for this purpose. Also the water following is greatly
commended. Take of Sorrel six handfuls: of Rue one handful: dry them, and
macerate them in Vinegar for the space of four and twenty hours, adding
thereto four ounces of Treacle: make thereof a distillation in Balneo Mariae,
and let the distilled water be kept for your use; and so soon as the patient
does think himself to be infected, let him take four ounces of that liquor,
then let him walk and sweat. He must leave sweating when he begins to wax
faint and weak, or when the humor that runs down his body begins to wax
cold, then his body must be wiped with warm clothes, and dried. The patient
ought not to sweat with a full stomach, for so the heat is called away from
performing the office of concoction: also he must not sleep when he is in his
sweat, lest the malignitie, go inwardly with the heat and spirits unto the
principal parts; but if the patient be much inclined to sleep, he must be
kept from it with hard rubbing, and bands tied about the extreme parts of his
body, and with much noise of those that are about him, and let his friends
comfort him with the good hope that they have of his recovery; but if allthis
will not keep him from sleepee, dissolve Castoreum in tart Vinegar, and Aqua
vitae, and let it be iniected into his nostrels: and let him be kept
continually waking the first day, and on the second and third, even unto the
fourth; that is to say, unto the perfect expulsion of the venom; and let him
not sleep above three or four hours on a day and night. In the mean time let
the Physician that shall be present consider all things by his strength: for
it is to be feared, that great watchings will dissolve the strength, and make
the patient weak: you must not let him eat within three hours after his
sweating; in the mean season, as his strength shall require, let him take the
rind of a preserved Citron, conserve of Roses, bread toasted and steeped in
wine, the meat of a preserved Myrabolane, or some such like thing.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether purging and bloodletting be necessary in the beginning of pestilent
diseases.
SO soon as the heart is strengthened and corroberated with cordials and
Antidotes, we must come unto phlebotomie and purging. As concerning
bloodletting in this case, there is a great controversy among Physicians.
Those that wish it to be used, say or affirm that the pestilent Fever does
infixe it self in the blood, and therein also the pestilent malignitie takes
its seat; and therefore it will soon infect the other humors, unless that
the blood be euacuated, and the infection that remains in the blood be
thereby taken away. Contrariwise those that do allow phlebotomie in this case,
allege that it often comes to pass that the blood is void of malignitie
when the other humors are infected with the venomous contagion. If any man
require my judgment in this doubtful question, I say, that the Pestilence
sometimes does depend on the default of the air: This default being drawn
through the passages of the body, does at length pierce unto the entrals, as
we may understand by the abscesses which break out one while behind the
ears, sometimes in the arme-holes, and sometimes in the groines, as the
brain, heart, or liver are infected. And hereof also come Carbuncles, and
other collections of matter and eruptions, which are seen in all parts of the
body, by reason that nature using the strength of the expulsive faculty, does
drive forth whatsoever is noisome or hurtful. Therefore if the Physician will
follow this motion of nature, he must neither purge, nor let blood, lest that
by a contrary motion, that is, by drawing in from without, the motion of
nature which proceeds outwardly from within, should be troubled. So we often
see in those who are purged or let blood for such Buboes as come through
unlawful copulation, that the matter is thereby made contumacious, and by
drawing it inwardly it speedily causes the French Poxes. Wherefore when
Buboes, Carbuncles, and other pestilent eruptions appear, which come through
the default of the air, we ought to abstain from purging and phlebotomie;
but it is sufficient to forearme the heart inwardly and outwardly with
Antidotes that are endewed with a proper virtue of resisting the poison. For it
is not to be doubted, but that when nature is debilitated with both kinds of
euacuation, and when the spirits together with the blood are exhausted, the
venomous air will soon pierce, and be received into the empty body, where
it exercises its tyranny to the utter destruction thereof.

In the year of our Lord God 1565. in which year there was great mortality
through out all France, by reason nof the Pestilence, and pestilent diseases, I
earnestly and diligently enquired of all the Physicians, and Chirurgians of all
the Cities (through whom King Charles the ninth passed in his progress unto
Bayon) what success their patients had after they were letten blood and
purged, whereunto they all answered alike, that they had diligently observed,
that all that were infected with the Pestilence, and were letten bleed some
good quantity of blood, or had their bodies somewhat strongly purged,
thenceforwards waxed weaker and weaker, and so at length died; but others which
were not let blood, nor purged, but took cordial Antidotes inwardly and applied
them outwardly, for the most part escaped and recovered their health: for that
kind of Pestilence took its original of the primative and solitary default
of the air, and not of the corruption of the humors. The like event was noted
in the hoarsenesse that we spoke of before: that is to say, that the patients
waxed worse and worse by purging, and phlebotomie; but yet I do not disallow
either of those remedies, if there be great fullness in the body, especially
in the beginning, and if the matter have a cruel violence, whereof may be
feared the breaking in unto some noble part. For we know that it is confirmed
by Hippocrates, that what disease soever is caused by repletion, must be cured
by euacuation: and that in diseases that are very sharp, if the matter do
swell, it ought to be remedied the same day, for delay in such diseases is
dangerous; but such diseases are not caused or inflicted upon man's body by
reason or occasion of the Pestilence, but of the diseased bodies and diseases
themselves commixed together with the Pestilence; therefore then peradventure
it is lawful to purge strongly, and to let a good quantity of blood, lest
that the pestilentvenome should take hold of the matter that is prepared, and
so infect it with a contagion, whereby the pestilence takes new and far
greater strength; especially as Celsus admonishes us, where he says; that, By
how much the sooner those sudden invasions do happen, by so much the sooner
remedies must be used, yea or rather rashly applied; therefore if the veins
swell, the face wax fiery red, if the arteries of the temples beat strongly,
if the patient can very hardly breath by reason of a weight in his stomach,
if his spittle be bloody, then ought he to be let blood without delay, for
the causes before mentioned. It seems best to open the liver vein on the left
arm, whereby the heart and the spleen may be better discharged of their
abundant matter; yet blood letting is not good at all times, for it is not
expedient when the body begins to wax stiff by reason of the coming of
the Fever; for then by drawing back the heat and spirits inwardly, the
outward parts being destitute of blood wax stiff and cold; therefore blood
cannot be letten then without great loss of the strength, and perturbation of
the humors. And it is to be noted, that when those plethoricke causes are
present, there is one Indication of bloodletting in a simple pestilent Fever,
and another in that which has a Bubo, id est, a Botch or a Carbuncle joined
therewith. For in one or both of these being joined with a vehement and strong
burning Fever, blood must be letten by opening the vein that is nearest unto
the tumor or swelling against nature, keeping the straightness of the fibers,
that this being open the blood might be drawn more directly from the part
affected; for all and every retraction of putrified blood unto the noble parts
is to be avoided, because it is noisome and hurtful to nature, and to the
patient. Therefore for examples sake, admit the patient be plethoricke by
repletion which is called Ad vasa, id est, unto the vessels, and Ad vires, id
est, unto the strength: and therewithal he has a tumor that is pestilent in
the parts belonging unto his head or neck, the blood must be let out of the
cephalicke or median vein, or out of one of their branches dispersed in the
arm on the greened side. But if through occasion of fatt, or any other such
like cause those veins do not appear in the arm, there be some that give
counsel in such a case to open the vein that is between the forefinger and
the thombe, the hand being put into warm water, whereby that vein may swell
and be filled with blood, gathered thither by means of the heat. If the tumor
be under the arme-hole or about those places, the liver vein, or the median
must be opened which runs along the hand: if it be in the groine, the
vein of the hamme, or Saphena, or any other vein above the foot that
apreareth well, but always on the grieved fide. And phlebotomie must be
performed before the third day: for this disease is of the kind or nature of
sharp diseases; because that within four and twenty hours it runs past
help. In letting of blood you must have consideration of the strength. You may
perceive that the patient is ready to swound when that his forehead waxes
moist, with a small sweat suddenly arising, by the aching or pain at the
stomach, with an appetite to vomit, and desire to go to stool, gaping,
blackness of the lips, and sudden alteration of the face unto palenesse:
and lastly most certainly by a small and slow pulse: and then you must lay
your finger on the vein, and stop it until the patient come to himself
again, either by nature; or else restored by Art, that is to say, by giving
unto him bread dipped in wine, or any other such like thing: then if you have
not taken blood enough, you must let it go again and bleed so much as the
greatness of the disease, or the strength of the patient will permit or
require: which being done, some one of the Antidotes that are prescribed before
will be very profitable to be drunk, which may repair the strength and
infrigne the force of the malignitie.

CHAP. XVII.
Of purging medicines in a pestilent disease.
IF you call to mind the proper indications, purging shall seem necessary in
this kind of disease, and that must be prescribed as the present case and
necessity requires; rightly considering that the disease is sudden, and does
require medicines that may with all speed drive out of the body the hurtful
humor wherein the noisome quality does lurk and is hidden; which medicines
are diverse by reason of the diversity of the kind of the humor, and the
condition, or temperature of the patient. For this purpose six grains of
Scammonie beaten into powder, or else ten grains are commonly ministered to
the patient with one dram of Treacle. Also pills may be made in this form:
Take of Treacle and Mithridate, of each one dram; of Sulphur vinum finely
poudered half a dram; of Diagridium four grains: make thereof Pills. Or, Take
three drams of Alloes; of Myrhe and Saffron, of each one dram; of white
Hellebore and Asarabacca, of each four scruples: make thereof a masle with old
Treacle, and let the patient take four scruples thereof for a dose, three
hours before meat. Ruffus his Pills may be profitably given to those that are
weak. The ancient Physicians have greatly commended Agarick for this disease,
because it does draw the noisome humors out of all the members: and the virtues
thereof are like unto those of Treacle; for it is thought to strengthen the
heart and to draw out the malignitie by purging. To those that are strong the
weight of two drammes may be given, and to those that are more weak half a
dram. It is better to give the infusion in a decoction, than in substance;
for being elected and prepared truly into Trochises, it may be called a most
divine kind of medicine. Antimonium is highly praised by the experience of
many; but because I know the use thereof is condemned by the counsel and
decree of the School of Physicians at Paris, I will here cease to speak of
it. Those medicines that cause sweates are thought to excel all others, when
the Pestilence comes of the venomous air: among whom the efficacy of that
which follows has been proved, to the great good of many in that
Pestilence which was lately throughout all Germany, as Matthias Rodler,
Chauncellor to Duke George the Count Palatine, signified unto me by letters.
They do take a bundle of Mugwort, and of the ashes thereof after it is burnt
they make a lie thereof with four pints of water; then they do set it over
the fire and boil it in a vessel of earth well leaded until the liquor be
consumed, the earthy dregs falling unto the bottom like unto salt, whereof
they make Trochises of the weight of a crown of gold: then they dissolve one
or two of those Trochises, according to the strength of the patient, in good
Muskadine, and give it the patient to drink, and let him walk after that he
has drunk it for the space of half an hour; then lay him in his bed, and
there sweat him two or three hours, and then he will vomit, and his belly
will be loosed as if he had taken Antimonie; and so they were all for the most
part cured, especially all those that took that remedy betimes, and before
the disease went unto their heart, as I my self have proved in some that were
sick at Paris, with most happy success: Truly Mugwort is highly commended
by the ancient Physicians, being taken and applied inwardly or outwardly
against the bitings of venomous creatures, so that it is not to be doubted but
that it has great virtue against the Pestilence. I have heard it most
certainly reported by Gilbertus Heroaldus Physician of Mompilier* that eight
ounces of the pickle of Anchoues drunk at one draught is a most certain and
approved remedy against the Pestilence, as he and many other have often found
by experience. For the Plague is no other thing but a very great putrefaction,
for the correction and amendment whereof, there is nothing more apt or fit than
this pickle or substance of the Anchoues, being melted by the sun and force of
the salt that is strawed thereon. There be some which infuse one dram of
Walewort seed in white wine, and affirm that it drunken will perform the like
effect as Antimony. Others dissolve a little weight of the seed of Rue being
bruised in Muskadine, with the quantity of a Bean of Treacle, and so drink
it. Others beat or bruise an handful of the leaves or tops of Broom in
half a pint of white wine, and so give it to the patient to drink to cause
him to vomit, loose his belly, and make him to sweat. Truly, those that are
wounded or bitte with venomous beasts, if they bind broom above the wound it
will prohibit or hinder the venom from dispersing it self, or going any
farther: therefore a drink made thereof will prohibit the venom from going
any nearer the heart. Some take of the root of Elecampane, Gentian,
Tormentill, Kermesberries, and broom; of the powder of Iuorie and Harts-horne,
of each half a dram, they do bruise and beat all these, and infuse them for
the space of four and twenty hours in white Wine and Aquavita on the warm
embers, and then strain it, and give the patient three or four ounces thereof
to drink; this prouokes sweat, and infrignes the power of the poison, and the
potion following has the same virtue.

Take good Mustard half an ounce; of Treacle or Mithridate the weight of a
Bean, dissolve them in white Wine and a little Aqua vita, and let the patient
drink it and sweat thereon with walking. You may also roste a great Onion
made hollow, and filled with half a dram of Treacle and Vinegar under the
embers; and then strain it, and mix the juice that is pressed out of it with
the water of Sorrel, Carduus Benedictus, or any other cordial thing, and
with strong wine, and give the patient to drink thereof to provoke sweat, and
to repel the malignitie. Or else take as much Garlic as the quantity of a
big Nut; of Rue and Celandine, of each twenty leaves, bruise them all in
white Wine and a little Aqua vita; then strain it, and give the patient
thereof to drink. There be some that do drink the juice that is pressed out
of Celandine and Mallows, with three ounces of Vinegar, and half an ounce of
the oil of Walenuts, and then by much walking do unburden their stomach and
belly upwards and downwards, and so are helped. When the venomous air has
already crept into and infected the humors, one dram of the dried leaves of
the Bay tree macerated for the space of two days in Vinegar and drunk, is
thought to be a most sovereign medicine to provoke sweat, looseness of the
belly, and vomiting. Matthiolus in his Treatise de Morbo Gallico writes, that
the powder of Mercury ministered unto the patient with the juice of Carduus
Benedictus, or with the electuarie de Gemmis, will drive away the Pestilence
before it be confirmed in the body, by provoking vomit, looseness of the
belly, and sweat: one dram of Calchanthum or white Copperose dissolved in
Rose Water, performs the like effect in the same disease. Some do give the
patient a little quantity of the oil of Scorpions with white wine to expel
the poison by vomit, and therewithal they do anoint the region of the
heart, the breast, and the wrasts of the hands. I think these very meet to be
used often in bodies that are strong and well exercised, because weaker
medicines do euacuate little or nothing at all, but only move the humors,
whereby comes a Fever. When a sufficient quantie of the malignitie is
euacuated, then you must minister things that may strengthen the belly and
stomach, and withhold the agitation or working of the humors: and such is
confection of Alkermes.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of maute Symptoms which happen together with the Plague: and first of the
pain of the head.
IF the malignitie be carried into the brain, and nature be not able to expel
it, it inflames not only it, but also the membranes that do cover it: which
inflammation does one while hurt, trouble, or abolish the imagination, another
while the judgment, and sometimes the memory, according to the situation of
the inflammation, whether it be in the former, hinder, or middle part of the
head; but hereof comes always a Frenzy, with fiery redness of the eyes
and face, and heaviness and burning of the whole head. If this will not be
amended with Clisters, and with opening the Cephalicke vein in the arm, the
arteries of the temples must be opened, taking so much blood out of them, as
the greatness of the Symptoms and the strength of the patient shall require
and permit. Truly the incision that is made in opening of an artery will
close and join together as readily, and with as little difficulty, as the
incision of a vein. And of such an incision of an artery comes present
help, by reason that the tensiue and sharp vapors do plentifully breath out
together with the arterious blood. It were also very good to provoke a flux
of blood at the nose, if nature be apt to exonerate her self that way. For, as
Hippocrates says, when the head is grieved, or generally aketh; if matter,
water, or blood flow cut at the nostrels, mouth, or ears, it presently cures
the disease. Such bleeding is to be provoked by strong blowing, or striving to
cleanse the nose, by scratching or picking of the inner sides of the nostrels,
by pricking with an horse hair, and long holding down of the head. The Lord
of Fontaines, a Knight of the Order, when we were at Bayon, had a bleeding at
the nose, which came naturally for the space of two days, and thereby he was
freed of a pestilent Fever which he had before, a great sweat rising
therewithal, and shortly after his Carbuncles came to suppuration, and by Gods
grace he recovered his health being under my cure. If the blood do flow out
and cannot be stopped when it ought, the hands, arms, and legs must be tied
with bands, and sponges wet in Oxycrate must be put under the arme-holes,
cupping-glasses must be applied unto the dugges, the region of the liver and
spleen; and you must put into the nostrels the down of the Willow tree, or
any other astringent medicine, incorporated with the hairs plucked from the
flank, belly, or throat of a Hare, bole Armenicke, Terra sigillata, the juice
of Plantain and Knotgrasse mixed together; and furthermore the patient must be
placed or laid in a cool place. But if the pain be nothing mitigated,
notwithstanding all these fluxes of blood, we must come to medicines that
procure sleep, whose forms are these:

Take of green Lettuce one handful, flowers of water Lillies and Violets, of
each two pugils; one head of white Poppy bruised; of the four cold seeds, of
each two drams; of Liquoris and Raisons, of each one dram: make thereof a
decoction, and in the straining dissolve one ounce and an half of Diacodion:
make thereof a large potion, to be given when they go to rest. Also a
Barly-creame may be prepared in the water of water Lillies and Sorrel, of
each two ounces, adding thereto six or eight grains of Opium: of the four
cold seeds, and of white Poppie seeds, of each half an ounce, and let the
same be boiled in broths with Lettuce and Purslane; also the Pills de
Cynoglosso, idest, Hounds tongue may be given. Clisters that provoke sleep
must be used, which may be thus prepared:

Take of Barly-water half a pint; oil of Violets and Water Lillies, of each
two ounces; of the water of Plantaine and Purselaine, or rather of their
juices, three ounces; of Camphire seven grains, and the whites of three eggs:
make thereof a Clister. The head must be fomented with Rose-vineger, the hair
being first shaven away, leaving a double cloth wet therein on the same, and
often renewed. Sheep lungs taken warm out of the bodies, may be applied to
the head, as long as they are warm. Cuppingglasses with scarrification and
without scarrification, may be applied unto the neck and shoulder-blades. The
arms and legs must be strongly bound, being first well rubbed to divert the
sharp vapors and humors from the head. Frontals may also be made on this
manner. Take of the oil of Roses and Water Lillies, of each two ounces; of the
oil of Poppey half an ounce; of Opium one dram; of Rose-vineger one ounce,
of Camphire half a dram, mix them together. Also Nodules may be made of the
flowers of Poppies, Henbane, Water Lillies, Mandrakes beaten in Rose Water with
a little Vinegar, and a little Camphire, and let them be often applied to the
nostrels: for this purpose Cataplasmes also may be laid to the forehead. As,
Take of the mucilage of the seeds of Psilium, id est, Fleawort, and Quince
seeds extracted in Rose Water, three ounces; of Barley meal four ounces; of
the powder of Rose leaves, the flowers of Water Lillies and Violets, of each
half an ounce; of the seeds of Poppies and Purflaine, of each two ounces; of
the water and vinegar of Roses, of each three ounces: make thereof a
Cataplasine, and apply it warm unto the head. Or, Take of the juice of
Lettuce, Water Lillies, Henbaine, Purselaine, of each half a pint; of
Rose*leaues in powder, the seeds of Poppie, of each half an ounce; oil of
Roses three ounces; of Vinegar two ounces; of Barley meal as much as shall
suffice: make thereof a Cataplasme in the form of a liquid Pultis. When the
heat of the head is mitigated by these medicines, and the inflammation of the
brain assuaged, we must come unto digesting and resolving fomentations, which
may disperse the matter of the vapors. But commonly in pain of the head, they
do use to bind the forehead and hinder part of the head very strongly, which
in this case must be avoided.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Erruptiou and spotts which commonly are called by the name of Purples
and Tokens.
IN Pestilent feauers, the skin is marked and variegated in diverse places
with spotts, like unto the bitings of Fleas or Gnats, which are not always
simple, but many times arise in form like unto a grain of millet. The more
spots appear, the better it is for the patient: they are of diverse colors
according to the virulency of the malignity and condition of the matter, as
red, yellow, brown, violet, or purpule, blew and black. And because for the
most part they are of a purple color, therefore we callthem Purples. Others
call them Lenticulae, because they have the color and form of lentills. They
are also called Papiliones (i) Butterflies, because they do suddenly seize or
fall upon diverse regions of the body, like unto winged Butterflies, sometimes
the face, sometimes the arms and legs, and sometimes all the whole body;
oftentimes they do not only affect the upper part of the skin, but go
deeper into the flesh, specially when they proceed of matter that is gross and
adust. They do sometimes appear great and broad, affecting the whole arm,
leg or face like unto an Erysipelas: to conclude, they are diverse according
to the variety of the humor that offends in quality or quantity. If they are
of a purple or black color, with often sounding, and sink in suddenly
without any manifest cause, they foreshew death. The cause of the breaking out
of those spotts, is the working, or heat of the blood, by reason of the
cruelty of the venom received, or admitted. They often arise at the beginning
of a Pestilent fever: many times before the breaking out of the Sore, or
Botch, or Carbuncle, and many times after: but then they show so greata
corruption of the humors in the body, that neither the Sores, nor Carbuncles
will suffice to receive them, and therefore they appear as forerunners of
death. Sometimes they break out alone, without a Botch or Carbuncle: which if
they be read and have no evil Symptoms joined with them, they are not wont
to prove deadly: they appear for the most part on the third or fourth day of
the dissease, and sometimes later, and sometimes they appear not before the
patient be dead, because the working, or heat of the humors, being the
offspring of putrefaction is not as yet restrained and ceased. Wherefore then
principally the putrid heat, which is greatest a little before the death of
the patient, drives the excrementall humors, which are the matter of the
spotts, unto the skin; or else because nature in the last conflict has
contended with some greater endeavor then before (which is common to all
things, that are ready to dye.) a little before the instant time of death, the
Pestilent humor being presently driven unto the skin; and nature thus
weakened by this extreme conflict, falls down prostrate and is quite
overthrown by the remnant of the matter.

CHAP. XX.
Of the cure of Eruptions and Spotts.
YOu must first of all take heed lest you drive in the humor that is coming
outward with repercussiues: Therefore beware of cold, all purging things,
Phlebotomy, and drowsy or sound sleeping. For all such things do draw the
humors inwardly, and work contrary to nature. But it is better to provoke the
motion of nature outwardly, by applying of drawing medicines outwardly, and
ministering medicines to provoke sweat inwardly for otherwise by repelling and
stopping the matter of the eruptions there will be great danger lest the heart
be oppressed with the abundance of the venom flowing back: or else by
turning into the belly it inferres a mortal bloody flixe: which discommodities
that they may be avoided, I have thought good to set down this remedy, whose
Efficacy I have known and proved many times and on diverse persons, when by
reason of the weakness of the expulsive faculty and the thicknes of the skin,
the matter of the spotts cannot break forth, but is constrained to surke under
the skin, lifting it up into bunches and knobbes. I was brought unto the
invention of this remedy by comparison of the like. For when I understood that
the essence of the French Poxs (and likewise of the Pestilence) consisted in a
certain hidden virulency and venomous quality, I soon descended unto that
opinion, that even as by the anointing of the body with the unguent compounded
of Quicksiluer, the gross and clammie humors which are fixed in the bones, and
immovable are dissolved, relaxed, and drawn from the center into the
superficial parts of the body, by strengthening and stirring up the expulsive
faculty, and euacuated by sweating and fluxing at the mouth; That so it should
come to pass in Pestilent feauers, that nature being strengthened with the
same kind of unction, might unload her self of some portion of the venomous
and Pestilent humor by opening the pores and passages and letting it break
forth into spotts and pustles and into all kind of eruptions. Therefore I have
anointed many in whom nature seemed to make passage for the venomous matter
very slowly, first loosing their belly with a Clister and then giving them
Treacle water to drink, which might defend the vital faculty of the heart,
but yet not distende the stomach, as though they had had the French Pox, and
I obtained my expected purpose; in stead of the Treacle water, you may use the
decoction of Guaiacum, which does heat, dry, provoke sweat and repel
putrefaction, adding thereto also vinegar, that by the subtletie thereof it may
pearce the better, and withstand the putrefaction. This is the description of
the unguent. Take of Hoggs grease one pound, boil it a little with the leaves
of Sage, Time, Rosmary, of each half an handful, strain it, and in the
straining extinguish five ounces of Quicksiluer, which has bin first boiled in
Vinegar with the forenamed herbs, of Sal Nitrum 3 drams, the yelkes of three
eggs boiled until they be hard, of Treacle and Mithridate of each half an
ounce, of Venice Turpentine, oil of Scorpions and Bays, of each three ounces,
incorporate them altogether in a mortar, and make thereof an unguent, wherewith
annoint the patients arme-hooles and groine, avoiding the parts that belong to
the head, breast and back bone, then let him be laid in his bed and covered
warm, and let him sweat there for the space of two hours, and then let his
body be wiped and cleansed, and if it may be let him be laid in another bed,
and there let him be refreshed with the broth of the decoction of a Capon,
rear Eggs, and with such like meats of good juice that are easy to be
concocted and digested; let him be anointed the second and the third day,
unless the spotts appear before. If the patient flux at the mouth it must
not be stopped: when the spotts and pustles do all appear and the patient
has made an end of sweating, it shall be convenient to use diureticke
medicines, for by these the remainant of the matter of the spotts, which
happily could not all breath forth, may easily be purged and avoided by the
urine. If any noble or gentlemen refuse to be anointed with this unguent, let
them be enclosed in the body of a Mule or Horse that is newly killed, and when
that is cold let them be laid in another, until the pustles and eruptions do
break forth, being drawn by that natural heat. For so Matthiolus writes,
that Valentinus the son of Pope Alexander the sixth was delivered from the
danger of most deadly poison which he had drunk.

CHAP. XXI.
Of a Pestilent Bubo, or Plague Sore.
A Pestilent Bubo is a tumor at the beginning long and moveable, and in the
state and full perfection copped and with a sharp head, immovable and fixed
deeply in the glandules, or kernels, by which the brain exonerates it self
of the venomous and pestiferous matter into the kernells that are behind the
ears, and in the neck: the heart into those that are in the arme-hooles: and
the liver into those that are in the groine; that is, when all the matter is
gross and clammy, so that it cannot be drawn out by spotts and pustles
breaking out on the skin; and so the matter of a Carbuncle is sharp and so
fervent that it makes an Eschar on the place where it is fixed. In the
beginning while the Bubo is breeding it makes the patient to feel as it were
a coard or rope stretched in the place, or a hardened nerve with pricking
pain: and shortly after the matter is raised up as it were into a knob, and by
little and little it grows bigger and is enflamed, these accidents before
mentioned accompanying it. If the tumor be red and increase by little and
little, it is a good and salutary sign: but if it be liuide or black, and
come very slowly unto its just bigness, it is a deadly sign: It is also a
deadly sign if it increase suddenly and come unto his just bigness as it were
with a swift violence, and as in a moment have all the Symptoms in the highest
excess, as pain, swelling and burning. Buboes or Sores appear sometimes of a
natural color like unto the skin, and in all other things like unto an
oedematous tumor, which notwithstanding will suddenly bring the patient to
destruction, like those that are liuide and black, wherefore it is not good to
trust too much to those kinds of tumors.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the cure of Buboes, or Plague-sores.
SO soon as the Bubo appears, apply a Cupping-glasse with a great flame unto
it; unless it be that kind of Bubo which will suddenly have all the
accidents of burning and swelling in the highest nature; but first the skin
must be anointed with oil of Lillies, that so it being made more loose the
Cupping-glasse may draw the stronger and more powerfully: it ought to stick to
the part for the space of a quarter of an hour, and to be renewed and applied
again every three quarters of an hour, for so at the length the venom shall
be the better drawn forth from any noble part that is weak, and the work
of suppuration or resolution, whichsoeuer nature has assaied, will the better
and sooner be absolved and perfected: which may be also done by the application
of the following ointment.

Take of Vnguentum Dialthaea one ounce and a half; oil of Scorpions half an
ounce; of Mithridate dissolved in Aquavitae half a dram: this liniment will
very well relaxe and loosen the skin, open the pores thereof, and spend
forth portion of that matter which the Cupping-glasse has drawn thither: in
stead thereof mollifying fomentations may be made, and other drawing and
suppurating medicines, which shall be described hereafter. A Vesicatorie
applied in a meet place below the Bubo profits very much, but not above; as
for example. If the Bubo be in the throat, the Vesicatorie must be applied
unto the shoulder blade on the same side: if it be in the arme-holes, it must
be applied in the midst of the arm, or of the shoulder bone on the inner
side: if in the groine, in the midst of the thigh on the inner side, that by
the double passage that is open for to draw out the matter, the part wherein
the venom is gathered together may be the better exonerated. Spurge,
Crow-foot, Arsmart, Beare-foote, Brionie, the middle bark of Trauellers-ioy,
the rindes of mullet, Flammula or upright Virgines-bower, are fit for raising
blisters. If you cannot come by those simple medicines, you may apply this that
follows, which may be prepared at all times.

Take Cantharides, Pepper, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, of each half a
dram; of sour Leaven two drams; of Mustard one dram, and a little Vinegar;
the Vinegar is added thereto to withhold or restrain the vehemency of the
Cantharides; but in want of this medicine it shall suffice to drop scalding
oil or water, or a burning candle, or to lay a burning cole on the place: for
so you may raise blisters, which must presently be cut away, and you must see
that you keep the ulcers open and flowing as long as you can by applying the
leaves of red Coleworts, Beetes, or Iuie dipped in warm water, and anointed
with oil or fresh butter. Some apply Cauteries, but Vesicatories work with
more speed: for before the Eschar of the Cauteries will fall away the patient
may die: therefore the ulcers that are made with vesicatories will suffice to
euacuate the pestilent venom; because that does work rather by its quality
than its quantity. Let the abscesse be fomented as it is showed before: and
then let the medicine following, which has virtue to draw, be applied, Fill a
great onion, being hollowed, with Treacle and the leaves of Rue; then roast it
under the hot embers, beat it with a little Leaven and a little Swines
grease, and so apply it warm unto the abscesse or sore; let it be changed
every six hours. Or, Take the roots of Marsh-mallowes and Lillies, of each
half a pound; of Line, Foenigreeke, and Mustard seeds, of each half an
ounce; of Treacle one dram; ten figs, and as much hogs grease as shall
suffice: make thereof a Cataplasme according to Art. Or, Take of Onions and
Garlic roasted in the embers, of each three ounces; bruise them with one ounce
of sour Leaven, adding thereto Vuguentum Basilicon one ounce; Treacle one
dram; Mithridate half a dram; of old hogs grease one ounce; of
Cantharides in powder one scruple; of Pigeons doung two drams; beat them and
mix them together into the form of a Cataplafme. Hereunto old Rennet is very
profitable; for it is hot and therefore atractiue being mixed with old Leaven
and Basilicon: you ought to use these until the abscesse be grown unto its
full ripeness and bigness; but if presently after the beginning there be
great inflammation, with sharp pain, as it often happens, especially when
the abscesses be of the kind of Carbuncles, we must abstain from those
remedies that are hot and attractiue, and also from these that are very
emplasticke and clammie; because they do altogether close the pores of the
skin, or because they do resolve the thinner part of the collected matter,
which if it might remain would bring the other sooner to suppuration: or else
because they may perchance draw more quantity of the hot matter than the part
can bear, whereof comes rather corruption than maturation: and last of all
because they increase the Fever and pain, which infers danger of a
Conuulsion or mortal Gangrene. Therefore in such a case it is best to use cold
and temperate local medicines; as the leaves of Henbane and Sorrel roasted
under the coals, Galens pultis, and such like. There are many that for fear
of death have with their own hands pulled away the Bubo with a pair of Smiths
pincers: others have dug the flesh round about it, and so gotten it wholly
out. And to conclude, others have become so mad, that they have thrust an hot
iron into it with their own hand, that the venom might have a passage forth:
of all which I do not allow one; for such abscesses do not come from without,
as the bitings of virulent beasts, but from within, and moreover because pain
is by these means increased, and the humor is made more malign and fierce.
Therefore I think it sufficient to use medicines that do relaxe, open the
pores of the skin, and digest portion of the venom by transpiration, as are
these that follow. Take the roots of Marsh-mallowes and Lillies, of each six
ounces; of Chamomill and Melilote flowers, of each half an handful; of Linne
seeds half an ounce; of the leaves of Rue half an handful; boil them and
strain them, dip spunges in the straining, and there with let the rumor be
fomented a long time. Or, Take the crumme of hot bread, and sprinkle it with
Treacle-water, or with Aqud vitae, and Cowes milk or Goats milk, and the
yelkes of three eggs, put them all on stupes or flax, and apply them warm
unto the place. Or, Take of sour Rye leaven four ounces; of Basilicon two
ounces, three yelkes of eggs, oil of Lillies two ounces, Treacle one dram;
let it be received on stupes and applied in like manner. Or, Take of Diachylon
and Basilicon, of each two ounces, oil of Lillies one ounce and half; let
them be melted and mixed together, and let it be applied as is abouesaid. When
you see, feel, and know, according to reason, that the Bubo is come to perfect
suppuration, it must be opened with an incision knife, or an actual or
potentiall Cauterie, but it is best to be done with a potentiall Cauterie,
unless that happily there be great inflammation, because it does draw the
venom from beneath unto the superficial parts, and makes a larger orifice
for the matter that is contained therein: neither must it be looked for, that
nature should open it of her self, for then it were danger that lest while
nature does work slowly a venomous vapor should be stirred up, which striking
the heart by the arteries, the brain by the nerves, and the liver by the
veins, causes a new increase of the venomous infection. For fear whereof
there be some that will not expect the perfect maturation and suppuration, but
as it were in the midst of the cruditie and maturitie will make an orifice for
it to pass forth at: yet if it be done before the tumor be at his perfect
maturitie, pain, a fever, and all accidents are stirred up and enraged,
whereof comes a malign ulcer that often degenerates into a Gangrene. For the
most part about the tenth or eleventh day the work of suppuration seems
perfected and finished; but it may be sooner or later by reason of the
application of medicines, the condition of the matter and state of the part*
when the matter comes forth, you must yet use suppuratiue and mollifying
medicines to maturate the remains thereof, in the mean while clensing the
vicer by putting mundificatiues into it, as we shall declare in the cure of
Carbuncles. But if the tumor seem to sink in or hide it self again, it must
be revoked and procured to come forth again, by applying of Cupping-glasses
with scarrification, and with sharp medicines, yea and with Cauteries both
actual and potentiall. When the Cauteries are applied it shall be very good
to apply a vesicatorie a little below it, that there may be some passage open
for the venom while the Eschar is in falling away. For so they that are
troubled with the french Pox, so long as they have open and flowing ulcers, so
long are they void of any pain that is worth the speaking of; which ulcers
being closed and cicatriced, they doc presently complain of great pain. If
you suspect that the Bubo is more malign by reason that it is of a green, or
black, and inflamed color, as are those that come of a melancholy humor by
adustion, turned into a gross and rebellious melancholy humor, so that by the
more copious influxe thereof into the part, there is danger of a Gangrene and
mortification; then the places about the abscesse must be armed with
repercussiues, but not the abscesse it self: and this may be the form of the
repercussiues: Take of the juice of houseleeke, Purselaine, Sorrel,
Nightshade, of each two ounces; of Vinegar one ounce; the whites of three
eggs; of oil of Roses and Water Lillies, of each two ounces and a half;
stir them together, and apply it about the Bubo, and renew it often: or boil
a Pomegranat in Vinegar, beat it with Vnguentum Rosatum, or Populeen newely
made, and applied as is aforesaid. If these things do not stop the influxe of
other humors, the abscesse it self and the places round about it must be
scarrified round about, if the part will permit it; that the part exonerated of
portion of the venom may not stand in danger of the extinction of the proper
and natural heat, by the greater quantity and malignitie of the humors that
flow unto it. In scarrifying you must have care of the great vessels for fear
of an irrepugnable flux of blood, which in this case is very hard to be stayed
or resisted; both because the part it self is greatly inflamed, and the humor
very fierce; for the expulsion whereof, nature, careful for the preservation
of the part and all the body besides, seems to labor and work. But yet you
must suffer so much of the blood and humor to flow out as the Patient is able
to abide without the loss of his strength. Moreover you may spend forth the
superfluous portion of the malignity, with relaxing, mollifying, and resolving
fomentations: as, Take the roots of Marsh Mallows, Lillies and Elecampane, of
each one pound, of Linseeds and Faenigreek, of each one ounce, of Fennell-seeds
and Annifeeds, of each half an ounce, of the leaves of Rue, Sage, Rosemary, of
each one handful, of Chamomill and Melilote flowers, of each three handfulls;
boil them altogether, and make thereof a decoction for a fomentation; use it
with a sponge according to Art. Also after the aforesaid scarrification, we may
put Hens, or Turkies that lay eggs (which therefore have their fundaments more
wide and open, and for the same purpose put a little salt into their
fundaments) upon the sharp top of the Bubo, that by shutting their bills at
several times they may draw and suck the venom into their bodies, far more
strongly and better then cupping glasses, because they are endewed with a
natural property against poison, for they eat and concoct Toades, Efts, and
such like virulent beasts: when one hen is killed with the poison that she has
drawn into her body you must apply another, and then the third, fourth, fifth
and sixth within the space of half an hour. There be some that will rather cut
them, or else whelps in the midst, and apply them warm unto the place, that
by the heat of the creature that is yet scarce dead, portion of the venom may
be dissipated and exhaled. But if never thelesse there be any fear of a
Gangren at hand, you must cut the flesh with a deeper scarrification, not only
anoyding the greater vessels, but also the nerves for fear of conuulsion: and
after the scarrification and a sufficient flux of blood, you must wash it with
Aegyptiacum, Treacle and Mithridate dissolved in seawater, Aquavita and
Vinegar. For such a lotion has virtue to stay putrefaction, repel the venom,
and prohibit the blood from concretion: but if the Gangren cannot be avoided
so, cauteries may be applied to the part: especially actual, because they do
more effectually repel the force of the poison and strengthen the part.
Presently after the impression of the hot iron, the eschar must be cut away
even unto the quick flesh, that the venomous vapors, and the humors may have
a free passage forth, for it is not to be looked for that they will come forth
of themselves. With these injunctions they are wont to hasten the falling away
of the Eschar. Take of the mucilage of Marsh-mallowes and Linseedes, of each 2
ounces, fresh Butter or Hog's Grease one ounce, the yelks of three eggs,
incorporate them together and make thereof an ointment: Butter, Swines-grease,
oil of roses, with the yelks of eggs, perform the self same thing. When the
Eschar is fallen away, we must use digestiues. As, Take of the juice of
Plantane water, Betonie, and Smallage, of each three ounces, Honey of Roses
four ounces, Venice Turpentine five ounces, Barley flower three drames, Aloes
two drams, oil of Roses four ounces, Treacle half a dram, make a
mundificatiue according to Art. Or, Take Venice Turpentine four ounces, Syrup
of dried Roses and Wormwood of each one ounce, of the powder of Aloes,
Mastick, Myrrh, Barley flower, of each one dram, of Mithridate half an ounce,
incorporate them together. This unguent that follows is very meet for
putrified and corroding ulcers, Take red Orpiment one ounce, of vnquencht Lime,
burnt Alome, Pomegrante pills, of each six drams, of Olibanus, Galls, of each
two drams, of Wax and Oil as much as shall suffice, make thereof an unguent.
This does mundifie strongly, consume putrefied flesh, and dry up virulent
humidities that engender Gangrens. But there is not a more excellent unguent
then Aegyptiacum increased in strength, for besides many other virtues that it
has, it does consume and wast the proud flesh, for there is neither oil nor
wax that goes into the composition thereof, with which things the virtue of
sharp medicines convenient for such ulcers is delayed, and as it were dulled
and hindered from their perfect operation so long as the ulcer is kept open.
There are many that being disseased with this dissease, who have had much
matter and venomous filth come out at their abscesses, so that it seems
sufficient, and they have been thought well recovered, yet have died suddenly.
In the mean while when these things are in doing cordial medicines are not to
be omitted to strengthen the heart. And purgations must be renewed at certain
seasons, that nature may be every way unloaded of the burden of the venenate
humors.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Nature, Causes and Signs of a pestilent Carbuncle.
A Pestilent Carbuncle is a small tumor, or rather a malign pustle, hot and
raging, consisting of blood vitiated by the corruption of the proper substance.
It often comes to pass through the occasion of this untameable malignitie,
that the Carbuncle cannot be governed or contained within the dominion of
nature. In the beginning it is scarce so big as a seed or grain of Millet
or a Pease, sticking firmly unto the part and immovable, so that the skin
cannot be pulled from the flesh; but shortly after it increases like unto a
Bubo unto a round and sharp head, with great heat, pricking pain, as if it
were with needles, burn ing and intolerable, especially a little before night,
and while the meat is in concocting, more than when it is perfectly concocted.
In the midst thereof appears a bladder puffed up and filled with sanious
matter. If you cut this bladder you shall find the flesh under it parched,
burned, and black, as if there had been a burning cole laid there, whereby
it seems that it took the name of Carbuncle; but the flesh that is about the
place is like a Rainbow, of diverse colors, as read, dark, green, purple,
liuide, and black; but yet always with a shining blackness, like unto stone
pitch, or like unto the true precious stone which they call a Carbuncle,
whereof some also say it took the name. Some call it a Nail, because it
infers like pain as a nail driven into the flesh. There are many
Carbuncles which take their beginning with a crustie ulcer without a pustle,
like to the burning of an hot iron: and these are of a black color, they
increase quickly, according to the condition of the matter whereof they are
made. All pestilent Carbuncles have a Fever joined with them, and the grieved
part seems to be so heavy, as if it were covered or pressed with lead tied
hard with a ligature: there comes mortal swoundings, faintings, tossing,
turning, idle talking, raging, Gangrenes, and mortifications, not only to the
part, but also to the whole body, by reason (as I think) of the oppression of
the spirits of the part, and the suffocation of the natural heat, as we see
also in many that have a pestilent Bubo. For a Bubo and Carbuncle are tumors
of a near affinity, so that the one does scarce come without the other,
consisting of one kind of matter, unless that which makes the Bubo is more
gross and clammie, and that which causes the Carbuncle more sharp, burning,
and raging, by reason of its greater subtlety, so that it makes an Eschar on
the place where it is, as we noted before.

CHAP. XXIV.
What Prognostickes may be made in pestilent Buboes and Carbuncles.
SOme having the Pestilence have but one Carbuncle, and some more in diverse
parts of their body. And in many it happens that they have the Bubo and
Carbuncle before they have any Fever; which gives better hope of health, if
there be no other malign accident therewith: for it is a sign that nature is
the victor, and has gotten the upper hand, which excluded the pestilent venom
before it could come to assault the heart. But if a Carbuncle and Bubo come
after the Fever, it is mortal; for it is a token that the heart is affected,
moved, and incensed with the furious rage of the venom; whereof presently
comes a feauerish heat or burning, and corruption of the humors, sent as it
were from the center unto the superficies of the body. It is a good sign when
the patients mind is not troubled from the beginning until the seventh day;
but when the Bubo or Carbuncle finketh down again shortly after that it is
risen, it is a mortal sign, especially if ill accidents follow it. If after
they are brought to suppuration they presently wax dry without any reason
thereof, it is an ill sign: Those Carbuncles that are generated of blood have
a greater Eschar than those that are made of cholor, because that blood is of a
more gross consistence, and therefore occupies a greater room in the flesh:
contrariwise a choloricke humor is more small in quantity and thy nne, and it
takes little room in the upper part of the flesh only, as you may see in an
Erysipelas. And I have seen Carbuncles whose Eichars were as broad and as
large as half the back: also I have seen others, which going up by the
shoulders to the throat, did so eat away the flesh that was under them, that
the rough artery or winde-pipe might be seen bare, when the Eschar was fallen
away: I had once a Carbuncle which was in the midst of my belly, so that when
the Eschar was fallen away, I might very plainly see the Peritonaum or Rim: and
the cicatrice that remains is as broad as my hand: but they do not spread
themselves so far without the great danger or death of the patient. There are
also some Carbuncles which beginning at the parts under the chyn, disperse
themselves by little and little unto the pattell bones, and so strangle the
patient. So in many, the Buboes in the groine arise above a great part of the
muscles of the Epigastrium. Truly of those abscesses that are so large and
great in quantity, and so terrible to be seen, there is great danger of death
to the patient, or at least to the grieved part. For after the consolidation
the part remains as if it were leprous, which abolisheth the action of the
part, as I have seen in many. Oftentimes also the corruption of the matter is
so great, that the flesh leaves the bones bare: but Carbuncles often leave the
joints and ligaments quite resolved through the occasion of the moisture that
is soaked and sunk in unto them; for they often cast out putrefied and
virulent sanious matter: whereby eating and creeping ulcers are bred, many
blisters and pustles arising up in the parts round about it; which shortly
breaking into one, make a great ulcer. These do come very seldom and slowly
unto suppuration, or at least to cast out laudible matter, especially if they
have their original of choler, because the matter is sooner burned with heat,
than suppurated. Therefore then, if they can be brought to suppuration by no
medicines, if the tumor still remain black, if when they are opened nothing
at all, or else a very little sharp moisture does come forth, they are
altogether mortal: and there is scarce one of a thousand who has these
accidents that recouereth their health: dispersed small blisters coming of
vapors stirred up by the matter that is under the skin, and are there stayed
and kept from passage forth, do not necessarily fore-shew death in Carbuncles.
But if the part be swollen or puffed up, if it be of a green or black
color, and if it feel neither pricking nor burning, it is a sign of a
mortal Gangren. Buboes or Carbuncles seldom or never come without a fever:
but the fever is more vehement when they are in the emunctories, or neruous
parts, than when they are in the fleshy parts, yet it is less, and all
Symptoms are less and more tolerable in a man that is strong and of a good
temperature: Carbuncles do not only affect the outward but also the inward
parts, and oftentimes both together. If the heart be vexed in such sort with a
Carbuncle that nothing thereof appears forth on the superficial parts, all
hope of life is past, and those dye suddenly, eating, drinking, or walking, and
not thinking any thing of death. If the Carbuncle be in the middriffe or lungs
they are soon suffocated: If it be in the brain the patient becomes
frantic, and so dies. If it be in the parts appointed for the passage of
the urine, they dye of the suppression of their water, as it happened in the
Queen mothers waiting maid at the Castle of Rossilion, of whom I spoke
before. If it be in the stomach it infers the accidents that are showed in
this history following. While I was Surgion in the Hospital of Paris, a young
and strong Monk of the order of S. Victor being ouerseer of the women that
kept the sick people of that place, fell into a continual fever very suddenly
with his tongue black, dry, rough, (by reason of the putrefied and corrupted
humors, and the vapors rising from the whole body unto that place) and hanging
out like unto an hounds, with unquenchable thirst, oftensounding and desire to
vomit. He had conuulsions over all his body through the vehemence and
malignity of the dissease, and so he dyed the third day, wherefore those that
kept the sick people in the Hospital thought that he had been poisoned, for
the certain knowledge whereof, the governors of the Hospital commanded his
body to be opened.

I therefore calling to me a Physician and Surgion, we found in the bottom
of his stomach a print or impression, as if it had been made with an hot Iron
or potentiall Cauterie, with an Eschar or crust as broad as ones nail, all the
rest of his stomach was greatly contracted and shrunk up together, and as it
were hornie; which we considering, and especially the Eschar which was deep
in the substance of the stomach, we all said with one voice that he was
poisoned with Sublimate or Arsnicke. But behold while I was sowing up his belly
I perceived many black spots dispersed diuerfly throughout the skin: then I
asked my company what they thought of those spots; truly (said I) it seems
unto me that they are like unto the purple spots or marks that are in the
Pestilence. The Physician and the Surgeon denied it, and said that they were
the bitings of fleas. But I persuaded them to consider the number of them over
all the whole body, and also their great depth and depression into the flesh;
for when we had thrust needles deep into the flesh in the midst of them, and
so cut away the flesh about the needle, we found the flesh about the needle to
be black: moreover his nostrels, nails, and ears were liuide, and all the
constitution of his body was contrary and far unlike to the bodies of those
that died of other sickenesses or diseases. Also it was credibly reported unto
us by those that kept him, that his face was altered a little before he died
that his familier friends could hardly know him. We, so persuaded by these
proofs, revoked our former opinion and sentence, and made a certificate to be
sent unto the Governors and Masters of the Hospital, setting our hands and
seals unto it, to certify them that he died of a pestistent Carbuncle.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the cure of a pestilent Carbuncle.
BY the forenamed signs of a pestilent Carbuncle, and especialy by the
bitterness of the pain, malignitie of the venomous matter, and by the burning
fever that is therewithal annexed I think it manifest, that very hot,
emplastick, and drawing medicines should not be applied to this kind of tumor;
because they prohibit or hinder the exhalation, or wasting forth of the
venenate malignitie; because that by stopping the pores of the skin, they
increase and cause a greater heat in the part than there was before. Therefore
it is better to use resolving medicines, which may assuage heat, and resolve
the pores of the skin. Therefore first the place must be fomented with water
and oil mixed together, wherein a little Treacle has been dissolved, leaving
thereon stupes wet therein: you may also use the decoction of Mallows, the
roots of Lillies, Linseedes, Figs, with oil of Hypericon for to make the
skinnethinne, and to draw forth the matter; and the day following you must
apply the Cataplasme following. Take the leaves of Sorrel and Henbane, roast
them under the hot ashes; afterward beat them with four yelkes of eggs,
two drammes of Treacle, oil of Lillies three ounces, Barley meal as much as
shall suffice; make thereof a Cataplasme in the form of a liquid pultis; this
asswages heat and furthers suppuration. Or, Take the roots of Marshmallowes
and Lillies, of each four ounces, Linseeds half an ounce, boil them, beat
them, and then strain them through a searse, adding thereto of fresh butter one
ounce and an half, of Mithridate one dram, of Barly-meale as much as shall
suffice; make thereof a Cataplasme according to Art: those Cataplasmes that
follow are most effectual to draw the venomous matter forth, and to make a
perfect suppuration, especially when the flux of the matter is not so great
but that the part may bear it. Take the roots of white Lillies, Onions,
Leaven, of each half an ounce; Mustard-seedes, Pigeons dung, Soap, of each one
dram; six Snailes in their shells; of fine Sugar, Treacle, and Mithridate, of
each half a dram, beat them altogether, and incorporate them with the
yelkes of eggs, make thereof a Cataplasme, and apply it warm. Or, Take the
yelkes of six eggs; of salt poudered one ounce; of oil of Lillies and
Treacle, of each half a dram; Barly-meale as much as shall suffice; make
thereof a Cataplasme. Take of ordinary Diachylon four ounces; of Vnguentum
Basilicon two ounces, oil of Violets half an ounce; make thereof a medicine.
Many ancient Professors greatly commend Scabious ground or braied between two
stones, and mixed with old Hogges-grease, the yelkes of eggs and a little
salt; for it will cause suppuration in Carbuncles: also an egg it self being
mixed with Barly-meale, and oil of Violets does mitigate pain and suppurate.
A Raddish root cut in slices, and so the slices laid one after one unto a
Carbuncle or pestilent tumor, does mightily draw out the poison. The juice of
Colts foot does extinguish the heat of Carbuncles: the herb called
Diuels-bit, being bruised, works the like effect: I have often used the
medicine following unto the heat of Carbuncles with very good success; it
does also assuage pain and cause suppuration. Take of the soot scraped from a
chimney four ounces, of common salt two ounces, beat them into small powder,
adding thereto the yelkes of two eggs, and stir them well together until it
come to have the consistence of a pultis, and let it be applied warm unto the
Carbuncle. In the beginning the point or head of the Carbuncle must be burned,
if it be black, by dropping thereinto scalding hot oil, or Aquafortis: for by
such a burning the venom is suffocated as touched by lightening, and the pain
is much lessened, as I have proved oftentimes: neither is it to be feared lest
that this burning should be too painful, for it touches nothing but the point
of the carbuncle, which by reason of the eschar that is there, is void of
sense. After this burning, you must go forward with the former described
medicines, until the eschar seems to separate it self from the flesh round
about it, which is a token of the patients recovery, for it signifies that
nature is strong and able to resist the poison. After the fall of the Eschar
you must use gentle mundificatiues, as those which we have prescribed in a
pestilent Bubo, not omitting sometimes the use of suppuratiue and mollifying
medicines, that while the gross matter is cleansed, that which is as yet rude
may be brought to suppuration; for then the indication is twofold, the one to
suppurate that which remains as yet crude and raw in the part, and the other
to cleanse that which remains concocted and perfectly digested in the vicer.

CHAP. XXVI.
How to cure Infants and Children taken with the Plague.
IF that it happen that sucking or weaned children be infected with the
pestilence, they must be cured after another order then is yet described. The
Nurse of the sucking child must govern her self so in diet and the use of
medicines as she were infected with the pestilence her self: Her diet
consists in the use of the six things not natural. Therefore let it be
moderate, for the fruit or profit of that moderation in diet cannot choose but
come unto the nurses milk, and so unto the infant who lives only by the
milk. And the infant it self must keep the same diet as near as he can in
sleep, waking, and expulsion, or avoiding of superfluous humors and excrements
of the body. Let the nurse be fed with those things that do mitigate the
violence of the feuerish heat: as cooling brothes, cooling herbs, and meats of
a moderate temperature: she must wholly abstain from wine, and anoint her
nipples, as often as she gives the infant suck, with water, or juice of
sorrel tempered with sugar of roses. But the infants heart must be fortified
against the violence of the increasing venom, by giving it one scruple of
treacle in the nurses milk, the broth of a pullet or some other cordial
water. It is also very necessary to anoint the region of the heart, the
emunctories and both the wrests with the same medicine: neither were it
unprofitable to smell often unto Treacle dissolved in rose water, vinegar of
roses and a little Aquavita, that so nature may be strengthened against the
malignity of the venom. When the children are weaned and somewhat well grown,
they may take medicines by the mouth, for when they are able to concoct and
turn into blood meats that are more gross and firm than milk, they may
easily actiuate a gentle medicine. Therefore a potion must be prepared for
them of twelve grains of treacle dissolved with a little of the syrup of
succory in some cordial water, or the broth of a capon: unless that any had
rather give it with conserve of roses in form of a bole: but treacle must be
given to children in very small quantity, for if it be taken in any large
quantity there is great danger lest that by inflamming the humors it infer a
fever. Furthermore broth may be prepared to be taken often, made of a capon
seasoned with sorrel, lettuce, purslane, and cooling seeds, adding thereto
bole armenicke and terrae sigillata, of each one ounce, being tied in a ragge
and sometimes pressed out from the decoction. For bole armenicke, whether it
be by its marvelous faculty of drying, or by some hidden property, has this
virtue, that being drunken (according as Galen witnesses) it cures those that
are infected with the pestilence, if so be that they may be cured by
physic: so that those that cannot be cured with bole armenicke, cannot be
preserved by any other medicines. But because the bodies of children are warm,
moist and vaporous, they are easily delivered of some portion of the venenate
matter through the pores of the skin by provoking sweat, with a decoction of
parsley seeds, prunes, figs, and the roots of sorrel, with a little of the
powder of hearts horn, or Iuory. But that the sweat may be more abundant and
copious, apply sponges dipped and pressed out in the decoction of sage,
rosemary, lauender, bays, chamomyle, melilote and mallows; or else swines
bladders half filled with the same decoction, to the arme-holes, and to the
groines. In the time that they sweat let their faces be fanned to cool them.
Also let a nodule of Treacle dissolved in vinegar and water of Roses be
applied to the nostrels, but always use a moderation in sweating, because that
children are of a substance that is easy to be dissipated and resolved: so
that oftentimes although they do not sweat, yet they feel the commodities of
sweating, the matter of the venom being dissipated by the force of the heat
through the pores of the skin, But in the sweating while the face is fanned,
and sweet and cordial things applied to the nostrels, nature must be
recreated and strengthened, which otherwise would be debilitated through
sweating, that it may be better able to expel the venom. After that the
sweat is wiped away it is very profitable to take a potion of conserve of
Roses, with the powder of an Hearts horn or of Iuorie dissolved in the waters
of Buglosse and Sorrel, the better to cool and defend the heart. If there
appear any tumor under the arme-holes or in the groine, let it be brought to
maturation with a mollifying, relaxing, drawing, and then with a suppuratiue
fomentation, or Cataplasme; always using and handling it as gently as you may,
considering the tender age of the infant. If you have need to purge the
patient, the purgation following may be prescribed with great profit. Take of
Rubarbe in powder one dram, infuse it in the watet of Carduus Benedictus,
with one scruple of Cinnamon, in the straining dissolve two drams of
Diaratholicon, of syrup of Roses laxatiue three drams; make thereof a small
potion. This is the cure of the Pestilence and of the pestilent Fever, as far
as I could learn from the most learned Physicians, and have observed my self
by manifold experience by the grace and permission of God: of whom alone, as
the author of all good things that mortal men enjoy, the true and certain
preservatives against the Pestilence are to be desired and hoped for.

FINIS.

