Fair Warning, OR, Happy is he whom other men's harms Can make to beware, and
to shun Satan's charms.
To the tune of Packingtons pound.


THe World is orerun with enormous abuse,
Pure virtue and honesty do now decrease,
One vice on the neck of another pursues,
It Is grown to a custom that hardly will cease,
but blessed is he
who when he does see
such vices in others, reformed will be,
For happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
Then be well advisd whoever thou art,
By other men's danger their ways to forsake,
And when thou see any for his folly smart,
Then see that good use of the same thou do make:
and when thou do see
how bad others be,
Say thou to thy self, here is example for me.
O happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
If thou see a man who is proud and ambitious,
Like searing Phaeton strive to aspire,
Presuming his Fated will be ever auspicious,
He boldly will clime till he can go no higher:
if fortune should frown,
he may tumble down,
Then heel be derided of every clown,
Thus happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
If thou see a Gentleman strive for the wall,
And hazard his life for a fantasy vain,
This is the occasion of many a brawll,
But he that's a wiseman from that will refrain:
it is better give place
to one that's more base,
Then hazard thy life in so desperate a case:
O happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
The second Part.
To the same Tune.




If thou see a whoremonger passing at leisure,
Half fearful his legs will drop off by the knees,
When every iustle may do him displeasure,
He has been so stung with ye Turnbull-street Bees.
when thou see his case,
beware of that place,
Which brings a man nothing but shame and disgrace:
O happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
If thou see a man who has been an ill liver,
By hanging himself, to kill body and soul,
It Is fit his example should make thee endeavor
That thy heart nere harbor a project so foul,
O what a vile shame
he brings on his name,
His children will after be twit with the same:
O happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
If thou see a Judge malefactors condemn
For rapine or murder, or such heinous acts,
It Is fit thou should take an example by them,
Who must by the Law suffer death for their facts:
their ways thou may flee,
because thou do see
The reason, and therefore they hanged must be:
O happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
If thou see a drunkard come reeling 'ith' street,
And cutting cross capers often times through the dirt,
Still ready to quarrel with all he does meet,
Whereby he goe^^ seldom to bed without hurt:
O then thou may think
comes all this through drink;
Sare I from the Alehouse in good time will shrink.
O Happy is he whom other etc.
If thou see a rogue to the Pillory brought
For perjury or else some cousening feat,
To look on his panishment thou may be taught
To live more uprightly, and use no deceit.
if thou love thine ear,
then do not come there
To look upon him may make thee to fear.
O Happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
If thou see a wealthy man grow very poor
By passing his credit for other men's debts,
Whereby he is constrained to keep within door
For fear lest a Sergeant ins clutches him gets,
be therefore aware
of this cruel snare:
By suretiship many men beggerd are:
But happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
Thus every man who is willing to learn,
Of other men's follies may make a good use,
And by their just punishment he may return
From vice unto virtue, reforming abuse,
the which if he can,
he is a blessed man,
And thus I Will conclude with the same I began,
That happy is he whom other men's harms
Can make to beware, and to shun Satan's charms.
M. P.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Richard Harper.


