The miserable estate of the City of Paris at this present.

With a true report of sundry strange visions, latel^ seen in the air upon
the coast of Britanie, both by Sea and land.

depictions of the aforementioned "sundry strange visions"

LONDON Printed for Thomas Nelson. 1590.

The miserable estate of the City of Paris at this present, with a true
report of sundry strange visions, lately seen in the air upon the Coast of
Britain both by Sea and land.
THe present and distressed estate of the City of Paris, as it is unknown to
some, so it is well known unto many thousand persons that daily feel the
force and bitterness thereof. The same being most extreme and lamentable, I
could do no less but lay it open to the view of the whole world that all the
Cities in Christendom may take example by the same, and fear hereafter to
attempt the like inhumaine, unnatural and most ungodly actions, which above
all other that City has sundry times committed, especially in two points:
first, in slaughtering the blood of many thousand innocents, and secondly for
resisting and rebelling from time to time against the authority of their
Sovereign and Christian King, wherein they have of long time peeuishly
continued. For which their so insolent crimes, doubtless almighty God does
justly plague and punish them, the rather to make it known unto them and
others, that he is a just God, and will punish the bloud-thirstie and wicked,
as he has promised, even to the third and fourth generation.

Such have been the crimes of those proud and disloyal Pariseans, (who of
late years lived in great prosperity, and abounded in wealth) that in the
life time of that bloudthirstie Butcher, and unnatural Murderer of Christians
called the Duke of Guize, with the consent of the Queen mother and her
associates, suffered to be accomplished and performed within the said City, a
lamentable Massacre of many thousand innocents in one night, and such
especially as were of the flower and chief of the Nobility of France, the
fact being yet so fresh in memory, that the blood of those then slaughtered
asks revenge and craves blood again upon those hard hearted helhoundes and
their posterity, now maintayners of their unholy League, that long time have
resisted the authority of the higher powers, and given their consents to seek
the dissolution and ruin of that kingdom, and the subversion of their King,
his Crown and dignity Royal, as they have done from time to time. For which
their so horrible actions, together with their grievous crimes and detestable
pride, whoredom, incest, gluttony, and such like abominable vices which they
of long time used, it has pleased God to send among them extreme famine (a
sharp messenger of revenge to punish them) whereby they are at this present in
such grievous distress as it is lamentable to report. For the City is
besieged round about by the kings power which is very strong, and thereby has
cut them off from having any victuals or other succor whatsoever, their
victuals within was spent long since, whereby they are in woeful ease for want
of food. They are enforced to eat Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cattes, Rattes,
Mice, and other filthy and unaccustomed things for their sustenance, yea that
which is more odious in respect of their necessity, it is said that they are
enforced to feed one upon an other: and that through feebleness and want of
victuals they fall down dead in the streets and in their houses. A most
lamentable and unaccustomed thing to be done, yet constrained so to do by
means of their want and grievous famine, which is now generally among them.
This their necessity may be compared to the want and miserable estate of the
Jews at the siedge of Jerusalem, where death threatened the destruction of all
the inhabitants, thereby showing them that for their wickedness and wilful
stubbornness their destruction is at hand.

The Friars and Clergy men who are the ring leaders and principal governors
there at this present time, perceiving the great necessity whereunto the
Citizens would be driven, by means of their detestable persuasions, dealt
pollitickely, sending for the Citizens of Paris into several Cloisters and
religious Houses within the same City, and commanded them to bring in all
their warlike furniture which they had in their houses, to the intent that they
might see if they were serviceable or not for war, so when they had gotten all the same furniture of pikes halbards, muskets, gunnes, dagges, swords, and
such like, they detained their weapons and sent every man home again destitute
of any furniture, wherewith to defend themselves if occasion should serve,
whereby they have weakened the whole multitude of Citizens, and drawn the
strength of the City into their own direction and government, fearing least
that famine should compel the general multitude to rebel against them, and
so constrayn the fat fed Friars to yield to their daily outcries, which is
to yield up the City into the kings hands, and to submit them selves
to his mercy, which to do they can not compel them for want of weapons. Some
here may happily demand, why the Clergy men and chief Rulers, will not
yield it up as well as the rest, rather then to taste of famine and so to
suffer so grievous and cruel a torment, which is more bitter then death, but
for answer thereto let this suffice. The Leagers and Clergy men of the
City, suspecting long before that such misery would come to pass, did
vitaile themselves for a long time, so that those especially that are chief
governors, Officers, Watchmen, and Guard to the City, have yet some
sufficient maintenance, nevertheless the ordinary Friars are not far differing
from the general state of the lay men in that City, for they are almost
starued by reason (...) their small allowance, so that most of them look like
unto wild men, whose countenance is lean and stearne, as willing to snatch at
the quarter of a good dog, as soon as any other, though it cost twenty
shillings, as at this present it is worth among them. This is the true estate
of the said City and inhabitants therein, whose misery is doubtless sent of
God, as a sharp scourge for their so great wickedness and disobedience
toward God and their Sovereign. Thus does God still harden the hearts of the
Governors, and makes them wilful, blind, and foolish in their own fancy,
that their punishment for their wickedness might be the more sharp and
grievous. The Prince of Parma for certainty has entered France with ten
thousand men of horse and foot, but soon after he passed the borders,
intending to aid those of the Legue, the Kings power gave him a battle and
discomfited three thousand of his men. They of the League are very sorrowful
for that the town of Moutriall in Pickardy is yielded up to the King, which is
of certain troth and done very lately. A general Battle is daily expected
forthwith, between the Duke de Main and the Christian King of France, for
whom almighty God daily does fight, and will doubtless speedily deliver his
enemies into his hands, they are within four leagues one of another on both
sides of a river. It is therefore very convenient that all Christians should
pray for the good success of the King, that it would please God to give him
victory over those rebellious and traitorous persons. At the coming of the
Prince of Parma into the French countries, it is reported there was visibly
seen in the Air to all his army, three rain bows, and between every one of
them the form of a toade, and presently the rivers there about seemed nothing
but blood, and so continued for a short space, whereby his army was in great
fear, and would willingly have returned, but they were by their general
commanded on pain of death to go forwards. Sundry such sights have lately
been seen upon the coast of France, for one of her Majesty's ships called
the Vangard, being in the narrow seas, met with nine hulkes and fly boats of
the low countries bound homeward from Spain, where the Captain examined them
concerning sundry matters, who among other things told him, that they being on
the coaste of France, on the one and twentieth of June last, in a place called
Bell I Will, the Sea round about them was of the color of blood, for the full
space of half an hour, and nothing was to be seen but blood, so far as
they could discern, and taking up the water in their buckets, they could not
perceive it from blood: this the Master and other in the company did swear to
be true. Moreover in July last past the said ship of her Majesty's called
the Vangard being at Sea, in an evening about setting time of the watch, all
the men in the ship at the rising of the Moon, did discern in the air over
the Moon the shape of a man, with a crown on his head and the king of Spaines
arms plainly displaide, which continued visibly to be seen for some small
space, and soon after it was as a thing overthrown and vanished away, and
seemed to them as though it were falling.

All which visions general, by the conjecture of sundry of good judgment,
presageth the ruin and confusion of those vnwholy Leaguers, vpholden by the
Pope and the king of Spain, and contrariwise the good success of the French
King, whose ancient arms is the three toades. God for his mercy sake daily
defend and protect him, that he may vanquish all his enemies, which seek and
pretend his utter confusion, which God grant for his mercy sake. Amen.

FINIS.

