The tranquillity of the mind.

A very excellent and most comfortable Oration, plainly directing every man,
and woman, to the true tranquillity and quietness of their mind. Compyled in
Latin by John Barnarde, Student in the University of Cambridge, now lately
translated into English by Anthony Marten.

Meliora Spero. Anno. 1570.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Wylliam Norton.

To the right Honorable the Lord William Howarde, Barron of Effingham, Knight
of the most Noble order of the Garter, and Lord Chamberlain of the Queens
Majesty's most Honorable household: Anthony Marten Sewer of her highness most
honorable Chamber, wishes health, prosperity, and peaceable tranquillity of
mind in Christ Jesus.
ACcording to my promise (right honorable) in my former Epistle made to your
Lordship: Both for your more easy reading of this comfortable Oration,
concerning true tranquillity of the mind, and also for your better edifying
therein, I have causde the same to be imprinted. So as, if it please you,
between whiles, (when vacation from public affairs shall give you leave) to
bestow some private exercise therein: you may reap such inestimable comfort and
commodity thereby, as not only, your Lordship for your part, shall fullye
confirm your own mind in perfect steadfastness: be it in honorable and
prosperous days (which God be praised you inioye) either in adversity,
sickness, or loss of friends (which by Gods appointment we mortal men daily
are subject unto) but also, you shall be able to teach and convince al others,
which with continual study, and restless travail disquiet themselves with
worldly vanities: seeking either at home where they live, or else by their
industry in far Countries, a mean to obtain the quietness of their
minds, after once so easy a means, as is the free access to this book
shall be pressed before their eyes. The Compiler hereof (while he lived) of what
disposition he was, it appears by the Book it self: which could not
otherwise proceed, then from a godly and justified spirit. But although,
this Translator, either in respect of his own unworthiness, may be judged
unfit, to present unto your Honor so worthy a thing, and to lay the same before
the eyes of the world: either else, for his manifold imperfectio^s, unable to
express in English, the sentences, of so many Poets and ancient famous
doctors of the church, as are comprehended and cited in this little book: Yet,
this is my humble request, that how much soever shall be detracted from my
ableness and sufficiency herein, so much the more may be added to my pains
and dyligence taken in the same, and also to my poor good will borne to your
Lordship. If this be performed, and all thanks whatsoever, might seem to be
due, by any others taking profit hereby, be wholly rendered to your Lordship:
and your Lordship yielding the same again unto God: I, for my part shall
acknowledge my self entirely to have obtained, for this my zealous endeavor
herein bestowed, as great recompense as my heart therein desired.

Your Lordships humble and obedient Anthony Marten.

To the Reader.
SO BE IT (GOOD Christian Reader) that thou having provided for thy self,
abundance of wealth in this world, infinite substance, plentiful
commodities, with hope to augment and increase the same by large and ample
gaynes: and have settled thy heart, to build thee a sumptuous, strong, and
beautiful house; as well for the bestowing and ordering of these thy temporal
riches, as for the sure and safe custody of them, saying with thy self: this
year I will be occupied in searching out of Timber, Stone, Brick, Lyme,
Laborers and excellent workmen, for the better accomplishing of this my
device. The second year I will be furnished of all these things, and prepare
them ready for the work: and the third year I mind to build and erect my
house. Will not thy heart burn within thee, while the cogitation hereof is
thus fixed within thy breast? will thou not imagine, that while all these
things are in performing according to thy desire, that every day will be a
year, and every year a number? Would thou not with an earnest desire seek
to be released of this hope joined with fear, planted within thy breast, and
with all the travel of thy body, labor to see the end of this thy device
and purpose, and that with all expedition? Whilst thou art yet casting and
pondering of all these matters in thy mind, how to bring them to good effect:
If two of thy dearest friends, who have a special regard to thy body least
it should perish with travel and care, do presently come unto thee: The one
of them saying: Behold, the Timber, Brick, Stone, Lyme, and all other
necessary things, for buylding, which I laid up in store for mine own
self, my wife, and my children, to build us an house withal, I have meant
toward thee. And that other friend also, the sooner to deliver thee from thy
troublesome imaginations, say unto thee: Lo, all these things meet for
buylding, I have brought to the place where thou have determined to lay thy
foundation. The plat form is drawn: the stuff is excellent, and well
wrought: the work is framed, and ready to be erected: and the season of the
year very well serves. Therefore ease thy mind, unburden thy conscience,
set thy heart at liberty: Now there remains no travel for thee, but only,
that thou throughlye ouersee and suruay the whole gift, which we have bestowed
upon thee. That is to say: beginning with the first stone of the foundation,
vewing and beholding every thing by percell meal, till thou come to the
principal Pillar in the midst, upon which, the whole work is appointed to
depend: And so continuing thy vewe and suruay, till thou come to the last
part, being the roof of the same house, there to behold the force and
strength thereof, for resisting the stormy tempests of raging Winter. When
thou have thus done, begin thy house, and finishe the same in few days, to
thy contentation, which before thou did fear, in many years could
scarcely have been performed. Will thou now thou worldly minded man, be
ungrateful for this so high an earthly benifite received? Or will thou not
consent, to this so reasonable and friendly a demand, of such thy dear
friends? Nay, (I am sure) thou will not only be thankful, but also wilt
run with all diligence, with great admiration, with loving countenance, and
with all feast and melody, to embrace them, who have delivered thy body from
travel and watching, and discharged thy mind from the thing whereof it stood
in fear. Yea, and I doubt not, but thou will with a glad and willing mind,
accomplish and fulfill this their gentle and easy request made unto thee. If
now, thou have thus taken carke and care, about the buylding of an earthly
mancion, to repose and lay up thy temporal treasure, to place and solace thy
carrian Carcass.: If thou have thus taken thought for the body, so
corruptible a thing, so loose of life, so short of life, so uncertain of life,
and of it self alone no life, which so many years is a growing, and so few
hours a fading: if thou be thus discharged of thy bodily travel, and of the
fear of travel, by these thy two special friends: How much more
circumspection, and steadfast care and diligence, ought thou to have over thy
soul, so incorruptible a thing, so eternal, so heavenly, and unspeakable a
gift, in so short a minute changed, from sin to bless, from man to an
Angel, from earth to Paradise, from momentanie life, to unspeakable
thousands of ages, from war to reward, from trial of faith, to triumph for
victory, from continual vexation, strife and unquietness, to perpetual
consolation, security and quietness: How much more provident (especially in
this wonderful age wherein thy mind is so moved and tossed to and fro, to
see the world wonder, and the Devil rage, that Christ his true Religion is
raised up and published) ought thou to be in puruaying for the assured
knowledge of the true Tranquillity, stay, and confirmation of thy mind: a
matter sufficient and able to build thee a celestial habitation, wherein thou
may lay up thy heavenly treasure: wherein thou shall enjoy the parpetuall
fellowship of Aungelles, the continual contemplation of Gods divine Majesty,
the fruition of everlasting joy and felicity, and the lively fountain of
eternal life. If thou with this lightness of heart, with this zeal of
mind, and with these tokens of gladness, wilt accept and embrace thy friends,
which have showed thee of so earthly a commodity, of so frail a thing, and
(as I may term it) of such a mass of Mortar: With how much more fervent
zeal, pure love, and beneuolent mind, (beloved) art thou to accept the Author
hereof, and Translator of the same, who have presented so singular a benifite
unto thee as is this book, which may so much further and profit thee for the
safety of thy soul. The one of these thy friends, nursed and educated, in the
beautiful lap of liberal science: the other led (till he had seen this
book) with delights, and trained (from youth) to the intisementes of Courtly
vanities. The one, always fed, with divine food of Evangelical Doctrine:
the other taught (till ere-whilste) with profane knowledge of obscure
darkness. The one practicing as well by his life, as by his pen, to compile
and gather together, the deep and secret wisdom of Tranquillity of the
mind: the other (being scoller to this book, and having put in proof, the
Lessons therein learned) remains as a witness to the world, of the
manifold consolation and commodity reaped by the same. The one having laid
up in store, this marvelous stuff of building, for the edifying of himself,
and of all those in the universal world which understand the Latin tongue:
the other for the duty he owes to his Country, has brought forth the same,
and laid it ready before the eyes of all our English Nation and Country.
All the thanks and recompense, which he hops to reap of thee, is that thou
(and that for thine own singular pleasure, comfort, and commodity) wylt
wholye read over the same, especially because it is one whole continued style
and Oration, depending consequently, (yet plainly, easily, and manifestlye) one
point upon an other: And therefore, thou must of necessity so do, if thou will learn how to obtain the true quietness of thy mind. This I will assure
thee (gentle Reader,) that if thou wylt, with attentive ears pervse this
book, in such sort, as I have declared unto thee: of what state, condition, or
degree so ever thou be, or how so ever thy body be inclined, or thy mind
affected, thou shall reap inestimable and heavenly profit thereby. In such
sort as if thou be high of dignity: thou will not become disdainefull: If thou
be base of state: ambicious. Or if thou be mean of calling: mutable and
inconstant. Neither in prosperity, thou will show thy self ungrateful, but
thankful: not proud, but lowly of spirit. In sudden sadness: thou will
lay hold upon speedy merynesse. In unreasonable merinesse: upon discreet
temperaunce. In the leaden lethargy and disease of sin: upon the quick
remembrance of mercy by Christ. In adversity, thou will not become
impacient, nor pensive: but quiet and joyful. In sickness, not murmuraunt and
waywarde: but pacient and content with Gods visitation. Yea, such fruit may
thou find, by some small pains bestowed herein, as I dare speak it, thou
shall confess thy self, to stand a thousand times more afeard of thy three
most spiteful adversaries (I mean the world the flesh and the devil) when
the world most flattreth thee, with the glorious and glittering show of her
vain gifts, bestowed upon thee, and in thy chiefest security of wealth and
happy days, than in the most troublesome tempests of trying thy faith, by
affliction of the world, by provocation of the flesh, or by Satan's
instigation of thy mind: either else in the time, when God by his own hands
does lay his gentle correction of sickness upon thee. Afeard (I say) in such
safe prosperity, least God make small account of thee: glad and joyful in
pinching adversity, because he acknowledges thee for his natural child, and
not rejects thee as a reprobate bastard. That thou being thus mortified to
the world, and renewed by Christ, to the life to come, may (so long as the
blessed will of God is, that thy wretched carcass shall yet remain upon the
face of the earth) be so light and glad of heart, so firm, calm, and quiet of
mind, in the true faith of Jesus Christ, and so ravished with angelical, and
spiritual cogitation upon divine and heavenly treasures: as thy very self, may
be already separated from thy self, and thy body no longer seem to bear, rule,
suppress, and Prison the spirit (as in every carnal minded man it does.) But
the spirit altogether to direct, sanctify, subdue and govern the body, and
the same to bear, lead, and carry about with it, no less, than if it were
already changed, and lifted up to the everlasting felicity of Gods eternal
kingdom, purchased for us by his son Jesus, who with the father and the holy
ghost, one eternal God be blessed, praised, and magnified, now and in the
world to come. Amen.

An admonition to the Reader.
ALthough (beloved Reader) this Treatise, be not of those sort of Books,
which are usually divided into Chapters, either short or long: yet, asvvell by
notes in the margent, as also by the tytles oboue the head of every leaf, you
are no less plainlye directed to every particular matter therein, than by the
other you might be.

A godly and faithful Oration full of comfort, which entreats of true
tranquillity of the mind, compiled and gathered in Latin by John Barnard,
englished by Anthony Marten.
IT SHALL (GOOD people) be a thing most profitable and very godly, and in all
mischaunces the readiest refuge, if I shall in deed perform (as in hope I
have attempted) to show with all diligence, where the true tranquillity of
the mind may be found. The which being found out, I may plainly (as it were
with my finger) set it forth, to the true lovers thereof: and being so set out,
I may encourage and provoke them, to embrace, follow, and earnestly labor to
atchieue the same: that all impediments removed, and all carfulness put of
and laid aside, there be no adversity so great in any state of life to
ouercharge them, but they bear and pass over the same with a pacient mind,
as people who despise the vanities of this world, being ravished with
meditation of the new life to begin, and desire of ascending to higher things
of more estimation.

But although the thing which I shall labor to be known and laid abroad,
and with due commendation to be set forth, be a matter very delectable, and of
every one fervently with all prayer to be desired, yet nevertheless, if I shall
reprove those things in the proceeding of my Oration, which might seem to be
allowed: it will be a hard matter, and a work of great difficultye, to
dissuade a man from the thing, which by wrong judgment he has conceived, and
to cause, that he not only in countenance and show, do make much of the
clear light of the truth, and receive the same again once excluded from him:
but also that the mind may convey it in by ye entry of the heart, and to love
it with all his power, to carry it about with him, and to suffer it to be
wrested and won away, by no subtle devise of obscure darkness. For in every
age, and especially in the schools of Philosophers, was the question,
concerning the true tranquillity of the mind, reasoned of, no less than was
that of ye felicity of man's life: for which, it is reported, they fell
oftentimes at great controversy. Which controversy, rose not so much of the
variety of men's opinions, as of the diverse trades of sundry other men's lives.
For thence, every man hoped to obtain the quietness of his mind, wherein he
counted the original of his own imagined chiefest good to rest. As the noble
Philosophers, The Philosophers tra^quillity.
counting the happy life to consist in contemplation and knowledge of things,
looked to reap that exceeding joy of a quiet mind, by the very knowledge and
through seeing of the truth. Democritus
For why did Democrytus (as it is reported) put out his own eyes, set naught
by his patrimony, leave his lands unhusbanded, but to withdraw his mind
altogether from cares and imaginations, and to aspire to a happy life, and to
the stayednesse of his mind, so highly to be wished for. The journey of
Apollonius.
Apollonius a Philosopher of Pythagoras opinion (as saint Hierom in a certain
Epistle to Paulinus, recites out of Philostratus) passed over Cancasus, went
through the countries of the Albanes, Scythes, and Massagetes, entered into the
most welthie kingdom of India, and at last having past over the most large
water of Physo^ (which some think to be Ganges) he came to the Brachmans to
here Hiarcha, who being in a throne of gold, and drinking of Tantalus
fountain, sat among a few scholars, teaching the nature of things, the
motion of stars, and the course of days. From thence returning to
Alexandria: by the Elamites, Babilonians, Parthians, Syrians, Phenices,
Arabians, and Philistians, he went into Ethiopia, to see the Gymnosophistes,
and to behold the table of the sun in the grauelly sand. This man, did he
in vain spend so great labors, patiently suffer so many griefs, enter in so
great ieopardies, by passing so many diverse regions, by abiding so many
penuries in performing his journeys, to the intent he might be present to hear
the most famous doctors of ye world speak with their lively voice, teaching
the precepts of their wisdom? or did he it to the intent he might every
where find somewhat to be taught: that he always profiting himself, might
every day proceed better and better, and by that means, atchieue to the
highest degree of happiness and security of mind, hazarded with so many
trauelles and dangers. To fill up the number of three, The wonderful thirst
that Cleanthes had after wisdom.
I will for the same purpose make mention of Cleanthes, and vouch him as a
lively image hereof: who alone by his example, may serve in steed of all
other, to shake of from mortal men, their so heavy sluggishnesse and so deep
rooted sleep of idleness: and to work in us a love of travel and diligence.
Which Cleanthes (says Laertius) was so set on fire with the love of
Philosophy, that when he was greatly surcharged with penury and poverty, he
drew water in the night time within the gardens, to relieve his nedinesse, but
in the day time he applied his travel continually to his book and study,
without any intermission. And the same man (they say) being destitute of money
to buy paper, was wont to write such things as he heard of Zeno, upon
shelles and Ox bones. Did any thing drive this Clea^thes (whom for enduring of
pains they named a second Hercules) to take in hand so many daily and nightly
labors, so willingly to suffer and go through so many watchings, sparing
himself neither day nor night: unless that with his wonderful great toils,
he thought thoroughly to aspire to the highest degree of wisdom and learning,
which might set his mind in a happy state, (being once delivered from
trouble and fear, eased of the great greediness of desire, voyded of all
violent and troublesome motion of disquietnesse) and so to delight it self
with the sweet food of knowledge and cunning? Wherefore the Philosophers life
to what end it tended, and what quietness of mind it sought, and whither that
greediness of mind had relation, why it refused no trouble nor vexation in
bringing to effect their pretenced learning: it plainlye and manifestlye
appears by the examples here recited.

But now the noble Princes and Governors of commonweals, The tranquillity
of civil Governors.
mighty kings also and Emperors, which cannot live in quiet contemplation as
Philosophers do, but must be occupied in their affairs and government of the
commonwealth, as civil Magistrates: they seek the tranquillity of mind, even
of those their acts and deeds, whereby they are wont to hunt diligently for
the happy life. For shunning base estate as nighe as they can, and
vnnoblenesse of their name, they are carried in a manner hedlong to honors and
dignities, and to the greediness of fame and praise: either devising to
augment their substance at home, if they be peaceable: either else enlarging
the bounds of their dominions, and subduing of strange nations if they be
warriors, and delight in arms. Whose greediness of honor what else does it
seek, but to be filled therewith? For what else is ambicion (if ambicion can
be satisfied) but a certain tranquillity of mind, wherewith the hot greedy
desire is quenched and fulfilled. And this did Alexander (for his acts
surnamed great) feel, whose insatiable gut of glory, could never be contented
with any victory. For after an innumerable sort of victories gotten in the East
parts, The insaciable ambition of Alexander.
when he heard Anaxarchus reason that there were an infinite number of worlds.
It is said, he brust out into tears, and bewailed his fortune. Who, when his
friends had demanded of him whither any thing had chanced worthy lamenting,
answered: have we no cause (says he) to lament our estate, if there be (as
they say) innumerable worlds and we as yet are not become Lord of one. O
wretched Prince, that desiring to be satistied with glory, and seeking a rest
from his cares and a quietness of mind by conquering of Nations, and yet
could not appoint an end of his ambition, nor limit the same within any
bounds, neither by so many victories gotten, neither by such infinite power
achieved.

Again, Gainmongers tranquillity.
a great part of mortal men, as crafts men, Merchants, Usurers, and they
that in barganings bystow their time, intending to themselves great and ample
gains, gape after getting of money, and heaping of riches on every side: and
reckoning with themselves, that the fruits of their labor, and swage of their
greedy desire consists in getting of money and augmenting of substance.
Such kind of men lay sure hold of the precept commonly known of the Poet
Horace.

O Cytis, first money seek to gain, Spoken ironice or in mocking wise.

After money, labor virtues to attain.
But the other sentence of the same Poet, they reject, and despise in their
mind, not willing once to hear it namde.

For more is gold, than silver sold:
But virtues are more high than gold.
In our age, but especially within late years, covetousness has prevailed
above measure, and taken deep root, by entering and possessing the hearts of
every one, of all ages, states, and degrees, that unless God, with all
expedition, put to his helping hand, we may despair of any remedy for this
disease, and iustlye complain with Ovid.

A golden world is now in deed, Ovid.

when love for gold is won,
And honors great are purchased,
and bought for gold alone:
Come thou thy self Homer,
companied with thy Muses nine,
If thou come empty handed:
like so shall thou depart again.
But of all covetous persons, none commit more damnable offense, nor more
heinous crime, than they, which to the hurt and hinderance of others, coople
house to house, and land to land, and such as join large and wonderful
possessions together, as rich booties gotten by violence, robbery, murder, and
deceyte. Esaias. 5.
Of whom Esaias demaundes, whither they think, that they themselves alone and no
other, shall dwell in the land.

Last of all, The tranquillity of voluptuons men.
very many, not alonely of the rich and substantial persons, which for
their great wealth may bear it, but of the poorer sort also (being prodigal
and ryotous, consumers of patrimony, such as live in great debt to other
men, and with their own, cannot maintain so great expenses) do lead their
life in deliciousness, make much of their throat, belly, and other
voluptuousness, go clothed in gorgeous apparel, have pleasure in banquettings
and fellowships, and being delighted with reere and after suppers, garnish
their tables with exquisite and fine dainties, burn sweet perfumes, make
filthy songs, and according to their deeds, words, and iestures, they will
make consonant the tune of their pypes and instruments, delighting themselves
in daunsing and vawting. Moreover, they provoke men to laughter, with their
fond talk, with their unseemly iestes, with their wanton and toying words:
they spend their whole time in playing at Dice, and other like kinds of
feminine delights, and they seek for a happy and quiet life, in such vile
pleasures, as are not meet once to be named. To much has idleness, wine,
women, huntings, bathinges, and games prevailed, among such as would be counted
Gentlemen, and are not without qualities of Gentlemen. But if they so run at
randon in idleness, casting and overthrowing themselves thereby, and (showing
to be fit scholars of Epicurus) have regard to no end but to pleasure (as
Sardanapalus the king of Assiria did) they differ not much in judgment, from
brute beasts, and being blinded, do cast in a manner of no greater things,
than do brute beasts, but wholly cleave to the desire of their own senses and
bodies, as beasts and cattle do. Some of the welthier sort of them say with
the rich man, whom our savior discribes in the Gospel of Luke: My soul,
thou have plenty of good laid up in store for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry. Others also, rehearse the words of the wicked,
which Solomon declares in the second Chapter of the book of wisdom: Short is
our life, sorrowful, loathsome, and full of heaviness of mind are our days:
There can be no such remedy imagined against the cruel and inevitable stroke
of death, that any one living creature, by stryuing, can shoonne and avoid the
same: we have known none of the dead, that has revived and escaped from them
beneath, but at al adventures are we borne, and in short space, shall we become
as if we never had been. After such long manner of talk, at length they add:
Come therefore, and let us enjoy our goods while we be here, let us fill our
selves with wine, let us annoint our bodies, and pass over the flower of our
age in mirth and pleasantness, let none of us be destitute of pleasures, let
us in every place where we come, leave tokens and monuments of the joys we
have had: For here is our commodity, here is our portion of inheritance. Many
other customs (enemies to life) I could recite, both to show the desire of
al men in getting, and the strife of many in seeking a rest from their cares:
and whereby I might discover the error almost of all men, in declining from
the true tranquillity of the mind, which they strive to attain: But with
these four kind of trades, which hitherto I have touched, I will satisfy my
self.

Now what am I, The modesty of the author.
or what knowledge remaynes in me, that the thing wherein so great a multitude
of mortal men in seeking have missed, I to take upon me as a creedible judge
to give sentence for avoiding of controversy, and as some notable divine, of
creedite above others, to dispute of the right way, unto the true tranquillity
of the mind. But my purpose is not, to publish a new or strange thing, such,
as no man to fore has set forth: but only by my industry, to drive into ye
memory, those things, which we have been admonished of before: and to restore
to mind, the principles of our Religion, which ought to be known, continually
exercised, and laid abroad in the state of every man's life. But such
nevertheless, is the heavy sluggishnesse of men, that unless, a man the
oftener cry out, and that with a loud voice, they will not awake, nor any more
be styrred up from their old disease of evil custom received, than if they
were dead a sleep. Although I know, the Lord, which has the key of David,
who shuts, and none is able to open, opens, but none is able to shut, is
able to reneale the mysteries of his secret will, to the meek that have
suffered affliction, and to resist the proud, which will not submit
themselves to Christ, with all their reverence. Wherefore, not meaning to
prefer my own judgment, before others, but humbly submitting my self, to
the opinions of all the godly (if I have erred in any place) do not yet doubt,
but the sheep of that blessed fold, will acknowledge the voice of the true
shephearde: and such as are of Christ, both with an indifferent and willing
mind, will accept, whatsoever is recited out of the text of that our only
master, of whom so ever it be spoken. It were no hard thing, to discide ye
whole cause by the word of God, without the aid of other sciences. But
although, this were easy to be done, and is used of the most sort: yet
nevertheless, if out of profane writers, there fall things into mind, which
may serve to the more full and perfect declaration of the matter which we have
in hand, being consonant also, with those divine institutions of Christ: I
cannot see, why any man should justly reprehend, either the apt bringing in of
examples and similitudes, or the witty and pleasant sentences of
Philosophers, seeing they be as fit attendauntes upon the word of God:
which being wayed, both with judgment and reason, are rarely, and aptly (but
yet conveniently) placed.

Now before I enter any further into the matter, I humbly crave the aid of
almighty God, desiring the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom I
acknowledge to be the true giver of all good things, through his son, that in
steed of this my want and imperfection, he will pour upon me his holy
spirit, to minister, give and inspire in me, those things, which both may be
acceptable and pleasant unto him, and also profitable and commodious to the
common wealth.

And first let us go back again to those four chief kinds of life, which
the voluptuous sort, the studious of gain, the polytique, and Philosophers, do
labor to attain. And let us with some greater consideration, search out,
whither in lucre and advantage, in worship and renoume, in knowledge or
cunning, the true tranquillity of the mind may be found: since in these (as
within their chiefest limits and uttermost bounds) those former things
consist and have their being.

The unlawful lust of voluptuousness, Voluptuous men have no part with
tranquillity of mind.
which with the pleasantness thereof, so easily creeps into the mind, will
never find any end, neither yet can the thirst of unlawful desire, be ever
satisfied. They say, that Xerxes, The voluptuousness of Xerxes.
when as all things had prosperously happened unto him according to his mind
before his passage into Greece, promised a reward unto him, that could find
out a new pleasure. But the thirst of his desire was such, as no pleasure,
were it ever so wittily devised, could satisfy his mind.

Morcouer, the pleasure of the body, abounding and passing quickly away, does
oftener (as the Philosophers say) leave causes of repentance behind it, than of
calling the same to remembrance being past. But such repentance, oftentimes
approaching, (because it ingendreth grief, and causes a certain inward
gnawing through sorrow) utterly excludes all quietness of mind. A great way
of, are the tender and delicate persons, which love finenesse. Yea, and far
of, are they, which be filled with dainty fare, till they sweat and blow
again, and much like unto fat oxen, give themselves to surfeiting and
drongennesse, far dissonant, from the sweet and sound joy of the temperate
sort, which follow noble abstinence and moderation in fare and diet. For the
first entering to voluptuousness, although it seem pleasant, yet
notwithstanding it brings bitter endings with it: and unless repentance be
had, incurres at length hell fire. They which are occupied with the Tabret and
Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Pype, spend their days as best lyketh
them: but in a moment (says the pacient Job) they go down to hell. Job. 21.
Deceyuable is the reioyceing of this world, whereunto the voluptuous sort do
trust over much, and wherein (according to the frantike manner) forgetting their
weakness, rashely and wildely, they fall to leaping for joy: such deserve the
curse of God. For woe be to you (says Christ) that now laugh, Luke. 6.
for ye shall weep and lament. Let us chiefly therefore remember, that worthy
example of our savior Christ, which he put under the person of the rich man,
to warn every one to beware and take heed. For he enjoying delicate fare
here, Luke. 16.
and being corrupt and marred, with the inticementes of pleasure in this
world, made no reckoning of the immortal life to come: therefore departing
hence, was cast hedlong into hell, to be tormented with horrible torments of
Devils, and to be adjudged to the perpetual flames and fires, there
continually to be burned. And moreover, that if men would so little regard the
fearful judgment seat, of the last Judge, yet should reason, wherein we
differ from brute beasts, revoke them from that foul and filthy trade of
life. What thing more horrible and wicked is there, than to provoke the flesh
to uncomeliness and dishonestie, which already of it self rages more than
is convenient. For since the Philosophers agree, that as the horse is made to
run, the ox to draw, the dog to seek out: so man is ordained to two
things (that is to say) to understand, and do: and does not pleasure, the
enemy to reason, make feeble, corrupt and subvert the whole work of man,
whereunto he was ordained, and also change him, from the nature of a most
excellent creature, into an inclination which is more than femenine? For
pleasure, if it be any thing great, is a hinderaunce to council, weakneth the
memory, abateth the sharpness of wit, takes away the power of
constantinesse, and the strength of agillitie, dulleth not only the eyes of
the mind, but utterly also extinguisheth the light of the soul: and in
process of time, so transformeth a man, into a most foolish and wanton beast:
that he may worthily be called a smooth hog of Epichrus heard. Very well
therefore, does the Poet call, and fray us away, from the love of pleasures in
this verse following.

Carnal pleasures let be refraynde:
For pleasures hurt with sorrow gaynde.
For not only the strength of the mind, and wit, but the disposition also of
the body, senses, and good health, leaves and forsakes them that loyter in
idleness, live finely, delicately, and wantonly, be amorous, delight in
drinking, playing, dancing to the noise of Instruments, be attentiffe to
loving wanton and trifling songs, and thereby stir up, kindle, and in
filthy manner inflame the lusts of the flesh (prone of it self to evil) and
such as haunt harlots, and are carried hedlong, into every kind of intemperance
and voluptuousness.

And moreover, True tranquillity with getting of riches has no society.
they which are delighted in lucre and gain, apply themselves with heart and
mind to getting of riches, and as waking bird catchers, they diligently ensue
after their pray, to catch the bird before it come at them. But so much the
farther they fly from the true tranquillity of the mind, in how much they
heap up together innumerable wealth and riches. For there can be nothing more
true than that verse so often cyted of Iuuenall.

How much our money with us does grow,
So far our love therein we sow.
Even as for the increase and superfluity of gross humors, Horace discribeth.

The cruel dropsy does increase, Horace.

And his sensual lust does feed,
But yet his thirst cannot appease,
Unless the cause the veins be fled,
And watrie grief from body yed.
Like so, the covetous sort, the more riches they heap up together, be it by
right or by wrong, the more vehemently and immoderately, they thirst after
them. And through that vice of covetousness, there breeds in kings and high
estates, polling and extorting from subjects, pilling and taking away of Church
goods, abusing the ministers of Christ's Church, and wresting the word of God
at their own pleasure, untrue accusing and putting to death of many, unjust
condemning and possessing of goods: and sinally the ungodly desire of wars,
to the intent to spoil countries. And in the meaner sort, for the desire they
have, either to maintain their superfluous charges, to increase their wealth,
or to shake of their poverty and beggary, there rests both fraud, guile,
legerdimaine, unfaithfulness, robbery, filching of the Princes treasure,
lying, stealing, robbing by the high ways, murders, perjury: and finally
there remains in every one the greedy desire of other men's goods,
(forbidden by the commandment) wherewith they being inflamed, make all the
way they can to get money. They break all laws, as well holy, as profane,
force neither for heaven nor earth, but turn all vpsye down, busy themselves
in wrong and oppression of their neighbor, undo the poorer sort with usury,
and which is woorst of all, many (after Judas example) become traitors to the
Gospel, so they may by one means or other, bring in substance and augment
their riches.

For what is it that hunger sweet of gold does not compel,
men mortal to attempt?
Very well therefore did saint Paul warn Timothy from desire of riches, when
he said: They that will become rich, 2. Tim. 6
fall into temptation, and into snares, and into many desires, both
unprofitable and hurtful, which draw men into perdicion and destruction: for
the root of all mischief, is the love of money: which (verily) while men have
coueted, they have fallen from faith, and inta^gled themselves with many cares.
Wherefore, if we have food and raiment, wherewith the body may be clad, let
us be content therewith. Math. 16.
For those words of Christ, proceeded not in vain from him: when he said,
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whereas, such
seek in a manner to establishe their kingdom here in this life (forgetting ye
heavenly habitation) which do greedilye covet great store of money, and more
substance, than need requires. Wherefore (says David) their houses are of
high estimation to them, Psalm. 48.
and they think they shall endure for ever, and their dwelling places, from
generation to generation, and call the lands after their own names. But since
they build themselves Mancion places in this life, (as if they were happy
men) not to endure for a season, but for a sure habitation to dwell in
continually, thinking their gorgious buildings, with the renown of their names
shall perpetuallye endure. When as (in deed) these great and huge buildings
flourished out with their vain titles, through antiquity, soon fall to ruin
and decay. They seek not therefore after the heavenly City, Heb. 13.
(according to the Apostles order) but covet to have their abiding here without
any alteration. They bear not in remembrance those sayings which ought
continually to sound in mortal men's ears, and warn them every day of their
state and condition wherein they stand: Naked came I into this world, Job. 1
and naked shall I return again. They forget also that threatening voice:
Luke. 12.
Thou fool, this night will they take thy life from thee, then whose shall
these things be, which thou have prepared. And besides that dreadful threat of
God. Esaias also against such manner of builders pronounces a great temporal
punishment. I call here to record (says he) in the hearing of the God of
Hosts, whether many of their sumptuous and fair houses, shall not become
desolate, and no man dwelling in them. And if such destruction, do not always
chance by and by, yet it falls out oftentimes, that their children and
posterity are thrust out, and mere strangers and enemies succeed in their
places. Wherefore better did Crates the Thebane (although not well to be
allowed therein) that threw into the sea.viij. talents, Crates threw his
substance into the sea.
wherein his whole substance did consist, rather than they should cause him to
be busied, about worldly cares and cogitations: so he taking a staff and a
scrip, entered into the poor Philosophers life. Better did Eutrapiles, that
gave to his adversaries great abundance of substance, to the intent, he
might drive and expel from himself, the heap of cares, and to translate the
burden of them, together with the riches, to his foes and enemies. For the
heavy pensiveness of Euclio, in Plautus, does plainly argue an inward
tormenting, that consumes the mind, through careful fear to depart from
those goods, which once have been gotten. And do they not vainly, Psalm. 38.
and unadvisedly turmoyle themselves, which heap up riches, and cannot tell
who shall gather them? Why do we not bear away that worthy precept of David,
and both in our life and conversation declare the same: Psalm. 61.
If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. Let the examples of the
Patriarckes be a warning to us, who be heirs of the same promise with us. Who
leaving their own native country, went into a straungs land, and dwelt to
their last end in Shepherds Cabbyns: and when riches through Gods blessing,
increased with them, they no whit at all fixed their minds thereon, but
tha^kfully acknowledged the aucthor and giver of them, and largely and
liberally, imparted the same to others. Let us therefore pray to the Lord,
that he will incline our hearts to his word, and not unto covetousness: which
vice, bearing swinge ouerlong, in Magistrates and great rulers, has now in our
days, so burst out and redownded against Christ's holy Gospel, as it has
caused the preaching of our salvation, not only dangerous amongst blasphemous
tongues, but also odious, in a manner to all sorts, of every age, degree and
state. And nothing there is, which has so much hindered and slacked, the
publishing of the Gospel, and proceeding thereof, or that has so vehemently
dismaide, turned, and withdrawn men's minds, from accepting, allowing, and
approving the same, or that has more moved and incenced the wrath of God, to
take his word away from us, than has this vice of covetousness done.

Yet moreover, Gredinesse of honor has no part with true tranquillity of the
mind.
there is an infinite rowte of wicked people, that are led with ambition, and
greedy desire of power, honor, and high calling. Hereby it comes to pass,
that a man through the blind love of himself, (which is called of the Greeks
Phylautia) does wonder, and has confidence, in his own proper virtues,
wisdom, and hablenesse, and yet is ignorant, of his own infirmity and
weakness. Hereof proceeds oftentimes disdain, and either plain, or crafty
oppressing of others. From hence comes envy, slander, hatred, reuengeme^t,
flattery, spite, enmity, brawling, evil speaking, chyding, and an infinite
number of other sins. And very seeldome do the ambicious sort, who are
drowned, in the study and desire, of worship and renown (which is chiefly
apertinent to the matter) vanquish and appease their unruly lust of greedy
ambition. Seldom find they a staying place, to temper their unbridled and
swelling pride: but forgetting their former vocation, strive still to reach to
higher, and higher degrees of honor, and never stay clymbing, till they have
reached to the chief estate of power and dignity, and thereupon made Lucan this
sentence concerning Caesar. Lucan in his second book.


So many walled Towns subdude,
and enemies put to flight,
So many Castles overcome,
when first he came in sight.
And Rome it self the hedde of all,
Of wars the chiefest pray,
But easy to be won:
to others might have been a stay.
But Caesar swift to each intent,
no act beleude was done
So long as ought remainde vngot,
that might with power be won.
In so outrageous heat of greedy desire, what place think we, is left, (I
will not say to quietness and tranquillity of mind) but so much as to breath
upon, at free liberty. Truly, it were easier, for such a one, if he were
falling down hedlong, from a steep, and high mountain into the Sea, to stay
himself by the way, then to appease and mittigate, his intemperate heat of the
mind, being captiuated with the insatiable apetite, of bearing rule, of honor,
and advancement. Glory also, with much pains and watchings is gotten: and
with infinite labor, in a long space of time, is empire purchased, but in the
least moment of an hour, may it be lost again. Wherefore the Poet Seneca,
cries out alowde, and warns Kings and Princes, sharply rebuking them, in
this sort.

O ye to whom the guide of land and sea, Seneca.

Has given the great law of life and death,
Your high and puffed looks, cast ye away.
For he whom break of day, proud espieth.
Him, shall evening tide, in grave find lie.
None has found the Gods, so to please his mind,
As he might make account of morrow day.
The God does change our reckning made,
With swift and boystrus wind.
But ambicious Princes, chiefly fall abous all others: and so much the more
grievous, is their fall, as they have attained, to greatness of dignity,
which thing the foresayds tragical Seneca, in his book of Hippolito,
eligantly expresses.

What miseries happen within man's life,
But fortune rages least, in matters small,
To small faults, does God decree but little grief:
To rest unknown, the humble sort do fall:
And soundly sleep within a cottage hall.
But houses built so nere the skies,
The Southern blast must bide:
The raging of the Northeast wind,
And showers of Western side.
The same sense has another (but none expressly) couched in these verses
following: and by bringing in of similituds, does trimly set forth the thing it
self, in our sight.

More often is shaket, Horace.
and rockt with wind,
the huge Pine Apple tree:
And hier towers made to fall,
with greater force, we see:
And lofty hills, are made to shake,
with lightning from the sky.
For
Whosoever (O Princes) least stands in fear, Seneca in Thyeste.

A more Lord than he, does threate him again,
Each king that rule, over other does bear,
A greater than he, over him does reign.
Even as
Of other dreadful kings, that Empire bear
There own to rule, does Jove subject again:
Who Giant like, in triumphant manner,
Does guide and govern all, with beck of eine.
It does me good to recite the Poets, who having no knowledge of Christ, yet
they submitted all things unto God, whom of Iuuando (that is helping) they
named Jove, of bountifulness, they called him the best: and unto whom they
attributed the care and charge of all man's causes. Yea, and make mention also,
that he would at length take accounte of his servants, even of such, as be
kings and governors of commonweals. But to come nigher the purpose: who is
he, that has not heard (if he have read but a few of the ancient writers)
how many Emperors have been deposed, and pulled from their seats, and also,
how the royal power of kings, has been taken from them, and wrested away by
violence. The Histories, are full of mutations in Monarchies, of the servitude
of kingdoms free borne, and of the destruction of noble Cities. Therefore,
whether careful coveting, has not obtaynde this pretensed degree of honor: or
if it have obtained the same, the careful fear of change: or if it have lost
it, the sorrowful calling to mind of that which was forgotten: will be a let to
an ambicious person, that he can not be quiet and void of care. But the true
tranquillity of the mind, What true tranquillitye of the mind is and the
commendation thereof.
which we seek for, hangs not upon chance and on all adventures, it has
no doubtful trade of living in outward show: it settleth not it self upon
hope uncertain, and blind expectation of all only one manner of life, whereof
one being deprived, hyeth it self away with such speed and celeritie: but is
all one as well in trouble and adversity, as in prosperity and happy days:
as well when it is dispoyled of honors and shamefully entreated, as when it is
honorably attired, and nobly rewarded. It always shows the same cheer in
poverty, that it did in abundance. It bears it self not higher through
praise of the people, nor through their disprayse becomes the sadder. When
fortune changes her copy, it lowres not, nor when she smyleth again,
shows any inordinate reioyceing. It fears not greatly the torments of the
body in an honest cause, nor (corrupted with the intisements of
voluptuousness) allows an evil cause: and thus with such temperance and
honest moderation, bears it self during life, as unto the very last breath,
like a faithful gest and companion inseparable, it never forsakes those with
whom it is conversant.

Lastly, Praise of Philosophy.
such as gave their minds continually to Phylosophie (adding somewhat every
day to their learning) wexed ripe in that study: wherein we see how many wise
men spent their whole lives. Psalm. 18.
Unto whom, the very heavens have so declared the glory of God, and the
firmament showed his handie works, as by reason only of the order, beauty,
and workmanship of things created, they acknowleged the very creator of the
world, and his eternal power: and thereby learned, with what means they might
pick out, and lay hold upon his wisdom and divine nature. These men have
gone more nearer than the rest, to a quietness from their troubles. For in
Socrates there remained always one manner of countenance, and one gravity. Of
very right (says Cycero) must he be calm and quiet, always of one cheer,
seeing there was no variabilitie in his mind, whereof the other is framed, and
whereto it is semblant. And what does Philosophy promise to bring to pass,
being adorned with so many high praises, as it is called the guide of our life,
the schoolemaister of manners, the mother of virtues, the expeller of vices,
the tilling of the wit, the medicine of the mind? does it not promise a rest
from cares, and delectation of the minds of such as be travelers therein? And
does she not (as in her own right) challenge the shaking of, of vain
carfulness, quenching of lusts, driving away of fear, and the curing (or to
speak least) the moderating of turmoyles of the mind. Neither does
Phylosophie, set forth only in utter show so great a profession, but the
heerers also thereof, being taught goodly precepts, and instructed with jolly
persuasions, do declare both by their life and communication, the virtue and
force thereof resting in them. Which of the old Philosophers, was either moved
with the occasions of sorrow, or was appalled at death when it aproched.
Socrates fast bound in prison, seized not to dispute of Phylosophie: and the
very day of his death, reasoned at large, concerning the immortality of the
soul. And when in his hand he held that deadly cup he departed this
miserable body with so pleasant and iocande a mind, as he seemed not to be
preased to his death, but using pleasant words, as if he had gone to a
solemn banquet of his friends, whom he had not seen a good while before.
Wherefore, to such as know not Christ, being not yet revealed to all the
world, I would judge no kind of life comperable to the Philosophers: either
if they seek to drive away cares, either else, for the natural recreation of
their minds. For what is there, that either in wealth and riches, either in
pleasure and pastime, either in honor and advancement, does so exceedingly
pacify the mind, and poures gladness therein, as does the science of
Phylosophie, and knowledge thereof, which has been author of those goulden
precepts of living, and being collected into books, has published the same
for a memorial to all the posterities.

But after that Christ, True tranquillity is scuered from Philosophy and is
transserred to Christ.
the brightness of glory, (who being the same light that gives light to
every man coming into this world) showed himself to the earth, and opened
the secret will of his father, and the true knowledge of tranquillity of the
mind, both to kingdoms and nations: we are commanded to here his voice, him
to obey and serve, him to follow as our only shepherde and master, in whom
all treasures of wisdom and knowledge lie hid. The Philosophers were but men,
and (as Saint Paul calls them) but natural men, who could attain no
higher from earthly things, than the natural reason of man would permit
them. But Christ, both is, and was the son of God: who of his infinite mercy,
left the throne of his majesty in heaven, and from the bosom of his father,
descended down upon the earth, to open the mysteries hid from every generation
since the beginning of the world, that whereunto man being but a creature
could not attain by reason of his blindness, thereunto his mind might
ascend, being lightened, changed, and regenerated by the spirit of Christ.
And the Philosophers do chiefly exhort every one to that worthy and
triumphant victory (which is meant of our lusts and appetites) than which,
they account none more greater, nor yet more honorable. For he that has
overcome an enemy, was of more force than his enemy, but he that by
restrayning himself, bridleth his own lusts, such a one has overcome
himself. He that has overthrown his enemy, has vanquished an externe
adversary: Aristotle.
but he that subdueth his own desires, conquereth a Rebel and domestical
Traitor. There is no evil, that is not easier to be resisted, than worldly
pleasure. For of what sort so ever it be, the same is a terror to us, even at
the first sight, and for the asperitie thereof, strikes us with a quaking
fear. For she with her smiling looks, allureth men unto her, and with her
sweet motions falling into the senses, speedily wins favor, no less than
does the song of the Marmayde call back and draw to her company such as
pass by. Through wanton pleasures was Hanniball undone at Capua: yet could no
overthrow in battle discomfite him. Wherefore, he that overcomes his lusts,
does not only with the old Trojans, put away Helene from him, but plainly
triumphs over sin, and does a greater act, than to overcome ye strongest
hold in the world. Very well therefore said Plato: A man to overcome himself,
A notable saying of Plato.
is the chief and most excellent victory of all others: but to be overcome of
himself, of all others is a most shameful, and horrible fall. With such like
exhortation, the Philosophers do annimate and incorage us to this difficult
and hard conflict, and teach and instruct us with all the precepts they can:
and yet do they neither keep near the right course, nor rightly set forth
the same: and are neither present with their hearers as they should be,
neither indue them with divine power from above, neither yet are able to give
grace for bearing away of victory.

But Christ leads us from all wandering and troublesome crossewayes of error
and blindness, and sets us with his doctrine, Tra^quillity trantierred to
Christ.
a true and ready way: and does not only sit as Judge of our doings, but
furnishes us also with the whole armor of God, wherewith, we being armed and
fortified on every side, may resist all our adversaries at once: both
overcome the motions of the flesh, and keep our souls undefiled from the
world. And the same Christ, being truly present with his spirit in every
place, both exhorts us to fight, indueth us from above with strength to the
battle, by his grace helps us to overcome, when we faint lifts us up, and
when we get the victory crowns us. Moreover, although we willingly embrace
the wholesome admonitions of Philosophers, whereby we are called to remember our
frailty and weakness, and to keep down the pride of man: and although we
set some store by those excellent disputations, which delivered the mind from
perishing, and so earnestly endeavored to set the same at liberty: yet very
greatly, and I know not how far of, Philosophy has been from the feel
and taste of eternal life. Even so much, as neither eye has seen, neither
ear has heard, neither heart has imagined. Yet some manner of feeling
thereof, has God reveled to his elect by his holy spirit. But of the exceeding
greatness of that unspeakable glory, none of the old Philosophers could so
much as dream upon, or make conjecture of. Which thing, God, in his son
Jesus has appointed as a right of inheritance, to be inioyed of the true
worshipers of him: even since the first beginning of the world, and creation of
all things. For others lacked the holy spirit of promise and adoption, which
God imparteth to the faithful, that desire and call upon him for the same: and
by the inspiration of the same spirit, does regenerate, quicken, and renew,
teach, rule, govern, sanctify, erect, comfort, and confirm us in faith,
helps our infirmity, makes us light and ready to all good works. Through
which we cry with boldness Abba father: which does bear witness with our
spirit that we be the sons of God, and heirs with Christ. Ephe. 1.
Who beetng the earnest of our inheritance, we are sealed to redemption of the
possession purchased by him: and being lightened in the joys of our mind, we
know what the hope is whereunto we are called: and having gotten the
inheritance of the children, we obtain the rich glory of his inheritance
upon the saints. Wherefore seeing in all places, the way to Christ is so
large, as he is present every where with his elect to their lives end, and to
the last consummation of the world: we have no need either to include our
selves in Monasteries or houses of Religion under a name of holiness, or to
take long pilgrimages in hand for the quieting of our mind: or to hide and
keep our selves in secret wilderness, as the manner was of religious sort in
old time: unless like persecution of Christians should wax hot again, as
in those days it did. But every man abiding in that vocation which God has
called him unto, shall reach to the true joy of the mind, and attain to the
true solitary contempt of the world, purchasing to himself the testimony of
a good conscience, if he put on Christ, and lay hold of him, in such sort,
as he has showed himself in the scriptures: and deuorsing from him all
preposterous Jewish fashions, he prefer the works commanded by God, before
man's ceremonies and inventions (and to end all at once) if he live and
behave himself as he ought, both toward GOD, and his word. But of Christ
and his word, of the manner of good living, of the testimony of a good
conscience, of the sense of eternal life, and of the great comfort by learned
men, shall be spoken of more at large hereafter.

Now it is necessary to declare the lets and impedimentes, The lettes of true
tra^quillitie.
whereby the most part are so plucked from the true tranquillity of the mind,
that a very few can attain thereunto. Men's Jove bent upon casual goods.
And first of all, an exceeding number of people (giving over their true
confidence in God) depend upon the goods of fortune, and being once deprived
of them, they faint in their minds by and by, The confidence we have in me^.
and become sorrowful. Moreover, others there be, which stay themselves upon
the succor of great men, and have a light heart, and indifferent mind, so long
as they are maintained with relief from them: But if the mainteyners
themselves quail, they streightwayes run down hedlong, The trust men have
in their own power and riches.
and fall into most bitter mourning: yea, and further, the greater sort
themselves, for a time, vaunte and boast of their power and riches: but if they
be excluded from their seat of honor, and diseased of their flourishing
fortune, they streightway be at wars with themselves, and spend all the rest
of their life in sorrow and heaviness. All these being disappoynted of their
expectation, lie in misery, complaining of their crooked fortune: and are
wont to sing that doolefull verse.

The earth is full of sinfulness:
The sea is frayght with wretchedness.
Some misfortune there happens always in man's life, to interrupt and subvert
our quietness, unless a man arm his mind to abide all misaduentures, and
prepare himself before hand, to bear what soever shall happen unto him. Which
common state and rule of life, Euripides has prettily set forth in these three
verses following.

There is no word so fearful spoke, Euripides.

nor fatal chance so glide,
Nor mischief wrested into man,
from wrath that took his seed:
But man by nature should put up,
and patiently abide.
Wherefore, Plato compared man's life to a Die, whose best chance, every Dicer
desires to have, but yet, howsoever it happens, he must by art remedy that
which chances to him otherwise than he desired. For as the Be gathers most
sweet honey out of the withered Time, and out of other herbs of more unpleasant
juice: like so, may we also, out of evil and unprofitable things, pick out
that which may turn to our profit and commodity. Even as shipwreck to Zeno
Citius, and banishment to Diogenes, gave them occasion to study Philosophy.
But let us proceed to other perilous matters, which be lettes of true
tranquillity of the mind.

There is seldom found out any one that is content with his calling, but
thinks an other in happier case than himsefe. Misco^tent with our own state
and wondering at other men's.
When as the poor, prefers the rich estate the rich, the noble man: the noble
man, the King: and every one having other states in admiration, desires to be
in the same case that they be in. Hereof grows so often changing of our
trade of life, which seems to bring a happy state with it, when in deed, they
differ not much from sickmen, which so often do alter their purpose. For even
as the sickeman, cannot away with the sight of his wife, blames the Physician,
is grieved at his friend that comes to visit him, and yet being gone, is
displeased again at there going: even so is the wavering way and trade of
life, and the wandedring and inconstant mutabilitie of the mind, which seldom
does ariue at the quiet and desired port. Wherefore, even as they which are
quesie stomacked, and are disquieted with vomiting, do leap from one ship to
another, that they may find some ease thereby, until they perceive themselves
nothing the better, but to do the same still that they did before, carrying
their vomit (as I may say) still about with them where ever they go. Even so
they, which ever between whiles, choose now one now an other trade of life, do
rather entangle themselves in cares and troubles, than be discharged and rid
therefrom. For whilste they study, as it were to land at next shallowes, they
are carried ofttymes into a more huge deep, Wicked and unlawful Arts.
and as I may say, into a bottomless poole. What if we do not except out of
this number, the curious tellers of men's natiuities, the Mathematricians, and
the Astronomers, who (after a sort) do draw and call back all things to a
fatal law, and suppose that man's life, manners, and successes, are governed by
the power of stars, and in prognosticating of other men's misfortunes,
cannot foresee their own destruction? With these men, let us join the
guessing Soothsaiers, which by their deuination, tell before of things to
come. Also the wicked inchaunters and detestable Nigromancers, which raise up
the souls of dead men, or rather call up Devils, of whom the Lord does
plainly forbid to ask any question. Deute. 18.
Such men putting confidence in their unlawful and abominable practices, and
forsaking the true God, being led with their own horrible errors, and ouerlong
deceived with lies, never remain in a stayde and quiet mind. And there be
others, Desire of excelling others.
which be so inflamed with the love of themselves, as they covet to excel all
others: and unless the success of things be correspondent to their desires,
in such sort as they may flow with all the gifts of good fortune, and pass
others in the excellent gift of wit, they are grieved in their mind,
thinking that all goes not well with them. Such a one was the elder Dionyfius,
who not content with his infinite power and authority, but thinking it a
discredit for him, to give place to Philoxinus in Poetry, to Plato in
knowledge of disputing: the one he cast to ye stonequarries, the other he sold
to be transported to Aequinum. There creepes in, I know not how, throughout
the life of every one (to use Salomons words) travel and affliction of
spirit, in such sort, as there is no state of life, that has not experience
of them. They disquiet Magistrates and private persons, single and married men:
They enter even into Kings and Emperors Chambers: They spare no kind of man
nor woman, yea, they creep into the secret nurceries, whereinto only women
are used to enter. What does the pleasant Rose, lawnde in with Briers,
signify unto us, and her beautiful sight fenced in with troublesome bra^bles.
Does it not admonish us, of mirth to be mixed with sorrow, bitter things with
sweet, and sour with pleasant? By the sin of our first parents it was
purchased, that nothing can cause a continual merrinesse in man, but that
after mirth sadness must come: after marriage widdowhoode: after fruitfulness,
abortion and barrenness: care and vexation annexed to the bringing up of
children: to the honorable life, dishonor: to prosperity, misfortune: after
delicate fare a cloyde stomach: and after health, sickness to ensue. But to
leave this variety of things, and to speak nothing of war and civil
discention, which in such violent sort breaks out into the life of man, and
disquietes the rest thereof, destroying many thousands of men, not with one
kind of destruction, yet with the edge of the sword chieflye: passing over
them also, which enterprise greater matters than their power can attain to,
purchasing to themselves great troubles thereby: How diuersely (I pray you) is
man's mind tossed hither and thither, Heap of troubles.
and with what a heap of miseries, is it not only overthrown, but also
whelmed over and over? And no marvel: for the flesh being a Rebel, and as it
were a home borne enemy, fiercely provoke and stirs us to mischief,
never cease to assail us hand to hand, suffers the conflicte to have no
rest, not the least moment of time.

The world, and Satan Prince and Lord thereof, being capital, and continual
enemies of mankind, conspire our destruction in such vnderminding sort, as if
they were near friends unto us. Our life a continual warfare.
In battle stand we all our whole life, so long as we live here. For man's
life it self upon earth, is nothing but continual warfare, and wrestling, and
a certain grievous conflict with three most cruel and noisome adversaries. In
which fight, few have the victory, but many be overthrown, and being
ouercharged depart from God. Hereof comes it that sickness so greeueth one
man, and puts him from sleep: and an other is stryken with fear of the evil
that hangs over his head. This is it that makes one were hastye with anger
and grudge: and an other, either with love to be pensive, or with lust to be
kindled. Here through, one falls into over vehement laughter, with inordinate
joy, and an other into immoderate lamentation, and unreasonable sadness. One
provoked with grief to see another in prosperity, and another compelde
through ambition of the wicked, to seek, and currie fauell. And to conclude:
hereof it comes that one, receiving an injury, is grieved, and studieth to
revenge: An other being author of a wrong, rejoices at other men's harms, and
seeks to keep him still under whom he has once oppressed. So is the mind it
self, at war with it self, and through contrary and repugnant affections,
The crafty wiliness of Satan.
is rent, and in a manner torn in pieces. Incredible (truly) is the craft of
Satan in interrupting the true quietness of our mind, and in making his
assaults upon us. Of whom we are not so much to stand in fear, when he
manifestly shows himself unto us what he is, as when he lays his baytes for
us, and (as the Apostle says) transformes himself into an Angel of light.
Oftentimes he does openly assail us, when he provoke us to those outward
heinous sins: as to surfeiting, dronkenesse, whoredom, adultery, incest,
murder, poisoning, and such like. But more oftener does he set upon us unawares
and unprovided, by his wiles closely vnderminding us, and making every one in
his vocation, slothful, negligent, and slow in hearing the word of god, in
true holiness, in honest deeds, in deeds of charity, in prayer, and giving
god thanks. And whylst they be thus careless and uncircumspect, he lays
hold of them upon the sudden. Sometime, he flatteringly intiseth us to
sin, to ye end he may deceive us: pleases us, to hurt us, allureth us, to
slay us: qualifieth the greatness of sin: pute out of our mind, the
grievous thretnings of God: takes away the feel of gods wrath against sin,
to the intent he may make a sinner careless on every side. An other while,
clean contrary, he aggreuateth the greatness of sin, showing what we are
to fear and dread: wills us to take experiment, by the horrible
punishementes and examples of others. And so, we being suddenly confounded, by
perceiving of Gods wrath, drives us well near to desperation, and after a
sort, takes from us, all hope of forgiveness. This crafts master, and worker
of all euilles, as he is a crafty, wily, and an old practiced fiende, so does
he destroy all persons with their own weapon. There is no kind of
temptation, no craft, no subtle mean, no deceitful devise, and no laying in
wait, that so ancient an adversary, and so old an enemy, has not
perfitely learned and practiced, through use it self, by the antiquity, of so
many thousand years space. Whom he cannot allure, with the pleasantness and
delectation of vice, him does he entrap, with admiration, and pride of virtue.
And whose mind, he perceyues flies from other wickedness, his heart does he
puff up with secret pride of his well doing. Wherefore, he is no less to be
feared when he is overcome, then when he himself does overcome, since he
executes his business, as well the one way as the other. First of al (says
saint Cyprian) he goes about covertly to deceive: For he promises earthly
honors, to deprive us of the heavenly. He shows us of false matters, that he
may privily convey away the true. But if he cannot covertly beguile us, then he
openly bendes his threats and terrors, against all the servants of God.
Deceytfull is he in time of peace, and cruel in time of persecution. We must
therefore be heedefull, and labor with all our might, and with a singular care
and diligence, to resist our cruel enemy, and such his fiery darts, as are
bent against us, wherewith we may be stricken and wounded. But to leave
speaking of the subtlety of Satan, the knowledge and remembrance whereof,
should make us the readier to resist, I will recyte the other impediments,
which be a hinderaunce to the happy and quiet life.

What a heap of euilles in these our days, The grievous evils of our time.
has burst out, and overthrown in a multitude, the true tranquillity of
their minds. And what a number, has the flood of unprofitable things,
disquieted and turned, from the peaceable state of their mind? One wrestleth
with the disease of incontinencie, and preuayling but little (striving with the
deaf) does waste his labor, to complain of the strait law of single life,
and of marriage forbidden him. (Out of which fountain, indiscreetly the
Prelates of Churches, do dissemble, and make, as though that exceeding great
mischief did not issue and proceed, when as God, in very deed, not as a
winker at such a matter, but like a Judge, for an example and warning to all
the world, has subverted Monasteryes, and houses of Religion, making them
even with the ground.) An other, does superstition compel, to have an
exceeding strayte conicience, in violating any of the least of man's inventions,
neglecting the commandments of the everlasting God, and dreading him, rather
as a cruel tiraunt, than esteming him as a loving father, and merciful
defender. Whereof it comes, that the fear of punishment, fayneth a sacrifice,
and that such as be dead, may be purged by the punishment of fire: which fire,
although not being perpetual, yet (as they say) terrible: and that the said
sacrifice, could deliver them from the place of torments, and raise them up
to the fellowship of Saints. Diversely also, is the mind of many, tossed to
and fre, and drawn hither and thither, into doubtful cogitations, because
they cannot determine any thing, for a certain judgment, concerning the great
controversies of our faith, sprung up in this our age: which holds also a
number of minds, in such suspense and boubt, that whyther they shall fly for
succor, whose aid they shall cleave unto, and finally, what is the best way to
be done, they are utterly ignorant. Many also, are turned from the Gospel,
partlye because of the multitude of herisies, which for our sins, are brought
in, and procured by false spirits: and partlye by reason of the vices, which
by man's own intemperaunce and dissolute life, are crept in: Such men being
seduced from the right sense, know not how to discern betwixt the work of
God, and the work of the Devil: nor with a discreet perseverance, to see the
difference, how to choose, and sever the one from the other. Also, there are
found many, who, being disquieted with the often change of Religion, become
(in a manner) void of belief, that there is any God at all: and as though he
would not well defend their cause, they yield to all ungodliness, and
scarcesly (nay nor so much as scarcesly) abstain themselves from blasphemous
words. Yea and the weaker sort, whose judgment is right, are so greatly
appalled, when violent persecution is imminent, that they quickly depart from
Christ, and stand more a fearde, of them which kill the body, than of him
which has power, to judge both the body and soul to hell fire. But, of all
the anguishes that do vere the soul, and disturb the mind from the right
way, there can be none more greater, than the anguish of conscience, and the
grievous remembrance of sins. The worm of the conscience.
For there gnaweth the worm: there the fire burns to ye uttermost: there
hell fire has his beginning, and also the weeping and gnashing of teeth, which
our Savior in the Gospel, pronounces to be reserved for the wicked sort.
Often we may change our resting place, take long pilgrimages in hand, pass
over desert seas, travel many countries, both on foot, and by horse:
conveyed may we be, and pass into the furthest parts of the world: But our
affections to lay away, our selves to forsake, the record of our conscience to
forget, and the sorrowful thinking of our wicked demeanor, to abandon and cast
from us, we are not able. For the trouble of our conscience, pricketh us at
home, moves us being abroad, accompanies us in the night, iornyeth with us,
dwelles in the country with us, and wheresoever we set our foot, or to what
place we go, makes her self such a mate and companion, as will not be separated
from us. The fables do describe, how Orestes, was tormented and vexed, with
burning Torches of the furies in hell. But the life of man throughout, is full
of examples, how every man's own deceyt, guile, naughtiness, mischief,
presumption of his own good wit and memory, is a heavy burden unto him:
and how man's own evil thoughts, and remorse of his own conscience, is such
a terror unto the wicked, as they become beside themselves, for the pain
thereof. These are the continual and inward furies, flames, and fyrebrands to
the ungracious, and rebrobate, which day and night, crave punishment for them.
There is recited by Plutarke, a story worthy of remembrance, of one Bessus,
who killed his father, and for a long space after, What a murder Bessus
committed.
hid and kept close himself: so as the crime being couertlye committed, and no
person privy thereto, he could never have been suspected and bewrayed,
unless he had first accused himself. But as this murderer, at a certain
time, went to suppe among strangers, he ryfelde down with his spear, a nest
of Swallows, and throwing out the young birds, trod, and pashte them under
his feet. When the company that stood by, (being, as reason was, stirred to
indignation, to see this thing) demanded what should be the cause, that might
move him to do so cruel an act, and to destroy the birds, so famillier,
and loving unto man, he answered: have they not this good while (says he)
borne false witness against me, and with their cries, accused me of my fathers
death? They which were present, wondering at the answer, reported his words
unto the King, and so the matter being thoroughly sifted out Bessus received ye
punishment, which long before he had deserved. Horrible fear (as Solomon most
truly judged) does naughty and wicked life bring with it, and makes the
conscience to be as great a testimony, as if a thousand witnesses were
present, and the same being convicted, does always prognosticate and look,
for mischief to ensue. What fear and dread, are the consciences of naughty
persons stricken with, through horrible dreams, dreadful sights, monstrous
signs, and carfulness of the mind, all which, seem to be brought upon the
wicked, by Gods appointment, for their evil demeanor. What snares do they
tangle themselves in, with what cross and persecution, do they destroy their
minds, being inwardlye troubled, and afflicted? Nero, after he had killed his
mother (as Suetonius reports) could never endure the grudge of his
conscience, for that wicked crime, neither immediately upon the deed done, nor
at any time after: although he were incoraged with consolations, both of the
soldiers, Senate, and people of Room. He confessed oftentimes, that he was
persecuted by his mothers Image, and with the cruel scourgis, and fiery whips
of the furies in Hell. And moreover, by a detestable deed of the Magis,
attempted to call up her spirit again, and to pacify her. It is said yt
Appollidor, thought with himself in a dream, how he saw his own skin
pulde from him, and his members by little and little, cut away: and also that
his daughters, were all their bodies over, on a light fire, turning and
daunsing about a circle. Hipparcus also, the son of Phylastratus, a little
before his death, dreamed, that he saw blood sprincle upon his face out of a
certain piece of plate. If I should call to remembrance, the reast of the
examples, which be of like sort, Paper would not suffice to continue the
same. Truly an evil conscience in the mind, is like a sore in the body. It
is contrived through default, not conuayde in by casualtie. It mightily
dismayeth the mind, and continually tormenteth the same, with deadly griefs
of pensive remembrance. After that Alexander, that noble king, and fortunate
spoyler of the world, had cruelly slain Calistenes, and caused Clytus,
Alexander delivered to be worshipped as God.
his familier, to be killed, the one, because he refused (after the Persian
manner) to worship him as God, and the other, because he preferred the Acts of
king Philip his father, before his, there entered into him afterward, such a
sore repentance, through remorse of his sins, as hardly it escaped him, that
he had not killed himself. What should I speak of Sylla, that oppressed the
Romans, of Antiochus, that with wars overcame the Indes: either of which,
Sylla and Antiochus dyed with the disease of lyce.
for the unhonesty of life, (which through shedding of blood, and beastly
cruelty, they stained and polluted) did perish with the ougly disease of
Lice, and pined away, with the grievous and defestable torment of conscience.
To this number, I may refer Herod, that put James to the sword, thrust
Peter in prison, and to please the Jews, stirred up persecution against the
Christians: But at last, being stricken by the Angel, was eaten of worms: and
after grievous affliction, by the wound of his conscience, miserablye gave up
the ghost. I cannot here altogether pass over with silence, those which dally
with God, in most grave and weighty matters: which wilfully for gain and
honors sake, either resist or forsake the truth: which repeal any thing,
manifestly against the word of God, and bind their consciences, Denying of
Christ by oath.
either to the wicked betraying, refusing, or utter denying of Christ by oath.
For even as peace, by the promise of God, does attend upon the true
Israelites: (who are the constant professors and mainteyners of christian
piety) even so the beguylers, false working Epicures, enemies to Christ's
Cross, whose belly is their God, and earthly things their study, bewitching
men, Psalm. 124.
from believing the truth, which they resist, as Iannes and Iambres did Moses,
declining also from the way of glory, and led to the desire of riches: Such
does God with the workers of iniquity, turn into their own reprobate
imagination: and with a reward, worthy of such a fault, will the just Judge
once make recompense, unless they repent earnestly from the bottom of their
heart. For, what for Cannonships, Prebendes, Deanryes, Benifices, Bishoprikes,
or some other temporal commodity, they either resist or forsake Christ, or
else they deal with the preaching of the Gospel, which tends to the
salvation of our souls, as with a profane thing: and in a mattter so weighty,
behave themselves vnfaythfullye, and much like to disloyal fugitives: Or else
they will ambiciouslye seek in the holy scripture, which way to please the
vain appetites of the people, vaunting of the pregnancie of their own wit and
learning, and boasting of their eloquence, and yet in time of persecution will
be the first, that shall start aside, from the known truth: and so, to the
great fall of the weaker sort, fowly and shamefully betray the doctrine, which
before they did worthily profess. But surely, they shall never escape free
unpunished, for so great a contumely, wherein they go to about beguile god, and
to dim his eyes (as they term it:) neither yet, They living in marvelous
despair, after they had forsaken the Gospel, at length killed themselves.
Look Gribalde in english.
in such sort departing and forsaking the wholesome doctrine, they shall ever
escape, from the hands of the living God, and his fearful majesty, whom
they have dishonored. This was felt of Latonius: this did wretched Spera, both
by his words teach us, and by his example plainly lay before our eyes: if
writers in their books have showed us the truth. The Apostles in the primative
Church, committed such persons (by the word) to Satan, that he might have
power to persecute their bodies: who, once perceiving, that neither they should
have rest in their bodies, while they yet lived, neither in their spirit being
departed, they might be reclaymed thereby, and so through long repentance,
attain to salvation, no greater torment, nor vexation more grievous, could be
imagined, then was bidden by them, which disloyallie departed from Christ:
being so vexed with the bitter anguish of conscience, as they had no rest,
neither day nor night, so much as to breath upon the same, or to be at any
stay of quiet mind. But I will no longer stand upon the impedimentes and
lettes, which hinder the peaceable tranquillity, that all men so busily seek
for.

Who is he now, that if he had subdued all Nations under heaven, if he had
gotten all the world in possession, would not lay aside all dominion, and
willingly surrender up the empire of the world, to the intent he might quiet
his afflicted conscience, and wash away the griefs and blemishes thereof,
which never suffers the mind once to take breath? Let us therefore seek out,
where, and from whence, that excellent quietness of the mind is to be looked
for, which does not only appease, the careful cogitations and thoughts of the
conscience, but also, slakes, and keeps under, the raging affections of the
same: and besides, does make easy, and tolerable, whatsoever else does either
hurt the body, or any other outward chance that happens to arise.

Omitting the erroneous opinions of the ignorant That Christ is the true
tranquillity of the mind.
which always throughout every age, as it were swallowed up a number, and led
them from the right race of life: let us begin with an other kind of style:
returning to Christ and his word: to the trade of a good life: the testimony
of a good conscience: to speak of eternal life, and of the manifold
consolation had by the Saints: Of which, I promised to entreat more at large
afterward. The scriptures declare, and in plain words bear record, that
Jesus does save his people from their sins. That he is the lamb of God,
which takes away the sins of the world. That he is the blessed seed of
Abraham, in whom all the generations of the earth should be blessed: who
should break of and tread down the head of the Serpent, through whose
subtlety, our first parents were allured to sin. That he is the salvation of
God, from sea to sea, and to the ends of the earth: of whom all the Prophets
do bear record, that under his name, every one, which put their trust of
salvation in him, should receive remission of sins. That he is the mediator,
spokesman, and peacemaker, between God and man, the throne of grace, the head
Bishop, and high priest, to make continual intercession for us. The
propiciation for the sins of the world. Our justification. The Shepehearde
and Curate of our souls, our hope, our life, and our resurrection. That he is
that Emanuel, the father of eternal life, the Prince of peace, the son of
righteousness, the light of the Gentiles. And to conclude: that he is the very
Messiah, in whom be all the promises of God, even yeas and Amen, whom the
Leuiticall sacrifice and old ceremonies did represent. To him, did Moses law
tend. Of him, did the Prophets before prophecy. And, even the very same,
did the fathers of the people of Israel wait for: whom the Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, and all the holy men, in their days, did believe, being showed and
sent among them. Christ therefore, the reconciler of God and man, who delivered
us from the curse of the law, became a curse for our sakes: and (as Paul
says to the Collossians) has put out, to them that believe, the hand writing
which was against us: and the same being taken out of the way, has fastened
upon the Cross. He, for a sweet incense, has offered up himself, an
oblation, and sacrifice unto God, and by death, has undone him for ever, that
had the rule of death. He, pacified the fathers wrath, not in part, but wholye
and perfitely, and has fully delivered us from the bond of sin, and taken
us out of the pit of hell. He, (having conquered Satan) has borne in token
of victory, his dispoyled power and principality, openly in the sight of the
world. And sumptuously, and gloriously, has this mighty conqueror of death
and hell, triumphed by himself, over those, whom he has conquered. He has
made plain the way to heaven, and ascending up on high, has led captivity
captive, and given gifts to men. He sitting in heaven, on the right hand of
God the father, makes continual intercession for us, and bears the office
of a bountiful patron, advocate, and spokesman. He daily renueth in us, the
Image and similitude of God: (which is, innocence, righteousness, and
holiness,) which were lost in our first parent Adam. He (among the number of
those, which were adopted by the heavenly father, to be the children of God)
has made us copartners with him, both of his name, and of his kingdom, and to
be heirs of everlasting blessedness. He it is, that is the true tranquillity
of the mind, and quieting of our consciences. He is the steadfast peace of the
heart, and pacient mittigation of our troubles. This was the same, which was
showed and revealed, in a certain vision to Elyas, the Charret of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof (as Elizeus words be) at what time he fled to mount
Horeb, for fear of Iezabel. For the word of the Lord spoke unto him, that he
should come out of the cave (wherein he rested all night) and to stand before
the Lord in the Mount. And behold the Lord passed by, and a mighty strong
wind that rent the mountains, and brake the rocks before the Lord: but the
Lord was not in the wind. After the wind, there came an earth quake: but the
Lord was not in the earthquake. After the earthquake, was a fire, neither yet
was the Lord in the fire. And after the fire, there came a soft still voice:
which, when Helias heard, he covered his face with his mantell. Why was it the
Lords pleasure, to appear in a soft still voice, but to shows plainly, that
he would give rest and quietness, unto such are sad and afflicted with
veration both of soul and mind: so as, in their whole heart, they seek after
God, and fly only to him for help: as did this Elias, when he sat under a
Juniper tree in ye wilderness, wishing for death. Wherefore, with this voice,
the Lord in the Gospel, does mercifully call unto him, such as are become
weak through desperation, as are troubled in conscience, and laden with cares,
saying: Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you. Math. 11.
Learn of me, for I am meek, and humble, and ye shall find rest unto your
Souls. For they, which with extreme inward fear, heartily, and with remorse
of their sins, dread the pain, which they have justly deserved: and being
abashed, and amazed for fear of hell fire, and of the feendes therein, do
truly bewail their sins: and in this anguished mind, through conceyuing of
Gods wrath, do humbly fly (as it were through this narrow straight, of
perpetual greefes and afflictions) to the unspeakable mercy of God, through
Christ, meaning to live a godly life, and asking pardon of their trespasses,
and remission of their sins: from such, does the son of God, wipe clearly
away all tears: such does he behold, with a favorable and loving
countenance, and with the excellent comfort of his holy spirit, does he
pacify, and set all their hearts at ease and liberty. For that place of Esaias,
which says: The spirit of the Lord be upon me, Esaias. 61. Luke. 4.
for the Lord has anointed me, and sent me to preach good tidings to the
poor, that I might heal those, which be contrite of heart, that I might
preach deliverance unto the captive, and sight to the blind, that I might
revenge the oppressed, and comfort them which be in heaviness: that in steed
of Ashes, I might give them plenty of Oil of gladness: for sighing,
pleasant ointment: for a mourning spirit, a robe of honor: the Evangelist
expounds to be Christ himself. We were al by nature, the sons of wrath,
and as lost sheep have gone astray, every one declyning for the right trade of
life, unto his own wicked ways, and forsaking God the fountain of life, and
of all good things, have purchased to our selves, misery, death, and damnation.
But Christ, of his infinite mercy, left the seat of his majesty in heaven,
and being sent from above, came into the world, and meekelye, of the virgin
Marie, took upon him the nature of man, to the intent he might have pity upon
our miserable state: to save sinners: to call that back again, which was gone
astray: to seek and save, that which was lost: and to give his life for the
redemption of many. Who also was wounded, and sacrificed for our faults,
Esaias. 53.
and buffited for our sins: all which, the father laid upon him in the name
of us all: 2. Cor. 1.
and by his beating and stripes, made us safe and whole. This was he, who, even
as he drowned Pharao and the Egyptians in the red sea, so by his death, he
querthrew Satan, the continual enemy of mankind, and set us at liberty,
being washed and made clean, through the helthfull sacrament of blood and
water, that ran from him. He became the wisdom of God, the righteousness;
sanctification, and redemption, for us. He it is, that bare our sins upon his
back on the cross: that we being dead to sin, might live to righteousness.
This most sacred ground of our religion, The memory of the mystery of our
rede^ptio^, is chiefly celebrated in the precept of the Eucharist.
and reverent mystery of our redemption, is to be exercised in the hearts of
every true christian, with a continual remembrance. And least the same should
be forgotten of us, Christ, left his body in the holy sacrament, and mystical
banquet of his supper, which he commanded to be distributed, directly, with
that perspiquitie of words, which he himself ordained and appointed, that it
might effectually be a remembrance of the old offered sacrifice: and plainly,
as it were with lively Image, to represent the death of our redemer, showing
perfectly, and after a sort, laying it before the eyes of the communicantes:
that all the people, with meditation of so great and fearful a mystery,
being godly amazed, and as it were ravished beyond themselves, should for that
time, occupy themselves with nothing, nor have any other consideration in
their minds, but of Christ only crucified on the Cross. The sacrament, being
in this sort ministered, according to Christ's institution, might by means of
the worthiness of the words, and virtue of the holy spirit, mightilye work
in the mind, and earnestly stir up the same: and also, might plainly before
the eyes of all the people, discribe Christ, paint him out, and (as Paul has
to the Galathians) in a manner crucify him a new. And hereof grows that
excess of saint Chrisostomes words: Imagine (says he) the blood of salvation
flowing as it were out of the divine and unpolluted side: and that spiritual
and wonderful blood, running into the Cup, to purify us: and there, the
tongue tasting, to be made red and blouddie: and so draw nighe, and receive it
with pure lips.

But although I have (as occasion did serve) recyted, to what end chiefly, yt
mystical feast does tend: which co^prehendeth, and chiefly respects the
declaration of ye lords death: yet, yt no man, lay to my charge, how I have
indirectly past over with silence, those high benifites: besides the common
confession of our faith, whereby we wait for salvation of our souls, through
one and the same Savior: The benefits which ensue the right receiving and
destributing of the sacrament of the Eucharist.
and besides the effectual remembrance of the mystery of our redemption, which
to make perfect, Christ gave his body to be slain, and his blood to be shed: I
acknowledge also, in the instituting of the sacrament of ye Lords supper, the
singular love of God toward mankind. For he not content only to redeem us,
and after that redemption, to put us in daily remembrance thereof: but he verily
also, and in deed, feeds and nourishes the faithful, with his own lively
flesh, so long as they shall live here like strangers, and aliants, and till
they have made an end of this habitation. He increases thereby our faith,
strengthens us to abide tribulation, confirms our hope of having eternal
life, kindles our love toward him, mainteynes our brotherly charity,
prolonges our life, and frames the same to good order, quieteth our
consciences, and (as though he forgatte our sins) reconciles himself again
unto us. He breeds in our minds, thereby, spiritual pleasure and delight,
draws away our ymaginations from the frailty of our bodies, and procures
us to think of immortality, and that, which is most of all, he cooples and
ioynes us to himself, mixeth us, and (as I may say) unites and incorporates
us with him, in a most sure bond. Which contriuing and linking one within an
other, the sensible nature of man can not comprehend: Neither, how he is our
head, and we his members, and flesh of his flesh, bone of his bones: nor
how he dwells and lives in us, and we in him. For if it be a thing to be
marvelled at, how we be members one of another, and man and wife may be all
one flesh: how much more wonderful, is this most nighe coopling together of
Christ, and us: which does most truly, and certainly, not faynedly, colourably,
or phantastically, happen unto such, as do faithfully eat this sacrament.
Whereat, the divine Prophet, being held with admiration, prophesied saying:
Psalm. 110.
The merciful and gracious Lord, has so done his marvelous works, that
they ought to be had in everlasting remembrance, he has given meat to them
that fear him. Wherefore, to this point, The apt similitude of Cyrillus.
does the similitude of Cyrillus aptly concur. Even as (says he) if one take
molten ware, and pour it to other ware, and works the whole together: so
must it needs be, that who so receyues the flesh and blood of the Lord, he
be in such sort joined to him, that Christ be found in him, and he in Christ.

But now, that we have been occupied, in calling to mind, the benifites which
are annexed to the Lords supper, being dulye ministered, as it ought to be, and
worthylye received of the faithful: let us return to the matter, which we
have in hand, (that is to say) to the great mystery of our salvation, and
redemption: through rememberaunce whereof, there grows peace of conscience,
and tranquillity of mind. Whereby, though the Devil put us in fear, the
world disquiet us, and the flesh provoke us, yet the same remains still in
perpetual quietness, and security. Thence comes it, that the multitude of
sins, and greatness of them, do not debar us the way to Gods mercy: nor
the abiding in sin for a season, utterly take away all hope of forgiveness.
From thence springs our love that we have toward God, which spared not his
own Son: but for all our sakes gave him to death, and with him gave us all
good things. Thence rises that deep mindefulnesse of Gods benifites, in that
he adopted us to be his own children: and for this benifite, continual
thanks is to be celebrated of all the faithful. There is nothing in all the
world, that at such time, as we are meditating upon Christ, can once pierse
our conscience: much less drive it to desperation: were it for committing the
greatest sin of all other. For if transgressing of the law, brings terror
unto us: It helps again to remember, that Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the law. If sin trouble us: we are recomforted, in that Christ, not
only remitted to the debtor ten thousand tallents, which ought a great deal:
forgave Peter, that had grievously offended him: pardoned the Thief, who had
long continued in sin: but also, by his own blood, washed us clean from all
sin. If death grieve us: Christ is become both our life, and resurrection. If
the wrath of God make us pensive: by Christ are we reconciled unto God. If hell
fire fear us: Christ by conquering of Hell, has opened the gates of heaven.
Purgatory
If the fire of Purgatory disquiet our minds: Christ for the sins of
mankind, has satisfied God: and the punishment, which by Gods justice, was
done unto us, he himself has abydden it, and has not only delivered us from
the offense it self, but also, from the pain due for the same. For otherwise,
how should either they, which be justified by their faith, be at peace with
God, (when as peace may in no wise be conuersaunt with fear of punishment) if
they should be in perplexity, for fear of greater punishment. Either else,
how should the Saints, receive here the full forgiveness of sins, if they
should be recompenst with pain, due for sin, in an other world, being
departed out of this life. Wherefore, the holy fathers (and that consonaunt to
the scriptures) were of the opinion, that all remission of sins, is here in
this life: yea, and so fullye, as no part thereof, Cyprian in his treatise
against De metrianus.
is differred till any other life to come. For so writes blessed Cyprian: Here
is (says he) the soul either lost or saved. Here do we provide for eternal
salvation, for the worshipping of God, and for the fruit of faith. Neither let
any man's sins or years, be a hinderaunce to him, from the attaynement of
salvation. To him, that has as yet any being in this life, there is no
repentance to late. To mercy the way is open, and free access is thereunto,
for such as seek and understand the truth. But when we are departed from
hence, then is there no place of repentance, nor any satisfaction to be made.
And of the same opinion was Ambrose, S. Ambrose
and other godly writers, which were exercised in the holy scriptures, and did
set forth treatyes and interpretations upon the same. The Lord increase the
faith of many, and give them a better mind, that they may truly believe in
the son of God, and earnestly repent, from the bottom of their heart: who in
their words profess christian religion, but nevertheless, in their deeds,
kick, and spurn against the Gospel, and deny the same, set sorth to so
godly a purpose. Who count the bloudde of the Testament, but a prohpane thing,
and reprochfully use the spirit of grace. Who although they do not openly
scorn this holy mystery, which we have so much entreated of, yet they do not
reverently embrace the same, and with such fear and dread as they ought to
do. In the days of Paul, Christ was to the Jews, an occasion of fall: but
to the Gentiles, a mere foolishness. In our days, Christ is no less
wonderfully spronge up again, than in old time, he was borne and bredde at
Beathlem in Jury: Nor no less revived, nilling the adversaries, then, when he
rose up again man earthquake, the Sepulker being close shut. I am a fearde,
least Satan, the flesh, and the world, do drive a number, to be so
perverse, as Christ becomes unsavory to them, and that they cannot taste
how sweet the lord is, and how plentifully the stream of the River, makes
glad the city of God. A sensible person, cannot so much as dream, what the
joy of the Children of God is: and how day and night, without intermission,
they sing, lifting up their voices, and gyuing thanks unto the Lord their
God. Rightly do we attribute unto Christ, that he will ease and refreshe our
souls: and will not only discharge, revenge, and set at liberty, them which
be captiuated with the tirannie of Satan, but also will lead the very same
captivity captive: Although our troubled consciences, many times, are more
grievously dashed with terror of the law, then they be appeased with comfort of
the Gospel of peace. Of very right also, do we impute it to his
bountifulness, that he is the remedy of our wounds, the rest of our
afflicted consciences, and the true tranquillity of our mind.

This we know by the word of God, Comfort taken by the word of God.
which is the light of our eyes, and the lantern to our feet: wherein as we
live, so ought we continually to be occupied therein, both day and night, for
the finding out of such things, as may further us to the attainement of
blessedness, to the government of our life, to the comfort of our soul, and
the abandoning of cares from us. How often in the holy scriptures, are they
pronounced blessed, which be diligent hearers and readers of this word, if
upon the same, they amend their manners, and apply the actions of their life
to the will of God? as for example. Luke. 11.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep the same. Blessed are
the undefiled in the way, Psalm. 119.
and that walk in the law of the Lord. Blessed are they that search his
testimonies: Psalm. 1.
they seek him with their whole heart. Blessed is the man, whose delight is in
the law of the Lord, and in his law will exercise himself, both day and night.
And is not he of very right to be counted blessed, that has altogether vowed
himself, to become Gods servant: in whose heart, is hidden the law of his
Lord? when as both things above, and things beneath, are put under him, Deuteronomy.
28: Leuit. 26.
and serve him? For the euilles, which so many ways, so oftentimes light upon
us, happen for no other cause, then for that we addict not our selves (as meet
we should) unto the will of our Creator. Moreover, the Apostle does prudently
commend unto us, the holy scripture, and does very well kindle our minds, to
the study thereof, by these words: 2. Tim. 3.
All scripture (says he) given by inspiration from God, is profitable to
teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man
of God, may be perfect, and prepared to all good works. And again: Romans 15.
What so ever is written, the same is written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. For we, as it were in
the mids of the sea, are tossed: and fast bound, will we or nill we, to an
innumerable sort of sins. Chrisosteme in the third sermon of Lazarus.
We stand continually in battle, and very often bear away the woorst. We are
besieged about in all places, and the darts fly about us on every side: as
well, through diversity of occasions, as for the necessity it self, of
cares, troubles, griefs, boastings, and swellings. Also we are so tossed, as
we were in the mids of waves, so drawn hither and thither with variable and
diverse cogitations, so shaken with storms of temptation, and so often
conquered and overthrown in the conflict, that we have always need, of
often and continual consolation out of the Scriptures: and because we receive
wounds every day, therefore to seek for medicine and remedy every day, out of
the same. Artificers, whatsoever they take in hand to make, they perform the
thing with such instruments, as they have: And we, if our minds be corrupted
and decayed, amend and repair the same, by the scriptures of the Apostles and
Prophets, and whatsoever else is given by inspiration from God: and if it fall
in decay, we renew it again thereby. They by their Art, only add a certain
fashion to things: but to change the very matter whereon they work, as of
silver to make gold, they are not able. But we show, and bring to pass a
greater matter. For we change the vessel of wood into gold: 2. Tim. 2.
Whereof S. Paul witnessing, says: In a great house, are not only vessels of
gold and silver, but also of wood and earth: if any man therefore pourge
himself from all these, he shall be a vessel sanctified to honor. They which
dwell in kings houses, wherein armor is laid, are so well fortified, as
neither thieves nor housebreakers, nor any other wicked rowte, dare set upon
that house. Even so, wheresoever the spiritual books remain, from thence is
all the Devils force expelled, and into those inhabitaunts, is entered a great
comfort. If we offend in any thing forbidden us, the very sight of those
books strykes our consciences, frayes us from sin, and makes us to abandon
our evil purpose. And if we persist in holiness, therein we become more firm
and steadfast through them: and by laying hold upon the Gospel, we settle our
mind, leading it away from worldly business, and thereby, diligently cleanse
our life being void of godliness. The Philosophers, Rhetricians, and Ethnicke
writers, desiring to be had in admiration, did but shadow in a certain dark
sense, the secret things of their wisdom. But the Apostles and Prophets, as
universal teachers of the world, have put things in writing, so plainly and
manifestlye, as by reading only, they may be learned. Who, hearing, that
happy are the meek, the merciful, and so forth with the rest, will desire
any scholemayster to interpret the same? But if in things which be more
secret, thou shall not perhaps find an instructor, and wilt bestow the more
earnest study therein: God, seeing thy diligence, and not despising thy care
and vigilancie, no doubt will open the thing to thee which thou seek for.
Remember the Eunuke, in the.viij. of the Acts, who by reading, obtained a
guide. God, which knew the ready inclination of his mind, embraced his
endeavor, and sent him (by and by) an expounder. A great defense against sin,
is the reading of the scriptures: but a great dangerous ruin, and a deep
dungeon of blindness, is want of knowledge of the scriptures: and to know
nothing of Gods law, is a great lack of salvation. For that is it, which has
bredde heresies, brought in filthy life, and turned all vpsydowne. For it
cannot be, that often and heedefull reading, should bring no fruit with it.
This excellent exhortation of S. Chrysostom (who for his godly eloquence,
obtained the surname of golden mouthed) did blessed Gregory, and saint
Augustine imitate and follow: who, aptly, conveniently, plainly, and
excellently well, do set forth with due praise, the most heavenly word of the
Scriptures. That mind (say they) is an enemy to this doctrine of ours, which
either in going astray, knows not the same to be wholesome, or else being
sick, does loathe medicine. For the very phrase of speech which the scriptures
uses, Gregory in an Epistle to bishop Lean.
has the way to nurse her little ones abroad, and to preserve them in
private, and also how to occupy their minds, with admiration of high
mysteries. It is a River (as I may term it) even and deep, wherein both the
Olyphant may swim, Augustine in the third Epistle to Voluscanus.
and the Lamb may walk, and it conteyneth things, both plain and evident. It
talks like a familiar friend to the heart, both of the learned and unlearned.
It lies hid in mysteries. It settes not forth it self with haughty
communication, and thereunto the slack and unlearned mind (as poor to the
rich) dare not approach. But it inuiteth all men, with an humble speech. Not
only It feeds them, with apparaunt and known truth, but also It exercises
them in secret verity, setting that abroad to the world, which it has in
secret store. But least those things, which be plain, should be contemned,
those secret things again are desired: being desired, are after a sort
renewed, and being renewed, are sweetly signified what they be. By the
Scriptures, both wits which be evil, are wholsomly amended: which be small,
are cherifed: and which be great, are rejoiced. For the word of God knows
faith, when it first grows, when it comes to ripe years, when it is brought
to full perfection: and when it draws to old age again, it nourishes the
same with gentle and wholesome food. Other things, have not so much relation,
to their age, time, and place. The study hereof nourishes our tender age, and
infourmes us in all godliness: It brideleth and keeps in our lassiuious
youth, delights our age, indueth us with the sweet hope of immortality, and
incourageth us to be of a joyful mind, to the uttermost end of our life. It
instructs us when we be in prosperity, fears and restraynes us from pride
and presumption, gives us comfort and succor in time of adversity, delights
us at home, and keeps us in our duty abroad. It calls to our remembrance,
the shortness of life, and that death approaches every hour. It tells us of
the judgment of God, and how there is a hell, a pit of darkness and a fire yt
shall never be extinguished. And besides these, It shows us of an innumerable
sort of Gods benifits: as, of the cross of Christ, of the holy ghost abiding
in us, of the angels appointed by God for our safegarde, and of the joys of
the kingdom of heaven. Whereby we ought at all times, to be revoked from our
wickedness, and to be stirred up to do every thing which is good and righteous.

Last of all, Saint Hieroms opinion. Drigin in a certain Homely.
we eat the flesh of the Lord, and drink his blood, not all only in the holy
mysteries, but also by reading of the scriptures: whereby we are delighted and
refreshed with inost sweet taste of eternal life, and with an unspeakable
joy.

Here now it comes very well to mind, How the conscience may be quieted in
time of contention about Religion.
to consider how the christian conscience may be quieted in these dangerous
times: wherein, not without need, by reason of those errors which have crept
in, they deal in questions, which concern the high mysteries of Christian
religiou. And to one man this way, and to an other that way, and to every man
his own way, apperes best. Many cry out, saying: ask council of the Church:
That cannot err, for it is governed by the holy ghost. If thou be disquieted
in thy mind, hear her voice, embrace her judgment, and it will shake of all
scruple of thy conscience. But if a man should freely and sincerely demand of
me, what I thought best to be done herein: I would council him, first of all,
(which I deem to be the right and wyser way, and more agraeable to the
Scriptures) that in such a dangerous time, he chiefly follow the council of
the divine Prophet Esaias: who cries out, that they rather should have recourse
to the law and to the witness. For if they shall not speak agreeable unto
this word, there shall no morning light appeers to them: but being all
environed with darkness, they shall fall at once, be hardened and perish with
hunger. The holy prophet well remembered, the commandment, that God in
the.xtj. of Deutronomie gave the children of Israel: you shall not every one
of you, do that which seems right in your own eyes: but the same which I
command you to do, that only do unto the Lord, neither adding nor
diminishing any thing. Let us hear the voice of our savior: John. 5.
Search the Scriptures (says he) etc. they are the same that testify of me.
Acts. 17.
Let us follow the example of those, which were converted unto Christ in the
beginning, when the church first sprung up: who examined the doctrine of the
Apostles, by the Scriptures, and out of them, searched forth thoroughly the
preaching of the Apostles, whether it were true or no. The same way, whereof I
have now given advertisement, I judge meet among other things, that the lovers
of the truth shoulds chiefly do. Thus, did Chrysostom advise us. And faint
Jerome also, by the words of the Prophet, gathers, and foreshewes, that the
people in the end of the world, should no less do of their own accord,
whose words although they be somewhat long, yet because they have very great
relation to the matter, I will recite them in this place.

When ye shall see (says he) the abomination of desolation standing in the
holy place, Chrysostomes prophecy of this our age, upon the. 24. of of
Matthew Antichrist in ye church.
(as much to say, as wicked herifie, which is the host of Antichrist,
standing in holy places of the Church) at those days, let them which be in
Iewrie, fly unto the Mountains, that is: let them which be of Christianity,
repair to the scriptures. For even as a true Jew (as saint Paul says) is a
Christian, not he which is a Jew outwardly, Romans 1.
but he which is a Jew inwardly in the heart: so true Jury is christianity,
under which name, is to be understand confessing: And by the Mountains, are
signified, the scripture of the Apostles and Prophets. Of which, it is said:
wonderfully do thou give light from thy holy hill. And again, speaking of
the Church: Psalm. 6.
Her foundation (says he) is laid upon the holy hills. And why does he will
all Christians at this time, to repair to the scriptures? Because never to
this very day, since heresies have entered into those Churches, there could be
any prouse of true Christianity: nor any other refuge can there be for the
Christians, which would know the truth of the faith, but to the scriptures of
God. Wherefore? No refuge but to the scriptures.
because very herisies themselves, (in show of words) have all those things,
which are peculiar to Christ in the truth: as well churches, as ye godly
scriptures themselves: Bishops, and other orders, of Church men: Baptism, the
Eucharist, and all the rest: and finally eue^ Christ himself. Whosoever
therefore, is willing to know which is the true Church of Christ, how shall he
know the same in such a confusion of likenesses, but all only by the
scriptures: even as in times past, they were known by signs and tokens, who
were the true Christians, and who were the false. But now the working by
miracles, is all taken away: and it is spide rather to be a trade among those
which be false Christians. Miracles chieflye wrought among false Christians.
He therefore, that will learn which is the true Church of Christ, how shall
he know, but all only by the scriptures. The Lord therefore, knowing what a
great confusion of things, would happen in the latter days, wills the
Christians which be in Christianity, and would understand a sertentie of the
true faith, that they should fly to no other thing, than to the Scriptures.
For else, if they have respect to other matters, they shall fall and perish,
not understanding which is the true Church. For the Devil, which could not
with diverse afflictions overcome the saints, being overcome in his own
cruelty, armed himself with deceyt, and under the name of Christ and the
Prophets, attempted to seduce them, saying by his Ministers: Behold here is
Christ, which is the Church: Behold there is Christ, which is the Church. For
the false Preachers of the truth, do the very same things in dissimulation,
which the faithful do in the truth. For they study chastity, they celebrate
fasting, they do alms deeds, and fulfill all ecclesiastical rules. And do
they not seem to be great matters, to seduce and lead men from the right way,
when thou see the Devil work the works of God? Thus far Saint
Chrysostom in his Commentaries upon Matthew: which if they be not Chrysostomes:
yet are they the doings of some other learned and cloquent man, one so
exercised in the Scriptures as (in Erasmus opinion) his judgment in this
point, need not give place to Chrysostom.

And Saint Hierome, S. Hierom upon Nahum.
writing upon the third Chapter of the Prophet Nahum, foresheweth most truly,
that it would come to pass in the end of the world, when as the Pastors
being sleepie, and secure in idleness: the people should seek after the
scriptures of their own accord. For woe be to them (says he) which be
schoolemaisters of perverse doctrine in Niniue. And aptly is it said to them:
Thy Pastors have slumbred, for to sleep have they betaken their eyes, and
their eye lids to slumber. And therefore, being brought a sleep by the King of
Assyrians, they have not found a place for the Lord, nor a tabernacle for the
God of Jacob. They have not heard of Ephraim the fruitful church, nor have
found out the thick woods. For the King of Assyrians knows, that he
cannot beguile the sheep, unless he first rock the pastors a sleep. It is
always the Devils practice, to bring a sleep vigilant minds. And moreover,
in the passion of our Lord, he filled the Apostles eyes with deadly sleep,
Whom, our Savior waking, said unto them: watch and pray, that you enter not
into temptation. And again: Mark 14.
that I say unto you, I say unto al, watch. And because he seaseth not at any
time to bring a sleep those which be watchful, how many soever they can
beguile, and intise to sloth, with the fair flattering, and deadlye tune of
the Marmaide: The word of God rayseth them up, saying: rise thou that
sleep, and lift up thy sefe, and Christ will lighten thee. That the people
themselves in the end of the world shall seek for the scriptures.
In the coming therefore of Christ, and his word, and ecclesiastical
doctrine, and at the consumation of Niniue, sometime the beautiful harlot: the
people, which before were brought a sleep under their teachers, shall be
wakened, and shall make have to go to the mountains of the scripture: and
there they shall find the hills, Moses and Jesus the son of Naue, and the
hills of the Prophets and Apostles, together with the Evangelical doctrine,
and hill of the new testament. And when they have fled for succor to these
mountains, and have been occupied in the reading of these hills: If they
shall find none to instruct them (because the harvest is great and the
laborers but few) yet shall both their study be well allowed, because they
fled to the mountains, and the masters for their parts blamed by reason of
their sluggishnesse. For he brought them in, but there was none to receive them.

Wherefore, they that be studious, and desirous of the truth, first of all,
must here the word of God: even the very same word, which Adam, Abraham, the
fathers, and Prophets: and finally, that the gentiles and whosoever else in the
universal world, which through belief obtained salvation, did here. This
word, as it was revealed to the fathers, so the will of God makes it known
unto us, by express declaration in Books: Whereunto if we give no credit,
neither will we believe, Luke. 16.
if one shall rise again from the dead. With this word, is the Church of God
made and ordained: The word, of greater authority than the Church.
and the same is builded upon the rock Christ, who is the foundation and
precious stone thereof. For take away the scriptures of the Church, and thou
shall also take the Church quite away. For even as the Church, did neither
found nor make any certain or undoubted scripture, but received it in old
time with great reverence: (being erected before by the holy ghost, the author
thereof, and derived from Christ and his Apostles, by perpetual succession into
all Churches) and after she had received the same, allowed it: which being
allowed, circumspectly kept it for the instructing of every age: so did she
specially take care, that nothing under the name of Scripture, which did bear
no certain sign of scripture, should be allowed in it: ye and that if an
Angel in heaven, The Church and her office.
should preach any other Gospel, condemned, him accursed.

This one, holy, catholic, Galat. 1.
and apostolic Church, that is: which is governed by the scripture of the
Apostles and Prophets, does sever (after the example of Paul) and set apart,
those things whereof It has no commandment by God, from the excellent
precepts of Christ, making a great difference between them: to the intent it
may will the things which be of Christ, to remain inviolate, and suffer
nothing contrary thereunto, to be admitted. But those matters, which be of the
churches own constitution, although they be sound, (and the spirit being
author of the^, are set forth amongst us) yet It leaves them at such liberty,
as testifiyng in plain terms, that it would none to cast any doubts, in
those things, whereof they have no express commandment from God. Whatsoever
things It finds in the holy Scripture, which contain the law of the Lord,
and doctrine of faith, perfected and thoroughly finished, above the rest,
without any sticking, It commendes, allows, receyues, and esteems: and also
reuerenceth all things therein, without choice and election: shunning, all that
may be, the crime of new devise, that most vainly might be laid to her
charge. In assuring her judgment, It accounts none more wyser, than Christ,
more holy than the Apostles, nor more ancient than the Primative Church. And
next after these, It places the monumentes of such as teach things,
concerning the religion of Christ, and innocence of life: but allows nothing
without judgment, and without dilygent examination thereof, with the law of
God. Whereupon It compelled Augustine, August. in an Epistle to Hierom.
her most serviceable child, to set forth this confession following. I confess
to thy charity (says he) that I have learned to attribute this fear and
reverence, Only the canonical Authors can not err.
only to those books of the holy scriptures which are now called Canonical:
so as I steadfastly believe, that none of the Authors of them have erred in
writing. And if I shall find any thing in those books, which may seem
contrary unto the truth, I will make no doubt, but that either the book is
faulty, or that the interpreter has not followed the matter, as it is spoken
or else, that I my self understand not the same. Other Authors also I reed in
such sort, as how great a port soever they bear of holiness and learning, I
may not therefore think them true, because such was their opinion, but for
that they could, either by those Canonical books, or else by good probable
reason persuade me in a thing that swarueth not from the truth. Wherefore, if
we make the scripture subject to the judgment of men: we therewithal
disanull the doctrine of most holy men. For it is not the word of God, but
the word of men, that is governed after the opinion of men. But this is that
holy sacred treasure of the Church, this is that excellent consolation of
faith, that high and steadfast knowledge of life: that the Scripture being
planted not by men, nor in the hand of men, but by God in the hand of God,
through his son Jesus, authorized by the holy Ghost, was delivered to the
Church, and by the same Church, published and set forth to the instruction of
all posterities. Wherefore, such as be members of the church, do not attribute
to themselves any authority against their head Jesus Christ: but being
subjects to their head, as meek sheep, give ear to no other voice, then to
their own pastor, to whom they owe their faith, conscience, and subjection:
and the same, as the voice of Christ, do acknowledge, here, and follow, from
whence soever it be uttered, and whatsoever thing it commands, that is
righteous and just to be done. For by judging of wholesome doctrine, they know
also the contrary, making a difference between them, that it, which is
sound, right, and lawful, may be allowde, (according to the saying: Prove
all, take the best) and things contrary and strange thereunto, may be
rejected and disprooued.

The judgment, wherewith we discern, approve, instruct, and reprove, must be
supported with knowledge. Exercise of the spirit of faith in the word of god.
Knowledge, springs chiefly by exercise of the spirit of faith, in the word
of God. Whereby with a sensible understanding, we sincerely accord those
places together (which appear contrary) to a likeness and resemblance in
themselves, according to the proportion of our faith. We way the beginning,
with that which follows: and by diligent comparing every thing in it self,
we endeavor to attain to yt knowledge of the Lords meaning. For this cause,
1. Tim. 4.
Paul moves Timothe, that he continually exercise himself, in reading,
exhortation, and teaching. These things (says he) exercise, in these remain,
that thy profiting may be known in all things. The difference between
spirits.
Hereby we find out the difference between the spirit of truth, and the
spirit of error: that whereas the spirit of Christ, searches and seeks for
nothing, but the glory of God, joined with the care and safety of our
neighbor: contrariwise, the other being set on and inflamed, with the love of
it self, with ambicion, covetousness, pride, revenge, tyranny, and the
immoderate love, of things private: defiles, polluteth, and corrupts all
things: so wresteth and turns the scripture, from the sense and meaning
thereof, as it can by a counterfeyte way, seem to defend and maintain the
very same thing, which it does repugne and stand against. By this reading and
exercise, the traditions of the godly, (which of right we call the holy seed)
being taught, may both cause a man to take heed to himself, and by reclayming
of himself, may convince errors: which, Christ prophesied, should be so great,
and abundant, before his latter coming, that he doubted whether the son of
man at his coming, should find faith upon the earth: and showed before, that
the verse elect (if it were possible) should be deceived by them. But first,
since in vain we spend our labor in this matter, unless God by his holy
spirit, expel the blindness from our minds, as one might ye scale from our
eyes, and through his coniming, take away our natural blindness, making
things plain and manifest: and by this key, open and unlock unto us his
secret will and pleasure: we must (besides the reading of the holy Scriptures,
which the Church has, as the one and only guide and ground of her faith in
Christ: and besides the exercise of the spirit of faith in the word of God,
whereby we aspire and attain to the knowledge of discerning of spirits) we
must, I say, have recourse to prayer also, and often, Often and fervent prayer.
and earnestly call upon God almighty, and crave his aid in this manner. Give
me understanding (O Lord:) lead me in the paths of thy commandments:
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies. Endeavor to help others.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy law. If the
Lord shall make plain and manifest his will unto us, and being so manifested,
shall appoint us to report the same t^ others, and to declare it to the
ignorant and unlearned: we must also pray with the Prophet, that it may be
available to them, and that it slip not out of their memory, but take good
root within their hearts. Upon which endeavor of helping and persuading
others, that prayer of Esaias proceeded: Bind fast thy testimonies (O Lord) make
sure thy laws within my disciples. Earnest endeavor of amendment.
Also, we must purpose and determine with our selves, earnestly to corect and
amend our life. For otherwise the ungodly reader or preacher, that with a
perverse and crooked mind expounds the scriptures, and nevertheless,
persisteth still in his wickedness, shall hear what God has spoken to the
sinner: Why do thou (says he) set forth my laws, and take my covenant in
thy mouth, when as thou hate to be reformed, and do cast my words
behind thee.

Great submission, Reverence and humility toward Gods word.
reverence, and meekness, must be had in exercising and using of the word of
God. For God has a favor to such as tremble and quake at his sayings: and
gently he beholds him that is of an humble and contrite spirit. The
Publican, that stroke his breast, and the Senturion, that said, he was not
worthy to have the Lord enter into his house: these enter by the door into
the sheepefolde. The Pharisie boasting of his merits, and climing by an other
way, after high matters, entered not in but fell, and for his pride and
arrogant boldness, was cast down hedlong: when as the other, for their true
humility and submission, were greatly magnified. We must submit our neck
under the yoke of Christ, that we may show our selves as Disciples in
following our master: who like a true Shepherd has pledged his life for his
flock, and has yielded himself, to the most vile and contemptuous death of the
cross. It follows, that by humble and lowly estimation of our selves, we
shall show the mistrust we have in our own strength, we will crave without
fayning for the assistance of God, and wholly yield our selves to the rule and
government of his grace. By which means, we may acknowledge the true voice,
of the true shepehearde, more than either the Ox that knows his Lord, or
the Ass, his masters stable. Rightly therefore, the ancient holy Fathers,
preferred this virtue in Christian piety, above others. Well and eligantly did
Saint Barnard, set it before virginity, An excellent comparison between the
virginity, and humility.
in this manner of comparison: Virginity (says he) is a comendable virtue, but
more necessary is humility. The one is councelled to be kept: the other is
commanded to be had. To the one thou art called: to the other thou art forced.
Of the first it is said, he that can compass it let him do: of the latter it
is spoken, unless a man become as one of these little ones, he shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. The one therefore is recompenst: the other is
demanded at our hands. Thou may without virginity be saved: without
humility, thou can not. Where lamentation is made for virginity lost, there
can humility pacify again. Without humility (I dare take upon me to say) yt
the virginity of Mary, had not been so acceptable. Upon whom (says the
word) shall my spirit rest? upon the humble and peaceable (he says) not upon
the virgin, so shows Marie her own self: He regarded the lowliness of his
handmayden. Although she pleased for her virginity, yet she conceived for her
humility. How appears that? eue^ because her humility doubtless brought to
pass that her virginity was so lyked of. Virginity (truly) is not with
every one: but with far fewer is humility joined with virginity. If thou
can not but wonder at the virginity in Marie, endeavor to follow her
humility, and it is sufficient for thee. But if thou be a virgin, and have
also the grace of humility, thou art great, whosoever thou be. Hitherto
Barnard. Moreover, to come by the pure knowledge of the Scriptures, we must
bend our selves very much to charity: unto the which, How needful is
charity to the scripture.
we ought to have a special regard. For else, knowledge makes men haughty,
when on the contrary part, charity edifieth. The Apostle wills us, that we
seek to excel unto edifying. For if we have all knowledge, and have no
charity, we are nothing. Add moreover to the knowledge of the Scriptures,
that we must forsake the world, with her pompes and flatteries. We must resist
Satan, with his crafts and fiery darts. We must not incline our selves to
surfeyting, drunkenness, and the pleasures of this life: but repugne the
mocions of the flesh. We must be diligent in our vocation, use abstinence, and
live blameless in our life. And from thence proceeds the promise: that who so
does his will, the same shall perceive by the doctrine, whose it is. And again:
Blessed be the clean in heart, for they shall see God. And lastly, to the
knowledge hereof: In so holy a work, we must avoid disputations, which be
ungodly, and done out of due time. Whereof if any question shall arise, (to
follow the council of Gregory Nazianzen that excellent divine) let us pourge
the mind from all vice, and put of, or at leastwise endeavor to put of from
our bodies all provocation to evil. A pretty similitude of Gregory Nazianzen,
in the first book of divinity.
For as the sight of him that is bleare eide (says he) is hurt by looking
against the Sun: like so it is very dangerous, to handle a thing that is
pure with hands unwashed: and a man not to pourge himself, that he may become
a vessel sanctified to honor, meet for the uses of the Lord, and prepared
to all good works. 2. Timo. 2.
Moreover, these mysteries, must not at all times, nor in all places, nor of
every one be used: But at such time, as we be void of cares of this life, and
have not our mind drawn hither and thither, with cogitations of this world:
least we mingle Baulme with Dirt. And among those only must it be done, who
be studious, and desirous to learn: not with such, as sport, dallye, and
tryfell in waightye matters, and for boast of their learning, wit, and
eloquence, make disputation hereof, amidst their vain pleasures. The bounds
also how far we must entreat of, ought to be considered, and so far must
we determine to go, as the capacity of our wit will serve: and no farther,
than the hearers shall be able to bear away. For, as a boystous noise, or
hedious sound, greeueth the heering: over abundance of meat, noyeth the
stomach: grievous burdens, the bearer: continual rain, the earth: and
overmuch of any thing, is noisome and hurtful: so do difficult questions,
quickly ouercharge weak and mean wits. I do not discourage any, from
reading of Scriptures, (which thing I think as necessary for the safety of
the soul, as breath for the life of the body) but I revoke them from
disputation, not from that which is godly, but from the immoderate, and
intempestine manner thereof. We may not sing the Lords song in a strange land,
that is to say: not every where, and where it is not lawful to be done. To
much Honey cloyeth the stomach. The winter flower comes out of season. It
besemeth not a woman, to wear the garment of a man, nor yet a man, a woman's
garment.. Mourning cannot beseem the place of marriage: nor mirth the time of
funeral. If in every thing, that which chieflye pertains unto it, best
becomes the same: how much more then does it so in the use of the Scriptures.
We must not run a head, as if we were wild Coltes, which can neither suffer
the bridle, nor away with their Rider. We must not declyne on this side, least
we return to Egypt, nor on the other side, least we be carried into Babylon:
but ever love to be reading, and always exercising the law of God, both night
and day, at morning, evening, and noonetide: from bed, to rising again:
while we be in the way: and in all our business: Oftentimes among godly men,
after the example of the two disciples, going to Emaus: continually must we be
talking with Jesus, both by the way, and in every place, evermore glorifying
God.

Furthermore, the euiles, which by reason of sin, are brought into the
world, ought neither to quail our mind, Evils imputed to Gods word, must
not discourage us from loving and defending the same.
nor yet fray us from constantnesse, that thereby, we should the less
firmelye, repose our selves in the known truth. And let us resolve within our
selves, that the same is the heavenly doctrine, which the son of God taught:
the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, by inspiration of the holy ghost,
comprehended in writing, and which the church of Christ has faithfully kept.
Who after she had so grievously bidden, that her Pastors were sleepers, and
that preaching was intermitted, and so long lay hid: at the last, when the same
revived again, she acknowlegde it, and receiude it with longing, and as it
were with imbrasing arms. It is no new and strange thing, that the word of
God, and true religion, should be counted the cause of miseries, misfortunes,
calamities, tumultes, commotions, and of private and public distructions.
Iere. 44.
The people which were in Egypt, being given to Idolatry: in their answer
which they made to Jeremy, alleged, that the misery and scarceness, which
they were in, was, because they had seized to burn incense, to the Queen of
heaven, and to offer Sacrifice unto her: and for that they had turned to the
true God, even their own God. 3. King. 18.
Achab complained that the kingdom of Israel was troubled about Helias. The
land could not abide the words, nor bear the sayings of Amos. Amos. 4.
The preaching of Amos was cause of all their disquietnesse. Paul with the
Authors of his turmoyle, disturb the whole world. It comes to pass also
oftentimes, that the true preacher of the Gospel, together with the truth it
self of the Gospel, is made the very outcast, and curse of the world. In
the old time, when Christ's religion first grue up, 1. Cor. 4.
all euilles, were so whole imputed thereunto, that it became a common proverb
among the Romans: Does there lack rain? the Christians are cause thereof.
Verily, the Ethnickes in times past, transferred the common misfortunes, which
chance in man's life, to the envy of Christians, and judged them to be cause,
of all public destruction, and discommodities of the people. Which most fond
opinion, both Cyprian in a few words to Demetrian, does reprehende, and
Tertulian, in these few lines ensuing, discribeth. A pretye quip of Tertuliau.
If Tiber (says he) run over the walls, if Nylus does not ouerflowe the
feeldes, if the heavens stand still, if the earth move, if pestilence and
famine come upon men: they cry out by and by away with the Christians, to the
Lions with them. Yea, and those also which were learned, and brought up in
liberal sciences, to the intent, they might make ye ignorant more cruel toward
the Christians, dissembled their knowledge, and affirmed to the people, that
the distructions and miseries, whereby it was expedient, that by spaces
appointed, both of times and places, mankind should be tormented, happened by
means of the christian name: and because the same was sprede abroad, with so
wonderful fame and renown, to the defaceing of their Gods. Whereupon that
wicked Porphirius, coniectured that the worshipping of Christ, was cause of the
plague, August, in his second book de ciuitate dei.
that so long reigned in his time: and for that Aesculapius, and the rest of
their Gods, which should have succored them, were neglected. Wherefore, it
is no marvel, if the very same thing happen to the heavenly doctrine, in
these days (since now it reuiueth again) which chanced in the old time,
even when the same first sprung and increaste.

Besides this also, The multitude of heresies reigning abroad, must not
dissuade us from reading of scriptures.
the multitude of heresies, that by cruel spirits are raised up here and
there, ought nothing at all, to seduce us from the right faith: nor so much
prevail, as they should make us refuse to hear the voice of Christ, spread
abroad in every place, by the true preachers of the Gospel, and to suffer our
selves willingly to be blinded with errors. For it is no marvel (as after the
appearing of the Sun, so many stinging flies, and venimed worms ensue the
same) if, at the preaching of the Gospel, a number of monstrous follyes, and
damnable errors, accompany the same. When as, among the good seed, that the
son of man shall sow, the envious man, (which is the Devil) will mingle
cockle. And even in the Apostles time, these errors appeared no less hurtful,
than now in our age. John the Evangelist (by Saint Ieromes opinion) at the
request of the Bishops of Asia, last of all, wrote his Gospel against
Cerinthus (of whom came the Cerinthians, which said, that the world was made by
Angels) and against other heretykes: but especially, against the sect of the
Hebionites, who affirmed, that christ was not before Mary. Whereupon, he was
compelled to set forth his divine nativity. He testifies also of the
Nicholaitans, Apoc. 2.
who allowed the copulation of women. What a traueyle sustained Saint Paul
against those of Corinthe, 1. Cor. 1^.
which denied the resurrection of the dead, and mingling the shadows of Moses
law, with the purity of the Gospel, drew back the Galathians, to the Jewish
opinion? How earnestly does he command Tymothe, that he pass over the
vnghostly vanities of voices: and brings into his remembrance the heresy of
Hymeneus, and Philetus, which erred: saying, the resurrection was already
past, and destroyed the faith of many. There has been no age, void of such,
as contended against the true doctrine, and that resisted the godly teachers of
the same. Which thing may appear by Iannes and Iambres, which repugned Moses:
The Priests of Ball, that stood against Helias in Phalestyne: The false
Prophets, which stood against Jeremy and Mycheas: The Scribes, Phariseis,
and high Priests, against Christ: and the Jews, false brethren, and
worshippers of Idols, which withstoode the Apostles.

Furthermore, Dissolute life and other evils not to be imputed to the word of
God.
the blame of dissolute life, as well as of heresies, and when true religion is
contemned, or else not so esteemed as it ought to be, should be imputed to the
naughtiness of men themselves, and unto the Devil, and not unto the heavenly
doctrine. For wheresoever Christ begins to be sincerely preached, there
Satan takes no rest, but poures forth all the force of his subtle wit:
moves and molesteth the people: whatsoever thing is in the earth, ye bears
any show of credit, to contend against the kingdom of Christ, the same
exciteth and stirs he up, by his subtle persuasions. As if there be
sedition stirred up any where: If the people shake off the yoke of obedience,
and live at their own will and liberty: If there be no reverent estimation of
laws: If great men, oppress the poor: If young men, be not obedient to their
elders, children to their parents, servant to their masters, subjects to
their kings: If the people wax dull and slothful, in the true worshipping of
God: If the greater part, do cast from them the fear of God: All these
things, and such other, he finds means that they be ascribed to the Gospel,
and to the true preachers of the same: that he may cause men, which attribute,
more than is meet unto works, both supersticious, and of their own
invention, to believe, that the same works, be both good and evangelical. And
the very things in deed, whereby a true Christian is to be known: that is
to say, the fear of God, the trust in Gods mercy, invocation, giving of
thanks, patience in affliction, all manner of duty to our neighbor,
liberality toward the poor, and such other: which Christ has not mislyked,
which the Apostolical doctrine has commended, which are contained in the
book of the ten commandments: those things, the Devil has caused them,
but little to exercise and regard.

It happens not seldom, but in a manner always, that the supersticious sort,
The supersticious sort more fervent in their Religion than the true worshippers
in theirs.
do serve their strange Gods, more earnestly, yea, and with greater and more
fervent devotion, than the religious people do the true God. And no marvel.
For even as our flesh, has nothing in it which is good: so are we accustomed,
with far greater endeavor, to follow the perverse council of Satan, than the
good admonition of the holy ghost. Whereof it comes, that nothing can be so
sumptuous, nothing so painful, that the Idolators do not vouchsafe both to
bear and abide. When as they (many times) which be not vain worshippers of
the true God, will give place to these in their superfluity: and yet
nevertheless, are not ignorant, to do those things which appertain them to
do. Those Idolaters, could vouchsafe, to burn their children to Moloch, whom
the Latians call Saturn: The true worshippers, can scarcelye with fatherlye
chastisement, instruct their children in good manners, nor teach and bring them
up, to work the will of God their Creator and Savior. The Priests of Ball,
used to prick themselves in with small Iauelings: when as we, for love of the
true God, cannot endure, to rest such certain days as are appointed by his
commandment, to do him service. So might we find, within the compass of
our remembrance, those which would endure far greater pains, and do more for
superstition sake, than for the true religion: which is as (Saint James says)
to visit widows and fatherless children, in their adversity, and to keep
our selves undefiled to the world. This wicked and preposterous diligence
about superstition, wherein men of their own proper nature, are so zealous,
and lean more favorably unto, than were meet and convenient: the Poets, have
in sundry places discribed by adulterous love, which is wont (for the most
part) to be more fervent, than true and lawful love. Wherefore, the licencious
liberty of the Commons, the oppressing of the poor, the manifest contemning
of God, the irreverence had toward Superiors, the swinge, Euiles imputed to
man himself to Satan, and to the world.
that every one in his own opinion takes upon him, and the unruly behavior of
these our days, must be imputed to the naughtiness of our flesh, ingraffed in
us of very nature: to Satan that drives us thereto, to the world that allures
us thereto, and by examples corrupts us: but yet chiefly, it ought to be
ascribed, to every man's own willing consent, who has too intemperately
behaved himself, letting slack the bridle of wicked life, making of his own
lusts above measure, and abiding himself to be restrained, and governed by no
good instruction.

For there can be no blame laid to the Preachers of the word of God, The true
Preachers without blame.
(them I mean, which earnestly traueyled herein) who by executing their
office, shall discharge their own souls. Act. 10.
Who might truly say to the people: we call you to record this day, that we be
pure from the blood of all men. For we have eschued no labor, but have showed
you all the council of God. Let your blood hereafter be upon your own head.
For (doubtless) they exhorted men continually to repentance. They bad them
fly from the vengeance to come, and to do the fruits which belong to
repentance: showing remedy, in a manner, for all sins and other griefs of
the mind. They were not dumb dogs, which knew not how to speak: but they
stretched forth their voice. They cried out, and seized not, to touch delicate
ears, with true quips. They feared not to discover the misdemeanor of Princes,
and to show and open to the people their faults: often beating into the heads
and memories of all sorts, the threatenings of God. They preached the word of
God diligently, they were earnest with them, they urged them thereto, both in
season and out of season. They rebuked, reproved, and exhorted them, and as
waking scowtes, watched within their Towers, (what mischau^ce so ever might
befall) without seasing or intermission. But woe be to you, whose hearts have
been hardened, whose minds have lothed the heavenly Manna, and whose ears
have waxen deaf, at the wholesome sayings of the true Preachers. Augustine in a
certain Homily.
If no less guilty he shall be, which negligently hears the word of God,
than he, that through his default, shall suffer Christ's body to fall upon the
earth: and they which made no difference, concerning the Lords body, became
weak and sick, and sleep till the judgment of the Lord: (which thing Paul
testifies in the.xj. to the Corinthians, to have happened most justly in his
time) what have we wicked generation, a people laden with iniquity, a
deceytfull seed, the lost children, Our departing from Gods word.
deserved: who have forsaken the Lord our God, and provoked the holy one of
Israel, traitorously reuolting from him. The Nobles have been unfaithful,
and companions with thieves, they gave no judgment with the orphane, the
widows and poores cause, has had no place before them. Every one, from the
least to the greatest, has loved taking of gifts. They have gaped after
filthy gain and covetousness. Ambicion and robbing of the poor, have had
their swinge. Charity and liberality toward the destitute, have waxen
cold. Every one has need to beware of his next neighbor. No man can safely
give credit to his own brother: for faith, honesty, and conscience, have
been banished. Among the whole multitude of the flock, there has scarcely
been found one plain friend of the truth. But even as before the destruction
of Jerusalem (for that he desired to spare his people, and the place of his
habitation) he sent his Messengers betymes in the morning, which seized not to
call them back, saying: Return ye wandering children, confess your iniquity,
and your starting a side, will I heal again: The last year of K. Edward.
Even so did the Preachers of Gods word, before this sudden change of state,
never more often, more earnestly, more boldly, and vehementlye, cry out and
preach repentance, fearing the people from their sins. But nevertheless,
with their threatening, they have not made our hearts to yield. We have not
thought upon turning to the Lord in all our heart, with weeping, fasting, and
lamenting. We have not repented earnestly, and in good faith: In acknowledging
our faults, we have not given the glory to God: but being past shame, with a
stiff neck, with uncircumcised hearts and ears, have abidden still in our
smnes. We have not submitted our selves, under the mighty hand of God, nor
disposing our minds to understand what his life is, have bewailed our own
miserable condition, saying, from the bottom of our hearts: we have sinned
Lord: we have wickedly departed from thee: we have done unjustly: we have
committed iniquity: In thy wrath (O Lord) remember thy mercy: space us
Lord, spare thy thy people, and let not thine inheritance, be a reproach to the
world. etc. Nay rather we have followed the example of the Jews, which
scorned the messengers of God, mocked his Prophets, and derided their Sermons,
until such time, as the wrath of God was kindled against his people, and no
remedy could be found. Why Gods word was taken from us.
Likewise, we have most shamefully derided the word of God, have despised the
Ministers of Christ, and have counted them as mad men: their prophecies, The
prophecy of Latimer, and others.
being the true Oracles of God, (as the success and end of them, have
verified) we have wickedlye esteemed, to be but vain fables, and lies. Justly
therefore are we scourged. For the Lord has taken away his kingdom from us,
and given it to a people, working their own works. In steed of Gods word
Idolatry.
He has taken from us the clear light, and sent darkness among us. He has
taken the candlestick from us, and appointed a hunger of his word.

But not pacified only with this punishment, Gods thretnings.
he has also threatened desolation of Cities, distructions, overthrows,
wastings, and ruynes: upon which, ensue loss of goods, committing of adultry,
and defloration of daughters: besides the miserable leadinges into captivity,
by barberous nations. Ye and more grievous than al these, he assigns unto
such as be obstinate, and ungodly, contemners of his word, and do omit
charity, and other good works above mentioned. And if for all this, they will
not repent, he pronownceth, that it shall be worse to them in the day of
judgment, than to Sodom and Gomorrha.

But the sincere lovers of the truth, (when contrary wise, the stubberne and
disobedient, by Gods just judgment, are blinded) shall see light in
darckenesse, and among deep errors, shall spy out the light of the word:
which word shall be their guide, and shall make the way plain unto them,
least the feet of the Saints stumble against the dark mountains. These
men, shining in good works, before the blindness of mortal men, shall, by
showing the true word of the Gospel, shake off the darckenesse of errors: and
by warning, exhorting, and reproouing the works of darkness, shall bring
back the sheep of Christ (often straying from the right course and pathway)
unto that one blessed flock of true Christians. These men also, that the
Devil (if it be possible) may suppress, he stretches out his threats, and
terrors of grievous persecution against them, that the preaching of the
Gospel, either by ridding such out of the way, or by their consent unto an
untruth, might utterly be put to scilence. But he finally preuayleth, by his
violent means. Little does he advantage, by his cruel and blouddie assaults,
to overthrow Gods servants, and to vanquish the truth.

For the Church of God, The Church of God and christian religion augmentes with
persecution. August. to Volusianus.
and christian religion, have evermore augmented through persecution: and by
the very same means that other things have been extinguished, and brought to
nothing, they have grown and increased. Which thing Saint Augustine
excellently well declares in a certain Epistle of his to Volusyan. When
tyrannous infidelity, says he (speaking of the first famous professors and
teachers of Christ's religion) rages against them, they wait for things
foreshewde, they hope upon promises, they teach the commandments, of a
small number, they are spread over the world, they convert the people with
marvelous facility, they increase amongst their enemies, they wax more and
more with persecution, through grievous affliction, they are carried out to the
ends of the earth. By those which are most unlearned, most abject, and least
of number, they are brought to fame, to renown. and are multiplied. The most
excellent wits, the trymmest eloquence, the wonderful, cunning, of wise,
eloquent, and learned men of the world, they do bring under Christ, and
convert to preach the way of godliness and salvation. Through adversity and
prosperity, which chance in the course of times, they thoroughly exercise
themselves, both in patience and temperaunce. The world, drawing now toward
an end, and declaring manifestly, by the feebleness of things, the last age
of the same, men do wait for eternal felicity, in the heavenly habitation:
and with much greater confidence, because the same is porficied of before.
Also, amongst all other things, the infidelity of wicked nations, storms
against the church of Christ: but she through patience, and steadfast professing
of faith, amidst the cruelty of resistaunce, has the over hand. Wherefore,
rightlye did one utter that noble sentence: boldelye and without fear he
declared it: that the blood of Martires is the seed of Christ's religion. A
noble sentence.
But now that we have largely enough set forth, how, and in what manner, every
man ought to behave himself, to find out the truth, in the troublesome time
of controversy, concerning our faith, and have entreated of every thing in
order, as matters necessary for our purpose did fall out. There rests that
by all ways and means we can, we search more dilygentlye, and when the place
serves better for the purpose, to try out, upon whom Christ is wont to
bestow that excellent peace, which he promosed at his departing hence, to give
to his Apostles, and with them to leave it. Shall all persons enjoy this
peace? shall every one possess this so high a benefit? I would all
Christians would so wholye dedicate themselves to Christ, and so dyligently
observe the rule, prescrybed to them, by him their only master, that they
might aspire to that most plesaunt joy of a quiet mind. But the way to this
so firm a peace, is cut off from an infinite multitude, through their own
default, who starting from the pureness, and integrity of life, are defiled
in their sins, and serve their own lusts.

Far from this are they kept, Who be excluded from a quiet mind.
which laying aside the fear of God, set great store by themselves: which
walk in this world, according to the time, according to the spirit, that
works in perverse children, and according to their own concupiscence: and
which study not with all endeavor and resistaunce, to purge the old leaven,
but do whatsoever pleases the flesh, and their own fancies. To be short:
all such as are excluded there from, as wittingly and wyllingly, repugnaunt to
the Table of the ten commandments, with all pronenesse of mind, rushe
hedlong into all mischief and naughtiness. A great way also are they severed
from this peace (to reckon every sin more perticularly) which be
whoremongers, adoulterers, delicate persons, thieves, covetous folk,
drunkardes, raylers, extorcyoners, unjust and wicked men, mankyllers, liars,
periurers, enuyers, whisperers, backbyters, spightfull, high minded, and
glorious men, and al unclean persons, which obstinatelye continue in their
sins, and boldly follow whatsoever is enemy unto the wholesome doctrine of
the Evangelist, and unto the glory of the blessed God. For those men cannot but
tremble in their minds, and quake with inward dread, when they understand
the wrath and vengeance of God toward them: and when they perceive before
hand, that they shall have him to be a Judge and revenger of their
naughtiness. And all those which be prophaners of his temple, and run
hedlong into vice, the Lord will destroy and judge, except they repent: For he
will punish them with a second death, casting them into the lake, burning
with fire and brimstone, and condemning them to everlasting pain. For they
obtained not the spirit of promise either by reason of their unbelief, pride,
and wantonness, either for that they were apparelled with no works of
righteousness, nor practiced the word of God, as they ought to have done: but
lived after their own ways, or rather after the manner of Dogs, in gyuing
themselves to uncleanness, riot, and other vices. And because they walked on
still, after the manner of men, in their own concupiscenses, not agreeable to
reason, therefore has the Lord, while they yet live, called them dead: the
Apostle, named them fleshely and beastlye: the Prophet, termed them cattle
and brute beasts: common experience, counted them no better than cattle void
of reason: and finally, the law it self has judged them unclean persons.

Therefore, they only are taught by Christ, To whom Christ is become the true
tranquillity of the mind.
and find rest unto their souls, which detest sin, and turn to their God
by faith, especially with the desire of their heart: which crucify the flesh
with her lusts, and kill the deeds of the same by the spirit, and being
dead to sin, live to righteousness and innocence. The which being buried
together with Christ, live again with him, and study to walk in newenesse of
life. They, which after a sort, work violence to their own nature, to take
away dominion of sin in them: and they also, which reposing their trust in
God, endeavor to live in the flesh, as if they were not in the flesh, that
the old man being shaken of, they may daily put on the new: and the Image that
in Adam was lost, they may recover again, by renewing the same more and more in
there mind every day. They only ascend to that blessed kingdom, wherein is
joy and peace in the holy ghost, which perceive the love of God toward them,
and embrace the same from the bottom of their heart, with thanksgiving,
helping their poor brethren, as far as their ability will stretch, both
with their travel, council, and substance. They also, which spare no labor
to serve in their vocation: but having taken a function in hand, do pass
through the same to the glory of God. They which covet not riches, which
compass not honors, nor hunt after pleasures: but with a stayde mind, despise
all human and earthly things, and fix the same upon the high and celestial
treasure. And they moreover, which in wishing for the Lords coming, do
rather like the same should come, than dread and abhor it. Such persons as
thus renounce all impiety, and bestow the course of this life in godliness,
righteousness, holiness, and sobriety: of very right are called men both
pure, spiritual, and living to God: because they have the spirit of the
father, which makes man pure, and exalts him to the life of God. Whose
quietness, what is it ye can impair, when they perceive and feel the loving
kindness of God so great toward them, as he does not only, of his fatherly
affection, appoint them among the number of his children, gives them plenty of
his spirit, (and as the Apostle says) richely endueth them, styrres up new
desires in their hearts, and such as are correspondent to the will of God,
inflames us to love God, and to have charity toward our neighbor, drives us
to praise God continually, to confess our sins, to advance the Gospel, to
call for help, to render thanks, to have true and steadfast confidence in God:
mooues us moreover to all duties of godliness, to patience in adversity, to
sobriety in abundance, to dexterity toward our neighbor, to diligence in
our calling, to meekness in behavior, to the endeavor of peace and concord,
to virtues meet for a Christian, to live friendly to the life of man, and
profitably to the Church of Christ, to the reposing of our sure and steadfast
salvation in Christ: But he also beholds us with his fatherly countenance,
keeps us carefully as it were the apple of his eye, and brings us to that
glorious kingdom: where (we being rid from the burden of necessity, and
turmoyles of this life) all the blessed, shall enjoy the continual beholding
of their God. Unto which blessedness, let no man think, he shall attain,
which under the cloak of feigned holiness, and colorable chastity of life,
shall (for a time) bleare men's eyes, and hyde his secret filthiness, with
crafty and hypocritical dissimulations: unless he shall inwardly also before
God, appear such a one, as he outwardly professes, and shall in deed, live
continently, temperately, soberly, chastely, and honestly. God hates all
filthy and unclean lusts: and forbiddes not all only whoredom,
wantonness, viciousness, and defiling of the body, but the unlawful lusts
also of the mind. He requires at our hands, not only cleanenesse of life,
and chastity, but temperance also and sobriety, by the which this pureness
of body and mind is preserved. For as our Lord God is holy, 1. Thessa. 4.
so this is his will, even our holiness, without which no man shall see God.
Hebrews. 12.
We ought therefore to be sanctified, both in body and spirit, that we may
serve him in holiness, and righteousness before him, all the days of our
life.

But and if a man, Of concupiscence.
that is often disquieted with the disease of concupiscence, and (by reason of
the precept of sanctification, How the conscience that is troubled with inward
concupiscence may be quieted.
taking care to keep continence and chastity) should ask my advice, how he
might quiet his conscience, which grudgeth and accuses him: I would persuade
him above all things, that he subdue the deeds of the flesh, and put away the
proud prouocations unto lusts, both with remedies appointed for that purpose,
and also by such other helps as are worthy of commendation in that matter.
For there be unlawful remedies, such as destroy nature, hasten our end, and in
short space bring plague and destruction to the body. And they are guilty of
murder, and effusion of blood, which exercise such (I say not remedies) but
poysonings of nature. Those not only kill the flesh, but they also overthrow,
kill, and destroy the whole man. Wherefore, let him first with earnest
inclination toward the word of God, fight against the raging of the flesh, by
faith and prayer: and through this wholesome and excellent remedy, in all that
he can, to quench and abate the courage of the same. For he that loves often
and diligent reading of the Scriptures, wherein the Godly may hear, how God
threatens his wrath to whoremongers, adulterers, and to such as are polluted
with the like vice: where, on the contrary part, with liberal promises, he
gently calls them to repentance, comfortes the sorrowful, relieues the
afflicted, confirms the wavering, calls men back from desperation: such a
one has prepared a strong hold, to suppress the wickedness of the flesh.
Likewise, they fortify themselves with an excellent defense, who be at hearing
of Sermons, which the Preachers of wholesome doctrine do make: and hear with
willing ears, the words of the Gospel, at the hands of the faithful
disposer of Gods misteryes, and of the true Minister of the Church: and do
coutch the same within their heart and mind, and in the same wholly, willingly,
and with all their heart repose themselves, no less, than if it were the voice
of Christ, here present, or as if it were spoken from out of heaven. The very
same also is wrought, through private talk of godly men among themselves,
while the word of Christ, concerning the remedies against vice, is plentifully
frequented amongst them with all wisdom, and while they instruct and
admonish one an other: whose company if we fancy, and with them confer,
meet, and familierly use, they will excellently well instruct us, to withstand
sin with ghostly weapons. But above all, we must without delay, and with all
confidence, fly to the aid and help of our heavenly father, who has both
commanded us to pray, and taught us the form of prayer: And further, dryuing
us by necessity to call unto him, has made us to attend for his help, has
encouraged us by his promise, and also hears us at such time as his pleasure
shall be, and that in better sort than we our selves can desire. A worthy
saying therefore, is that, of the holy man Bernard. Brethren (says he) I
would not have you doubt of your prayer, but know ye, that even when the
word issues out of your mouth, then is your prayer written in the sight of
God: and it shall be either granted you, which is desired, or else it is not
expedient to have it granted. Wherefore, we must call upon GOD fervently, and
earnestlye open our Prayer unto him, when we be touched with the taste of our
euilles. For look even how much more greater the danger and necessity is,
so much the prompter and readier ought our mind be to pray. For the prayers
are but faint, of those which live in great security, and are troubled with no
private discommoditie. Neither were it requisite by reason of our
unworthiness, that we decysted from praying. But it behoues us to remember
rather, that God does retoyce at the name, which David so often does attrybute
unto him: which is, that we truly acknowledge him to be the hearer of our
prayers. But and if he shall not in every point, consent to our demand, yet
whilst we still continue all night in prayer, and be not weary thereof, he
will show us the way whereunto he has called us: which we must enter into,
if we prosper not, nor prevail in the first, and may lawfully prove the same,
without offending him, if God shall draw us thereto, by denying our request.
Moreover, How to suppress concupiscence.
to the furtheraunce thereof, we must avoid such as be peruerters of good
studyes, all thintisementes to pleasures, flattering, fawnings, dishonest games,
lashing expenses, banquets out of due time, immoderate and contynuall drinking,
indecent shows, songs of love, wanton daunces, naughty company, but
especially, we must shun idleness, which is cause, both of these euilles,
and of a number mo. For idleness is most delectable to the flesh: which
delights above measure in sloth, lythernesse, ceassing from occupation,
sluggishnesse, and heaviness of mind: and it has a desire to be doing of
nothing, and to be void of all care and business. Yea, and let the godly man
remember, that filthy lusts are chiefly nourished by excess and idleness:
Idienesse the feeder of lusts.
for thereof is the fyrebrande kindled, and there is the Oil poured in and
ministered so aboundauntly, as not without cause, that wyttie Poet said.

Is it asked wherefore, Egistus was adulter made.
The cause is plain, and quickly known:
since he with sloth was clade.
For they which be always tied to some labor or business, and never be boyde
of occupation, do sildome give any respit to vuhonest lust. Wherefore it is
necessary that with Godly studies, and honest occupations, we continuallye
resist the pride of the flesh, and with accustomed fasting and hunger, (but
the same moderate) we bridle the violence thereof: and also that with continual
sobriety and temperaunce, we keep under our laciuious life. Whatsoever the
devil shall sugiest, and will us to do, the same must we diligently traueyle
to shake of, even with all the expedition we can: and we must neither wyllingly
consent thereunto, nor yet rest any longer upon the same, but strait way sly
to the assistaunce of almighty God, and pour out our prayers before him,
expelling from our mind (as it were one nail with another) evil thoughts,
with other thoughts which are better. And let us remember the sayings and
examples of the mystical scriptures, which forbid all filthynesse, and
pronownce wrath and punishment, against those which be defiled. Let us be
abashte to commit in the sight of God, (who sees all things) such filthiness
as we would be ashamed off, if, but our own companion should be privy
thereunto. Let it come into our remembrance, what we professed in baptism,
how famous conquerours, warryours, and Captains we would become: and upon
victory gotten, what large and bountyfull rewards we shall look for: as
eternal triumph in heaven, life, peace, everlasting salvation, blessed and
heaped immortality, with all good things. Let us still bear in mind, the
shortness and uncertainty of this life, death in a manner every minute to be
looked for. Let us think of the last and dreadful judgment, of hell, the
feends and fire that shall never be extinguished. Through remembrance whereof,
the unlawful raging of our flesh and lusts of the same, may be abated, and
for fear of punishment of our wickedness, we will keep our selves in better
order. But and if we prevail nothing, through all these remedies: if we
perceive our selves to profit little, neither by the earnest practicing of the
word of God, neither by the contynuall company of good and godly men, by
often prayers made to God, nor yet by shunning of idleness, and avoiding the
disco^modities, which ensue upon the same: If neither by earnest industry, and
study, by honest labors, godly exercises and occupations: if through much
hunger, fasting and watching, through sobriety and temperaunce of life: if by
thinking upon the promises and threatninges of God, that if either we overcome,
we shall have everlasting joy, or if we be overcome, we shall have eternal
pain, we obtain nothing, we profit and prevail nothing thereby: there
rests then the shoot anchor, Marriage the shoeteanker of concupiscence.
whereunto we must fly being so called, without any scruple of conscience,
even honest and lawful matrimonye, appointed for them which cannot keep
themselves continent: and the only safe remedy, chiefly prepared by God for
redress of this evil, according to the saying: 1, Cor. 7.
Let every man take his own wife, for avoiding of fornication: and again, it
is better to marry than to burn. Which thing, the holy ghost does advance
with this notable praise: Honorable is wedlock among all persons, Last of
Hebrews.
and the bed undefiled. Wherefore, he that shall in this sort obey rather Gods
calling, than give ear to men's prohibicion, may not think himself to sin
thereby. Nay rather, he sins by cloking the matter before men, with a
feigned holiness, by disdayning the matter when God does call him, by
nourishing still his unlawful lusts and filthy cogitations, and by distayning
his conscience. Many godly writers of our time, bewayling the filthy life of
Churchmen, Corrupt life of Churchmen.
(for which the whole order of them farde the worse) have complained, and not
without cause, upon the law of single life: which by the sincere judgment of
them, have drawn many troops of men to desperation, to the eternal wrath
of God, and to blasphemies. Let us therefore think, and utterly resolve in our
heart and mind, the thing which is most true, (that is to say) that a naughty
and corrupt conscience, can not call upon God: which is plain, by that saying
of John, in his first Epistle and third Chapter. If our heart condemn us not,
then have we trust to God ward: and whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of
him. It is a lamentable thing, in such sort to live, as thou dare neither
call upon God, nor yet to put thy trust in his government and defense. Such
persons so living without God, and so alyenated from a godly life, the devil
does blind every day more and more, and bewraps them in heinous crimes. For
the Apostle testifies in plain words, Ephe. 4.
that blindness is the punishment of lusts. Wherein they being blinded,
become void of all council and wit, but purchase to themselves punishment
and destruction. If Joseph had defiled himself with adultery, he had forgone
many gifts of God, and being forsaken of him, had fallen into many sins. As
it happened unto David, who, besides the adultery committed with Bethsabe,
added thereto the murder of Vryas her husband, that excellent man: and many
other offenses committed he. Gene. 6.
The Lord opened the Cataractes of heaven, to destroy the world with the
floude, for the licencious lusts thereof. Gone. 19.
With fire and Brimstone, he consumed those two Cities, which so raged and
shamefully went a madding, in all kind of wicked lusts. He slew all the
Sychemittes, by the hands of Jacobs sons, for rauishing of Dyna. He
destroyed all the Cananites, because they were defiled with incestious lusts:
besides the hanging of their chief rulers. For adultery, Leuit. 8.
he consumed. xxiiij. thousand, from among the children of Israel. Number. 25.
He brought the whole tribe of Beniamine well near to an end, for defiling
the Leuits wife. Iud. 30.
He suffered Solomon, being delighted with lusts of foul voluptuousness, and
inchaunted with the intisements of Harlots, to allow the examples of
Idolatrye. Moreover, amongst other things, he delivered Jerusalem (chiefly for
this sin) into the hands of the king of Caldea. To this rule, may be
referred the destruction of Cities and kingdoms, which are rehearsed of
Ethnike Writers: besides the mutation of commonweals, and pitiful ends of
famous men. As for example: the rauishing of Helen, was the destruction of
Troy: and the incest of Oedipus, appeared to be cause of great evil that
happened unto the city of Thebes. The kings, for deflowring of Lucretia, were
banished out of Rome: and for the wicked act of Appius the Decimuir, the
commonwealth was changed again. Very well therefore does Aristotle, in the
first treaty of the Politicals, rehearse by many examples, (which there he
alleges) that sensual lust, Sensual lusts the cause of translating
kingdoms.
is one of the causes of mutation of kingdoms. At Athens, the sons of
Pysistratus, for the dishonor they did to a maid, were driven out of the
city. And Pawsanias the Lacedemonian Captain, for ye like injury that he had
done at Byzance, was condemned by the Judges to die with famine: although he
being a victor before, had removed the Persian army. Wherefore, bearing away
the calamities which do chance, not without cause to such as be polluted (but
yet as punishments, whereby God declares his wrath to the world against this
sin). Let us also, whither we lead a single life, or be married, when
occasion is offered, remember, how we have dedicated our name to our chief
Captain Christ, Promise in baptism.
and are sworn to his word: how we have promised to fight under him all the
days of our life: and so let us manfully set forward to fight. Let us
remember, A pretty saying.
that none may be crowned but he that shall overcome, and that none can
overcome, except he fight, nor can fight, except enemies be present, which
should provoke to the battle. Whose provocation, what else is it at length,
but the seed and occasion of everlasting glory: if we yield not to
temptation, but cleave to the shield of faith, (wherewyth we destroy all the
fiery darts of that evil) and then taking up the sword of the spirit, we
put the whole armor of God upon us. So with a valiant courage let us enter to
the battle, and by the Lord and his strength, let us steadfastly continue in
resisting the assaults of the Devil. Endeavor we now, our hearts being made
clean by faith, to pass the time of this our pilgrimage incorruptly: and let
us associate our selves, with the number of those, 1. Pet. 2.
which Saint Peter calls the chosen generation, the royal Priesthood, and
the holy Nation: that we may set forth his virtues with a glad heart, who has
plucked us out of the power of darcknesse, and called us to his marvelous
light, that he might make us fit to be pertakers of the inheritance with
Saints in the light. Romans 12.
Let us give our bodies a lively Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, not
fashioning our selves like unto this world, but transforming our shape, by
renewing our mind, that we may try what the word of God is. Let us separate
our selves from such, as either be addicted to the world, or be servants to
their lusts: Who like vile bondslaues, bear the yoke with unbelievers, and
rejoice at all filthy talk, refusing not to serve and flatter for such men,
as were convenient that they themselves should have power and dominion of, as
Lords over servants. Let us learn our sanctification of our Master Christ:
whose doctrine, what else does it teach than repentance, than sound and lively
faith in Jesus our Savior, than mortifying of our flesh, denying our own
selves, contemning of the world, dispising of all things, which either in the
flesh, or in the world, displease God: and by the same christ our savior,
learn to obtain eternal life. Which, as here we lay hold of by faith, so in
that blessed resurrection, and redemption of our bodies, (which we wait for)
we shall fully, 1. Tymotb. 1.
gloriously, and perfitely enjoy. Let us now so finishe the whole course of
our life, as we may to the last breath, observe charity, proceeding forth of a
pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned: which is the finishing of the
commandment. And above all things, let us endeavor, to keep the unity of
the spirit one with another, through the bond of peace: that contention being
taken away and abholished, as much as is possible, we may all together speak
one thing in Jesus Christ, and think one thing in him, in whom only we
increase in godly agreement and consent of friends: and by wearing out with
voluntary forgetfulness, the injuries done unto us, we may love even our
enemies, as the Lord has commanded us, and provide to our power, both for the
safety of their bodies, and salvation of their souls.

From hence, The means of true quietness.
shall that joy in the holy ghost abound, and a quiet conscience shall
lighten the mind. Hereof it comes, that when at any time, our mind is
eliuated with any godly study, continuing steadfastly in prayer: our
communication with God, becomes so pleasant and delectable, that, in manner,
forgetting our selves, and taking very little care for the body, we neither
pass upon sleep, nor desire meat, nor yet seem at that instant to live
amongst men in the earth, but having attained (as it were to immortality) we
may seem, after a sort, to be in company with Angels. Hereof breeds so great
a quietness and security, as the day of the Lord, which to the wicked, shall
become fearful and terrible, to us shall be thought joyful, luckie,
prosperous, and happy. And at the approaching of the same, let us lift up our
heads, and look up, because the fullness of our redemption then draws nigh.
For from them, which have the testimony of a good conscience, and (being
sealed with the holy spirit of promise) behold the pleasant beauty of the
son of righteousness, not with sad, but with cheerful countenance: and
desirously, with a joyful mind, let in by the window of the heart, the shining
beams of the word of God: from such, I say, does the pleasant taste of
eternal life (which they perceive, while they live here) wype away all grief
and sorrow, and ingendring a contempt, of the most vain vanities of this
world, bringes into them a most delectable joy: but the same joined with
desire of putting of mortality. For as everlasting life, is all wholly, Of
eternell life having beginning in this life.
perfected in the immortalitye to come: so is it (at least wise) begun in
this present life.

But how may we attain to that desired knowledge, of perceiving what manner of
life that everlasting life is: which with such unspeakable and incredible
pleasure, draws the mind to God? and what kind of taste has it among the
Saints, that constraynes the children of God, to have such great desire to
attain to heavenly things, before they be discharged of this mortal
tabernacle of the body? I will recite the words of Saint Augustine which do
make this matter that we seek for marvelous plain unto us. If the raging of
the flesh, (says he) be at rest in a man: the imaginations upon the earth,
August. of the feel of eternal life.
water, and air, be at quiet in him, the heavens still, and the very soul it
self, be at rest in it self, and go beyond it self, not in deep cogitation
of it self: if he be quite void of dreams and imagined revelations: if
every tongue, every sign, or other transitory thing whatsoever, be altogether
at quiet: (forasmnch as, if a man give ear, all these things, do say: we our
selves have not made our selves, but he made us that abides for ever. Which
being said, if these things then whishe, because they lifted up their ear to
him, that made them, and that he alone may speak, not through them, but by
himself, to the intent we may hear his word, not by the voice of the flesh,
nor by the voice of an angel, neither through the sounding of a cloud,
neither by obscure questions of similitudes: but even him, whom in these
things we love, himself without these things let us hear: even as at this
instant, we stretched out our selves, and with our ravished cogitation, attained
to everlasting wisdom which rests upon all things.) If this shall be
continued (other imaginations, which be far incomparable to these, being
withdrawn) and only this imagination, rauishe, swallow up, and repose the
beholder thereof among inward joys: that such may be the life eternal, as
was this present moment of understanding him, to whom we have lifted up our
hearts: Is not this as much as to enter into the joy of thy Lord? Wherefore,
the same Saint Augustine, in the last book of his confessions, adjoined this
prayer thereunto. O Lord GOD, give us peace, for all things have thou showed
unto us: both the peace of rest, the peace of a quiet conscience, and the peace
of eternal rest: for all this beautiful order of things very excellent, shall
pass away, when the measure of them is fulfilled, and the morrow after
becomes ye euentide in them. And the same is either the seventh day or
euentyde, and has no Sun going down, because thou have sanctified it, for
an everlasting continuance: that whereas thou, after thy most excellent
works, did rest the seventh day, (although thou were at rest when thou
made them) the same might be declared to us by the voice of thy book,
because we also in thee, might rest in the Sabbath of eternal life, after our
labors, which be very good also, for that thou have appointed them unto us.

To this inestimable joy, which this holy man, most desirous of the
immortality to come, has trimly discribed in his books: to this perpetual
vacation after labor, which shall bring such a rest with it, as is to be
wished for, with all prayer: To that most blessed kingdom of joy, wherein
dwells both righteousness and peace: To the heavenly Country, to the
fellowship of Angels, to the most pleasant company of Saints, in everlasting
life to come, (by the only meditation and remembrance whereof, we conceive an
incredible delight in our mind, and joys pierce our secret breast.) Why the
holy elect do so vehemently desire to leave this earthly habitation.
To all these things I say, do all the children of God desire, with longing
sighs speedily to attain: and with fervent wishes, wait to have that same
their small taste of everlasting life, to be fully finished and perfected:
which thing, the tumultes of the flesh, attempt to interrupt, and the
temptations of Satan, labor here to destroy and to pluck from us. For this
frail body, being corrupt, is heavy to the soul, and this earthly mansion,
keeps down the understanding, which is laden with cares. And hereupon came
that exclamation of S. Paul, Romans 7.
who took it grievously, that his body wandered here in a strange Country,
as a banished man, saying: O wretch that I am, who shall deliver me out of this
body subdued to death. Again: I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ.
Philip. 1.
For the natural corruption in man, which is, as it were the root of all
sin, no man has had any hope to pluck up quite by the root, or to rid
himself from the same in all respects, till death only by reducing the flesh
into dust, at length shall remedy so huge an evil. Hereupon the fervent
desire of the creature, abides longing, that the sons of God may appear.
And we our selves also, Romans 8.
which have the first fruits of the spirit, mourn in our selves, desiring to
be put on a new, and wait for the adoption, which is the redemption of our
body: that the creature, subdued to vanitye, should be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, 2. Collos. 5.
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For even then, at the
resurrection of the just, The felicitye of the Saints in life to come.
and regeneration to come, shall sorrow, grief, anguish, sickness, affliction,
occasion of sin, yea, and sin it self have an end. Then shall immortality
swallowe up mortality: uncorruption, devour corruption: and perpetual joy,
consume the bitter calamities of this troublesome life. At that time, there
shall come to the godly society of the elect, so many as ever from the first
beginning of ye world, of all ages, are ordained to everlasting life: and they
together with the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, Confessors,
and with the holy Angels of God, shall contynually sing: Halleluya, and with
joyful voice, shall attrybute honor unto the king of heaven. Psalm. 35.
There shall they be satisfied with the plenteousnesse of Gods house, and shall
be filled with the river of his pleasures. There (death being swallowed up to
victory) they shall behold the visage of his glory, with uncovered face,
which the Angels in heaven are glad to look upon. They which here did sow in
tears, shall there reap with gladness. They shall not hunger nor thirst any
more: neither shall the Sun or any heat light upon them, because the Lamb,
Apoc. 7.
who is in the midst of the throne, shall both govern and lead them to the
lively Fountaynes of waters: and because also, God has clearly wyped from
their eyes all tears. For, as it is here wyshed for, desired earnestly, prayde
and longed for, from the very heart: so there we shall lay hold of it, take
pleasure of it, praise and magnify it. Here we are at strife, and continual
war with most cruel adversaries, such as conspire our destruction: there
the crown of righteousness is brought by the Lord, to the victor, that has
fought a good fight, ye has finished his course, The reward of the just.
and that has kept his faith. There, there is decreed a most ample triumph of
joy. There, are the temporal labors recompenst with the chiefest reward of
Gods house. Psalm. 83.
Who therefore will not cry out with the Prophet: How amiable are thy
dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts. My soul is weary and wastes, with longing
after thy habitation. Blessed be they (O Lord) which dwell in thy house, for
they shall evermore praise thee. There, shall they behold that insatiable
beauty, and being inflamed with perpetual love thereof, shall never cease
from lawde and praise. When can he be destitute of that peaceable quietness of
mind, which continually day and night, is thinking upon these celestial and
immortal things, and which fixes all his mind, care, and cogitation, in
continual contemplation of heavenly matters. How can he be out of quiet, who
with vehement sighs, and exceeding prayer, labors to come to that blessed
country, where the saints be pertakers of life eternal, and truth immutable:
and who, every day, does indruour to unburden himself somewhat of earthly
cares.

The very right way therefore (in my opion) does he take to the true
tranquillity of the mind, True tranquillity of the mind rests in the sure
confidence in christ, in the testimony of a good conscience, and in the lively
hope of eternal life.
who has Christ to be his rock and foundation, and with steadfast faith
cleaues unto him: and he being endued with a perfect persuasion of Gods good
will toward him, purchases the testimony of a good conscience, by performing
the whole course of his life, both godly, justly, and soberly: and who both in
mind, invocation and confession, cleaues so thoroughly to the true christian
Church, (whereof the son of God is President, the Angels are protectors, the
holy spirit is the sanctifier, the godly and elect of every age are the
fellowship) as he is a very member of the people of God, and of the mystical
body, whose head is Christ: and does not only hold fast the lively hope of
eternal life to his last end, but also increases every day, by proceeding
from one virtue to another. For the expectation of the children of God, who
with a right passage and courageous stomach, (as to a prefixed sign) go
forward to the reward of their heavenly vocation, cannot be deceived: if the
same lean upon the sure foundations, of eternal election, of the precious
redemption, and of the promise of God. For even as God of his mere love, which
he pours into the hearts of us, by his spirit, has adopted us to be his
children: that a certain wonderful greatness of love, being styred up in
our minds, by the knowledge thereof, the same might wax more vehement,
toward our most merciful God: and also by sending down his son, has
performed our redemption, and as touching the firm promises of eternal life,
has determined the heritage to us: So likewise he by his omnipotent power,
finisheth the work of salvation begone in us, if we waver not, but stand
steadfast in faith. Let us therefore call upon the Lord, to pour into our
minds the gift of faith, and daily to increase the same, being begone in us:
that in asking, seeking, and knocking, we may receive, find, and have it
opened unto us. Justifying by faith.
For the justification by faith, from whence the true quietness of the mind
does grow, and by which access with boldness to the throne of Majesty is
assigned unto us, and by whose help and defense, we are brought to this grace,
wherein we stand, and boste our selves under the glory of God, is after Saint
Barnardes opinion, S. Barnard.
as it were a mid passage, from eternal predestination, unto the magnification
(as he calls it) to come, by which we ascend to the heavenly Jerusalem, the
City of the living God, to the innumerable company of Angels, to the
congregation of the first borne Sons, which are written in heaven, to the
spirits of the just and perfect men, and to God the judge of all men, and to
Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament: where we being blessed, shall inioye
everlasting life.

Since all Scripture preaches unto us, Of true tra^quillitie of mind in time
of afflictions.
that these things, must with true and certain persuasion be believed, and
denounces against the unbelievers, pain and eternal death: why are we
discouraged in our minds, if misery assail us? why do we lowre and lament,
if but easy adversity come upon us? why do not excellent persuasions, take so
good root in us, that we contemn and wear out afflictions of time present,
by conferring the same with life to come, which is reserved for us? why are we
not so armed with the continual study, of most blessed immortality, which is
looked for, and with sure hope of that most happy kingdom: that whatsoever
shall chance, we bear it both patiently and quietly? If the longest age of
ours, being compared with everlasting life, can scarcely be counted one
minute, why regard we not those transitory things, as matters of no effect,
which may easily be abidden: settling our mind far beyond afflictions, upon
the good things eternal, which tarry looking for us? And why waighe we not
down this light affliction, that indureth but for a season, even only with
the earnest thought of the felicity to come. Of our momentany and light
affliction, speaks Saint Paul, 2. Colos. 4.
judging that it breeds in us, a wonderful and exceeding weight of glory,
while we have not regard unto the things which are seen, but to those things
which are not seen. For the things which are seen, are temporal, and the
things which are not seen, are eternal. For by affliction, are good men
thoroughly tried, as Iobe and Tobias were: or else evil men thereby are
corrected and amended: as Manasses and many other kings of Judah. Where should
either the virtue and power of the spirit, be so evidently perceived, or the
noble and excellent virtue of patience, give so splendent a show, or faith have
any earnest exercise, if the Saints should be strayned with no misery? For
even as the stars do shine in the night, but in the day time they lie
hidden: even so, true virtue, wering bewtifull by temptation, does (as iron
with use) show in adversity what force it is of, which otherwise in time of
prosperity, lay hid in secret. And how should evil men forsake their
earthly desires, relinquish, and cast from them their wicked devises, if no
such thing should happen, whereby they may be led from love of the world,
from general flattering of themselves, and from their naughty and sinful
custom? For as the Physician, binds him fast that is vered with a frenzy,
stirs him up that is troubled with the disease of Lytharge, puts them both
to vexation, and yet loves them both: being not only desirous to restore
health unto them both, but also applies very diligently his whole art and
study in curing of those things: even so God, although he be sharp in
punishing, yet does he most lovingly, by such means, procure salvation unto
his elect. Deuteronomy. 29.
Wherefore, Moses reckneth affliction in stead of benefit, when he thus
speaks to the children of Israel: But this also (says he) weigh thou within
thy heart, that even as a man chastises his child, so does the Lord thy God
correct thee, that thou may walk in his ways and fear him. After like
manner does David, in this sentence following, Psalm. 119.
extol the chastining of the Lord, as a special benefit unto us. It is good
for me that thou have humbled and afflicted me, whereby I may learn thy
statutes. Why God does suffer his elect to be tormented by the wicked.
But why does GOD many times suffer his elect to be afflicted by the evil and
wicked? Truly, they which be most holy of all, commit something every day
worthy of punishment. For, not so much as in the flesh of the very children of
God, Romans 7.
there abides any thing that is good: but in them, is concupiscence of the
flesh against the spirit: and they are so changed into a new creature, as
nevertheless the old man is not utterly shaken of. They may refer that
saying of John to themselves as well as to others: if we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. For even the very thought
of the heart, is inclyned to evil, if occasion be ministered thereunto.

There is no such prerogative given to the Saints, The elect not free from
sin, but rather prone to evil.
so long as they live in this light, (if they remember their own frailty and
weakness) to make them think, those common prayers of the Church: (as Lord
forgive us our trespasses: wash me more and more: And enter not into judgment
with thy servant:) that they pertain not as well to them, as to others.
Wherefore the Lord being a righteous Judge, by his judgment, corrects
first his own householde, brings them into the way again, and admonishes
them to call upon him for help, least they should be condemned with the reast
of the world. And even as every beast that is stricken with lightning, turns
his face toward the lightning: so likewise, if the household of God will have
regard to God when he pleases them, he will compel them also to have an eye
to him when he strykes them, according to that saying: when he slew them,
Psalm. 77.
they sought him, and turning back, they called to remembrance, that God was
their rock, and the high God their redeemer. But and if the afflicted household
of God, will from thence forth, diligently seek after their God, with sighings
from their heart, and with righteous and pacient minds, will abide, waiting
for his secret council, their lamentation shall enter into the ears of the
Lord of Sabbath: who pluckes them out of their adversaries hands, that he may
learn them to depend only upon him: reuenges them also at length of their
very enimyes, if they scorn them: and the rod of punishment (which they
execute, not so much for their office sake, as for pride, chalenging to
themselves more than is right) oftentimes he throws into the fire.

But to comprehend the whole sum of the matter under one conclusion, The
chief causes why God send affliction to the just.
and to draw toward the end of our purpose, with a compendious alleagement of
causes: I will briefly recyte the chief matters, why God does often use his
elect to the Cross, and to afflictions.

He sends adversity upon them, The first cause.
to the end, that they feeling the greatness of gods wrath against sin,
may altogether see, how base they be of themselves: acknowledging also the
guile of their own spirit, may perceive how far they be from dying to
themselves, and from living only to the glory of God. Very often does subtle
security, idle feebleness, crafty hypocrisy, flattering love of a man's
self, secret pride, and close contemning of God, creep into hearts of the
Saints: all which through affliction, as with fire, must be burned and boiled
out. For God is a jealous God, and desires to be loved in deed, and to be
worshipped with all the heart. He loves nothing that is feigned, nothing that is
counterfeyt: but all things, Why God shows himself angry with his elect.
which be sincere, unfeigned and lively. For this cause he does show himself
angry with his elect, and bringes troubles upon them, that they being contrite
in heart, may begin to mislike themselves, and to shake off their old sloth,
feebleness, security and dissimulation: and so remembering their infirmity,
may from thenceforth be earnestly bent, to pray to God, and more solicitus to
live a godly life. For as salt preserves flesh, that it do not putrify, and
the drawing plaster, searches and purges that part of the body, which is
sore, least through corrupt matter it pine away: and as the hot iron, being
put thereunto, burns out and consumes, whatsoever should hinder the
recovery thereof: so does tribulation (least we should wax rotten in the
filthynesse of sin) draw us back from the renewing of sin, takes away the
delight of resting in evil, quenches the fire of lust, and easily plucketh
out of a good heart, whatsoever is an impediment to the good health of the mind.

Moreover, through misery, The second cause.
God calls away his elect from the love of this world, wherein they have
proof and experience, only of troubles and disquietnesse: who being drawn
away before, by the flickering intisementes of creatures, he now leads them
back again, to the love and worshipping of him their Creator. And he so
inflames the^ with a desire of celestial things, as they travel to come to
the everlasting and blessed country of heaven: and all the whole course of
their life here in earth, to muse upon nothing else but upon the life
celestial. For even as, by long boiling of gold, which is thrown into the
Furnace, any other corrupt thing mixed therewith, is tried out, and taken away
from it: like so, through trouble and adversity, both the delight we have in
creatures, the flattering we make of our selves, the confidence we have in men,
and whatsoever else is not pure, vanishes away and is put from us: and the
mind thereby wholly bent upon God, of whom it wayteth to obtain a
quietness. Wherefore, it is not without a cause that judgment begins first
at the house of the Lord: when as the hearts of the Saints, being by this
means made plyaunt, like wax, are become of righter judgment and of better
mind. Which thing, in times past was signified, by that, when as God so
would, that all the borderers upon the children of Israel, should be enemies
unto them.

And as well these private miseryes and infelicities, The third cause.
as also public calamities, be, after a sort, Public calamuies the voice of
the law.
the voice of the law, and more sharper Lessons, than any Sermons, that the
Ministers can make in the temple concerning repentance. For they chiefly above
all other things, make the greatness of Gods wrath, and hatred against sin,
to be apparaunt to us, whereof, no utterance of mouth, is able so much as to
make a shadow, much less express it plainly. For these bring to pass, that
a man forsaking his own strength, runs with true invocation and confession
of his own imbecillitie and weakness, unto Gods divine succor. These, when
we fall, admonish us of our duty, and that we give from thence forth a
greater heed, and resist with a more vigilant eye, the temptations of Satan,
the desires of the flesh, and the intifementes of the world. These, strike
men with fear and dread, that when an example of others is laid before their
eyes, it may cause them to remember what themselves should be afearde of: and
so having experiment by others, may be framed more slack to commit sin.

Moreover, the Lord, by causing his elect, The fourth cause.
through affliction, to become subject unto him, teaches them true obedience,
instructs them to patience, and invres them to be plyant to his will with a
quiet mind. For, The difference of enduring trouble between good men and evil.
in the enduring of trouble and misery, there was wont always to be a great
difference between the godly sort, and the ungodly. For as the courageous
horse, shows by his prauncing, and all other tokens of fierceness, how
unwillingly he abides his Ryder, yea, he throws him off, if he can, and yet
never thelesse is brought under will he or no: and as the gentler horse, more
quietly suffers his Ryder, turns what way so ever he appoyntes him, and lettes
himself be tamed: Even so the wicked, when God does try them with misery,
with pensiveness, and with adversity, they spurn against it, although they
nothing prevail: and being impacient of their misfortune, make resistance all
that ever they can. But the godly sort stoop to God, suffer themselves to be
ruled, and with all humbleness of mind, yield to the will of God. Through
which it commes to pass, that as the one sort, reapes no fruit through their
impacience, so the other by their sufferaunce, depart with exceeding great
profit and commodity. For as the Sun hardneth mire, and yet melts wax:
even so, in a manner, does affliction make good men become the better, and evil
men the worse. The godly men therefore, do patiently endure the wholesome and
fatherly kind of correction of our heavenly father: They bear whatsoever God
lays upon them, with a true submission of mind. They daily take up the
cross, which God has appointed for them. They persevere stedfastlye, in
suffering of these things, till they have made an end of this life. They
desire by prayer, to be delivered from vengeance and punishment, but not from
good instruction: From the fury and wrath of God, not from his judgment:
according to that saying of Jeremy: Iere. 10.
Correct us, O Lord, in thy judgment, not in thy displeasure, least thou
break us to powder, and so we become nothing. Pour out thy wrath upon people
that have not known thee, and upon Kingdoms which have not called upon thy
name.

The elect do know, how Christ has in every one of his members, as it were a
certain quantity, and measure of trybulation, which they must abide: that the
members may be made apt for their head. They are not ignorant, how that
saying of Saint Augustine, is most true: Augustine in his book de peccatoru^
meritis.
The thing which thou suffer, and wherefore thou mournest, is a medicine to
thee and not a punishment: a chastysing, and not a condemning. For even as the
Musician strayneth his strings, and yet he breaks none of them, but makes
thereby a sweeter and better concord: So God, through trouble, destroys not
those which be his own, but makes them better, and more pliable, unto fruition
of the life to come. And as ye Mason heweth out stones, which he makes fit
for building of his house, graves them and squares them, before he lay and
join them to the building: even so through affliction does God turn, try,
exercise, and prepare before hand, his elect, with whom, as with lively
stones, he has purposed to build the habitation of God. He siftes them, as
corn with a Fan, winnoes them from the chafe, and puttes them aside into
his Cheste, before he lay them up in his heavenly Barn.

Besides this also, The fife cause.
the godly do not perceive the virtue and benefit of the word, but in time
of temptation: Nay rather, when they live in peace and security, they have
small regard to godly Sermons: they hear not the voice of their God, with
such fear and trembling as they ought to do. But when temptation comes,
then at last, they believe those things to be true, whereof they were warned
before by the word. Then do they stir up their minds, to the fear of God.
Then, at length, do they hear the wonderful sayings of God with a wylling
heart, and then do they tremble with great reverence, at his word. At that
time, they be appointed to behold the excellent virtue of the word, how in it
only, is set forth the greatest consolation, both to the sick, afflicted,
miserable, and destressed people, and also the only hope and safety of them
which be departing this life: at which time, al other things contained in
heaven and earth, do forsake a man, neither bring they any manner of help and
succor unto him. Which word, they lightly esteemed before, when they were in
health, and a loft in prosperity, being pampered up with abundance of things,
according to their desire.

Besides these causes, The six^ cause.
we may also gather many times (by the evils which God sendes upon us) the
good will of our most merciful father, receiving as it were a testimony of
Gods favor toward us, and gather thereby, a token of our election. Because,
when God does afflict his chosen, for their desert, be chastises them
commo^lye, by the hands of the wicked, not under the name of due desert, but
for things which they have done righteouslye: that even by the oppressors
themselves, they may reap comfort. Tranquillity two ways to the godly.
Through whom, tranquillity to the godly sort, happiness two ways. Either,
for that the injuries of the evil men, have no further success: either
because the godly, be nothing disquietes therewith. For although the ungodly,
do of set mischief, of naughty hatred, and of unjust fury, wax cruel for
a time, against the servants of God: yet do they quickly perish together
with their threats and torments, and are clean consumed to nothing: or else,
God gives secretly by divine inspiration, such sufficient strength unto those
his elect, which perceive with themselves, that the fear and confidence in God
still remains with them, as they are ready with a good courage, to suffer
whatsoever to his majesty shall seem meet and expedient.

Add moreover, The seventh cause.
that God sendes adversity to his elect: Because whom he loves, them he
calls forth to suffer tribulation, that he may have a trial how they be
affected toward him, what certain love they bear him, and what steadfast
confidence they have in his goodness. Gene. 22.
Hereby he thoroughly proved the faith of Abraham, Job. 1.
the patience of Job. Hereby he tried, Deuteronomy. 13.
whether the Israelites loved him inwardlye with all their heart, and with all
their soul: as outwardly they professed him with devout holiness.

Again, The eight cause.
God does sometime bring his chosen in peril of death, and in extreme
hazard, both of life, and loss of all their substance: that when, Why the
godly are brought to extreme peril.
through his only assistance, they have escaped all dangers, contrary to
their own expectation, and are restored again to safety, (which thing they
neither thought would come to pass, nor yet hoped for the same) that then he
may cause them, to be the more forward, both to honor and advance the name
of God, and to repeat his benifites in every congregation. For how much
greater the danger is, so much the more joy, is wont to be had after
deliverance. That then also he may kindle others, by their examples, both
with one mouth, to tell out the bountiful goodness of God, and also to look
steadfastly for his succor in the time of their adversity. From thence issues
out that sacramental vow, of the godly, which in the midst of trouble is
pronounced: Psalm. 21.
I will show forth thy name unto my brethren, and in the midst of the
congregation will I praise thee. Thence comes it, that they so deaseably
perform the vow, which they have made: as for joy they conceived, by the
sudden and unexpected deliverance, they utter out that sentence so full of
exhortation and inuttation of others, to the extolling and publishing of Gods
name and his exceeding mercy. Ye that fear God (says the Prophet) praise
him. Psalm. 21.
Glorify him all ye seed of Jacob. Let all the generations of Israel fear
him: for he has not shunde nor dispisde the prayer of the poor: Neither has
he turned his face from me, but when I cried unto him he heard me. Of thee
shall my song be in the great congregation, and my prayers will I make in the
sight of them that fear him. For there is nothing that more stirs up the
Saints to magnify God, than when he inclines his ear unto the prayers of the
poor destitute, and so mercifully beholdes the supplication of the afflicted.

Lastly: God is wont to put his elect, The ninth cause.
to the will of the world, and lay them before the cruelty of most wicked
tyrants, that he may, as it were boste forth before the world the virtue of
his spirit, wherewith he has armed the Saints: who mightily contemn all
earthly things, in respect of heavenly, as well for a testimony and renown of
Gods goodness toward his elect, as also to bear a certain triumph over the
Prince of this world, that the weaker elect, may be made stronger, and the
crueller wicked sort be confounded. These men, by their blood, bear open
testimony, both of the good virtues which remain in the Saints, while they
yet live here, and eke of those good things which are to come hereafter. And of
very right, do they obtain the name of Martyrs, who for defense of the
gospel, and maintenance of justice and innocence, esteem the terrible
broils of the world, (which are raised up because it cannot away with
preaching of the word of God) as a thing of naught: and contemn, and settes
little by the threatening concourse of Kings, and whisperings of Princes,
against the Lord, and against his Christ: and by no torments can they be drawn
away, and made with less will, courage, or cheer, to profess the truth unto
their last end. Wherefore, by the continual remembrance of such causes, as
move the Lord, to bring afflictions and troubles upon his elect, we shall be
encouraged to bear all things that shall happen, both with a pacient and quiet
mind: and either to rejoice, if in defense of righteousness we be
unrighteously punished: or else take occasion, if we be justly, and of due
desert chastised, to correct our manners, and amend our life thereby. Let it
fall to our remembrance, that as a woman, which lies in labor, feels
great anguish in her whole body with the travel, but after she is delivered,
and her child come into the world, is not only eased of her pain, but also
takes singular joy and pleasure, by forgetting her former trouble: even so
affliction, which at first is wont to seem sharp and bitter, yet at length,
it accustometh to work joyful and merry ends, with delectable fruits of
patience.

Let us never ymagine in our own opinion, That there is no fortune but all
thing be rightly governed by the omnipotent power of God.
that there is either chance or fortune, and so suppose things happen by
easualtie and at all adventure: (although no religion as may appear forbids
those words by fortune or chance to be used in phrase of speech when things
come to pass) nay, but let us think and persuade with our selves, that there
is a God: and judge for a surety, 1. Kin. 2.
that all things by his council and providence, are excellently well governed.
It is the Lord, that appointes us to death, and restores us again to life. He
carries us down to hell, and brings us from thence again. The Lord makes
both the poor and rich. He exalts the humble, and casts dewne the high
looks of the proud. Through him, kings do bear rule: and by him, kingdoms
are transtated, from one Nation to another, for their wrongs and contumelies,
and for their riches compassed by fraud and guile. Without the will of our
heavenly father, Math. 10.
our savior affirms in the Gospel, that so much as a sparrow, does not
light upon the house top, nor that a hear falls from the head, but by his
providence. And what careful foresight the Lord has toward his elect, he
himself, does plainly signify unto us, in these words of the Prophet Esaias.
Esaias. 46.
I have borne you (says he) from your mothers womb, and brought you up from
your birth till you were grown, and the Church will I bear up in her last
age. I have made you, I will also nourishe you, bear you, and save you.
Wherefore the Lord is angry, when we fly to the succor of man, leaving Gods
help. Which thing, we may well perceive, by the saying of the said Prophet:
An Egyptian is a man and not God, their horses are flesh, and not spirits: and
so soon as the Lord shall stretch forth his hand, Esaias. 31.
then shall the helper fall, and he also that looks for help shall perish,
and both together be consumed. Let us learn therefore, with great trust and
confidence, to wait for the assistance of God: and only to respect what his
will and pleasure is: to endure also with a quiet mind, whatsoever his
heavenly providence most graciously shall assign unto us.

Let us follow the council of that holy Martyr Cyprian, who instructs a
godly mind, Euilles turnde to our benefit.
how he should turn euilles (as well those which be ingraffed in the very
nature of man, as those which by other accidents happen unto him) to become an
instrument of glory. For thus he writes. Cyprian.
Is any man ransackt of his substance, either by war, shipwreck, or by
robbery? Let him not devise by and by, to repair his losses, by naughty and
evil practices: but thus let him say with him self. It is the Lord that
proves me, and shall I not love him from the bottom of my heart? It is even
he himself that gave me these things, and he himself it is that has taken
them away again: blessed be the name of the Lord. Let him give thanks, for
that he received them of Gods bountiful liberality: and let him also give him
thanks, because they be taken away again for trial of his faith. If he shall
thus say with the same mind and will, that holy Job did, he shall with him
also reap a reward. For the Lord regards not how much a man loses, but
how patiently he bears the same. Like as he has not respect to the quantity
that a man gives to the poor, but with what will and intent the same be done.
Have thou one only son, whom thou love, and sudden death does deprive
thee of him? or does the plague take from thee thy best beloved spouse, thy
children, and thy friends? take it patiently and say: So it seemed best to
the Lord, and so peradventure it was expedient for us and ours: the Lords
name be blessed therefore.

There be also certain diseases, Tranquillity in all sickness and diseases.
which are of no less terrible pain, than the cruelty of any tormentors: As
the Plurisie, the Sciatica, the Gout, the Stone, the Paulsie, the soreness of
the raynes and bladder. If any such grief happen unto us, let not our minds
be moved to impacience, least our tongue also break out into blasphemous
words. But let him that is troubled, say with blessed David, and with Hely
the Priest. It is ye Lord: Let him do whatsoever seems good in his own
sight. So shall we turn those euilles, which are not come upon us for
professing of Christ, not only to be a crown of reward unto our selves, but
also to be extended to the glory of Christ: and peradventure bring to pass,
that the Lord, through our patience will tender us, and either take away
quite, or else mittigate our pain and torment. But and if we be not eased
thereof, yet by such means, we shall cause the thing, which before was
intolerable, through our impacient mind, now by our quiet enduring to become
more tolerable.

Let wicked murmurings therefore in time of adversity, No murmuring in
adversity.
be removed from us, which be full of desperation and mistrust, and most
evident tokens of perverse opinions, according to the excellent judgment of
this grave writer. Let unjust complaynings against the Lord be rejected far
from us. Let us subject our selves under the mighty hand of God. Let us
receive his gentle correction, with a quiet mind, who has never suffered
unpunished such wrestling as has been against his ordinance and appointment.
Let enery man, that is full of pain, trouble, and misery, Mycheas the last
chapter.
say with the Prophet Micheas: I will bear the wrath and indignation of God,
because I have sinned against him. And with Daniell: Danyel. 9.
To thee Lord, belongs righteousness, and to us perteyneth shame and
confusion. Let us fall to hearty and earnest prayer, and to continual
exercise of the holy Scriptures, the most sure strengthening of the heart: out of
which if apt sentences be taken, and prudently with great aduisement collected,
and have the same persectly, and as it were at our fingers end: they will not
only keep down the serpent appearing up with his head, and minister present
remedy to all the diseases of the soul, but also will arm and make us ready
to endure with a pacient mind, all other troubles and afflitions which shall
come upon us. Let us think and suppose them, to be but base borne, and not
right children, whom the Lord does not chasten. And a shrewde figne may be
gathered, Hebr. 72.
that God has rejected those, which be continually out of trouble. Let it be
evident in our minds, that all things further to salvation, and fall out for
the best to such as love God: Romans 8.
and that affliction, with such, does not argue the hatred of God, but declares
rather his love, who chastises them for a season as children: over whom he
takes more than fatherly care, exercising them with troubles, that (they being
put of from the filthiness of sin, according to the Image of the first
begotten of God) he might determine to endue them with blessed and immortal
life. Let us call to remembrance, that God sends trouble and disquietnesse,
to the intent the old man being subdued within us, we should with an humble
and contrite spirit, and with certain reverence, tremble at his word. Let us
bear away that true similitude: that as the seed of the Harvest, which is
covered with Frost, increases more fruitefully: and as the flambe, with
blowing is kept under, to the intent it may increase and be made greater: so
does God, through adversity, more vehemently rauishe our minds, stirs them
up, and increases them with a longing for him. Let examples laid before our
eyes, We see by examples whom God loves, he also chastises.
be a comfort unto us: whereby the mind may be made more steadfast to suffer
loss and displeasure, and to endure pain and vexation. After the example of
Christ, let us patiently abide affliction, and while we be oppressed with
euilles, let us have an eye to Jesus the finisher of our faith. Heb. 12.
Who is so arrogant, as will refuse to imitate the son of God? why does the
Disciple complain himself, since his Master lead the way, and willed that
he should endeavor to follow him? why does the servant require to be in
better state than his master? And has not Christ the son of God, ascended
by the cross, to triumph: by slander, to glory: by death, to immortality?
And let us (says saint Paul) in following his steps, ^. Tim. 2.
clime up by the same degrees to glory. 1. Pet. 2.
For if we have both dyed together, lived together, and also suffered together:
we shall also reign eternally together. The Lord loved Jacob, but Esau he
hated: yet abode Jacob more troubles in this life, than Esau did. Yea, did he
not abandon Saul, and prefer David, a poor Shepherd? and yet
notwithstanding, how did he exercise him, both with trouble and affliction? How
often did he lead him to extreme danger, of his life? that unless the Lord
of his excellent grace, had delivered him, he could have found no way to
escape. What needs me to speak of Danyell, Dan. 6.14.
who being twice thrown into the Lions Den, twice escaped by the will of
almighty God? Or what need I to remember Job, a singular pattern of
patience? from whom the Lord took all that he had, as well the honor and
ornaments of his life, as the relief and comfort of his prosperous health:
clothing his body also with loathsome sores, and yet restored more than dubble
fold to him again. Let the children of God remember hereby, that the Saints
in time of affliction, do depend upon God only, and of him do wait so
greatly for succor and safety, as they may boldly say with David: The Lord
is my light, and my salvation: whom then shall I be afearde of, The Lord is the
sure strength of my life, Psalm. 26.
who shall then make me afeard? If an host of men were set against me, yet
shall not my heart be astonished. If the strength and cruelty of war should
invade me, yet shall my mind be at rest and quiet. For such as these be, do
bear with so pacient a mind whatsoever betyde, as although the world should
turn vpside down, the very ruin thereof should confirm their minds:
According to that saying of the Prophet: Psalm. 32.
Let them learn that blessed are the Nations, whose GOD is the Lord Jehovah,
and the people that have chosen him to be their inheritance: about whom the
Angels of the Lord pitche their tents, that they may preserve them, and
deliver them by wonderful means. Let them learn that a king cannot be saved
by the multitude of his host, Psalm. 32.
neither a mighty man by his great strength: That a horse is but a vain thing
to save a man, nor that a man is delivered by the puissance of his horse: Let
them not forget, that excellent verse, and not only to use the same often in
their communication, but to verify it also in their living: Some put their
trust in horses, and some in Charriots,, but we will call upon the name of
the Lord our God. For being in this sort disposed in their minds, although
they were in as narrow a strait, as were the children of Israel, and had on
their back half cruel Pharao, with his mighty host, the deep Sea before
them, and exceeding high mountains, on either side: yet would they not be
dismayde with sear, nor despair, but with a pertite pacient mind not once
muttering, would wait for help of Moses the Captain of God, almighty,
according to that saying: Exodus 4.
Be ye stable and ye shall see the salvation of God which he will bring upon
you. The Lord shall fight for you and ye shall be still. They which do not
refuse nor seek to escape the same state of suffering trouble and affliction,
that Christ himself, ye Prophets, Apostles, and holy Martirs did, nor require
a better condition of life, than Jesus the very head corner stone, nor then
the pillars of of the Church, (being the chosen Prophets of God and Apostles)
did: but do so lean unto God, and quietly suffer, whatsoever his providence
shall allote unto them, as without complaining and lamenting, without moning of
their present fortune, and without any unlawful endeavor, either of trusting
to themselves, or making provision for substance, they then expect and wait
only for the help of almighty God: From such, the Lord cannot be absent, but
will maruellously deliver them (and that often) contrary to the expectation of
al men: as it is evident, not only by examples, but also as it plainly
appears by the book of Psalms. Psalm. 61.
My soul (says he) wait thou still patiently upon God, for of him comes
my salvation. He verily is my strength, my defense, my health, and my strong
hold, so that I shall not fall. The mind that is thus affected, can never
take a repulse of God, but shall obtain of his bountiful goodness, either an
inestimable comfort in all kind of tribulation, either else a clean riddance
thereof: or at least wise a mitigation of his troubles.

From hence flows so sure a confidence in God, The Saints of most quiet mind
in adversity.
that the saints are in most quietness of mind, in time of adversity. As
were those three most noble children, which song in the flaming Furnace, and
invited to their sweet song, all creatures, and every particular part of the
world, to praise the glorious majesty of God, and to magnitie and extol his
goodness. And as were Paul and Silas also in a certain City of Macedon,
Acts. 16
who being seourged with rods, thrown into the innermost prison, and their
feet fast tide in the stocks, at midnight did set forth God with praises, and
song psalms together with a joyful mind. Wherefore, it is thought that GOD
shows himself more amiable to us in adversity, than he does in prosperity.
And thereupon, what a cheerfulness had the Apostle Paul, as his words
declare, what joy, 2. Cor. 11.
what glorying in the Lord had he, while he remembered his labors, his stripes,
his imprisonmentes, shipwrackes, watchings, hunger, thirst, cold, and a number
of other perils, and often death also: when he delighted in the infirmities,
rebukes, necessities, persecutions, and anguishe which he had suffered for
Christ's sake: when he reioysed in abiding so many great cruelties and
miseries, for preaching of the Gospel: when he was filled with exceeding joy
in all his tribulation: when he brake out in the mids of trouble, into a
certain godly ioyfulnesse of mind, saying: Blessed be God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which is the father of mercy, and the God of all comfort,
comforting us in all our troubles, in so much as we are able to comfort them,
that be in any manner of trouble, by the same comfort wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God. For the same cause the Apostles departing from the face of
the counsel to be scourged, wen with great joy, that they might be counted
worthy to bear blame for the name of Jesus. Wherefore, although it appears
plainly, that the Church of God has evermore been vexed with trouble and
persecution of the wicked: As when Abell, which was killed of his brother:
Esaias, most cruelly sundered with a Saw: Jeremy, that was stoned to death by
the people in Egypt: Zachary, slain by the Priests: John, by Herod: Christ,
by Pylate: Steven by the Jews: the Apostles by cruel Tyrants: and so many
Martirs, Wisd. 5.
assigned to death, and extreme punishment: Esaias. 8.
and as the godly who of wicked seorners are so trodden under foot, that
oftentimes they are reputed for most vile abiects, and the crime of new
seditious devise, and doting foolishness, laid to their charge: (and therefore
the Prophet constrained, by reason of their envy, hatred, reprochings,
slanders, and tauntes, said with loud voice: behold I, and the children,
which the Lord has given me, are a token, wonder, and prodigious thing in
Israel:) yet is it a delight among so many miseries of this life, in so
variable cases of men's dealing, in such tossing and turning of the world, in so
many terrors of punishments and rebukes, to remember, how far from
impacience, the saints of God be: The steadfast joy of Martyrs at their death.
with what a cheerful countenance they depart from this life, and with how
steadfast a mind they go toward their death, 2. Macha. 7.
as toward the gate of eternal life. How did the seven brethren, and their
noble mother (of whom the story of the Machabees puttes us in remembrance)
how light set they, by those horible torments? how scorned they the cruel
tyrant? how smally did they weigh all thines present before their eyes, in
respect of the immortal joy to come. And no marvel: although a mortal man,
The effecient cause of the Saints tra^quillitie in affliction.
that has not the spirit of God, will be amazed thereat. For God has made a
choice of the hearts of such as have a good conscience, and charity
therewithal, which makes every thing very pleasant, be it never so bitter
and uncomfortable: whom he will sweetelye inspire with his peace, which
exceeds all capacity and understanding, and who shall be to him in steed of
a Temple, wherein he will dwell and walk.

From hence springs out, that wonderful patience of the Saints, who
perceive, that their obedience shall be bountifully rewarded in time to come,
and shall be precious and well accepted in the sight of the heavenly father,
through Christ. Hereby, is the whole mind possessed with God, and strengthened
by him: and hereby, is the lively hope of immortality to come, confirmed. God
only, which is the chiefest, and that one alone goodness, does by the
presence of his comforting spirit in the time of trouble, so recreate and
satistie with joy, the minds of his elect, that either they plainly put away
all feel both of injuries done unto them, of poverty, of banishment, of
contempt, of infamy, of prisonment, of torments, and of other miseryes and
calamities: or at least wise, bear them out with an excellent courage. For
they desiring (as the Apostle did) to be loosed, Death an advantage to the
elect.
and hoping assuredly to die well, count death an advantage to them, to
separate them from all misery, and to give them an entering to all abou^dance
of good things: whither they desire to be carried with full sail: (as did
Simeon, who after he had seen the child Jesus, pronounced out this verse,
saying: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. etc.) that the
soul being loosed from the prison of the body, wherein after a sort it lies as
it were brought a fleepe: may stie up to her quiet rest, to delectable peace
and liberty, and to everlasting life: where, it may continually draw out of
the plentiful fountain of gods blessed majesty, continual pleasures,
delectations and joys. Who then had not rather, with the wayfaring man, (if it
so pleased God) be rid at the first stone he comes at by the way, than to
endure so many griefs, so many labors and dangers, to the utter tyring of his
body, during the whole course of his journey in this life. For the children of
God mourn, while they yet live within this earthly mansion of the body: which
being once consumed, they know how they have a dwelling place with God, even a
mancion not made with hands, but such a one, as is everlasting in heaven. And
they being lightened with a sure hope thereof, do endure all manner of troubles,
not only with a pacified mind, but with a willing and a glad heart also. They
count banishment for defense of the Gospel, and for righteousness sake,
Hatred of the world, the reward of virtue.
but a trifle. They know that in this life, the reward of virtue, is the
hatred of the world, is persecution, is hunger and banishment, Banished for
the gospel of christ.
which they had rather enter into among other perfect exuls of God, and to
wander here and there uncertainly, than by remaining among Idolaters, to
possess a fine and delitate life: while in the mean time by assenting, and
subscribing to their evils, they must of necessity lose gods favor and
eternal life also. Math. 10.
They believe the words of Christ, that if one country forsake them, they
shall be received of an other: even as Mesopotania entermyned Jacob: the land
of Madian, Moses: Phalestine, David, being driven out of Judea: and Egypt, that
received Joseph and Christ. There is no place destitute of godly charitable
men, who not being forgetful of that saying of Christ (he that receives you
receives me) desire to be made pertakers of the Gospel, in helping of the
poor needle defenders thereof, yea, and rejoice at the present occasion
offered, making much of the same: whose hearts the Lord does incense, to
help, cherishe, and harbor, the holy succorlesse strangers of God.
Wherefore, they take no care for their meat and drink, Psalm. 146.
but cast all their care upon the Lord, who gives fodder to the Cattle, and
feeds the young Ravens which call upon him. He sends down rain, which
brings forth herb, to feed them, How God provides for the young Ravens.
while they wander in the desert Mountains. He hears the creaking of these
little birds, as it were a prayer made unto him: and being hated of their
dammes (as chickins out of kind) and forseken but new hatched, white, and
unfeathered, he does feed either with the dew of heaven, (as some think) or
else with worms, that breed in their nest. If God then so favorably behold
the beasts of the earth, and the fowls of the air, how much more of his
aboundaunt goodness, will he be present with his own people, which cry out
to him by faith, and steadfastly wait for his only help? But and if it
happen, that Gods people, receive not always, food, of God their Savior, in
the most liberal sort, yet do they wait for some heard and small pyttance:
Esaias. 30.
according to that saying of Esaias. The Lord (says he) shall give you the
bread of trouble, and the water of adversity. Whereunto, the Lord is
accustomed to stand in time of extremity: and with such hardness they being
exercised, can easilye hold themselves content. For God does suffer none of
his elect to be brought to utter penury, and to die for hunger, unless they
be chosen out to be Lazars, (that is to say) singular examples of
sufferaunce. And therefore his will was, that Helias, being driven away, and
forced by flying to shift for himself, should be fed and nourished by the
Widow, and by Ravens.

Moreover, the constant elect, are no whit grieved with the long prosperity of
the wicked: whom they wish rather to convert and amend, than for their
obstinate continuance in naughtiness, to have them judged to the fire of hell,
and to take their portion with the Devil and his Angels. For such, Four
causes why god suffers the wicked so long to florishe.
they know the will and pleasure of God is, that the ungodly, either by their
long felicity, may be called to repentance, and to forsake their impiety:
either that the good GOD, seeing them to refuse the goods everlasting, Romans 2.
may minister unto them the more abundance of worldly things here, to the
end they should receive nothing of his goodness in time to come: Luke. 16.
either, because men may be put from ye desire of revenge, and provoked, after
Gods example, to love their enemies, Mat. 6.
when as God not only spares his enemies, but is also beneficial unto them:
Or else, God uses such wicked men, as instruments, both to punish the
misdemeanor of evil men, and to exercise the virtue of good men. Which thing
is confessed by David, Psalm. 16.
in that prayer of his, in the.xvj. Psalm. Up Lord (says he) deliver my
soul from the ungodly, which is a sword of thine, and from the men of thy
hand.

I have taken upon me now in this whole discourse of true quietness of minds,
A repetition of that which went before.
(which I trust every man will grant me with favor and good will) the office
of a whetstone, whose part is to make the iron tool sharp, it self being
unfit to cut. So the true tranquillity of the mind, enuyroned with the goodly
company of all virtues, and richely noted out with variety of all manner of
Gods gifts: I have discribed with the Pen of this my continued style. The
writer himself mean and base, being at no rest from worldly disquietnesse:
endeavoring to direct others, to the shore of perfection, and yet my self
bearing me sufficient record, of mine own euilles: and perceive very well,
how I abide amidst the surges of sins, not exempt from fear of wrack, in
so huge a breaking in of losses and discommodities. I have set forth the
pacient tranquillity of the just, as well in all things, as specially in time
of trouble and adversity: not to the intent we should behold the same with
curious eyes only (as idle gazers do) and receive it with outward show of
vain gratulation, as some fruit might arise thereof: but with an inflamed
zeal, (after the example of the Saints) to labor and strive, even with all
diligence and endeavor, who shall do hest therein. Wherefore, let us not lean
to those four sinful conclusions, which the ambicious, covetous, volupteous
sort, and which the Cynike Philosophers do purpose to themselves. Let us not
put any kind of confidence, either in the assistance of men, or abundance
of friends, in the greatness of riches, or strength of an host, and power of
men, that by such manner of stays we think to lead a more safe and quiet life:
but let us refer our whole confidence to the true God, being author of the
true tranquillity of our minds. Let us not rudely rushe into other men's
offices, but to this thing only take heed, that we content our selves with
our calling: and the state of life, that we are in, let us order it well and
decently, and not wilfully, by coveting to come to that place and degree,
whereunto we can not aspire, bring sorrows upon us, through our own folly. Let
us utterly renownce the study of such Arts, as are not admitted us to deal
in. Let us take in our hands the book of Gods word, that being occupied
therein both day and night, we may refreshe our minds with fruitful and
pleasant consolation, and from thence draw, as out of the pure Fountain, a
right judgment, as well of controversies concerning our faith, as also in all
other things: that we being thoroughly taught thereby, may spy as it were by
an infallible mark, what kind of worshipping, God does admit, and what he is
displeased withal: and plainly discern thereby, truth from falsehood, right
from wrong, the pure sincerity, from counterfeyt show, and the thing which is
honest, from that which is dishonest: that we may with confident wisdom,
judge between the work of God and the work of the Devil, and prudently and
cunningly distinct and sever the one from the other: least we should both
ignorauntly and wickedly, ascribe those evils to the gospel, which through
man's own perverse dealing, and the Deuilles cruel malice, are brought upon
us. Let us banish away inordinate disquietnes of our minds. Let us remove the
anguishe of our consciences, by flying to Christ for succor. Let us make
speed to come to this our savior, with a sound faith, and learn to depend
only upon him: by whom we are lead, from the vain similitude of good
things, unto the true and everlasting goodness it self. Also, when we be
troubled in our consciences, let us go to the minister of the Church, such a
one as is godly, no babbler of things told him, but well wylling, and ardent in
charity: One that can endure troubles with us: One learned and exercised in
Scriptures, and garnished with gifts of knowledge: who as a skillful
Physician, is both wylling and able to make medicine in due time for every
disease: who sometime, feeling in himself, the fall of his own conscience,
shall easily be able to stay up ours when it begins to waver and decay.
But and if such a one, be not ready at hand, nor may easily be found out, so
as his aid may be with us, then, refusing others, which be unlearned,
ungodly, baine talkers, drunkardes, rash bablers abroad, whatsoever we tell
them in secret, affected with no private feel of sin, no Priests, but
counterfeyters of Priests, no nor ministers of Christ, but bondslaues of
Satan, and rascal of the common wealth: of whom we cannot look for remedy
of our sins, nor to be instructed in godliness: (For how can they by their
doctrine make us better, when by their examples they may make us worse)
refusing such, I say, let us, if so occasion fall out, go to the lay man which
is endued with the same gifts that are in a godly Minister, and with him let
us confer: to him let us open our griefs and troubles: if he can give us
any good council, let us hear and receive it with a willing mind. Let us
often bear in remembrance the mystery of our redemption, accomplished and
performed in Christ: and wheresoever the holy Supper of the Lord is rightly
distributed and ordered as it ought to be, thither let us often assemble, to
receive the same worthilye together. Whereby we shall strengthen our minds in
the sure hope of our salvation, we shall also take fruit of the heavenly
pleasure, while we yet live here: and when we be called by God to depart this
life, we shall be in a good readiness, and well settled in an excellent hope of
dying well. But if so be we cast all shamefastness from us, making our selves
common to false Gods, to commit adultrie with them like shameless Harlots, and
so wickedly depart from God, leaving him, so loving a husband, to run like a
light huswife a whoring to Idols: it is greatly to be feared, least he make us
a Bill of deuorcement, and then we utterly loose his heavenly grace and favor,
and through our own default, be deprived of the heritage of that blessed
kingdom, and so put for ever from that most delectable beholding of god, from
the fellowship of Angels, and society of Saints. Let us not imagine in our
selves good intentes and meanings, when they have a show thereof, and yet be
contrary to the word of God: since from thence rise oftentimes doctrine of
Devils, and supersticious and ungodly customs: but with great chariness, let
us reject them from us.

For by them, the children of Israel being beguyled, did sacryfice their
children to Saturn. Thereby, Aron erected the Caulfe, to the intent he might
keep the people in their duty and obedience. Thereby the Jews persecuted
the Apostles, supposing they did God good service therein. Let us bear away,
what happened to Vza for staying the Arc, and to Saul for saving king Agag
and the best cattle. Let us not think, that we ought to prove our own
wisdom, or to follow the advice of man's heart, which is prone and inclyned
to evil, nor to do that which seems good and right in our own eyes: but
let us do that, which the Lord our God has willed and commanded us to do:
whose voice when we here, let us not harden our hearts, but in hearing the same,
to declare our true obedience, which the Lord has always preferred above
oblation and sacrifice. Let us never so long as we have breath and life within
us, consent to the intisements of the world, to the suggestion of Satan, or to
the desires of the flesh: nor suffer our selves, through their jolly
flatteries, to be inchaunted and overcome, as it were with the sweet tune of
the Marmayde: or to rest (as seems to the ungracious) in the pleasant
slumber of sin. But let us withstand them, with all our force and might,
determining to make continual war with those three most cruel adversaries*
Let us call to remembrance, that God is (...) sanctification: and by living
well, let us try whyther we have the testimony of a good conscience: and not
only to lay hold of the lively hope of our salvation, but every day also, to
increase the same more and more. Let us knowledge and confess, that the most
true word of God, (which is the only comfort of our souls, In the time of
Qucene Mary.
and wherein consists the spiritual kingdom of Christ) is taken away from us
for our unthankfulness, and that we have deserved to be put from the same:
which is so inestimable a benefit, as David being amazed, when he thought
thereupon, song this Verse: The Lord (says he) has not done so to every
nation, nor his judgment has he opened to the heathen people. Wherefore, with
just sorowing let us lament: and let us pray to God contynually, that he will
forget our sins, and restore us to his grace and favor again. And although,
not because of our unworthiness, yet for the advancement of his name, and
challenging of his honor, he will rise up and defend the constant defenders of
his pure religion, and overthrow the obstinate adversaries of the truth, which
are Authors of darkness, and subuerters of souls: that he will by his just
judgment give them due punishment for their desert. Who knowing him to be God,
do not glorify him as GOD, nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:
but wandering in their own inventions, and sticking to their own wisdom,
rather suppress and keep under the word of GOD. But these (except they
shortly repent) shall suffer punishment, even death everlasting, from the face
of the Lord, and from the glory of his might: when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and become wonderful unto all true believers in him.
But if affliction fall upon us, let us reckon it in stead of a benefit unto
us: since the Lord thereby, rather informs us as children, calling us into the
right way, then reiectes us as Bastardes and reprobates, to reserve a greater
punishment for us in Hell. Let us in time of adversity, abandon all naughty
murmurings against our merciful God, and use often prayer and thanks giving
unto him, with a sure hope and confidence in his mercy: which thing, is the
most acceptable sacrifice of all other: If affliction oppress us, and there be
no stay of miseries and disquietnesse, let us by staying upon Gods promises,
cast our mind beyond all grief and vexation, upon the everlasting good
things: and by laying the one against the other, transfer those heavy
troubles, which presently molest us, to the reward of immortality and
everlasting joys to come. Let us fully resolve with our selves, that there is
neither fortune nor chance, but that all things be most righteously governed
by the providence of God almighty: and that, what displeasure and misery
soever does happen in man's life, happens for the best to them which have
respect to godliness, and love God from the bottom of their heart: and having
a fervent zeal toward him, do desire him earnestlye, do choose him for
their Protector and defender in all their affairs, do call upon him only,
do fly to his mercy only, and do repose their trust on him as their only
and alone succor. So we putting our trust in the free goodness, mercy, and
clemency of almighty God, shall be replenished with excellent comfort, and
being kindled with love of the true and eternal good things, shall be brought
with a full and perfect course to that most desired quietness of mind. Where
we being filled with the spirit, be it in prosperity or adversity, let us
speak unto our selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody in our hearts, with thanks giving always to the Lord for
all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is one and the same
both yesterday and to day, and for evermore. To God the Father also who is king
of Kings, and Lord of Lords: who only has immortality, and dwells in
the light that no man can attain: who largelye, plentifully and abundantly,
will participate with his elect people, the thing which here only in the
hearts of Saints is begone: even the rest of eternal life which we so
greatly long for: through his beloved son, in whom he has made us dear
unto him: To him be dominion, virtue, power, glory honor, and praise
euerlastinglye, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

