LVCRECIA-ROMANA
woodcut, Lucrece holding a dager to her chest

Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Lucrece, by
Thomas Purfoote.

FOUR PARADOXES.
1 A Bishop and a Minister is all one. 2 A Bishop or Deacon should not be
called Grace, Lord, or exercise such authority. 3 A popish Priest is no law
full Minister of the gospel 4 Canon Chauncellours, and Officials are no meet
Officers in the Church of God.
Acts. 14.

Quae doctrina noua haec?

What new doctrine is this?

1 A Bishop and a Minister is all one.
Let a man so think of us, as of 1. Cori. ^ 2. Cor. 10*
the Ministers of Christ, and Disposers of the secrets of God.

A Bishop must be unreprovable, 1. Timo. 3* Titus. 1.
apt to teach. etc. Likewise must Deacons. etc.

Paul and Timothee the Servants Philip. ^ Colos. 1.
of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi,
with the Bishops and Deacons. etc.

The Elders which among you, I 1. Petee. ^
beseech, which also am an Elder.

Whereof I am made a Minister, by Ephe. 3.
the gift of the grace of God given unto me. etc.

Take heed therefore unto your Acts. 20*
selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you Overseers.
etc.

We are Gods Laborers, ye are 1. Cori. 3*
Gods husbandry.

Who also has made us able Ministers. 2. Cori. 3.
etc.

Thus in the place of the Ministers of the law, as Priests and Levites, Lamb.
in suis para doxis.
there be only two kind* of Ministers under the Gospel, Bishops and Deacons:
and the Bishops have sundry names as Ministers, Disposers, Servants, Elders,
Ouersears, Laborers, Prophets, Evangelists, Preachers, Apostels, and yet all
are one.

Between a Bishop and a Minister, Chrysostom. in Timoth. cap. 5.
there is almost no difference: for the charge of the Church is committed to
the Minister, and the things which are spoken of the Bishop, do appertain to
the Minister.

The Minister differs not from the Aerius.
Bishop, the order is all one.

None of us appoints him self Augu. de bap. lib. 3 cap. 3. Cypri. in Council.
Carthag. Ambr. in Timo. 1. cap. 3.
to be a Bishop of Bishops, nether drives his Fellows into a necessity of
obedience.

The ordering of a Bishop and of a Minister is one, for they be both the
Disposers of Gods secrets.

A Priest and a Bishop are but one Hiero. in Epist. ad Tit. ca. 1.
thing, and before that by the inflaming of the Devil, parts were taken in
religion. etc. The Churches were governed by the common consent of the Priests.

The Apostel teaches playnelyt, Idem ad Euagr.
that the Bishops and Ministers are all one.

The things spoken of the Bishops, Theoph in Titu^.
do belong unto the Ministers, neither is the one above the other.

A Bishop rather by custom, then Panor. cap. 4. de consuet.
by Gods law, is above the Minister: yea, in times past one Minister did
ordain an other.

Hierome seems to match all Eras. in schol. in Epist. ad Euagriu^
Bishops together, as if they were all equally the Apostels successors: and he
thinks not any Bishop to be less then an other, for that he is poorer:
nor greater then an other, for that he is rycher. etc. And further he thincketh
that a Bishop is no better then any Priest. Muscul. in locis co^mu.


There is but One only hie Priest in the new Testament.

Antichrist had his beginning, Bullyng sermon. 58. in Apo.
when the custom began, that Bishops should be preferred before Priests.
Calvin. lib. 4. Institu. Pet Mar in lib. Iu.


The Pastors have all one charge with the Apostels.

For Bishops to have large Diocesses is a filthy disease.

When the Church began to have Beza in cap. 1. ad Philip.
one chief, as a President, or Ouersear of the people, then the Devil began
to practice his peruer^itie, and to lay the foundation of his tyranny.

There is no difference between a Herm^. Bod^s. Hameltonus VVestmether. Spangel
bergius.
Bishop and a Minister.

Bishops and Priests are equal.

All Bishops are Ministers, and the rest are Deacons.

A Pastor of the Church is a person which is called lawfully, by ^he authority
and commandment of God, unto the cure of souls to teach the doctrine of the
Gospel, and to minister the Sacraments.

Is it so horrible an heresy to say, Jewel co^tra Harding. R. T. in suo opu: in
quo di lucide apparet Petrum no^ fuisse Romae. Radul: Gualter. Tigurin in Acta:
apostol. cap. 1.
that by the scriptures of God a Bishop and a Priest is all one?

An Elder and a Bishop were both one at the beginning, Act. 20. ver. 17. 18.
which two verses conferred, will show the same.

Therefore they often times acknowledge, and confess an equality and
condition among the Apostels. For if that Matthias received a part of that
Ministry, which was as well committed to Peter, as others: then none of them
obtained the whole, whereby he might be called the Head, or Lord of others,
neither could Peter's authority in preaching the Gospel be greater then either
John's or Matthias, because they all received but one, and the same
commandment of the Lord Jesus, as is plain.

The seven stars are the Messengers Apoc. 1, Bvlling. sermon. 6.
of the seven Congtegations.

Stars be called Angels, Angels be Gods Messengers, and Pastors of Churches,
so called in the second and third chapter of Malachie.

The seven stars in signification Bale.
are the Messengers of Gods word, or the Apostolic Preachers, appointed to
the seven Congregatio^s in Alia, and in them, to all the world.

Christ gave the like authority unto Cypr. de simplic. prelatorum.
every one of the Apostels.

This is the mind of the English church at Geneua, in their Annotations before
the Chapters, and upon the new Testament: This is the consent of the Church of
Scotland: this the opinion of all the reformed Churches in Europe. And this is
mind of S. Paul in the.xx. of the Acts, and of Hierome and Theodorete upon
the same place.



James and Simon Cananeus were Bishops of Jerusalem.

Peter was Bishop of Antioche.

Ignatius succeeded Peter in that Bishopric.

Policarpus was bishop of Smyrna, and so of others.

Epiphanius also writes in the defense of a Bishoplike distinction, and
authority, and therefore to have Bishops is a thing allowed by the authority of
the primitive Church.



Saint James and Simon Cananeus were but as Simon Zelotes preaching in
Mauritania and Aphricke.

Peter was in no ampler sort Bishop of Antioche, the Judas Thaddeus preaching
in Mesopotamia.

Ignacius was at Antioche, as Onesimus at Ephesus.

Polycarpus was at Smyrna, but as Simon was at Bostrum.

As for Epiphanius, fuit Episcopus, and voluit arroga^ter suam tueri
dignitatem, he was a Bishop, and he would arrogantly maintain and uphold his
dignity.

question, whether it has been, or may be profitable to the Church of God,
that one Minister should be set on high and above the rest.

Rome, this political superiority has set him on horsbacke, and a gog on all
his pride, whereby the Church of God was, and is afflicted, Christian Princes
injured, religion utterly subverted, and superstition mainly defended.

Then concerning England, this pre-eminence in Priests was the cause why
William Rufus, and Henry the first were troubled by Anselmus, Henry the second
molested by Thomas Becket, King John by Steven Langthon, Henry the third by
Edmunde, Edward the first, by John Peckham, and Robert Winchelsey, king Richard
with William Bishop of Ely, and so of other kings, who every one in his time
had some what to do with Bishops Archbishops and Cardinals: so that the end of
this superiority is the dishonouriug of God, the troubling of Princes, the
heaping together of great wealth, abusing of the goods of the Church, and
molesting and wringing of all christian people.

Thus we see it manifestly proved, if self will and ambition raygne not, that
no primacie either in the Pope, or in any other Priest, may be mayntained:
And we have it proved by the holy Ghost in S. Paul, and in S. Peter.
Chrysostom concludes so, Aerius affirms it, Augustine aloweth it, Cypria^
so says, Ambrose agrees thereunto, Theophilact confesses it, Hierom
avouches it, Panormitan so writes, Erasinus so thinks, it is the mind of
Theodorete, of Musculus, of Bullinger, of Peter Martyr, of Calvin, of Beza, of
Gualter, and of other the godly and learned, wherefore to conclude, we may well
reason thus:

All things disagreing from the godly and learned-mens judgment, and from the
holy Ghost his teaching, are to be rejected: Therefore that one Minister should
be above his fellow brethren, is to be rejected.

Add hereunto the Minor, and then the argument holds in Darij.

Seeing that the degree of a Bishop, Melanet: in opusc: de vtraque part
Sacramenti etc.
and of a Pastor do not differ by the law of God, it is evident that if any
Pastor or Curate make any godly ordinance in his Church, it is confirmed by
the law of God.

2 A Bishop or Deacon should not be called Grace, Lord, Honor, or exercise
such authority.
Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles Math. 20
have dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority over
them, but it shall not be so among you.

They that bear rule over them, Luke. 22
are called gracious Lords, but ye shall not be so.

Feed the flock of God, which depends 1. Pete. 5.
upon you. etc. not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage.

We preach not our selves, but 2. Cor. 4.
Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus fake.

He that is called to a Bishopric, Orig: in Esaiam homil: 7 Hieron: ad Nepo
tianum.
is not called to a Sovereignty, but unto the service of the whole Church.

Let Bishops understand that they are Ministers, and not Lords.

He that truly succeeds Paul, will Bern. ad Eugeniu^
say with him, not as though we were Lords over your faith, but helpers of
your joy.

We ought not to be lyfted up on Chryso: sermo: Gregor: Nazian: ad Procopium.
Barnes in sua supplic.
high, and to seem mighty.

The lust of strife and desire and of Lordship raygne there.

They shall know openly by manifest scriptures our fained hipocrisy, and that we
ought not to be Lords of the Parlame^t, nor to have any place of worldly
honor among the people.

Here was an ensample how they Eras. in Mark. 12
ought to know nothing of Princes affairs, whose duty it is to preach and
teach heanenly matters.

The king keeping his Parlame^t, Te^pore Edouardi primi.
with his Barons, the Archbishops and Bishops being shut forth, it was enacted.

The Bishop of Rome ought to be Episco: Aragen:
the Minister of the Church.

If Christ the son of God, came Segoni- us in council: Basil
not to be ministered unto, but to minister and serve, how then can his Vicar
have any dominion, or be called Lord, as you Panormitan will affirm?

They do evil that seek to be Bishops, Musc: i^ locis co^mun.
to the intent they would be notable above the rest.

The Bishop was not so above the Calvin. lib. 4. ca. 4. ser. 2. Gardin: de vera
obedient.
rest in honor and dignity, that he had a dominion over his fellows.

Dominions and high authorities be as it were stops and impedimentes to the
attaining of eternal felicity, and they are to be cast away and contemned.
etc.

Bishops may not be Princes, and Francisc. La^bert.
Lords of any place, but of their own household: for it is contrary to be a
Bishop and Prince, for to be a Bishop, is to be a Minister and faithful
Servant. An: Gil: super Michea^.


But because they did love ye worldly kingdom, and lordship, more then the
kingdom of heaven, as Christ here charge them, that they will be great, and
be called Lords. etc.

Where it is a Ministry that is here Gualter: Tiguri: in Acta Apost.
entreated of, it is foolishnes, and great absurdity under color thereof to
seek reverence of the people, or to exercise tira^nical lordship over the^

Therefore the Popes kingdom is of Guiliel. Tyndal.
this world: For here one sort are your Grace, your Holiness, your Fatherhood:
an other my Lord Bishop, my Lord Abbot, my Lord Prior: an other Master Doctor,
Father Bacheler, master Parson, Master Vicar, and at the last comes in
simple Sir John, and eueri one raygneth over other with might, and have every
Ruler his Prison, his Iayler, his chains, his torments.

Thou will say: thou can not see Tyndal.
how there should be any good order in that kingdom, where none were better then
other, and where the Superior had not a law to compel the inferior with
violence.

It belongs only unto the Prince Barnes.
to have full power over all worldly courses: for the Bishops may not usurp
any power that belongs un to the sword: so that S. Paul takes Roma. 13.
Orig: in Roma. cap. 13.
all men from their subjection, and Origene takes away all crimes from their
correction.

Here it appears euidentlye by the Law of God, by the example of our savior
Christ, by the holy wrytinges of the Apostels, and by the exposition of the
ancient fathers, and others, that neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any other
Bishop or Deacon, ought to have and take the name of gracious Lords, nor yet
that they should exercise any such authority, and therefore we may hence
reason thus:

Al Successors of the Apostels ought Barbara. Feri.
to shun the titles of gracious Lords.

All our Bishops are Successors of the Apostels.

Therefore al our Bishops ought to Thunne the titles of gracious Lords.

Again: Nothing disagreing from the scriptures is to be allowed:

But that a Minister would be called Grace or Lord, is disagreing from the
scriptures:

Therefore it is not to be allowed.

3 A popish Priest is no law full Minister of the gospel
A Bishop must be unreprovable. etc. 1. Tim. 3.
apt to teach. etc. but a papal Priest is no such man.

The Ministers must be chosen by Actss. 14. Titus. 1.
the Faithful, with prayers and fasting, and in the assembly of the faithful:
but the popish Priest is chosen by an Idolater, without true prayers, or
fasting, and in the company of irreligious Papists: therefore he is no true
Minister.

He which is lawfully ordained, and Cypr: lib Epist. 4.
holds the Apostolical and Evangelical tradition, is a Minister: but such a
one is not the poipish Priest: the proof is plain.

The Sinagoge of the Pope is more adversary to Christ, then the Francise
Lamber ad princip: lan san:
Turk: therefore his Priests are no lawful Ministers of the Gospel.

Consider the definition of a Pastor, and it must needs euidentlye appear,
that a popish Priest is no lawful Minister.

refuse his papacy, and being converted unto the Gospel, may he not be a
Minister, without any further calling, and so administer the Sacraments?

lawful in the primitive Church, for the Conuertes, without further calling to
be Ministers of the Sacraments.

And if a mere Lay man is no lawful Minister, no more is the papal Priest.

Again, if a turkish Priest being converted, may not yet administer the Lords
Supper, nor without further calling Baptize any, no more may the papisticall
Priest.

It is heresy to affirm, that the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, wythall ^amberus
in pa ^ad:
his kingdom, be of the Church of God, which is meke, al pure and holy.

Wherefore, considering the premises, weighing the practice of the Apostels,
and looking to the order of the primitive Church, we may reason thus, for it
is effectual:

None being ordained by the synagog Celarent.
of Antichrist, is a lawful Minister:

All popish Priests are ordained by the synagog of Antichrist:

Therefore no popish Priest is a lawful Minister.

4 No Canon Chancellor, or popish Official, is a meet Officer in the Church
of God.
They are ignorant in the word of God, skylfull in the Popes law only, given
not to reform things rightlye, but to ^ake and reap their own commodity:
they are friends to the Pope, they are foes to all good Protestants, and
should such have any government in a reformed Church?

If it was thought good at Basil, when reformation began, to dysplace.xii.
popish Senators, shall it be necessary for us to retain popish
Chauncellours, and papal Proctors?

For Canonistes to have authority to excommunicate, absolve, suspende, and
interdicte, what is it but to embrace the Popes kingdom still?

The Canon law is full of heresies, and shall the professors thereof be
Judges in Christ's Church?

Examine the state of the Church, by the space of a thousand years, before the
said laws were prescribed, and you shall find that the congregation of God did
safelye run rowardes heaven, under the sweet yoke of our Lord.

The Officials of Archbishops, for Querimoni^ hanc habuere principes German: in
Council. Norenberg: an: 1523.
the most part are unlearned and unable men, besides that, men of yuell
conditions, taking thought for nothing but only for money, etc. besides this
the Laity are miserably spoiled and robbed of their goods by these light, and
vile Officials. In whose conscience there is no spark of Christian pity and
godlynes, but only a wicked desire, and covetousness. Which thing the
Archbishops and Bishops, if they were in deed such as they are called, that
is to say, Pastors, and Shepherds of Christ, without doubt, they would no
longer suffer, or commit Christ's flock to such wicked and offensive Pastors,
to be fed and nourished.

What? shall we account of those, in whose Court S. Paul is no doctor? Psalm. 2
Nay, let us break their bands, and cast their coardes from us.

Well, the primitue Church never knew such Crows, the Kyte of Rome bred them,
they be his brood, not ours, they live only upon his food, and where shall
we have to feed them?

It is manifest, that the Officials, Melanc: in suo opusc: de vtraque part
sacrame^^. Ibidem.
and Commissaries as they call them, do use an ungodly liberty and power not
to be suffered.

And what helps it, to have many Counsayles, Assemblies, and Parlamentes, if
Bishops will suffer nothing to be reformed contrary to their mind.

So long as this tyranny remains Idem.
how can the Church be healed? Surely so many as allow the Popes ordinances,
and maintain his doctrine, traditions, and invented service, to honor God
with, they infect and pollute them selves with Idolatrye, and blasphemous
opinions, they are gyltie also of all the blood of the faithful, which the
Pope does persecute, they minishe also the glory ^^ (...), and (...) the
salvation of his people, for as much as they confirm errors, and abominable
wyckednes unto all their posteritye for ever.

FINIS.
ROMANS VIII. If God be with us, who can be against us?

