An extracte of Examples, Apothegmes, and Histories. Collected out of
Lycosthenes, Brusonius and others.

Translated into English, and reduced into an Alphabeticall order of common
places, by. A. P.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toie.

To the right worshipful, and his singular good master, Doctor HVMFRIE, Vice
Chaunceler of Oxforde, Deane of Gloucester, and President of Magdalen College.
John Parrincheffe his humble servant wishes long and prosperous health.
When Iphigenia (right worshipful) should be killed and offered in
sacrifice unto Diana, to appease her long conceived ire to Agamemnon, and all
Greece for his sake: Timanes the paynter was sent for to describe this heavy
and turbulent tragedy, done as it was. But coming unto the description of
Agamemnon his face, he found it so sad, sorrowful and mourning-like, that
with all the cunning he had, he could not in paynting represente the same.
Wherefore covering his face with a veyle, he left the sorovvfulnesse thereof
unto the imagination of men.

Lykevvyse I, who in descrybing of persons am nothing so cunning as was this
Timanes in portraying of Pictures, because I can not condignely express the
godly virtues, and virtuous godliness, with other good gifts and qualities,
that GOD, nature and fortune has endued you vvithall: I will cover them with
the veyle of scilence, and leave them to the judgment of them that know, and
can better express them. And so leaving to hang a garlande of green Iuie at
the tauern door, where the wine is so good, famous, and vendible, I mean to
spare pen, paper, and pains, and return to my purpose.

VVhilest God gave life to D. Spenser, of most wortshipfull memory, I (for
the love he bare to good letters) found his worship, not in words, but in
deeds, not in one or two things, but in many most beneficial, a father
rather than a master unto me. I was glad then, and do rejoice yet, that it was
my fortune to dvvell with so worshipful and virtuous a master. Whose
singular virtues, If I should go about to express or number, as I might
lightly find to my oration a beginning: so should I hardely make thereof any
convenient ending. Wherefore I mean not at this time (though I shall seem
scantly to perform my duty) to blase or advance his virtues at all, unless
it be in affyrming, that he was a man, not unworthy to be the successor of
Doctor Tailer, whose office and cure he supplied. What commendation is
comprised herein, judge they that know, or have read of the goodly and godly
qualities, the authority and wisdom that this Tailer was endued with. Nam
sua cu^ct is nota est agricolis pietas, and candida metis simplicitas. Well
this good doctor Spenser, as in all things he was my very friend, so chefly (as
in a thing of chefest price) he had a singular and earnest care to instruct me
with lerning and virtue. It happened about this time twelve month, that
waiting and vvalking abroad in the fields with him, at his commandment, I
began to read in the beginning of the Christian Poet Pallingene, until I came
unto this invocation of the Poet:

Et vos Castalides nimphae. etc.
Tradite me famae ne prorsus inutilis olim,
Vixisse hie videar: pereamque in funere totus:
At which words he caused me to stay, and began to declare unto me the
frailty of our life, and that we knevv not when death should call us. And
therefore exhorted me, and wished all others in their vocation to leave some
fruit of their study. And because he said that he knevv the disposition of
young men to be fantastical, inconstante and full of conceits, to the intent
that I should not wander, and go about I vvot not what, he would tell me,
vvherin fruitfully to my self, and profitably to others I should employ my
study. VVilling me to take my short notes (which I had for my own use
collected out of master Fox) and orderly to reduce them into an Epitome. A
grateful work, as he supposed, for the common people, which can not, and
vvoulde feign have some sight of that worthy work. Moreover, because that
there in Essex and Suffolk, were many vvelspoken Ministers, which by the
exercise of Prophesying, and the knowledge of the French tongue, were able well
to judge, and soundly to preach the Gospel: and only their defecte was, that
(for want of the Latin tongue) they could not induce any moral example or
history, which being rightly applied, gives a goodly illustration and grace
unto a sermon, or any other exercise: he thought I should please them and
profit my self, if I would take Brusonius and Licosthenes, and translate some
of their examples into English. His motion, both for authority and good
will, was a sufficient commandment unto me to satisfy his pleasure in
accomplishing his advise and behest. And albeit he be gone, yet was not I so
obliuious to forget, or so discourteous to neglecte his words. Wherefore I have
with such diligence as in me lay, and with the small learning that God has
lent me, patched it up as I could, and as you see, I have reduced it into an
Alphabet of common places, conferring as the reader may see, Lycosthenes and
Brusonius together, chosing out such examples and Apothegmes as I thought most
necessary, and omitting (as near as I could) all unnecessary superfluity.
And thus having longer here continued my laborious style, than reason requires
(for avoiding of tediousness) with so imperfect an end I will surceasse,
most humbly beseeching your worship to take in good part this my simple
travail. And then shall I little esteem of the fond surmisinges of the
scornful company: nor the rash report of so fond a fellowship. VVishing
them rather to prove the like labor, than haughtily to reprove my well
meaning mind.

God long preserve your worship in prosperous estate and felicity.

Datum Bracklei. Anno salutis humanae. 1572. Your worshippes humble and
faithful servant, 10. FARINCHEF.

Of Abstinencie, Continency, and Temperancie.
WHEN Caesar brought two hundred Talentes unto Demetrius the Cynicke,
Brusonius. li. 1. cap. 9.
he smiling, cast it unto him again, and said: if he meaned to try me, he
should have done it with all his Empire.

Certain Legates bringing unto Photion a great sum of gold, which was sent
him from Alexander the great, he demanded of ye bringers why? because (quod
they) he demeth thee of al others to be an honest and good man: then (quod he)
let me be in deed, and continually be accounted, as he now judges of me, and
so contemned and refused the gold.

The same Photion likewise refused gifts which were sent him from Philip king
of the Macedonians, and when the Ambassadors persuaded him to take it, though
not for his own use; yet for his children: he answered, the same field which
has brought me unto this dignity, shall likewise nourishe them. But if they
prove not like me, I will not have mine expe^ces to be an occasion to maintain
their riot.

Harpalus fleeing from king Alexander, Brusonius. li. 1 cap. 9.
came unto Athens with great plenty of gold, where, when he had intised many
unto him through his great gifts: be sent also 70. talentes unto Photion. Who
turning him about unto the bringers, away (quoth he) you naughtie-packes with
this gear, and tell Harpalus in my name, yt it shall be to his great grief
and pain, unless he abstain his hands from corrupting the city.

Diomedon Cizecenus, promised Artaxerxes the great king of Persia, that he
would corrupt Epaminundas with money, and so being well furnished therewith,
he repaired to Thebes, where when he had corrupted Michitus a young man, he
thought likewise to have dealte with Epaminundas. But he answered Diomedon,
it was needelesse for thee to bring me this money. For if the kings pleasure
tend to the weal public, I promise thee, I will do it francke and freely,
if not, no worldly wealth shall cause me to accord thereto. And as for thee
Diomedon, because not knowing me, thou deemedst me like thy self, I forgive
thee, but I charge thee get thee hence, least that when thou canste not
prevail with me, thou corruptest others. Heereat, when Diomedon began to fear
that he should not escape, Epaminundas willed him not to fear: For I will
(quoth he) dismiss thee safe, not only for thy sake, but also for my own
honesty, least some suppose, that whereas I would not take the money of thee, I
should now take it from thee.

When Aetolis saw earthen vessels on Q. Tuberius table, at his retourning
home, he sent him plate of silver, but Tuberius neglecting such pomp, sent
them unto him again.

The Ambassadors of king Alexander bringing unto Xenocrites. 50. talentes,
(which in those days, and specially amongst the Atheniens, was coumpted a
great sum of money) Xenocrites brought them to supper into the college,
intertaining them homely, and with his ordinary fare. On the morrow, they
asked him who should receive the money? Lib. 1. cap. 9 Bruson.
whereto he answered, why, did you not perceive by yesterdays supper, that we
lack no money? At which words, when he saw them sorry, he took of them
thirty pounds, to the intent they should not think that he despised the
kings liberality, and so dismissed them.

When Alexander had taken king Darius wife captive, albeit she were the
fairest Queen living, yet he never meddled with her. But shutting her and her
daughters in the Temples, he suffered them to live unseen of any, and would
say in jest, that the Persian damsels were eyesores.

Xenocrates, Plato his scholar, was a man of wondrous continency: In somuche
that whereas Phryne a passing fair strumpet, had laid a wager with certain
yongmen, that she would allure him unto her pleasure, she could by no
whorishe tricks provoke him thereto. But when the yongmen required the wager:
she answered, that her wager was laid of a man, and not of an image.

Valentinus the Emperor, at the hour of his death, said: that one conquest
only rejoiced him, and being asked what that was? He answered, that now I have
subdued my flesh, the wickedst and greatest enemy that ever I had.

S. Jerome tells of a certain yongman, which by the commandment of Decius
Valerianus, was laid in a pleasant garden, Lib. 1. cap. 9
and there brought unto him a fair faced harlot, who with her dalying
endeavored to provoke him to sin: but such was his continency, that when she
went about to kiss him, he bitte of his tongue, and spit it in her face.

As Alexander travailed by the way, and thereby had gotten a great thirst, it
happened that one presented unto him a helmet full of water: who receiving the
helmet in his hand, and beholding his horsemen about him, he bowed down his
head, beheld the drink, and restored the drink, not tasting thereof, but
said unto his chief men, if I alone should drink, all these would be a
thirst. Remembering well the Ouidian verse:

Est virtus placitis abstinuisse bonis, Great virtue it is from present pray,
man's fancy to refrain. When Pompei was sick, and thereby had no appetite unto
his meat, his Physician commanded them to dress him a thrushe: but such
either was the time of the year, or else the scarcity of things that for money
none could be had, only they told him that Lucullus had one in his cage, but
he would none of him, saying: and can I not live unless I have Lucullus his
wanton toys?

Of accusing and speaking evil of others.
A Certain Sophist called Zoilus, indyted many railing commentaries, Li. 1.
cap. 16.
which he presented to Ptolomie king of Egypt, hoping to have had some great
reward of the king for his pains, but when the king gave him nothing, he was
so needy, that he procured some to demand the kings liberalitye, whereat
the king had great wonder, that Homer so many years after his death could
feed so many thousand men, and Zoilus, who professed him self better learned
than Homer, should stand in so great need. And on that occasion caused him
to be punyshed for his labor.

Memnon a captain of Darius, fighting against Alexander, and hearing one of
his soldiers railing against the king his enemy, stroke him with his spear,
and said: I keep thee to fight against Alexander, and not to rail on him.

When Antigonus his soldiers reviled him, not thynking that he was present, he
opening his tente with his rod, said: go further to rail on us, or else it
shall be to your pain. But Seneca in his third book of Ire, says that he
said, Stand further sirs, least the king hear you.

Also the same king Antigonus hearing his soldiers curse him, because that in
a dark night he had brought them into such a mierie place, that they could
hardly go out: he came him self (they not knowing him) and holps them every
one out. And now (quoth he) curse Antigonus, which brought you into the mire,
but pray for him which pulled you out.

When a certain drunken gest, had railed on the cruelty of Pesistratus, king
of Athens, Cap. 16.
and his friends willed ye king to punish him therefore, he answered that he
was no more offended with him therefore, than he would be, if a blindefolde
man should unawares run against him.

Pirrhus the king, hearing that some wtoute cause had railed on him, Bruson.
he caused the parties accused, to be sent for, demanding them whether they
had said of him, as the report went they did? Whereto one of them answered,
yea O king, and should have said much more, had we had more wine to have
provoked us thereto. Whereat king Pirrhus laughing, suffered the^ to depart in
peace.

It was told Augustus, that Aemilius spoke evil of him, who turning him
about unto the accusers, as though he were in a great chafe, said, I would
you could prove it on him, Aemilius should then know, that I have a tongue too.
For I would say as much of him.

Philip king of Macedome, being railed on by one Nicander, began to bestow
many gifts on him: after this, Nicander changing his note, began now as fast
to praise him. Wherefore Philip turning him unto his friends, said: Lo it
lies in us to be spoken well, or evil of.

Whereas M. Crassus for a light cause would change love into hatred, and would
be both defender and accuser of one man, and in a short time, would dissuade
the self same laws, which lately he persuaded, he caused many to be troubled
thereby. Wherefore Sicimius, who accustomed to cast many things in men's teethe,
being asked, why amongst others he only spared Crassus? because (quoth he) that
Crassus, though he be a shrewde cow, yet he has short horns.

Socrates in Plato says, that we offend God as often as we dispraise a good
man, Lib. 1. cap. 9
or praise an evil man.

Of Adultrie, Fornication, and Whoredom.
WHen Vrias was slain, Brusonius. Lib. 1. cap. 4
and David had taken Bersabe his wife, the thing sorely displeased God,
wherefore he sent Nathan the Prophet, to warn him to put her away. But Nathan
daring not openly to tell the matter to him being a king, 2. Reg. 12
and taken in love: used this insinuation. There were (quoth he) two men in one
City, the one very rich, having of his own two herds of beasts, and as
many flocks of sheep, the other poor, and had but one only Lamb, which he
brought up with his children, and it used to eat with them. And when a
stranger came to this rich manne, he would not slay any of his own flock for
his guestes supper, but took this poor man's Lamb, to entertain him
withal. This thing when David greatly misliked, and said, that such a
fellow could not be too much punished, which having so many of his own,
would so unjustly take the poor man's Lamb: Nathan pronounced even that
only he had committed the like fact.

Vrbinia a virgin vestall, being taken in adultrie, was whipped about the
City with rods, and afterward according to the manner, was buried alive.
And of the Adulterers which meddled with her, the one slew him self, the other
the overseers of the Temple, caused to be executed openly in the markette
place. But this is not to be forgotten, through her default, in offering
sacrifice after she was thus polluted: Rome was generally plagued, so that
women with child, together with their birthe, dyed in travel.

When Tereus had ravished Philomela, his wife Prognes sister, and cut of her
tongue, because she should not disclose him, both his wife caused him to
eat his own son Itis, and also he was turned into the bird called a
Lapwing. Brus. Lib. 1. cap. 4.

Lais a famous strumpet of Corinth, for the comeliness of her person, Lib. 1.
cap. 4
and elegancie of her beauty, earned much money, so that richmen resorted
unto her out of all Greece, but she required great hire, so that this Proverb
rose on her.

Non cuiuis homini contingit adire Corrinthum. Every man's purse can not
reach to go to Corinth. Unto this harlot came Demosthenes secretly, desiring
to be received into her grace, but when she required ten thousand groates for
her reward: Demosthenes as one astonished with the wantonness of the woman, and
the great sum which she required, turned from her, and said, I will never buy
repentance so dear.

Cyanippus of Syracuse, for that he did sacrifice to all the gods but Bacchus,
was by him stricken with such a drunkenness, that meeting his own daughter
Cyane in the dark, he defiled her. But she, to the intent she might after
know who it was with whom she had to do, took a ring off his finger,
thereby perceiving that it was her own father. And afterward, when the whole
City was plagued for this so horrible an act, and the Oracle willed the
author hereof to be taken, and sacrificed: whereas none knew the author, nor
what was the occasion thereof, Lib. 1. cap. 4
Cyane with afflicted conscience well remembering it, slew her father, and
afterward also slaying her self cast her upon him.

Of Avarice or Covetousness.
A Certain man dreaming on a time, that he had found an egg, Bruso. lib. 1.
cap. 1.
knitte in a corner of his sheet, declared it unto a Southsayer, who
interpreted, that thereby was meante some hidden treasure, counselling him to
dig in the place where he had this dream. Which being accordingly
accomplished, he found in the same place, gold covered over with silver, of
the silver he sent a little, but of the gold, he sent nor said any thing.
Wherefore the interpreter receiving it, and alluding unto the egg, demanded if
it had no yolke?

It happened that M. Crassus making expedition to make war into Parthia, by
the way espied Diatarus building a new City, to whom, because he was an Old
manne, he began to say: What meanest thou O King, in the twelfthe hour of the
day to begin thy bulding? Nay (quoth Diatarus,) what meanest thou being an
Emperor, and not very young (me thincketh) with such expedition to go
unto Parthia? Hereof Tullie in his book de senectute says, I can not
devise, what Covetousness in an old man should mean? For can there be any
thing more foolish, than the less way a man has to go, the more to care
for vittaile, wherewith to pass the way.

Semiramis the Assirian Queen, caused in her life time a Sepulcher to be
made, and therein engraued, that what King so ever should want money, might
open the grave stone, and take inoughe. Which inscription Darius king of Persia
reading, opened it, but money there he found none, only there was a scrolle
wherein it was written: Unless thou were a naughty manne, and unreasonable
Covetous of money, thou would never have opened the sepulchers of the dead,
to have sought it. Lib. 1. cap. 1


Oraetes a Persian, imagining how to destroy Polychrates a Persian Lord,
Bruso. lib. 1. cap. 1.
with whom he was at strife, remembering him to be very greedy of money, sent
a Legate, to persuade him to take his part against Cambises, promising him
for his reward, great abundance of gold, and that he should not think
this promise vain, or of none effect, he willed him, to send some freende
of his, to see the Treasure, whereof he should be partaker. Heerevppon
Polychrates sent Maeander his scribe, unto whom Oraetes showed eighte chestes
filled with stones, and covered over with gold. With the which golden bait,
Polychrates moved, came unto Oraetes, and so was taken, and crucified to death.

Cesellius Bassus borne in Carthage, came unto Nero, and told him that in a
field of his, he had found a wondrous deep cave, and therein great store
of hidden treasure, which he supposed to be of Didoes hiding: Nero
straighte-wayes giving credit unto this talewith all expedition sent a many to
fetch this treasure. The orators in the mean season greatly commended Nero,
saying that he was a Prince most fortunate, and most entirely beloved of the
Gods, in whose time treasure so long hidden, should now be revealed, wherefore
he in hope of this new found treasure, fra^kly spent and consumed his substance
at home. But in fine, when they were come unto the field where this treasure
should be, Cesellius brought them from this place to that place, to seek the
cave, and so when a great company of moiners were come together in vain, he
fained himself to be fre^sie, and said that his dream had never deceived him,
until now. Wherefore to avoid the present fear and shame which he was like to
sustain, Lib. 1. cap. 1.
he willingly slew him self, and left Nero gaping in vain for his pray.

M. Cato the younger, at the request of Q Hortentius his friend, gave him Marcia
his wife, but after Hortensius was dead, he took her home to him self
again. Wherefore afterward Caesar and he falling at debate: Caesar by those
words accused him to be a covetous person. If (quoth he) he had no need of
her, why did he take her? if he had, why did he let her go? but that he was
disposed to make marchaundise of her, letting her go in her youth, that he
might receive her again when she was rich?

At the siege of Prenest, a city in Jtalie, it happened that in a great famine a
soldier caught a mouse, which he chose rather to sell for two hundredth pence,
than therewith to assuage his hunger. But he was worthily punyshed for his
covetousness. For he which boughte the mouse lived, whereas the covetous
seller dyed of famine.

Vaspatian the Emperor was so unreasonable covetous, that he caused vessels to
be set in the way, to receive the urine of such as passed by, and so selling it
to the Dyers, got thereby great tribute. Hereof when Titus his son reproved
him, he said nothing, until that the rent hereof was brought unto him, then
putting the money unto his nose, asked him how he lyked the smell thereof,
whereto when he answered that he liked it well, why (quoth Vaspatian) it comes
of piss. Also when this Vaspatian had gotten his empire, a cowherd of his, who
had served him al his youth, now desired him to make him free, but could not
obtain his suite, wherefore he exclamed this prouerbiall sentence: The Fox may
change his cote, Bruso. li. 1. ca. 1.
but never will leave his craft. Hereupon Seneca in his Proverbs says, that
the covetous man does nothing well, but when he dies. Wherefore Marcial in his
Epigram of Sceuola, who after his wealth became more covetous, writes thus:

Si dederint superi decies mihi millia centum. etc. In English thus:
If millions many Gods would give
of goodly glittering gold,
Should not then Sceuola be estemde,
and highly be extolde?
Oh then, how would I live (quoth he)
vvhereat the Gods did smile
And gave him his request: but then
his joys he began exile.
Then ragged govvne as pelting patche,
our Sceuola could use,
With patche on patche as loutish lobbe
he cobled often his shoes.
His table then he did neglecte,
and course fare pleased him best:
With vvorldly cares he was so toste
that scarce he took his rest.
Then must I live he often said,
or else the Gods me take:
And so with wealth began cares increase,
and him more careful make.
The said Vaspatian demanding what the funeral pomp of a certain noble man
stood in, and being told. 300. pou^ds, he cried out, give me so much, and
cast me into Tiber.

Midas king of Phrigia was so desirous of gold, Lib. 1. ca. eodem.
yt he made his petition unto the gods, ye whatsoever he touched might be
turned into gold: wherein obteyning his request, all things which were ordained
for him to eat, being turned into gold, he miserably dyed for hunger.

Josephus in his sixte Book of the war of the Jews, shows that there were
some of the Jews found, who had devoured gold. Wherefore as many of them as
came into the hands of the Assirians, had their bellies ripped. So that in one
night there were. 20000. opened, in hope to find gold in their bellies, and
had all so been destroyed, had not Titus set forth a sharp edicte to the
contrary.

At the destruction of Salomons temple at Jerusalem, when the Romans were
ascended on the temple, the Jews setting it on fire, destroyed many of the^,
amongst whom there was one Agorius, who with a loud voice cried unto Lucius
his fellow soldier and chamber fellow, that if be would help him out, he
would make him inheritour of his patrimony. Wherefore Lucius in hope of the
promised reward, ran unto him, and taking him on his back, with the weight
of him was thrown down, and with the falling down of stones, was presently
destroyed.

Oclius the son of Artaxerses, king of Persia, was so insatiable covetous,
that whereas the Persian Princes were accustomed as often as they went, to give
to every woman a piece of gold: because he would give none he never came there.
Yea for covetousness of a small thing, he banished him self his country.

Alexander the great hearing Anaxarchus disputing of infinite worlds, Lib. 1.
ca. 1.
began bitterly to weep, and being demanded the cause thereof: he answered,
have I not good cause to weep, when as there be many worlds, and I have yet
scarce conquered one?

Of Audacitie and boldness.
A Gesilaus being warned of his soldiers, Bruso. li. 1. cap. 6.
not to fight against the Thebanes, because that their power was greater than
his: answered them, that he which will rule and reign over many, must not be
afraid to fight with many.

Fabius Max. telling Scipio (who made all expedition to wage war into Africa)
that nature teaches all men first to defend his own realm, before he go to
conquer others, and that he should first be sure of peace in Italy, before
he made war into Afrike. Scipio answered, that it was a greater token of
courage to make war, than to defend it.

At Hannibals coming to Capua, Lib. 1. cap. 6.
Perolla, Calanius his son, could neither by the commandment of his
father, nor at the instance of Hanniball be induced to come to the banquet
where Hanniball was: but watching his father as he came from supper, and was
going into a garden, he followed him, and said: I can tell you father a devise,
which shall not only get me pardon of my offense toward you, but also bring me
unto great dignity and favor amongst the Romans for ever. When his father
demanded what devise ye was, he cast of his goune, and showed his sword, which
was girt to his side, saying, now I will confirm ye Roman leage with Hanibals
blood, and so his father could hardly keep him from running Haniball through.

Cne^us Piso accused Manlius Crispus, Idem.
who although he were guilty in the thing whereof he was accused: yet for Po^pei
his sake, who favored hi^, he was delivered. Wherefore Piso laid al ye fault on
Po^pei. Wherefore Po^pei asked why he did not accuse him the^? Assure me (quod
Piso) that thou will not make civil war if you be provoked thereto, and then I
will ask counsel whether thou or Piso should lose his head.

When Alexander Phereus, (who took part with the Athenia^s, against ye Thebans)
promised the Athenians that he would bring to pass, yt they should have
as much flesh for a farthing, as they were wont to pay a pound for. Epaminundas
hearing it, said, but we Thebans will be more liberal than so, for we will give
you wood enough to sees your flesh for nothing: for we will destroy your woods
frank and freely.

Of Banqueting.
PHilippe king of Macedonie, being on a time invited to supper, brought many
gests with him, whereat seeing his host troubled, fearing belike that there would
not be meat enough, he devised this merry jest: He sent one to every of his
friends, willing them to keep a place for the iunkets which should come after.
And so they gaping for after dishes, left the meat on the table untouched.

When Socrates had bydden many rich men to supper, Lib. eodem.
and his wife Zantippa was ashamed, for that they had no better provision to
intertayne the^ withal: he bad her be of good comfort: For (says he) if they
be modest, they will nothing be offended with a sparing table, but if they be
given to riot and excess, I care not for them.

Xenophon in his book de repub. shows, Bruso. vt supra.
that at feasts young men ought not much to talk, but only to answer to
such questions as are demanded them. Licurgus made a law amongst the
Lacedaemonians, that at banquets should be recited all the noble affairs that
any man had done in the city. And Plato says, that guestes ought not to talk
of any weighty matters: but as their talk ought to be honest and chaste, so
should it likewise be merry and pleasant.

Heliogobalus sometime Emperor of Rome, was so excessive in banqueting, that
he was never two days served with one kind of meat, sometime his company was
served at meal with the brains of Ostriges and strange soul called
Phenocapterie, an other day with the to^g of popiniays, and other sweet singing
birds. Being nigh ye sea, he never used fish in places far distante from the
sea, al his household were served with most delicate fish, at one supper he was
served with 7000. fishes, and 5000. fowls. Who being foretold of his
sorcerers that he should dye a violent death, he provided ropes of silk to
hang him self, swords of gold to kill him self, and strange poison in
Iacinas and Emeraudes to poison him self, if needs he must be forced. Libro
and caeodem
Moreover he made an high toure, having ye floor of bords covered with gold
plate, and bordred with precious stones, from the which toure he would throw
himself, if he should be pursued of his enemies: but for all this he was slain
of his soldiers, and cast into Tiber. Ex Eutropio.

Of bestowing and tha^kfull receiving of benefits.
THoas in his youth brought up a young Dragon, which waring great, Bruson.
he searing his serpentine nature, brought him into the wood, and there left
him. It happened afterward, that in the same wood Thoas was beset with thieves,
whose voice the dragon remembering, came and rescued him from them.

Philarchus tells of a man of Egypt, who brought up an adder, which
afterward bringing forth yo^g, one of the^ slew the son of him who had fostred
the^. But when the old adder perceived it, she slew her young one, and
afterward would never more come there.

Also it is reported, that at Sestos a city in the sea coast of Thracia, there
was a maid which brought up an Egle, who to requite her gentleness, would
first kill her birds, and afterward fly abroad, and bring home great pray
unto her: moreover when the maiden died, the egle also cast her self into ye
fire, wherein according to the manner, the maiden was burned, and so in her life
requited her, at her death died with her.

Simonides finding a dead man, who^ he knew not, Lib^. ca. 27.
lying unburied on the ground, took the pains to take him up, and bury him
Wherefore when as he minded the next day to take shipping, he was warned as he
thought, by ye dead man in his sleep not to do so, for yt the ship wherein he
would sail, should make shipwreck, and so it came to pass. And Simonides by
this means tarying at home, was saved, whereas ye rest, with who^ he should have
taken his journey were drowned.

Aristomenes after ye Lacedemoma^s were conquered, Lib. eodem.
brought from thence. xv. virgins captive, who^ when his co^panio^s would have
defiled by the way, he defended the^, and in their defense slew some of the
company. Wherefore afterward when the virgins were raunsomed of their
kinsfolks, Aristomenes was accused of murder, but ye virgins would never
return unto their cu^try, until ye by kneeling and weping at the judges fete,
they had delivered Aristomenes their defender.

When L. Cinna had conspired against Augustus Caesar, and Caesar had therefore
determined to be revenged on him, the empress Liuia desired him to abstain
from taking vengeance: persuading him rather by gentleness to bind him unto
him. Wherefore Caesar called Cynna unto him, unto whom declaring the trespass
committed, he desired, that like as he would forget and forgive it: so Cynna
would from thencefoorth leave off such conspiring devises, and join with him
in peace and vnifie, and besides that (which Cynna little looked for) he
bestowed on him the Consulshippe, and after that found him most faithful and
friendly in all things.

Diogines being demanded why he was called Cynicus, Cap. eodem.
that is a dog, because (quoth he) I use to fawn on such as give me any
thing, bark at such as give me nothing, and bite them which are naught.

Of brethren, and sisters.
ARthemenes and Xerxes, two of king Darius his sons, Bruson. li. 2. cap. 39.
after their fathers death contended for their fathers kingdom, Arthemenes
alleging for himself his birthright, because he was eldest, and Xerxes stuck
to the felicity of the time, wherein he was borne (for Darius was a king at
his birth, whereas he was but a private person at the birth of his brother. The
determination hereof was committed to Anafernes their vnele, who understanding
both their cases, gave sentence with Xerxes. But neither was Xerxes hereof
glad, nor Arthemenes any whyt grieved, but eue^ in the very time of their
contention, they gratifled each other with presents, and oftentinies kept
banqueting and good cheer together.

Lucius Lucullus did bear his brother such good will, ye albeit he were the
elder, yet he would bear no office until his brother came to age: whereby he so
pleased the people, that even in his absence, his brother and he were made
Odiles.

When Cato had found his brother Caepio dead, he made wonderful lamentatio^
and mourning for him. And after that he had with wonderful great charges
finished his burial, he erected him a sepulcher of nutte or mazer. Further at
his returning to Jtalie, he determined to carry his brothers ashes with him,
and when his friends persuaded him to put these relics in some other ship,
and not to bear them with him, for fear of drowning both his ship and
himself. Lib. 2. ca. 36.
He answered, that he would rather depart from his life, than from it. And so
he sailed, not without great danger of lesing his life, whereas the residue
arrived safe.

When Itafernes we al his family were taken captive of Darius, and cast into
prison, his wife came every day to his gate, making so pitiful co^plaintes,
that in fine the moved him to mercy. Insomuch that he sent one unto her, who
willed her in the kings name, to chose the delivery of one captive whom she
would, wherefore she amongst the rest desired that her brother might be
delivered. The king wondering that she did thus prefer her brother before her
husband and children: she answered him, an other husband, and other children if
it please God I may have, but an other brother (now my parents be dead) I shall
never have.

Of Children.
SEruilius Geminus supping with Lucius Manlius (who was counted the best
paynter in Rome) seeing his children Bruson. li. 2. capi. 34.
hard favored, he said unto him, I see Manlius thou can not make a child
so well as thou can paint him. No (quoth Manlius manerly answering) for I
paint them in the light, but I make them in the dark.

Cyriades the first of the. 30. Roman tira^ts, for yt Cyriades his father was
justly displeased we him, took a great piece of money, and fled unto Persia,
where joining with Sapores, he made war against Rome, and killed his own
father, but after wards was by his own craft slain him self.

Absalon king David's son, Lib. and cap. vt supra.
desiring his fathers kingdom, and therefore making war against him, was, as he
fled, hanged by the hair on a bushe, and so flayne; whose death his most
godly father bewailed with many tears.

Ariaster Triganis son, hearing that Pompe^ was inuading his fathers kingdom,
fled to aid him against his father: whereof Triganis hearing came and humbly
submitted himself at Pompeis feet, who courteously received him, and placed him
on the right hand, and his son Ariaster on his left hand, dividing the
kingdom between them. But Ariaster being offended herewith, when as Po^pei
sent for him to to supper, he would not come, sending him this manacing answer,
ye he had no need of him, but would join with some other Roman, who should
better esteem him. With which words he so offended Pompei, that he cast him
in prison, and kept him for a spectacle at the triumph.

Herodes father to Parcorus, hearing of of the death of Parcorus his son, and
the disco^fiture of his host, was so grieved that he fell mad for sorrow, but
after he had been a great while in this care, at last coming to himself, he
was so greatly trobled, who^ of his 30. sons which he had begotten of his
co^cubines, he might make king: for every of these co^cubines desired ye
regiment of ye kingdom for their son: but in fine he determined to prefer
Phrahates thereto, who immediately killed his father, destroyed his brethren, and
when his own son came to age, put him to death.

It was by an oracle declared unto Altamenes, Lib. 2. ca. 34.
ye he should be the death of his father Cartareus, king of Crete, now called
Candie, which destiny he desirous to eschew, departed and dwelt at Camiros in
Rhodes. But after a season, his father desirous to see him, departed from
Candie, and by night arrived at Camiros. But his men, and the inhabitants
falling at debate, Altamenes coming amongste them unawares, sieve his father.
Which thing when he understood, being ashamed to look any man in the face, he
departed into the wilderness, and there died for sorrow.

Spartianus writing of the life of Seuerus, says, that there was almost no
good, or noble man, which left any son good or profitable for the common
wealth, but either they died without issue, or left such, as it had been
good if they never had been borne. And to begin with Romulus, he left no
child, Numa Pompilius none to do the common wealth good. What did Camillus?
left he any child like himself? What did Scipio, or the Catoes, who were
noble men? And what should I speak of Homer, Demosthenes, Virgill, Crispus,
Terence, Plautus or the rest? Or what of Caesar or Cicero? Who above all others
had been happy, if he had died without issue. And finally, who had been more
happy than Marcus Aurelius, if he had not left his son Comodus, to
succeed him in the Empire? Libro and ca. supradicto.
or who more fortunate than Seuerus Septimius, if Bassianus had never been
begotten? Read more in the title of education.

Of Concord and unity.
When Pisistratus, king of the Atheniens, giving his children good counsel,
Bruson. Lib. 2. cap. 4.
could not be heard of them, he was justly displeased with them for it. Which
thing his enemies perceiving, were very glad, hoping that by this discord in
his house, some alteration would follow. Whereof, when the king had
intelligence, he assembled the City before him, telling them, that because his
sons would not obey his fatherly pleasure, he was offended with them, but yet
now it seemed good to his fatherly pity, that remitting their disobedience, to
forgive them, and consent unto them. Wherefore willed it to be published in the
City, that the king and his sons were now at one.

Demetrius, a very loving and obedient son to Antigonus his father, chauncing
to come from hunting, whilst certain Embassadoures were doing their legacy
unto him, in their presence entered all armed as he was, and kissed his Father.
Wherefore, when the Embassadoures should depart, Antigonus said unto them:
Remember sirs to declare the love and hearty affection which you have seen
between my son and me. Hereby declaring, that agreement between the father
and the son, is the greatest token of a Princes power that may be.

Licurgus, unto the Citizens, which wrote to know how they might best
resist their ennimies force: Answered, if you shall be content to live poor as
you are, and abstain from mutual dissension and discord.

That Concord, is a thing very pleasante before God, Lib. 2. Ca. 4
Homer in his F^^ades declares. Where he felleth, how Mars the God of war,
came unto Jupiter to complain of Diomedes, who had wounded him, but Jupiter
with stern countenance, answered, I would thou knew that of all ye
celestial company, you art one that I worst can away withal, whose only delight
is in brauling, fighting, and making of war.

In Salust, Mycippa at his death, warned his sons to agree amongste
themselves, saying: by Concord and unity, small things are increased and made
great, but by discord, the greatest things that ever were, will be decayed and
brought to naught.

Of the Court and Courtyers life.
CAlisthenes the Philosopher, Bruson. Liber. 1.5.
going to dwell with king Alexander, was warned of Aristotle, either seldom to
speak unto him, or else to frame his speech pleasant and merry. But he
reproving the king, for taking pleasure to be saluted of the Persians, and
indeuoring to induce him in the Macedonian customs: was cast in prison, and
there as some say, he died of the gout, others say he was crucified, which
Trogus denies, saying, he had his hands and his ears cut off, also his nose,
and his lips deformed, and so was made a spectacle for men to behold.

Praexaspes, Liber and ca. infradict.
one of Cambyses his secret counsel, being asked what the people said of
him, he answered, that all men praised him greatly, but that they say he was
toomuche given to Wine. Wherewith Cambyses being angry, said, thou shalt
perceive whether the Persian people be deceived, or no. For if I strike not thy
son, which stands in thy entry, in the midst of the heart, with this my
shafte, then is the report true, which the Persians speak of me, but if I
strike him, then do the Persians belie my sobriety: and at this word he
drew his bow, and struck the child full in the heart, and thereat laughing,
he said, now may thou see Praexaspes, that not I, but the Persian people are
beside themselves, and I pray thee tell me, if ever thou saw any aim
righter: whereat Praexaspes searing least he should have been slain himself,
said: Nay surely, I think even God himself could not have shotten righter.

When Agrippa the king, had bestowed a Bishopric upon Mathias Jonas his
brother, one Sylas his chief ruler, which never had failed him in his
affairs, envying the preferment of Mathias, began continually to cast his good
service in the kings teethe, requiring that he also might be rewarded for his
diligence, but thereby he so displeased the king, that he took from him his
former dignity, and cast him into prison.

Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, Idem libro, and cap. eod.
hearing that Veronius Turinus made the people believe, that he was in great
authority with the Emperor, and thereby got great bribes: He caused one
to sue to himself openly, for a certain suit, but willed him to go secretly to
Turinus, to request his favor, which being accordingly accomplished, Turinus
promised his furtherance herein, and shortly after, told him that he had
greatly labored unto the king in his case, whereas in deed he had said never
a word.

The matter thus suspending, he was again called for, where his Advocate
Turinus likewise appeared, who hearing the case, began to becken, but said
nothing, yet in fine he obtaining his suit, Turinus required a great reward
for his labor, which he receiving, and being accused hereof unto the
Emperor, was bound to a stake, in the markette place, and stifeled with
smoke. The crier standing by, and cried: smoke he sold, and with smoke he is
punished.

Lampridius in ye life of Seuerus, which he wrote unto Constantine, says,
your godliness knows what you read in Marius Maximus, how that the common
wealth is in better case, and more in safety, where the Prince is evil, and
his friends be good, than that common wealth, where the Prince is good, and
has evil friends. For one, be he never so had, may be amended by many
good, whereas a multitude evil, can never be amended by one, though he be never
so good. And he says further, that Courtiers ought to be holy, worshipful,
agreeing (...) they were seeking, and he covering this theft, bitte, and tore
his side pitifully. All which pain he constantly abode, until the seekers were
gone, whereof when one of his companions mocked him, saying, that he had been
better to have delivered the Fore, than so to be bitten to death: he answered,
no, but it is better to die with pain, than to be apprehended with theft.

Aristides having married one of his daughters to Dionisius the younger, Lib. 2.
cap. 1.
and after repenting that he had so done, said: that he had rather wish his
daughter shortly to die, than long to continue with such a husband: whereof
Dionisius hearing, commanded that he should immediately he put to death, but
first he demanded of him, whether now he thought his daughter any better
bestowed, tha^ of late he professed: No (quoth Aristides) I repent me greatly
of that I have done, but nothing at all of that I said.

When Decius Brutus making war into Spain, had subdued all Luscitania, only
one City, called Cynania excepted, which stoutly took armor against him: he
sent Ambassadors unto them, to try whether they would give any money to be at
pear. But they answered the Ambassadors, that their ancestors had left them
swords to defend their country, but neither silver nor gold to redeem it of
so covetous a captain.

Agis a man of Sparta, being by Leonida cast into a prison called Dechas, where
the prisonners were strangled to death: seeing the hangman weep, and stagger
in doing on the rope, freende (quoth he) weep not for me. For I dying thus
unjustly, and contrary to the law, am in better case, than they which
condemned me heereto. And at this word, he held down his head, whilst the
executor tied the knot to strangle him.

Pomponius a Roman captain, Capite vt supra.
after many wounds, was taken captive of Methridates, who asked him, whether
he would hereafter become his freende, if he caused him to be healed: to
whom he answered, if thou will be a freende unto the Romans, I will be thy
freende, (...) not, I will surely be thy ennimie.

When Socrates was appointed to die, he seemed as though he cared not for his
life, Brusonius. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
wherefore Hermogenes his familiar freende, said unto him, O Socrates, it were
good, that you had some respect unto your own safegarde: why do not I seek
my safegarde freende Hermogenes (quoth he) whilst I bethincke me of my life
passed? An other called Appollodorus, who also loved him entirely, said, D
freende Socrates, I am very sorry to see thee thus unjustly condemned. Why
Appolodorus (quoth he) had thou rather see me justly condemned, than
unjustly? and so fell a laughing.

After that Pompei was conquered by Caesar, Cato the younger, fearing least he
should come into the hands of Caesar, first reading Plato his book de anima,
of the immortality of the soul, cast him self on his swearde, but when his
household ran about him, and his son with a Physician, came and bound up
his wounds, he inwardly blamed him self, for not making the wound deep
enough, then thancking the Physician for saving his life, he said that he
would a while take his rest, and so the company supposing that he would have
slept, departed, when as he renting the wound wider, tore out his guts, and
died.

This Cato, in his childhood coming to Sylla his house, and seeing many noble
men's heads brought thither: asked Sarpedon his master, why no man slew
Sylla? Who answered, because they fear him more than they hate him. Why the^
(quoth Cato) did not thou give me a sweard, that I might have delivered my
country of so cruel a tirant?

When the said Sylla had fully obtained the regiment of the common wealth, and
none durst gainesay him in ought he took in hand: he desired the Senate to
give sentence, and pronounce Marius an ennimie to the common wealth. Whereto
only Sceuola would in no wise consent. But when Sylla began cruelly to threaten
him, Scenola answered: albeit thou would straightwayes show me thy hand of
soldiers where with thou did assault this court, yet could thou never,
for shedding this little old blood of mine, cause me to call him an enemy,
who so manfully has saved this City, and all Italy by his prowess.

When Aristides, who for his virtue, of the Atheniens was surnamed Iustus, Lib.
2. cap. 2.
was leading toward execution: all that met him, call down their eyes, and
lamented, that not only an upright and just man, but even Justice her self (as
it were) should so be dealt with all: Only one spit in his face as he came by.
Wherewith Aristides nothing moved, in smiling sort desired the magistrate to
take him away, that he might no more so frowardly trouble them.

Of Craft or subteltie.
ALexander king of Macedonie, meaning to destroy Lapsacus, Brusonius. Lib. 2.
cap. 3.
the City wherein Anaximenes his master dwelled, prepared with all his might
to accomplish his pretended purpose. But it happened, as he came nighe the
City, he espied Anaximenes his master within the walls, wherefore, knowing yt
he would dissuade him from his purpose, thincking to prevent him, he made an
oath, that he would not grant Anaximenes his fuse. Hereof Anaximenes (as it
should seem) having some privy intelligence, came unto him, and desired that
he would destroy Lapsacus. And so Alexander, who had sworn to deny his
request, to save his oath, was forced to spare the City, which he so feign
would have destroyed.

On a time two strangers delivered a certain sum of money to a woman to
keep, on that condition that she should deliver to neither of them their
portion, until they both came together to fetch it. But shortly after, one
of them faining that his fellow was dead, came and had both their portions
delivered him. It happened not long after, that the other whom the woman
supposed to have been dead, came and required his part. Wherefore the woman not
having wherewith to pay him, and not knowing how to do, meante to hang her
self out of the way. But Demosthenes delivered her of her great sorrow and
care, willing her, that when he came again, she should bid him bring his
fellow, according to his former promise, and he should have his money.

Semiramis Queen of the Assirians, making war into India, that she might
make them afeard with the sight of Elephantes, which they supposed to be no
where but in Jndia, caused Oxehides to be sown in the likeness of Elephants,
and to be stuffed with hay, having each of them within it, a Camel and an
armed Knighte sitting on his back.

Trimellius a citizen of Rome, removing and abiding with his whole family in
ye country, one of his servants finding a sow of his neighbors abroad,
killed her, and brought her home. Whose carkesse being dressed, Trimellius
laid under the bla^kets, wherein his wife lay. And when his neighbor made
inquisition and search for the sow, he swore that he had but one, and she lay
under his blankettes. And therewith bringing them into the chamber, he showed
the bed where this wife lay. And so with this jest, deceived his neighbor, and
caused his wife for ever afterward, to be called Trimellius sow.

When Photion could by no means keep the Atheniens from making an
unprofitable war with the Boetians, he commanded that all men from the age
of seventeen to seventy, shoulds within five days after come before him in
complet harnis. Whereat they stomaking the matter, that aged men should be
brought to that point: he answered them, what wrong shall I do you when I my
self which am fourscore years old shall be present with you? And by that
means quited them from prosecuting their pretended war.

After that the Magarenses, and the Atheniens, had a long while made war for
the I Will of Salamis, almost unto the utter decay of them both: it was in fine
concluded by the Atheniens, that who so made any law of rechalenging the said
Island, should loose his life for it. Wherefore Solon being very careful in
this case what to do, knowing that by holding his peace he should do the
common wealth no good, and on the other side by counselling them thereto, he
should be in danger of his life: he sayned himself to be mad, and like a
mad man ran about the streets, and so causing a great assembly of people
to come about him, he persuaded them with such verses as he never before used,
and so prevailed therein, that with all expedition, they prepared them selves
to renew the war against the Megarenses.

In the time of the war between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, Cap. 3.
the Lacedaemonians having the better, to the intent to bring Pericles the
Athenian Captain in suspicion: left all his lands untouched, which thing he
foretold the Athenians, and to avoid the enuic which they thought hereby to
cause him incur: he gave all those his lands to the use of the common wealth.

When Medea would be revenged of Pelias, Vtinfra.
she promised to make him young again, and the better to persuade him thereto,
in his presence she transformed her self from an old woman, unto youthly
years again. Wherefore he commanded his daughters to do what soever she
should command them. Whereupon when he was a sleep, she commanded them to
take him and tear him in pieces, and afterward to put him in a cauldron,
that she might by that means restore him to his youth. And so was she
revenged, and he stayne by his own daughters, and through his own
commandment.

Of Cruelty and Immanitie.
TVllius Cicero with his own hands wrote a Decree against Anthonius, Bruso.
li. 1. ca. 9.
the which he likewise pronounced against him in the common place. But
Anthonius revenged him, causing his head and his hands to be cut off, and
fastened in the same place. And (as Dion writes) Fuluia Anthonies wife,
holding his head in her lap, with most opprobrious words rayled and cursed
it, spitting on it, and opening his mouth, pulled out his tongue, which she
all bepricked with pinnes.

When Vitellius understood that Otho his enemy was slain in the field
Bebryacus, and coming thither, saw the dead carcass lying on the ground,
whereas others abhorred the stenche of it, Bruso. li. 1. ca. 9.
he with a detestable voice cried out, that the dead corpse of his enemy,
especially being a citizen, had a sweet savor in his nose. But afterward
he him self having his hands bound behind him, a halter about his neck,
and his hair cut of like a condemned person, was for a mocking stock so
drawn along all the way to the temple. And finally, being set upon the
Gemonia^ ladders, had his head hacked of with little strokes, and thence was
tumbled down into Tyber.

After that the Tribunes had slain Apuleius, the Senate and the people of Rome
consented that Metellus should be revoked from banyshement: whereto Publius
Furius then being Tribune, would in no wise consent, no not though his son
with tears desired it on his knees. Which son of Metellus was surnamed for
this Pius Pityfull. The next year Caius Cornelius succeding Furius in the
Tribuneshippe, for this caused him to be called to accounte, but so had his
hard and cruel heart incensed the people against him, that they not abiding
his answer, re^t him in pieces.

Such was the wretched cruelty of Domitius Nero, that he commanded Ruffinus
his son in law to be cast in the sea, also he put to death his own sister,
being great with child, and his master Seneca, Lucane, and diverse others,
as well learned men, as also his tutors and friends, he rewarded with like
courtesy. Finally, when he had attempted diverse diuelishe devises to destroy
his mother, and yet she was by Gods providence preserved, in fine pretending
great amity, he sent for her to a banquet, where with great joy he received
and interteined her, and at parting kissed ye breasts, which he more unnatural
than any Tigre had sucked, secretly commanding the shipmaster, that being on
the sea, he should make as though perforce he were driven against her ship, and
so bursting the ship, to drown her: which being as wickedly accomplished, she
nevertheless swam out and escaped. Whereof (as joyful tidings) when one
Ligarinus brought him word, he commanded him to be put to death, and with him
his own mother. This Nero commanded Rome to be set on fire in twelve places,
Fox.
and so continued it six days, and seven nights in burning, while that he,
to see the example how Troy burned, sitting in his tower Mecaenas, song Homers
verses. But in the end he was feign to kill him self for fear, co^playning ye
he had neither friend nor foe left ye would do it for him.

Also C. Caesar Caligula was so cruel, that in dedicating a bridge which he
had made, containing in length three miles, and six hundred passes: he
calling a number of people unto him, caused them all to be thrown down, and
drowned in the sea, he wyshed that all the people of Rome had but one neck, to
the intent he might destroy such a multitude. But God sent so shrewde a cow
short horns. For he was cut of by Cheraea, Sabinus, and others, which
conspired against him. After whose death there was sound in his closet two
libels, wherein was contained ye names of those senators and noble men, that he
meant to put to death, there was also found a coffer, Fox.
wherein diverse kinds of poison were kept to destroy a multitude of people,
which poisons afterward being thrown into the sea, destroyed a great number
of fish.

When Herod had put to death al his sons, and at length falling into a great
and grievous disease, insomuch ye worms did eat him alive, dispayring ye he
should never recover, he caused all the noble men of Iewry to be imprisoned,
the^ calling his sister Salome and Alexander her husband unto him, he said
unto them: I know the Jews will be right joyful, and make great feasts at my
death, wherefore take these whom I have in hold, and put them to death, that
once in my life I may cause all Iewry to lament and mourn.

When king Darius made war against the Scithians, and had taken the sons of
Orobertus a noble man: he desired the king to leave him one of his three sons
to comfort him in his age. Which thing Darius promised to do, and more than
that to. And so cruelly killing them, he bad him take them all three.

Cneius Piso made an Edict, that if any of his soldiers returned out of the
field without his company, he should dye for it as well as if he had slain him,
him self. It happened that one so returning desired his leave to go seek his
mate, Lib. 2. cap. 9.
which thing Piso would not grant, but commanded a Captain to see him
executed, which when he prepared to accomplish, he saw the man which was
missing coming toward them, wherefore he commanded the hanchman to stay the
sword, and so brought them both unto Piso: but he in a fury commanded the^
all three to be put to death, the one because he was already condemned, the
other because he was the cause of his condemnation, and the Captain for not
executing his precept.

Of deceyte and guile.
ROsimund the wife of Alboinis king of Longobardia, Bruso. li. 2.
through ye persuasio^ of one Helmelchides, who promised her marriage, made
away Albonis her husband. After whose death the adulterer and she being
chased from Longobardia, fled to Rauenna, where she was honorably interteyned
of Longinus the king, who also being taken with her beauty, desired that she
would make away Helmelchides, and marry him, promising her by this means to
restore her to the kingdom of Longobardia. Whereupon as Helmechides on a time
came out of the bathe, she making him believe that she had made him a drink to
recover his strength, caused him to drink poison, which thing when he
perceived, he compelled her to drink the rest, and so in one day, and with one
kind of death, the world was delivered of two adulterers.

Datames was a man of singular craft, Capi. 19.
and very subtle and circumspecte in all his dealinges, so that when it was
told him, that there were some which lay in wayse to kill him, he caused one
to do on his attire, and to go to the place where the ambushement was, who
being supposed to have been Datames him self, was beset, but Datames with
greater power rescued him, and subdued his foes. After this one Mithridates
pretending friendship, desired to speak with him in a secret place, where he
before had hid his weapon. When the time was come that they should meet,
Datemes caused him, and he Datemes to be searched, and when no weapon could be
found about them, they came together to talk, and after long debating, they
departed each man his way: Capi. 19.
but Mithridates coming to the place where his weapon lay, making as though
he paused, took up his weapon, and hid it under his clothes, the^ calling
again after Datemes, as though he had somewhat more to say unto him, came to
him and flue him.

When Xerxes for his feblenesse began to be conte^ned of his subjects, Bruson.
Artabanus his chief ruler hoping to aspire unto the kingdom, came with his.
vij. sturdy sons unto the palace, where first he secretly made away his lord
Xerxes, then ye sooner to attain his hoped pray, he set discord between the
two young princes, persuading Artaxerses that Darius his brother had killed his
father Xerxes. Whereupon Artaxerses caused Darius to be killed in his bed.
But as GOD would have it, Artabanus not keeping his own counsel, opened his
traiterous stomach to Bacabassus his companion, who disclosing it to
Artaxerses the Prince, he faygning as though he would see a view of his men,
commanded them all against the next day to be before him in complete armoure.
Wherein they accomplished his commandment, and he according to promise came
to take a view of them, and espying Artabanus amongst the rest, making as though
his cote of maile were to short, he willed Artabanus to change with him. And
so Artabanus vnarming him, Artaxerses thrust him through, verefying the Psalm,
Foueam feecit, ac incidit in eam, he pretended the destruction of an other, and
was him self destroyed.

After that Ptolome king of Ceraunia had subdued Antigonus, Lib. 2. ca. 9.
made war with Antiochus and Pirrhus, and had now gotten ye regiment of al
Macedonia into his own hands: he assaied also to deceive his own sister, and to
bereue from her her two sons, and her city Cassandra. Bruso.
And that he might the better accomplish his malicious intent, he desired to
mary her. Herein albeit she suspected his wicked purpose, yet fearing his cruel
nature to take vengeance on her, she denied him not, but sent one Dion to
reason with him in her cause. To who^ he swear and made many solemn
protestations and vows, that he sincerely sought the marriage of Arsinoe his
sister. Hereupon she hoping that his meaning had been as simple as his
speaking, consented to marry him. Unto the solemnization whereof he assembled
his nobility, charging them to call and take her for Queen. Which fair
words making her feign, she now of her own accord desired him to go see her
city Cassandra, and against his coming she caused the city to be adorned and
garnished, and further she commanded that her two sons, Lycimachus and
Philip, with their crounes on their heads, should come and meet him by the way,
which thing they accordingly did, and Ptolome with feigned countenance embraced
and kissed them. But as soon as he came unto the city, he commanded the Tower
to be taken, and the two children to be slain. Wherefore the poor babes were
compelled to flee unto their mother for reskewe, who embracing them in her
arms, assayed with her own body to keep them from wounding but all in
vain. For in fine they were slain, and she most cruelly and dispitefully
expelled the city: whence she went to Samothracia greatly lame^ting that she
was not slain with her children. But Ptolome for his wickedness escaped not
unpunished: For shortly after, leesing his kingdom to the Frenchemen, and him
self taken captive, with the sword (as he deserved) finished his life. Whose
head was fastened on a spear, and carried about for a terror to their enemies.

Caius Cannius a Roman knight, lying at Syracuse to refresh him self, was
very desirous to buy a garden there: Which thing Pithius understanding, came
unto him, and told him that he had a garden which Cannius might use as his
own, but he would not sell it. The next day he had Cannius to diner, and had
provided that at that time all the fishermen should fish before his garden. At
the time appointed Cannius came, where he saw great store of botes, and much
fish taken and cast up, even at Pithius feet. Whereat Cannius wo^dring, what
meneth it friend Pythius (quoth he) is here such store of fish? Yea (quoth
Pythius) it is no marvel, for all the fish in Syracuse is in this place.
Herewith Cannius was greatly in love with it, and earnestly desired Pythius to
sell it. Which thing Pythins made strange to do at the first, but in the end
yielded to his request. And so Cannius being a very welthy man, and desirous to
have it, gave him as much money for it as he would ask. A day or two after
Cannius invited certain of his friends thither to supper, and he him self came
thither betimes, but could see never a boat there. Wherefore he demanded of
the next neighbor, whether the fisherme^ kept holyday that day, because none
of them came thither? No (quoth the neighbor) but they use not to fish here.
Ex Ci. off. lib. 3.
Wherefore I marueled yesterday to see so many of the^ here: and thus was
Cannius deceived.

Of death and burial.
DIogines the Cinicke being persuaded that after a ma^s death he should have no
sense nor feeling, Bruson. li. 4. cap. 10.
was asked of his friends what should be done with him after he was dead: why take
me (quoth he) and cast me in the fields. To who^ his friends replying, that
beast and birds would then devour him, he bad them lay his staff by him. But
what shall that staff do (quoth they) when you can not handle it? And what tell
you me (quoth he) that beasts will eat me, if I feel them not. Wherefore
Seneca says very well, that burial was not inverted for the deades sake, but
for us that live, that we might not be offended with the noisome savor and
sight of the dead corpse.

When Alexander had taken certain Philosophers of India called Gymnosophistae,
which provoked Saba to rebellion, he proposed them hard questions, which
unless they could absolve, they were put to death, and one of them which was
eldest was made judge in the matter. The first of them was demanded whether
there were more living or dead? he answered there were more alive, because the
dead have no more being. The second being inquired whether the land or sea
engendered greater creatures? answerred, the land, because the sea is but a
portion of it. The third being asked what beast was most subtle? the beast
(quoth he) that man can not discern. The fourth was demanded what induced him
to persuade the Sabians to rebellion? who answered, because I thought it better
to dye manfully, than to live miserably. The fifthe inquired, which was first
made, the day or else the night? who said that the day was a day before the
night. The sixte being demanded how one raygning might get the goodwill of
the people? answered, if he be not terrible. Of the other three, one was asked
how a mortal man might be accounted in the number of the Gods? if he do
greater things (quoth he) than man's power can attain to. The other was
demanded whether he thought life or death to be the stronger? answered, that
life was strongest, because in it man suffers so many calamities. The last
was inquired, how long a man should live? until (said he) that he thincketh
life to be better than death.

The Galathians do so contemn death, that they fight naked, and are persuaded
as Pythagoras thincketh, that they shall put on new bodies. And therefore many
put letters into the fire, wherein their friends bodies are burned, thinking
that their friends shall read them after their death.

Aulus Posthumous in an oration which he made unto his soldiers, said: It is
given to all men both good and bad to die, but to die godly and gloriously is
only given to good men. Hector in Homer, Diodorus, lib. 6.
speaking unto Andromache his wife, said: be not grieved for my death, for both
the valiante, and the miser, must needs take that way.

When Socrates was condemned of the Athoniens. for bringing in of new Gods,
with a steadfast countenance he took the poison out of the hangmannes hands,
and put it too his mouth. And when Xantippe his wife complained that should
die giltlesse. Why (quoth he) and had thou rather to see me die guilty,
than giltlesse?

The Thratians weep at the birthe of man, and are merry at his death. The
Licians at the death of their freedes, put on woman's attire, that being moved
with the deformity thereof, they might the sooner cease mourning.

The Egiptians do poulder the dead carcass, and keep it at home with them.
The people in Carmania called Chelonophart, do throw them to fishes to be
eaten. The people in the East, called Nabatholi, do bury their kings in
dunghils. The Persians do lap them in wax, and salt them. The Magians use
not to bury the corpse, before it be rent with wild beasts. The Hircanians
keep dogs to devour them after they be dead. The burial of the Parthians,
(as Justin records) is first to have the flesh devoured of beasts and
fowls, and then to cast the bones into the earth. The Megarenses when they
interre the corpse, turn them to the East, and the Atheniens to the West, etc.

When any of the Egiptians domestical friends depart, the women smeare their
head and their visages with durte: then leaving the dead carcass at home,
they gadde about the streates with their garments rent, and their hair
hanging about their ears, and pitifully yall and bewail the dead. The like
kind of lamentation, the men likewise use. When they return to the corpse,
they take a crooked iron, and therewith pull the brain out of the nostrelles of
the dead, and stuff it with herbs. Afterward, they take a sharp Ethiopian
stone, and therewith cut his belly, and take out his paunch, which when they
have emptied and made cleave, Lib. 4. ca. 10
they stuff it with sweet odors and sow it up again, suffering the hair on
their heads to grow, but use to shave their beardes.

Diognit' Emperor of Erithraea, taking Policrita of Naxus captive, dealt not with
her as me^ use to do with captives, but retained and kept her as his wife. It
happened whilst she abode with him, yt the Erithreans, otherwise called ye
Milesians, keeping solemn feast, were all ouercomen with wine. Which thing
she perceiving, desired Diog^^tus to give her leave to send some of the
festival cakes unto her brethren at Naxus, and being permitted, she folded a
sheet of lead, and covered it over with dowe, wherein she declared the drunken
case of the Milesians, and exhorted them with speed to come thither. Which
they accordingly accomplishing, came and set on them, and returned with great
spoil, and no less victory, bringing home Polycreta their sister with them:
who being commended, saluted, and iuyfully received of all men, even in the
midst of this their joy, gave up the Ghost.

It is written that Philarchus in the midst of a battle, died with
straining his voice. Or as some write, after he had attained a great victory,
crying out, O joyful and happy day: he was taken with a sudden fever which
brake his veins, and killed him.

The signs of death in a sick man are these: If he have the rauing sickness
to laughe. Otherwise, if he be careful for mending his apparel, or delight to
fold his bed clothes. If after sleep he move not himself, or continually
use to lie upright. If he use to stretch out his hands, and answer to them
which inquire of his discease. Celsius says, that it is a token of death, to
rise up in the very pange, immoderate sleep or over watching, to fetch breath
thick, to void sneuill, hardly to spit, to weep when he has no will, to have
slime slicke on his tongue.

Of Discord and Variance.
WHen the fathers conscript, and the Roman people were at variance between
themselves, Bruson. Lib. 2. ca. 20
the fathers thought good to send one Menenius Agrippa, an eloquent Orator, and
well be loved of the people, to make them if it might be, at one again, who
being admitted into their tents, made his Oration in this wise. On a time
(quoth he) when the parts of men did not consent as now they do, but every
part followed their own counsel, saying and doing as they thought good: the
residue of the members complained and said, that by the care, labor, and
service of the other parts was pampered and nourished, and so the rest took
the pains, and the belly enjoyed all the pleasure. Wherefore they concluded
amongst themselves, that neither the hands should reach the meat unto the
mouth, neither the mouth receive it, nor yet the teethe divide it. But hereby
whilst they thought to tame the belly, they brought not only it, but also
them selves to extreme penury. This tale of Agrippa so prevailed with the
people, that he caused them to reconcile them selves with the Senate.

Likewise Plutarch writing of the life of Agis, by a like tale declares what
mischief comes by discord. It happened (says he) that the tail of the
Serpent raised sedition against the head, desiring that he might another while
have the guiding of the body, and not always to be guided by the head. Wherein
obtaining his request, and having no eyes to guide him, and going he wotte not
whether, vt supra. Brusomus.
not only hurt him self: but also because the head contrary to the law of
nature, was content to obey and follow so blind a guide: he was made partaker
of the same mischief.

Leontius Bishop of Antioche, in that great Sinode which was kept there
concerning the establishing of Christian faith, seeing their controversy to
be like to grow unto a sedition, and fearing plainly to express his mind: he
stroked his head being full of white hairs, and said: After this snow is
thawed, we are like to have much durte, by which words as it were in a
riddle, he foretold that that discord would grow to dissension, and that the
authors of that brabbling should never consent with the residue of the
multitude. Lycosthenes, page 252.

Amongste the Lacedominians, when two brethren fell at discord, the officers
mersed their father, because he dissembled the matter, thincking good to bear
with the young men, and to impute the fault, which through their hot age, they
committed unto the negligence of the father, in whose power it stood to forsee
that no such controversy should arise between his children.

Of Desire of knowledge Discipline, and the duty of Scholars to their
Masters.
LVcius coming to Rome, chanced to meet with Anthonius the Emperor, of whom
demanding whether he went, and what business he had that way? Anthonius
answered him, I know it is no dishonestie for an old manne to learn, which
causes me to go to Xextus the Philosopher, that of him I may learn the
things which yet I know not. At which words of his, Lucius wondering, held
up his hands, and said: Good Lord this old man like a child goes to
schole with a table in his hands, Lycosthenes, pa. 284. ex Philostrato.
whereas our king Alexander, being but thirty years old, is already dead.
Herein must I needs more commend this Emperors study and modesty, than
Lucius his license and liberty.

Salinus Iulianus the Emperor, being famous as well for his study in the
civil law, as also for the great freendshippe which was between him and
diverse other Princes: was wont to say that he would be glad to learn, albeit
one of his feet were in the grave. Which saying of his, was commended as it
well deserved of all good men. But in these days we have an other sentence
common in most men's mouths, I am now too old to learn. Whereas in deed it is
a shame, yt being so old, thou haste not already learned all such things as
are worthy to be learned. Lycost. pa. 248.

Solon of Athens, hearing Sapphus his brothers son singing a song as he was
tippling amongst his pottes: desired the yongma^ to teach him that song. Who
being demanded why he so desired it: answered, that I may die by yt time I
have learned it. Showing hereby how desirous to learn he was, when even now
being as it were at deaths door, he was not ashamed to learn. Yea he would say,
ye by learning every day a little, he became an old man. Lycost. pa 246. ex
Aeliano.

Alphonsus king of Arragon, being in talk of the loss of jewels, sadly
affirmed yt he had rather lose his gemmes, Margarites and precious stones,
whereof he had great store, than any of his books. Panormita. li. 4.

Metrocles said, Bruso. li. 2. cap. 23.
that other things, as house, lands, garments, and such like, might be
given and sold for money, but only learning and discipline require long
study and indefatigable labor. La. l. 6. c 6.

Marcus Antonius the Philosopher and Emperor so entirely loved his techers,
that he set up ye picture of Front his master, and exalted Proculus to the
dignity of a consul. He would embrace and kiss Iunius Rusticus in the
presence of ye senate, and in the end made him also consul: and after his
death erected his Image. Lico. ex Antonio in Melissa: par. 2. sermon. 11.
And shortly to say, he so honored them al, that he adorned their images with
gold, and would himself often resort unto them, and offer flowers and incense
upon them.

Alexander being demanded whom he loved better of Philip his father, or
Aristotle his master, said, that he was more beholding to his master. For
Philip had made him a man, but Aristotle had made him a learned and wise man.

When Dionisius told Plato that some body should cut off his head,
Xenocrates Plato his scholar standing by, said, Nay I will first have this
head of mine cut off. Lycost. ex Laert. lib. 4. cap. 2.

Zeno not having money to give a master to teach him, Ex Laer. l. 7. cap. 1.
would creep in by a back door to hear Polemon read his Logic Lecture:
whom Polemon espying, said: I see well Zeno thou will steal that from me,
which others are like to buy of thee. Lycost. pa. 251.

Of Drunkenness and Drinking.
AStiages in Xenophons Pedia demanded of Cirus why he quaffed wine no better?
Brus. lib. 1. cap. 16.
because (quod he) I fear there be some poison mixed in ye goblet among the
wine. For I perceived well, yt at the last feast you supped up poison apace.
How know thou that my son (quoth he) because (quoth Cirus) I saw that
thereby you lost the right use both of body and mind.

Alexander of Macedonie, being a great drinker of wine, whether overcome with
wine, or envying his fathers co^me^datio^, at a banquet killed Clytus his very
friend. But after his fury, he greatly repented ye act, and therewith falling
into a rage, he would have slain himself, had he not ben let by his friends.
Afterward falling on the dead corpse, he embraced and kissed the wounds, and
could scarce be got thence to eat his meat.

Whereas Antigonus loved, and greatly reverenced Xeno the Philosopher, it happened
on a time, that being overcome with wine, he met his master Xeno, wherefore like
a drunken man he went to embrace and kiss him, desiring the Philosopher to
commau^d him do somewhat for him. Mary, I pray thee then (quoth Xeno) get thee
hence and vomit. And so by this grave and wise reprehension, he both taunted
his drunkenness, and warned him to beware, least by such surfeiting he should
hurt him self, and shorten his days. Lycost pa. 297. ex Acliano li. 9. de
var. hist.

Agesilaus the great king of the Lacedaemonians, at a certain dricking, was by
casting of lottes, as the manner was, made ruler of the feast. whose office it
was to appoynte how much every one should drink. Wherefore when the
tauerner demanded him how much wine he should fill to every one of them: If
thou have prepared much wine (quoth he) let every man have as much as he shall
call for. But if thou haste but little, let every one have like much. By which
his wise dealing, he provided that if there were wine inoughe, he might please
the lusty quaffers, and yet not compel the sober drinckers. And on the other
side, if there wa^ted wine, dividing to each like much, he should not cause
them to murmr. For when one had as much as an other, they which would
drink moderately, had so to do, and they which would quaffe freely, though
they had not enoughe to satisfy their appetite, yet having inoughe to satisfy
nature, could not complain since they had as much as their fellows.
Lycost. pa. 298.
Wherefore they which otherwise would have druncke freely, for this cause only
used it moderatly. Ex Plutarch. in Lycost. Apoth.

Aristippus the Philosopher, who was Socrates scholar, hearing one commend
him self that he could drink much, and not be drunken: Marry a goodly
matter (quoth he) and so can a mule to. ix Laer. li. 2. ap 8.
Lycost. pa. 298.

Philochrates and Aeschines being sent with other Athenians in legacy unto
king Phillip, at their coming home commended him to be a lusty quaffer. Whereto
ye orator Demosthenes answered, that virtue has the sponge likewise: meaning
that to be asmal virtue in a king to empty pottes apase. Licost. pa. supradict.

Anacharsus a Scythian, being demanded how a man might eschew drunkenness?
If (quoth he) he always set before his face ye uncomely gesture of dru^kards.
For nothing more rese^bleth madness, than the indecent behauioure of
drunkards, where he him self thinks that all things become him marvelous
well. Brus. li 4. cap. 19.
Lycost. ex Laer. li. 1. cap. 9.

The Lacedaemonians cause their children to behold their bondsiaues when they
be drunk, to the intent that they may see how foul and frantikelike a
sight it is to see a man overcome with wine. Yea they would compel their
slaves to drink to much, to dance foolish daunces, and to sing mad
verses. And so whereas others with many words could scarce persuade sobriety
to be a thing most honest, and drunkenness to be a detestable vice: they as it
were in a brief, set it before their childrens eyes by the example of these
bondslaues, unto whose conditions for a child to degenerate, Lycost.
was a foul and dishonest thing Ex Plut. in Lacon.

Of educatio^ of children.
SOcrates said, that welborne children, Lico. Erasm. Apo. 3.
and specially good natures, ought to be well instructed and brought up in
their youth. For it comes to pass with them, as it does with horses, which
though they be fierce, and of a hautie stomach, yet if they be well and
gently broken they become coragious and good for any thing. But being evil
delte withal, they become intractable and good for nothing. And hereby it
comes often to pass, that the best and readiest wits are through ye folly of
their teachers, marred, whilst they straightways turn horses into asses for
want of skill to use the^

He being demanded why he did not rule the common wealth since be knew so
well the trade thereof? Answered, that he does more good to a City, which
makes many apt to bear rule therein, than he which governs it him self.
Lycost. pa. 305.

He exhorted yongmen oftentimes to behold themselves in a glass, and if they
saw them selves beautiful and fair, Lycost. pa 305
to take heed they commit nothing unworthy so fair a face. If they seemed
deformed, to recompense that with dexterity of wit, which wanted in feature of
body. Ex Eras. lib. 3. Apoth.

A certain child being brought up with Plato, Lycost. supradict.
after a season returning home unto his father, and seeing him immoderatly
laughing, wondered, and said, he never saw any such thing all the whilst he
dwelled with Plato: of so great a force it is even from ones infancy to be
acquainted with virtue.

When one was in hand with Aristippus, to teach his child: and he requested
for his pains. 500. groates, the other being (as it were) astonnyed, with the
greatness of the sum: said that he would buie a slave better cheap than
so. Yea (quoth Aristippus) but for this money thou shalt have two, meaning
that he should have his son a good Philosopher, Ex Lac. li. 2. cap. 8.
and an obedient child: Pretily taunting the nigardisenesse of the common
sort, which are more covetous in nothing than about the education of their
children. And will bestow more cost on one to keep their horse, than on him
that shall take pains to teach and instruct their child. Lico. pa. 306 ex
Lac. li. 4. cap. 9.
Lico. pa. 306.

Carneades was wont to say, that rich men and kings sons learn nothing
aright, but the art of riding. Because all other feed their humor, and
flatter them, whereas the horse, not knowing nor caring whom he has on his
back, unless he sit well, will cast him off.

When Diogenes was taken captive, and should be sold at Crete now called
Candie, the crier asked him by what title he should commend him unto the byer.
Say (quoth he) thou haste one to sell, who can rule children. A certain man of
Corinth marueling at the stra^genesse of the crier, came to Diogenes, to know
whether he could do as the crier professed: where perceiving by his talk that
he was a wise and a learned man, boughte him, and brought him home, committing
his children unto him to see them instructed, and brought up in the liberal
Sciences. Who receiving them, did liberally instruct and bring them up. And
first he set forth for them the seven sciences. Afterward he taught them to
ride, to bend a bow, and cast a sling, with diverse other deeds of actiuitie.
Besides this, he provided that they should learn all the best sentences out
of Poets and other good authors. He taught them to serve their father at his
table, to be content with course meat, and to drink water. And whereas other
did wear their heir long for a pride, he caused them to be shaven, and when
they went abroad, to go with their heir unkempt, no coats on their back,
nor shoes on their feet, and so taught them, that he was reverenced of them,
and highly commended of Xeniades their parent. Lic. pa 306. Ex Laer. li. 6.

Lycurgus, Bruson. li. 2. cap. 38.
which made ye Lacedemonian laws, indeuoring to bring the citizens from their
riot and excess, unto a more temperat and better trade of life, and to make
the^ desirous of honesty and virtue: brought up two whelps, which he took of
one bitch, and were litred at one time. Whereof ye one he brought up at home we
delicat fare, the other he daily exercised in hu^ting abrod. After he had thus
brought them up, he brought the^ both forth with him before the people, then
setting by them meat to feed on, whilst each of the^ fell thereto, he suddenly
put forth a hare, wherefore when the dog which had been exercised in that trade,
saw her, he began with swift speed to make after, but the other, according to
his educatio^, fell still to his meat. Lo (quod Lycurgus) see you not these
whelps, who although they are both of one kind, yet what diversity there is
in them by reason of their education? and that exercise does more prevail
unto the attainement of honesty, than education. Some say that these two
whelps were not both of one kind, but that ye one came of a mastife, the other
of a grayhounde, and that he exercised the mastife to hu^t, and suffered the
grayhounde to tarry at home and fill his belly, and so it came to pass that
the mastife proved the better, and that he said: Wherefore O citizens, our
noble of spring, which the common sort commend and wonder at, saying that we
came of the stock of that noble Hercules, shall nothing avail us, unless we
learn and exercise such honest, virtuous, and noble deeds as that notable
and famous man did. This wise man found a way, that whereas the multitude are
not fit for Philosophical reasons, he might by a familiar example, as it
were, set the image of virtue before their eyes. For commonly the things
which we see with our eyes, do more move us, than that we hear spoken of
others. But that which he did in this city, that may every hous-holder do in
his own family, and every ruler in his own company. Nature is of great
force, but education is of greater force. Eras. li. 1. Plut. in Lacon.
For that can amend a naughty nature, and make it. And the faults that come
by birthe, we can not do withal, but to instruct and amend them by
education, that may we do.

Alexander being but yet a stripling, saw Philip his father about to cast away
a horse, because he was so fierce that he wuld suffer no body to take his back.
See (quod he) what a horse these cast away, for want of knowledge how to use
him. And when he had so said, he came to the horse, and with great skill by
fair means he so dealt with him, that in the end he got on his back, and
softly with strayning the bit, he ran a course, and retired back again.
Wherefore at the returning, as he was about to alight, his father embraced and
kissed him, saying: It were good reason my son, to get thee an other
kingdom, for Macedonia shall not be able to contain thee. The wise man
forsawe, that the fathers kingdoms would not suffize so wise and valiant a
child. But the horse warns us of many good wits, which for want of skill are
cast away: by reason that such as have charge of them, not knowing how to
deal with courageous horses, maks them tame asses. Ex Eras. li. 1. Apotheg.
Lico. pa. 311,


A certain man being accused for heating his father, Lico. pa. 312.
defended his impious act in this sort. When he was a young man he beat his
father (quod he) and this my son when he comes to age will beat me, for it
comes so to us by kind. And we see it commonly come to pass, that like as we
behave our selves to our parents, so do our children behave themselves to us
when we are parents. Eras. li. 8. Apoth.

Leonidas Anaxandridas his son, going to war against the Persians, when his
wife Gorgon asked him what commandment he would give her at his parting: I
command thee nothing else (quoth he) but that thou marry and bring up thy
children well. By which saying it is evident, that the wise man foresaw that he
should dye in war, and warned his wife to take a new husband, and to do her
endeavor, that her children might be well brought up. Plut. in Lacon.

Of Exercise and use.
WHen Octauius had conquered Antonius at Actium, as he returned home, amongst
others which gratified his victorious success, there came one, holding a crow
in his hand, which he had taught to say: God save thy grace Ceasar, victorious
Emperor. Caesar maruelling at the courteous salutation of the bird, gave a
great sum of money for him. But his companion, who had taken like pains in
bringing up of the bird, and could get no part of ye said reward, came to the
Emperor, and told him that he had an other crow, which he requested Caesar
to co^pel him to fetch. Which being taught a contrary lesson, began to say:
God save Antonius the Emperor. Wherewith Caesar was nothing offended, but bad
the money to be divided between them both. It hayned that a cobbler seeing this,
following their example, endeavored to bring a crow to the like salutation. But
when he had with great pains and some charges kept this crow a long while, and
could by no means cause him to answer, he would say unto the bird: I see my
labor and cost are cast away. But in the end ye bird began to speak, and as
the Emperor came by, saluted him, to whom the Emperor said, I have now enough
such fellows to salute me at home, the bird remembering the sentence which his
master was wont so often to repete unto him, said: I see my labor and cost is
cast away, whereat the Emperor laughing, Bruso. li. 2. ca. 30.
boughte her also for the like sum of money.

When Demonax heard one stumbling in his declamation, he exhorted him to
exercise him self often therein. Why so I do (quoth the other) for I
oftentimes use to declaime when I am alone by my self. Mary it is no marvel
then (quoth Demonax) that thou did it so foolishly now, since hitherto
thou haste been accustomed to so foolish an audience. Eras li. 8. Apotheg.

When Cicero had praised M. Crassus, in the common place, and his Oration was
greatly commended of the people, and afterward in the same place vehemently
inuaied against him. Why (quod Crassus) dyddest not thou lately praise me in
the same place. I confess (quoth Cicero) I praised thee in deed, but for
exercise sake I took in hand a slanderous argument. For the Rethoritians
sometimes take in hand arguments of contrary matters, as when they praise
Bulyris, the quartan fever, or ingratitude. Licost. ex libro. 4. Apotheg.
Erasmi.

Socrates was wont to say, that such as exercised their body with dancing,
had need of wide houses, but such as exercised them selves in singing, or
making orations, might stand still, and never move out of their places. Eras.
lib. 3. Apotheg.
By which saying of his, he allowed mode rate exercise, and disalowed the
immoderate, especially after meat. Licost. pa 324.

Plato was wont to admonish men, that neither they should exercise their
body without some exercise of the mind, neither their mind without the body,
whereof the one is proper to champions, Laerti. li 3.
the other to fluggards.

The Lacedaemonians had a kind of black potage, which they so greatly esteemed,
that the elder and better sort would only eat thereof, and leave the meat
for their yongers. Wherefore Dionisius king of Sicil bought a Lacedemonia^ cook
commanding him to make that kinds of potage, Ma. Tu. Ci. Tusc. quest. libro. 5.
and to spare no cost therein. But when the king tasted of it, he lyked it
not, but spit it out again. To whom the cook said, you must use this after
you have exercised your self as the Lacedaemonians do. Lycost.

Of fatal Destiny.
WHen Dioclesianus was abiding at Turin in France, Bruso. li. 2.
as he stayed at a certain June, and a woman named Drutas and he commoned of
his living, she said unto him: Dioclesian thou art over covetous a nigarde. To
whom he in jest answered: thou shall see what a liberal fellow I will be,
when I am Emperor. Well (quoth she) jest not, for thou shalt be an Emperor
in deed when thou haste killed Aper, (meaning Aper, Numerianus father in law,
whom afterward Dioclesian killed for the death of Numerianus, who^ Aper slew.)
But Dioclesian construing Aper to be spoken according to the sense of the Latin
word, for a wild hoar, daily used to hunte wild bores: But when he had killed
many, and saw Arelianus, Probus, Tacitus, and Charus possess the Empire, he
would say: I kill the bores, but others eat the brawne. In the end, having
killed this Aper, and being now made Emperor, he said, now I have killed my
fatal Bore.

Procas succeeding in the kingdom of Albanie, conceived two sons, Aemulius and
Numitor, whereof Numitor being the elder succeeded in the kingdom. But
Aemulius perforce expelled his brother, and usurped the kingdom. And because
none of his posterity should afterward enjoy it, he killed Numitors son,
and made his daughter Rhea a virgin vestral. But she, whether it were by a
soldier, or else by the god Mars, as the Romans think, was conceived, and
bare two sons. Whereof Numitor having intelligence, caused her to be bound,
and put in prison, and commanded one to take the children, and cast them into
Tibris, but at yt time it happened that the water was so ouerflowe^, that he
which was charged to droun the^, could not come to ye river side, but thinking
that the ouerflowing of the water should be sufficient to drown them, he left
them there, and went his ways. Shortly after the water decreasing, one
Fastulus the kings shephearde, came and found them under a tree, which
afterward was called Ruminalis, and carried the^ home, committing them to
Laurentia his wife to be brought up. Who because she was evil reported of for
her honesty, ye shepherds called her Lupa and hereof it came that some write
they were fed of a she wolf. For Lupa in Latin so signifies in English. When
they came to age, they became great hunters, and used to rescue the pray which
thieves came to fteale. So that they were accounted amongst the shepherds to
be very valtaunt fellows. But in process of time it happened that ye shepherds
of Numitor and Aemilius falling out, in a fray Remus was taken and brought
bound unto Numitor, where he so valiauntly behaved him self in his answer,
that he caused Numitor to wonder at his singular audacitie, and remembering the
time of the exposition of his Nephues, by the circumstraunce of the time and
the liniame^t of the person, he suspected that it was his nephue. And whylest
Remus was thus occupied with Numitor, Faustulus which knew all the matter,
opened it unto Romulus. Whereupon leuying an army of young men, and having aid
also from Numitor their graundfather, they set on Aemulius their vnlce, and in
the end restored Numitor their graundfather unto his kingdom. And leaving
Albane they builded Rome in the place where they were cast forth. Brus. li 2.
cap. 38.

Mandana, Bruso. li. 2. cap. 38.
Astiages his daughter, dreamed that she made so much water, that the whole
city was filled, and all Asia overflowed therewith. With which dream
Astiages was so terrified, that he married his daughter unto Cambyses, a man
of a good wit, but of a mean birth. But the same year he him self also
dreamed, Just. li 2.
that he saw a vine grow out of the priuitie of his daughter, whose branches
ouershadowed al Asia. Wherefore he sent for his daughter, who was then nere her
travel, setting some to watch the birth, that as soon as it was brought
forth, it might be slain. Which being performed, as soon as the child was
borne, it was brought unto the king. Who took it unto Harpagus his very
friend, desiring and straightly charging him to carry it home, and kill it. But
when he came home, he determined with him self to abstain his hands from
killing the babe: wherefore he sent for Methridatis the kings shephearde, and
charged him in the kings name to take the infant, and cast it away on the
mountains. When he had the child, he carried it home, and showed it unto his
wife, who desired him of all loves not to cast away the child. But if he must
needs cast away one, she desired him to cast away her own, which she brought
forth that present day: wherein he accomplished her request, and cast away his
own child, retayning the other in his stead. Who growing in years, was made
king of his playfellowe boys: Wherefore playing Rex amongst them, when one
Artembaris, a rich man's son had disobeyed him, he caused him to be
apprehended, and beat him. Whereof his father complained unto the king, and
caused him to be sent for. When he came, the king beholding him, said: Art
thou the shepheardes son, which uses to beat the chief men's sons of
Media? Yea O king (quoth he) and that not without a cause. For the boys made
me king above others, because they thought me fitter therefore than the rest
were. Now whereas the rest reverenced and obeyed me: this one would not do
so, wherefore according to his deserts I punyshed him. At which words he
caused the king to wonder, and remembering the time of the childs exposition,
with the age and comeliness of the person, he feared that it was his nephue.
Wherefore calling Methridatis unto him, he straightly charged him to tell the
very truth of the matter, who daring do none other wise, declared the truth
of it. Heerevppon the king sent foorthwyth for Harpagus, demanding him what
he had done with the child? who declaring all that he had done, the king
made as though he were nothing offended herewith, but shortly after bidding him
to a banquet, he slew his son, and caused him unawares to eat thereof, asking
him after supper how he liked the meat? And when he said very well, he
commanded his cokes to bring in the head and other appurtenances of the child,
and sent Cyrus his new-founde nephue unto his parents at Persia. Who
afterward by the aid of Harpagus, subdued his Graundfather, verified their
Dreams, and enjoyed the kingdom. Herodot. li. 1.

Laius king of Thebes was told by an oracle, Brus li. 2. cap. 38.
that it were good for him never to have child. For the child whom he should
conceive, should be an occasion of great murder in their own house. Wherefore
as soon as the child was borne, it was drawn out by the heels, and thereof
was called Oedipus and cast away. But a woman chauncing to find him, brought
him up. Afterward it happened that Laius his father and he meeting, because
Laius proudly commanded him to give way, he slew him, not knowing that it was
his father. About that time, there came to Thebes, one Sphinx, who keeping a
certain bridge, there put forth a riddle to them that passed by, throwing the^
into the water that could not read it. But this Oedipus absolved it, and had
for his reward Iocasta, and the kingdom of Thebes* The ridle was thus. What
Craeture is it, that first has four feet, then two fete, and at last three
feet? Which Oedipus interpreted to be a man, who at his birth crauleth on all
four, afterward goes on his two feet, coming to age leans on his
staff, and so has three feet. Wherefore Sphinx was cast into the river, and
Oedipus unawares married Iocasta his own mother.

Of Felicity or happiness.
CRoesus king of Lidia, the richest man that ever was, sent for Solon, and
asked him whether any man were more happy than he? Yea (quoth Solon) that is
Telus, who had very honest men to his sons, and he him self manly died in
defending his country. Then Craesus asked him again, whether next unto Telus
he were not most fortunate? Eras. lib. 8. Apoth.
No (quoth he) Cleober and Brito are more happy, both for the singular
friendship which is between them, and also for the great obedience and
reverence which they showed unto their mother. But Craesus was here with
offended, and asked whether he had no place amongst ye fortunate? No (quod
Solon) we can not yet call thee blessed, but as soon as thou art dead, and out
of the danger of fortune and affection, then we shall see how happy thou shall
be. Wherefore Craesus was sorely displesed with him, and let him go without
doing him any honor. But this saying of Solon was shortly after verified. And
Craesus being overcome and taken captive of king Cyrus, and a fire made to
burn him, when he should enter into the flame, began oftesones to say, O Solon,
Solo^* Wherefore Cyrus asked him what he meant by those words? Then Craesus
telling him the sum of the matter: Cyrus seeing thereby the variety of
fortune, and the alteration of the world, caused the fire to be quenched, and
made Craesus one of his chief counselors. Ovid 4. de Ponto.

Of this felicity Martial in a certain Epigram says thus:

Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem. etc. In English thus:
The things which cause ma^s life, methinketh,
most full of bliss to be,
Are these: when goods from friends do fall,
and we from labor free.
When fertile field grows fast abroad,
and mind is void of strife,
And merry John by toasting fire
may sit with Ione his wife.
When corpse is sound and strong withal,
and wisdom rules the mind,
And friends in friendships faithful knot,
a faithful heart does bind:
When fare is good, though not of cost,
and night with pleasure pressed,
Not drousie head, but merry mind,
does cause a quiet rest.
To be as heart could vvishe or crave.
thy state content vvithall:
Not fear nor vvishe for fatal day,
But come when come it shall.
Demetrius was wont to say, that he thought nothing more unfortunate than him,
Eras. lib. 8. Apoth.
who in all his life had no misfortune chauncing him. For that such a one
either knows not himself, for lack of experience, or else is contemned and
over escaped of the Gods, as one good for nothing.

Sylla, who for his felicity was surnamed Felix, among other his happy haps,
said, that two things cheefely rejoiced him. The one, for that he had Pius
Metellus to his freende, the other, because he had not destroyed Athens. Ex
Plutarch. in Romans Apoth.

When one demanded of Socrates, whether he thought not Archilaus most happy?
I can not tell quoth he, for I never spoke with him. Bruso. lib. 2 cap. 36.

Antigonus seeing one of his soldiers, (who otherwise was a valiant man) to
have some secreate disease, asked him what the matter was that he looked so
pale? To whom the soldier confessing the truth of his anguishe, Antigonus
bad his Physicians, if it were possible to cure him. But being now cured of his
disease, he began to be more slack to fight, and not so hardy in his
affairs as he was wont to be. Whereat the king wondering, asked him how it
came to pass that his mind was so fodenly altered? Why thou thy self (quoth
he) art the cause thereof. For as long as I lived in pain and misery, I was
nothing afeard to lose so miserable a life. But now when by your goodness I
live in better case, I am loath to lose my life. Lycost. Ex Eras. lib. 8. Apoth.

Of Fortune.
POlycrates king of Samia, was a prince so fortunate, that he never desired any
thing, but he had it. And could no sooner wish but have. Wherefore fearing
the mutabilitie of Fortune, who when she strikes, strikes home: he took a
ring of inestimable price, and cast it into the sea. But fortune was so
favorable unto him, that a fish eat his ring, which afterward was taken and
given unto him, in whose belly the Cook finding the ring, restored it unto him
again. But in the end, making war with Darius, he was taken captive of
Crontes the chief Captain, hanged on the high mount Michasus, and there left
a pray for fowls to devour.

Dionisius the younger being asked how it chanced that his father was preferred
from the state of a private man, Brusonius. Lib. 2. ca. 37.
to become a king, and he from royal scepter, to be thrown down to so base
an estate, answered: because my father left me his kingdom, but not fortune.

Cressus consulting the oracle, whether he should wage war against Tomiris
the Queen (of whom he was in fine killed) was answered: If thou deemest thy
self immortal: then need thou not my counsel herein, but if thou
acknowledge thy self to be a man, let this be thy first lesson, that the state
of human affairs is round, and that fortune never leaves man in one estate.

When Aucaeus the son of Neptune and Astipalcas planting a vineyard, Bruso.
Lib. 2. ca. 37.
was earnest with his servants to apply their work: one of them said to his
fellows, what pains my Master takes about this vine, and yet he shall never
taste the fruit of the grape. When Ancaeus heard hereof, he said nothing until
the grapes were ripe, and even now pressed them, sending for his servant, and
caused a cup of the wine to be filled, he put it toward his mouth mocking and
taunting his servant for this vain prophecy. But as he was thus preaching
over the cup, an other of his servants came in with speed, and said, that
there was a wild Bore in the vineyarde. Wherefore Ancaeus cast down the cup,
and running to chase away ye wild bore, was destroyed of him: and heerof sprang
the prouerbial verse. Multa cadu^t inter calice^ supren^aque labra.

Though to thy mouth thou lift the pot,
Whether thou shall drink yet wotest thou not. Brusonius. Li. 2. cap. 37.

When one Damacles a Parasite of Dionisius began to praise ye abundance of
wealth, majesty and dominion, wherwt Dionisius was endued, and said, ye he
never saw any so fortunat as he was: Dionisius asked him whether he would be
content to assay his estate and fortune awhile? Yea (quoth Damacles) with all
my heart. Wherefore the king commanded that this Parasite should be laid in his
bed. The next day he caused a gorgious dinner to be prepared, and setting him
in his chair of estate, he charged the^ that with all possible honor and
pleasure they should serve him. But in the midst of this cheer, he caused a
glistering sweard to be hanged with a horse hair, and let down over his
head. Which when Damacles saw, neither could he behold the comeliness of his
seruitures, nor yet the delicacie of his meat, but only fastening his eyes on
the sword, he desired Dionisius to give him leave to depart, and said that
he would no longer be blessed. Bruso. Lib. 3. cap. 13.

On a time when the papacy of Rome had been vacant two years and more, the
Cardinals concluded to elect Petrus Moroneus a godly man, and consecrated him
by the name of Celestine the fifthe. Who because he began to refourme the
clergy, Boniface the eighte, (then called Benedictus) so handled the matter,
that what by his iuggling and speaking through his chamber walls, nightly
admonished him to give up his papacy, and other his diuellishe illusions, he
persuaded him in in some solitary deserte. And ere long was by this Boniface
apprehended, imprisoned, and put to death. For which impiety of his, when
Iacobus and Petrus Cardinals of Columna, seemed to be offended, this Boniface
took such displeasure against them, that he caused Preneste, Zagorolum and
Columna to be made level with the ground. Yea for their sakes he was so
displeased with the Gibilenes, and the inhabitauntes of Columna, that on
ashewednesday, when Porchetus an Archebishoppe, came and kneeled down before
him to receive his ashes, he looking on him, and perceiving that he was one of
the Gibilines, cast his handful of ashes in his eyes, and said: Memento
homo. etc. That is, remember man that thou art a Gibiline, and to ashes thou
shalt go. But in the end, partly from the Cardinals of Columna, Ex domino
Foxo.
and partly from Phillip the French king (whom he had greatly molested) were
sent an arnne of men, which came to Augonum, and there in his own fathers
house, and in the very chaumber where he was borne, they spoiled his
substance, and led him captive to Rome. And there within. 24. days after he
dyed for sorrow.

Whereas the inhabitants of Paphus were wont to have their king chosen of the
family of the Sinarasians, and now that house was clean spente, Alexander
being very desirous to get them a king of that stock, understood that there
was yet a poor man called Halimomus, which came of that lineage, wherefore with all speed he repaired thither to create him king. And finding him in his garden
drawing of water, with all triu^ph had him thence, and incontinent made him a
king, and companion of his own person. Bru. li. 2. cap. 37.

It is reported that Marius Septimus the tyrant was made emperor one day,
reigned ye next, and the third day was slain of his soldiers. Brus. li. 2.
cap. 37.

After the death of Antiochus, king of Syria, his son Seleucus killed Bernice
his stepmother, with the young child his brother. Whereof when Ptolome king of
Egypt, and brother to this Bernice, had intelligence, he came to Syria with a
main Host, to revenge the death of his sister: and so good success he had
herein, that all the kings of Syria yielded them unto him. But whylest he was
thus occupied in Syria, his own subjects rebelled in Egypt. Wherefore he was
feign to raise his siege and depart home. Then Seleucus thinking to be
revenged on the Syrian cities, which took part against him, prepared an army
to invade them. But so it fell out, that the greatest part of his navy were
drowned on the sea, and he with a small power arrived at the city, and there
when the citizens submitted them selves unto him, he received them to mercy.
And gathering a new army, he renewed the war against Ptolome, of whom he was
subdued, and compelled to flee to Antioche, as one with whom fortune was
disposed to make a playgame. Bruso. lib. 2. cap. 37.

When Timotheus, Conous son had subdued many cities unto the Athenian
kingdom, certain persons envying him, and ascribing all his prowess unto
fortune, painted him a sleep, and fortune subduing cities for him. But he
offended so to loese the glory of his valiant attemptes, the next time that
he had obtained a conqueste, he said unto the Athenians, that in all the
victories that ever he got, fortune could rightely challenge none of his
glory. Whereupon fortune was so offended with him, that after that time he
never atcheeued any notable act, but had evil success in all the affairs he
went about, and in the end lost the favor of the people, and was banished
his country. Brus. lib. 2. cap. 37.

When tidings was brought to king Phillip, of sundry good fortunes which
happened unto him at one instaunte, as that Tetrippo his son had won the
price at Olimpus, Dardenio had got a great conqueste on the sea, and Olimpia
his wife had brought him forth a man child: he held up his hands to
heaven, and said. And O fortune I beseech thee for so many and so great
benefits of thine, suffer but some small myschiefe to lyghten upon me. Lico.
Plut. in Apo reg. Fulgo. lib. 7. cap. 2.
Knowing her manner to be such, that on whom she means to work some
great myschiefe, on them she first she weth a favorable and fauning face,
as plainly appears in the story of Polycrates.

Simonides the Philosopher was invited to a banquet of Paulanias the king. Who
in the banquet desired him to tell them something out of his Philosophy, that
might be a lesson for them whylest they lived. Well then (quoth he) remember
Pausanias, that thou art a man. For seeing Pausanias by reason of his happy
estate, to think well of him self: he thought good by those words to put
him in mind of his duty. But albeit Pausanias contemned this sage saying of
the Philosopher, yet afterward (being taken captive, and like to be
famyshed) he was forced to allow and commend his words, and to appostrophate
unto himself in this sort: O guest, guest, I see now there was great
weighte in thy words: Lycost. Aelian. li. ^0
but I reposed such confidence in mine own fickle fortune, that I thought
them of no force. Wherefore now I must dye a miserable death.

Of Fortitude and Manhood.
IF Antisthenes saw any woman go gayly apparelled, he would straightwayes
go unto her husbands house, and bid him show his horse, and his harness,
and if he thought them sufficient, he would suffer his wife to go at her
pleasure, because she had one at home to defend her. But if he lyked not of
it, he would persuade her to leave of her gay clothes, least some body would
come and steal her away. Ex Laer. li. 6. cap. 1. Licost.


Archilomida Brasidas mother, hearing that Brasidas her son was slain in
war, the first question she demanded, was whether he dyed manfully of no?
Yea (quoth the Thrasisians:) For amongst all the Lacedaemonians there was none
in prowess and virtuous qualityes comparable unto him. You know not sirs
(quoth she) what fellows the Lacedaemonians are, I think in deed Brasidas my
son was a good honest young manne, but yet not so good, but that there be many
better amongst the Lacedaemonians. Which answer of hirs is greatly to be
commended, as well for her wisdom and fortitude, in so rejoicing at the honest
death of her son: as also for her modesty and natural affection unto her
country, which could not abide that her son should be so highely praised,
that his praise should any thing derogate from the true commendation of her
native soil. Plutar. in Lacon. Apoth. Lycost.


When a certain Athenian made a funeral Oration in the praise of them whom
the Lacedaemonians had slain in the war: a Lacedemonian standing by, said:
If these were such iollie fellows which were slain, what think you of our
men which slew them.

Alexander the son of Mammea, hearing that Artaxerses king of Persia, was
coming with an huge army to invade the Roman Empire, said unto his
soldiers, that strong and valiant men ought to wish the best in all
things, but yet to be content and to suffer, if any thing happen contrary to
their expectation. And neither to wax proud in prosperity, nor to despair
in adversity. Licost.
Herodian. lib. 6.

When Publius Crassus son had a long time manfully fought against his
enemies, and was in fine slain of them, they fastened his head upon a spear,
and therewith approached nigh unto the Roman army, and greatly triumphing that
they had him, they asked the Romans of what stock that young man came? saying
that it was impossible that so valiant a son should come of so cowardly a
father. But Crassus was nothing troubled with this heavy sight, but ran among
the Roman soldiers, and said: this loss is mine ye Romans, this calamity
is mine, and I only have cause to be sorry for this, but in your health and
prowess, consists the public wealth and glory of the whole city. Plut. in
N. Crass.

When Xerxes made war against Greece, the Athenians sent a spy to view
Agiselaus Themistocles brother. Who coming into the host slew one Mardonius
Xerxes Courtier, thynking to have slain the king him self. Wherefore he was
apprehended and sacrificed on the altar of Sol, and there stoutly endured all
the torment, not once sighing for all the pain. And when he was losed, he told
them that all the Atheniens were such fellows, and if you believe me not burn
my left hand also.

Of Friends and Friendship.
SOcrates was wont to say, that no possession is so good as a true and a
faithful friend, and that nothing is so pleasant and profitable as is such a
friend. Wherefore they go a contrary way to work, which are more sorry for
the loss of their money than for their friend, and think that they have lost
much, if they bestow a benefit on any man without some present profit,
whereas in deed they gain thereby a friend, which may by the fruitfullest
gain possible. Erasm. Lib. 3. Apo.

When it was told Dion (which afterward expelled Dionisius out of his
kingdom) that Calixtus his friend, who^ above all others he trusted most,
went about to seek his life: he couloe by no means be persuaded to condemn
him to death. But said: I had rather be dead, than not only to stand in fear
of my ennimies, but also to mistruste my friends. Ex Plutarcho in regum
Apotheg.

Antigonus dreamed that he was walking in a fair field, Bruso. Lib. 1. cap. 3.
and there sowed golden crummes, whereof incontinente sprang up golden Corn.
The interpretation whereof, was applied to Methridates king of Pontus, whom
they said at Ponthus to have great store of Gold. Whereupon Antigonus fully
purposing to destroy Methridates, opened his mind to Demetrius his son,
binding him with an oath to tell it to no man, but Demetrius being Methridates
very friend, because for his oath he could not open it in words, watched a
time until Methridates and he were alone, and then he took his Spear, and
with the point thereof wrote, Flee Methridates, and so delivered his friend
from present peril.

Luc us being Brutus very friend, Bruso, li. 1. cap 3.
and seeing the Soldiers very desirous to take Brutus: he made as though he
had been Brutus, and so was taken, and with all speed brought before
Antonius the Emperor, in whose presence he said: O Anthony, no man has
taken Brutus, and God forbid that he should ever come into his ennimies
hands. At which words of his, when Anthony saw his Souldioures greatly
abashed, he said thus unto them: I believe (syrs) that you are greatly
grieved, and very sorry to see that you are thus deceived, and also think
that you were very much mocked herein. But know of a troth that you have
brought me a better pray than you are aware of, for I know not (I protest)
what to have done with Brutus if I had him a live. But such a friend as this
is, I had rather have than all my foes. And so lovingly entertained, embraced
and kyssed Lucius. Plutarchus.

Orestes and Pilades so entirely loved each other, Bruso. li. 1. cap 3.
that whereas Orestes fell mad for slaying his mother Clitimnestra: Pilades
took him and brought him to Tauritia to the temple of Diana where Iphigenia his
Sister was abiding. And there afterward when Orestes and his Sister went about
to steal the Image of Diana, he was therefore apprehended and brought before
the king. And when he was adjudged to die, Pilades made as though he had been
Orestes* and Orestes as the truth was, offered himself as the party guilty.
And so contended whether of them should die. Ex Plutarcho.

Such friendship likewise there was betwixt Damon and Pythias, Bruso Lib. 1.
cap. 3.
that whereas Dionisius the tirante had condemned one of them to die, and he
desired leave to go to bid his friends their vltimum val, and to set his
goods in a stay: the other became his suertie, promising that if he came not
at his day, he would dye in his stead. But when he was so faithful that he
came at the time prefixed: Dionisius maruelling at their fidelity forgave the
party guilty, and desired them to make him the third in this saythfull and
friendly fellowship. Cicero off li. 3.

But because this friendship is a black Swanne in these our days, Bruson.
li. 1. cap. 3.
Esope in his fables warns us, that the things which we now do our selves,
we never look for our friends to do for us. The Fable whereof is this: On a
time the Lark having yongones in a corn field which began to wax ripe, when
she should flee abreade to seek meat, she warned them to harken what news
they could hear, and at her coming home to certify her thereof. It happend in
the mean season that the owner of the field came thither with his son to
see his corn, saying this geere is ripe, and it is time that it were now
cut down: wherefore to morrow morning betimes go unto my friends, and
desire them that I may have their help to dispatche this business: which
thing the son accordingly did, and they no doubt promised their aid.
Wherefore at night when the Lark came home, all her birds began to flutter
about her, telling her what they had heard, and desiring that she would
incontinent carry them to some other place, but she willed them be content,
and bad them hearken the next day what news they could hear. The next day
the goodman and his Son came a field, waiting when his friends would
appear, but there came nobodie. Wherefore he said again unto his Son, go
to my Cosens and Kinsfolk, and desire them to morrow morning to come and
help me reaps my corn. The yongbirdes hearing this, were now more earnest
with their damme to transporte them thence, but she was as earnest to persuade
them not to be afraid. For no Cosens (quothe she) will be so serviceable, that
they will strayghte-wayes come and help their kindred. But to morrow abide,
and hearken what other news you can hear, and then if need be, I will
provide for you. The next day the Cosens came not: wherefore the goodman
said, farewell friends and kinsfolk, let us trust to our selves, go thou my
Son and provide two hooks, one for thy self, and an other for me, and we
two to morrow will reap it our selves. When the Lark heard of this, nay now
(quoth she) it is time to get us packing, and so she immediately bare away her
youg ones. Ex Aesopo.

Zopirus caused his nose and his ears to be cut off, and making as though he
were some other of the Persian princes: he went unto Babylon, and there
complained, that Darius had so cruelly delte with him, desiring them to take
vengeance on him. And so prevailed with them that they levied a power, and made
him chief ruler of their Army, and so by this means betrayed Babylon unto
Darius his friend. But afterward Darius would often say, that he had
rather have Zopirus whole again, than the conquest of a hundred Babilons. Much
unlike such Princes which make more of a disarde, a horse, or a dog, than of
an honest faithful and learned friend. Also Darius finding fault with the
cruelty of Zopirus toward himself, would say that by a foul fact he had
gotten himself a fair name. Ex Plutarcho and lustino in Lib. 1.

Scipio the younger following the advice of Polibius, endeavored never to return
out of the market before he had made some of them whom he met there, to
become his very friend. Plurarchus in Reg. Apoth.

When Nicocles and Photion being perfect friends, were condemned to die of
poison, Nicocles desired Photion to suffer him first to taste of this deadely
drink, who answered. Albeit friend Nicocles this request of thine is hard,
yet must I needs grant it thee, to who^ in all my life hitherto I never
denied ought. So great a grief it is where true friendship is, to see the
death of his friend. Plutarch. in Grae. Apoth.

Of Gluttony and Riot.
WHen it was told Augustus that Curotes his steward of Aegipt had boughte a
tame Quayle, which was compted the passingst fighting bird in all the
Country, and after he had boughte him, did roste and eat him. He sent for his
Steward, and proving this report to be true, he commanded that he should be
fastened to the maste of a ship and there to dye. Accompting him unworthy to
live, who for his gluttonous appetite would kill a bird, whose life would
have showed many men much pastime and pleasure.

When it was told Scipio that a certain young man bydding Guestes to a
banquet, had made cakes like unto the City, and termed it Carthage: he
took this young man's horse from him, and when he demanded him what he mente
thereby? why quod Scipio, dyddest thou first take away Carthage from me and
eat it? And so with a pretty scoff punished him for his gluttony.

Cyrus in Xenophon rebuked Astiages his Grandfather for his excess in delicate
fare. But Astiages answered him, if thou dyddest once taste of this, my Son,
thou would like it marvelous well: and how should I like of it quoth
Cyrus whereas thou do so much abhor it? For when thou take bread thou
never wipest thy fyngers after it: but when thou dippest of this, thou keep
a wyping as though thou had touched some unclean thing.

Of Hatred and Envy.
WHen it was told Agis that there was one envied him, no force (quothe he) the
harm shall be his, for then both his own evil hap and my good fortune
shall put him to pain: Aluding to Horace who said.

Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. The envious man pineth away when he
sees his adversary prosper.

And Antisthenes said, that Envy gnaweth and consumes the envious man no
other wise than ruste does the iron. Likewise Chrysostom upon one of the
Psalms says: that envy is an unquenchable fire which consumes him that
has it, like as the mothes do cloth. Whose ugly anctamie a certain Poet
describes in this sort.

Pallor in ore sedet macies in corpore toto. In English thus:
His face is pale, his corpse is lean,
his eyes are dim of sight,
His teeth do rust, his breath does stink
his tongue is poisoned quite:
He never laughes, unless it be
when other men do weep,
He troubled is at others joys,
that scarce he takes his sleep,
And other men he blames apase
and they at him do chyde,
And thus himself he does torment,
and pain does still abide.
When Caius Furnius was made free, albeit he had but a little ground of his
own: yet he so played the good husband therein, that he had more increase
of Corn than his neighbors had, of better and far larger fields.
Wherefore some of them accused him, that he had by witchcrafte gotten other
men's Corn into his field. At the day therefore of his appearance, he brought
all his husbandry tools with him. He brought his Daughter being a ioly
huswife, and well apparelled, his plowchaynes strong and well made, his culter,
share, and other instruments meet for a good husband, and his Oxen mighty
and full of flesh, and said: lo here are my charming instruments which
brought my field so good increase, and so he was released. Ex Plin. Lib 18.
cap. 16. Bruson. Lib. 3. cap. 7.

Antiphiles envying Apelles, accused him to Ptolome, (who loved him very
well,) that he went to Tire, and there stirred the king to Rebellion, and
said that all the business which was between the ^irians and Aegipt, came by
means of this Apelies. Ptolome believing this tale, began to call Apelles
traitor and rebel. But afterward when one of the Tirian captives swore, that
Apelles was falsely accused, and that he neither made nor meddled therein:
Ptolome repented him that ever he had so said, and for amends, gave Apelles a
hundred Talentes, and this Antiphiles to be his bondsman. A just reward of a
lying and envious varlet, and a notable example for Princes to be ware, so
lightely to give credit to pickthankes and tell tales. Brusonius Lib. 3. cap.
7.

Marcus Anthonius commanded his Steward to deliver two hundred pounds to a
friend of his. Bruso. lib. 3. cap. 7.
But the Steward maruelling, and envying at the greatness of the gift,
began to open the money, and asked what should be done therewith? Why I tell
thee (quoth the Emperor) I mean to bestow it on this my friend. And seeing the
malicious stomach of his Steward, he said: Is this the whole sum? yea
(quoth he:) now ^urely quoth Anthonius I thought two hundred pounds had
contained much more mency than this. Wherefore go and fetch as much more. O how
many ^uch wicked and malicious stewards be there now a days, which because
they deserus nothing them selves, they can not abide that their Lords should
bestow it on such, as well deserve it.

Themistocles was so grieved, to see Milciades honored for the great conquest
he won at Marathea, fighting against the Barbarians: that he could not take
his rest. And being demanded what caused him to be so watchful? He answered,
that Milciades triumphs, would not suffer him to sleep.

The king of the Assirians, so loved Gobrias, one of his Noble men, that he
meaned to join his daughter in marriage with Gobrias son. Wherewith Gobrias
being well content, sent his only son to the king, that they might further
entreat of this marriage matter. But so it fell out, that the kings son, and
he going a hunting together, and chauncing to meet with a Bear, the kings
son shot at him, and missed, but this young Gobrias siewe him. And when the
like chanced, in chasing a Lion: the kings son was so wroth, and envious
against him, that he took a spear out of his man's hand, and slew him.
Bruson. Lib, 3. cap. 7.

Of Harlots.
Solomon who had himself. 300. concubines, says in his Proverbs, that the
lips of an harlot, are as the dropping of an honey comb, and her throat more
sweet than oil, but her end is as bitter as wormewoode.

When Agrippus a yongman in Plautus comedy, entitled Asinaria, Bruso. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
was like to be put from his lemman, because he had not twenty pounds to give
her, and Leonidas his man had so handled the matter, that he had got the
money: the harlot came to him and said, O Leonida mine eye, my Rose, my mind,
my pleasure and hearts delight, let me have the money that we two lovers be not
put asunder. Nay I pray thee quoth Leonidas call me thy sparow, thy hen, thy
Lamb, thy kid or thy calfe, and so pretely tau^ted her flattering tongue.

Straphones a soldier in Plautus comedy Truculentus, was in love with Phronesius
a harlot, and when he had been from her a season she said, that she was
conceived with child by him, and getting an other woman's child, she mente to
present it unto him, and make him believe that it was his. When word was
brought unto him, that Phronesius was brought a bed with a child, and
confessed that he was father thereof, he made al speed to return home unto her.
Afterward resorting unto her house, and meeting with Astrophius the Harlottes
handmayde, he talked with her in this sort: I pray thee is Phronesius brought
a bed? yea forsoothe sir (quoth she) with a goodly Boy. And is it like me
quoth he? as like as may be (quoth she.) For as soon as he was borne, he
called for a sword and a buckler.

Phryne desired a Caruer that was in love with her, to give her one of the best
Images he had, the which thing the lover promised to do, but the crafty
Harlot thinking that he would not let her know which was the best,
suborned her man to set his shop on fire, wherefore when most part of his
Images were brent, and yet some of the best escaped, the caruer cried out,
Alas if Cupide and my Satyrs had been brent, I had been utterly undone. And so
by this devil she policy, she understanding that the Image of Cupide was more
worth than the rest, required to have it for her reward. Ex Eras. li. 6.
Apoth.

Theodora a passing strumpet, Lycost.
talking with Socrates of her great haunt, made her best that she could call
away more of his scholars, than he could of hirs. No marvel (quoth
Socrates:) for thy ways seem pleasant and easy: but the way to virtue
seems full of brambles and briers. Recitatur apud Xenophon, and Telia. li.
13. de varia histo.

Gnathena a queen, Licost.
seeing two young men fighting for her, comforted him that had the worse in this
wise: Be merry good fellow, for this game was not for glory, but for spending
of money. Meaning that in other games he that had the best, had some reward
for his pains. But here he that had the best, must pay some money, or else
should go wtcout her. And so it was better for him to go without ye conquest,
than have it. Ex Er. l. 6. Ap.

Of Humanity and Gentleness.
DEmonax said, that we ought not he offended with men, when they offend us,
but to correct and amend their faults: imitatin; herein good physicians, which
are not offended with me^, because they are infirmed, but endeavor to cure
their disease. And as it is proper to man to offend: so is it the manner of
God, and of such men as desire to be like unto God, to forgive their offenses.
Ex Eras. li. 8. Apoth. Licost.


Certain tospottes chanced to fall in company with Pisistratus wise, who having
dronken more than they had bled, began to show their lascivious manners
abundantly toward her. But on the morrow when they came to them selves, and
remembered what they had don, they went to Pisistratus, and besoughte him with
tears to forgive their folly. To whom Pisistratus said: take heed
hereafter that you behave your selves more soberly. But as for my wife, I can
bear her record, that she was not out of my gates yesterday of all the day.
Showing great humanity in forgiving the sily souls, Lycost.
and no less wisdom in defending his wives honesty. Ex Plut in Grae, Apoth.

When one told Agisipolis, that Philip king of Macedonie had in a short time
destroyed the city Olirthius, he answered: but it would be a good while ere he
would build such an other. Meaning that it were far better with gentleness
to preserve such a city, than with such austeritie to destroy it. Ex Plut.
in La.

Theodocius the younger was of such and so wonderful humanity, Licost.
that when his friends demanded him why he did not behead such as had
conspired his death? he answered: I had rather restore such as are dead to
life, than to put to death such as are alive. Aboundauntly herein declaring
the ductie of a good Prince, who ought to be gentle and ready to forgive such
as offend privately against him self, Ex Eras. li. 8. Apoth.
but yet to be austere and sharp to punish such as offend generally against
the common wealth. Brus. li. 3. cap. 4.


When Ouileus Camillus a Romans Senator meaned to rebel, and purchase unto
him self the Roman Empire, Alexander Seuerus hearing thereof, sent for him,
and thanked him, that he was so willing to take so great a charge in hand. And
in the Senate house called him sellowe Emperor, courteously intertayned him
into his palace, caused him to be apparelled with his imperial robes, and when
he went in progress, took him as his companion to ride with him. And when he
him self went on foot, he would cause him to ride on horseback. And
finally when by the law he was condemned to dye, he gave him his life, and
forgave him his fault.

Traianus the Emperor, Eiusdem.
which succeeded Nerua, did so surmount his predecessors in humanity and
gentleness, that when his friends blamed him, and said he was too gentle unto
his subjects: he answered, that he behaved him self toward them, as he
would wish that they should do toward him.

Sigismunde the Emperor said, Licost.
that those Princes of all others were most happy and fortunate, which expel
from out of their court the malicious and proud, and retain such as be
merciful and gentle. Aeneas Siluius de dictis Sigismun, Impe.

Alexander having taken Porus king of Indio captive, Licost.
offered to give him his request in any thing that he should reasonably
demand. Wherefore king Porus desired him that he might be used like a king.
At which words Alexander smiled, and said: I meaned so to do, albeit thou
had not desired it, though not for thy sake, yet for my own honor and
honesty. Ex Bruso. li 3. cap. 13.

When one had sold gems of glass unto Galenes, Aurelius Ceasars wife, Lycost.
making her be leeue that they were right gemmes, she afterward perceiving
that she was so deluded, desired her husband to have him punished for his
disceite. Whervppon the Emperor commanded that be should be taken, and made
him believe that he should be devoured of a lion. Then being put into a cave,
and all men looking when a ramping lion should come to devour him, on a
sudden he cast in a sily capon. And when all men marvelled at so ridiculous a
thing, he caused the crier to cry, he offended in deceit, and with deceit lo
he is punished. Lycost.
Ex Trebellio pollio.

This Aurelianus the Emperor coming to besiege Tira, and finding the gates
shut against him, said in his chafe, that he would not leave a dog alive in all
that city. Which voice of his greatly encouraged his soldiers, hoping thereby
to get some great pray, and when they had now subdued the city, they desired
the Emperor according to promise, to suffer them to ransacke the same. Go to
(quoth he) I remember in deed that I said, that I would leave never a dog
in all the city. Wherefore go your ways, and kill them al. And so he
accomplished his promise, and yet ge^tly intreted his einmies. Ex Flauio Vopisc.

At the siege of Caieta, Lycost.
when the inhabitants had for want of vittaile expelled out of their city all
the young fry, old people, and all other that were not mete for war:
Alphonsus king of Arragon, who came to subdue them, gently received them into
his camp. Whereof of when certain of his soldiers blamed him, and said,
that if he had not received them, the Caietanes would have yielded unto him
ere long: he answered, that he did more esteem their lives, than the conquest
of a hundred such cities. A notable act, and worthy perpetual memory. And
afterward the city, which with forty thousand men of arms he could not
subdue, by that kindness, without any effusion of blood yielded unto him. Ex
Panor. li. 1. de rebus geftis Alphonsi.

Ex domino Foxo.
Johannes Scotus, a right godly divine and learned Philosopher, coming to
France out of his own country of Scotland, by reason of the great tumults of
war, was worthily entertained, and had in great estimation of Carolus Caluus
the French king, whom he commonly and familiarly used to have about him, both
at bed and at board. Upon a time the king sitting at meat, and seeing (belike)
in this John Scotus. somewhat which seemed not very courtly: cast forth a merry
word, asking him what difference there was between a Scot and a Sot? Whereunto
the Scot sitting over against the king, somewhat lower, replied again suddenly,
rather than advisedly, (yet merrily) saying: Mensa tantum, that is, the table
only: importing himself to be the Scot, and so by craft calling the king a
Sot. Which thing the king took in good part, and laughed it out.

Xerxes seeing Grecian spies come to view his army, did them no harm, but
led them about, showing them all his army, and let them go unhurt.

Laurentius Palatine of Hungary said, that Sigismunde the Emperor did
foolishly, Lycost.
who not only forgave his enemies their lives, but also entreated them as his
friends, and bestowed much liberality upon them: to whom Sigismunde answered,
thou think it profitable to kill thy enemies, because they shall make war
against thee no more. But I kill my enemy with sparing him, and with my
liberality I make him my friend. Ex Aenea Siluio. l. 3. commentarij de rebus
ge^^is Alphon.

Of Innocence, or a good conscience.
WHen Anaxandridas saw one heavy, Licost.
because he should be banished the city, he said, be not afraid good fellow to
leave the city, but be afraid to forsake justice and equity. Meaning that
they were not miserable which were unworthily punished, but them to be most
miserable which of their own accord forsake justice, Ex Plut. in Lac. Apoth.
and depart from honesty, albeit no punishment ensue therefore.

Pirrhus leading an army against the Lacedaemonians, Lycost.
heard Cyrcilidas a Lacedemonian Senator manace the army. But Pirrhus said
unto them: Be of good comfort sirs, for if Cyrcilidas be a God, we have done
nothing wherewith he may be displeased. But if he be but a man, he shall well
perceive that we are men, to whom he thus threatens, and not women. Whose
meaning was, that the innocent are always in hope of Gods favor and
assistaunce: Who although he be sometimes displeased, yet will he always he
just and righteous in visiting the unjust, Ex Max. Ser. 5.
and letting the innocent and guiltless escape.

When Vespasian had a long time ben sick of an ague, Licost.
and was removed in his bed from the place where he lay, unto some other
chamber: he looked up into heaven, and complained that his life should without
cause be taken from him. And said that he was sorry for no deed that ever he
did, but for one, what that was he told not him self, neither can any
contecture what it should be. Ex Suetonio.

When one blamed Anthonius Pius the Emperor, Lycost.
saying: that he was over gentle unto his enemies, and such as had conspired
his death, asking him what should become of him, if they had prevailed against
him? he answered: I do not so serve God, neither is my life such that I
should be given into my enemies hands. Ex Brus. li. 5. cap. 26.

Alphonsus King of Arragon, being demanded why he went sometimes without his
guard? answered, that he went accompanied with innoce^cie. Whereby the wise
prince meaned that he was well guarded from sustayning any injury, that had a
clear conscience of his own, and that they were never in safety, who bear
about them a corrupt conscience, Panor. li. 2. de Alphon. rebus gestis.
but as the Psalmist says, they are afraid of danger where no danger is.

Of Judges and Judgment.
PHilip king of Macedonie, sitting in judgment in a certain cause of one
Macheta, slumbring, and not tending the cause, unadvisedly condemned Macheta.
But he cried out, and said, I appeal. Appeal (quod the king) unto who^ do
thou appeal? Unto thee O king (quod he) if thou will awake and hear me.
Whereupon the king began to awake and be more atte^tiue in his cause, and
perceiving that he had done him wrong, he did not revoke his former judgment,
but paid him self the sum, wherein Macheta was condemned. Bruso. li. 3.
cap. 10.

Alexander Seuerus did bear such stomach against corrupt judges, that when he
chanced to meet with any of the^, by co^motion of his mind he would cast up
choler, being so moved with them, that he could not speak, and was ready with
his two fingers to put out their eyes. Bruso. li. 3. cap. 10.

When Cambises king of Persia understood that one of his judges had pronounced
false judgment, he commanded that his skin should be flayne of, and set on
the chair where he sat in judgment, and where his son after him should sit
to give sentence. Brus. li 3. cap. 10.

Marcus Antonius the wise Philosopher, and mighty Emperor was wont to say,
that private persons had many judges, but Princes and Magistrates have only
God to be their judge. As by this example following may appear.

Ex domino Foxo.
Anno domini. 1105. two famous Archebishops of Mentz being right virtuous and
well disposed prelates, were cruelly and tirannously dealt withal, and entreated
by the bishop of Rome. Their names were Henry and Christian. This Henry
having intelligence that he was complained of to the Pope, sent a learned man,
(an especial friend of his) named Arnolde, to excuse him. But this honest man
Arnolde, in stead of an excuser became an accuser, brybing the chief
Cardinals with good gold: by which means he obtained of the Pope those two
Cardinals to be sent as inquisitours, and only doers in that present case.
The which (coming to Germany) summoned the said Henry, and deposed him of
his Archbishopricke (for all that he could do) either by justice, or law,
substituting in his place the said Arnolde* upon hope (no doubt) of the
Ecclesiastical gold. Whereupon that virtuous and honorable Henry spoke unto
those perverse judges on this wise: If I should appeal unto the Apostolic
see for your unjust process had against me: perhaps the Pope would attempt
nothing more herein than you have, neither should I win any thing by it, but
only toil of body, loss of good, affliction of mind, care of heart, and
missing of his favor. Wherefore I do appeal unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as to
the most highest and just judge, and cite you before his judgment, there to
answer before the high judge. For neither justly nor godly (but by corruption
as it pleased you, ye have judged me. Whereto they scoffingly answered: go you
first, and we will follow you. Not long after (as the story is) the said Henry
died. Whereof the two Cardinals having intelligence, said one to the other,
iestingly: behold he is gone before, and we must follow, according to our
promise. And verily they said truer than they were aware of, for within a while
they died in one day. For the one sitting on a iakes to ease himself voided out
al his intrels into ye draught, and miserably died. The other gnawing of the
fingers of his hands, and spitting them out of his mouth (all deformed in
devouring himself) died. And likewise not long after the end of these men, the
foresaid Arnolde (most horribly) in a sedition, was slain: and certain
days, lying stinking above the ground unburied, was open to the spoil of
every rascal and harlot. Ex domino Fox.

As Ptolome was on a time playing at tables, Licost.
one came to him, reading the names of such as were condemned, with the crimes
that they had committed, to know what kind of execution each of them
(according to their deserts) should sustain. But Bernice, Ptolomes wife took
the scroule of his hand, and would not suffer him make an end of reading. And
said that he ought not go so unadvisedly to work, when they entreat of life
and death, but leaving of their game, should go to it in earnest. Knowing that
the life of man is of greater importance, than a cast at tables. Which wise
words of hirs greatly pleased the wise Prince, and after that he would never
determine of so weighty a matter, before he had rightly and duly considered
the same. Ex Aeliano. li. 14. de Va. hi.

When Zeuxis an excellent painter had portrayed the picture of Helena, Lycost.
Nicostratus an other painter coming by, gazed a long time on ye artificial
workma^ship thereof. An other of his neighbors coming that way, went to
Nicostratus, and asked him why he wondered so much at so common a thing? O
(quoth he) if thou had mine eyes, thou would not think it common. Alluding
to our proverb: Eras. li. 6. Apoth.
A blind man can not judge of colors.

When Apelles had portrayed his pyctures, he used to set them forth in the
street, and sitting him self behind a clothe, he would hearken what every
one said of his workmanship. It happened therefore on a time, that having with
all diligence portrayed a passing piece: a shoemaker came by, and found fault
with the shoe, saying, that there wanted a hemme in the heel, which reprofe of
his, Apelles (authorizing his science) took in good part. But the next day
coming by again, he said that the leg was not well formed. Wherefore
Apelles seeing his blind boldness: stepped forth, and said: Ne suitor vltro
crepidam. Nay let not shoemaker meddle further than the shoe. Ex Bruson. lib.
1. cap. 10.

Negabisus an affectionate fellow sometimes would greatly commend the rude
workemanshippe of the Paynter, Licost.
and at an other time would disprayse very artificial workmanship. Wherefore
Xeuxes sons holding a paynting stick in their hands, would laugh and mock
him to scorn. Wherewith when he seemed to be offended, Xeuxes said unto him:
as long as thou hold thy peace, the children think thou art a fine fellow,
because of thy gay clothes, but as soon as thou think to speak of some
weighty matter, they contemn thee, Wherefore rule thy tongue, and praise nothing
wherein thou have no skill, and know not whether it be well or evil. Ex
Aeliano. Lib. 2. de vari. Brusonius li. 3. cap. 16. Erasmus Lib. 6. Apoth.
Plin. pro Negaby. ponit. Alexan. Magnum.

Of Justice and Equity.
WHen Bias was about to condemn one to death, he began bitterly to weep, and
to lamente the lamentable case of the man. But when one said unto him, why
doste thou weep? since it stands in thy choice whether thou will condemn
him or save him: he answered as nature charge me to bewail his death: so
does she bind me for nothing to depart from justice and equity. Ex Eras.
ser. 44.

Antisthenes the wisest of the Athenian Philosophers, said: that a wise man is
not bound to humane laws. Meaning that a wise man is only bound to virtue,
and in all things orders his life according to equity and justice. Laer. li.
6

When Cyrus was a boy, his master gave him this argument to teach him the rule
of perfect justice. There were (quoth he) two boys, the one great, and he had a
little coat, the other little, and he had a great crate, now this little boy
put of his own great coat, and did put on his fellows little coat. Was
this good justice quoth ye master, or no? Yea (quoth Cyrus) for by this means
each of them had a fit coat. Nay quoth his master thy judgment is false.
For justice commands to give every one his own. And so took him up and
beat him.

On a time as Carolus Caluus the French king was sitting at dinner, and was
served with a certain dishe of fish, wherein were two great ones and a little
one, after he had thereof sufficiently taken his repast, he set down the said
fish to Johannes Scotus, to distribute with the two clerks that were sitting
with him, which were two tall mighty persons, he himself being but a little
man. Johannes takes the fish, of the which the two great ones he carved to
himself: the little fish he reached to the other two: whose unjust division
the king beholding, reprehended him therefore. But he answered and said that he
would prove this division to be both just and equal. For here (says he) be
two great and a little, poynting to the two great fishes, and him self: and
likewise here again is a little one, and two great, pointing to the little
fish, and the two great persons. I pray you (quoth he) what odds is this? or
what distribution can be more equal? Ex domino Fox.

Glaucus in all his dealings was a very just and vprighte manne, only in one
thing a little departing from justice, he was greatly plagued therefore. On a
time one Milesius took a great sum of money to keep, leaving a certain
token whereby he might know how, and to whom to restore it again.

But after long continuance of time, when the sons of the man that delivered
it came to require it, he would not deliver the money before he had therein
consulted the oracle. Wherefore he died without issue, and the name of his
house was clean extinct and decayed. Bruson. Lib. 3. cap. 8.

Johannes the Emperor, and Henricus Duke of Corinthe, Lycosthe.
being a long time at variance for the kingdom of Boheme: there came one unto
this Johannes, who promised that if he should have any thing for his labor,
he would poison the Duke his ennimie. But this godly Emperor so embraced
justice: that he gave him this sharp answer. If thou had killed Duke
Henry, I not knowing thereof, and had come to me for a reward: I promise
thee I would have rewarded thee with a halter, for imbruing thy hands with his
regal blood. And would thou, thou varlet have been author of so horrible an
act? Aneas Siluiu, lib 3. commentariorum de rebus gestis Alpho.

Ex domino Fox.
On a time when the Abbot of a certain Monastery was dead, there came unto the
Court of William Rufus then king of England two Monks of the same house:
who before had gathered much money and made their friends to the king, and
offered large offered large offers, either of them to be promoted unto that
dignity. There was also the third Monk, who of meekness and humility
followed the other two: to the intent that on him whom the King should
admit Abbot, he should attend and wait. The King called before him the two
Monks severally, and either of them out-profered the other, but as he cast
his eye aside, he espied the third Monk standing by, supposing that his
coming had also been for the like cause, wherefore calling him unto him, he
asked him what he would do, whether he would give more than his brethren had
offered to be Abbot? who answered the king and said: that he neither had
(nor would if he might) offer any penny for it, nor by any such unlawful
means come by it. When the King had well pondered his answer he said, that he
was best worthy to be Abbot, and to have the rule of so holy a charge: and so
gave it him without taking any penny for it.

Of Labor and pain taking.
DEmocritus being demanded what difference was betwixt the painful and the
idle? answered, the same difference that is between the wicked and the godly.
Lycost.
For the labourer hops for his reward, whereas the idle person, respecting
his present estate, is content to take his ease, and to live a miserable and
beggarly life. Ex Maxi. ser. 32.

The wise man in his Proverbs, reproves the sluggardes in this wise. Go to
the Pismire, O thou sluggard: behold her ways, and be wise. For she having
no guide, gouernoure, nor ruler, prepares her meat in summer, and gathers
her food in harvest. How long will thou sleep O thou sluggarde? when will thou awake out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
folding of thy hands together: Therefore thy poverty comes on as a
trauailer by the way, and thy necessity as an armed man.

The Corinthians hearing that Phillip king of Macedonie, was coming to invade
their kingdom: began every man to do his endeavor to resist his force. One
in making fit his armoure, an other in gathering of stones together. Be made
the walls higher, and the other made the fortresses stronger, and to be short,
every one did somewhat which might tend to the defense and sauegard of the
City. Which thing when Diogines saw (because he had no other thing to do) he
began to roll and tumble his tun. Whereat when one of his friends wondered, and
asked what he meaned thereby? He answered, because I alone will not be idle,
when all these are so busily occupied. Guido Bitur. tit. de Disidia.

When one told Socrates that he would very feign go to Olympia, Lycost.
but that he feared least he should not be able to endure the labor and
pains: Socrates answered him, I know thou use to walk between thy meals,
which walk if thou use onwardes thy way to Olympus, within five or six days
thou shalt come there. Whereby the wise man declared that it is rather a
slouthful imagination, than ought else, which makes men afraid to attempt
any goodness. For if we should sustain any labor, danger, or cost, for
some honest matter: Lord how we excuse our selves, detracte the time, and
cast dangers? Whereas commonly in a thing of no value, yea sometimes in
dishonest affairs, we nothing stick to sustain the like or greater pains. As
for example, exhort a slothful truande to the study of learning and virtue,
and he will straiwaies have an excuse, that for want of wealth he can not sit
up, and take pains at his book, that he is not able to buy books and other
necessaries to his study: and yet the self same fellow for all his weakness
can endure to sit up whole nights at cards, dise, and tossing the pot, and so
both spend his money, leese his credit, and get the Ague, Gout, or
Dropsy or some such disease.

When one Matheus Siculus blamed Alphonsus for laboring with his own hands:
Alphonsus smyled and said, what has God and nature given Kings their hands
to do nothing with?

The Lacedaemonians used this proverb, put to thy hand and then call on
fortune and she will help thee: Whereby they meant that we should so call to
God for help that we in the mean season be not idle our selves, for then our
prayer shall nothing help us. And as we know ye he will prosper our works
that we attempt in his fear: Lycost.
so ought we to persuade our selves that he detesteth idle and slouthful
persons, and that his pleasure is that we should take pains for his
blessings, not thincking him to be so folish that he will bestow his blessings
on them that ear not for the^. Ex Plut. in Lacon.

Amiss king of Egypt, amongste other his statutes, made an especial law, that
the Praetor should once a week ask an accoumpte how every one in the City
lived: to the intent that if any were found irle, or occupied in any vnhenest
science, he should be taken and punished as one greatly offending against the
common wealth.

Aristotle would often say that the root of learning was sour and bitter,
Lycost.
but the fruit thereof to be most pleasant and sweet* Meaning thereby that
without labor and diligence a man can attain nothing* But after labor and
diligence so applied, that there ensues perpetual rest and tranquillity of
mind. Ex Laert. lib. 5. cap. 5.

Of Laws, Statutes, and Decrees.
PAusanias being demanded why the Spartanians might alter none of their old
laws? Bruso. lib. 3. cap. 34
because (said he) that laws ought to rule me^, and not to be ruled by the.

Anacharsis, no less pleasantly than truly, Ibidem,
called laws spider webs, because they take the silly flees, but let the great
birds through them. Meaning yt the pore only are punished for their offenses,
but the rich and mighty by bribing, and other shifts, escape unpunished.

When one inquired of Demarchus, Lycost. Ex Plut. in Laco^. Apot.
why he was exiled his Country, being himself Prince thereof? He answered,
because that our Spartantan laws are mightier than our Princes. Meaning that
albeit he were Prince of the City: yet he ought to be ruled, and guided by the
law. Herein showing a Princely modesty, in so quietly taking his exile, and so
nobly authorizing his country laws: Who did not repine, but spoke well of the
rigor of his countrymen.

Antiochus the third wrote unto his citizens, willing them, that if he chanced
to write any thing unto the^, Lycost.
which were contrary to ye order of their law: they should not accept it, but
account it written weout his consent, or knowledge. For Princes sometimes for
pleasing of parties write such things as they would be loathe to have
accomplised. Wherefore, what so ever is contrary to the law, Eras li. 5. Apo Ex
Plut.
ought to be accounted as a thing forged, and not consented unto by the Prince:
who ought to defend, and not to infringe his laws and customs.

The Lacedaemonians had a law that in warring with their ennimies, Lycost.
who so fled out of the field, should be apprehended and put to death. But
it happened that fighting against the Remaynes at a field called Leuctria, the
greatest part of the Army took their heels: wherefore the Captains being
destitute of aid on the one side, were loath to put so great a multitude of
their soldiers to death: and on the other side were as loathe to have their
laws infringed. So yt they desired Agesilaus a valiant captain and a wise
ceu^seller to take so me order herein, whereupon going up into the pulpet, he
began in this sort to insinuate the people.

My purpose is not at this time either to make any new law herein, or to add
or diminishe any thing from your old and commendable decrees, or in any sort
to alter or change the same. But only this I counsel and think good, that
the Statute in this case enacted, shall from to morrow forewardes take date
for ever hereafter to be executed. And so by this shift he defended the city
from present danger, and provided a remedy for the dangerous mutation of
laws, and all this by abrogating the law for one day. Ex Plutarc. in Laco.
Apotheg.

Augustus made a Law for adulterers, Lycost.
how they should be judged which were accused thereof, and how they should
be punished which were found guilty therein. But afterward hearing that a
young man had to do with Iulia his daughter, he was so incensed with ire:
that he fell on him and beat him with his own hands. Wherefore the young man
cried out O Caesar thou made a Law herein, but do thy self contrary to
it: Ex Plut. in Romans Apot.
with which words Caesar coming to himself, and remembering how he had
violated his Law, was so sorry therefore, that that day he would eat no
meat.

Ethelstane sometimes king of England, prescribed a Law, Ex domino Fox.
that every man should pay Tithes of his increase: whose words are these.
Ego Ethelstanus. etc. I Ethelstane King, charge and command all my officere
through my whole Realm, to pay the Tithes of my proper goods, as well in
living and cattle, as in the corn and fruit of the ground, and that my
Bishops likewise of their proper goods, and my Aldermen and officers and
head men shall do the same. Remembering what Jacob said unto the Lord: Of all
things that thou have given me I will pay the tenthe, and how terribly God
threatens us, that if we will not pay our tithe, from us nine parts shall
be taken away, and the tenth only shall be lest us.

King Alfrede his father devised and set forth many godly and wholesome laws:
Ex domino Fox.
wherein especially by him was provided for the extirping and abolishing of al
theft, and thieves out of this realm. So yt the realm through his viligante
care was brought to such tranquillity, or rather perfection at that every
cross or turning way he made be set up a golden brooche, at least of silver
gilded through out his realm: and none to be so hardy by day, or night to
take it down.

Vitoldus duke of Lituania, Ex domino Fox.
desirous to differ from his subjects, made a Law that all men should be
shaven, and no man to have a bearde but he. But nature so impugned his vain
devise, ye he had no hair growing on his face. Wherefore still coveting to have
a knacke by himself, he shaued his head and his eyebrowes, forbidding his
subjects to do the like. And he would say that the people should obey the
law, and the law be subject unto the Prince. The words and works of a right
impious tirante. Who when he ought to give his subjects example of obeying
the law, would himself be unruly, and lawless, and deny that in life and
conversation, which he ratified in words and constitution.

Of Lascivious love, lust, and lechery.
OVid in his book de art amandi, says love is I wotte not what, that comes
I wotte not whence, Ovid de Art aman.
who sent it I wotte not, it ingendreth I wotte not how, it is contented I
wotte not wherewith, it is felt I wotte not how often, nor I wotte not
wherefore.

And finally it takes root without breaking of the flesh outward, or
pearsing the intrals inward.

Diogines says that love is a business to set idle persons a work, Lycost.
alluding to the verse of Ovid, in his book de remedio amoris. Laert. lib. 6.

Quasi tollas periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptique iacent and sine luce faces.
Where idle mind is not in place,
There Cupids craft has lost his grace.
Estrasco a young Roman that was dumb, and Verone a Latin Lady yt was dumb
also, saw each other at the mount Celio^te at a feast, and there fell in love
each with other. And their hearts were as sore fixed in love, as their tungs
were tied with words. The young Lady came from Salon to Rome: and he went
from Rome to Salon, by the space of thirty years together without the witting
of any person. And at last died the husband of the Lady Verone, and the wife
of ^icrasco, and the^ they discovered their love, and concluded a marriage, of
whom descended the noble lineage of ye Scipions: which were more liberal in
feats of arms, than their father and mother were of their tongues. Ex M.
Aurelio.

Masin^^^a king of Numidia, and Sapharise a Lady of Carthage, all only by one
sight, as they saw each other on a ladder, he declared his desire unto her:
and she knowing his lust, breaking the ore of fear, and lifting up the Ankers
of shame, incontinently raised the sails of their hearts, and with the ships
of their persons joined each to other. And so the knowledge of their hearts,
the marriage of their bodies, the perdition of their estate, and the infamy of
their name, in one day, in one hour, in one moment, and in one step of a
ladder was agreed. Ex M. Aurelio.

Paris a Trojan, and Helena a Greek, of two strange Nations, and of far
countroys, with one only sight in the temple, their wills were so united,
that he took her as his captive, and she abode his prisoner. In Paris appeared
but small force, and in her as little resistaunce. So that in manner these two
young persons, the one in procuring to vanquish, the other suffering to be
vanquished, Paris was cause of his fathers death, and Helene of the infamy of
her husband, and they both of their own death, loss of men, destruction of
Troy and slander to all the world. Virg. li. 2. Aenidos.

When Alexander would have given battle unto the Amazones, the queen
captain of them, no less fair than strong and virtuous, came to a rivers
side, and the space of an hour each of them beheld other with their eyes,
without speaking of any word, and when they returned to their tents, their
fierceness was turned into sweet wanton words. Ex Marco Aurelio.

Cleopatra in the Province of Bithinia, in the wood Sehin, made a goodly ba^ket
and solemn feast to Marcus Anthonius her lover. And though she were not very
honest her self, yet had she with her right chaste women. And thus the banquet
endured a great part of the night, and the wood being thick, the young
damselles were not so wily to hide them, but the young men Romans found them,
so that of sixty daughters of the Senators. 55. were gotten with child. Which
thing made great slander to the people, sorrow to the Senators, infamy to
Cleopatra, and dishonestie to Anthonius. Ex eodem.

When Pirrhus, the faithful defendour of the Tarentines, and renowned king of
Epyrotes, was in Italy, he came to Naples, and had not been there but a
day, the same season there was a Lady in that same city named Gamalice, of a
high lineage, and greatly esteemed in beauty, the very same day she was gotten
with child, shamed throughout all Jtalie thrust out of the city, and slain
by her own brother. Ex Marco Aurelio.

Nero Domicius was a monster of so horrible uncleanness, that he absteined not
from his own mother, his natural sister, nor any degree of kindred. And that
(more horrible is to speak) he used his filthy buggerie with Porus a boy, whom
by magike and sorcerie he endeavored to traduce unto the nature of a woman.
Bruso. li. 3. cap. 9.

Letus declares how that Maxentius being at a time far in love with a
noble and chaste gentlewoman of Rome: sent unto her such courtiers of his as
were most fit for that purpose, whom also he had in greater estimation than
any others, and with such was wont to consulte about matters for the common
wealth. These first fell upon her husband, and murdered him in his own
house: then when they by no means, neither with fear of the tyrant, nor
threatening her death, pull her from him: at length she desired leave of them to
go into her chamber, and after her prayers she would accomplish their
request. And when she was gone into her chamber, under this pretense she slew
her self. But the rakehelles, when they saw the woman farrie so long, being
therewith displeased, brake up the door, and found her lying dead: wherefore
they returned, and declared this heavy hap unto their unhappy master. Who
was so far past shame, that in stead of repentance, he was the more set on
fire to attempt the like. Ex domino Fox.

Also Tarquine the proud, being a right goodly man in gesture, right valiant
in arms, and of a noble blood, as an unhappy Prince, defiled all his virtues
with vicious living, in such wise that he converted his heautie into lechery,
and his power into tyranny, for doing the like villainy unto Lucrecia, the
chaste Lady of Rome. Whereby he lost not only his realm, but also caused the
name of Tarquine to be banished out of Rome for ever after. Liuius li. 1. and.
2.

Of Liberality.
MYcippa in Salust said unto Iugurtha, that neither an army of men, nor yet
abundance of treasure were so firm to retain a kingdom, as a sure and
trusty friend, whom neither gold can win, nor sword compel to forsake
his friend. And such friends (said he) by beneficence and liberality thou
may easily find.

At the siege of new Carthage, there was a proper young woman (who was the wife
of one Lucius prince of the Celtibrians) taken captive, and brought unto Scipio
as a booty worthy of so valiant a captain. But he no less courteous and
liberal, than he was valiant and martial, did in most honest manner restore
her again. Wherefore her father and her friends gave him right condign
thanks, and offered him a great sum of money for her ransom. Which sum
Scipio willed them to deliver unto him, and faking it in his hands, he
delivered it unto her husband, and said: besides the dourie which her father
had bestowed with her, he would give that to her marriage. Abundantly declaring
his liberal and gentle disposition, both in restoring the damsel and refusing
the ransom.

Who on another time having taken Hasdruball king Masinis^a his cousin captive,
Brus li 3. cap. 23.
gently intertayned him, and sent him home, with other great presents unto
the king his cousin. Showing hereby that a valiant captain ought as well to
excel in liberality and other domestical virtues, Bru. li. and ca. ^adem.
as in warlyke affairs and prowess.

Cymon was so gentle and liberal, Brus. li. 3. cap. 28.
that whereas he had farms, orchardes, and gardeynes in many places: he never
set any man to keep them, but suffered who so would to enjoy the fruits
thereof: Accustoming always, whersoeuer he went, to have one follow him with
a purse of money, that if any one asked his alms, he might straightwayes
bestow his liberality upon him. And if he saw any one want clothing, he
would do off his own apparel, and bestow it upon him. And though this kind of
liberality be in these our days very rare, yet by report good master Fox
does to his power resemble this good Cymon.

When a certain Macedonian was driving a Mule, Brus. vt infra.
laden with the kings coin: it happened that with the weight of the money the
Mule was tired. Wherefore the man took it on his own shoulders, and began
with great pain to carrye it. But the weighte thereof was so heavy, that the
poor man was forced to fall under it. Which when Alexander the king espied,
he said: because thou shalt not be weary to carry so tedious a burden, I
give it thee, take it, and carry it to thy own house.

When Ptolome had subdued Demetrius, he not only spared his life, but also
left his tente untouched, and gave him. 8000. of his captive soldiers without
any ransom, saying: that valiant men strive not for the death of men, but for
honor and glory. Whose regal beneficence Demetrius wondering at, desired God
to give him occasion to requite him with the like. And so it came to pass. For
Demetrius took Cilla a notable aptayne of Ptolomeis, captive, and with like
humanity restored him again. Brus. li. 2. cap. 28.


Amongst infinite foreine examples which I might here insert: I thought good
not to forget a domestical example of an English captain in beneficence and
liberality inferior to none. In the reign of king Edward the third, the
year of grace. 1 3 4 5. the king of England waging war into France, sent
thither Henry Earl of Lancaster, as general captain of his army, who albeit
he were a man famous and notable for his prowes in marciall affairs: yet in
courtesy and liberality he surmou^ted all others, and almost passed himself.
In so much that at the siege of Briers, whereas he had granted every man for
his booty the house with the impleme^ts therein, which he by victory should
obtain: amongst other his soldiers, to one named Reth, fell a certain
house, wherein was contained the minte and money coined for that country, to
the value of a great substance. Which when the soldier had found, in
breaking up a house where the first gross metal was not yet perfitly
wroughte, he came to the Earl, declaring unto him the treasure, to know what
was his pleasure therein. To whom the valiant captain answered, that the
house was his, and what so ever he found therein. Afterward, the soldier
finding a whole minte of pure silver ready coined, signifying the same to the
Earl, thinking so great treasure to be to much for his portion. To whom the
said Earl answered and said, that he had once given him the whole house for
his portion, and that he had once given, he would not call back, as children
use to play, and if the money were thrice as much, it should be his own.
Dominus Fox. Ex Chro. Albanea.

Dionisius the elder coming to his sons house, and seeing there great store
of plate, bethe of silver and gold, cried out and said: O my son, thou
haste no princely stomach, which can keep all this plate to thy self, and
make friends with none of it. Meaning, that without the good will of the
citizens, he should never aspire to be prince, and hardely keep his kingdom,
if he had it. But the unskillful young man thought it better to have a house
well garnished, than to have faithful friends abroad in the city. Brus.
lib. 3. cap. 28.

John Patricke being sometimes a hardeand a sparing man, as he was at his
prayers on a time, there appeared unto him a comely virgin, having on her head
a garlande of Olive leaves, which named her self Mercy, saying to him, and
promising, that if he would take her to wife, he should prosper maruellously
well. Wherefore after that day he became so bountiful and beneficial to the
poor and needy, that he counted them as his Masters, and him self as a
servant and stewards unto them. He used twyce a week to sit at his door
all the day long, to take up matters, and to set unity where there was any
variaunce. One day it happened, as he was sitting all day before his gate, and
saw no man come unto him, he lamented because that that day he had done no
good. But his Deacon standing by, said, that he had more cause to rejoice,
seting that he had brought the city to such perfection, that there needed no
reconcylement amongst them. An other time, as he was reading the Gospel, the
people (as their manner is) went forth to talk and iangle: he perceiving
that, went forth a^^e, and sa^e amongst them, and said: where the flock is,
there ought the shepherd to be. Wherefore either come you in, that I also may
come in with you, or else if ye tarry out, I will likewise tarry with you.
Dominus Fox. Anno. 651.
ex Polly chro. li. 5. cap. 10.

Osevvie sometimes king of Deira in England, was a prince of wondrous
liberality toward his people, and no less devout and religious toward
God. Who on a time had given to Adianus a Scottishe Bishop, a princely horse
with trappers, and all that perteyned thereto. This Adianus as he was riding
upon his kingly horse, there meets him a beggar craving his alms. Adianus
having nothing else to give him, lighted down, and gives to him his horse
trapped and garnished as he was. The king understanding this, and not contented
therewith, as he was entering at diner with the said Adianus: what mente you
father bishop (said he) to give away my horse I gave you, unto the beggar, had
not I other horses in my stable that might have served him? but you must give
away that which of purpose was picked out for you? To whom the Bishop
answered and said: what be these words O king that you speak? Why set you
more price by a horse, which is but the foale of a horse, than you did by him
which is the son of Marie, yea the son of God? He said but this, and the
king fell down at the Bishops feet, destring him to forgive him that, and he
would never after speak any word for giving away any treasure of his.
Dominus Fox Pa. 164. Ex Hunting. de hist. Angli.

Of Marriage, wives and women.
WHen the realm of Carthage was flourishing in riches, and happy in arms,
they ruled the common wealth by wise Philosophers, and sustained it by discrete
armies on the sea. At which time Arminius the Philosopher was as well esteemed
amongst them, as Demosthenes amongst the Greeks, or Cicero amongst the
Latins. Fourscore years he lived quietly, as a baron most peacible of mind.
And was as strange to women, as familiar with his books. Then the Senate
seeing he was much broken with the common wealth, and withdrawn from al
natural recreation, they desired him with great instance to be married, that
mentorie might be had of so wise a man in time to come. But she more
importunate they were, the more he resisted, and said: I will not be married.
For if she be foul, I shall abhor her: If she be rich I must suffer her:
if she be poor, I must maintain her: if she be fair, I must take heed of
her: if she be a shrewe, I can not suffer her. And the least pestilence of
all these is enough to slay a thousand menue. Ex Marco Aurelio.

When one asked Socrates whether it were better to marry, or to live single?
He answered: whether of both thou do, it shall repent thee. For if thou
marry not, thou shalt live solitarily, thou shalt dye without issue, and a
strange* shall inherit thy land: on the other side, if thou take a wise,
thou shalt have perpetual vexation and continual complaining. Her dourie
shall be cast in thy dishe, her kinsefolkes shall bend the brows at thee, and
her mother shall speak her pleasure by thee. And besides this, little knows
the father what shall be the end of his children. Brus. li. 7. ca. 22. Laer.
li. 2. ca. 5.

When Cneius Pompeius passed the Orient, on the mountains Rifees he found a
manner of people called Masagetes, which had a law, that every inhabitaunte
should have two tons or fattes (because they had no houses to dwell in.) In
one of them was contained the husband, their sons, and their men
servants, and in the other the wife, the daughters, and their maid servant.
On the holidayes they did eat together, and once a week lay together. Hereat
when Pompei wondered, and demanded the cause thereof, they answered: because the
Gods have given us but a short life (for none of us may lius above lx. years
at the most) those years we endeavor to live in peace and tranquillity. And
in having our wives still with us, we should live ever dying. For we should
pass the nyghtes in hearing their complayntes, and the day in abiding their
chidinges and braul^^ges, but in keeping them this wise a parse from us, they
nourishe their children more peaceable, and eschews the noise which slays
their fathers. Ex Marco Aurelio.

But hereof Palingenius passingly entreats in this sort.

Sed for san multi dubitant, an caelibe vita
Coniugiu^ melius: namque vxor sepe superb' est
Litigiosa, ferox, demeus et adultera saepe. etc.
Englished thus:
But some perchance will doubt
The marriage or the single life,
which best of them: for stout
And proud the vviues are often seen,
and often to chide and brall,
And catch their husbands by the pates,
and often naught vvithall:
Besides, the cares of children vex,
whom greeues the sickness rage,
Or else untimely death does take:
the daughter comes to age,
With monied bags a mate requires,
or else dame Lais school,
Does practice there, and stains the house:
the son proves often a fool,
Limefingred often, and harlots kepes,
a bravvling merchant stout,
A swearing goose, a ruffian vvilde,
a vile unshamefast lout.
He seemth not to be free beside,
who so ever has a wife,
Must alter needs conditions all,
and leave his youthful life.
Forsaking frayes must bide at home,
nor ride from town to town,
Nor in the night time walk in the streets
in beating doors a down,
And keeping Ione. Its needful then
to live advisedly,
And see thy goods then not decreace,
but may augmented be.
Least in thy age the vvallet come.
Although these things be so
Yet think I sure with married bed
and nature for to go,
More better far, as she to us
of birds and beasts vntame,
Example shows, how both the kinds
them selves together frame.
And join in one of duty must,
and always so remain,
Increase to get, and nourish up
their young with equal pain,
VVherby the kind may still endure,
and never more decay:
For we as every kind of beast,
are moude to Venus play,
By natures will: a worser thing
shall hap to thee be sure,
If thou thy self wilt never seek,
this thing for to procure.
And void of issue shall thou die,
and yield thy corpse again,
A stranger then shall have thy goods,
for which thou tokest pain.
And when that aged hairs shall hap,
and sickness shall thee hent,
Who shall thy wearied age relieve?
who shall thy hurtes lament?
Thy brother or thy kinsman near,
or will do this thy friend?
No sure, for to be heir to thee,
they rather wish thine end.
On thee alive they wait and fawn,
thy goods at grave to take:
And each man loves, and fears thy good
on thee no force they make.
But now thy wife her father leaves,
and mother dear besides,
With all her house and household friends:
with thee alone she bides
For evermore both night and day,
and of thy seed she bears
A svveete and goodly gold polde boy
of young and tender years.
And kindred eke to thee she brings,
and does thy house enlarge,
And helps thee eke in every thing,
and takes with thee thy charge.
Betvveene you, all things common are,
both good and evil things,
Whatsoever harmeth one, hurtes both,
and that which profit brings
Unto the one, that profits both.
If sickness make thee weak.
Or greater age, then does she straight
exhort thee well, and speak.
She comfort thee, and helps thee then,
she never leaves thee there,
She watches thee, and watching serves:
likewise thy children dear,
With all the means they can they keep,
for both their bloods are one,
And image like: and when the day
vvherin thou must be gone
Is come, thou art not clean extinct,
but shall alive remain
In them, who then shall represent
their fathers face again.
But some there be that rather had
in common harlots bed,
Uncertain children get, therefore
they list not vviues to wed.
Such kind of men I can not praise,
nor wise I have them thought,
For wife with dourie helps thee well,
where harlots bring thee naught.
A wife does bring thee store of friends,
where harlots bring thee foes,
A wife thou may in safety keep
a whore with grief and woes.
The one will trusty still remain,
the other false always,
And fearing to be cast at large,
she steals all she may,
And for her self she heaps up all,
her state for to repair,
When thou have plucked her bells away,
and cast her up to air.
More, if thou kepest a whore, thy goods
are but in queasie case,
Of wives are children lavvfull got,
of harlots bastardes base.
To wed therefore it needful is.
On a time when Socrates had invited Euthidemus to supper, in the midst of
the banquet Xantippa Socrates his wife was so offended with her husband, that
she railed at him, and rising, overthrew the Table with all that stood
thereon. Lycost.
Heereat when Socrates saw Euthidemus sore vexed, he said unto him, why art
thou so offended with this? Cansts not thou suffer my wife, as well as I last
day suffered thy hen to flee on thy takle, and overthrow the pottes, and other
things that stood thereon? Ex Laer. lib 2. cap. 5.

An other time, when Alcibiades asked him how he could suffer his wise so to
chide and seeld with him? He replied, and how chances it then that you canste
suffer thy hens at home to cackle? I abide them quoth Alcibiades, because
they bring me eggs and chickens. Idem.
And so (quoth Socrates) I bear with my wife because she brings me children.
Ex Laertio li. and ca. supradict.

Also when one said that he wondered how Socrates could abide to suffer two
such shrewde wives in his house: Idem.
He said, that of them he learned patience at home, to put in practice when
he went abroad. Ex A. Gellio, lib. primo. cap. 17.

When Anymus had bad one to supper, and saw him displeased to hear his wife
chide and scolde with her maidens: he turned to his gest, and said: Good Lord
how impacient art thou? I have suffered her this twenty years, and can not
thou abide it two hours. And so quieted his gest, Lycost.
and caused his wife to leave chiding and fall a laughing. Ex Adriano Barlando.

But as there are and has been many wives, proud, malicious, deceitful, and
shrewde unto their husbands, so has there been, and are many of that sex,
temperate in words, faithful and loving unto their husbands, well ordered
in their persons, peaceable with their neighbors, honest in their family,
and shame faced amongste strangers, whereby they have attained great renown
in their life, and left eternal memory after their death: Of which sort as I
could allege many examples both Ecclesiastical, foreign and civil: so to
delight the good I mean to insert two or three, as here immediately you shall
see following.

On a time when Camillus a Roman captain had made a solemn vow to offer
a present unto Cybilla, if he conquered his ennimies: when he had attained the
victory, Rome was so poor that it had neither gold nor silver to make this
promise good. Wherefore the Matrones of Rome seeing their husbands had offered
their lives in the said war, went altogether into the high capitol, and
there in the presence of every manne, presented their Owches hanging on their
ears, the rings of their fingers, the Bracelets of their arms, the Pearls
from their heads, the collers from their necks, their brooches from their
breasts, the girdles from their middles, and borders of their gowns. Whereby
there was enough, Ex M. Aurelio.
not only to perform the said vow, but also to prosecute the war against
their enemies.

Fuluius Torquatus being consul in the war against the Volseos, the Knights
of Mauritane brought a wild man to Rome, that had but one eye, whom they had
taken in hunting in the deserts of Egypt. And the matrones of Rome were at
that time as sad and sober, as their husbands were valiant and virtuous.
Amongst others was the wife of yt said Torquate, who was great with child, and
near the time of her deliverance. A woman so honest for the sober
solitariness that she kept in Rome, that she had no less glory in the
city, than her husband had abroad in the wars. For in ye fourteen year
that her husband was in warfare in Asia, from the first time ye he went
thither, she was never seen at ye windows gasing out, nor suffered man child
above the age of eight years, to come within her gates, Yea where she had
left with her three sons (the eldest of whom was not above the age of three
years) as soon as they came to the age of eight years, she sent them away
unto their graunde father, to the intent that under the color of her own
children, no others should enter into her house. Those years passed, after the
good old Torquate was returned home, the said Wild man with one eye went by
the door of the said Torquate, and one of her maidens told her that it was a
marvel to see him. Wherefore she had great desire to see him, and because
there was no body to show him her, she lost her lust, and dyed for sorrow,
choosing rather so to do, than either to go abroad, or to gaze out of the
windows to see him, wherefore she had this glorious Epitaphe.

Here lies the wife of Torquate,
the chaste Matrone:
That did adventure her life,
to assure her Fame.
Ex M. Aurelio. Almaricke king of Jerusalem, (who destroyed Babylon,) had a
son named Baldewine, and a daughter called Sibilla. Baldewine from the
beginning of his reign was a leapre, and therefore not able of body (all be
it valiant in heart) to rule that function. Sybilla his sister was married to
one VVilermus of the mount Ferat, by whom she had a son called also
Baldevvinus. After him she was married to an other husband, named Guido de
Lizimacho, Earl of Joppa and Ascalon. Upon this it befell that the said
Baldevvine the Leapre son of Amaricke, being thus feeble and infirm (as is
said) called his nobles together, with his mother and the Patriarche,
declaring unto them his inhabilitie, and by their consentes committed the under
government of the City to Guido the husband of Sybilla his sister. But he
being found vnsuffiente, or not luckie in the governing thereof, the office
was translated to a another named Raimundus Earl of Tripolis. In the which
time, the Souldans with the Sarazens mightily prevailed against the
Christians, and ouer-ranne the country of Palestina. In the mean time
Baldevvine the leaprous king departed, whereby the kingdom fell next to
Baldevvinus the son of Sybilla by her first husband. But he also dying in
his minority, the succession thereof by discente fell to Sybilla, the wife of
Guido above mentioned. To whom the Peers and Nobles of the Realm iayning
together in Counsel, offered unto the said Sybilla, as to the lawful heir
unto the Crown, to be their Queen: with this condition that she should
sequester from her by lawful diuorcement the foresaid Guido her husband. But
she refused the kingdom offered unto her on that condition: till at the last
the Nobles with the Magistrates in general granted unto her, and by their
oath confirmed the same, that whom so ever she would choose to be her
husband, all they would take and obey as their king. Also her husband Guido
amongste the rest with like petition humbly requested her, that the kingdom
not for his sake, or for his private loss, might be destitute of government.

At length, she with tears consenting to their entreaty, was contented, and
solemnly was crowned for their Queen: who after the manner, again received
their fidelity by their oath. Whereupon Guido without all hope of kingdom and
wife, departed home quietly to his own house. This done, the Queen assembling
her states and Prelates together, entered talk with them about the choosing of
the king, according unto that they had promised and sworn unto her: and to
obey him as their king, whom she should nominate: the Queen with a loud
voice said unto Guido that stood amongst them: Guido my Lord, I choose thee
for my husband, and yielding my self and my kingdom unto you, openly I
protest you to be the king, And worthy (no doubt) was she to be commended
and extolled both for her singular virtue of chastity and high prudence: so
tempering the matter, that both she obtained to her husband the kingdom, and
retained to her self her husband. Dominus Fox. Ex bibliothaeca Cariensi.

Licurgus made a law amongste the Lacedaemonians, that the father that died,
should give nothing to his Daughter. And that neither living nor dying, he
should give any thing to marie her with: to the intent that none should marry
her for her riches, but for her goodness and virtue. And whereas now some be
unmarried because they are poor: so then they abode unmarried, because they
were shameful and vicious. Ex M. Aurelio.

Of Magistrates and Officers.
CLeobulus said that that common wealth was most fortunate and best ordered,
Lycost. Ex Stobeo, ser. 41.
where the Magistrate was more afearde to be evil spoken of, than to suffer the
penalty of the law.

Bias said, that that common wealth was happiest where men stood more in
fear of the law, than of the Magistrate. And Pitticus counted that realm in
best case where the wicked do bear no sway nor authority.

Antisthenes being demanded how they ought to order them selves that come to
be Magistrates in the common wealth: Lycost.
answered, they must do as men that do come to the fire, that is, they must
take heed least they stand to near for burning their shinnes, nor yet stand
to far of, least they be a cold still. Ex Stob. sermon 43.

Agasicles being asked how a man might rule without a guard to defend him?
Answered, if he do so rule his subjects as a father does his sons. Lycost.
Meaning that if he were gentle and amiable unto his Citizens, there can be no
surer defense than they will be unto him. Ex Plutarcho in Lacon.

When Cleon should take in hand to administer the common wealth, he called
all his friends unto him, and dissolved his old knot of amity and
frendshippe, Lycost.
as a great stay to keep him from equity and justice. Therefore also when
Themistocles should be made Magistrate, he denied it, saying: he would never
sit in that seat where he might do no more for his friends than for his
foes. Ex Plutarcho in Lacon.

Chrysippus being demanded why he would bear no office in the common
wealth: Answered, because that if I rule not well, I shall displease God, but
if I rule as I should do, the people will be offended. Brusonius Lib. 3. cap.
5.

Socrates was wont to say that it was a shame to see that where as in handy
crafts, no man takes any thing in hand, Lycost.
wherein he has not benetraded: yet in administration of the common wealth
oftentimes many are made officers, which wotte but very little, what belongs
thereto. Ex Eras. lib. 3. Apoth.

Antisthenes willed his Citizens to set Asses to ploughe, and when they
aunsweared that Asses were not apt to that labor: what matter is that quoth
he? For you make many Officers in the common wealth: which never learned the
manner thereof, and yet when you have made them, they serve the turn well
enough. Meaning that it was a thing much more absurd, Lycost.
to make an unskillful man a magistrate, than to set an Ass to ploughe.
Brusonius Lib. 6. cap. 5. Ex Laertio Lib 4. Cap. 1.

When the regal Diadem should be set on Antigonus his head, Lycost.
before it was put on, he said these words: O noble (though unhappy)
crown, if a man knew how full of trouble and misery thou art, he would not
take thee up, albeit he found thee lying in the streate. Max. Valerius lib. 7.
cap. 2. Ex Stobaeo sermon. 46.

Alphonsus the mighty king of Arragon used to say that Magistrates ought as
much to excel private persons in life and conversation, Lycost.
as they dee in dignity and vocation. Meaning that the life of the subjects
shall best be reformed, when Princes and others give others example of their
godly and virtuous living. As by this story following may appear. Ex Panorm.
lib. 6.

Cato being Censor in Rome, was so severe a punisher of transgressoures, and so
feared for his good and virtuous living, that like as children in the schole
hearing their master coming, run unto their books: so when he went through
the city, every one ran unto his business. Who when he took any evil
doer, he strayghtewayes imprisoned him, and in stead of examination, the first
thing he took hold of, was their hands: which if they had been laborious and
full of hard knots, though his crime were very grievous, yet his chastiseme^t
was mitigated and made more easy, but if the unhappy prisoner chanced to have
idle hands, that is, soft and smoothe, he should for a small fault have
grievous punishment. For the Romans had this proverb: he that has good
hands, must needs have good conditions. Ex Marco Aurelio. Lycost.


The said Alphonsus also called effites and dignities, touchstones to try the
natures and dispositions of men, which can in nothing be so well perceived, as
in promotion and dignity. Ex Panormita, de rebus gestis Alphonsi. li. 6.

Of Misfortune and misery of man.
CRates said, that what state soever man follow, he shall be sure to find
bitterness therein. In the field labor: at home cares: in a strange country
fear, if he have ought: in youth, folly: in age, weakness: in marriage,
unquietness: in lacking a wife sollitarinesse. If a man have children, he
shall have cares: if he have none, he is half maimed: so that one of these two
(says he) is to be wished, either not to be borne, Lycost.
or quickly to dye.

Xerxes seeing Helespontus swimming with his ships, and all the playnes
therabout mustring with his me^, said that he was a right happy man, and
therewith began bitterly to weep. Which soden alteration Artabanus his uncle
espying, wondered, and demanded the cause thereof. Oh (quod Xerxes) now I
remember how short and transitory man's life is. For see, of so great a
multitude as here is, within this hundred years there shall not be one man
alive, Ex Plut. in Romans Apoth.

When Philip king of Macedonie had subdued Cheronea, a city of Athens, Licost.
and thereby had purchased innumerable wealth, he began to be hautie and high
minded, saying, that fortune had no power to do him harm. But afterward
being advertised that his pride would have a fall, and how vain a thing man
was, he kept a boy every day to come to his chamber door, Ex Caelio. Rhodi.
li. 9. cap. 33.
and with a loud voice to cry: Remember Philip thou art a man.

Also his son Alexander, as he was at the siege of a certain city, viewing
in what place the walls thereof were most weakest, was wounded in the leg
with an arrowe. But at the first, not seeling the smarte thereof, proceeded in
the siege, until in fine his leg waxed so sore, that he was compelled to
take his horse, and leave the field. And then he said: Every one tells me
that I am immortal, and son to Jupiter, but this wound plainly shows,
that I am a miserable mortal manne. Ex Plutarch. Lycost.
in vita Alexand.

When flatterers came about Canutes (sometimes king of England) and began to
exalte him with high words, calling him a king of all kings (most mighty)
who had under his subjection both the people, the land, and the sea. Canutus
reuoluing this matter in his mind (whether for pride of his heart exalted, or
whether to try and refell their flattering words) commanded his chair to be
brought to the sea side, at what time it should begin to flow, and therein
sitting down charged and commanded the floudes rising to go back, and not
to touch him. But the water keeping his ordinary course, growing higher and
higher, began to wash him welfauouredly: Wherefore the king starte back, and
said: Lo, ye call me a mighty king, and yet I can not command this little
water to stay, but it is like to droune me. Dominus Fox. Ex Polli. li. 7.
Hunting. li. 6.

A scholar of Zenons coming honey to his father, was of him demanded, what
profit he had attained by his long study in Philosophy? who answered that he
would tell him, and saying no more, his father was offended, and thinking his
cost cast away, he began to beat him. Which thing his son patiently
suffered. Then his father demanded him again to she we some experience of his
learning, to whom his son answered: Lo this fruit have I gotten by my
Philosophy, thus patiently to endure my fathers displeasure. Ex Era. l. 8.
Lycost.
A poth.

When one stroke Socrates with his heels, and his friends said that they
wondered how he could put up so great an injury, he answered them: what and
if an ass should kick you, would you go to laws with him for it. Another
time when one gave him a blow, he was nothing offended, but said it was great
pity that men could not tell when to do on their helmets. Ex Eras. Lycost.


Pericles being rayled on and brawled with, of a brabling merchant, Licost.
said nothing, but went his ways home, and when the other followed him,
incessantly scolding with him (being late in the night) he caused his man to
light a candle, and brought him home.

Augustus lying at a certain village in the country, could not take his
rest, for an Owl which every night awaked him. Wherefore he willed some body
to take the Owl. Which thing a soldier, being skillful in byrde-taking,
accordingly accomplyshed, and hoping to have some great reward for his
labor, brought him to Augustus. Who commended him for his diligence, and bid
one give him a thousand pound for his pains. But the mallaperte souldioure
said, that he had rather let her go, than take so little for her, and so let
her go in deeds. Wherewith Augustus was nothing moved or offended. Li. 5. cap.
4.


Crates after he had by shipwreck, lost all that he had, was nothing grieved,
but with a meric chere said this: Go too fortune, I know what thou meanest, I
am sure thou intendest nothing else, but to call me to Philosophy, and I am
well content to come thither as thou call me. Lycost.
Ex Laer.

Of Fathers and their love toward their children.
SEleucus had a son named Antiochus, Bruso.
of comely gesture, and valiant in arms, who coming to youthly years, fell in
love with Stratonice, his mother in law, and his fathers wife. But fearing and
shaming to disclose it, it so payned him, that he was sick and like to dye
thereof. Wherefore his father caused many Physicians to be sent for, to know,
and to cure (if it were possible) his sons sickness. Amongst the rest one
named Eristratus perceived the effect and cause thereof. For when Stratonice
his mother in law came in to visit him, strayghtwayes his color began to
rise, and his pulses to beat, and when she departed, his color vaded, and his
sickness increased. Wherefore calling Seleucus unto him (who was wondrous
pensius for his son) he told him that Antiochus his son was sick with love.
Then the careful father earnestly desired him, to disclose the party that
caused his son so to fare: to whom Eristratus answered: O king it is my wife
that thy son so loves. Immediately Seleucus with many tears desired him to
accord unto his sons will, and to save his life. O king (quoth the Physician)
this is soon spoken, but if it were your wife that he were so in love with (as
well as you love him) I believe you would tell me an other tale. Oh no (quoth
the king) there is nothing so hard, but to save his life I could well find
in my heart to do it. Why then (quoth Eristratus) you must be your own
Physician, for it is your wife Stratonice that causes him to feel this pain.
And so the loving father was content to forsake his own pleasure, to redress
the pain of his son, and married him unto Stratonice his wife. Li. 5. cap. 4.


Agesilaus so entirely loved his children, that he would play and ride on a
stick with them. And when one of his friends came in, and saw him so playing
with them, Agesilaus desired him that he would tell no body thereof, until
that he had children of his own. Meaning that then he should him self prove
and feel the great love and affection which nature causes parents to bear
unto their children. Licost.
Ex Acliano li. 12.

The like saying is of Socrates, whom when Alcibiades saw playing with
Lamprocus his son, he began greatly to laugh, and mock Socrates therefore.
But Socrates answered: why man is it so great a matter of laughter to see the
father play with his children? Hold thy peace, when thou have children of
thine own, thou shall do the like, and perhaps more foolishly than this.
Licost.
Ex Acliano.

Albeit Pericles had lost all his kinredde, and his own sister, yet he was
nothing grieved therewith: but when he had lost Paralus his son, he could
not choose, Brus. lib. 5. cap. 4.
but fell a weeping and crying, and said: Good Lord keep Camillus, that I
lose not him too.

When Absolon was hanged by the hair, albeit he had defiled his father David's
bed, and had sought by all means possible to put him besides his cushion, yet
when his father heard thereof, he could not contain his fatherly affection,
but bitterly wept and said: O my son Absolon, my son, my son Absolon,
would God I had dyed for thee, O Absolon my son, 2. Reg. 18.
my son.

Of Pride.
WHen Aristotle saw a young man proud, which was endued neither with learning
nor virtue, nor any other good gift, he said unto him, I would my self no
better than thou think thou art, nor my foes to be no worse than thou art in
deed. Another time seeing a young man proud of a gay cloak, he said: will thou not leave to be so brag of a sheep skin. Anthon. in Melissa, part. 2.
sermon. 74. Licost.


Socrates seeing Alcibiades proud of his riches, and of a ferme or two that he
had: brought him unto a Map, wherein the whole world was descrybed. The^
he had Alcibiades look where he could find Athens therein, which when he had
with much a do accomplished now (quoth Socrates) show me your ferme here:
why (quoth Alcibiades) it is not here. And why then art thou so proud (quoth
Socrates) of that which is counted no part of the world? Licost. Ex Stobaeo:
ser. 20.


Chilon enquiring of Esope what Jupiter did, was answered that he was occupied
in putting down the mighty, and exalting the humble. Wherefore when Artabanus
would dissuade Xerxes from leading his army into Greece, he said: thou see
that the great beasts are killed with lightning, Brus. lib. 6. cap. 5.
but the little ones escape: high houses and trees are blown down, whereas the
little cotages stand still. For God deliteth to put down the mighty from their
supernall seats.

When a certain Physician named Menacres had good success in his profession,
and had cured many desperate diseases, the people flatring him, said that he was
a God, and called him Jupiter. The proud vainglorious fool thinking highly of
him self, and well liking this surname, when he should write to Agesilaus, he
prefixed this salutatio^: Menacres Jupiter to Agesilatis sends greeting. But
ye king offended with his presumption, replied with this salutation, Agesilaus
the king sends to thee Menacres health. Whereby he meante that the Physician
him self was sick, 2
and neded some pills to purge his proud stomach, who being a man subject to
mortality, would think so highly of him self, as to term him self by the
name of an immortal God. Licost.
Ex Achano. li. 12.

When one Pambo saw a woman proud, and very gorgiously attired, he wept and
sobde. And being demanded the cause thereof, he answered, that there were
two things that caused him so to do. The one is (quod he) to see the woman
thus cast away, the other is, for that I, who bear the name of a Christian, do
not so indeuer with innocence of life to please my God, as this woman does
with her gay attire to plese wicked and naughty persons. Licost.
Ex Pet. de nata. Eccle. hist. l. 8. c. 1.

Iulia, Augustus Caesar's daughter being nicely apparelled, came so unto her
father, who abhorring all pride, rebuked her for her over niceness. Wherefore
the next day she attyred her self more soberly, and came and saluted her
father. Who said unto her: is not this attire better than yesterdays? yea
quoth she. For to day I endeavor to satisfy my fathers, by yesterday my
husband his eyes. Licost.
Ex Macrobio Satur. lib. 2. cap. 3.

An other time when one told her, that she was a great deal more proud than
her father Caesar. She answered: my father forgets that he is Emperor, but
I remember well that I am an Emperors daughter. Licost.
Ibidem.

When one demanded Phitons wife, why she was not attired in gold as other
princes wives were? she answered: because my husbands virtue is a sufficient
ornament for me. Licost.
Ex Stobeo. ser 72.

Tharsius Amphius being exalted from the state of a gardener, unto great honor
and dignity, began to forget his old friends. Wherefore one of them said
unto him: if ye remember sir, we also sprang up of the same seed that you did.
Brus. li. 6.


Of Princes and principality.
PYthagoras said that a Prince ought so to rule, yt he may be more beloved
than feared of his subjects. For love causes reverence, but fear causes
hatred and treason. Licost.
Ex Stobaeo ser. 46.

Edward surnamed the Confessor sometimes king of England, describes the
office of a prince in this sort: A king (says he) ought above al things to
fear God, to love and observe his commandments, and to cause the^ be
observed through his whole kingdom. He ought also to keep, cherish, maintain,
and govern the church within his kingdom, according to the institution of his
auncientes and predecessors, and to defend ye same against al his enemies, so
ye god above al things be honored, and ever be before his eyes. He ought also
to set up good laws, and customs, such as be wholesome, and approved, and such
as be otherwise to repel and put out of his kingdom. Item he ought to do
judgment and justice in his kingdom, by the counsel of the nobles of the
Realm. Also three servants a king ought to have under him as vassals,
fleshly lust, avarice, and greedy desire. Who^ if he keep under him as slaves,
he shall reign well and honorably in his kingdom. Al things are to be done
with good aduisement and premeditation, and that properly belongs unto a
king. For temeritie and rashness will bring a kingdom soon to desolation and
decay. Dominus Fox. Ex libro regum antiq. in praeto. Londinensi.

Agesilaus would often say that a prince ought to excel his subjects, not in
niceness and wantonness, but in fortitude and temperaunce. Also he said,
that a prince ought to learn this lesson, to be stout and cruel against
traitors and rebels, and to be gentle and loving unto his citizens and
subjects. And he was wont much to rejoice in this, that where as he was
Prince and ruler of his people, yet he could as well endure to take pains as
any of them. Yea when us would have his soldiers attempt any enterprise, he
him self would be the first that should set on it, and so for shame they
would follow him in doing the like. Licost.
Ex Plutarch. in Lacon.

When one said unto Theopompus king of the Lacedaemonians, that then it should
be well with the Lacedaemonians, when the Prince knew how to rule the
subjects as he ought to do: he replied, that that should rather come to
pass, when the subjects knew how to obey their Princes. Meaning that the
city shall be best governed, where the citizens will be obedient and ruled by
their governor. For as the Gospel says, every city divided within it self
shall be brought to desolation. Licost.
Ex Fulgocio. li. 7 ca. 2.

Cyrus king of Persia, said, that no man should be a Prince, which were not
better than the people whom he ruled, and did not excel them in valiantness
and prowess, as well as in wisdom and knowledge. Brus. li. 3. ca. 33.

Frederick the Emperor being demanded whom he loved best of his subjects,
he answered, that he loved the^ best which would so please him, that in no case
they would displease God. A christian prince, and spoken right christianlike.
Ex Aenea Siluio. Licost.


Alphonsus king of Arragon said, that those princes ought especially to be
beloved and feared, which were lovers and imbracers of justice and equity.
Which Princely virtues who so ever is endued withal, their behest all men
love, reverence and fear. As we read of Cyrus, who not only in justice, but
also in all other princely virtues, was him self an example unto his
subjects, and whose word was of as great a force as the oath of any private
person. Ex Panormi. lib. 1. de rebus gestis Alphonsi.

When one told him that the king of Spain should say, that it was not comely
for a Prince to be learned: he said that those were words of an Ox, and not
of a man. Lycost. ex eodem.
For quoth he a Prince without learning, is nothing else but as it were an Ass
with a crown. Also, when it was told him that he was not apparelled like a
Prince: he answered that he had rather be princelike in manners and
authority, rather than in his scepter and crown.

Boso the last king of Araletensis commanded the Bishop that he should not
go to Evening prayer on Christmasse even, before that he came thither. But
when the Bishop with the rest of his company had tarried somewhat longer than
his accustomed time, and saw that the king came not, he went to service.
Wherefore when the king came in, he began to chide with the Bishop, and was so
moved that before all the people he gave him a blow. Lycost. Ex Munster. li 2
Cosmogra.
Whereof the Bishop thincking to be revenged, complained to Otho the Emperor,
who immediately commanded that the Bishop should be beheaded. And when the
Archbishop entreated for him, he would not forgive him, but said that no
word that came from the mouth of a Prince, should be spoken in vain.

When one said unto Antigonus, that all things were honest and just, what so
ever the Prince did, Bruso. li. 3. cap. 13.
he answered, yea, amongst the Barbarike Princes it is so, but we account
nothing honest, which is not honest in deed, nor any thing just which is not
just in deed.

Alexander Seuerus the adopted son of Heliogabalus, was a wise, valiant and
virtuous Prince, who bare such affection to learning and learned men, that he
would do nothing without their counsel and assistence. From his Court he
dismissed all superfluous and vnneedefull servants, and said that he was no
good pupil, which fed idle servants with the bowels of his common wealth.
And amongste his other good virtues (which was a rare thing in those days) he
was freendly and favorable unto the Christians. In so much that when the
Christians had occupied a certain public place to some good use, belike for
the assembling and conuenting together of the congregation, the company of the
cooks or tiplers made challenge thereto. The matter being brought before the
Emperor, he judged it more honest the place to serve to the woorshippe of God
(how so ever it were) than to the durtie slubbring of cooks and scullians. Ex
domino Fox.

King Alfrede alias Alurede, Anno 899 king of England, in his youth
perceiving him self somewhat disposed to the vice of the flesh, and thereby
let from diverse virtuous and good purposes, did not as many young Princes and
Kings sons in the world be now wont to do: that is, to resolve them
selves so all kind of carnal license and sensuality, running and following
without bridle, whether so ever their license given does give them leave (as
therefore not without cause the common proverb does report of them) that
kings sons learn nothing else well but only to ride. Meaning thereby that
Princes and Kings sons having about them flatterers, which boast them in
their faults: only their horses give them no more than to any other, but if
they fit not fast, they will cast them. But this young king seeing in him self
the inclination of the flesh, minding not to give him self so much as he
might take, but rather by resistance to avoid the temptation thereof, besought
God that he would send to him some continual sickness in quenching of that
vice, whereby he might be more profitable to the business of the common
wealth, and more apt to serve God in his calling. Then at Gods ordinance he
had the evil called Bicus, till he came to the age of twenty years. After
this sickness being cured, he fell to another, which continued with him from
twenty years of his age to. 45. (according to his own petition and request
made unto God) whereby he was more reclaimed and attempred from other more
great inconveniences, and less disposed from that which he did most abhor.
Also he divided his goods into two equal parts, the one appertaining to uses
seculare, the other to uses spiritual or ecclesiastical. Of the which two
principal parts, the first he divided into three portions: the first to the
behoose of his house and family: the second upon his workemenne and builders
of his new works, whereof he had right great delighte and cunning: the
third upon strangers. Likewise the other second half upon spiritual
uses, he did thus divide in four portions, one to the releeuing of the poor,
an other to monasteries, the third to the scholars of Oxford, for maintina^ce
of good letters, the fourth he sent to foreign churches without the realm.
Also so sparing he was of time, that he divided the day and the night into
three parts, if he were not let by wars and other great business, ye
viij. hours he spent in study and learning, and other. viij hours he spent in
prayer and alms deeds, and other. viij. hours he spent his natural rest,
sustinance of his body, and the needs of the realm. The which order he kept
duly by ye burning of waxen tapers, kept in his closette by certain persons
for the same purpose. Now besides these other qualities and gifts of Gods
grace in him, above mentioned: remains another part of his no little praise
and commendation, which is his learning and knowledge of good letters, whereof
not only he was excellent expert himself, but also a worthy maintainer of the
same throughout all his dominions. He translated into English Orossius,
pastorale Gregorij the history of Bid, Boethius de consolatione Philosophy,
also a Book of his own making in his own tongue, which in the English speech
is called a handbooke, in Greek called Inchiridion, in Latin a manuell.
Suffering no man to aspire unto any dignity in the court, unless he were
learned. Do. Fox.

Next unto this virtuous and learned prince Alfrede, of all others that I could
read, Maximi ian most resembled him in godly learning and in learned
godliness: Who was so excellent expert in the toungues, but specially in the
Latin style, that imitating the example of Julius Caesar, he did write and
comprehend in Latin histories, his own acts and feats of chivalry, and that
in such sort, that when he had given a certain taste thereof to one
Pycharmerus a learned man, asking his judgment how his warrelike style in
Latin did like him, the said Pycharmerus did affirm and report of him to John
Charum (the witness and writer of this history) that he did never see nor
read in any (...) story a thing so exactly done, as this was of Maximilian.
Moreover, as he was himself right learned, so was he a singular patron, and
aduauncer of learning and learned men. And for the maintenance thereof erected
the excellent university of Wittenberge. Dominus Fox ex Iohanne Carione.

Of Pleasure.
KIng Lysimachus by chance of war taken captive of the Scithians, in his
captivity was so sore oppressed with thirst, that he was glad for a draught of
drink to sell his kingdom. But afterward remembering for how short a
pleasure he had sold a thing most precious, he cried out and wept, Lycost.
saying: Alas how mad was I to sell a noble empire for the satisfying of
my affection and greedy belly?

The same day that Socrate, should drink his deadly drench, when his shakles
were taken off his feet, he felt himself marvelous light and pleasant, and
said: behold how wonderously nature has ordained, Lycosthe.
that sorrow and pleasure go always together, and that there is never any
perfect pleasure, where there has not been pain and sorrow before. Ex
Laertio, lib. 2.

As Homer like a learned Poet does feign, that Circes by pleasant
enchauntments, did turn men into beasts, some into Swine, some into Asses,
some into Foxes, some into Wolves: even so Plato like a wise Philosopher does
plainly declare that pleasure by licentious vanity, that sweet and pleasant
poison does engender in all those that yield them selves unto her, four
notorious properties. The first, forgetfulness of all good things learned
before. The second dullness to receive either learning or honesty afterward.
The third, a mind embracing (lightly) the worst opinion, and barren of
discretion to make true difference betwixt good and bad, betwixt troth and
vanity. The fourth, a proud disdainfulnesse of other good men, in all honest
matters. Plato and Home. have both one meaning. For if a man inglut himself with
vanity, or walter in filthiness like a swine, then quickly he shall become a
dull ass, to understand either learning or honesty, and yet he shall be as
subtle as a fox, in breeding of mischief, in bringing misorder, with a busy
head, a discoursing to^g, and a factious heart, always glad to commend the
worser party, and ever ready so defend the falser opinion. And why? for where
the will is given from goodness to vanity, there the mind is carried from
right judgment to any fond opinion in religion, in Philosophy, or any kind
of learning. The fourth fruit of vain pleasure, by Homer and Platoes judgment
is pride of them selves, and contempt of all others, which is the very badge of
all those that serve in Circes Court, who transformeth the voluptuous man (as
has been described) into a marvelous monster, which caryeth at once in one
body, the belly of a swine, the head of an ass, the heart of a horse, the
brain of a fore, and the womb of a wolf. Ex ludimagistro domini Aschami
Platonis Epistola. 3. ad Dionysium.

Of Servants.
DIogines had a servant named Naues, who running away from his master his
friends willed him to make inquisition for him. No (quoth Diogines) that were
a sport alone, if Naues can live weoute Diogines, that Diogines should not be
able to live without Naues. Lycost.
For he is the best Philosopher that needs fewest things, wherefore he would
not seem to be worse than his servant, and to seek such a servant that
cared not for his master. Ex Erasmo.

When Xeniades had boughte Diogines, Diogenes (as though he had been master)
said, see that thou do what so ever I bid thee. Marie quoth Xeniades, that
were a merry world, when the servant should command the Master. No? quoth
Diogines, what if you should hire a Physician, would you not do what soever
he prescribed unto you? Much more then ought you being sick in mind, to obey
your servant, who is a cunning Philosopher, Laerti. lib. 6.
and cannecure your disease. And as much as the mind excels the body: so
much the disease of the mind is more dangerous than the infirmity of the
body.

He also was wont to say, that there was no difference between the Master and
the servant, but only their name. And that whereas the servants served their
masters, the masters served and obeyed their own affections. Wherefore he
concluded yt good and faithful servants were better than their masters,
Laertius. li. 6
if they were voluptuous and wicked livers.

Callicratides being demanded what kind of people the Jonians were? answered
that they were evil free men, but good bondmen. Meaning that they knew not
how to rule, Lycost.
but could well endure to be ruled and governed by others. Ex Plutarcho in
Lacon.

A woman of the Lacedaemonians being taken captive, and brought to be sold, was
demanded whether she would prove an honest woman if she should be bought,
Lycost. Ex Plut. in Lacenar. Apot.
yea that I will quoth she, albeit I be not bought. And when he asked her what
she could do, she answered, all things that a free woman should do. But
when she was put to do some servile business: she said, thou shall repent
thee, that thou haste bestowed thy money no better, and immediately slew her
self, saying: that albeit she were a captive, yet a caitine or a bondslaue,
she could not, nor would not be.

A certain servant in Rome accused his master, that contrary unto the Roman
edict, he had hidden gold. And coming before the Tribune, he brought the
gold with him. Whereupon his master was brought before the judge. But his
mother purposing by accusing hirself to excuse her son, came and offered her
self as the party guilty, and said, that the treasure was of her hiding: On
the other side, the servant refelled her saying, and earnestly endeavored to
prove that it was his master that had hidden it. His master all the while
stood still and said nothing. Wherefore albeit Brutus (being judge) perceived
by his scilence this accusation to be true, yet having compassion on the young
man and his mother, dismissed them, and badde them take the gold with them. But
seeing the untrustiness of the malapert servant, who so greatly desired his
masters death, he commanded that he should be hanged, according to the law of
Seuerus the Emperor, who made a law that if any servant complained on his
master, his complaint should stand of no force, Lycost.
but that he should be punished therefore. Ex Plutarch. in Rom Apoth.

When the Scythians had been seven years together in Asia in warre-fare,
their wives being weary, and greened any longer to tarry for them, thinking
that by this time they were clean destroyed: determined to marry with their
servants which were left at home to keep their cattle. Wherefore when the
war was finished, and the Scythians as conqueroures would have returned home:
their servants in armure forbadde them their coasts. So that they were
compelled to wage war with their own servants, who so stoutly resisted
them, that they were as like to be conquered of them, as to conquer, or subdue
their ennimies. Whereupon one more wise than the rest, willed them to change
their weapon, remembering that it were not their ennimies, but their servants
and bondeslaues, with whom they had to do. And therefore not by force of
arms, but by the authority of their maistership, they should repress them.
And so changing their sweardes into rods and whips, on a sudden they set
on them, and with shaking the whippes so terrified them, that where as by dinte
of sweard they could nothing abate them, with fear of stripes they chased and
put them to flight, not as conquered ennemies but as fugitive servant.
Justin. lib. 2.

When M. Antonius was subdued of Octaunus, he commanded Erotes his servant to
thrust him through with his swearde: Bruso. lib. 6. cap. 4.
but the faithful servant so entierly loved his master, that making as
though he would have stricken him, he turned the sweard, and thrust it through
his own body.

When Caepio was condemned for conspiring against Augustus, his servant
put him in a chest, Idem cap^. eodem.
and so conveyed him secretly in the night over Tibris unto Napies, and there
hid him and returned home. And being taken and examined hereof, he could by
no violence be induced to confess where his master was.

On a time as Appion lay a sleep in a stable, a company of armed men, which
bare him a secret grudge, came to kill him: but his servant knowing of their
coming, attired himself in his masters apparel, and lay him down in his
place: And so the me^ rushing in, killed the servant, Ibidem.
supposing that it had been Appion, and Appion by this means, being apparelled
in his servants attire, escaped with his life.

Seneca in his sixth Epistle, gives this lesson to masters. Live so (says he)
with your inferiors, Bruso.
as you would that your superiors should do with you And when ye remember what
power you have over your servant, remember also that the same power your Lord
has over you. Ex Senecae epist, 6.

Of Sobriety.
DEmades the Orator dining with Photion, and seeing his slender provision,
said unto him, I wonder Photion how thou can govern the commonwealth, and
fare no better than this? wherein he showed a double error, thinking his office
to tend to his own utility, and commending excess unto him, who above all
others liked and used sobriety. But Demades mused, as he used, and judged
other men by him self, for he was wondrous covetous of money, and altogether
given to riot and excess. Licost.
Ex Eras. lib. 6. Apoth.

When one asked why the inhabitants of Sparta did not love to tipple wine?
Leonchidas answered, that we may be able to give other men counsel, and not be
compelled to go and ask it of others. Wisely showing, that great typlers of
wine are nothing apt to give good counsel, but that sobriety is the mother
of good and wholesome counsels. Ex Plutarch. Lycost.


Romulus the first founder of Rome, is reported to be wondrous abstenous in
drinking of wine. Wherefore on a time being invited to supper (for that he had
some business to do the next day) at that meal he would drink little or no
wine at all. And when his friends said that wine would be good cheap, if no
man drunk more than he did: he said, nay then it would be dear, if every man
did as he did, for he (he said) did drink as much as he listed. Eras. li. 6.

Frederick the Emperor so embraced temperaunce and sobriety, that where as
his wife Leonora never drunk wine, and it was told him for a medicine, that if
she would use to drink wine (by reason that Germany was so cold a country)
she should with great ease be delivered of her children: he answered, that he
had rather have his wife be barrein, than much accustomed to drink wine.
Licost,
Ex Aenea Siluio. li. 2.

Alphonsus king of Arragon never drunk wine, unless it were mixed with much
water, and being demanded why he did so, he answered, because I will not be
drunk. For I know well enough how much the immoderate drinking thereof has
obscured the glory of Alexander the great. Licost.
Ex Panor. li. 1.

Anacharsis said, that the vine brings forth three grapes, the first of
pleasure, the next of drunkenness, the third of sorrow and grief. Meaning
that to drink wine moderatly is wholesome and good, but to drink too much
makes me^ drunken, and to continue in excess, causes chiding, fighting, and
dangerous diseases. Bruso. li. 1. cap. 16.

Of Superfluity and superfluous expenses.
DIogenes tau^ted the madness of men in this wise, they will (quoth he) for
vile things give much, and for things of importance give little or nothing. As
for an image they will be glad to give a hundred pounds, and for a bushel of
wheat they will grudge to give twenty pence, and yet of the one we have no
need, and without the other we can not live, and therefore if men had reason,
wheat should be dearer, and images better cheap. Lycost.
Ex Laer. li. 6.

Likewise Crates deridyng the folly of the world, which are hard and
nigardely to bestow cost in things most necessary and honest, and most
liberal and prodigal in things dishonest and shameful, says thus: give a cook
ten pounds, and to a Physician four pence: give to a flatterer ten talentes,
and to a counsayler give smoke: and give to a baude a talente, and to a
Philosopher three halfepence. Ex Laer. li. 6. ca. 5.

Of worldly wealth, riches, and prosperity.
WE read of many profane Philosophers (as Socrates, Diogenes, Bion, Crates,
Anaxagoras, Pythagoras, and innumerable others) who considering that worldly
wealth could nothing less do, than cause a quiet mind, as a thing of no
worthiness, neglected it, and as a thing of no price, set it at naught.

Whose consideration Plutarche by this similitude approves as not untrue.
Likewise (says he) as a man going to the sea, and first carried toward the
great ship in a little bote, there beginning to vomit, desires greatly to be
at the bigger vessel, supposing to find ease therein, where he is worse
troubled with the same grief than he was before: even so a man being in a
vile state, and poor case, and not well content therewith, coueteth
advancement to higher condition, and to have his goods and substance
increased. To the which things if he chance to attain, he shall be more
unquieted than he was before in his former dignity.

As for examples, Alexander the great king of Macedonie, possessing in a manner
all the world, for all that was so little quiet, that when he heard Democritus
disputing of many worlds, Brus. lib. 1. cap. 1.
he wept bitterly, that he had not yet conquered one of them. Of the other
part, poor Diogenes, glad to use in stead of a house, a tun to lie in,
Era. Apoth. lib. 3.
and compelled with poverty to live with cold herbs and water (his mind
instruct with learning and virtues) was never unquiet, never careful, no, he
thought him self richer than Alexander, to whom he was bold to say (at which
time he offered to give him what he would desire) that he was in better case, and
needed fewer things than he. For as for him he was well contented with his
state, but as for Alexander, he could not be contented with the kingdom of
Macedonie, no not with the kingdom of the whole earth. At whose security
Alexander marvelled, and said: And if I were not Alexander him self, I would
wish to be none other, but even Diogenes.

Laertes, which to the sight of ye world lived welthy, and wondrous quiet, yet
was not quiet in deed, as witnesses Plutarch. On the other side Metrocles
vile and beggarly, in winter covering his body with a tub, Era. Apoth. lib. 6.
for lack of houseromth, and in summer taking up his innes in the porches of
the temples, faring no better than did the dogs of the city: yet was he of so
quiet a mind (virtue being the author thereof) that his quietness amongst
writers shall be had in perpetual memory.

In Aristotle's problemes it is demanded of riches, why he used to dwell with
the worst, and so to disdain the company of the best? Ex Hugone.
who answered, that his mind was once to have dwelled with them that were
good, but Jupiter envying this his purpose, put out his eyes, and since he
lost his sight, it was ever his chance lightly to happen on the worst. It was
also asked of poverty, why she did still visit the good men, and passed by
them that were wicked and naught: she answered, that good men could tell how to
entreat her.

And so shall ye read that such murderers as Tantalus, ambicious as Croesus,
covetous as Crassus, and sicophantes as Cylition, had of wealth great
abundance. And on the other part such just and good men, as Aristides, Cato,
Vticensis, Fabius Maximus. Anaxagoras, and Plato were ever in great trouble,
indigencie, and affliction.

Manius Curious, was once a man of much nobility, riches, and renown amongst
the Romans. Howebeit afterward as it fortuned, he became a very poor man,
insomuche that his meat for the most part was only roots, cold herbs,
and wortes. Era. Apoth lib. 5.
It chanced that the Embassadoures of the Samnites the^ being at Rome, and
hearing of his poverty, who^ they had known once to be famous and wealthy,
came to his house to visit him, where they found him in a poor chamber, very
poorly arrayed, and dressing his simple dinner, they after much communication
about to depart, gently offered to give him money, the which he refused, and
said: keep your money to your selves, for he that can be content with such
apparel and fare, has no need of your money.

Horace considering ye whorish charms of the world, calls her riches and
ornaments matters of the great evil, and cou^selleth them that be loathe to be
wicked, to hurl them into the sea.

Let us therefore not pass for the lack or loss of riches or other worldly
things, that be so perilous: but rather prepare our selves to follow the
counsel of Horace, though he were an Ethnicke: not in casting away our goods,
if we have them, but living as though we had them not. Imitating the godly
rich Abraham, Job, Tobie, in giving and distributing them unto the poor and
needy. And (...) so shall we lay up treasure in heaven, where neither rust nor
mothes do corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal.

FINIS.
The Table.
A. Abstinence, Continency and Temperaunce. Page 1. Accusing aad speaking evil
of others. Page 6 Adultery, Fornication, and whordome. Page 10 Avarice or
Covetousness. Page 13 Audacitie and boldness. Page 21
B. Banketting. Page 23 Bestowing and thankful receiving of benefits. Page
25 Brethren and sisters. Page 28
C. Children. Page 30 Concord and unity. Page 34 Court and Courtiers. Page 36
Constancy. Page 41 Craft or subtlety. Page 46 Cruelty and Immanitie. Page 51
D. Deceyte and guile. Page 56 Death and Burial. Page 63 Discord and
variaunce. Page 66 Desire of knowledge, Discipline, and the Duty of scholars
to their masters. Page 72 Drunkenness and drinking. Page 75
E. Education of children, Page 79 Exercise and use. Page 86
F. Fatal destiny. Page 90 Felicity or Happiness. Page 97 Fortune. Page 101
Fortitude and Manhood. Page 110 Friends and friendship Page 113
G. Gluttony and Riot. Page 121 H. Hatred and envy. Page 122 Harlots. Page
127 Humanity and Gentleness. Page 130
I. Innocence or a good conscience. Page 137 Judges and Judgment. Page 139
Justice and Equity. Page 145
L. Labor and pain taking. Page 150 Laws, Statutes, and Decrees Page 154
Lascivious love, lust, and lechery. Page 159 Liberality. Page 165
M. Marriage, wives, and women. Page 173 Magistrates and Officers. Page 189
Misfortune and misery of man. Page 194
P. Pride. Page 202 Princes and Principality. Page 205 Pleasure. Page 216
S. Servants. Page 218 Sobriety. Page 224 Superfluity, and superfluous
expenses. Page 227
W. VVorldly wealth, riches, and prosperity. Page 228


FINIS.

