A nevve order for Banqueroupts.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Charde.

1582.

A notable decree of the Lords of the Parliament house of Paris, bearing date
the 26. of June, 1582. Pronounced against William Buhigue, containing a
punishment for Banquerouptes, namely the wearing of a green Cappe or Hatte.
BEfore I come to the setting down of the sentence pronounced by the Lieutena^t
of La val, one of the jurisdiction of the presidentall seat of Poytow* either
of the confirmatiue decree of the Parliament house of Paris, ratifiyng the said
sentence, I thought it good (gentle reader) in few words, to describe the
part of a creditor toward his debtor, as also the charge of a debtor toward
him that have been beneficial unto him by relieuing his want with his goods,
whether goulde, silver, or other commodity, to the end, by this brief
collection and advertisement, each party may consider his office and duty,
and so, better late then never, reconcile himself to God and his neighbor,
during his pilgrimage in this vain and transitory life, which being ended,
our God will (as all men know) require an account how every one has dealt in
his vocation and office, how simple so ever it has been, and in the latter
day of judgment, yield the reward due to his deserts, except by speedy
repentance before the said judgment he reconcile himself. For God being
just and perfect goodness, extends his mercy upon thousand generations of
those that unfeignedly do love him and obey his commandments which he has
left, and willed his faithful servants and Apostles to preach unto us, and
punishes only to the fourth generation such as of set purpose do disobey and
transgress his precepts, for more acceptable is obedience then sacrifice, and
better it is to obey God then man. The part therefore of a creditor toward his
debtor, consists in lending unto him that thing whereof he stands in
need, and which the creditor may with least loss best spare, without looking
for any amends, or requiring any reward for the time of the lone thereof, therein
putting in practice that Christian charity, which by God and his Church is
taught in these words, Mutuum dantes, nihil inde sperantes, lend looking for
nothing again, together with many other places of the old and new Testament,
and Canonical and Apostolical epistles, continued in the doctrine of many
learned fathers of the Christian Church, both old and new, whereunto every man
is bound to conform himself, in case he be endued with any jot of judgment,
or bears any dutiful affection unto his salvation.

But such is ye malice of our days, yt creditors in their lending, will so
greatly regard their own commodity, that if they lend, it shall be to the
end, of their debtor to receive double the value, as in delivering but mean
commodities, and to receive again ye best: In delivering of rye, oats, or
barley, to claim again pure and clean wheat: either to deliver their old
wines full of all sorts of dregs, yea for the most part sour or foystie, and
again, to require that which shall be new and of a perfect good vintage.

They sell their clothes and other wares at a high and dear price, when in
troth they be but little worth, giving their debtors so short days, as to their
undoing, they be forced again to sell them, yea for the most part by brokers
to those of who^ they first bought them, for little or nothing.

Others there are that deliver forth money, or other commodities from fair to
fair, from 3. months to three months, after ten in the hundred or more, to
the utter empouerishing of their debtors. To be brief, the Devil and his
supposses in the shape of men, have by their subtlety invented infinite kinds
of usury: wherewith like ravening wolves they still devour their poor
debtors, that are driven to submit themselves to their faith and charitable
courtesies, who in the end are thereby brought to utter beggerie, and undoing
without redemption, which is a woeful and lamentable case. Yea, in the good
towns and other places, each one maintayneth those people, and cloak their
offenses, or at the least dare not speak of them for fear of being stunge by
the like villainous vipers whereof the world is full: for usually those be the
soonest preferred to honors and dignities whereof in truth they be utterly
unworthy: therefore for those that are manifestly known to be such letters
forth of goods, there were no reason their debtors should incur the
sentence and decree hereafter rehearsed, especially when it is evident wherein
the debtors have by such ravening wolves and their detestable brood been
circumuented, deceived and entangled with debt upon debt unto the full valewe
and extent of all their goods. Oh poor, miserable, and wretched sheep, who
having yielded fleze, skin and flesh, do hardly reserve the bare bones,
which rattle up and down the Cities, Towns, and villages, where they remain
within the reach of such wild and cruel beasts, as encroch up the whole
world.

Howebeit as such debtors are by justice, to be relieved and defended against
that kind of people, who in every City and town do bear the whole sway both
in wealth, honor, and dignity, so must we not therefore maintain a number
of subtle shifters, which using all fair pretenses and colorable flattering
speeches, do abuse and deceive both here and elsewhere, many well meaning
marchantes, such as being of a franck, good, and upright disposition do think
that all others do resemble them. These crafty conueyars by borowings
reiterated and renewed ofter then need requires, and that in sundry places,
and of diverse persons for fear of discrying, yea and in greater sums then
their power or ability will bear, one creditor nothing knowing of another,
when ye days of payment draw on, will not find wherewith to satisfy eue^ she
smalest sum wherewith they have bin helped: but then to avoid emprisonme^t,
(therein counterfeiting the glutted and drunken Ape, which after drink hoppeth
up and down) do leap from place to place, and according to the proverb, come
to set their tails upon the stone, which by law and justice is appointed for
the cession and delivery of al their goods to their creditors, whom to the same
intent, they cause to be summoned to the sight of that their miserable
benefit: which interdiction of law, tending to the relief of the good and not
to the boulstering up of such fraudulent debtors, as are last mentioned, is
founded upon the edict of Orleance, though in that respect but simply executed
throughout most part of this land, where every one indifferently, which
seeks to deceive his creditor, is upon his own only petition, admitted to
the benefit of cession of goods, bringing in for the true value thereof, no
other witness the^ himself can choose among his friends or favorable
neighbors, without other circumstaunce or solemmity, then during the sitting
to assist and houlde plea barehead upon the said stone.

Hereunto has this court at this time had great and diligent respect, to the
end, hereafter to cut off such shifts and wicked dealings, for the relief
of honest, and in deed charitable creditors, and therefore in confirmation of
the sentence of the ordinary judge of Laual, have decreed yt from henceforth,
every one that will sue for ye admission, to the benefit of cession of goods,
shall wear a green Cap or Hat, which his creditors shall buy him.

And for this time, William Buhigue to begin with the wearing of the same,
which shall be provided him, by Marin the Monk, defendent and withstander of
the said cession of goods, to the end, as well the said Buhigue, as all
other of his profession may be known, and the world thereby warned of his or
their said cession, which by the wise advice of the chief president Thou,
together with the grave, learned, and experimented Senators, his assistantes in
the great chamber, who are not to seek in the like cases practiced among the
Romans, and contained in their histories and secrets of law, is commanded to
be put in execution. This decree is taken a simili, namely of the ancient
manner of the Romans, practiced upon such as had incurred any great loss by
la^d or by water, as piracie, drowning, fire, or robbery, or any such like, as
we may in these days term those extremities, whereto our Master usurers by
means and diuises aforesaid, together with infinite others, enough, if a man
should stand upon them all, to replenishe hole vollumes, do reduce and drive
the poor: whose practice at this time is so manifest, that there needs no
more but the princes commission, directed to faithful officers, to make
general inquiry thereof, least they do hereafter as horseleaches, even suck
up the marowe of the poor, and be drunken with their blood, yea the prince
must use them according to the sense of the Emblem, where standing with a
sponge in his hand, and wringing out of every drop of ye water therein, he
gives to understand, that in like manner he is to use al such as fill and
enriche themselves with his treasure, or the substance of his poor commons,
whom with their subtle slightes and practices, catching at their goods, they
wring as dry as a bone.

The Romans I say, used plainly and at large to paint and set out the
miseries, and inconveniences or losses, which such men had any way sustained,
and the^ to cause the party endamaged, to carry up and down this table, wherein
his loss was portrayed upon his shouldiers, whereby every man might know his
loss, and consider of his desert, and so if need were to relieve him, or
otherwise to beware of committing to his hand that thing which he was not able
to keep or make account of, as the satirical Poet Persius, and after him more
at large his expositor Murmelius do rehearse. Upon this ground have this court
at this present, in confirmation of this sentence of the aforesaid Judge of La
Vall of the jurisdiction of the seat of Poitow, determined and decreed that the
Banquerupte William Buhigue shall from henceforth wear a green Cappe or Hat,
at the cost of Marin the Monk defendant, upon the alowance of his letters of
cession, and that only to the end, the said Banqueroupt may in all places be
known, as were those me^ at Rome, which carried upon their shouldiers the
picture of their mishap, whereby the people might afterward know the^: Such
therefore is the excellency of this sentence, that it deserves confirmation
throughout all this land, against such Banquerupts, as forcing them to wear
a green cap or hatte, as a badge of their disorders, yea and to be for
perpetuity inserted into the very heart of the civil and canon law, also by
virtue of the princes perpetual and irreuocable edict, for ever to be ratified
word for word, after ye order and form of ye said decree and sentence, as
follows.

An abstract out of the records and ordinary register of the court and
Jurisdiction of La Vall.
Between William Bughigue, prisoner in the castle of La Val, chalenger of the
fite of cession of goods at this present, by his Attorney M. Francis Belangier
Licentiate in the laws on the one part: and Marin ye Monk appeala^t there
against, personally and by his Attorney M. John Sercoul, likewise licenciat in
the laws on the other part.

The parties heard, and the said appealant by his declaration, not able to
prove any concealment of goods, as by him has been into this court intimated,
we do debar and condemn in costs and damages, and in respect thereof,
have a merced him at forty shillinges tournois.

Moreover, in as much as the said appealant, cannot produce sufficient cause
why the said Buhigue should not be admitted to the said benefit of cession,
our sentence is, that presently he be dismissed out of prison, and so brought
into this court personally to receive the said benefit. Hereupon the said
Buhigue, being come into the face of this court* has wholly resigned and made
cession of all his goods to his creditors, and acknowledges the whole su^me
by this appealant demanded, faithfully promising upon the bettering of his
estate, to satisfy all his creditors, and affirming that he has not any
other goods whatsoever, then what presently he bears about him. Also that
fraudulently he has not made conueyaunce of any away. In consideration
therefore of the premises we have, and by these presents do grant the said
benefit of cession unto the aforenamed William Buhigue, as well for all sums
demanded, as for his lodging and fees.

We do also at the instance of the appealant, the Monk aforesaid, decree and
ordeyne, that for the manifest knowledge hereof, the said William Buhigue
shall from henceforth in all places, and at all times wear a green Cappe or
hatte, which the said the Monk shall prouid^ for him. Also that when, or
wheresoever the said Buhigue shall be found without the said Cap or Hat, after
that the aforesaid, the Monk shall have made delivery thereof to him, it
shall be laweful for ye said the Monk, or any other his creditors to commit
him to prison, commanding our chief usher, upon reasonable request to see
this our decree fully and in all parts executed according as is most requisite,
and thereto do give him full power and authority.

Given at La Val, in the presence of us, Francis Tartrous, Licentiat in the
laws, and Lieutenant general in the jurisdiction of the said place, this 9.
of September. 1580. Thus signed. Morayne.
FInally, this court by decree has disanulled al appeals here against,
without costs or damages, and do ordain that notwithstanding whatsoever
appeal, the said sentence shall stand in full force and power.

Given in full plea the 26. of June. 1582.


Hereby it is evident that Annuells, Annuells and Quinquenelles are yearly,
and five yearly protections for debts.
Quinquennells, and cessions of goods ought not slightly to be granted, or
permitted to every one that will sue for the same before a judge, for the
causes and considerations before mentioned: for Annuels and Quinquennels, are
no other but the two steps whereby debtors do clyme to Banqerouptshippe, or
cession of goods; endeavoring by such devises and privileges to defeat their
wretched creditors of such commodities, as simply and on good faith they have
lent them. Also under such clokes, shadowing their false intentes, and
mayntayning their credites to the uttermost: which is an easy matter to do,
unless the green Cappe or Hatte be to the same conjoined, as an evident
token thereof, according as by the sentence is provided, which together with
the decree, confirmatiue thereof, deserves perpetual remembrance and honor,
as the mean whereby the posterity may know such as look so simply to their
affairs, or fraudulently seek to defeat their creditors of their right, that
they be forced to submit them selves to the dishonorable wearing of a green
Cappe or Hatte under pain of imprisonment on the behalf of their creditors,
so often as they be found destitute thereof.

Which nevertheless is not meant to tend to any such note of infamy as thereby
to be debarred or rejected from lawful witnessing, or bearing such office or
authority, as otherwise they might be capable of, in case all other their
behavior were correspondence. Neither ought any Annuels, Quinquenelles, or
cession of goods to be otherwise taken, tolerated and allowed, then for
mischances happening through fire, water, wars, or such like, when without
doubt, by some inevitable inconvenience, the loss of all or most part of a
man's goods do thereto drive and enforce the petitioner, not his own manifest
negligence or wilful wast, and so to have recourse to those means, yea
sometimes before that debt be due, for the which they sue out the said
Annuells, Quinquenelles, respits, or cessions of goods: during the allowance of
which suites, they shall not be forced to put into the officers hands those
sums of money which they owe, except the said suite be compassed after
condemnation. Neither is the suitor to be emprisoned, after he has procured
his creditors to be summoned to appear at the admission of the said Annuells,
and Quinquenelles, but being so emprisoned, is to be released and set at
lebertie.

Father, a man condemned for trespass in amends, is not receiuable to the
Cession of goods. Many other things are also to be considered before any be
forced to the said cession in respect of the interest that sundry creditors
have thereto: and therefore it is meet that any appear at the suite commenced
and prosecuted against the debtor for deteyning his person, by reason he has
no goods (as is to be presupposed) wherewith to pay: but if he have any, the^
he ought to confess the^ to his creditor, to the end, be may therewith be
satisfied according to reason. All which notwithstanding, it is to be noted,
that a man giving up his goods in manner aforesaid, can not be taxed with any
spotte of infamy, rejected from witnessing on any behalf, or made incapable
of bearing such office as otherwise he might, or by right ought to enjoy.

For cession of goods simply, is a favor to the poor, and by law admitted
for sundry commendable respects, and therefore is not to breed contempt
against those that by poverty, or other inconvenience are forced to submitt
themselves to such extremity of law.

This therefore may be a sufficient warning to all creditors, wisely and
christianlike, to use their duty as is before specified: also to such needy
debtors, that in time they have recourse to others according to reason, before
they be compelled to wear a green Cappe or Hatte at their creditors costs,
as by this former decree, confirmatiue of the sentence of the abouenamed
ordinary judge of La Vall, the day and year aforesaid, it is both learnedly,
circumspectly, and wisely ordained.

Let this therefore serve as an example to all wis^, discreet, and wary
persons in every common wealth. Farewell friendly reader, and take in good
worth this simple discourse: grounded upon the said sentence and decree.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Charde. 1582.


