THE EXPOSITION AND declaration of the Psalm, Deus ultionum Dominus, made by
sir Henry Parker knight, lord Morley, dedicated to the kings highness.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND mighty prince, HENRY the.VIII. king of England and of
France, defendour of the faith, lord of Irelande, and in earth supreme heed
immediately under Christ of the church of England, his most humble subject,
Henry Parker knight, lord Morley, wyssheth all wealth and prosperity.
IF I HAD MOST christyan Prince, and my most dear and graciouse soueraygne
lord, as Uirgil says, an hundred mouths, with as many tounges, and therewith
as much sweet eloquence, as had the Grecian Demosthenes, or the Romayn Cicero,
yet could not I express half the virtue, half the righteousness, that is in
your most royal majesty, as in a perfect Arc of all princely goodness and
honor. For where as unto this present time of your most happy reign, this
your Empire most triumphant, has been wrongfully kept, as tributarie unto
the Babylonicall seat of the Romyshe bishop, your most sage and polytike
wisdom has benne such, that as it may be well thought, by divine
inspiration, ye have taken a very kings heart, which seeks, as it ought, to
rule, and not to be ruled. and has set the english nation at fredoome and
liberty. What worthy thanks for so noble a deed, and so beneficial an act,
can your most bounden subjects render unto your high majesty? We may much
better say to you, than ever might the Romans unto the most noble Emperor
Augustus, that ye are not only the noblest king that ever reigned over the
english nation, but also Pater patriae, that is, the father of our country,
one by whose virtue, lernyng, and noble courage, England is new borne, newly
brought from thraldom to freedom. For where as there is nothing more sweet
than liberty, nothing more bitter than bondage, in so much that death has
often ben chosen to aduoyde servitude. What owe we unto you most gracious
sovereign lord, which are by you, as by a most natural father, the bonds
broken, set out of danger, from the captivity Babylonical, so that we may say
plainly as the Jews did to Judith: You are our beauty, you are our honor,
you are our glory. Scipio the Affrican did much for the Romans, Codrus for
the Atheniens, Epaminondas much for ye Thebans, Themistocles much for the
Grecians, Cirus much for the Persians, Salandine much for the Egyptians, and
yet all these compared with your hyghnes, may seem almost to have done nothing
at al. I therefore, most christian king being a parttaker of all your
inestimable benefits, have and shall always study, which ways, and how I
may, to the vttermoste of my litel and most feeble puissance, give thanks to
your highness for the same. And for as much as I know my self unmeet to do
any bodily service, condign to so virtuous and excellent a prince, yet at ye
least I shall give unto your hyghnes, ye thing, which as well the feeble as the
strong may give, that is to say, hartye prayers to god, for the preservation
of so just, so merciful, and so faythefull a king. I than offer unto your
highness this new year, dear and dred soueraygne lord, this psalm of king
David, Deus ultionum dominus, with a brief declaration of the same, most
humbly praienge your high accustomed goodness, to accept it in gree, and not to
regard the rudenes, but rather the faithfulness of me your subject, that
wylleth with the very heart, as he writes, goodness, and all goodness to you:
And to your enemy the Babylonicall bishop of Rome, reproufe, shame, and
utter ruin.

DEVS VLtionu^ dominus, deus ultionum libere egit, O Lord god almighty, that
haste made with thy word, Heaven and Earth, with all the beaultie thereof, and
do with the same, feed all kind of beasts, in time requisite, and haste
put under man's subjection, beasts in the earth, birds in the air, and
fyshe in the sea, so that he is little less in dignite than angels, and at
the last crowned him with glory and honor, as thou have done our most
victorious prince, making him thyn anointed king, to rule under the, the
Empire of England, which has, doothe, and intends always to defend thy
word: We pray the, with devout hearts, to assist him, in suppressynge the
proud heed of the poluted city of Babylon, the Romysshe bishop. Deus
ultionum dominus, that is to say, thou that would we should commit al
vengynge to the, revenge us against this serpent, that would, to maynteyne his
power, devour thy holy word, if his might were as great as his malice.

Exaltare qui iudicas terram, read retributionem superbis. It is not to me
unknown, my sauyor and redemptor Jesus, yt when thy holy will is, in like manner
as thou did defend the people of Israel, by thy duke and leader Moses,
from the proud and obstinate Pharao, Joshua from the.xxxi. kings, Gedeon from
the Amolytes, Sampson from the Phylistiens, David from Golyas, Ezechias, from
the Assirians, Asa from the Ethiopians, Judas Machabeus from Antiochus, and
Nycaor Constantine from Maxentius, Theodosius from Eugenius, the noble Henry
the fyfte from the french men, the wise Henry the seventh, from the tyrant
king Richard, with infinite mo: all be it they seemed to be inferior to the
innumerable multitude of their adversaries, yet thou ouerthrewest them, in
exaltyng thy power. Give than my lord, and my helper, power to our prince, to
thruste down this bishop of Rome, not only his adversary, but chief ennemy
to thy glory, which seeks by tyrannous presumption, to bring in his
subjection, all pryncis of the world. I cry to the good lord, Exaltare, qui
iudicas terram, that is to say, Be thou lift up on high, and ascend up to
thy seat, that art the judge of the universal earth, and render to the
proud bishop as he has deserved.

Vsquequo peccatores domine, usque quo peccatores gloriabu^tur? All be it
mercyfulle Jesus, thou do permytte by thy secret judgment, evil persons to
prosper, I my lord and god, that know not, but as man knows, say to the, O
good god, how long shalt thou suffer, I say from the botom of my heart, how
long wylt thou suffer this seat of Satan, to glorify it self in evil
doing? What great damage to al Christendom, and what great mischief wrought
Honorius against Frederike the good emperor in his journey ageynste the
Turks? This wicked bishop sent letters to the Soudan, showing him which
ways he might distroy the christen army. What should I say of Bonifacius the
third, of Alysander the.vi. of Julius the second, the greatte thief of the
world, of Leo the tenthe, of Clemens, and now of Paul, that dyuellyshlye
always go about to set one christen prince against an other, only to maynteyne
their usurped and tyrannous estate? Vsquequo peccatores domine, usquequo
peccatores gloriabuntur? How long shall such proud prelates prosper? how long
time wolte thou suffer them?

Effabuntur and loquentur iniquitatem, loquentur omnes: quia operantur
iniustitiam. Those that be adherentes to his cursed court, they murmr, they
grudge, and do that in them is, to resyste the holy zele, which our king
has, to set forth the holy word of god. But our prince, that has goddis
word fervently and most constantly fyxed in his heart, will with his
assistens, persevere against all them, that would ought do to the contrary. And
as the royal king David, although he were rebuked of his father, his
brethren, and his friends, let not to go naked, to fight against great Golyas:
even so let them say all, that do evil, what they will, our prince woll not
cesse to resyst with all his power, the obstinate will and usurped authorite
of the proud bishop of Rome.

Populum tuum domine humiliauerunt: et haereditatem tuam uexauerunt. And not
without cause our prince does and woll withstand the malycious power of
this synfulle seat of Rome. For sythens the time that Syluester challenged by
gift, that that Constantyne never gave him, he and his successors, enioyenge
temporal possessions, fell from thy holy faith, which before was spredde
by thy apostelles througheout the universal world. And as it had great
success, and daily increased in all countries more and more, as long as they
that were in the apostels place, followed their humility, poverty, and
obedience: so by the pride, covetousness, and tyranny of this Babylonicall
monster, it has left Asia and Affrike, and scasely remains in Europa, a
small corner of the world. Wherefore this may be well said, They have put down
thine elect people, and they have vexed thyn inheritance. Who ought not with all his hole heart, to bewail this piteous decay? Or who will not be glad to
resyst the malice of those that be the causers thereof?

Viduam and aduenam interfecerunt, and pupillos occiderunt. As this decayer of
the monarchye of Christendom, is for the most part occupied in greattest
mischeues, as in stryuynge against truth and goddis gospel, in banysshynge
true religyon, and setting up hypocrisy and ydolatry: in hurlynge down al
good order, and obedience, so sometime that all men and women to, may have
just cause to hate him, he comes from the grettist to the small, and falls
to the spoylyng of wydowes, to the slaughter of strangers, to the murder of
orphans. And as he and his, sometime stir up the emperor against the French
king, sometime the french men against the imperyals, brefely each kingdom in
other necks, so sometime they come to lower matters, and set one private man
to poison an other, one cytezen to murder an other. In so much that men think,
fewer christen men to be alive at this day, than they, for the maynteynynge of
their quarelle, have caused to dye by fire, sword, hunger, and pestilence.

Et dixerunt, non uidebit dominus, nec intelliget deus Jacob. They perceiving,
that al thing came to pass as they would have it, and that the blind world
believed, they might pull out of heaven, and throw into hell, whom they lusted,
handeled the mattier in such sort, that who so ever said the contrary, had
all princis in his top, ready with the swerd, to take their part. Anon they
were exalted in such pride, that as Lucyfer did, they presumed to pitche
their trone equal with god, and let not to boste, to brag, and to say: God
shall not see our abusion, the god of Jacob shall not perceive wheraboute we
go.

Intelligite insipientes in populo, et stulti aliquando sapite. But our prince,
most mercyful savior Jesus, which is thy Christ, yt is to say, thyn anointed
king, even as his regal majesty, requires of him, ceasseth not to warn all
people, specially those, that be simple and unlettered, to give them monition by
the word of god, to be wise, to take heed, how they have fallen into extreme
darkness, in gyuynge credit to his erroneous doctrine, and falls traditions, in
leanyng to much to his laws, and commandments: and wishes all men to
trust in god, which woll the death of no sinner, but all men to be saved.
And if they do not this, they fall clean from god, unto a frail temporal man's
arm, which is but flesh, and shall come to duste.

Qui plantauit aurem, no^ audiet, aut qui finxit oculum non considerat? He that
consydereth well with him self, the wonderful works of god, must needs see,
that he is alone almighty. He that marketh how faithful he has been in all
his promyses, can not but think, that he alone is to be trusted? he that sees
what power he has given to other things, must needs grant, that he him self
has all power. He created all things, he made the ears to here, and the eyes
to see, now, is it like, that he, which set ears upon your hedes, and
gave you power to here, can be deaf, and here nothing him self: And if he be
any thing quycke of herynge, shall not the voice of the innoce^tes blood, shed
by your cruelty, which cries still, at the last come up to his ears? Can
they lament still, and never be herd? Shall he that has set eyes in your
forheades, and given you power to see, not se the^ great abuses, the false
wrestynge of his holy word, the wicked desire that this papisticall sort has,
to maynteine their pomp, pride, and tyranny? Shall he here them, and se al
these your mischeuous inte^tes, and not see you one day punyshed?

Qui corripuit gentes no^ arguet, qui docet hominem scientia^. Shall not he,
that changes all worldly monarchs, and does transpose, as Daniel the
prophet says, realms, countries, and empires, now to rule, now to be
ruled, shall not he hurl down this seat of Satanas? He changed the dominion
of the Assiria^s, and gave it to the Medes, from the Medes to the Persians,
from the Persians unto the Greeks, from the Greeks unto the Romans, and
wolle not he bring the proud and usurped estate of these, that ought to
serve, from the noughty, to naught at all? or to say, as it ought to be,
restore it rightfully to them, that a long season have been wrongfully kept
from it? Thou art still that same self god, yt taughtest Paul thine apostell,
the secret hyd science of scripture. Thou art he that dydste so illuminate
the mind of thine elect and tenderly beloved disciple John, that he, which
before was a fyssher man, utterly unlearned, now excellynge the rest of the
Evangelists, uttered many high mysteries, and such as the other three left
untouched, writing that wonderfulle piece of work, In principio erat verbum.
No meruail, if thou that taughtest the unlearned such high mysteries, teach
the learned at length, to know the false doctrine, the wylye ways, the
abhomynable hypocrysye, the detestable ydolatrye of this wicked mo^ster of
Rome. Can he that teaches the hethen to follow things just and right in the
face of the law, suffer the Christians, still to blonder, still to be in
blyndnes, still to be seduced by this Babylonycall strompette?

Dominus scit cogitationes hominum, quoniam uanae sunt. I might greatly
marvel, ye and more then meruayl, how this chair of pestilence could so
long stand in honor, saving that I know very well, both to what folyes
the vain cogytations of men bring them, and how lightly the people are
illuded by superstition, and color of religion. The Jews sometime thyn elect
people, not withstanding they saw with their eyes the red sees divided, to
give them passage, water spring out of the hard stoone, to quench their
extreme thirst, meat descend down from heaven, to feed them, when they were
full hungrye, yet while Moses was in the mount Sinai, they forgetting al
these miracles and benefits of god set up a calf, and took it for their god. I
might marvel, and greatly marvel* that the christen people could be so
fond, to leave the word of god, and his heavenly doctrine, and follow this
wicked bishop of Rome, and his dyuellyshe dreams. But as this is not the first
evil change, that foolyshe man has made, so let us assure our selfs, that
vayn cogitations dure not ever, the seduced turn again, when good guydes
show them the way.

Beatus homo, quem tu erudieris domine, and de lege tua docueris eum. Blessed
may thou be called, most christen king HENRY the VIII. supreme heed of the
church of England. Blessed art thou, whom god has taught, to epsy out the
peryllous doctrine of the bishop of Rome, whereby the people of England ar
brought from darkness to light, from error to the high way of right knowledge,
from danger of death eternal, to life that never ends, to be short, even
from hell to heaven. By the O sage king, the word of god, that in time paste
was cloked and hyd to the elders of thy realm, is now manifest to chylderne,
that cease not to praise with their mouths, god, and his holy word. For the
mayntenance whereof, most royal king, thy praise shall still continue upon
earth, and than depart, when all men have taken their leave of it. Happy,
happy is that man good lord, whom thou teach, happy whom thou endewes^^
with thy doctrine.

Vt mitiges ei a diebus malis, donec fodiatur peccatori fouea. Albeit O lord,
thou have long forborne, and suffered this greatte deceyuour of the world, this
Romayne bishop to reygne after a cruel sort, proudely commaundynge all
princis, all estates to obey his lusts, yet thy goodness be ever praised,
thou haste at the last raised up a prince, and by him dug a pytte, to hurl
this wicked wretch in, where both he, his false doctrine, his hypocrisye, and
idolatry, shall as our trust is, be buried for ever. This pit has often
been a making, many have dygged and left of, er ever the pytte has been fully
made. Noble HENRY the eight is he, whom we trust, thou wolt always aid and
presorue, not only until all popyshe power be brought into the diche here in
England, but also until all Christian nations shall have so covered this
dyche, that Romish power be never able to rise again.

Quia no^ repellet dominus plebem suam: et haereditatem suam non derelinquet.
Let England I say, put other nations in memory, of the great fall, that the
estate of Christendom took, when kings began to obey the lewd doctrine of
priestis, when pristes presumptuously took upon them, to rule goddis word
after their fantasyes, and not their lusts, according to his laws. Let
fortunate England which now in spyte of tyrants tethe, has recovered her
inherytaunce, be an exaumple to the rest of Christendom, that goddis will is
not, to forsake his people, to see their right inheritance wrongfully kept from
them. God hates all such as usurp upon his anointed kings. Awake christen
kings awake, England blowethe the trompe, and shows you all, how ye may
avoid bondage, and how according to your title and name, ye may as kings
rule and Reygne. God chose not you his kings, for to be reuled, but to rule.
Ye may have officers under you, as many as you will: being kings, you ought
to have none above you.

Quoadusque iustitia conuertatur in iuditium, and qui iuxta illa omnes qui
recto sunt cord. God a long season suffered Pharao, to vex his people, to
heap affliction upon affliction, and yet at the last he met with him, and
in a day was even with him for all the injuries, he had done to his people.
He forbear a great while, and yet a time came, that he would suffer no longer,
but converted justice to judgment, and rightuously executed such sentence
against him, as he had long before differred. The time is at hand, yt Christ
shall for their great abhominatio^, se these tyra^tes at Rome, turned out of
their triu^phant thrones, wherein they sit as gods, treadinge down the laws of
Christ, setting up their decrees and decretals, as rules, or rather misrules,
to disordre almooste, all that god had well ordered before. The time is at
hand, that they shall be brought from pride, to meekness, from superfluities,
to honest poverty, from voluptuous lust, to sober and chaste life, from
haute and imperious commandments, to humble and lowely obedience, from
feined holiness and hypocrisy, to godlynes and right religion, and than shall
we have good cause to say, as saint John said in the Apocalypse, Cecidit
Babylon, cecidit Babylon ciuitas magna, that is, the greatte Babylon, the
greatte city of Babylon is fallen down, she is fallen, that made al nations
drunk with the wine of her hooryshe fornication.

Quis consurget mihi aduersus malignantes? aut quis stabit mecum aduersus
operantes iniquitatem? Like as the excellent king and prophet David, greatly
meruaylynge, did demand, who should rise with him, to subdewe evil doers,
workers of wickedness, so may our most noble and Christen king say, who
ought not to rise with me, to the vanquishyng of this monstrous hydra,
considering the innumerable mischeues, the civil discord, the cruel wars,
the effusion of Christian bloudde, that has been shed by the practices of
these Romayn bishops? Who has not hard, how these good prelates, have set
princis subjects against their soueraines, much contrary to the doctrine of
Peter and Paul, which expressly command, and woll all subjects to obey
their pryncis, under pain of perpetual damnation. They cease not to encomber
all pryncis realms with Sedytion, where they perceive any thing in hand,
touching their refourmation, and wol kings still suffer such sowers of hatrede
and mischief, still to have to do in their realms? Ought they not rather to
give ere to our most noble prince, saying with David, Quis co^surget mihi
aduersus maligna^tes? aut quis stabit mecum aduersus operantes iniquitatem? Who
wolle rise with me against these wicked men? what prince wolle follow, to take
part with me, against these most ungodly persons?

Nisi quia dominus adiuuit me, paulominus habitasset in inferno anima mea. If
there were none that would follow the godly ways, and further the virtuous
procedynges of the most worthy Henry our king, yet god, that ever does assiste
and exalte the good, resyste and withstand the proud, shall under the shadow
of his holy wings, defend all rightuous causes. They that seek righteousness,
may often be brought into many straytes, much trouble, great distresses, but
yet if the confidence and trust, that they ought to have in god, fail them
not, they are ever sure to escape. Dauyd was brought into many dangers, and
yet evermore delivered. And who knows not what ieoperdies the kings highness
has escaped only by the help of god?

Si dicebam motus est pes meus misericordia tua domine adiuuabat me. The kings
hyghenesse may say, as well as ever David might, when so ever I said to the, my
foot slypped, or failed me, my fre^dis or subiectis, whom I entierly trusted
and loved, were not as I took them, thy mercy good lord, always did help me,
and kept me evermore from falling. The bishop of Rome has sought many
ways, to make his gracis feet slyppe: but god be thanked, his highness
standethe every day more surer than other, every day more faster than other.

Secundum multitudinem dolorum meorum in cord meo, consolationes tuae
laetificarent animam meam. It is not to be douted, but his highness most
tender and gentil heart, felt great dolor, when he saw such to have
intended him most high displeasure, whom he took to be his trustiest
servants, and as the dolours were greatte, so must his gracis gladness be
greatter, to see the waking eye of god, so ready to undo his enemies, so pressed
to preserve and defend his highness. His wisdom, has devoured a great
multitude of peynes, following the fervent study and desire he has to
maynteyne the word of god, against the proud Babylonicall bishop, and yet the
consolation and comfortes, which he takes by the overthrow of so
intolerable a monster, of such an ennemy to truth and goddis honor, is
far greatter than ever were his peynes.

Nunquid adhaeret tibi seeds iniquitatis? quia fingis laborem in praecepto. Can
the seat of wickedness, be joined with the good lord? Is it to be thought,
that thou chosest him to thy vycar, which works all things in manner
contrary to thy will and pleasure? Wolt not thou declare one day in other
realms, as well as thou haste done in this noble realm of England, that thy
will is, the bishop of Rome, which abuses the pretense of thy
commandments, to the setting forth of his abhomynable doctrine, be taken
to be as he is, thine enemy, a deceyuour of as many as trust him? he has
seditiousely swarued from that state, and degree, which thou set him in.
He is made of an humble sheparde, an image for pryncis to kiss his shoes, wol
nothing move the good god, that thou still with such patience suffers him
thus to abuse thy patience? Moses could hurl Chore, Dathan, and Abiron into
hell, for disseueryng them selves from his governance. And shall not other
princis bring this runnagate, this strayeng bishop, under the yocke of
obedience, as Henry the eight has done? Help them good lord, as thou haste
helped him, open their eyes, as thou haste done his, the popysshe power is
utterly confounded.

Captabunt animam iusti, et sanguinem innocentem condemnabunt. He and his never
cesse, to seek the destruction of the rightuous, still condemnyng the
innocents blod. Here if a man would but rehearse, how many they have condemned
by falls process, chargynge them with errors, that died for truths sake, he
should find a great slaughter, a great quantity of innocents blood drawn by
these blood suckers. But he that lusts to put in writynge, what bloudde has
been shed, what a noumber of men have dyed at such times, as these have set
christen princis one against an other, he should be able to justify, that great
mylles might be driven with blood, if that that has been shed, could run
together. A piteouse case, that the innocent should be taken for the gyltie, a
world to be lamented, that the wicked should send the godly to be slain,
even as lambs in the fleshambles. Our lord be thanked, England is now out
of that case, and none slain, in especial by process and judgment, but such
as are unworthy to live.

Et factus mihi dominus in refugium, et deus meus in adiutorium spei mei. Men
know, what ways this bishop and his adherentes, have sought and daily seek,
to hurt noble Henry the.viii. men se, how his highness may stylle say, as
David said, The lord is he, that I fly unto for help, he is the comfort of
my hope, he is mine hoole trust and shote anchor. If he continue his aid and
succor toward me, I woll nothing doubt, but as I have passed over the
Babylonycall walls: that so one day, other princis woll come to the sackynge
of this harlot, that has so long deluded them, I trust every bird woll take
his fether, and that the proud crow of Esope, being ones naked, shall make
the world to laughe, which a long season has made it to wayle.

Et reddet illis iniquitatem ipsorum, et in malitia eorum disperdet eos,
disperdet illos dominus deus noster. He has played the tyraunte to many years,
prowdely vexynge whom he lusted, sparyng neither king ne Keysar. God, styrred
by the sins of the people, and angry with the ygnora^ce of princis, has
suffered him thus to reygne and rage over them both, a long a long season,
and yet sufferethe him to rule in many nations, both as much their loss and
damage, as he and his pirates, I would have said prelates, can deuyse. God is
a god fulle of compassion, and one that long suffers, stylle lookynge for,
and desiring amendment. But where he sees no hope of redress, he pays in
one hour all dettes. Assuredly, if we woll use, the knowledge, which god has
sent us, to his honor, the time is come, that he intends to execute his
ryghtuouse sentence against this sect of Satan, against this dronken
strompette, so used in the bloudde of saints and martyrs. All the world shall
cyre out, and say, Woo woo to the, thou greatte City of Babylon, thou mighty
strong city, so builded up with blyndenesse of people: the hour is come,
thy judgment is given, though yet not executed. They that have been enryched
by the, shall stand afar of, weeping and wailinge. The kings of the earth,
shall now lament, that ever they medlyd with thy marchaundyse: lamente, that
ever they took thy part: lamente, that they consented with the, to the
vexation, trouble, prisonment, banyshynge, spoylynge, and sleing of innocents.
They shall now stand afar of: they wolle no longer favor thy wicked
doings: They woll sorrow, that they so long have suffered the, and be much
aferde, lest god be likewise angrye with them. And so thou left alone,
forsaken of all princys, hated of all the godly and good men, shall woefully
come to a miserable end. The lord our god him self shall bring the, to
shame, sorrow, ruin, and utter confusion.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.


