CHRISTIAN ADVERTISEMENTS AND Counsels of Peace. Also disswasions from the
Separatists schism, commonly called Brownisme, which is set apart from such
truths as they take from us and other Reformed Churches, and is nakedly
discovered, that so the falsitie thereof may better be discerned, and so justly
condemned and wisely avoided. Published, for the benefit of the humble and
godly lover of the truth. By RICHARD BERNARD, Preacher of Gods Word. Read
(my friend) consideratly; expound charitably; and judge, I pray thee, without
partiality: do as thou would be done unto.

PHILIP. 3. 16. In that whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one rule, that
we may mind one thing. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND CHRISTIAN PROFESSORS, SIR GEORGE SAINTPOLL
Knight, and to that virtuous Lady, the LADY SAINTPOLL, both his singular and
ever good Benefactors, all comfortable blessings to the welfare of soul and
body, is heartily wished for ever.
RIght Worshipful, Satan's subtilties are of old; it is no news to relate
them. CHRIST Jesus is that Lamb, who loves his dearly, and is beloved again
of his unfeignedly; but the devil is that Lion, roaring in his inueterate
hatred, seeking to dishonor the one, and to devour the other. The fearful
he affrighteth with dread of torment: whence it is, that Peter forgetting his
profession which he made so boldly, for swears his Savior, even with cursing
most unfaithfully. Thus many miscarrie in time of trial: they either
presuming, and God not assisting, or they formerly seeming to be what they were
not, are then manifest to be as they were in deed.

But where by fear he cannot make afraid, he turns his shape: of a Lion
roaring, he would seem a lamb lamenting: when by force he cannot win, he
endeavors by deceit to beguile: the^ Satan would be a Savior, and persuades
Eve that following his counsel, she shall be more like God then before,
whilst he intends to make her as himself, hopeless of heaven. If he
cannot, as an Angel of hell, make men over wicked: yet in the shape of an
Angel of light, by a preposterous zeal, he will set them on to become over
just, as Solomon speaks. Sometime he does lead men into a superstitious
voluntary worship without Scripture on the left hand. Sometime to run with
nothing but pretended allegations of Scripture, into by paths of error and
schism on the right hand. Thus Manasseth is against Esaias 9. 20. 21*
Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseth, and both against Judah, amongst us.
The Schismatic Brownist, he snatcheth at the right hand, and is hungry:
the Antichristian Papist on left hand, and is not satisfied. What safety to
Sion? It is time to see and consider.

We sland (Right Worshipful) in the midst, behold we may matters of fear,
malice and justice: the justice of God for sin, the malice of man and Satan
increasing transgression, to force still justice to wrath: should we regard
lightly these things? Is it enough for us, as many do no more, to condemn the
one side, and to abhor the other, as careless Securitanes? Far be it from
us: except we repent, we likewise shall perish. Shall we leave our standing,
and by stumbling at such stones of offense, fall from our well doing? God
forbid: walk we must, more warily; neither go Prou. 4. 27.
on this side, nor on that, but remove our feet from evil. Ask we should for
the Word promised, on which if we humbly depend, we shall hear it behind us,
when we are going on either hand, saying Esaias 30. 21.
unto us; This is the way, walk in it.

It grieueth me much (Right Worshipful) to see this breach made amongst us;
loss it is to the Church, gain to the enemy, and then what true good to
themselves? Many laugh at it, some account it a matter scarce worthy thinking
upon, and so few or none lament it: to me has it been just cause of sorrow,
and therefore could I not lightly pass it by: but in love to such as yet abide
with us, and in desire to do my best to recover again mine own, whom God
once gave me, I have published these things.

My labor (Right Worshipful) I offer unto you as a testimony of a never
forgetful remembrance, with a mind hartelie thankful for your Worships
continued favors, and bountiful liberality toward me. By your work of
mercy, in the University was I brought up, whereby through the good grace of
God, I am that I am. Accept therefore this I beseech you, not as any recompense
(for how can ever a child repay a due fully equal to parents deserts?) but as
a continual witness of my bounden service. Our will is of God the Father
accepted for the deed, where there can be nothing better: the like measure of
mercy I am sure his children will mete unto me. In persuasion whereof, with
comfort already well experienced, I cease further herein to trouble you:
beseeching the mighty God of heaven to be with you, and to bless you after his
abundant love to the Saints in Christ elect, the very Israel of God, I humbly
take my leave. From Worsop in Nottinghamshire.

Iun. 18. Your Worships ever to be commanded in Christ Jesus: RICHARD BERNARD.

TO THE GODLY Reader, the grace of con stancie, with the spirit of love and
humility in well doing.
THe troubles of the Church must affect thee. A child pitieth the misery of
his mother, and mourns for that which he cannot amend. He that in such a
case is careless, is grown unnatural and deuoid of grace. In times
heretofore we read, that the Church of God was in a very high degree vexed:
first, with bloody persecution: then by Antichristian superstition and
idolatry. This caused by Antichrist, who with Egyptian darkness obscured the
verity of God, and obtruded a false word and worship upon the Church. The
other by the stumbling Jews, and foolish Grecians, in the first planting of
the Gospel; but both of the devil. The first was to keep out the truth at ye
beginning, by afflicting bodily death: the latter to deface it, being brought
in by men's devices, to souls damnation. The extreme rage of both is abated.
Enemies yet must be, to keep men watchful; trials also, to see our own
soundnes: but Satan is chained from rising hereafter to the former measure of
his malice; and Antichrists power shall never so prevail as heretofore:
thereof persuade thy self. The decree of God is established; let men consult
and intend what they please; in spite of man the purpose of God shall be
permanent.

There remains nevertheless an other mischief, nothing less dangerous;
which is, Atheistical security, carnal living under a general profession in
an evil peace. This the Apostle foresaw, (1. Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) and said,
it should be: the same Christ himself foretold by the example of the old world
and Sodom in the days of Noah and Lot, that scarce faith should be found on
the earth. This evil creeps upon the world; pleasures with peace do nourish
it, (English people the instance) contentions in religion breed it. Upon
occasion whereof, Satan suggesteth, man's corrupt heart intertaineth, and so
becomes the worse: one offends, and another there at stumbleth; but woe is
unto both, and a mischief ensues thereby unto many.

Other nations are full of examples: and of this misery may we also lament:
much sin, and thereupon fearful judgment; but little sorrow, and less
amending without greater inforcement. Dreadful days! Behold our security in
the midst of misery; understand and pray.

Papists on the one hand increase, though their cause be cursed. The practice
of their bloody intendments might make them odious, and teach us to walk more
warily in unity: but we amongst our selves do work our own woe, by
uncomfortable contentions; neither side yielding, the evil grows by partial
partaking. Oh that our Abraham's would somewhat yield a little in the smallest
things, and know themselves; and Lots also hearken to wholesome counsel, that
both may be united in peace: for the Cananites are in the land. Whilst the
victory is striuen for, the general enemy does win ground, and Satan has
sent a new company on the right hand, lest this his contentious work should
cease to be. The one sort is justly feared, and therefore as the general
enemy of many resisted: the other held contemptible, and therefore as base
neglected, or for the fewness despised: but the little Foxes eat grapes. These
must also be seen unto, and said to; but without rigor and bitterness.
Through our silence, they proclaim themselves Conquerours: they challenge all,
and still bid battle to the whole host of Israel, as if they were invincible,
and had overcome all: and yer Master Gyshops book, Master Bradshawes
challenge, Doctor Allisons consutation, certain Ministers reioynder to Master
Smith, with other more are not answered. They do offer encounter upon certain
questions, as if therein were their own cause propounded; when Brownisme is a
thing differing from both Papist, Protestant, and Puritan, so called: for,
says the Papist, Christ's ruling power is in the Pope; nay, says the
Protestant, it is in the Ecclesiastical governors, Bishops: nay, says the
Puritan, it is in the Presbytery: nay, says the Brownist, it is in the body
of the Congregation, the multitude, called the Church. And in this begins
Brownisme: the first stone of that schismatic building, upon which are laid
those other errors mentioned in this book. This (Reader) take notice of, to
discern where Brownisme begins. They propound the reformed Churches
government to allure thee, and our state so, as they may make thee forsake it:
when neither this is the simple reason why they depart, nor the other their
cause properly, wherein they stand. By these they do only make way for such
as know not their way, which they have by themselves, to come to them: but the
government of the reformed Churches do not they maintain.

For this cause (Reader) that thou may not be deceived hereafter, either
with their pretending of such trueths as be not their own, or yet with their
equiuocating renunciation of Brownisme, I, a little one amongst others, and in
the presence of my Brethren; not with Saul's armor, but with a stone in a
sling* even with my mean mediocritie, have nakedly discovered unto thee this
way. If thou do affect it, before thou run, uncase it; take from the Iay,
other birds feathers: set it before thee as it differs from all other
Churches, then behold it with both eyes, judge by deliberate consultation, and
take as thou by the word have warrant.

I have sought out and found, and after my judgment leading will I go, and
not run after affection: as I am persuaded, so would I have other, if I be
found in the truth: if otherwise, I promise not to contend for any victory.
Confidence in our cause, (that here is a true Church of God, from which we may
not make separation) has made me aduenturous: and the spiritual injury which
some of late have done to me, more then to many, has called me hereunto. They
have taken away part of the seal of my ministry. Mine own with them may
have Instructors, but no Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten them
through the Gospel. I will claim them, though unnaturally and unkindly they
disclaim me; in love do I follow, and so will, albeit they flee from me with
hatred. Friendly Reader, when thou have read this huc and cry, send it away by
thy approbation thereto, and report the cause to other for discovery thereof,
as thou shall think fit. If thou happily do find any meek ones of them in
thy way, rebuke them lovingly, entreating the Younglings gently for the Lords
sake, and send them back again. For in a schism many may be, who are not
thereof: many affect that where of they cannot judge, and so are mislead; yet
without any intendme^t of evil. The humble that are of a tender conscience, are
very reclaimable: but the strait hearted opinionate are not so recouerable; yet
I hope of both: for it is the Lord that works the will and the deed, both
when and as he will.

Thus (loving Reader) thou see what I only intend: how men will take it, I
well know not; how they should, I know. If any thing be set down which may any
way give offense, as not seeming to be without some gall of bitterness in the
manner of handling, and nothing does touch the matter of the argument; I
profess, as I look for a blessing, I have not intended to abuse any man's
person, but to open the cause. I leave men to judge, the wise as they find, the
perverse as they please. This I only crave, that no man take ill any thing
without just cause, and that every one expound well a man's meaning, as charity
shall lead him, and right reason persuade him. And so I commend thee to God.
June 18.

Thine in the Lord, R. Bernard.

THE CONTENTS of this book.
I CHristian counsels tending to peace and unity. page 1-20.

II. Disswasions from Brownisme. page 21.

I. By great probabilities, that that way is not good, and they are in number
seven: 1. The nouelty of it. page 21. 23. 2. The agreement thereof with
ancient Schismatikes. page 24. 3. The ill means by which it is maintained,
viz. by abuse of Scripture, and that diverse ways, as also by deceivable
reasoning. page 25-29. 4. The want of approbation of the Reformed Churches.
page 30. 5. The condemnation thereof by all our Divines. page 30-32. 6. Gods
judgment against it. page 32-42. 7. The ill success it has had. page 42-44.

II By Reasons, which are threefold: 1. Taken from the evil of the entrance
into that way. page 44-47. 2. From their persons so grievously sinning in that
way. page 47. in condemnable unthankfulness to God and men. page 48. 49. in
spiritual uncharitableness. page 49-65. in abusing the Scriptures. page 65.
in obstinate persisting in Schism, from all the Churches of God in the world.
page 65-70. in railing and scoffing above all other. page 70-78. 3. From their
opinions, the matter of their profession, which are altogether erroneous and
false, as they stand (and so differ in their v^^ from all other Churches) in
Brownisme: diverse errors of theirs are here mentioned. and the principal
answered at large. page 78. 79. 80. 82. 83. 88. 102. 109. 128.

Besides these here is maintainned for truths against them: 1. That our Church
was truly constituted, and from which men may not make so wicked a
separation with such condemnation. page 79. 109-128. 162. 163-176. 2. That a
particular visible Church is a mixed company. page 87. 168. where is noted,
how and why such a company are called Saints. page 85-87. 3. That popular
government is utterly vnvvarrantable. page 90-94. 100. 102. 103. 4. That, Tell
the Church, Matthew. 18. 17. must be expounded, Tell the Church Governors. page
94-100. 5. That one man is not polluted by the sin of another. page 103-109.
6. That we have true Ministers of Jesus Christ. page 128-144. but their
Ministers are not lavvfully made. page 144. 145. 7. That our worship is not a
false worship, much less idolatrous; for order, it is after the Jewish
service, and warrantable in the New Testament. page 146-150. Lastly, that
stinted and set prayer is lavvfull. page ^^2. 193.

CHRISTIAN ADVERTISEMENTS AND Counsels of Peace to the wise hearted, and to him
that is of a peaceable disposition.
Receive wholesome instruction thou that read: be desirous to walk in the
strait way, but yet in the right way, keep measure and thou shall hold within
the compass of a holy and godly mean. Beware of superstition in Religion to
decline on the left hand, and take heed of rash zeal to run on the right
hand; endeavor to be what thou ought to be, though thou can not attain
to that thou should be. Go even; be no Atheistical Securitane, nor
Anabaptisticall Puritan: be no careless Conformitant, nor yet preposterous
Reformitant: be no neuterall Lutheran, nor Heretical popish Antichristian: be
not a schismatic Brownist, nor fond and foolish Familist: be not a new
Nouelist, nor yet any proud and arrogant Sectarie to draw disciples after thee:
be no follower of any such, beware of them all carefully.

But stand a constant Protestant, in the ancient, Catholic, Orthodoxall
verity and truth. Be to God faithful, and to lawful authority not
disloyal. To conclude, hold the truth after the word, and gainsay not laudable
customs of the Church, not against the word. Be not ready to take offense,
and be in like manner loath to give offense. And God shall be with thee, and
the spirit of life shall guide thee.

To further thy godly inclinablenesse hereto, consider well of these so
friendly given Christian aduertisements and wholesome Counsels of Peace. Read
(good friend) advisedly, I beseech thee, post not on apace: though thou have a
quick apprehension to understand, yet take time to settle affection. Some good
things are soon known, but in hei^ (...) for the most part lightly
entertained: whence it is, that many do only talk of that often, which not
once they ever made use of. But in a word, the purpose of my penning these
things, is to bring them into practice: and therefore so read thou
deliberatly, as thy will may be to perform them conscionablie. Amen.

Love peace, and desire to hold it with God and good men: yea follow after it
with all men, as much as is possible with holiness. Seek the public quiet of
that established estate under a Christian Governor, whether it be Political
or Ecclesiastical, where thou art a member, and by what means thou can
devise, not against Religion, common honesty nor charity; and thus to do:

I. Uphold the manifest good therein. How a man ought to carry himself in a
Christian State.


II. The manifest evils, labor in thy place by the best means to have them
amended peaceably.

III. Bear with lighter faults for a time, till fit occasion be offered to
have them amended.

IV. Likelihoods of evil, make them not apparent evil, by ill interpretation,
where neither the State intends it, nor so maintains it.

V. Doubtful things take in the better part, it is ever charity.

VI. Iudiciously discern between the abuse of a thing, and that which may be
well used; lest in abhorring the abuse, thou also do utterly condemn the
thing it self and the use thereof.

VII. Let the corruption of the person and his lawful place be distinguished:
and where person and place are not so lawful, and in the proposed end not
against thee, wisely labor to make them for thee; and make that good of them
thou can, and wholly condemn not that Ministry which a godly man may make
for good.

IIX. Pattern not a Monarchy to an Oligarchie, or any other State,
Aristocrasie or Democrasie: neither let (as thou supposest) the well being of a
foreign State make thee unthankful for the present good thou do enjoy, and to
loathe thine own being, lest malcontentednes break into contention, and so
thou lose that good thou have, and procure the increase of evil, which thou
do dislike.

IX. In thy zeal for Religion against corruption, let the book of God well
understood be thy warrant; and in thy hatred against wrongs in the
Commonwealth, let the knowledge of the law and the equity thereof move thee to
speak: this is Religion, this is reason. But beware of superstition, for so
beginning of uncertainty, thou may lose the fruit of thy labors, and be
condemned as a busy medler and contentious.

X. Refuse not to obey Authority, in any thing wherein there is not to thee
manifestly known a sin to be committed against God: let fantasies pass; be
more loath to offend a lawful Magistrate, the^ many private persons. Where
thou can not yield, there humbly crave pardon: where thou can not be
tolerated, be contented with correction for safety of conscience, and bear
what thou can not avoid with a patient mind.

The kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace and
joy in the holy Ghost: for whosoever in these things serves Christ, he is
acceptable to God, and approved of men, Romans 14. 17. 18.

I. Omit no evident and certain commandment How to avoid scrupulosity of
conscience, and contention in seeking for reformation.
imposed of God. If there be nothing but probability of sinning in obeying the
precepts of men, set not opinion before judgment.

II. Let ancient probability of truth be preferred before new conjectures of
error against it.

III. Mark and hold a difference between these things, the equity of law and
the execution; between established truth generally, and personal errors of
some; between soundnes of doctrine and erroneous application; between
substance and circumstance, the manner and the matter; between the very being
of a thing and the well being thereof; between necessity and conueniencie;
between a commandment and a commandment to thee; between lawfulnes and
expediencie; and between that which is given absolutely or in some respect.

IV. Use the present good which thou may enjoy to the utmost, and an
experienced good before thou do trouble thy self to seek for a supposed
better good untried, which thou enioyest not. Dislike not things present, as
men do discontentedly; praise not things past foolishly; and desire not a
change, hoping for better vainly.

V. Endeavor for things which are of necessity, wish also the well being of
the same for conueniencie: but for this contend not forciblie against public
peace, lest in seeking for the been, thou do utterly lose the benefit of the
necessary esse.

VI. Do not trouble thy self either to take part with, or to be against that
thing, the holding or denying whereof makes nothing for or against religion,
salvation or damnation.

VII. In a common cause make one, but after thy own judgment convinced of
truth and within the compass of thy calling; not for company to make up a
number, or for that thou will be doing because other are so.

IIX. Never presume to reform other, before thou have well ordered thy self:
See at home, then look abroad; redress that which is faulty, and in thy
power to amend, before thou do meddle with that which is beyond thy reach.
Be not fair in public, and foul in private, hate hypocrisy and avoid vain
glory.

IX. Receive no opinion in religion, but what the Word evidently does warrant:
beware of apprehensions out of thine own wit, but let the Word first give
thee sight, and so entertain it, as thou art enlightened. As thou may not
of policy for fear of trouble, by thy wit get thee distinctions, to lose
sincerity where the Word is plain: so may thou not of scrupulositie,
imagine sin to trouble thy conscience, and to vex thee with fear of
transgression, where there is no law: the one does breed Atheism, the other is
the mother of superstition.

X. Let thy own knowledge ground thy opinions in thee, and not in the
judgment of other: see into the glass of the Word by thy own sight, without
other men's spectacles, and hold what thou iudgest truth, only in love of the
truth; beware of by-respects: so hold the truth as never to be removed; but
that which is erroneous in thee, be willing both to see, and to be reclaimed.

XI. Witness the truth, for the truths sake: inform others lovingly; desire
that they may see the truth, but never urge them beyond their judgment,
neither take it grievously if thy words do not prevail, but wait with
patience. Beware of rash judgment, neither condemn nor contemn other that
are not as thy self. Think not to make thy gifts another guide, nor thy
measure of grace their rule, for to every man is allotted his portion.

XII. Whomsoever thou do see to do amiss, judge it not to be of
wilfulness, but either of ignorance, and so offer to inform them, or of
infirmity, and so pity them, and pray for them Be charitable, so shall not
his sin hurt thee, and much shall thy charity advantage thy self in the end:
and add this withal, Be slow to anger, let never another man's distempered
passion bring thee to disorderlinesse in affection.

XIII. Love not to be in controversies, it argues pride and a spirit of
contention; but if thou be drawn unto them and called thereunto, undertake
the right, and choose the truth: and in the handling,

1. Never come to it with a preiudicate How a man ought to carry himself in
handling of Controversies.
opinion, but with a mind to find out the truth, and not of contention.

2. Take words doubtful in the better sense, as the cause and circumstances
will bear: evident truth embrace willingly, manifest errorrs deny plainly,
likelihood of falsehood esehew friendly, likelihood of truth bend them the best
way: pervert nothing wilfully, acknowledge thy ignorance where thou art made to
see, and yield the victory when thou can not win it without wicked
Sophistry.

3. Be sure in answering that thou have the Authors meaning, either by which,
or to which thou do make answer. Allege no testimony rashly, and
especially beware of this evil in quoting Scripture. Wresting of Scripture is
a great abuse of the Word; and if thou be in error, and do by the Scriptures
presume to maintain it, thou would have the truth to uphold falsehood, and
wickedly do make the holy Ghost a maintainer of a lie.

4. Follow the matter strictly, avoid idle excursions, pass by weakness, take
heed of hasty passions, and in defending a cause abuse no man's person.

XIV. In things Indifferent make no How a man ought to carry himself in things
Indifferent.
question for conscience sake: so it be that neither holiness, merit nor
necessity be put therein; nor used for any part of Gods worship, but for
decency, order and edification.

If thou be in a doubt, and thy conscience as thou think does trouble thee
about the use of a thing indifferent:

I. Quaere, Whether this doubt arises Whence sem^pulositie of conscience
arises.
simply of a tender conscience from judgment convinced; or that it be but a
nicenes of dislike coming from a desire not to be troubled with them, or for
that thou have not used them, or because some cannot away with them, or from a
godly jealousy and suspicion only, for from henceforth will scruples arise:
so also from a continued custom, likewise from ignorance and the want of
certain knowledge and a settled persuasion of the lawfulnes of a thing. If the
ground Note well.
be not a judgment enlightened and convinced, it is not trouble of
conscience, but a dislike working disco^tentednes upon some of these former
grounds* which thou may easily remove by settling thy judgment upon the word
and sound reason.

II. Quare, Whether this doubting arises through thy own default, by looking
out reasons to increase thy dislike, and neglecting to search for arguments to
give thee satisfaction. If thus thou have offended, as many do, take a^ great
pains in Gods sight to resolve thy self, as thou have done to bring thy self
into doubting, else dealest thou bu^ partially.

III. Quaere, If it be trouble of conscience What to do in perplexity of
conscience.
indeed, and yet the thing be no^ plainly forbidden, nor so commanded; why
(where a special warrant to a particular is wanting) a general rule, or a
general commandment to obey, may not give thy conscience satisfaction: else
how to do in such a case.

IV. Quaere, Why a man should be more scrupulous to seek to have warrant
plainly for every thing he does in Ecclesiastical causes even about things
indifferent, more then about matters ^olitike in Civil affairs. Men in these
things know not the ground nor end of many things, which they do yield unto
upon a general command to obey authority, and knowing them not to be directly
against Gods will: and yet every particular obedience in civil matters, must
be 1. of conscience: 2. as serving the Lord (so must every servant his master:)
which cannot be without knowledge and persuasion, that we do well even in that
particular, which we obey in; which men usually for conscience sake inquire
not into, but do rest themselves with a general commandment of obeying
lawful authority, so it be not against a plain commandment of God. What
therefore does let, but that a man may so satisfy himself in matters
Ecclesiastical?

The curious searching so particularly into every thing to have full
satisfaction, has so wrought in these days upon men's wits to bring
distinctions, that the more men seek in doubts for resolution, the further are
they from it. Oh days full of distractions! what counsel shall I here take
and give!

I. Keep al maine truths in the word How to settle a man's conscience to
prevent scrupulofitie, and perplexity.
which are most plainly set down, an^ are by the law of nature engraven i^
every man.

II. Believe every collection truly an^ necessarily gathered by an immediat^
consequence from the text.

III. Follow evident examples fit for thee, either as a Christian, or as thy
special calling requires.

IV. Avoid that which is plainly forbidden, or follows necessarily by an
immediate consequence.

V. Intertaine true Antiquity, and follow the general practice of the Church
of God in all ages, where they have no^ erred from the evident truth of God.

VI. If thou suffer, let it be for known^ truth, and against known
wickedness* for which thou have examples in the Word, or examples of holy
Martyrs i^ story suffering for the same or the like But beware of far fetched
consequents or for suffering for new devices, and for things formeriy unto al
ages vnknown^ seem they never so holy and just unto man.

If yet thou do judge a thing commanded a sin, and not to be obeyed, for
thy help herein:

I. Quaere, Whether that which is How a thing unlawfully commanded, may be
lawfully obeyed.
wrongfully or sinfully commanded, may not yet nevertheless be without sin
obeyed; as Ioab obeyed David in num^ring the people. Then be not thou to ^lame,
but do what thou ought, al^eit others do what they should not.

II. Quaere, How thou do reckon it ^uill: if simply, then find a
prohibiti^n; else, Where no law is, there is no ^ransgression: if accidentally,
that is in ^he abuse that may be removed; or in ^espect of thy ignorance of the
lawful^esse, making thee to doubt, and so sea^ing to offend, use all diligence
for re^olution. And if it be not a known sin ^o thee certainly, but only by
probabi^ties:

Quaere, Whether probabilities of sin^ing How probabili^ie of sin cannot
excuse due obedience to a sinful precept. Vide Pouelum lib. de Adiaph. cap.
11. page 116.
may give thee a sufficient discharge ^or not obeying a plain precept, and to
^eglect necessary duties otherwise, both ^o God and man.

If yet thou do think thou shall ^ot do well (albeit the Gospel may be
^eely preached thereby) to yield so much to the evil disposition (so supposed)
of men, think how S. Paul value^ the liberty of preaching the Gospel* who
since the Ascension of Christ, afte^ that the Ceremonial law was abolished,
when he had preached against it, an^ against Circumcision; yet did check^
himself publicly, and with a place o^ Scripture, for speaking as he did
against a Simonicall, a false (in respect of hi^ entrance) a persecuting and
murdering high Priest: he observed legal rites, h^ circumcised Timothy, and
did not find^ fault with things not altogether to be^ approved, so long as they
were no^ made a part of Gods worship; and a^ this he did to procure free
liberty t^ preach the Gospel.

And for yielding somewhat to me^ evil dispositions, I say but thus:

Quaere* How it could stand with M^ses How oftentimes somewhat may be yielded
to the evil disposition of men.
faithfulness to grant a bill of D^uorcement (contrary to the law of Marriage,
contrary to the first institution from the beginning) for the very hardness
of the peoples hearts, and to pr^uent a greater mischief?

If this happily trouble thee (in doin^ what thou may and ought) that
thou shall offend many whom thou would not offend.

I. Quaere, Whether it be an offense How we ought to carry our selves in
offenses taken.
justly given by thee, or taken without just reason of them; thou not offending
and they displeased, the fault is their own, and thou not chargeable therewith.

II. Quaere, Whether they be offended in respect of what themselves know, or
but lead by affection, disliking of other men's dislike. Entreat the former to
let thee abound for such things in thine own sense, and show them that herein
thou may brotherly disagree: for the later, inform his judgment, if he
will yield to reason, if not, then,

III. Quaere, Whether thou art bound to nourish up such a one in his folly, and
to respect his partial affection, being more carried away with an ouerweening
of some men's persons, then any thing at all with the right understanding of the
cause. If they be men of judgment, and will contend with thee, be not troubled
with what wit can invent to say, but what is truly spoken from the Word, not
by far conclusions, but by a near consequence, and plain evidence of holy
writ. If thou can answer the substance of that which is objected, let
their vain conceits or subtilties pass; neither think that thou art
overcome, or art bound to yield unto them as one convinced in judgment,
because thou can not see every deceivable reply, to give thereto an
unanswerable reason to take it away. If ignorance make a conviction, and
Sophistry be the means, then should men be easily carried about with every
wind of doctrine. There is no Heretic but has his arguments, nor any Sect
but has conceits, and Satan by his Sophistry helps both, even to beguile
other, and to deceive themselves the more too.

IV. Quaere, What authority may do Note well.
in things external for outward rule in the circumstances of things; and then,
Whether Authority commanding does not take away the offense, which might
otherwise be given in a voluntary act.

V. Quaere, Whether a man should stand more upon avoiding dislikes in private
persons, then offense to public authority. Whether this be not an humouring
of men, to increase discontentednes, rather then to endeavor to preserve
(wherein thou may) the public peace and welfare of a Christian State; or,
Whether it were not better to cross some men's affections without sin to God,
then that otherwise thou should stay the passage of the Gospel, neglect most
certain duties, let people perish, open a gap to the enemy, lose thy
liberty, and no whit better the Church. It were better, wherein thou lawfully
may, that after the Apostles practice, thou did become all things to all
men to win but some.

Study, study (says the Apostle) to be quiet; follow those things which
concern peace; and let me entreat thee to keep patience within thee. Use
charity abroad, attempt nothing rashly, know things first rightly; be zealous
but iudiciously, neither speak nor write with distempered passion. Let the
Word be thy warrant only, thy calling thy bound, the Spirit of God thy
directour, godly wise thy counselors, Gods glory thy mark, truth the matter
of thy trouble, other men's corrections thy Schoolmaster, their miscariage thy
caueats, thy enemies watchings, thy warines in living, and thy living such as
ready to die, with an ever holy remembrance of thy end, and thou shall never do
amiss,

Amen.
DISSWASIONS FROM THE WAY OF the Separatists, as they have principles by
themselves, the grounds of their separation, commonly called Brownisme.
Probabilities against the Separatists schism.
FIrst, from the likelihoods (so I call the first reasons, that they may not A
sin unbefitting men, professing to go so far beyond all other in purity: yet
I wish it were not usual in them.
scoff at them, had I judged them more solid arguments) and great
probabilities that that way is not good:

I. Is the novelty thereof differing from I. Likelihood.
all the best reformed Churches in Christendom: The guides in that way with
colors of the opinions of the reformed Churches, and with some shows of like
practice in some things, do persuade their hearers, that the one and the other
differ almost nothing: but if their words be true; I. why will they not join
unto They differ much even in things of great moment from the reformed Churches
beyond the seas: else why join they not with them? and why does Barrow
condemn their government as false?
them, if the difference be so small? Saint Paul himself would not, neither
taught the Disciples, to separate from the evil disposed Jews, but only when
they obstinately resisted to receive the outward profession of Christ, and did
blasphemously rail on him, Act. 19. 9.

II. Howsoever they call them true constituted Churches, yet are they so far
from reuerencing them therefore, as Barrow calls their way, in contempt of
it, a silly Presbytery and Eldership: and in hatred thereof, perfidie and
apostasy; the building of a false Church to the Harlot, a second beast. Yea
Barrow and Greenwood do avouch it as new, strange and Antichristian, as
prejudicial to the liberty of Saints, to the power, right, and duties of the
whole Church, as (they think) the government by the Bishops is. Such as seek
that kind of reformation, he calls wretched disciples of Calvin,
counterfeit reformists, transgressors of the worship of God, disturbers, and
violaters of the holy order which Christ established. Their writings for it,
he calls pernicious forgeries, and sacrilegious profanation of Gods holy
ordinance, their own timber, and stubble devices. Whatsoever therefore they
now say, except they publicly in print disclaim these opinions of Barrow and
Greenwood herein, they are as far out of liking with other Churches as with
ours, and can like none, but such as are from and after their own devised
constitution.

Sithence then their own mouths and present practice witness the novelty of
their way from all the world; it is ^^euitie to entertain a new device
suddenly; it is dangerous to forsake all Christian Churches in the world for
it: and it is a proud presumption to imagine themselves to see, what other yet
never saw, neither can be made to see ^y any thing they yet published, ( viz.
that their device is the only truth) and to go away with so peremptoric
condemnation of all other Churches, to be ^alse Churches: for these men now
li^ing do call ours a false Church, and Barrow you see calls that form of
government in reformed Churches, a ^alse form, and the building of a false
Church unto Antichrist, yea to be the second beast: what can be said more
against us?

II. For that it agrees so much with the II. Likelihood, See for this M.
Gyfford against Brownists.
ancient Schismatikes, condemned in former ages by holy and learned men: Such
were the Luciferians, Donatists, Nouatians, and Audians. And lest men might
think that these are not to be likened to the ancient Schismatikes, in respect
of sound Nothing commendable in these new Schismatikes, in which the ancient
Schismatikes heretofore were not commended, and yet of the Church condemned.
Vide Mornae^m de Ecclesia.
truths which these hold, and for that these be of so religious a conversation;
let such understand, that Lucifer was banished and suffered persecution for the
faith of Christ agreed upon in the Nicene Council: So did Nouatus under the
Emperor Maximinian. It is said of the Donatists, that they believed one and
the same things, that they were baptized, and did baptize after one sort with
the Churches of God then. Of Audius it is reported by Epiphanius that he was
upright in life, in faith, and full of zeal toward God: and can any thing
more be said in commendation of any? and yet nevertheless for separating
themselves from the Churches, because of corruptions, they were condemned for
their Schism, into which after they were fallen, they persisting obstinately
in the same, were left of God to their particular conceits, which afterward
bred further mischief; wherein also they as willingly stood, as in the former
beginnings. Heretics are full of craft and subtlety; Schismatikes more plain
and of passionate affection: but both wilful in their courses, as experience
does teach.

III. The manner of defending their opinions, III. Likelihood. The truth^
needs not such ill means to maintain it.
and proving their assertions: I. By strange expositions of the Scripture,
contrary to the general and constant opinion of Divines, for which, one
chief leader of the latter company is reprehended by diverse godly and
learned men extant under hand writing. II. By pulling and writhing the
Scriptures to their opinions, and alleging many impertinently, See Doctor
Allisons Confutation of Brownisme, in which he confuteth the Brownists
description of a visible Church
for which they are reproved of one, who has challenged the chief of the
Church of Amsterdam, to answer about twenty positions; which another
principal member, amongst this latter company, has also.

This note by the way: that to devise first a course in a man's head, and then
to Beware of this.
go seek for Scripture to maintain it, is the breeder of all heresy,
schism, and what not? an abuse of holy truth: for no lie is of the truth, and
it is to make the holy and blessed Spirit of God a nurse of impiety and evils:
a horrible sin.

But to show you, that have not observed the deceit in their allegations of
Scripture (which is done diverse ways) observe these things carefully.

I. In quoting Scripture by the way, They abuse the Scriptures, and misleade
the Reader thereby diverse ways.
that is, for things coming in upon occasion, but nothing to the maine point:
by which to the simple they would seem to speak nothing but Scripture, when,
indeed the maine point considered, they speak nothing less then Scripture, as
if all spoke for the controuerted question, when in truth it is nothing so.

II. By urging commandments, admonitions, exhortations, dehortations,
reprehensions, godly examples, and such like, not to prove corruption, or
wants, (when good things imposed are not done, and evil forbidden are not
avoided) but to prove a falsitie, which cannot be. As for example, the fifth
Commandment bids a child to be obe^ie^t to his parents, and Christ's
example of obedience to his parents shows that ^t so ought to be: but shall we
therefore conclude, that he which is not answe^able to the commandment and
ex^mple of Christ is a false child, or rather, that he is a disobedient and
not a good child? and yet if you do mark their Scriptures, they do allege
much against us and our Churches, to this purpose, which is an utter abuse of
the^.

III. In alleging Scripture, not to prove the thing, for which to the simple
^t seems to be alleged, but for that which they take for granted, and is
the matter in controversy, and often hardly fit for that. As for example, one
of them says, that al ye truth is not taught in our Church: and to prove this
he cites Act. 20. 21. where the Apostle says, he kept nothing back, but
showed all the whole counsel of God: Ergo, the Church of England does not
teach all the truth of God: which is the matter in question and unreproved:
this should rather have been gathered, that therefore every Minister ought to
hold nothing back, b^ should teach the whole will of God and not, because the
Apostle did so therefore we do not so. In their writing may be sound such
quotations.

IV. By bringing in places, setting See their book of the description of a
visible Church, and observe the quoted places answered by Doctor Allison.
forth the invisible Church, the excellency and graces thereof, and holiness
of the members, to set forth the visible Church by, as being proper thereto:
as 1. Pet. 2. 9. 10. and such places, * which is as much as to make the proper
qualities of a man's soul, to be the qualitie^ of the body properly. And thus
they deal with the Scripture to uphold their cause.

Another way and manner of defending Another deceivable way, which they
entangle their followers by.
their course, is by inferences; as, If that be true, this must follow: and
therefore object to them their positions out of their own conceived order, they
cannot confirm them by themselves with evident Scriptures, but must first set
every one in their rank and place, and so deduce one thing out of another; and
by inferences and references (a deceivable practice) the simple are entangled,
who cannot consider of antecedent, and ^ecessarie consequence, nor compare
^^ings together.

Note this.
And a crooked way has many win^^ngs; but necessary truths of God to
^^luation (as they hold their opinions to ^ee) though one depend upon another,
^et may evidence of truth be brought ^r every one of them severally, without
^^ch inferences and references, ouer^helming the wits of the simple, and over
In what thing first to be informed, to judge rightly in this controversy.
of better understanding, not being ^orowly acquainted with the cause, and with
other grounds of the true do^^rine of the Church, to discern there^y the
deceiueablenesse thereof; and without which, none shall ever be able (...)
disallow or allow of our course, or ^^eirs, but generally and in confusion, ^s
most do.

It is therefore marvelous with me to ^onsider so many simple people, to be
(...) peremptory in the cause, professing (...) soon, to see the truth so
evidently, and can so peartly champer against all ^f us, and condemn us all
for false Chri^^ians, false Churches, and so forth: but would to God they yet
were less con^eited, and more humble, for their own good and the welfare of
Israel, the people of God.

IV. Likelihood is, that they have not the IV. Likelihood. See M. Junius three
godly and learned letters to the^ of Amsterdam: and a petition made to the
G^^ours by the other English Church. See more for this in the end of the book.
approbation of any of the reformed Churches for their course. They have
written to some learned beyond the seas, and have published their confession,
but without allowance: and yet do all reformed Churches give us the right hand
of fellowship, as a true Church of God, whom these condemn as Antichristian
and false: now it is an especial property of the true visible Church, to be
able to discern of true visible members thereto belonging; else who are they
of mankind, to whom God has revealed this necessary truth? The spiritual man
discerns all things, 1. Cor. 2. 15. even the Word, and the true Teachers of
the Word; how much more the Church visible by the Word?

V. The condemnation of this way by V. Likelihood.
our own Divines, both living and dead, against whom, either for godliness of
life, or truth of doctrine (otherwise then for being their opposites) they can
take no exception; unless they will be Barrow-like in every point.

Doctor Whitaker (the Regius Professor Docter Whitakers lib. de Eccles.
in the University of Cambridge) calls them new Schismatikes: and he spoke
not as a man rash, fiery, or ignorant: but iudiciously, as learned, and in the
spirit of sobriety and meekness, being a man far from violence of passion.
M. Perkins on the Creed.


Master Perkins (a famous man) says, they are excommunicators of themselves.

Bredwell against Brown, calls their Bredwel.
course a by-path.

Touching their reasons maintaining their assertions, Doctor Willet says, they
Doctor Willet.
are ridiculous, more worthy to be laughed at, then answered. And Master
Perkins calls them paper shot.

The spirit wherewith Barrow and Greenwood were led, is judged by many Divines
(setting down jointly their judgment thereof) to be the spirit of lying,
railing, scoffing: and (as another says) of pride and insolency. How true
they speak of the forenamed men, shall appear by that which follows: and how
far the succeeding sort are from the same, let such as by experience know,
speak. If they amend herein, it shallbe taken notice of; and the sins of
other yet partaked in, not be laid to their charge. It seems Master Perkins
judged In a Treatise, (...) apply the Word to the conscience.
as he found in some of them, who calls them an indiscreete and
Schismatic company; full of pride in persuasion of knowledge; evil speakers
of the blessed servants of God; affirming that the poison of Aspes is under
their lips.

Touching the causes of their outbreake, one (a godly man in the Epistle before
his book called the true watch) does propound two questions to them, and
withal shows how it comes to pass that they so leave us. A conceit None of
these guides of the latter sort did fall to this course, before they were in
trouble, and could not enjoy their liberty, as they desired. VI. Likelihood.
(says he) of their own perfection, coffeehouse withal, and
uncharitableness has caused this grievous rend; What M. Doctor Allison, M.
Cartwright; M. James. M. Rogers. M. Henry Smith and others more, have judged of
them, their labors being extant I refer men thereto, as tedious here to
relate.

VI. The Lords judgment giving sentence with us and against them. I. The
blessing of God upon us in our Ministry, by which people are won truly
Saint Paul avoided this.
to sanctification of life; whereas they work, but upon the labors of other
men, for want of a blessing from God herein to themselves; which because they
have not, they despise the blessing, saying, A fool may beget a child, but it
is Yet by the begetting he is a child, and not by education; and S. Paul held
it more honor to beget, then to build up. See Romans 15. 20.
a point of wisdom to bring it up. Thus basely have some of them made
comparison of the conversion of a sinner, (for which Angels rejoice) with their
new constitution.

II. The blessing of God and his outstretched arm assisting us, walking in our
way with the reformed Churches, who has from Luthers time (to ascend 2. Cor.
10. 15. 16.
no higher) made prosperous our way by him and other glorious instruments, and
in few years spread the truth into many nations, that whersoeuer they came,
they left constant Teachers, propagating the same truth, which yet is blessed
in the hearts of many wheresoever the truth comes. But contrariwise, it
seems Bredwel says a legible corse of God has been upon it.
the Lord was from the beginning offended with their course, manifestly showed
in their chief Leaders, of which, the first came to as fearful an end as
Judas did, Bolton by name, the Bolton.
first broacher of this way, as M. Gyfford says; which end the Lord lets
not his special instruments come unto, to wit, those which he calls forth
otherwise then after a common course, either to plant Churches, as Apostles, or
to reform them, as Eliah, Elisha, and John Baptist in former time; or as
Wicliffe, John Hus, Luther, Calvin, and the rest in these latter days. The
Lord was with these, as he promises to be with his, Genes. 12. 3. Matthew. 28.
20. Iosu. 1. 9.

The next man to this was Brown, Brown, and other more of note amongst them.
whom the Lord forsook and assisted him not that new way (as he would, had he
set him on work) disclaimed his profession, and did also very wicked things,
during his continuance in that course, as the letter of Harrison his companion,
printed by M. Bredwell does show. Of any such desertion of the Lords own
extraordinary instruments in his cause, one so after another, can we never
read of, let them not instance Judas.

Next succeeded Barrow and Greenwood, Page 24. 25. 26. Barrow and Greenvvood.
possessed with a fearful spirit of railing and scoffing, as shall after be
showed; into which cursed speaking they fell above all that ever we heard or
can read of, pretending such holiness. There cannot any instrument of God be
nominated, who ever filling their mouths with bitterness of railing, and cursed
speaking, as these have done against all the people of God, and holy things of
God practiced amongst us.

After them rose up the two brethren, Iohnsons. the two brethren. See George
Iohnsons book.
both Iohnsons, upon whom the Lord sent (raised up, upon a small occasion) an
evil spirit of hateful and fiery contention, which so burnt up both
spiritual love, (if any were) and natural also, as the one of them, George
the younger, forgetting their profession and way (wherein for holiness they were
separated from other) and also brotherly love, became a disgraceful Libeller,
loading his brother, and other more, with reproaches of shame and great infamy,
and that in print to abide for ever. The other now living, was so divided from
him again, as that he brake fellowship with his brother, and with his own
father (who George his book, page 6.
took part with his son George against him, and cursed him with all the
curses in Gods book) and this breach was confirmed by the heavy sentence of
excommunication, and so did he deliver up his father and brother to the devil;
in which state they stood till death, for ought yet published to show the
contrary. Oh dreadful beginnings and full of horror! Is the cause the Lords?
There may be contentions in the Church, and amongst the best: but Paul and
Barnabas did not so far ever run.

Now that they be come to a certain Why God does not now so deal in that high
measure with the rest.
head; whereto (as seems by the Lords crossing their first beginnings, as he
did Balaam) they have now attained, as it were, whether God will or no. He
suffers them, as he did Balaam, to go on, and proceeds not so in that manner,
by judgment visible. But does God like that afterward at any time, which at
first he did hate? no surely: instance in Balaam, M. Bornit a Teacher died in
prison of the plague, Gods fearful correcting rod upon offenders. And it may
seem that God would not have had M. Smith to have gone that way, by so often
thwarting his judgment. I. To publish in print on the Lords Prayer, against
that way, and for as much. II. In falling into it after, again under his hand
to renounce the principles of that way called Brownisme. III. Brought again to
like it, but not wholly, for he held some true Church, some true Pastors here,
and did dislike the distinction of true and false Church in respect of us: then
went he, and conferred with certain godly and learned men, whereby he became
so satisfied, as he kneeled down, and in prayer praised God, that he was not
misled farther, and was so resolved, as he purposed to dissuade his Tutor M.
Johnson, from the same, saying, he would go to Amsterdam for that end. This
will be, and is confidently avouched by diverse then there present. Besides
these crosses in judgment, the Lord did chastise him with sickness nigh unto
death, to consider better with himself yet of his course: and this also was by
some applied unto him: and with all these, a dauntablenesse of spirit with
fear, not daring to be bold to suffer for the cause here with us, did
continually accompany him. Thus it seems, that God would more then by an
ordinary course taken, have reclaimed him, if either inward distractions, or
Gods special outward means used to recover him, might have prevailed, but
Gods secret counsel shall stand: behold the end. His own former judgment,
his Note well.
hand writing, his own mouth in prayer to God, godly men's testimonies, Gods
correcting hand, all these openly are against him.

Secondly, this hand of God may be seen partly in such as are misledde that
way. Some of them, in our way (which they call corrupt and false) were so
protected by the Lord, as they lived unreprovable from notable crimes: but
coming to them, have been forsaken of God (for what is it else?) that they did
fall into very detestable uncleanness, as M. White mentions in his book.

This I note, not that I think any Church can be pure, or that there is any
sin, which the devil may not draw some into, who make fair profession; or
that the whole assembly there does allow such: it is far from me so to think;
but I therefore note it, as Gods testimony with us, where abiding truly
fearing God, or but making an apparent show thereof, he does so preserve us
here, as we cannot be tainted (though no such watch be kept one over another,
as were to be wished) with such evils, as men that forsake us (with such
condemnation as they do, who entertain that way) do often dreadfully fall
into. What is this but a likelihood of the Lords witnessing against them?

Besides this befalling some, there is an evil (the Lord open their eyes to
see it) which has seized upon most of the generally, not only that they
cannot apprehend these things, but also herein, that as soon as they be
entered into that way, they are so therewith bewitched (that I may so say) as
they be nothing like themselves, in what was laudable and good in them: before
humble and tractable, then proud and wilful: before they can feel the Word
work, after if but inclinable that way, then they judge the Minister to have
Read Doctor Downames Epistle to the Reader before his second Sermon.
lost the power of his Ministry, because they themselves are in affection
altered: blaming the Teacher, when they are in fault themselves. They can with
understanding standing discern between cause and cause, reason and reason:
but the^ they lick up al which comes from themselves, as Oracles, be they
never so absurd: As to think that the spitte was the Altar whereupon the
Passover was sacrificed: That there was no conversion in a true Church; when,
indeed there is conversion to sanctification, though not to open profession of
Christ: That privileges and properties are all one: That one man has all the
power of Christ, and right thereto, as the whole assembly. That godly men
cannot choose them helpers to further their salvation, if any one open offender
do join with them therein. That if one man depart (after the manner) from one
Church for corruptions, and so from all the true Churches in the world, which
are corrupted, the true Church does remain in him only. And many such conceits
taken up as truths with greediness, when most manifest verities of God,
confirmed by sound reason, and explained by most evident similitudes, cannot be
apprehended, as either tasting of truth, or reason: What is this, but a
spiritual besotment?

Before they be in that fraternity, they can feel in themselves lively
marks of the children of God, and can judge so of other, and so embrace them:
but then afterward they can be content to be persuaded against former faith,
and sensible feeling, to think that neither they themselves had, nor any other
(out of their way) has any outward marks of the children of God, and so do
fall into utter dislike of their own former graces, the goodness of God in
other, and the power of God, working by our Ministers, and all for that they be
not within the compass of their park; as if a Dear had lost his shape, for
not being within the pale, where perhaps he should be. Is not this a
spiritual foolishnes?

If their way (which in every particular they hold is as much known to me, as
our way is to them) should be so abhorred of us, and every good thing of ours
therein, as they do us and our way, only upon the good liking of the good
mercies of God, which we do possess; I should think verily, God had deprived
us of common reason, as not discerning between good and evil; and might look
for a fearful curse, for calling evil good, or good evil, as they do the
best things we have, because of corruptions.

VII. The ill success it has had these VII. Likelihood. It has had ill
success.
very many years, being no more increased. The increasing of God is not so:
for it is like Isaacs increase, hundreds for one, and that in a short time, if
he begin to set men on work. We see his hand with Luther most miraculously,
when he began, the Lord in larged his people mightily: but these have bin here
and there up, and again cast down, and have gotten no sure footing by the
special power of God. See how the Lord assisted and managed his truth, when he
raised up instruments not ordinary, as these would be held, who only have a
toleration in another country, where the enemies of Israel left not Egypt
without Pharaohs leave, nor the Jews Babylon without Cyrus consent.
Jesus Christ (blasphemous Jews, and other Heretics) may be, as well as true
Christians: which course as we never read used of God (to raise up men in one
nation, and gather them to carry them into another of a strange language, as
Ezechiel speaks, chap. 3. 6. and that without either leave or compulsion in
many): so will he never bless such new devices held up with such ways and
means.

To conclude, they leave rather a curse They hinder the word where they come, a
curse not a blessing does follow where they arise. M. R.
then a blessing where they come, so as good things little prosper after them.
They are like a scorching flame, swinging where it comes, that the growth of
things are hindered by it: So said one (that is now amongst them) before he
went that way: thus can men so observe and discern before, and be blind
afterward.

And thus much of the likelihoods that the way cannot be good, which I will
conclude with that godly Hezechias prayer, 2. Chron. 30. 18. Now the good Lord
be merciful unto him, that prepares his heart to seek the Lord God of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed, according to the purification of the
Sanctuary. And the Lord heard Hezechias and healed the people. Even so now
Lord Jesus. Amen.

Reasons not to run that course.
NOw follow certain reasons of more Reasons not to run that course.
force, then bare probabilities, to keep men back from that way.

I. Because of the great evils which The entrance is very sinful and cursed.
insueth upon the first entrance thereunto: which are especially two.

I. Is not only an utter disclaiming and condemning of corruptions and the
notorious wicked (for which who does not lament, mourning also as did David,
Psalm. 119. 136. that men keep not Gods law?) but also a forsaking of all
former Christian profession amongst us. Thou must cast off that word here with
us which made thee alive; also the faithful messengers of God, the Fathers (1.
Cor. 4. 9.) which begat thee, who have the words of eternal life; and whither
will thou go? yea thou must renounce al fellowship of the godly here, who have
been formerly approved of thee; and such as have received fully as good
testimonies of Gods mercy and grace as any in that way, and not only Reader
weigh these things, with Christ's compassion, with the Apostles commiseration,
with the ancient Fathers toleration, with thy own heart, bearing with thy own
self, and Gods mercy toward all, and thou will never do so wickedly.
(...), but thou must ever after judge the^ false Christians and Idolaters;
having a false faith, false repentance, and false baptism; and so separate
from all spiritual communion with them, as wicked men. Thus must parents and
children, husband and wife, brother and sister, judge one of another; though
all profess one Lord Jesus Christ, all be baptized after one manner, all
renouncing Antichrist, and all such have tokens of Gods grace. O accursed
beginning, so uncharitable, so unnatural, and so ungodly! he that begins so
ill, can never speed well. That we should forsake father and mother, and all
for Christ and the Gospel is not denied: but having Jesus Christ and the
Gospel, to forsake father and mother and all our Christian brethren and
sisters with a false condemnation, for men's devices entitled with Christ and
his Gospel, that we do deny: for here amongst us is cause of rejoicing in
Christ: Romans 15. 17. 18. I have therefore whereof I may rejoice in Christ Jesus
in those things which pertain to God. For I dare not speak of any thing which
Christ has not wrought by me, (...) make the Gentiles obedient in word a^
deed. And Act. 10. 34. 35. Of a truth perceive that God is no accepter of
person^ but in every nation, he that fears him an^ works righteousness is
accepted wit^ him. And Romans 14. 17. 18. For the kingdom of God is not meat,
nor drink, b^ righteousness, and peace, and joy in the hol^ Ghost. For
whosoever in these things serves Christ, is acceptable, etc.

II. With such a renunciation of truth They which enter that way, must approve
of many untruths.
must be entertained much untruth, the deceiueablenesse of that way, as shall
appear afterward: as first, thou must believe their way to be the truth of
God though it be but the error of their own mind: then condemn our Church as
false Church; when (in the end of the confession of their faith) they have
published under their own hand, that the differences between us and them, a^
only such corruptions, as are by the^^ set down In their little book of the
confession of their faith.
. Now corruptions do no^ make a false Church, but a corrup^ Church, (make the
worst of it that ca^ be) as corruptions in a man, makes b^^ a corrupt man, and
not a false man.

By thus entering, a man must cease to walk this way, ending toward us in
uncharitableness, and begin a new way with them, and enter with lies. Such a
^ate is the entry to death, and not that ^^raite way, which they insult of,
leading to life.

I know no corruptions here so ill, which men are tied to entertain, as the
entrance into that way with these conditions. Discern, Reader, wisely; and
judge the course rightly, and God give me understanding in all things.

II. Reason is grounded upon one of The second reason not to join with them.
their own chief principles, and a great point of their practice: that is,
that we are not to conioyne our selves with open wicked, obstinatly
maintaining their corruptions, whether the same be in ill life, or doctrine:
for upon this ground do they forsake us, and keep off from all reformed
Churches.

Now then from their own ground ^trong enough to keep men back, ex^^pt any
will go by received principles ^his own way, to profess condemna^^on against
himself) they may not be joined with, because who does so, must partake of
their very great and grieuou^ sins, wherewith they be polluted, and do not
reform themselves. The sinne^ are these:

I. Is that woeful entrance before named. 1 The grievous sins of the
Separators, wherewithal they that go that way, are polluted.
We enter by baptism, renouncing the devil and sin; but they witha^ (in
part) do here renounce Gods mercies and all good men, with every good thing in
them, as stained and polluted so as no holy communion can be ha^^ with it: but
what God has cleansed, le^ not them make unclean, Act. 10. 15.

II. Is a hie degree of vnthankfulne^ 2 They are very unthankful to God.
first to God that begat the^ by his word either by denying their conversion,
o^ else accounting it a false conversion, ^ if the Lord did but counterfeit
with them, when they have felt good token of grace, and outward fruit
proceedin^^ from thence. Is not this to have a bla^phemous conceit of the
blessed wor^ of God, to dare to call it a false conue^sion, where it appears
to be true, eue^ experimentally in a man's self? Secondly, To the Church of God.
this unthankfulness is also to the mother, this Church of England, th^^ bare
them, which they desire to make whore, before Christ her husband so condemn
her: they forsake her, before he refuse her, and give her a bill of
diuorcement; for till then, they ought to stay.

But are not these children worthy to be accounted bastards, that will needs
deny their father that begat them, and also gladly would have all to take
their mother for a whore that bare them, and would vnbowell her of all her
dear children viperously? Oh unkind and unnatural children, unworthy to
breathe in their fathers air, or to inhabit near the skirts of their mother!
Some there be who are offended when any does openly and sharply reprove them:
but such I wish to consider, with what meeknes they can in natural love hear
their mother, an honest woman, called a whore, and their brethren made
bastards; if they cannot, why love we less our spiritual mother and brethren,
so much abused by these men?

III. Reason, is the sin of spiritual They are full of spiritual
uncharitableness.
uncharitableness, the contrary whereunto is spiritull love, which the holy
Apostle prefers before any external constitution, before alms deeds,
before preaching, yea before suffering persecution, and men's giving their
bodies to be burned, saying, all profit nothing without it, 1. Cor. 13. 1. 2.
3. And in this spiritual uncharitableness do they exceedingly transgress.

I. Toward us, who approve not, or In audacious censuring.
will not go their way, nor be inclinable to them, whom they do deeply
censure, and deadly condemn; of which there be three sorts: 1. Such as know it
1. The ignorant.
not; and those they thus condemn, as This can I show under hand writing:
nothing here spoken without book, or by uncertain he are say. 2. Such as
know their way.
men blinded by the god of this world, that is, the devil, and so such to be
lost, for that their way (which they call the Gospel) is hidden, say they, to
none but such as are lost. 2. Such as see the way and do not yield, these they
condemn as worldlings, fearful, convinced in conscience, and yet go on in
sin wilfully and in presumption. For hereof (Reader) take notice, that this
is taken as granted, that whosoever knows their way directly, must needs
know i^ for the truth, yea for the Gospel of God, there is no remedy; so as
forsake it, forsake Christ and the Gospel, and in their judgment (as far as
man can see) thin^ own everlasting salvation. 3. Such as 3. Such as oppose
themselves against them.
have had a little taste of the way and affection to the same, misled by
imagined truths, and by the honesty of the men for their lives, and some
former familiarity had with them in an even way, (which indeed are the
ordinary baits by which many are catched) yet at length perceiving the
falsehood thereof, which is called Brownisme, they have upon good consideration
deliberated, and in deliberation and searching found out the errors thereof,
and so left them: these they condemn as Apostats, and what not? But if they
oppose against them; not of hatred, not of malice, not of purpose to vex them,
or to increase their affliction, (God is witness; the Lord is judge, who will
give sentence between one and another) but only to let them see their errors,
and to reclaim them, (if God be pleased) and to keep other back, then such
they term godless men, deprived of their understanding, persecutors, hunters
after their souls, and dare boldly pronounce sentence against them, that they
shall grow worse and worse, so as men shall say, God is avenged on them. What a
degree of deadly uncharitable censure is this? Is here love? Love thinks no
ill, says 1. Cor. 13.
the Apostle, love hops all things; love does nothing contumeliously.

II. Point (which is yet a higher degree) In desiring the hindrance, or rather
extinguishing of all the spiritual good we publicly enjoy.
of uncharitableness spiritual is this: A most ungodly desire (as ever was
heard of) to have the Word utterly extinguished amongst us, Egyptian darkness
to come over us, rather then it should be preached by such as do not favor
their course, though it be taught faithfully, and that men see Gods blessing
upon the same, and their lives also answerable thereunto.

Thus in seeking their own glory, A wish against God Commandment, the
Apostles joy, and the peoples salvation.
and the honor of their own way, they wish destruction unto the people, who
without vision perish, Prou. 29. 18. They are far from the Apostles
rejoicing, Phil. 1. 18. and so from his spirit. They are far from the
compassion of Christ, who seeing the people as sheep without a shepherd, sat
down and taught them, Matthew. 9. 36. They be far from his commandment,
willing men to seek for the food of life, Ioh. 6. 7. not for a constitution
before it. Blessed is he that hears the word of God (says he) and keeps
it, Luke 11. 28. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear, Revel. 1. 3.
His word he preferres before a constitution, as a testimony of his special
love. Psalm. 147. 19. 20. He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt so with every nation, etc. And for a
great curse, he threatens a famine of his word, not the taking away of a
right constitution, Amos 8. 11. Nay our Savior did not forbid, or ever wish,
either the Scribes and Pharisees not to teach at all, or the people not to
hear them; but reprehends the one, and gives liberty with caueats to the
other, Matthew. 23. Aquila and Priscilla having heard Apollos, they inquired not
of what constitution he was, but wherein he did not sufficiently teach, they
did better instruct him, and encourage him to the work of the Lord, which was
to preach by the Scriptures, not a constitution, but that Jesus was that
Christ. See the place Act. 18. 24. 28.

The Disciples that went and preached, Act. 8. 1. 4. stood not upon every
special point in entering so orderly unto the work, as these men would have
it, without which they hold all as nothing. See verse 12. neither did the
people enquire thereof, but are commended for hearing and receiving the word,
and for believing in Christ Jesus, Act. 17. 11. and 13. 43. 48.

To conclude, what in all the new testament is so urged, so commanded, so
commended, such promises of blessing annexed thereto? what made so necessary
as the preaching and hearing of Gods word? And what less talked on any where,
then a constitution? Yet these men without this, wish an overthrow of all, and
do despise the word and holy Sacraments with us.

This yet I speak not, that men may That which is the more necessary, is to
be preferred before the less necessary; and neither of them to be despised.
run out disorderly, that every man may take upon him to preach and expound
Scripture (as very weak and simple men amongst them presume to do) nor that
observation of order is a thing lightly to be regarded. It is much to be
wished, that every thing be done decently, in order, to Gods glory, and the
Churches edification: but therefore have I thus written to magnify the word
preached as it deserves, above form and fashion, so it be not wholly
unorderly; and not to cast off the one for want of exactness in the other:
this is for the tithing of mint, annise and cummin, to leave waightier matters:
(I speak here comparatively between constitution and preaching) not, that I
value a right orderly proceeding at no more worth then annise and cummin; these
ought to be done, but at no hand for want hereof to leave the other undone,
both to the extinguishing of the truth and the increase of ignorance, and also
the intertainement of Popery; which some of them, as has been said, would
rather embrace, then to return to us again, so great hatred is bred in them,
against our way and standing even in the best things, which are all one as the
worst, to them; which, they say, are the deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness.

Is this love? love seeks not her own 1. Cor. 13.
things, as these only do, condemning all not transformed into their shape:
love rejoices in the truth; but these rather in the abolishing of the means,
which only drives away error and ignorance, and vpholdeth truth. Love
suffers all things; love endures all things; but these cannot endure that we
should enjoy the very truth of God, rather then that their way should be
hindered.

III. And the last point of this uncharitableness In envying, contemning, and
condemning the best, for the best graces of God in them.
(which is the highest degre^ of all) is, that they are sorry and envious that
the good things of God do prospe^ with us; yea the more religious men b^ in
this way, the more are they grieved which is apparent by this; that Barro^ does
not more vilely abuse, or rail upon any, or more blasphemously scoff a^ the
good graces of God, and holy exercises in any, then in them; as shall be^ after
noted to the view of the world, either to reclaim them, or to make the^
ashamed, if in any thing they will so themselves, and if God will open their
eyes to behold what is amiss in themselves. This is not Barrows vein of ol^
but even ye same spirit does possess, n^ the meanest of the latest company,
sco^sing at the argument of the conversion of souls, as if it were but a
dream of us, or in it self a toy, without their constitution.

Is this love? Love enuieth not; but 1. Cor. 13.
these like nothing well what we do: but indeed the better it is, the more
they do detest it, for that they suppose it is the greatest let to hold men
from them.

Therefore here profane and secure worldlings, and Atheists need not to
fear, that men painful and conscionable in their Ministry, yea and
conformable in their lives, will breed Brownists, and further Brownisme, no
more then the truth can bring forth error, or soundness corruption properly,
or brethren in unity substantially, can breed Schismatikes essentially.

Indeed by the beams of the Sun, being one and the same, the earth which the
husband tilleth and sows with good seed, in some part brings forth good
corn, and in another breeds weeds; but the fault is in the earth, not in
the Sun or husbandman: So of one sweet flower the Be gathers honey, and
the Spider poison, yet the flowr^ keeps it own nature.

If by the wholesome doctrine of painful Teachers, some, as ill earth be more
weedie, some, as spiders gather poison; neither are they nor their doctrine to
be blamed. But to proceed; is this love? Love rejoices not in iniquity, it is
not 1. Cor. 13.
provoked to anger; but these men are glad, when we contend amongst our
selves, never praying for peace, nor the welfare of the Ministry, because How
men come to be Schismatikes, or Heretics.
they do think, (as judging others out of themselves, provoked to anger) that
troubles will breed coffeehouse; coffeehouse sets heads on working;
this causes searching, (but with prejudice against one part offended)
searching draws men to a liking of that by passionate impatiencie, which
iudiciously in peace they do not love; and so runs into crooked by-pathes,
to the hurt of themselves and offense of other.

Such a spirit of uncharitableness, never was in any of the holy men of God in
the Primitive time, who rejoiced at the blessings upon the Teachers, and at the
peoples receiving of the Gospel, ^ot at their standing in a constitution, ^ct.
11. 20. 21. 23. In which place is gi^en a reason of Barnabas his rejoicing, ^^r
that he was a good man, and full of ^^e holy Ghost, verse. 24. for indeed men
^^dued with Gods Spirit, and good men ^^ter God, will rejoice in good things;
christ will not quench the smoking axe, nor break the bruised reed; but ^ill
check his Disciples, for rashly for^^dding one to cast out devils in his ^^me,
because he followed not them, ^^d will bid them suffer him, giving this ^^ason,
that, he that is with Christ is not ^^ainst him, no, nor against his Disci^^es,
though one follow not another; so ^^e it, we all follow Christ. And thus ^^uch
for their uncharitableness against (...).

Perhaps they will say they pray for us Their love to us, is but as to
strangers out of the Covenant: and what special thing is that? M. Smith.
^^en heartily, and profess with protesta^^n that they do love us.

I think they do love us, but it is on^^ in hope, or for some by-respect; for
o^^rwise one of them writes, that cer^^nly he cannot by the Word be
per^^aded, yt any one of us has either true faith or fear of God; then how
can the truly love us in the spirit, who judge t^^ bond broken, and the
communion v^lawfull?

I think they do pray for us, but it to bring us unto them; so will they pr^^
for Papists, Atheists, Jews and Turke^ so will any sect, to have men to come
(...) them. They pray for us, but not as visib^^ members of Gods Church; they
w^^ not pray with us, that is, join to o^ prayers, nor join us with them. The
love us, but not as in the communion Saints: their love therefore is not be
esteemed of. Consider how the judge of every one of us, even of hi^ that most
seeks, in our Church, to a^uance Religion, to live religiously, a^ have peace
with all men in holiness, much as is possible.

But does this uncharitableness exte^^ This spiritual uncharitableness is also
amongst themselves one to another.
it self only to those, which they iud^^ without? Nay it breaks out amon^
themselves even toward one anot^^ in their customarie excommunication not
only for notorious crimes in (...) wilful and obstinate; but even for lig^^
offenses in some, albeit other obstin^^ ^^n be let pass: contrary to the
practice ^f the Primitive Church, where we ^ade neither of such sharp
censuring, Read George Iohnsons book, page 15. and see horrible sin daubed up.
A body natural does not easily cut off a member, though very noisome, not
after the first means be used in the best manner, but after long trial of
the same, and what possibly may be.
^or of such partial dealing, that men should be reprehended, and that no sin
^^e suffered to be openly practiced, who ^^nieth? but that men should be
hastily (...)st out, or for and upon every light of^^nce, of what nature
soever, (albeit the ^^rtie offending be through ignorance, (...) else of a
peevish nature somewhat ^ilfull) we wish it should not be. It is ^ot a point of
love, so easily to lose a ^hristian member, and to cast him to ^^e devil,
judging him unworthy to (...) accounted a visible professor in the church of
Christ.

I speak not this to lessen sin, or to ^^lerate it, but to stay so great a
cen^^e, that it be neither executed lightly ^^d rashly, nor used with the
rigor of ^^e law in the utmost period of the right (...) censure.

I may not pass by the witness of M. White as I remember.
^^me against them, testifying that one ^^lfe excommunicated another some^^e: a
very fearful thing, and unheard amongst men of wisdom and moderation. If
they did excommunica^^ for sin, it were yet less: but I maru^^ that they
will use this censure, (the power of Jesus Christ, delivering men unto Satan)
for doing the work of God which is for hearing Gods word by the ministry of
others, which are out ^^ their way, though the Preacher deliu^^ nothing but the
true word of God, a^^ so, as the hearers do receive much go^^ thereby.

This their practice cannot be wa^rantable Search the Scriptures, whether
there be any word forbidding to hear one that preaches the true Word only.
See more page 64.
from the word of God: Tr^^ Prophets never forbad to hear such spoke truly;
Christ never condemn^^ such as spoke the truth in his name, f^^ want of a
constitution; the Apostle P^^^ forbad not to hear such as preach^^ Christ for
lack thereof, neither ever ga^^ caveat to the Church that she sho^^ mark that
as a note, and to beware such Teachers under pain of excommunication, and not
to hear them.

Where is the hearing of the t^^^ word of God only preached made a (...) I
would gladly see, where they ca^ pro^^ that men hearing Christ's voice, (...)
which they have received life, sho^^ for that, be cast out of a Church that
^rofesseth Christ. The Scribes and Pha^^sies did not so with any for hearing
Christ, though they did hate him; why should it be done by such as profess
Christ, to such as now desire to hear ^im? But in hearing the word of God ^^om
us they hold no necessity, because This Anabaptisticall assertion, makes the
common sort of them too oue^ bold with Gods most holy word.
^^ey teach their simple scholars to be^^eue, that they have in that way the
an^ointing, which will teach them all ^^ings; and thereupon a silly sort
mee^^ng amongst themselves, will content ^^emselues with themselves, and so
will ^^point one, who will presume, upon ^^is imagined spirit, to teach; albeit
^^ard by, they may have the word pub^^kely and profitablie delivered unto ^^em:
yea if one of them abide alone ^^ongst us, and cannot read, yet must ^^ch a
one rather live upon his or her ^^iuate meditations, then to go and ^^are any
of us. Is this love?

If a family together, having sufficient ^^ode, should forbid any member
there^^, far from it, not being able to come ^^ther for food, to receive
food good ^^d wholesome (so by trial known to be) from other, but not of the
house hold, should be bound either to live (...) what the same members had
eaten, (...) else to perish; were this charity? or r^ther a point of great
cruelty? And th^^ much for their uncharitableness.

Peradventure it will be said, that the They love one another, but mark how,
and why.
love one another very much: it is n^ denied: else cannot their course
continue: if this partial love were n^^ the practice of that
uncharitableness(...) would soon break the new couena^^ made between them:
For the love communicating of their goods, it is gre^ter amongst the Familists,
it is mu^^ with the Papists; And Solomon shewe^ that so very wretched
creatures, a^ companions in evil, will tie themsel^^ one to another, Do not
take this place otherwise then I do intend it.
Prou. 1. 14. and companions have a love amongst themselves, even inwardly as
far as they one, to preserve their body and so^^tie: else a kingdom,
divided against self, will soon come to ruin.

Let not this their love therefore, w^^ in themselves, and toward one ano^^
move thee, without the truth of cause first conuincing thee; for iud^^ment must
ever lead affection, and love must be bestowed worthily in the Lord, else is it
not at all acceptable to God.

IV. Reason, is their sin in abusing The fourth kind of sin, with which
they are polluted.
of the Word, of which they are all guilty: for as the places of Scripture
misalledged and wrested, are delivered by the Teachers, so the rest do receive
them, and learn so to apply them. Of the knowledge more or less, or degree
of sin herein, I do not speak, but that ^t is a sin, and whereof some (as
before ^^s said) have accused some of the principals with, cannot be denied,
but must be granted.

V. Reason, is their wilful persisting The fifth sin, is wilful obstinacy,
joined with contempt and scorn of all other.
^n their Schism, lightly regarding re^^erend men's labors, and scornefully
despising weaker means. See George ^ohnsons testimony herein, against his
brother and the Elders, page 4. lin. 19. See their answers to learned Iunius,
and to M. Gyfford, and other more, how they set at naught all men's reasons and
answers, so addicted are they to what they ^old, as they prevent in a
preiudicate o^inion all good counsel, and forestall their thoughts with a fond
persuasion, that hitherto never any could answer them; that none will dare,
neither ca^ any be able to confute them; so as say what may be said, they have
answere^ ready, not without pride, scorn, and contempt, for any thing.

Object any unto them, who hau^ How they answer every thing that can be
objected to the answers of such as have written against them, and they
answered.
written against them, and they any wa^ made answer unto, they say, such ha^^
had the foil; and why? because the^ answer not again; as if every thin^ they
speak were worthy of answear^ (So thought not amongst many other neither M.
Perkins, nor yet Doctor W^let) or as if, they ever prevail, who (...)ter the
last words. It were better for the to think, because so many grave, lea^ned,
and godly men do so lightly (...)guard them, and their reasons, (as the can
pass them by with silence) the should in humility more suspect the^ selves,
and search more narrowly in their courses, and fear themselves to out of the
way.

Object unto them such as they h^^ not answered, if they be famous men; To
famous men unanswered.
Doctor Whitakers, Master Perkins: the say, they knew not their cause: as if
^ther of them (the latter especially speaking in so many places, at diverse
times against them) made no conscience to speak so much and so sharply against
an unknown cause. It were better not to believe their untrue report, then to
call into question the judgment and conscience of these famous and approved
men.

Object unto them other, if men of To men of less note objected.
less note, them do they despise, as simple, and not worthy answering: and
yet the meanest of themselves, (writing any thing) must be answered, or else
be judged unanswerable. Miserable partiality!

Bring the most learned testimony of To the testimonies of reformed Churches.
worthy Divines, and practice of whole Churches, they can answer all, with
this, We are not led by men; they are ^ut men; as if other men erred, and they
(men also) did not, or were not men.

But hold them to the Scripture: If To Scripture objected.
the places be evident against them; they do seek strange expositions, or
stick upon an other translation, or the force of the word, and so wind out by
shift or other, not to give way unto the truth, which may check their
constitution in any thing.

Confer with them, and reason the Note the perverseness of their spirit in
conference.
matter, and they will not mark so much what one says to them (that they may
see their error): as they do study which way either to entrap a man, or to
object against him, or how to deny what is spoken.

Object unto them the corruptions of To corruptions of other Churches objected.
Churches Apostolical; and their answer is, either that we maintain our
corruptions, by the sins of other Churches (misconstruing our intendment and
why we do so argue, to wit, yt corruptions make not a false Church) or else
they were in a true constitution: as if the means which they had, and might
use to remedy sin, should make their state less evil, though sins were
committed, and the remedy not applied: and other places more sinful, for want
o^ such a constitution, and yet fewer by many, and lesser sins by far be
there committed publikly: and, as if a constitution, after their frame, made
good to ^ man his standing in a Church full o^ great wickedness, and the want
thereof utterly condemn him in another, though in life and doctrine no such
error be amongst them by many degrees. But when this constitution is truly
defined, (which yet they have not, that I can find; whereof it stands they
show, but have not defined it) and so made manifest by the plain truth of God,
the ^^arenes and excellency of this miraculouslie working constitution, it
shall be ^mbraced with due regard.

Object, the reformed Churches, why To an objection made of a Church
Constitution.
they join not with them, which are constituted; they deny not the
constitution, (though (as you heard) Barrow and Greenwood did, whose judgment
is not disclaimed, as an error yet, in any of their writings; but by their
practice approved, howsoever these do not oppose against the constitution) but
answer, that they have their corruptions.

Thus like nimble Squirrils, they skip from one tree to another, to save
themselves from being taken: name corruptions, they skippe to constitution:
tell them of constitution, they will tell you of corruption. So as by all this
we see, it is not possible by reason, Scripture, conference, Correction for
instruction to these men is the may of life. A head gathered, whether the
company be Civil, or Ecclesiastical cannot be dissolved, but by violence.
Experience the Schoolmaster herein.
or testimony of the learned, to give any of them satisfaction: but this they
must have, because they will have it, that our Church is to be forsaken because
of a false co^stitution, and the constitution of other Churches, because o^
corruptions. What must follow hereupon, but this? that all must come to them*
as the only Church truly constituted and without corruption, with condemnation
in these respects of all Christendom. But far be it from men of godly
wisdom, moderate zeal, and sound learning so to judge, and so far to
oouershoote themselves.

VI. Reason, is their sin of railing The sixth sin, is the sin of railing,
etc.
and scoffing; yea and I may truly add^^ Henry Barrowes blasphemies, who has
egregiously abused all our holiest exercises of religion; taunting every state
and order in the Church, and in the Schools of learning amongst us. An^ that
the spirit, wherewith he was led may appear not to have been of God who
utterly condemns such dealing (1. Pet. 3. 10. 11. Psalm. 34. 13. Jude v. 9.
Titus. 3. 2. Exodus 22. 27. Act. 23. 5. Ia. 1. 26. will, as briefly as I can,
set down the ^utrage thereof, as it is here and there dispersed in his book
of Discovery; by which, whatsoever he discovered of other, he laid open a
strange spirit ruling ^n himself.

Bishops he calls, Antichristian, proud Prelates, the tail of the beast.
Their style, John by the permission of God, and power of the Devil, Bishop of
such a place. The hands of a Bishop ^n ordination, he calls Simoniacall. In
^^is saying, Receive the holy Ghost, he ^aith, he breaths on them an unholy
Ghost: The Bible in the Bishops hands, ^ee calls a bybell: And, that they cast
^ut by the power of Satan. Yet Master ^mith on the Lords Prayer, first
ac^nowledgeth them to be officers of Christ's kingdom, called ruling Elders.
^econdly, that the King has authority ^o substitute such Ecclesiastical
Magi^^rates, according to the Word, for Church policy. Thirdly, that they may
^xercise jurisdiction, visit Churches, and ordain Ministers, page 91. And what
^ore allowed them by our law?

Patrons, he terms, The great Baals, or Lord Patrons.

All Ministers, he calls Priests, in scorn: and Deacons, half Priests. And
not here with content, he miscalleth and raileth upon Ministers most spitefully
and so, as cannot be but hateful to all that truly fear God, calling them
Baalamites, Cananites, Babylonish Divines, Egyptian Inchanters, limbs of the
Devil.

Others, not of his strain, he tearmet^ them dangerous and pestilent seducers
sectarie counterfeit preachers; miserable guides; treacherous watchmen; sworn
waged marked soldiers of the beast Scorpions, disguised hypocrites; ravening
wolves; deceitful watchmen; foolish and presumptuous shepherds; pernicious
deceivers; Sycophants, Angel^ of hell, bright stars of the smokie Egyptian
furnace: and such as live mo^^ religiously amongst us, he scorns a^ much as
any other; and goes further and says, that upon them are the utter most
deceits and effectual delusions o^ Satan.

Our divine exercises and godly fruits of faith, he blasphemously scoffs at.

Set prayers he terms the smoke of the bottomless pit: And yet Master
Pattern of true prayer.
Smith in the same book in the Epistle ^o the Reader says, first, that a set
form of prayer is not unlawful. Secondly, he professes his dissent from them
of the separation. Thirdly, he says, that he is ^erely assured of the truth
of that he affirms. And touching ye Lords Prayer, page 33. he first calls it
a platform of prayer. Secondly, a prayer, and the best that ever was made,
page 181. Thirdly, that Christ did pray it, page 33. and 179. Fourthly, he
that uses the words and matter of the Lords Prayer, prays well, page 181:
and after petition made ^o God, may end and conclude his prayer with the Lords
Prayer. He was verily assured of this truth then, and now dis^laimeth that
verily assured truth. Reader, when may any rest on his judgment, and assure
himself of his assu^ednesse?

Other prayers made, he calls, long, Pharisaicall and abominable.

Preachings, preachments and sermocinations.

The Preachers delivery of the word, he calls, the distilling and dropping
down of old parables from his mouth.

His time of preaching, disputing to an hour glass.

The pulpit (he calls) a prescript place like a tub.

Solemn fasts, (he names) hypocritish fasts, and a stage play, where one
plaieth sin, another judgments, another repentance, and the last Gospel.

The singing of Psalms (he calls) harmonizing some pleasant ballad, o^ some
Psalm in ryme.

The congregation singing together he likeneth to fowls; as Vultures, Crows,
Gleades, Owls, Geese; and to beasts, as Leopards, Bears, Woolues* Foxes,
Swine, Dogs, and Goats.

The receiving of the Sacrament o^ the Lords Supper, he terms a two penie
feast: and when the Minister debarreth any from the same, he says, the^
Master Parson takes his pastoral staff or wooden dagger of suspension, b^
which he keeps such a flourishing, as flies can take no rest. Yet Master
Smith, page 95. expounding the second petition, says, that there the Ministers
are prayed for, that they may faithfully execute their office, part whereof he
makes suspension.

All the whole worship of God with us, is called Idolatrous, and all of us
Ido^aters.

The honest conversation of godly men, he calls an outward show of
holiness, hypocrisy, vain glory, counterfeit show of gravity, austernesse
of ma^^ers, and the outside of a good conscience.

To make up this his sinning in a high ^egree, the fruit of our ministry,
our ^eaching and laboring, he says is the ^oysoning and stinging of every
good ^onscience, the leaven of hypocrisy: and ^uch as be reformed are
Proselytes, and ^ecome thereby twofold more the chil^ren of hell, then they were
before. Thus ^orriblie blaspheming in saying, that ^he preaching of Gods word,
and the ^pirits effectual working, makes men ^he children of hell, and two
fold worse then before: and yet he, and all of the^ (if ever converted) were
converted b^ those men, which he so raileth upon and by that blessed means,
which he (...) blasphemeth.

That he might leave nothing vnto^ched, he also abuses the Universities the
Colleges he makes like to the Sodomitical Monasteries, and fellowship of the
idolatrous Monks and Frien^ brethren of one birth, ever by both parents, that
they have ever been profess(...) and bitter enemies to Christ's kingdom

Their exercises and orders he mock^ at; The Commencement he likens to stage
play; Disputers, to Fencers, or dog and bear; Master Vicechancelor he mocks,
naming him Mass Cha^cellor; Morning prayer, he says is t^^ reading over their
gear; and he the reads the Chapter, he calls the Bibb^^ Clerk.

As was the work managed, so w^^ his managing; as was the spirit of err^^
which invented the one, so was it him violent above measure, carryi^^ him in
this manner of outrage, to defe^^ the same, and disgrace whatsoever el^^

With this man's sin and spirit of pro^hanenesse, are all these in this way
de^ed: because neither he, (while he li^ed) published his repentance to the
^orld in print, (as he sinned in print) nor ^et any of these have declared
their dis^^ke thereof unto us in public, but ra^^er indeed approved thereof;
some ^^ying that it was his zeal that so led ^^m, excusing his blasphemy with
a ho^^e grace of Gods Spirit, (for they ^^eane zeal in the best sense); Some
^^ing his words amongst us, accoun^^ng the preaching of the Word, prayer ^^d
catechizing to be but a prophanati^^ of the Sabbath; another calls it ^^e
deceiueablenes of unrighteousness, ^^luding to 2. These. 2. Al of them by him
^^ue increased their dislike and great ^^ntempt of every holy exercise, and
^^acious duty amongst us. Till they (...) therefore publish his repentance,
or ^^ase to praise his such zeal, and temper ^^emselues that way, ceasing in
this and to partake of his ill spirit, they ^ay boast of a holy constitution:
but ^ee may reject them for that kind of ^^rsed corruption, if they had no more
by their own doctrine, until they d^ openly show amendment.

Lastly, their very opinions, whi^^ The last sin is their Schism, consisting
of many errors.
are the very matter of Brownisme, (...) their own inventions, upon which the
do build their constitution; and b^ which they have made so grievous rend and
separation. The very mai^ and principals thereof, I will set down and
answered, that so they may eas(...) see them to be errors; if they will not
(...) prejudicial to their own selves through partiality, and so be blind,
when the may see.

The opinions are these, and such they hold, and cannot deny, being (...)
ready avouched under their hands: (...) as I know their assertions, so will I
(...) wrong them in setting them down, mislead any, and that they may not uoid
an answer with this, to say I (...) stooke the cause.

The errors of the Separatists, and the matter of their Schism.
I. They hold, that the Constitution our Church, is a false Constitution. I.
Error.


I. They cannot prove this simply by Answer.
any plain doctrine of Scripture, and that which they would prove, is but only
respectively, (as so and so considered) and after this sort may we condemn any
thing; and their Church also, in respect of all those things, which are and ^ay
truly be objected against it. See more for the answer hereto in the end of
this book.


II. It is against the evidence of the ^criptures, which makes the Word,
Matthew. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 15. 2. Cor. 5. 9. and 11. 2. Job 33. 23. 24. Act. 2.
14. 7. 38. and 16. 32. 33.) the external pro^^ssion, (Act. 8. 12. 37. 38.) and
Sacra^ents, (Matthew. 28. 19. 1. Cor. 19. 16.) ^he visible and true constitution
of a ^ompanie so gathered and knit together, and so was ours constituted, as
this ^ooke does show: and as in another Treatise (ere it be long) shall be
plainly manifested, wherein is handled the doctrine of the Church, and the
principles and inferences concerning the same, set ^owne; which is very
necessary to be ^nowne, that men may judge better, and more rightly of this
controversy.

II. They hold our Constitution a real II. Error.
^doll, and so us Idolaters.

This is contrary to the course of h^^ Answer.
Scripture, never taking an Idol, n^ Idolaters in any such sense: I have p^^
used many Scriptures, and can see no^ in that sense; and Marlorat in his
E^^chiridion, sets down a Catalogue Idols mentioned in Scripture, where^^
reckons up 47. in all, and not one (...) them in this sense.

These men therefore, as they bu^ new Churches, they will also make n^^ sins;
as if man had not transgress(...) enough to lead him to hell. But into mean
season, they make an idol their own Constitution, as a godd^^ sanctifying the
Word, Sacraments, Pr^^er, people, and every thing: but wi^^out it, the Word,
Sacraments, pray^^ alms, repentance, faith, love, yea e^^rie ordinance of God
is false and Ido^^trous. Is not this then true,? so as th^^ may (as the
Ephesians cried) say, great the Goddess Co^stitution, great is D^^na of the
Brownists. Let none blame^ for M. Robinson held as much before fell in amongst
them.

III. That such as are not of a parti^^lar III. Error.
constituted Church, (to wit, such a (...) theirs is) are no subjects of
Christ's king^^me.

I. The Scripture never sets forth Answer.
^^y of Gods people by this mark: then ^^re is a new note coined, as before a
^ew sin, for new people must have new ^^ings. If they had said, that he which
^ay, and does not ordinarily, having ^eanes offered him, live in a Church
^^ghtly constituted, that is, in a true vi^^le Church of Christ, does live out
of ^^der and offends God, it had been ^^ue; for the godly are commanded to
^^me out of Babylon, and to join with ^^e Congregation, and Church visible
^^thered together, if possibly they can, ^uk. 13. 37. Revel. 18. 4.

II. It is contrary to Calath. 3. 7. 9. Ioh. 3. 14. 1. Cor. 1. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
15.

III. What may be said of Wickliffe, ^^us, Luther, Bucer, Melanthon, and over;
yea of all our worthy Martyrs, and (...) the people of God with us; of Lot
^^rsaking Abraham for the world; Job so, and the people in Mordecaies time
^iding in Babylon?

IV. I ask whether Christ's kingdom be not spiritual and invisible a^ so?
Ioh. 18. 33. and 10. 16.

IV. That all not in their way, are wit^out; IV. Error.
and do apply against us, 1. Cor. 5. 1^ Ephesians. 2. 12.

I. These places are meant of such ^ Answer.
never made so much as an outward pr^fession of Christ Jesus at all.

II. They cannot prove by the Scri^ture that we are a people without, they
will expound this scripture phra^^ without, by the scripture, laying by t^^
forgeries of their own brains.

III. God almighty has witness^ God has visible communion with us, and we
with him allo.
that we are his people:

1. By giving us his word, Psalm. 1^ 19. 20. and Sacraments.

2. By his effectual working the by, Iere. 23. 22. therefore her^ the voice of
the Son of God, Ioh 25. and the words of eternal (...) whither the^ shall we
go? Ioh. 6*

3. By his most strange and mir^^lous deliverances of us, from the ^nemies of
his Gospel: a pro^^ of God to his people, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. 7.

Yet they regard not the mercie^ ^^e Lord, but maintain so stiflie this They
like it, that we call them brethren, but they will not so account us.
^rosse error, as they hold not themselves ^ound to admonish us as brethren,
but ^^ey may let us alone as men without, ^^cept it be to get us to them, as
they ^ould do even Turks and Jews: and ^et they like well that we should
call ^^em brethren: a strange imagination; ^n they be our brethren, and we
not ^eirs? What reason there is to like the ^e and to dislike the other, I
leave to ^^l men of reason to judge.

V. That only Saints, that is, a people V. Error.
^^rsaking all known sin, of which they ^ay be convinced; doing all the
known ^^ll of God; increasing and abiding ever ^^erein, are the only matter
of a visible ^^urch.

I. This is a proper description of the Answer.
^^uisible members of Jesus Christ, and ^^cludes even hypocrites from being ^^e
matter of the visible Church.

II. This makes that David, Iehosha^^at and the Church of God in their ^^ies,
were no true matter of a Church: ^r there was marrying of many wives, ^ere was
the continuance of the high ^^ces, so plainly spoken against; the sen Serpent,
until Hezekiahs days, w^^ idolatrouslie worshipped: David, f^^ fear of Ioab,
did suffer blood, all hi^ days to be unpunished, contrary t^ Gods word and
threatening: Moses for the hardness of the peoples hearts di^^ allow a bill of
diuorcement against the law of marriage. If he had a dispensation from God for
this, so it is, but is n^^ manifest unto us; else here were know^ sins: so
Corinth being admonished yet did not amend. 2. Cor. 12. 21. as al^^ the
Churches of Asia, Reu. 2. 20. 21.

III. The Scriptures which they d^^ bring (reader mark them) are place
speaking of invisible members properli^^ of visible analogically, or,
figuratiuel^^ as they are judged to be, or in hope the^ may be, or showing
what men ought be, as the commandments, exhorta^^ons, admonitions,
dehortations, and (...) proofs in Scripture declare; but the show not what men
are, neither can the be so alleged, for we cannot conclu^^ from those places
which teach how m^ should be, that therefore men are so, (...) else not Gods
people.

IV. Men are called Saints in Scri^ture not for soundness of knowledge; for
^hen Christ's disciples had bin no Saints, who were ignorant of many things, and
^o other mentioned, Act. 19. 1. 2. Not for ^nternall pure affections; for then
S. Paul had been no Saint: Romans 7. 18. 21. Not for holy practice of their
duty always: Eccles. 7. 22. An instance of this may be given in all the men
of God in all ages. But they are called Saints:

I. Because of their outward calling Why a mixed company, whereof the visible
Church consists, are called Saints.
^o Christianity, as 1. Cor. 1. 1. which is ^olie, and to an holy end. 1.
These. 4. 7. Even as a man rightly called into the ^unction of the Ministry
of the Gos^ell, though he show himself vnwor^hie thereof, yet being therein,
is therefor called a Minister: so is it with men ^n the calling of
Christianity.

II. Because of the profession of faith ^n Christ, who makes all true
believers holy and Saints.

III. In respect of Baptism, by which externallie the party baptized is to
be ^udged, to have put on Christ, as Scripture phrase is, Gal. 3. 27. to have
remission of his sins, Act. 2. 39. to be par^aker of Christ's death: Romans 6.
3. 4. Collos. 2. 12. and to have assurance of salvation. 1. Pet. 3. 21.

IV. In respect of the better part, though the fewer by many, for thus the
Scripture speaks, ascribing to all, that which is due properly but to some.
Deuteronomy. 1. 23. 24. 1. Cor. 6. 11. compared with 5. 1. 2. Cor. 12. 21. So we
speak, calling a heap of chafe and wheat, wheat only, not naming the
chafe, though the wheat cannot be well seen for the chafe; so lees and
dregs of wine, mixed with wine, we call wine, not mentioning the lees: So does
God speak of the visible Church, being, (as all Divines by a general consent
hold) a mixed company both of good and bad.

V. In respect of the visible signs of Gods favor, and his presence, who
promises to be with his. Thus (Exodus 3. 5) the ground was called holy ground,
not that it was in it self holy, but for the presence of God there: so
Jerusalem was called the holy city, Mat. 4. 5. for that the Temple was there,
and his word, and other signs of his presence, albeit it was then an odious
place, containing Simoniacal high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites,
and false teachers, and indeed a bloody city, murdering Gods Saints: Matthew.
23. 37.

VI. In respect of Gods good pleasure, who looks not upon his Church, as the
particular members thereof are, but as he accepts of them; therefore is it
said, He saw no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel: Numb. 23. 21.
and yet if (when this was spoken) Israel it self had been looked unto, it was
an ignorant, unbelieving and a stiffenecked people.

Thus we see in what respect the visible The visible Church is a mixed company.
Church is called Saints, not as they do hold in this erroneous position: for
the visible Church, as I have said, is a mixed company.

I. The parables in Matthew. 13. so set it forth.

II. Every visible Church of God from the worlds beginning, even all of them,
consisting of good and bad, do manifest the truth of the parables so expounded.

III. The judgment of learned and godly Divines both with us, and beyond the
seas, do so universally interpret the same; when went the Spirit of God from
all Churches herein to them only? Well it were, that all were Saints: but that
is to look for a heaven on earth.

To conclude, even their Church shows that the parables so interpreted is
true, if they consider well themselves, what is before spoken truly of them,
and also the accusation of George Johnson, and M. White, which he says, he
has proved against them.

VI. That the power of Christ, that is, authority to preach, to administer the
Sacraments, and to exercise the Censures of the Church, belongs to the whole
Church, yea to every one of them, and not the principal members thereof.

This opinion is indeed the first A. Answer.
B. C. of Brownisme, whereupon they build all the rest of their untruths; And
^^pularitie ^^e first prin^^le of Brow^^me, which ^^ing laid, ^^ey build
^ereon their ^^aration.
of this, they infer the audacious boldness for every mean person to take
in hand to interpret the Scripture, to censure the whole Church, and to
excommunicate it, which they call less odiouslie (but all one in substance, if
this be) marked) separating from the same: This is their own judgment; in
which miserable error poor souls are inwrapped, for that it carries with it
a great liberty to flesh and blood, and gives great power to one man, more
the^ our Church allows to any Bishop in England.

Hence do they conclude, that by one If this sixth positio^ be maintained,
what things necessarily will follow thereupon.
man, all the assembly is polluted, for that every man has authority to
proceed against him, which if it be not done, every one partaketh with the
offenders sin, and so is defiled.

Hence they gather also, that it is not only lawful to separate from that
assembly where wicked men are, but also ought so to do, unless they can cast
them out.

Hence also it is, that two or three gathered together, must be a Church which
has the whole power of Christ, and may presently make them Officers, and use
the discipline of Christ; for this their position contains thus much, that a
company gathered (as they say) into the name of Christ by a covenant made, to
walk in all the ways of Christ known unto them; such a company has in it
authority to ordain Ministers, and Officers, to preach, administer the
Sacraments, and use the censures, yea every member of them has this power with
the rest; but yet for order sake only, some are chosen by the whole thereunto,
but the power of this is in all and every of them, so as in want of special
men, any one, the fittest chosen, may perform that work.

This is the ground of their out-breaking from all the Churches in the world;
which pleasant bait offered, he that does greedily snatch at, must of
necessity swallow the hook, with every falsehood hanging thereupon. his
populari^^e is,


But this their assertion is:

I. Contrary to the order which God 1 Contrary to Gods order under the law.
established before Christ, both before the law and under the law: before; the
power of governing was in the chief, the first borne, Genesis 4. 7. and 25. 31.
Number. 3. 12. till Levites were chosen. Under the law; the Lord himself selected
the Tribe of Levy, to take the charge of the congregation, which power was
theirs, not received from the people; but given them from God by Moses, the
people being commanded, they only approve the Lords appointment, Number. 2. 6.
12. Leuit. 8. 2. 36. This government continued all the old Testament time: of
this I hope there is not doubt.

II. It is without warrant of Scripture, 2 Without warrant in the Apostles time.
during all the Apostles days: for this is general every where, that the body
of the congregation attempted nothing of themselves, but always Church matters
were begun, governed, and composed by the Apostles, Act. 1. 15. 23. 24. 25. and
6. 3. 6. and 14. 19. 20. 23. 1. Cor. 5. 3. 5. neither can any one instance be
given to the contrary, in all the new Testament, only they were made
acquainted with that which concerned them all, Act. 1. 15. a liberty was
granted the^ by the Apostles then, to choose officers only, to present them to
the Apostles, but they never made any themselves, Act. 6. 3. 6. and 14. 23.

III. It is flatly against Christ's commission 3 Against the commission of
Christ, granted to his Apostles, and other succeeding them.
granted to the Apostles, and those which succeeded them, Matthew. 28. 19. and
16. 19. Ioh. 20. 21. 22. 23. Mark. 13. 34. which, as before is showed, they did
practice, and in their absence committed the same, not to the body of the
people, but to the chief Ministers of the Gospel, as to Timothy, 1. Tim. 1.
3. and 3. 14. 15. and 5. 21. 22. And to Titus, Tit. 1. 5. And this was to
continue in the persons succeeding them for ever, as is evident by the charge
imposed on Timothy, to continue ever, which could not be in his person, but
in other following in his place, 1. Tim. 6. 13. 14. Therefore that place of 1.
Cor. 5. 4. 13. though spoken generally, must be understood of the Elders, or
chief Officers of the Church, as may appear, 1. Cor. 2. 6. And all that can
be gathered from that place for the body of the Church, is but this, that it
be done with their knowledge publicly, when they meet together in the open
assembly, as the fifth verse means.

IV. It is most apparent, Ephesians. 4. 4 ^he place of ^^e Ephesians against it.
11. 12. that Christ ascending up, gave gifts, for preaching, administration of
Sacraments and government, unto some sorts of men, who are set out there, and
plainly distinguished from the other Saints, the body of the Church. The
Church is compared to a body, Ephesians. 4. 12. Colos. 1. 18. for even as a boodie
special members given it of God, and endued with special virtues in
themselves, which the body does not bestow upon them, as the eyes to see, the
tongue to speak, the hands and feet have their proper offices, all for the
good of the body: yet have not these special properties from the body, but
from God: so is it with the Church, which has special Officers receiving
their power from Christ, by such means as God has appointed, and not from the
Church. And therefore both here in the Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. the principal members
with their gifts are plainly distinguished from the body, as receiving their
gifts from Christ, for the Church; and not from the Church, that is, the body
of the Congregation: To which he never said, go preach; nor ever committed his
power of government unto the same, as is manifested in the former reason. And
is as plain as is the shining of the Sun in the firmament of heaven, to such
as either are not blind, or wilfully shut not their eyes from seeing.

V. It is never to be found in all the old Testament, that the people, but
Princes and Ecclesiastical Governors, men 5 (...) Word ^ not lay gouern^^t
upon people: ^^her repro^^h them for (...) reforming ^^gs amisle: ^^t the
chief ^^uernours, whom it ^^s to re^^rme. ^^ow Matthew. 8. 17. is to be
^^pounded, ^^d the rea^^ns why.
in authority, were reproved for suffering holy things to be abused, Ezech.
22. 26. 1. Sam. 2. 27. 1. King. 13. So in the new Testament, Matthew. 23. Revel.
2. 1. 8. 12. 18. and 3. 1. 7. 14. No mention in these places is made of the
people.

Therefore must that one place, 1. Cor. 5. be expounded by all these places,
and the whole course of Scripture, and practice of Gods people from the worlds
beginning: and so, Tell the Church, Mat. 18. 17. must be understood, Tell the
Governors, the chief Officers of the Church: and that it must be so
expounded, thus it is evident:

1. Because Christ must herein be expounded, either as the practice was the^,
or as he appointed it, by giving his commission to some afterward, else was
he not then understood, neither can now be; and we read not of any, that did
so practice after the letter, but after this exexposition. Now the authority
was the^ in the chief Governors, and not in the body of the people, as
appears in Ioh. 9. 22. and 12. 42. and 16. 2. And the commission was given to
certain men, I have declared, not to all; and Cloes complaint is made to the
chief Governor the Apostle, and not to the body of the people, 2. Cor. 1.
11. Therefore it is rightly thus expounded.

2. Our Savior having spoken in the third person, Tell the Church, when he
comes to ratify the authority (to be committed by him, to his Apostles
after, for the benefit of the Church) he turns his speech to the second
person, (not saying what it shall bind, etc, but) what you shall bind and
loose; to wit, for the good of it, etc.

3. He speaks also of a few, two or three gathered together, meaning thereby
the officers of the Church, and not all the body, of which he would have
spoken, had he by Church meant indeed the body of the congregation.

4. In the 19. verse he establishes the authority of a few, for the good of
many, the officers, for the Church: for he says, If two of you shall agree,
etc. whatsoever they, that is, the Church, shall desire, it shall be given unto
them, where is also a plain difference in change of the person again,
between the officers of the Church, and the Church complaining, to have things
reformed.

5. It is necessary to take it here figuratively: 1. it does agree to the
practice of the Jewish Church (from whence it is held that the manner of
governing in the Church is fetched), 2. For that, as you have heard, it agrees
to Christ's commission given. 3. For the other reasons before going, and the
rest following. 4. For order sake, and to prevent confusion: for as the
proverb is, That which is all men's, is no man's: whereupon arises great
carelessness in seeing unto such things, as are all men's in public, as
experience teaches, both in Church and Commonwealth: yea by it pride, and
thereupon contention insueth. 5. To avoid the absurdities, which else would
necessarily follow out of the text, if the word Church should not be expounded
figuratively. First, because then all the whole Church must speak to the
party offending: for it is said, if he will not hear the Church: by which it
is plain, that there by Church is meant such as must speak to the party; how
can he else hear? But the whole Church cannot speak jointly, that were
confusion, contrary to the commandment, 1. Cor. 14. 40. nor severally one by
one: for then women must meddle in the Church censures and speak in the
congregation, which is contrary to 1. Cor. 14. 34: for they be members of the
Church, and it is not the whole Church without the^, and young youths, children
and servants; and if these are not to be understood by the Church, then
necessity compels to take the word figuratively, the part for ye whole: and
if one part may be left out, why not another, and so leave out many, until the
principal and chief of the congregation be taken, who are chosen by the rest,
and may well be the mouth of the rest, and stand for the whole Church?
Secondly, for that in the 19. verse our Savior should then cross himself, who
gives to two or three, that is, to a few the authority, which belongs unto
all: for it is not enough that two or three agree to a thing, where all have a
right, but that all, or at the least, most should yield their consent and
approbation to the thing that is to be determined.

Sixthly, if the word Church be not taken here figuratively; then it follows,
first that the Corinthians offended, being al commanded to deal with the
incestuous person, 1. Cor. 5. 13. and yet but some of them did proceed against
him, 2. Cor. 2. 6. Secondly, the Apostle S. Paul should offend, who upon the
complaint of Cloes house, did not wait for the Churches consent, but of
himself absent from them, considered of the matter, judged of it, and
determined what to be done: for it is said, I have determined already, verse.
3. and commands his sentence to be executed there in the open congregation.
Thus we see the figurative speech good and warrantable. Christian Reader with
reason be satisfied.

Seventhly, this is the judgment and the practice of all reformed Churches.
And let not men marvel that ye officers should be called ye Church: for first,
it is no unusual speech to put the name of the Act. 15. 3.
whole upon the part, and this to be taken for the whole. Secondly; a company
no where is called in all the new Testament a Church, (Christian families
excepted) but then when they have their officers; otherwise they are called
believers, disciples, but not a Church, but Note this place. Act. 15. 22. 23.
only in Act. 14. 23. by anticipation, as heaven and earth are so called before
they were, Genesis 1. 1. Therefore if the officers give to a company the
denomination of a Church, what great marvel is it, that by Church may be meant
the Officers or Governors?

Thus we see the truth, contrary to their assertion, plainly proved; which
cannot be wrung from me, but only by obiecting certain inco^ueniences, which
Certain Ministers have answered master Smith herein, who has their answer,
which he has not answered again as yet.
would follow hereupon, to the hurt of the Church. But such peremptory
assertions, and of such consequents, as they are now made (even the matter of
salvation or damnation) are not to be maintained with deceivable conclusions
(so I call them, for that men not wary may be easily mislead by them) neither
can an absurdity dissolve an argument, nor inconveniences whatsoever overthrow
the truth of God.

It is not for man to dream of making better in any sort the way of the Lord,
which he has set down, let the inconveniences and discommodities (which man
can imagine) thereupon ensue, how many or of what sort soever: but whilst
these men do dream of so many inconveniences, which will befall the Church,
(if the same be not as they would have it) they think not what evil
befalls to the Church by this ground of theirs, to wit, their popular
government: let such declare it, as experimentally have tasted of it.

VI. In it self (the multitude being 6 It is instability and disorderlinesse.
ever unconstant) it is instabilitie, vnorderlinesse, where every one is alike
equal, it is the nurse of confusion, the mother of schism, the breeder of
contention, as appears by them at this day: and whosoever holds it, must
needs make separation with the Brownists: he cannot avoid it.

VII. This their assertion is against 7 It is against the commandment of God.
the very commandment of God, who wills the sheep to obey their shepherd,
Heb. 13. 17. and not he to obey them: the flock to depend upon their Pastor,
1. Pet. 5. 2. and not he on the flock. The contrary can no where be proved
by Scripture; neither can it be showed in the old or new Testament, by Note
this well.
any example, that ever the people had command over their Pastor, or power to
cast them out.

VIII. This is against common reason, 8 Against common sense.
that the father begetting should be subject to his children begotten (1. Cor.
4. 15.) the work domintere over the workman, 1. Cor. 9. 1. 2. the seedsman to
be ordered by the corn, and not the corn by him.

They speak of a few gathering together to be a Church, but they show not
how: If they come lawfully together, it is by the Lords means, even by the
Ministry, the ordinary means to plant Churches: or else urged thereby to
join unto a Church. But that such a company should be a Church of God truly
constituted, who so break forth from Churches, and will not join to any
other, but will be a Church of themselves, such a gathering together to be a
lawful assembly gathered in the name (that is, in the power, authority and
good pleasure) of Christ, from amongst us with condemnation, his will in his
Testament shows not.

IX. And lastly, this is against the dignity 9 Against the authority of the
Ministers of Christ.
and office of true Ministers of Christ Jesus, who represent Christ's person
unto the congregation, 1. Cor. 4. 1. having their authority from him to preach
in his name, and administer the Sacraments, and to use the censures in his name
for the good of the Church, which none but such as represent him can give to
them, nor any, but such, take it from them. Now the body of the people, do
not by office represent Christ, neither are equal with Ministers as they be
such, much less have authority over them: and therefore can they not make
that which themselves are not, neither can they take from them, that which they
never gave them: neither read we that ever the people, either made or deposed
any from their places; but only such Governors and persons in authority as
do represent Christ.

VII. That the sin of one man publicly VII. Error.
and obstinatly stood in, being not reformed, nor the offender cast out, does
so pollute the whole congregation, that none may communicate with the same in
any of the holy things of God (though it be a Church rightly constituted) till
the party be excommunicated.

The former position is the ground of this, and this latter is the ground of
separation, where sinful men be unreformed: and the reason is, for that every
man has power (as they say) to cast him out, and he that does not use his
authority, is guilty of his sin, as a Magistrate that winketh at wilful
murder.

I. The former ground (as we see) is Answer.
most false, and therefore this error built thereon is also overthrown.

II. There is not any sound ground Men are not polluted by the sins of other
men, whilst they approve not of them: neither ought men to separate from holy
things, for ill me^
for this their opinion in the Scripture, to wit, that he which neither in
judgment allows, nor in affection likes of the sin of another, but does
speak against it; in his countenance upon occasion shows his dislike of it;
does his best in his place to reclaim them; practices no such thing, but the
contrary virtue, should yet be so far polluted, as that because of the
offender he may not come to the holy things of God* this seventh position is
false, which I thus manifest:

I. Under the Law there was a sacrifice ^o sacrifice ^or it under ^^e law.
for all manner of pollutions, yet none appointed for this: therefore such a
pollution then was not: and therefore is it not moral.

II. The godly people are never reproved, Godly not so ^eproued.
for being at the ministration of holy things, though wicked men were there;
and yet the Prophets every where mention great evils amongst the people, but
never such a sin as this; yea where they speak of separating the clean from
the unclean, they reprove the Priests, for not making a separation of them,
but never dissuade the godly from coming to communicate, in holy things.
Ezech. 22. 26. Therefore it was not revealed then to be a sin, which these
now make a sin by their error of the Churches authority. Thus with broching
errors, they increase the peoples transgressions by making also new sins.

III. The Prophets did not separate Prophets never made se^^ration in the
greatest time of corruption, from Gods worship.
themselves, though they cried out so against wickedness, (as in Esai. 1. 4.
5. 6. 9. 10. 13. 14.) with does plainly show that the holy Ghost was not then a
teacher of any such thing: howsoever certain Scriptures speaking of
ceremonial pollution, may only seem, I say, to make for them, yet do not so
indeed. For if this could have bin gathered from those places, we are to
judge, that the Prophets would so have expounded Moses, and have also declared
it by practice: unless we think the Prophets halted in doctrine, and regarded
not to sin in life, as too many now do.

IV. The Scripture plainly teaches Scripture teaches the contrary.
the contrary.

I. By acquiting the godly from the transgression of other: Ezec. 33. 9. and
18. 14. 17. 20. and 14. 18. 20. Tit. 1. 15. Revel. 3. 4. and 2. 24. 22. 23.
Gal. 5. 10. read the places.

II. By declaring it to be a sin for Note this.
to leave the holy things of God, for the wickedness of other. 1. Sam. 2. 24.
17. Where the words are plain and cannot be avoided by giving an other
exposition of the word, contrary to the use of it elsewhere in Scripture,
contrary to the common and general acception of it by Divines, and the proper
sense of the place.

This place cutteth deeply into their schism, who are grown into a hie
measure of abhorring the Lords word, his Sacraments, and all the holy exercises
of religion amongst us, as is showed before.

V. In the word we have liberty given The Word does warrant godly men's coming
to the holy things.
us to come unto the holy things of God, if we look unto our selves to reform
our ways. So our Savior allows, Matthew. 5. 23. 24. So the Apostle (1. Cor.
11. which place is most pregnant for the deciding of the controversy) See M.
Powels Reioynder. page 118.
for he purposely speaks of the pollution of holy things, to wit, of the
blessed Sacrament, verses 18. 22. Where he first tells them of their fault; then
informs their judgment in the institution, verses 23. 24. 25. 26. after
shows the peril; if men do not come reverently, that such a one eats and
drinks damnation, not to other, but to himself, verse. 29. Lastly, does will
every man for remedy of such an evil, to examine, not other, but himself, and
so allows him to come to the Lords Supper, v. 28. In all which he does not
mention pollution by other, neither prescribes separation for a remedy: of
this he speaks not one word, and yet Corinth was a corrupt Church in
doctrine, and other uncleanness, yea wherein men did continue after the
Apostles once and twice admonishing, 2. Cor. 12. 21. Therefore the Apostle
instructed by the Spirit of God, had not received any such doctrine from the
Lord, to teach unto the people, as these men would pick out now from the holy
word of God.

And to conclude, this their position insinuates that the sin of one, does
dissolve the bond of allegiance between God and another, for the Lord
commands us to worship him, to receive the Sacraments, etc. Now it cannot be
proved, that another man's sin freeth me from doing what I am commanded: let
this be proved. May not I serve God, because another man does offend him? must
I cease to obey, because another lives in transgression? It is without reason
to think it.

Thus we see the strongest reason for separation, and the ground thereof
overthrown. The Scriptures which are alleged for separation are nothing
against To what heads all the places alleged for separation, may be referred
unto, and so answered.
us, nor against our public communion in holy things. The places may be
reduced to these heads:

The places that forewarne Gods people under the law, to separate themselves,
are thus to be taken: 1. From Idols of false gods, as Israel from Egyptian
Babylonish or heathenish gods, and Idolaters dwelling about them. 2. From Idols
of the true God, as Judah from Israel in Ieroboams time and after. 3. From
persons ceremonially polluted. In the time of the Gospel: 1. From Jews not
receiving Christ, but railing against Christ. 2. From Gentiles without Christ.
3. From Antichrist, under the show of Christ, persecuting Christians. 4. From
familiar accompanying in private conversation, with men excommunicate, or of
lewd life worthy to be excommunicate, when neither religion commands,
charity binds, nor our calling warranteth us thereunto. But what are all
these places to us, which are against Idols and Idolaters, against Antichrist,
against Jews railing on Christ, or Gentiles not entertaining Christ, we
professing Gods truth, and worshipping Jesus Christ, with detestation of
idolatry? or what are the places which concern private and voluntary
familiarity, against the public coming to the holy things commanded of God?
nothing at all.

It cannot be proved that a man is polluted, that comes to hear the Word
preached, and to receive the Sacraments, by such, as by whom the Lord has bin
effectual to convert men unto him, and has a calling of the Church.

VIII. That every of our Assemblies, VIII. Error.
are false Churches.

This erroneous and false position, is Answer.
more fully confuted in the end of this Treatise, to which I may refer the
Reader; nevertheless, I will add thus much more hereof in this place thereto.

First, touching the distinction of true The distinction of true and false,
cannot stand nor be urged, as the difference between us and them.
and false, applied unto us, it cannot be maintained by the Word against us:
there is never a place of Scripture speaking of false Prophets, false brethren,
or of false gods, which can truly be alleged against us; but such places must
needs be miserably wrested.

Secondly, it is strange they should tax so generally without exception, every
Congregation, and all the godly people and servants of Christ amongst us. He
that runs that way, had need It contains a deadly condemnation of us all,
and in our standing to be as void of comfort, as the Antichristian Assemblies
of the Papists.
of serious consideration, before he hastily entertain so deadly a censure:
for this carries so much with it, as the same secludeth us all visiblie, as
far from any assurance of saving grace, from pertaking of the life of God,
and the way which leads unto everlasting salvation; as the Papist, and do not
they so judge of us? It appears by their continual quoting of the same
Scriptures against us, which ye holy Spirit intends against Antichrist and
cursed idolaters, thereby abusing simple honest hearts, leading them into this
woeful censure of condemnation and most accursed uncharitableness against us:
whereas we find in the word, God called Israel his people after defection, and
their children (in respect of circumcision) his children Ezeck. 16. 21. 22. 2.
Some in the Act. 19. 2. which were ignorant of the holy Ghost, believers. 3.
The Corinthians, Saints, when there was incest openly committed, men were also
drunken at the Sacrament, and some which denied the resurrection. 4. Pergamus a
Church, and yet false teachers in it. 5. The Church of Christ is set out even
by the naming, that is, by the profession of the name le-Christ: Romans 15. 20.
See how little has God taken, to condemn those, who will not hold us a true
Church, for that much which we have.

But to the same more in particular I answer thus; That our assemblies are not
false Churches, that congregation What is a false Church.
which is false, has a false head, false matter, false form, and false
properties: but this cannot be avouched against our congregations: for we have
no false We have no false head.
head, we hold Jesus Christ, and worship no other God, but the Trinity in
unity: If such, as have been of us, and by themselves may judge of this
truth, do yet deny the same, they need rather correction, then instruction.

The matter is not false: and to understand No false matter.
this, we must note a difference between no matter, true matter, and false
matter.

No matter, are they with makes no profession, of Christ at all, as infidels
that believe What is no matter at all.
not him: such are Jews, Turks and Pagans: whose Assemblies are no Churches
of God at all.

True matter, (to wit, visible, for of this What is true matter.
we here speak) are all such as openly profess this maine truth, that, Jesus
the son of Marie is the son of God, Christ the Lord, by whom only and
alone they shall be saved.

That this is the true matter of the Church of God, thus I prove.

I. Because they believe the sum of the Gospel, which Gospel, who so makes
outward profession of, are the true visible matter: Romans 10. 9. Ioh. 1. 12. and
3. 36. Ioh. 17. 3.

II. Because it was the doctrine alone by which the Apostles did gather people
to make them a Church and disciples unto Christ, Act. 2. 36. and 9. 20. and 19.
4. 5. and 18. 28. Luke 24. 47. 1. Cor. 15. 3. and 3. 11.

III. Because such asmade profession hereof, were without any stay or let,
received into the Church as true matter: Act. 8. 37. and 16. 31. 33. and 11. 26.

IV. Because he that does make open profession hereof, does differ from Jews,
Turks, Pagans, yea and from Papists, for the former hold not Jesus Christ to
be the son of God, and these latter do join works in the cause of
salvation, which is against the true nature of faith in the Son of God, and
destroieth it. Romans 10. 3. Gal. 3. 2. and 5. 2. 4. Act. 15. 1. 10. 11. And
likewise against the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 14. 18, and 1. 6.

Thus we see by these reasons, that such We are true matter of a true Church.
as make this profession are true matter, and so are we; for we all profess
this says, and are baptized thereinto, as is appatrent: 1. By the doctrine of
our Church, received by all the reformed Churches in the harmony of confession.
2. By the same publickelie preached. 3. By the same maintained by our laws, by
writings, and even sealed with the blood of holy Martyrs against the Papists,
and other heretics: and therefore are we true matter of the visible Church.

Yet here again note, that true matter True matter is either good or bad.
is either good or bad, for who can deny, that to be true matter of building,
which yet is not good? as timber and stone is true matter, but yet not some
timber and stone good matter: So is it in the spiritual building; all that
thus profess Christ, are true matter, but every one not good matter: Such good
and bad matter was in Corinth, and in the Church mentioned in the Reave. 2. 3.
and has bin in all the Churchs of God in the world, which bad matter by due
proceeding, is either to be reformed, or else to be cast out of the building,
not as false matter, but as no good matter, though true; therefore a man
excomunicate is cast out not as false matter, but as bad and corrupt matter
only, and therefore is to be held a brother: 2. These. 3. 15.

Neither let it seem strange, that the Outward profession of the true faith,
makes a man true matter of the visible Church, albeit for his conversation he
be bad matter.
outward profession by word makes men to be true visible matter; whether they
be hypocrites; for the Apostle received Simon Magus an hypocrite: Act. 8. and
Christ Jesus received Judas: for many are called and few chosen: Mat. 22. 14.
or whether they be men of leaud conversation within the Church, deserving
justly to be cast out, as bad matter; for that the Scripture calls such
brethren, for their profession: 1. Cor. 5. 11. Neither does Christ (Reave. 2. or
his Apostles: 1. Cor. 3. 12. 13. for corruptions of manners, or for building
hay or stubble) call them false matter. This may appear in marriage of man and
woman, by which similitude Christ sets forth himself and the Church.

Two persons lawfully marrying, do openly by words acknowledge their consent
each to other, and do profess duties of love in marriage; but afterward the
wife does not perform the same as she ought and did covenant: Is therefore the
woman no true wife? She may be accounted unjust in her word, and not a good
wife, but yet is she a true wife, till the bond of marriage be broken, and a
bill of diuorcement be given out.

A man professing obedience to a king, acknowledging him his king and none
other, and subiecting himself in general to his laws, he is a true subject
to that king, albeit he do transgress in some things greatly and openly,
else kings in these days should have but very few true subjects.

A man that makes profession of one only calling or trade, and of none other,
by that only profession is he truly called that tradesman, albeit he be
but a bungler in his trade, or careless in living by it: none will say that
he is a false tradesman, but either no good tradesman, or unprofitable.

Even thus is it in the profession of Jesus Christ, as is already said; for
whosoever does profess Christ, is a Christian and true matter of a visible
Church, though neither good to other, nor profitable to himself.

Good Christian Reader, miscarry not in thy judgment from the truth only of
a good affection desirous to have all well, and grieved at what is amiss: for
thou shall find ever cause thus to be affected, wheresoever thou come in in
this vale of misery and corruptions.

False matter is contrary to this true What false matter is.
matter.

The visible form is not false, which The visible form and constitution of
our Church is not false.
is the uniting of us unto God, and one to another visiblie: For as by laying
of the foundation in a building, and so the rest upon it, cemented together,
makes the form of an house; so does it in this spiritual building, called a
house: 1. Pet. 2. 5. And that we are united unto Christ, and made one with him
it is manifest.

Go to the Scripture and see how a By many evident notes there be many which
show themselves in man's judgment, to be of the invisible Church of God amongst
us.
people are inuisibly the Church of God, and secondly how visiblie.

The form of the invisible Church is the union betwixt God and man, and one
with another, which is, first, by the spirit, by which invisible hand, God
immediately takes us by the heart, and says, he will be our God, 1. Ioh. 4.
13. Ezech. 36. 27. Ephesians. 2. 22. and 4. 4. 1. Cor. 12. 13. Galat. 4. 6. Romans 8.
9. 2. By faith in Jesus Christ, by which invisible hand, as many of us as be
regenerated, do take hold upon the promise of the Spirit (Galath. 3. 14.) and
of Christ (Ephesians. 3. 17.) believing that we are his people, and he our God. For
if we be in Christ, and he in us, we have union with the Father, Ephesians. 4. 6.
Ioh. 17. 21. and with the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 13. 13. and 6. 19. Romans 8. 9.
Thus God and man are invisibly made one, and united. 3. One with another; and
that is, 1. As they be all knit to the head by faith, and the Spirit, 2. As
they take hold one of another by love, and are bound together, Colos. 3. 4.
Ioh. 13. 35. Thus is the visible Church knit; and such as God has given his
Spirit unto (having true faith and love) are the matter of the invisible
Church, and the union by the Spirit, faith, and love, is the invisible form.

Now even as the invisible form is made, so answerablie the visible form
arises by such things, as be proportionable thereunto.

God begins (Ioh. 15. 16) both the Whence the visible form and constitution
arises.
invisible (as is declared) and also ye visible, and that is thus. As God
inwardly begins by the holy Ghost, so first outwardly by his word, which
is the only first visible note and testimony from Go gives his word.
God, by which he makes a people his people (Psalm. 147. 19. Romans 3. 1. 2. Ioh.
17. 6.) It is his visible hand stretched out, to win and subdue people unto
him (Romans 1. 16. Matthew. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 16. hence it is called the sword of
ye Spirit, by which it smites, Ephesians. 6.) his messengers are his mouth, 2. Cor.
5. 20. promising to men, that God will take them to him, if they will receive
him; by this he begets us, Iam. 1. 18. and therefore called the immortal
seed, 1. Pet. 1. 23. By this he makes us alive, John. 5. 25. By this he
reconcileth us into one; and therefore is it called the word of reconciliation:
2. Cor. 5. 20.

Thus it is manifest, that where and to whomsoever God sends his word, there he
testifies his love, propounds salvation, and is desirous to make such his
people, and to plant there a Church.

The second is, by the peoples open A company of people receive it, and
profess the faith.
profession of their faith unto the doctrine, God working in them a will to
receive it, in what degree soever: 1. Cor. 15. 1. Such a people have visibly
taken hold of the word, and have (as I might say) stricken hands with God: 1.
Because as internal faith is the invisible hand; so is external profession of
that faith the visible hand, showing openly, that the word is taken hold off,
and so a covenant made between God and them. 2. Because the Lords messengers
the Apostles (who in these things erred not) did take outward profession of
faith for faith, and so added Baptism, the Lords seal of forgiveness (Acts
2. 38.) of new birth, (Col. 2. 11, 12. 1. Cor. 6. 11.) and of salvation (Tit.
3. 5.) thereunto, Act. 8. 12. 13. 37. 38. which they would not have done, had
they not been directed by the holy Ghost, to take the outward profession of
faith, for a striking of hands as it were with God, and couenanting with him,
howsoever it was in hypocrisy: for man sees not the heart, neither did they
stay to see their lives reformed, but only exhorted to amendment; they
outwardly professing amendment, were not rejected: Act. 2. 38. Matthew. 3. 6. 3.
The Lord to such promises his mercy, even for receiving the word from one, as
Gods Minister: Mat. 10. 40, 41. and he promises life to such as openly
confess him: verse. 32.

The third is, the holy Sacrament of The Sacraments seal it, and unites them
together.
the Lords Supper; which as it is a seal of our faith, so is it a testimony
of that visible communion of love, also of one member with another: 1. Cor. 10.
16, 17. And thus is the vnin made visibly, by which God and the people are one:
and such are a true Church gathered by the word, and united in communion by the
Sacraments visibly, by which they be the visible Israelites, as truly as the
Jews outwardly were the seed of Abraham, though not the Israel of God, which
are only elect: neither does corruptions Note this.
hinder them to be the true visible Church before men, no more then the
continual corruptions of the heart, does make an elect people before God, no
true invisible members: for why should outward offenses before men make open
professors of the faith, more to be false Christians to men, then sins of the
elect make them false before God? The one is a true invisible Church before
God, (though many of them deserve correction for their evils, which God
punishes in them, using his discipline, spiritual or outward crosses, but not
making the^ no true church:) so is such a people openly professing, and thus
visibly conjoined, a true Church (though many therein be very bad, we are to
be corrected, but not to be condemned as a false Church) being thus truly
co^stituted both formatter and form.

Now such congregations have we, so professing Jesus Christ, (as is before
said) and no otherwise, and also to which God has given his own holy word and
Sacraments, and moved the hearts of many of the people effectually; and all of
them outwardly to receive both the one and the other: and therefore are truly
constituted, as that which follows in the end of this treatise will more at
large show. It is therefore very untrue to say, that every of our congregations
The true visible, and conuertible properties of a true Church, what they be,
which also we have. The first property.
is a false Church, having false matter and form.

Lastly, the visible properties are not false: for the true visible properties
(which necessarily arise from the form mentioned) are these.

I. Is continuance in hearing of the doctrine of Christ received, and using of
the Sacraments and prayer: John 10. 27. Acts 2. 42. 1. Cor. 15. 1. For as
hereby the Church is begotten visibly, and conjoined, Matthew. 28. 19. so when
these do cease, and men reject them, they cease to be a true Church of God: for
the visible testimonies of Gods spiritual love tokens are taken away; and
those same has he divorced. Hence is it that all Divines in our Church, and in
all the reformed Churches in Christendom (which now are or have been) do
hold, that the true word of God preached, and true Sacraments of Christ Jesus
administered, are infallible tokens of a true Church, and are reciprocally
converted with the true Church. I do not say a word preached, nor the word
truly preached, nor the Sacraments rightly Observe well.
administered; but thus, the true Word preached, the true Sacraments
administered: for indeed to preach the true word truly, and to administer the
true Sacraments rightly, are no conuertible signs with the Church; for truly
and rightly in preaching and administration, are not of the essence of the true
word and true sacraments, but are the holy graces of the Church; graces most
necessary in delivery of the word and sacraments; yet nevertheless herein
may there be corruption: so as the true word is not truly preached, nor true
sacraments rightly administered, yet does the true word and true sacraments
remain, and are^ most certain notes of the true Church. Now this property is
a true property which we have: for neither have we, nor hold we, any other
word or sacraments, the^ those that be Christ's own only, and therein do we
continue.

II. Is the holding out of this truth The second Property.
and the sacraments, as banners displayed against the enemy: Reu. 3. 8. Whence
it is, that the Church is called the pillar and ground of truth: 1. Tim. 3.
15. And this property arises necessarily from the form, and is an essential
mark: for when men do utterly leave their open profession, and partaking
hereof, they cease to be visible members; for they have rejected the visible
marks of Gods presence and visible communion with him.

Now this mark also is in our Church: for we do hold out an open profession
of the true word, which is the word written in the holy scriptures, (not Popish
unwritten imagined verity) and also the true sacraments, and none other: and
wheresoever these two be, there are undoubted marks of a true visible Church,
though no other properties be apparent: and where these are wanting, there is
no true visible Church of God.

Thus we see how far from all truth it is, that they hold every of our
congregations to be false Churches, when it is manifest that with us, there are
particular congregations, which have true matter, true form, and true
properties, as evidently has been declared from the word, and is apparent by
our profession and practice herein.

There is a third property, which is The third Properti^.
care for the welfare of all, and every one for the whole, and each for other,
1. Cor. 12. 25. And this property arises also from the form, through the
union of all the members together, making but one body, Romans 12. 5. 1. Cor.
12. 12. which property is very necessary, both for the present welfare, and
also for continuance of the body in good estate. This care is either
corporal, for the maintenance of the body, which is showed in alms deeds,
and by which note also the Apostolical Church is set forth, Acts 2. 42. or
spiritual touching the soul, which stands in admonition and exhortation,
and so forth, to the edifying, one of another, practiced of the Thessalonians,
Epist. 1. Cap. 5. verse 11. I say, this is very necessary, for the well being
of the Church, which also we have, and If this third property were in a great
part wanting, yet might we be a true Church.
show by practice: but yet if this property were almost wholly wanting, the
Church could not therefore be judged a false Church. Is a household, having
t^^e matter and form and essential properties, a false household; because the
family cease to care, as they ought, one for another? Is a man, consisting
of true matter, form and essential properties of a man, a false man; because
through folly, or madness, or wilfulnes he neglects the welfare of his body,
or any of the members thereof? I hope no man will be so senseless to avouch
it. Why should any then condemn that congregation or Church for a false
Church, which has true matter, true form, and true essential properties of a
true church; because it wants some what, or for that it is very defective in a
thing necessary for the well being thereof?

This is an undeniable truth, that the Discipline is not of the essence of the
Church, so as yet without it, the same cannot be a true visible Church
care for the welfare of the Church, (which contains the censures also, and
the power of excommunication, termed by the name of discipline) cannot be
proved (by evidence of Gods word) to be such a property as is of the essence
of the Churches being, without which the Church must needs be a false Church:
the utmost that can be made of it is, that that Church is a defective Church, a
maimed Church, by which it is also corrupt, and may come to ruin; but that a
necessary defect, can make it either no Church, or a false Church, cannot
justly be maintained.

It is a necessary property of a man to speak, it is for his welfare to see,
to go; but yet, if he can neither see, go, nor speak; he is not therefore a
false man. This distinction of true and false, applied to our Church, is
altogether frivolous and vain: yet is it vpheld by them, as we see, against
both Scripture, reason, and common sense.

To conclude then, if a necessary property, may be in part actually wanting
to a true Church, and yet such a want not make that a false Church which
wa^teth it: then cannot the supply of it howsoever, make that a false Church.

From all that has been said, we may observe: 1. That it is an error to make
discipline so essential a property, as the Church without it, is no true, but
a false Church: 2. To make our Church a false Church, because discipline is so
exercised with us, as it is contrary to their new found popular Government.

IX. All our Ministers (say they) an IX. Error.
false Ministers.

This also is as erroneous as the former, Answer.
from whence it arises: If the Church be a false Church, the Ministers (say
they) are false Ministers: but we see that our Church is not false, and
therefore not the Ministers without exception.

They are true Ministers, that are sent of Christ, according to his ordinance
in his Church, and are not false Ministers; for it is belonging to Christ to
send Ministers, Ioh. 20. 21. Matthew. 28. 18. 19. therefore are they called
Ambassadors of Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 20.

But such Ministers have we, as is manifest by this, that they are qualified
with good gifts, they are called by the Church, and such also as do diligently
and faithfully preach, and so preach Christ, as many thereby do hear and
believe, even confirming their calling by the blessed success and effect of
their labors, Romans 10. 14. 15. 1. Corinthians. 9. 2. Conser these Scriptures with
these quoted places, 2. Cor. 3. 1. 2. 3. and 13. 3. 5.
And therefore the Apostle (that is, one sent) proves this sending by the
seal of his Ministry: and it cannot be proved, that Jesus Christ works by
false means: it is their grant in their own confession, page 31.

Private persons may convert: and therefore Objection.
conversion of souls proves not a lawful ministry.

I. The Apostle so proves himself Answer.
an Apostle: and why is it not a forcible reason for an ordinary ministry?
Neither can the device of some stand, who imagine, yt by work, (1. Cor. 9. 1.)
should be meant an outward constitution of a Church, which externally the
Apostle planted: but by work, is meant that work which the Lord wrought by
him, even their conversion from idolatry, to embrace the doctrine of the
Gospel by faith; as Interpreters expound it, and 2. Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. does
confirm the same.

II. For private men's converting, as an ordinary means to salvation, cannot
be proved by Scripture; albeit that John 4. 39. be objected; where only their
dociblenes is called believing, which was not faith indeed. But grant that she
did convert; it must surely be held extraordinary, that one private, and that
also a woman preaching Christ, must win men to God: must it therefore hence be
concluded, that Ministers in England do convert as private persons
extraordinarily? Seeing now there is, first, no extraordinary calling: and
secondly, the Ministers are in their office as public persons; therefore they
do convert as ordinary public persons. To open the cause more plainly, that
all men may see what Ministers are the true Ministers of Christ, and of the
Church, the spouse of Christ: and what Christ does, and the Church, in a
Ministers ordination, I will show them: 1. What the Lord himself does, wherein
the Church intermedleth not. 2. When the Church takes at the Lord, and what
she does. 3. How a Minister may approve himself to God and to the Church. 4.
What the Lord again does to confirm him. 5. The communion between the Pastor
and the flock; how he is to behave himself toward them, and how they ought
to carry themselves toward him.

I. The Lord only ordains offices He only ordeineth offices.
in his Church, 1. Cor. 12. 5. 28. diversity of administrations, (...): but
one Lord has ordained them, (...). This the Church cannot do: Jesus Christ
both Lord and King does it; the Husband, and not the wife.

II. The Lord, as he ordains offices, He only distinguishes offices.
so he distinguishes them one from another, 1. Cor. 12. 14. 27. 28. This
disposition is of the Lord, that one may not intrude into the office of
another, but every one in office attend and wait upon his own office, Romans
12. 6. 7. 8.

III. The Lord only prescribes the He only describes the duties in these
offices.
duties to be done in every distinct office, as he only ordains the offices
and seuereth them himself: therefore is it, that as there be diverse members,
Romans 12. 4. 5. so are there diversity of gifts for such diversity of offices,
Romans 12. 6. 1. Cor. 12. 4. 6. 8. 9. 10. 11.

IV. The Lord as he ordains functions, He only qualifieth men thereto:
distinctions of them, and several duties in them, so he only qualifieth men
to these functions, and none can do this also but God alone, 1. Cor. 12. 4. 5.
11. the same Lord, one and the self same 6. 1. 2. (...). 7.
spirit. Therefore is it that God says, he will and does send them his
Prophets; and wills them to pray him to send forth laborers, Matthew. 9. And
this is, when 1. he furnishes them with fit gifts (...) gifts.
to discharge the function, as aptnes to teach in a Pastor; wisdom to rule in
a ^^m. 3. 24.
Governor, etc. The truth of this is plain: 1. Because Christ says, as his
father sent him, so does he his Disciples, Ioh. 20. 21. Now he was furnished
with gifts fit for his office. 2. As the Lord did with rearing up his
Tabernacle, so will he do with such as build his Church, Exodus 31. 1. 2. 3.
The example of his dealing with his Apostles, whom he endued with gifts, and
would not let them go forth before, Mat. 10. 1. Luke 24. 45. 49. Act. 1. 4. 8.
4. The description set down to try ordinary officers by (1. Timoth. 3. Titus
1. 7. 8. 9.) does show that God will send men answerable thereto.

II. He bestows with his gifts holy ^^th graces.
graces: 1. A godly desire to enter into the Ministry, only to do the office
of a Minister, 1. Tim. 3. 1. 2. In the execution of the function (besides
knowledge) he moves his Minister to have compassion to a poor sinner (as
Christ had, Matthew. 9. 36. Esa. 61. 1. 2. 3.) to have true love to the godly,
(as Christ also had, Luke 13. 34.) and to have true zeal of Gods glory,
because of the obstinate, claiming boldly Gods right of them, and freely
denouncing judgments against their obstinacy, as Christ did, Matthew. 23. 23.
and the Apostle, Act. 8. verse. 21. 22.

III. He works holiness in them, to lead a blameless life to adorn their
profession and ministry as they ought, Tit. 2. 7. And this is the calling of
God; Note these things well, you miserable blind Leaders of the blind.
and this is the internal, material and substantial part and matter of a
true Minister, sent of Jesus Christ; which calling in some degree and measure
must be had, before any man can truly say, that the holy Ghost moves him to
this calling, to be a Minister of Christ to his Church.

The Church must separate whom only What the Church is to do.
the holy Ghost calls, Act. 13. 2. and therefore by the book of Ordination is
a question to be asked of the party to be admitted, touching his inward
grace; and also examination appointed for trial of his outward gifts.

Therefore here come in the actions of the Church, which are in comparison of
the former only circumstantiall and formal: Circumstantiall, by electing such
and such persons to this or that office, in this or that place: formal, when
she ordains one according to the rule of the word and manner of ordination
there set down.

Here note, that the Lord does make Ministers, either extraordinarily by his
immediate calling, as Apostles were, or by an extraordinatie instinct of his
Spirit, as Philip became an Evangelist, and this without the Churches
approbatio^. But the Church cannot make a Minister lawfully without Gods
sending; that is, without his measure of gifts for the Ministry. This is to
be taken notice of, that we may understand how much more the calling of a
true Minister depends upon God, then upon the Church: which Churches calling is
yet necessary to the outward and ordinary making of a Minister: which stands
in three things: The Church is to observe three things in the calling of
Ministers.


I. The ground, which is, to admit of such an one only, as God has appointed,
as nie as possibly may be, and the Church able to discern. For albeit the
Church has not to do in the Lords former actions; yet God has to do in the
Churches always; who by his word and Spirit (if she will follow the same)
points them to such a one, as he has called; neither ought the Church to
admit of any, but such as are indeed so qualified: 1. Because Ministers are If
Governors Ecclesiastical would take heed hereto, they should have less
sin, Patrons should not sacrilegiously choose blind Guids, nor the people be
miserably sterued by the^. 1. Tim. 5. 21. 22.
Christ's Ambassadors, and not the Churches, 2. Cor. 5. 20. 2. The Church is to
pray to Christ to send Ministers, Mat. 9. Now he himself sends none, but such
as he qualifieth, Ioh. 20. 21. 22. 3. The Lord commands such to be made, 2.
Timoth. 2. 2. and 1. Tim. 5. 21. 22. Lastly, thus did the Church in the
election of Matthias, Act. 1. 23. 24. If any be admitted of the Church, and not
first called of God, he is the Churches Minister, and not Christ's. Christ's
Minister is as a perfect child in the womb, every way having Prou. 29. 18.
his measure of perfection, wanting only time of birth to be brought forth by
the Church. If the Church bring forth untimely fruit, it is her sin, and a
punishment of God for sin unto the Congregation. Amos 8. 11.

II. Is the rule according to which the Church must make a Minister, and this
is the Lords word, from which she may not swerue: for as earthly Kings do make
their laws both for making officers, and guiding them in office; even so
Christ our King, has ordained rules which must be kept, Iam. 4. 12. Phil. 3.
16. 1. Cor. 4. 6. 17.

III. The actions of the Church in ^he Church to do three ^^ings in the ^aking
of a Minister.
Ordination, do stand in three things also.

I. After some be presented, Act. 1. 23. is in examination, yt is, a trial of
the parties, whether called of God or no; and this is very necessary, lest the
Church admit of an unworthy man; and because it is the only means to find out
a man's worthiness; and lastly, because it is imposed upon the Church, and none
allowed to be admitted before, neither by Gods word, 1. Tim. 3. 10. and 5. 21.
22. nor yet by our law. See the book of Ordination.

This examination stands in two things: 1. In the examination of gifts, for the
place to which he is to be admitted. 2. Of his graces. His gifts must be
examined according to those things which the place (wherein he must be)
requires, and God has commanded.

Now the office or place of the Ministry, In what things the Ministry does
consist.
consists principally in the preaching of the Word, administration of the
Sacraments, and prayer. The first is to be preferred in the first place: 1.
Because it was the first imposed, Matthew. 10. and 28. 19. 2. It is that which is
most necessary to beget a people, Iam. 1. 18. 3. To preserve them converted,
without which they perish, Prou. 29. 18. and therefore the Apostle used
preaching to the converted, Act. 20. 7. and it is for them, 1. Cor. 14. 22. and
not to be despised, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. And the ancient Church of the Jews had
preaching daily in their Synagogues, with the word read, Act. 15. 21. and 13.
15. 16. N^hem. 8. 8. 4. It is of the three only mentioned, in setting forth a
Minister, 1. Tim. 3. Titus 1. 9. 2. Tim. 2. 24. 5. Because it is most urged by
the Apostle to be performed, 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 6. For that the Scripture
specially allows such, and so qualified, 2. Tim. 2. 2. 1. Tim. 3. 2. Titus 1.
9. 1. Tim. 5. 21. 22. And if Deacons must have the mysteries of faith; yea if
al must be able to be Teachers in some measure, Hebr. 5. 12. much more such as
are Pastors.

His graces must be examined: 1. His desire and inward motion, by asking him of
the persuasion he has to that place by Gods Spirit. 2. His knowledge zeal
and utterance, by the exercise of his gifts. 3. His honest conversation, from
sufficient testimonies, reporting well of him, upon their own knowledge. 1.
Tim. 3. 7.

II. In Election, whereby one is of I. Electi^^.
the Church (I mean by the Guides and Governors thereof) separated and chosen
from amongst others being found fit, Act. 13. 1. 2. and 14. 23.

III. After examination, and the party That is requi^^d in a holy ^^mission.
chosen out and approved, then follows admission, 1. Tim. 3. 10. and herein
are three things required: 1. That it be done in the face of the Congregation,
after the Apostles practice, Leuit. 8. 2. etc. Act. 14. 23. and 1. 23. and 6.
2. That it be done in a holy manner, they calling upon the name of the Lord,
Act. 13. 3. 3. That it be co^summate with imposition of hands, an Apostolical
perpetual practice, Act. 6. 6. 1. Tim. 4. 14.

The Minister thus admitted, as a Pastor Wherein the Minister is to approve
himself unto the people.
over a flock, he is to approve himself to the Church in a holy manner: and
this stands in three things:

I. In preaching and holding the pattern Titus 2. 7. 8.
of wholesome doctrine, dividing the word of truth aright, 1. Tim. 2. 15. for
sound and wholesome doctrine is a touchstone of a true Minister, 1. Tim. 4. 6.
Deuteronomy. 13. 1. Ierem. 23. 22. So Christ proves John Baptists Ministry to be
of God, by that which he taught, Luke 20. and so did Christ himself by the
true word he taught, as it is witnessed in John the Evangelist.

II. In faithfulness, 1. Corin. 4. 1. 2. which stands in two things: 1. In
revealing the whole truth of God according to his measure of knowledge, Act.
20. 26. in the manner also as it ought, for we are to speak the word, as the
word of God, as Peter exhorts. 2. In diligent performance of his function,
Ierem. 48. 10. 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 1. Pet. 5. 2.

III. In adorning his calling by an honest conversation, Tit. 2. 7. 8. Psalm.
50. 16. 17.

The Minister thus going on in his When God does approve effectually of the
Ministers made by the Church, as his Ministers.
place; the Lord comes again and assisteth this Teacher with his holy
Spirit, to perfect up the work, making his word by him effectual in the
hearers, by binding and loosing their consciences, 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. Act. 2.
37. 47. and 13. 48. Ioh. 10. 3. By which he seals up to the Minister his
calling, 2. Cor. 3. 1. 2. 4. He gives testimony that he approves the
Churches choice in ordaining him, who^ he had chosen and called. From this
work of the LORD follow two things:

I. That such an one may challenge the What the communion is between the
Pastor and the flock.
people to be his flock and claim his authority: 1. Cor. 4. 15. Because God
by working their conversion has showed to them the seal of his office: 1.
Cor. 9. 1. 2.

II. The people must acknowledge duties due unto him as a Pastor, which stand
in six things.

1. In acknowledging him their Pastor, and God to be with him, Matthew. 28. 20.
and in him, 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25.

2. In loving him singularly for his works sake: 1. These. 5. 13.

3. In reuerencing him: 1. Tim. 5. 17.

4. In obeying him: Heb. 13. 17.

5. In praying for him: Deuteronomy. 33. 11. Romans 15. 30. Collos. 4. 2. 3. 2. These. 3.
2.

6. In maintaining him sufficiently, as shall be both necessary, and also
befitting his place and charge, 1. Cor. 9. 7. 14. Gal. 6. 6. Prou. 3. 9.

And this is the mutual communion (...) the Pastor and his flock, by which
^^ey be tied one to another, and thus or^^ined and conjoined.

Now from all this arises the evident ^oofe of that which has been said, that
^^e are true Ministers of Christ in the ^^rch of England standing over the
^^emblies, first, for that they be called (...) Christ, having both good gifts
and ^^ces.

II. They have an outward calling of (...) Church, being examined, found fit,
and so are elect and ordained.

III. They preach the true doctrine of Christ, administer his Sacraments,
perform their office faithfully, and live, conscionablie, and Christ does
assist such graciously in co^uerting souls, and the people do approve of
them.

They are not ordained by the Church, Objection.
but by Bishops, and so have a false entrance.

I. As if there were any Ministers recorded Answer.
in the Scriptures to have been ordained by any other, but by Ecclesiastical
persons, Apostles, Evangelists and Bishops, which are called Elders.

II. Suppose a false entrance, (which can never be proved) does that make
false Ministers? Marriage is Gods ordinance, the holy entrance thereunto is
appointed. Yet if the parties enter not after a lawful manner, in some
respect, yet being married, they are lawful man and wife: Then as a faulty
entrance to marriage disanulleth not two conjoined, to be lawful man and wife;
no more does a faulty entrance into the Ministry disanull a Minister so
entering, for being a lawful Pastor: for why cannot one faulty entrance
disanull one ordinance of God, as well as another? and if the one stand: why
may not also the other?

The place in Ioh. 10. which they allege The places in Ioh. 10. answered.
so commonly against us, makes much for us. The properties of a true
shepherd there set down, do agree well with Ministers in the Church of
England.

I. He enters in by the door: Ioh. 10. 2. so do they; which the former words
(touching the sending of such Ministers by Christ) do prove.

II. To him the porter (that is, Gods Spirit) opens the hearts of the
hearers: so does he to them, for many are converted by them.

III. He calls his own sheep by their names, verse 3. So do these who
abide by their flock, and do both know them, and are also well known unto them.

IV. He leads them out, verse. 3. so do these instruct them, and lead them
forward in sound doctrine.

V. He goes before them, verse. 4. so do these in godly life and
conversation. Therefore for them to call those Ministers thieves and robbers,
as they do, have to answer for it, and must give an account unto God therefore.
These have not the properties of thieves nor robbers: for thieves, verse 10.
come to steal, kill and to destroy, but these do not so; it is manifest both
before God and man: They seek the flock, and not the fleece; They make alive
(through the Spirit working by their Ministry) and do not kill: They save
many, and do not work the destruction of any.

But whilst they condemn our Ministers Their Leaders are no lawful Ministers.
for false Ministers, they forget to justify the lawfulnes of their own
Ministers, who are made Ministers by such as are no Ministers; contrary to the
constant practice of the Church of God, from the days of Adam hitherto.

I. God almighty was the first preacher: Genesis 2. 3. He ordained Adam, and
till the law, did God raise up extraordinary Teachers.

II. Under the law, Moses a Teacher made Aaron; and the Priests consecrated
Priests ever after: yea if man did meddle, to stir up a Prophet, it was by a
Prophet, as Elias did Elisha: Apostles were made by Christ Jesus the chief
Pastor, and without these were none made: Act. 14. 23. Neither can we read
that ever: the people had such a liberty given; but this was committed to
other officers: Tit. 1. 6. Neither ever can it be sound in all the new
Testament, that the people attempted any such thing; but waited till the
Apostles came to ordain Ministers for them: Act. 14. 23.

This custom did continue, in the times following in all the Churches of
Christendom, as Ecclesiastical writers do make mention, and so through pure
and impure Churches: yea God in using instruments, some what extraordinarily,
in the last reformation of his Church, would not break this order; but he
chose men, who were Bishops, ordained even in the Popish Church (I speak of
the Church of England, whereof the controversy is) so that they might ordain
fit persons afterward. This order our Church still keeps. How is it then
that these dare break the order of God continued five thousand and six
hundredth years, and yet they must be true Ministers, and we false? When we
are made by Ecclesiastical persons, who are Ministers, a constant practice of
the Church; and they make Ministers by men that are no Ministers: a new device.

X. Our worship (say they) is a false X. Error.
worship.

That which is added unto the end of Answer.
this treatise, does make answer to this assertion. Yet somewhat I will say
against this also.

I. We worship no false God.

II. We do worship the true God with no false worship, for the word preached,
is the true word; the Sacracraments are true Sacraments; the prayers we do
pray, (whether conceived or set and stinted) are such as may be warranted by
the word, and agreeable to the prescript form of prayer taught by our Savior
Christ: if any thing else be prescribed besides the word read, and preached,
besides the Sacraments, and prayer, the same is not imposed, as service unto
God, neither do any of us by them worship God, neither teach men so to do:
but only in spirit and in truth. And therefore that place of Matthew. 15. 9. and
other Scriptures to that purpose are falsely alleged against us. But grant
there were some corruptions added, which men should put merit and holiness in,
to worship God by, which yet can never be proved, being utterly false: is
therefore all the worship false? Is good meat, mixed with ill meat, false
meat? or good, corrupted? This false distinction of true and false against us,
will not stand.

Now for that in the positions annexed to the end hereof, there is a defense of
set prayer: I will only set down the practice See Morneus on the Mass.
of the Church of God, before us in the law; and show you the order of their
set service. The order was this: Set and stinted service amongst the Jews.


I. A general confession, which was an accustomed practice, as is manifest,
Esra. 9. 5. 6. and 10. 1. Leuit. 16. 5. 16. and this the Jews writings do
witness, and it was called the confession of the mouth, or a confession of words.

II. After this general confession, other prayers were used.

III. Certain Psalms and thanksgiving did follow, which were ^ung clean
through, as their prescript form amongst them, ascribed to Ezra, does show.

IV. Then were the Scriptures read, the law divided into one and fifty
sections, called sedarim or Parisiioth: and the Prophets into as many, called
Haphtaroth, that is, lessons or openings of the book, that the Scripture might
be read through every year: Deuteronomy. 31. 9. 14. Nehe. 8. 1. and 13. 1. Luke 4. 16.
18. Act. 13. 15. and 15. 21.

V. With this reading were there also expositions, (as we call them Sermons)
and interpretatio^s of the Scriptures, that the people might understand, what
was read unto them; and this was also, as usual as reading in every Synagogue,
upon every Sabbath day: Act. 15. 21. Nehem. 8. 8. Luke 24. 17. 21. 22. 31.
Act. 13. 15. 16.

VI. In the end they had a general prayer for the Church and State, and a
blessing pronounced upon them, when they departed: Number. 6. 23. 27. This was
done in every of their Synagogues, which were as our parish Churches, whereunto
the people resorted, and out of which they were for offenses excommunicated,
Ioh. 9. 34. and 12. 42. As the cities were more or less populous, so was the
number of these. In Jerusalem there were 500. as the Rabbines do reckon, and
they were called, Bethi Medrashoth, houses for congregations, Sermons and
expositions. And thus we see the order of their service.

Now let us see how the Apostles and The holy service and worship of God in the
open assembly in the Apostles time.
holy men of God did practice as the times would serve: for though the order of
ordinary service be not set down in the new Testament, evidently together,
yet there be places to confirm the establishing of such things: And as for
the order it should be as may best serve to edification, as the Apostle says,
Let al things be done decently and in order: 1. Cor. 14. 40. Of these things
we do read, that they all met together in one place: 1. Cor. 11. 17. and 14.
23. And that upon the first day of the week, Acts 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 1. That
they used prayer more special and more general, Act. 20. 36. 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2.
That they had the word read, Col. 4. 16. That it was preached, Act. 20. 7. 1.
Cor. 14. 23. 31. And men commanded not to despise it: 1. These. 5. 20. They
received also the Sacrament: Act. 20. 7. and 1. Cor. 11. 18. 20. Sung Psalms:
Matthew. 26. 30. Ephesians. 5. 18. 19. Col. 3. and made collections and gave alines
to the poor: 1. Cor. 16. 2. Act. 2. 42. The well ordering whereof was
established by the holy Apostles, 1. Cor. 11. 34. and the keeping of order
herein is that which the Apostle so much rejoices in, to see and behold it in
the Philippians: Phil. 1. 2. 5. and not discipline, which cannot properly be
called order, but is a preservative of order, and appointed for the holy
preservation of order in these things, and the religious use of the same
observed in every person orderly.

To see the practice of the Church afterward herein; read Justinius Martyr
Apology the second, where all these things are fully set down touching the
public service of God, at that time. Thus then we see concerning the
substantial order of our service, it has approbation both before, under the
Law, and after, in the time also of the Apostles and Apostolical men.

Diverse other opinions they hold, Diverse other opinions of the Separatours.
which I will also set down, to acquaint you therewith that do desire to see
more fully their way; but not to spend time in confutation of them, because
that these former errors being confuted whereupon the other arise; they also
are confuted, and also for that the absurdity and falsehood of them, is even
sufficient to make them to be rejected, as soon as they be read: and they
be these:

I. That our congregations, as they stand, are all and every of them incapable
before God to choose them Ministers, though they desire the means of salvation.
Thus say they against us, and yet if only two or three of them be gathered
together, they have the whole power of Christ, not only to give their consent,
but even to make a Minister.

This would they prove by long consequences, and far fetched conclusio^s,
from unsound premises, and far from plain evidence of the Scripture, or any
practice of the Church of God these thousands of years.

II. That God in our best assemblies is worshipped after a false manner. This
can they not prove, and that which is added to the end hereof confuteth the
same.

III. That Baptism is not administered into the faith of Christ simply, but
into the faith of Bishops, and Church of England. All their divinity cannot
maintain this; and they herein do exceedingly abuse the Church of God with us.

IV. That our faith and repentance is a false faith, and a false repentance.
And yet (Reader) the properties of Saints, set out by Master Amsworth, their
Doctor, may be found amongst us, being in number twenty, and that by visible
tokens.

V. That our Ministers converting men to God here, do it not as Pastors, but
as Teachers. A distinction without a distinction, as between the beard of
Aaron, and Aarons beard.

VI. That our Church stands in an adulterous estate. A strange assertion;
what Idol worship we?

VII. That they cannot say certainly, M. Smith.
by any warrant of Gods word, that any of us, has either faith or fear of
God. These men herein have lost the feeling of former grace, and all true
charity.

VII. That none of our Ministers may be heard. And this they hold so great a
sin, as they censure men for it: and if they will needs hear, they
excommunicate such therefore.

But such a practice is far from the warrant of the Word; and where no law
is, there is no transgression. Who ever heard, that, to hear the word of God
should be a sin, and to deserve censure and excommunication? especially for
hearing the word of Christ, which has made alive the dead, Ioh. 5. verse. 25.
and by which Christ Jesus has wrought effectually to the conversion of many;
yea even their conversion, if yet they be converted. No word of God inhibiteth
from hearing such as preach Christ Jesus, and his truth, to which Christ
gives witness, by his blessing. In the Scripture it is set out as a mark of
Gods child to hear the word, Ioh. 10. 27. and not a mark of one deserving
excommunication, and to be delivered up to the devil. In the Word we are
exhorted to hear the word, to seek it, Ioh. 6. 27. and men pronounced blessed
that hear it, Luke 11. 28. Reave. 1. 3. yea, no inhibiting by Christ for any to
hear the Scribes and Pharisees, who perverted the Scripture, Matthew. 23. yea
the Apostle reioiced that Christ (that is, the truth) was preached, though it
was done of contention, and with an intent to increase his afflictions. Now if
he rejoiced at their preaching, such as it was; surely he held not the people
worthy to be censured that heard such as so preached. The Apostle warns to
avoid an obstinate Heretic; therefore except we be Heretics and obstinate
Heretics, we must be heard. If this their speech, opinions, and evils be
observed; we may better maintain, that none of us should We are not to hear
them.
hear any of them, as Iere. 23. 16. They speak (as Brownists) their own
fantasies and visions of their own heart, and not truly out of the mouth of
the Lord: and herein they go on obstinately and will not hear the Charmer,
charm he never so wisely.

Besides, how can their Teachers be preferred so to be heard as Ministers of
Christ before our Ministers? God has given no seal to them of their
ministry, they convert none to God; but pervert simple honest hearts already
converted, and do steal away our labors in the Lord. When the Lord Jesus
has abundantly blessed his people here in converting them by our ministry;
yet are some so foolish amongst us, as they will neither be moved by Scripture,
reason, their own feeling, nor Gods visible testimony by his blessing upon
many, to yield to the truth, which we bring, if it cross their course any
way. But in prejudice of our Ministry, in hatred of our course, and too great
a conceited love to their own devised way, they contemn and reject the
judgment of both learned and godly men amongst us, as either blind, not having
their eyes as yet opened, or put out again by the god of this world, if so be
a man know Why they dare condemn men so much that know their way, and set
themselves against them.
their way and will not join himself with them. For they do take for
granted, that he which knows their way must needs know it for the way of
the Lord; upon which false imagination, they do presumptuously censure, and
dare boldly condemn men, which know the same, and either do speak or write
against it; as men should, or else yield themselves, and give the cause.

IX. That it is not lawful to join in prayer with any of us: that is, though
they will pray for us, yet will they neither join us with them in their
prayers, nor approve of our praying for them. What can they do more against,
or less unto, a Jew, Turk, and Papist? for these will they only pray for, and
no more do they for us. If they hold any of us the children of God, then our
Savior has taught them to join us with them in prayer, and to say Our Father
with us.

X. That Ministers may not celebrate marriage, nor bury the dead. This they
say, but without Scripture.

XI. That Ministers should only live of voluntary contribution, and not
either of set stipends or tithes.

This is against the wisdom of God, who allowed a settled maintenance under the
Law: and there is nothing against it in the Gospel.

XII. That our Churches ought to be raced down, and not to be employed to the
true worship of God.

The maine reason for this assertion, is by making equal Paganism, and
Antichristianisme, which being taken for granted, they do urge the Scriptures
in the old Testament, uttered against the Heathen Temples, to race down our
Churches. But there is great difference between Antichristianisme, and
Paganism; for this was the worshipping of a false god, and without any
profession of the true God: but the other worship the true God, and hold many
truths of God. Paganism was wholly without the Church, but Antichrist sits in
the Church of God, so as the Church of God had a part in those things, when
they were built, to keep possession for Note this.
the Lord in his creatures, which they did abuse to idolatry and false
worship; and therefore there is more cause to purge them, holding the right
which we have by the godly, before us in the^, then to race them, because the
wicked did abuse them. But grant there be no difference, yet it must be proved
that our Churches were built by Antichrist, before we pull them down: else all
the Scriptures alleged are but misapplied.

And thus much of this, and all other their Brownisticall opinions, which I
here have set down by themselves, to acquaint thee with them, that so thou
may discern and judge of yt their way by it self, and the difference
between it, and all other Churches, which I wish thee to discern wisely, and
judge of rightly. If they tell thee of a false Constitution, and false
Ministers: will them to prove first their confused popular Government, and
their own false ordination of Ministers. If they tell thee of corruptions,
urge for that M. Whites testimony against them herein, and also the witness of
George Johnson, who herein If thou can possibly, get his book.
is to be believed as a full Jury against his brother, against the Elders, and
against other of them: for this man continuing one in that way, yet lays to
their charge such unnaturalness, such pride, cruelty, partial dealing such
deceitful shiftings; such monstrous uncleannesses; such obstinacy and wilful
vnreformablenesse; such scorning of those that reprove them, laughing at, and
reuiling the party offended; such Popelike censuring and excommunicating, as,
(observing all the particulars which he specifieth) look what they seem to
condemn amongst us, as insupportable, they immeasurablie therein exceed amongst
themselves. Oh my friend, will thou so abhor thine own mother, for her wa^ts
and failings, as thou can be content to embrace voluntarily a stranger, so
full of such transgressions? unnatural and foolish: strait hearted are such,
and not men of a tender conscience. If they do propound unto thee, the state
and government of reformed Churches, tell them it is not their cause, and
nothing at all to make good their way, from which they differ essentially: else
did Barrow very ill to make a mock of their manner of governing. Let them, as
men separated from all Churches, show their private differences from the same,
and let them not object unto thee Corruptions, nor the constitution of the
reformed Churches, as if that were their sole cause, as by their seven
questions propounded, they make men believe: but will them to manage their own
standing so from all Churches, else cease to hear them, and be not indirectly
^ead at unawares into their by-path and singular course from al other. See, I
pray thee and consider.

Before I conclude, one thing let me Johnson against Jacob.
put you in mind of: when they say, we are no true Christians, and that we are
a false Church: they use to say, in such a standing in such a state, as we are
thus, and so. Where note well, that only respectively we are so, but not
otherwise. By which course of respects, no calling might be good, no man
honest, no^ Church true, no person a Christian, none faithful nor in the way
of life. But who do thus, (having love and charity in them) consider men so,
only seeing the evils, and condemning men for corruptions; but not any way
approving of their graces? This is not after God, who, when respectively he
considered of a mi^^ company, for some good, does call all good, Numb. 23. 21.
for some Saints, call all Saints, 1. Cor. 1. 1. But these men do condemn very
godly men for some respect, externally considered, upon them not in them, nor
from them. If we do consider godly men, and true Churches respectively, we are
bound by Gods example, by the practice of the Apostle, and by the Christian
rule of charity, more readily to mark the good in the^, to commend it, and
approve them; the^ to see things amiss only to condemn^ them, and all the
goodness in them. Such as have charity without suspicion, and true unfeigned
love with commiseration, cannot deal so unchristianly: The misery of these
times.
but these graces are far to seek now: therefore do men on all hands judge
of every thing peruersely: this will they allow, and that again will they not
like, humorously. That which may be justly well done without offense, there at
will other be unjustly offended. Things doubtful men take sinisterly: yea
they dare censure what they never saw. Condemn as ill, what they knew not:
suspect where they have no cause: gainsay, where there ought to be no
contradiction: partial to themselves, and rigorous toward other: Authority
will rule thus and so: subjects will obey with exceptions: judgment from the
word is not so much a Guide, as will and affection in too many are made
Masters. These be ill days and contentious, and times unhappy, in which men
either will do, that they will do of themselves, and dream of an ipse dixit:
or else fall to humor parties (not simply receiving a love of the truth for
the trueths sake) and so come to partakings, which does but increase
contention, till all come to confusion, except the Lord in his great mercy
prevent the same, and that he do turn us all into a more moderate course, and
there keep us: which I beseech him to grant for his Fatherly mercy sake.
Amen.

Godly peace is a good possession: and the way measured by the rule of the
golden mean, is the peaceable path: even that I do wish: which herein I aim
at: and desire all to seek after. Even so, and no more: Wisdom with
charity; patience with contentation; honor with humility will, by Gods help,
bring us all to unity.

FINIS.
CERTAIN POSITIONS HELD AND maintained by some godly Mini sters of the Gospel
against those of the Separation, and namely, against Barrow and Greenwood.
THat the Church of England is Our Congregations are true Churches: for
a true Church of Christ, and such a one as from which whosoever wittingly and
continually separateth himself, cutteth himself off from Christ, we doubt not
but the indifferent Reader may be persuaded by these reasons following:

First, we enjoy and join together in 1 We have and join together in the use
of the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments.
the use of those outward means, which God in his word has ordained, for the
gathering of an invisible Church. For proof whereof, we allege that the
means which we use and enjoy have been effectual to the unfeigned conversion
of many: as may appear both by the other fruits of faith that may be found
amongst us, and by the martyrdom which sundry have endured, that were members
of our Church, and had no other means of conversion, then such as we have.
Yea even these men who judge so hardly of us now, are able to witness with us
in this case, that if there be any true faith and sanctification in them
(though it be much increased (as they think) since they left us) yet it was
begun and bred in our assemblies.

Secondly, if these places of the holy Scripture, Mat. 28. 18. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11.
14. be well examined, it will be found that the means which Christ ordained
for the gathering of an invisible Church, are the very same which we enjoy,
even the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments. That
which Henry Barrow says against us in this point, page 160. of his Discovery,
viz. that there is not any one thing among us either in order or
administration, according to Christ's Testament, shall be hereafter disproued,
when we shall come to justify our ministry of the Word and Sacraments,
against their arguments or objections whatsoever.

Now that this is a good and an infallible Which is an infallible note of a
true Church.
argument of a true Church appears: 1. Because there can no people be named
that having these means, may yet (by the word) be euicted not to have been the
true Church. The Papists indeed brag of these means, but without cause: for
the doctrine of faith is not preached amongst them, but oppugned, and
consequently they cannot have the true Sacraments which are seals of that
righteousness which is by faith. 2. The Scripture every where speaks of the
preaching of the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments, as of
privileges peculiar unto ye church of God Romans 3. 1. 2. and 9. 1. Psalm. 147.
19. 20.
. So while the Jews only were the Church, these privileges were restrained
to them, and never made common to the Gentiles, till (the partition wall being
broken down) they also were incorporated to the Church of God Mat. 10. 5. 6.
Act. 11. 19. and 13. 46. 47.
. So the Prophet says, that this should be the reason whereby the Gentiles
were moved to join themselves unto the true Church, because there (and no
where else) the ministry of ye word was to be found Esaias 2. 2. 3.
.

Secondly, our whole Church makes 2 We make profession of the true faith.
profession of the true faith. The confession of our Church, together with the
Apology thereof, and those articles of religion which were agreed upon in the
Convocation house in the year of our Lord 1562. (whereunto also every Minister
in the land is by law bound to subscribe, so far forth as they concern the
doctrine of faith and of the Sacraments) do prove this evidently: for how
shall we better judge of the faith which our Church professes then by such
evidences? Many Papists and Atheists are in our land (we grant) and many
ignorant and wicked men besides, who make not so clear and holy a profession
of the true faith as they should; but that our Church accounts any one for
her child or member, who either denies Christ, or professes any other way to
salvation, then faith which works by love, or who does not profess this
faith in some measure, that do we confidently deny. Now this reason also has
force sufficient to prove us the Which is enough to prove a true Church.
true Church. For as true faith in Christ is that which gives the life and
being to such as are effectually called, and so become members of the invisible
and elect Church; so the profession of true faith is that which gives life and
being unto a visible Church. Upon this profession we find many have been
incorporated into the visible Church, and admitted to the privileges thereof,
even by the Apostles themselves, (Act. 8. 37. 38. and 16. 31. 32. and 8. 12.)
Yea even Simon Magus though he neither had faith nor the spirit of God, yet
because he made profession of faith, was judged a member of the visible Church,
and baptized (Act. 8. 13.) So the Church of Pergamus though it had grosser
defects and corruptions in it then we have any, yet because it kept the name of
Christ and denied not his faith, was still called the Church of God, Revel. 2.
12. 15.

The description of a Church which they give in the 67. page of their
collection of letters and conferences, viz. that it is a company of faithful
people that truly worship Christ and readily obey him; is utterly untrue, if
it be understood (as needs it must) of the visible Church. For if every one
that ye Church may account a visible member be truly faithful; how is our
Savior to be understood when he co^pareth the Church, or the ministry
thereof to a draw net, which being cast into the sea, gathers as well that
which must be cast away, as good fish? (Matthew. 13. 47. 48.) and to a field,
wherein the devil does as busily sow tares, as the Son of man does good
wheat? (Matthew. 13. 37. 39.) How shall that difference stand which the
Scripture makes (1. Sam. 16. 7. Act. 15. 7. 8.) betwixt the Lords judgment
and the judgment of man, if men may not account any to be members of the
Church by their outward appearance and profession, unless they know them to
have true faith, which thing the Lords eye only is able to discern?

Thirdly, we hold and teach, and maintain 3 We hold and teach all truths
fundamental.
against all Heretics and adversaries, every part and article of Gods holy
truth, which is fundamental, and such as without the knowledge and believing
whereof there is no salvation. Our Confessions, Catechismes, Articles of
religion published and approved of in our Church, may persuade all indifferent
men of this. Yet was not H. Barrow ashamed to write in the tenth page of his
Discovery; That all the laws of God, both of the first and second Table are
here broken, and rejected both of the Ecclesiastical and Civil estate, and of
every particular person in both; all things being innouated in both, according
to the lusts and pleasures of men, the law and word of God being quite
rejected and cast aside. And in the 212. page of their refutation of Master
Gyfford, they have these words: We hold that you have poisoned all the
fountains of sincere doctrine, and perverted the whole Testament, and turned
away the practice thereof, by your damnable false Expositions, yea that you
teach not one point sincerely. And in the 162. page of his Discovery, They are
made so contrary one A lying Spirit.
unto another, as it is an impossible thing to find two of them of one mind,
yea or any one of them constant in that he affirms: they know not the
doctrines even of the beginnings of Christ. Add hereunto Henry Barrows words
in the 12. and 13. pages of their collections of letters and conferences.

We will not give any answer to these speeches, but only desire the Christian
Reader to consider, whether ever Gods Reader consider well, and the Lord give
thee understanding to discern of spirits.
Spirit taught any to write so slanderously, not only against a whole nation
(the conversion whereof they pretend to seek) but against the blessed truth of
God: and how unlikely it is, that they should be in the right way, whose chief
Leaders were guided by such a spirit; that they should be the Lords building,
whose first founders and master builders had either so small skill, or so bad a
conscience. Do we not hold all the same books of Canonical Scripture which
they themselves hold? Do we not reject out of the Canon of the Scripture, all
which themselves account Apocryphal? Have they any translation of holy
Scriptures besides ours? Do they themselves believe or reach otherwise in the
article of the holy Trinity, of justification, or predestination then we do?
Has every member of their assemblies received that spirit, whereby they are
led into all truth, as H. Barrow, (page 167. of his Discovery) affirms? and
is there not any one amongst us, that has not quite rejected the whole word of
God? not any one that knows the doctrines even of the beginnings of Christ?
We know no better way to convince them in this, then by appealing thus unto
their own conscience, which we are sure will take our part against them.

Now this reason also is strong to Which none can do but the true Church.
prove us a true Church: for although the bare letter of the Scripture may be
found amongst the Jews, and Papists, and other Heretics; yet was there never
any other people that held and maintained the true sense of the Scripture in
all points fundamental, but only the Church of God; whereunto only this title
belongs, to be the pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. Wherein we
desire Note this.
the Reader to consider, that a people may be the true Church, though they
know not, nor hold not every truth contained in holy Scripture, but contrarily
hold many errors repugnant to the Scriptures: yet has H. Barrow affirmed (in
the 167. page of his Discovery) Then is not he, nor his followers, the true
Church and people of God, for they maintain errors amongst themselves
obstinately, and do grossly speak untruths against us, now Gods Spirit is not
lying. 1. Ioh.
that, to the people of God and every one of them, God has given his holy
sanctifying Spirit, to open unto them, and to lead them into all truth.
Whereby it is evident, that he would have none to be accounted the people and
Church of God, who either know not, or practice not every truth contained in
the Scriptures. In which opinion, see (I pray you) how many gross and
dangerous errors are contained. First, that to every inferior member in the
Church, there is as much revealed, as to the Pastors and chief members;
whereas the Apostle affirms (Romans 12. 3. Ephesians. 4. 7. 16. Colos. 2. 19.) that
the holy Ghost is given to every member of the body of Christ, not equally,
but proportionally, as the place which it occupies in the body does require.
Secondly, that the promise mentioned, Ioh. 16. 13. was made to every member of
the Church, which in the last words of ye verse appears plainly, to be
peculiar to the Apostles. Thirdly, that the Church cannot err, and so neither
were the Corinthians rightly called the Church of God, when they judged
corruptly of fornication, and of the resurrection; neither they of Pergamus,
when the doctrine of Baalam was maintained amongst them; neither was Paul nor
the rest of the Apostles true members of the Church, who (though in the
exercise of their Apostolical function, they could not err) yet knew but in
part, and in many things were subject to error: 1. Cor. 13. 9. Another strange
opinion is maintained in the 156. and 157. pages of their Discovery, viz. That
every truth contained An error full gross, with slanders and lies.
in the Scripture is fundamental. For although we affirm not (as he there
slandereth us) that some part of the Scripture is more holy, more authentical,
or more true then other; yet doubt we not to say, that some parts are of more
use and more necessary for men to know, then other some. Else why does the
holy Ghost give special commendation to some parts more then he does to
other, as a Song of Songs? Why Cant. 1. 1. 2. Tim. 2. 11. Titus 3. 8.
does he use special Art in setting down some parts rather then in other? as
Psalm. 111. and 112. and 119? Why does he (as it were) make proclamations, and
solemn Oyesses before some, and not before other? as Mark. 4. 3. 1. Tim. 1.
15. and 4. 9. And although we do not hold (as they falseslie charge us Still
false accusations.
in the forenamed pages of their Discovery) that some parts of the holy
Scripture are of small moment, superficial, needless, and of no necessity,
and such as may be altered and violated without any prejudice and danger to the
soul; and much less that a man, who has obstinately continued in the
transgression of some parts, and openly taught the same unto others, may be
undoubtedly saved, though he die without repentance. But on the contrary we
believe and teach, that there is no part of holy Scripture, which every
Christian is not necessarily bound to seek, and desire the knowledge of, so
far forth as in him lies; yet dare we not call every truth fundamental;
that is, such as if it be not known and obeyed, the whole religion and faith
of the Church must needs fall to the ground. For we make no question, but that
both the penitent Thief that was crucified with Christ, and the Eunuch, even
then, when he was baptized by Philip, were in the state of salvation, though
they could not choose but be ignorant of many truths in religion.

The only fundamental truth in religion is this: That Jesus Christ the son
of God, who took our nature of the Virgin Mary, is our only and all
sufficient Savior.

For first, they that receive this truth are the people of God and in the state
of salvation; they that receive it not, cannot possibly be saved, Matthew. 16.
18. Mark. 16. 16. 1. Ioh. 4. 2. Coll. 2. 7. Secondly, there is no other point
of religion necessary otherwise, then as it tends necessarily to the
bringing us unto, or confirming us in the assurance of this one truth, Ioh.
20. 31. Ephesians. 2. 20. Hebr. 13. 8. 1. Cor. 2. 2. And therefore when the Apostle
says (Ephe. 2. 19. 21.) that the Church is built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles; his meaning is, not to call every thing contained in
their writings the foundation of the Church, but that this foundation which we
have spoken of is there to be found, and has witness from thence; and that
all the writings and doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets do bend unto, stay,
and rest upon this one truth, as the walls in the building do upon the chief
corner stone.

Lastly, all the known Churches in the All reformed Churches give testimony
unto us.
world acknowledge our Church for their sister; and give unto us the right hand
of fellowship. This H. Barrow and John Greenwood deny in the 14. page of their
Refutation: but they name not any one Church that makes question of us. Indeed
some of them affirm that we want some parts of the discipline, which we have
not yet (as they think) so thoroughly received, as we should have done: but
whether we were the true Church or no, never was there yet any reformed Church
that made question. Yet are they well acquainted, by our books, by the report
of such as have traveled from hence, and sundry other ways, with our
doctrine, and Liturgi^^ Neither do they only forbear to show their dislike to
us, or are content to preserve society with us (which happily through humane
infirmity they might do upon sinister respects, though they approved not of
us in their judgment) but they do also hold and teach, that what people
soever has so much as we have, is the true Church, though their wants be as
great, as ours are judged to be.

Now when we allege for our selves Which strongly argues that we be the true
Church.
the testimony of the Churches, we do not thereby (as these men fondly
conclude in that 14. page of their Refutation) make the words of men the
foundation of our Church, nor do we use this as our only or chief defense
whereby we seek to approve our selves, either unto the Lord, or to the
consciences of his people: but such an argument we hold this to be, as in the
due place, has much force in it, and as God himself has sanctified for a
principal help in the deciding of controversies in this kind. The Apostles
use to allege it as a matter of comfort to the^ whom they write unto, that the
Churches of Christ do salute the^, (Romans 16. 16. 1. Pet. 5. 13.) that they were
famous, and had the testimony and good report of the Churches (Romans 16. 19. 1.
These. 1. 7. 8. 3. Ioh. 6. 2. Cor. 8. 18. 19. 23. 24.) S. Paul, though he
received not his calling either from men, or by men (Gal. 1. 1.) nor was any
whit inferior to the chief Apostles; (2. Cor. 11. 5.) yet does he allege
for the credit of his ministry, that three chief Apostles approved him, and
gave to him the right hand of fellowshippe: (Gal. 2. 9.) yea he sought also
their approbation, and feared that without it, he should have run in vain
(Gal. 2. 2.) And which is yet more, he seeks to win commendation and
credit even to those orders, which he by his Apostolical authority might
have established, by the example and judgment of other Churches. (1. Cor. 7.
17. and 11. 15. and 14. 33. and 16. 1.) If these Churches, that were planted by
the Apostles themselves, might take comfort in the good opinion that other
Churches had of them, may not we much more? If the ministry of Paul and the
orders he prescribed to the Church received further credit with the people of
God, by the approbation of other Churches; shall not the testimony of all
other reformed Churches give some credit to the ministry and orders of the
Church now?

The doctrine and word of God, though (to speak properly) it receives
authority only from it self, and the Spirit of God; yet has it ever been the
rather received by men, for the testimony that the Church has given unto it.
So our Savior says, that Wisdom is justified of her children. (Mat. 11.
19.) And although he affirms that he receives not the record of man, (Ioh.
5. 34.) yet in respect of the salvation and good of men, he judged it
necessary that John Baptist should give testimony unto him. (Ioh. 1. 7. 8.
and 5. 33. 34.) Now if this one thing furthered the damnation of the
unbelieving Jews, yt they would not hear nor receive Christ, though
testimony were given unto him, by one who^ they knew to be sent of God; shall
not this Great pride is it and obstinacy, to d^spise the voice of all the
Churches of God in the world.
further the condemnation of these men, that they refuse to hear and receive
us, though we be commended to them by the testimony of so many Churches? Some
cases there are wherein we are commanded to seek for the judgment of other
Churches, and to account it as the judgment of God. Else, why did the Church
at Antioch in a question that could not be debated at home, seek to the Church
at Jerusalem for help; specially seeing they had two such excellent men with
them, as Paul and Barnabas, whose judgment they might safely have trusted
unto? (Acts 15. 2.) Says our Savior to any particular congregation of the
faithful in our own land, that Whatsoever they bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven? (Mat. 18. 18.) and says he it not also to the Churches of other
nations? Shall he be accounted as a Heathen or Publicane that will not regard
the judgment and censure of that particular congregation whereof he is a
member; and shall not they much more Matthew. 18. 17. Those of the separation to
be held of us as Heathen and Publicans.
be so accounted, that despise the judgment of all the Churches? Must the
spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets amongst whom they live? (1.
Cor. 14. 32.) and must not both people and Prophets of a particular Church be
subject to the judgment of all the Prophets and Churches in the world?

The ability to try and discern the spirits and doctrines of such Teachers
as arise in the Church, is such a gift, as the true Church never wanted, (1.
Ioh. 4. 1. Reu. 2. 2.) neither could it be the pillar and ground of truth, (1.
Tim. 2. 15.) if it should be ignorant of a truth so necessary to the salvation
of men as this is, viz. What people is to be accounted the true Church of God.
If God has given his Church power to judge and pronounce of a particular man,
that he is in the state of salvation, and that so infallibly, that he has
promised to ratify in heaven the judgment which the Church in this case shall
give upon earth, (Mat. 18. 18.) has he not much more made his Church able to
discern and pronounce of a congregation or people, that it is a true visible
Church, which is a matter of no such difficulty as the other?

So that (to conclude) though these men make so light account of the judgment
and testimony of other Churches, as if the word of God had come out from them,
or unto them only (1. Cor. 14. 36.) or, as if they themselves were better able
to judge of us, then all the godly learned in the world besides; yet do we
take much comfort and assurance from hence that we are the true Church of God.
The first objection against the whole body of our Church, that it was not
rightly constituted.


The first thing they object against the whole body of our Church, and of our
parish assemblies is this: That it was not gathered by such means as God in
his word has ordained and sanctisted for the gathering of his Church. For
(faith H. Barrow in ye 10. page of his discovery) all this people were in one
day with the blast of Queen Elizabeth's trumpet, of ignorant Papists, and
gross idolaters made faithful Christians, and true professors. And in the 3.
page of that Epistle to the Reader, which they have prefixed to their
refutation of M. Gyfford, they have these words: Where such profane multitudes
were all immediately from public idolatry, at one instant received, or rather
compelled to be members of this Church in some parish or other, without any due
calling to the faith, by the preaching of the Gospel going before, or orderly
joining together in the faith, there being no voluntary or particular
confession of their own faith and duties made or required of any: who can say
that these Churches were ever rightly gathered or built according to ye rules
of Christ's Testament?

To all that they thus object against But this cannot warrant their separation.
our first gathering, this answer we give:

First, that we might lawfully be accounted a true Church, though it could
Because the knowledge of this is not necessarily required to be stood upon.
not appear that we were at the first rightly gathered. For even as the
Disciples might be well assured of Christ's bodily presence amongst them, when
they saw and felt him (Ioh. 20. 19. 28.) though they could not have discerned
which way or how he could possibly come in; so may we esteem them a true
Church, of whose present profession and faith we are well assured; though we
cannot see, by what means they were first gathered. Else may we still doubt
whither Melchisedech, and the families of Job, or Cornelius were true Churches
and members of the Church; because we cannot find how they were first gathered
and converted, neither indeed can we see by what commandment in Gods word
we are required to examine how they were gathered and made a Church: of whom
we are now certainly persuaded that they were a Church. Nay we find good
warrant in the Word to the contrary. For we read of many, who (having by that
they heard and saw, perceived evidently that a people was the Church of God)
did join themselves willingly unto them, without inquiring how they were
gathered and converted: as Abraham to Melchisedech, Rahab to Israel, the Eunuch
to Philip, ye Iaylor to Paul and Silas.

Secondly, we might be rightly gathered Secondly, because me^ may be brought
otherwise to the outward profession, then by the means which are most ordinary.
to the society and fellowship of the visible Church, by other means the^ by
the preaching of the Gospel: for proof whereof we allege, first their own
judgment and opinion, (which, how unsound soever it be, yet has it force
enough to stop their mouths) namely, that men may be won to the true faith
of Christ, not only extraordinarily, but even ordinarily also by other means,
then the public and ministerial preaching of the Word. For if several
members may be converted without this mean, may they not much rather without
it be gathered together and made an assembly? Secondly, admit there were no
other mean whereby a man could be soundly converted, but only preaching, yet
it is evident, that by some other means men may lawfully be brought to an
outward profession, and so be made a visible Church. Many in the days of
Christ believed, (that is, were prepared to hear and believe) and did also so
follow him and profess themselves his Disciples, that no man could without
sin have denied them to be members of the visible Church, who yet were not
all drawn by his word, but some by his miracles (Ioh. 2. 23. 25) some by the
report they heard of him (Ioh. 4. 39): some by the desire they had to be fed
by him (Ioh. 6. 24. 26.) Since Kings became nursing Fathers, and Queens
nursing Mothers to the Church, their laws have been means to bring men to the
outward society of the Church; and the parable proves, that men may be
compelled to come (Luke 14. 23.) Now as many hearing of the same of John
Baptist and of Christ, came to them and so were converted by their preaching;
so many that for fear of law were first brought to the Church, and outward
profession of the truth, have bin and are effectually converted by the
ministry of the word. Thirdly, Our Church was gathered by such means as God
appointed.


Thirdly, our Church was gathered by the preaching of the word. For the first
conversion of our land to the faith of Christ, was by preaching of the Gospel,
as is manifest by the testimony of the best approved histories. Since that
time many have from age to age been called by the same means: as by the
ministry of Master Wickliffe, and such like. For proof whereof this may
serve, that in most of the Kings days there have been some which have endured
martyrdom for the truth. These secret ones did gather other secretly, so long
as persecution continued; and showed themselves openly, when liberty was
granted. In the days of King Edward great numbers were by preaching so
effectually called, that in Queen Mary's reign many simple men and women were
able to manifest the truth against the learned Papists, and to seal it with
their blood. Besides them, there were sundry secret congregatio^s in many
parts of the land, all the days of Queen Mary, which gladly received and
openly professed the Gospel, offered to them by public authority at her
Majesty's entrance to the Crown. If it be said, that they ceased Objection.
to be the true Churches of Christ, because they joined themselves and became
one body with such as were newly come (and that not of conscience but for
fear only) from idolatry: We Answer.
answer, that they rather that had fallen from the Gospel in Queen Mary's
days, were moved by Queen Elizabeth's proclamation to join themselves unto
them that had stood faithfully all that while. Neither is it truly said of
Another untruth of theirs
them, that in one day by the blast of her Majesty's trumpet at the beginning
of her reign, all sorts of men were drawn to a profession of the Gospel,
without any further means used. For before any were compelled to the
profession of the Gospel, which was not til ye Midsommer after her Majesty
came to the Crown, there were not only many Commissioners sent into all the
parts of the land, that might deface all the monuments of Idolatry, but sundry
Preachers also (that in the days of Queen Mary had received approbation, and
exercised their ministry in some of the best Reformed Churches beyond the
seas) did by their doctrine both keep them (whom they found converted) in the
profession of the truth, and called many others: Of which number we may reckon
Master Knox, Lever, Gilbie, Sampson, Whittingha^, Goodman and sundry others.
And there are daily many added to the Church by no other means then by the
ministry of the word preached. So that if this were a good reason against
many other particular members or whole assemblies, yet can it not justify a
separation from all, seeing we have many that by the preaching of the Word
were converted and gathered.

Fourthly, this being proved, that Fourthly Though the means used for the
gathering of our Church, had not been sufficient for the first calling of a
people to the says, yet were they sufficient to recall the people that had
fallen from the faith, which formerly they professed.
there was a true Church in this land before her Majesty's reign; the question
must not be whether the means she used were the right means, for the first
calling and converting a people to the faith; but whether she took not a
lawful course for the recalling and reuniting of her subjects unto those true
professors, whose fellowshippe they had forsaken. This was the course that
Iehosaphat took, (2. Chron. 17. 7. 9.) who (to gather the Church who was
decayed) sent Preachers into sundry parts of his Kingdom, and appointed Noble
men to accompany and assist them, by countenancing their ministry, and
compelling the people to hear them. This course also did Josiah take, who
having abolished idolatry, compelled all his subjects to the service of the
true God, (2. Chron. 34. 33.) Thus did Asa use his authority in commanding
Judah to seek the Lord, and to do according to the law and the commandment,
(2. Chron. 14. 4.) and threatening them with death that should refuse, (2. Chro.
15. 13) So did Ezechias by his proclamation, bring diverse of Israel to
Jerusalem, who were before separated from the Church of God, (2. Chron. 30. 11,
12.)

Fifthly, where as they say, that at the Fifthly, though the solemn covenant to
renounce idolatry, and to cleave to the truth, be not absolutely necessary:
yet was that also required and performed in our first gathering.
beginning of her Majesty's reign, the people should have been required by
solemn oath and covenant to renounce idolatry, and profess faith and
obedience to the Gospel, after the example of Asaes reformation: We answer:
first, that if it had been absolutely necessary to the being of a Church, that
there should be such a solemn couenanting by oath to renounce idolatry, this
course should have been taken in that reformation, which Iehosaphat and Josiah
made as well as in that of Asa. Secondly, even as where that oath was taken, ye
people were Gods true Church before the time of that oath and covenant: so may
our people be. For the covenant made and the oath taken by Asa, we read, was
made and taken in the 15. year of his reign (2. Chron. 15. 10. 12.) when yet
his subjects were the true Church of God long before: 2. Chr. 14. 2. 4. 2.
Chron. 15. 17. and 15. 9. Thirdly, there be diverse Congregations in our land,
which in the beginning of her Majesty's days, and since, have publicly
professed their repentance for their former idolatry, and promised to embrace
and obey the truth, as it is presently established, as in Couentry,
Northampton, and some other places. Yea, we doubt not to affirm, that the
whole land in the Parliament held in the first year of her Majesty's reign,
did enter into a solemn covenant with the Lord, for renouncing of popery, and
receiving the Gospel.

The second thing they object against The second objection against the whole
body of our Church is, that it uses a worship of God that is polluted, with
the writings of men, as read stinted prayers, etc.
the whole body of our Assemblies, is this: That they communicate together in a
false and idolatrous outward worship of God, which is polluted with the
writings of men, viz. with read stinted prayers, homilies, catechismes, and
such like; which in the 244. page of their refutation, they call the smoke of
the bottomless pit.

To this second objection we give this answer:

First, it is evident by the word, that But this reason cannot warrant their
separation, for First, stinted and set form of words is lawful in ordinary
prayer.
the Church has used, and might lawfully use in prayer and Gods worship, a
stinted and set form of words. For we find a form of blessing the people
prescribed to the Priests, (Number. 6. 23, 24.) a form of confession to be used
at the bringing of the first fruits to the Temple, prescribed to the people,
(Deuteronomy. 26. 3. 15.) a Psalm appointed for the Priests and Levites to use every
morning, (Psalm. 22. 1. as Tremel. interprets, and the title of the Psalm.
shows) another to be used every Sabbath day, (Psalm. 92.) So in the
thanksgiving used at the bringing home of the Arc, unto the place prepared for
it by David, the Church tied themselves to the very words of the 105. and 96.
Psalms, (as in 1. Chro. 16. 8. 36.) Neither would our Savior have said to his
Disciples, (Luke 11. 2.) When you pray, say thus, Our Father which art in
(...), if it had not been lawful for us in making our petitions unto God, to
use those very words which are there prescribed. Now to that they object
against Objection.
this, that we never read the Apostles did use this prescript form of words
in prayer: We answer, that it is Answer.
absurd to reason negatiuely from examples of men, against that which God has
in his word so expressly either commanded or permitted: for we may as well
reason thus: We do not read that the Apostles or the Church in their time did
baptize infants, therefore infants were not then baptized: or thus; We do not
read that the Apostles did pray either before or after they preached,
therefore they did not: or thu^; Saint Paul did not marie nor take maintenance
from the Corinthians, therefore he might not lawfully have done it. The most
Psalms that David made, as they were committed to the Churchmusitions, that in
singing them, were

(...)
