Man's Felicity and Misery: Which is, a good Wife and a bad: or the best and the
worst, discoursed in a Dialogue between Edmund and David.
To the tune of I have for all good wives a song.


Edmund. KInd Cousen David prithee stay.
Good news to thee I will bewray,
Since last I saw thee I am married,
Now things with me are better carried,
I dare say that which few men can,
I have the best Wife that ever had man.

David. I am right joyful Cousen Ned,
To hear that thou so well art sped:
As thou may thy good fortune bless,
I may curse my unhappiness;
My torments none on earth can scan,
I have the worst Wife that ever had man.

Edmund. My wife for beauty bears the name.
From all in the town from whence she came,
For shape she might a Lady be,
And so all say that do her see:
Her middle I can easily span,
O she is the best Wife that ever had man.

David. My wife so l^thsome is to view,
She every morning makes me spew,
For person she is scarce good enough
To try, maids have ye auy Kitchin-stuffe:
She (...) Dripping pan,
O she is the worst Wife that ever had man.

Edmund. My wife is affable and meek,
To please my fancy she does seek.
My humor she will never th'wart,
But d^t my will with all her heart,
We use no words but Ned and Nan,
She is the best Wife that ever had man.

David. My wise is obstinate and froward,
She Is sullen, peevish, and untoward;
She Is glad at heart when she can find,
Occasion to molest my mind:
She Will I have her will do what I can,
O she is the worst Wife that ever had man.

Edmund. My wife is careful of her charge,
She never romes abroad at large,
Her business she will never neglect,
But brings all things to good effect:
She Is to her Babes a Pelican,
O she is the best Wife that ever had man.

David. My wife among her Gossips does gad,
As though nothing to do she had,
The children go undressed all day,
Unless I put on their array:
I ^ot faint to make what shift I can,
For she is the worst wife that ever had man.

Edmund. My wife's (...) constan chastity,
Like Lucrece or Penelope:
She is so wary in her carriage,
That if a kiss would wrong her marriage,
No one should get that favor than,
For she is the best Wife that ever had man.

David. My wife is full of merry tricks,
She has been naught with five or six,
If she can get me out o'th door,
Ere I return she will play the whore,
She Will say though I cannot others can,
O she is the worst Wife that ever had man.

The second part,
To the same tune.


Edmund. My wife so cleanely is and neat,
She adds a goodness to my meat,
I eat when I no stomach have,
Because it is done as I do crave,
In sickness she is my Physician,
For she is the best Wife that ever had man.

David. My wife is such a beastly Slut,
Unless it be an Egg or a Nut,
I in the house dare nothing eat,
For fear there is poison in the meat,
The Dogs do lick both Dish and Pan,
O she is the worst Wife, etc.

Edmund. My wife will wear no yellow hose,
No wench can make her swell ith'nose,
She knows that I to her am just,
And in my faith she puts her trust;
She Will not be vexed say what I can,
For she is the best, etc.

David. If I upon a woman look,
My wife will swear upon a book,
That she is certainly a Whore,
Though I never saw the Woman before,
She Will claw her eyes out if she can,
O she is the worst, etc.

Edmund. My wife will never follow me,
Go where I will, at home stays she,
Though I from morn till night do rome,
She smiling bids me welcome home.
This makes me haste home to my Nan,
For she is the best, etc.

David. If I unto the Alehouse go,
To drink a Judge of beer or so,
Though never so fast I thither hye,
My wife is there as soon as I:
At me and my friends she will curse and ban,
For she is the worst, etc.

Edmund. If any friends come home to me,
My wife gives entertainment free,
But out oth' doors she will not stir
Unless I go along with her,
She scrapes and saues what ere she can,
O she is the best, etc.

David. My wife will at the Alehouse sit,
And waste away both money and wit,
Nay rather then she will liquor lacks,
She Will sell the smock from off her back,
She Will steal from me all that she can,
O she is the worst

Edmund. Kind Cosen David I am very sorry,
To hear thee tell so sad a story,
Marriage and hanging now I see,
Go as they say by destiny
I would thou could say as I can,
I have the best wife, etc.

David. I thank you Cosen for your good will,
Long may your blessing continue still,
My cross I must with patience bear,
Till God or the Devil end my care,
And thus I end as I began,
I have the worst Wife that ever had man.

Author. You wives who have heard this discourse
Now show who is better and who is worse.
The best will freely buy this Song,
The worst will show she has a tongue.
The head's soon broken that is scald,
And Iades will kick if they be galled.

FINIS.
M. P.

Printed at London for Francis Grove.


