THE NIGHTINGALE WARBLING forth her own disaster; OR The rape of Philomela.

Newly written in English verse, By MARTIN PARKER,

LONDON, Printed by G.P. for William Cook, and are to be sold at his shop
near Furnevals June gate in Holbourne. 1632,

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Henry Parker, Lord Morley and Mount Eagle, Baron of
Ric, etc.
My Lord:
YOu may (I confess) accuse me of petulancy and exceeding presumption, in that
I far unworthy and altogether unknown to your honor, should thus dare to
attempt the Dedication of this my unpolisht piece to one so eminent in judgment
as your excellent Self, yet when I contemplate your virtues (whereof humility
is chief) I am imboldned (in hope of your Honorable pardon) to present this
Embrion of my weak brain to your judicious view: desiring your Lordship to
show your self (as you hitherto have bin) the Pattern and Patron of courtesy
in accepting and remitting my book and my boldness: the ancient Philosophers
did decipher a true Noble man by four excellent qualities which are these:
First, A hauty courage in time of Martial exercise. Secondly, A heart to
judge. Thirdly, A hand to ^eward: and Fourthly, Clemency to p^rdon. I knowing
your noble mind to be amply replete with all these v^rtuous indowments, what
wonder i^ it that I have thus adventured the Poem, for the excellency of the
history (I confess) did deserve a more skillfull penman, being a Tragedy so
unparaleld, that I wonder why none of our temporary Laureats have undertaken it
before: but as I do rejoice to be advanced to the first place in this work,
so do I more abundantly exult in that it finds so honorable a Patron My
Nightingale fearing the hissing Serpents of this envious age desires your
powerful wings to shelter her. And in lieu of your generous approbation of her
song, my Muse (by you her noble Mecaenas a^imated) shall endeavor heereaf^er
with a Posie of a sweeter odor ^o kiss the hand of your Honor. In t^^
interim 'I remain both in heart tongue and pen,

The devout adorer of your Lordships virtues. MARTIN PARKER

To the Judicious Reader, health.
I Am not ignorant (courteous Reader) of the old adage; He that seeks to please
all men, shall never finish his task; for there is no piec so accurately done,
but some (either through ignorance or envy) will epsy conceited faults in it;
let ^^pelles draw his picture with never so much art and judgment the Cobbler
will find a hole in his coat; let an Author write as learnedly as Homer, were
it possible, he shall be subject to the cavilling censure of Zoilus; no marvel
then if I the most unperfect vassal of the Muses be scoft for my endeavor,
when the best deservings Artist is not free: but my hope is that though I be
condemned by the ignorant Momus, or envious Critic, I shall be bayld by the
learned and judicious, to whom I only send my Book: for the rest, as they
cannot be barred from reading, so I will not hinder them from their own
opinions: which when they have, their gain is little, and my loss is less. If
my Nightingales song please the honest and intellectual man, she has her
wish, for she sings not to please knaves and fools: nor can they hurt her
much: unless they shoot her dead with the arrows of aspersion; but I think
none is so inhumane to hurt (much less to kill) a Nightingale, therefore she
is confident of her safety, and dares adventure into the world to warble forth
her own disaster. In her story you shall find such woeful, wonderful and
tragical discourse, that a heart of Adamant way find its invaliditie, like
unto Goats blood which has the virtue to dissolve it, when to all other
means it is impenetrable. I have endeavored (as her Secretary) to pen her
song, with as much skill as my little learning can produce, wherein if I have
pleased the fancy of the understanding Reader, I have hit the white, and gaind
the fruition of my hopes; if not, all my Poetry is quite killed in the egg.
Therefore, good Reader, for the love thou bear to the Muses, judge
charitably now that I may be animated to proceed to thy future profit and
pleasure. Which hoping thou will, do I commit thee to the tuition of thy
Maker, and rest,

Thine, if now, ever hereafter, MARTIN PARKER.

The Author to his Book, and it to him in manner of a Dialogue.
Poor harmless bird, how dare thou undertake
To leave the desert woods and fly abroad,
Among those that of thy song a scoff will make,
And poison execrate like to a toade
What ever pains thy Penman has bestowd?
One he mislikes the phrase, another will
Say this word fits not well, that verse runs ill.
What though one overweening fool may find
Some faults produced from his fond conceit?
For him I shall a thousand meet more kind
That will commend my song and give complete
Encomious to thee for thy travel great,
For thou (though no great Clerk, yet) have so penned it,
That twenty may find fault ere one can mend it.
To my friend Martin Parker on his mournful ditty, The rape of Philomel.
ITs now in fashion, he who has brought forth
With His pen an issue of his brains best worth,
Before toth' larger stage he venture it,
Will cloth't with begged or borrowed rags of wit:
Thy Nightingale needs none; yet she shall have
These fragant branches, which the Muses gave
Her from their bower, to shroud her self among,
From hissing Serpents that would spoil her song.
These will to her be a delight of choice,
But give no diapazon to her voice,
To please the modern fry of wit and fame:
That bribe their Judgments with the Authors name,
And in the title page conclude it ill,
Because it sprung from thy obscurer quill.
On these set easy thoughts, her voice she will raise
To sing this unjust rape; and thy just praise.
William Reeve.
An Encomium on the Author and his work.
IS there less pains or merit in translation,
Then of a Poem in his new creation?
Or does be less the Laurel branch deserve,
That will the subject of another serve?
No sure: the weapon by this Author used
May by another easily be abused.
He knew his own invention, matter, end,
His proper scope, whether his Muse to tend
His liberty was choice to run, his field
Was large, that he cach way himself might weild.
But thou in narrow bounds art now included,
Thy Muse being from her liberty secluded;
Captive to thy Authors humor and thy quill
Subject to his subject, method, and his will.
Carpe not then Momus at another pains,
On Naso's Poem; since he sufficient gains
Has got already, eternizing his name,
And memory still ecchoing forth his fame,
For his invention of this mournful song,
Sadly tuned forth by Philomela's tongue.
His was the plain song of this direful ditty.
The descant thine, moving each heart to pity
Sweet Philomela's rape, henceforth so long
As incest, murders, cruelty and wrong,
Revenge, and sad Eryinnys here shall dwell,
So long this story forth thy praise shall tell.
I.S.
To his ingenious friend M.P. Author of this Poem.
I Often have admired thy fluent vein,
Composing things of an inferior strain;
But neither I nor any man could look,
For such a piece from thee, as this thy book.
Were thou a scholar then 'twere no rare news,
But being none can any Reader choose
But wonder at thy smooth and haughty style?
Were I not sure thou did this work compile,
I Would not beleev't; tush, common sense does show it,
It Is wit not learning, that can make a Poet.
Proceed with boldness then, and let men see,
The Aganippean well does spring in thee.
Da. Price.
The Argument of this Poem or History.
PAndion Prince of Athens (as the Roman Poet Ovid writes) had two daughters,
the eldest called Progne, and the youngest Philomela; which Progne, being
espoused to Tereus, the young King of Thrace; lived in great tranquillity and
happiness for the space of five years; in which time Progne (more fond than
wise) desired to see her sister Philomela, and with hourly importunity filled
the ears of her husband Tereus, so that he gave his consent to fetch
Philomela, and having gotten the forced consent of her father (partly by her
own desire to see her sister) he carried her away, and in the ship began to
attempt the conquest of her virginity; whom she resists, and strives to
reclaim with forcible arguments: but landing, he took her to a Graunge house
that stood in his own Country, and there perforce both ravished and cut out her
tongue lest she should bewray his impiety; so goes home, and tells his Queen,
that her sister Philomela was dead: she grieves; but he with assimulation
pacifier her, little mistrusting any such inhumane action as he had done. But
Philomela by her self (enclosed) wrought her mind in an handkerchiefe, which
by a Gentleman that came that way by chance, she sent to the Queen her sister,
who conceald her spleen, till she found fit time of vindication: which
occasion soon offered in this manner: It was an annual custom in Thrace for
women to go strangely disguisd about the country, to celebrate the feasts of
Bacchus; in this manner went Progne to the Graunge, and fetched out her sister
Philomela, whom having brought to the Court privately, she afterward invited
her husband to a banquet, killed her young son Itis, who was about three years
of age, and dressing him for meat set it before her husband Tereus; who having
eaten it, and the impious deed detected, the Poet will have them (as unworthy
of humane shape) to be Metamorphosed into birds. Philomel into a Nightingale,
Progne to a Swallow, and Tereus to a Lapwing.

Note the moral and let the fiction pass as it is.

THE RAPE OF PHILOMELA.
When Tellus old by Hyems late oppressed,
Was pitied and rescued by Ver,
And in her gorgeous mantle was new dressed
Which Flora kindly had bestowed on her;
I that did health before all wealth prefer
Walked forth to take the benefit of the air,
Wherewith Ambrosia might not then compare.
2
And chancing to pass by a curious grove,
Which Nature artificially had made,
Excelling that wherein the Queen of love
Her wanton toys with her coy lover played,
Therein I stepped my self a while to shade
From Titans force, which then full South was got,
Reflecting rays that were exceeding hot.
3
There as I lay reposed on the ground,
Delighted with its odoriferous smell,
The heavenly Quiristers about me round,
Made music which did please my senses well:
Especially the lovely Philomel.
Upon a hawthorne bough did warbling sit,
You that will hear her song attend to it.
4
For by the figure called Prosopopeie,
I Will tell het tale as though her self did speak,
You Will pardon give, if not so well as she
I paint her story, for my braine's too weak,
For such a task, yet I the ice will break
That others of more learning may endeavor
Further to wade in this deep spacious river.
5
Then let your minds suppose that you do heart
A virgin ravished and deprived of tongue,
For so the Nightingale that sings so clear,
Was once, as Ovid long ago has sung;
You maidens, wives, and men that hear her song
Regard it well for it concerns you all,
It Is woeful, wonderful and tragical.
6
I was, says she, the daughter of a Prince
Who ruled the flourishing Athenian state,
I had a sister that before nor since
For shape and beauty hardly had a mate:
Our father had no son, so't pleased fate,
We his two daughters did support his age,
Whom he maintained in princely equipage.
7
But see the mutability o'th world
And worldly things; how apt we are to fall
From bisse to bale; we to and fro are hurled
From joy to woe, from liberty to thrall;
Most know their birth, but none know how they sha^^
Depart from hence? or where, or when, or how,
No time is ours but that which we have now.
8
My sisters beauty was by blab-tongued fame
Divulged and dispersed far and near,
The youthful King of Thrace, Tereus by name,
Though far remote did of this Phoenix hear,
And quickly left his realm and subjects dear,
To come and see whether fame ly'd, or no,
But seeing her, he said, 'twas certain so.
9
He wooed hard to have her for his mate,
And got at last her (and our fathers) love;
The nuptial rites in princely pomp and state
Were solemnized, and like it was to prove
A happy match: for either party strove,
Each other in affection to excel;
Terens loved Progne, she loved him as well.
10
In a short time after the wedding day
The Thracian King (having a care on's land)
With his fair Bride from Athens sayld away,
And soon arrived where he did command:
His dutious subjects on the shore did stand
To welcome home their King, and far fetched Queen
With all magnificence that ere was seen.
11
Five years these Princes (as they ought to do)
Did live and love with minds reciprocal,
And then fair Progne (O why did she so!)
Desired a thing which caused my downfall;
Yet 'twas her love then blame not her at all.
She did entreat her husband to fetch me,
Whom she desired ardently to see.
12
He willing to fulfill her fond desire
Hoyst sails for Athens to fetch Philomel,
Whom for my beauty all men did admire,
Coequall with my sisters truth to tell;
But young when Tereus first in liking fell
With her: when he came on fair Athens shore
And told his tale, my Father mourned sore.
13
Alas, alas, dear son in law, quoth he,
What you propound will surely be my death,
For if you take my Philomel from me,
Twill not be long ere I resign my breath,
For there is nothing that is underneath
The heavens, that I do value worth my Child;
O let me not be of her sight beguild!
14
The pearled drops fell from his aged eyes
Like rivolets, that his pale cheeks bedewd;
O Tereus mark how old Pandion cries,
This sorrow did presage what woe insewd;
Yet Tereus his petition still renewd;
Quoth he; I will as careful of her be,
As heaven I wish should have respect to me.
15
Her will I cherish like my own dear Child.
And I was overwilling to go see
My sister Progue, then the old man smild,
Sweet Girl, if thou desires to go (quoth he)
It something mitigates my grief for thee;
Farewell my joy, but till thy safe return
My hourly exercise shall be to mourn.
16
Here take her Terens, and my blessing with her,
Be careful of her if thou wish me life.
Thus went the Wolf and silly Lamb together:
I toward my sister, he toward his wife.
O now alas, my senses are at strife,
Whether I should relate his monstrous blame,
Or hold my peace; and so save manhoods shame.
17
But fith I thus have undertook the task,
I must proceed and tell the story right,
Wherein such horrid deeds I will unmaske
As may the Auditors with woe affright:
O monstrous caitiffe, armed with hellish spite!
No time before nor after ere could tell
Of any deed that thine may parallel.
18
Lucretia that Roman Lady had
Great cause of woe; yet not so great as I,
For Tarquin though his fact was worse than bad
In ravishing the flower of chastity;
He was no kin to her: but Tereus, thy
Unnatural deed, can no way be excused
For thou thy wives own sister have abused.
19
When in his ship the Fox had got the Kid,
Poor innocent, I dreading no such ill,
Against the laws of gods and men he did
Begin to tempt me to his lawless will;
But I, by virtue always tutored, still
Defied him and his impious desire,
And used these words to quench his lust-bred fire.
20
Ah brother Tereus, spring these words from jest
To try my constitution? if they do,
I pardon them: but if your foul request
Be framed in earnest; then I let you know,
You are not as you seem in the outward show;
A man I thought you were by form and statute,
But your interior parts shame humane nature.
21
Have thou me ravished from my fathers sight,
Pretending that my sister for me sent?
And seek'st thou thus to rob her of her right,
Whom once thou thoughtst Natures chief ornament?
Do think the gods would not thy will prevent?
To wrong thy wife if thou in lust do burn,
Can none but her own sister serve thy turn?
22
For shame leave off thy brutish enterprise,
And let not future times speak such a thing,
Even for thine honors sake I thee advise,
Stayne not the sacred title of a King:
Think what a scandal it to thee would bring*
Kings like the gods should practice actions just
Methinks this thought should quench thy bestial lust
23
These arguments (and many more as good)
To him (past sense) I did in vain produce,
My tongue more than my face inflamed his lust,
All pious thoughts with him were out of use:
No tears, no prayers, no reason, no excuse
Could pierce his bosom (made obdure with sin;)
He Is now more fierce than when he did begin.
24
Yet in the ship his will he could not have
Because of those which were within the same,
Whereby (poor wretch) I had good hope to save
That Jewel which he did unjustly claim:
But more and more this hellish fire did flame
Therefore another course he took in hand;
Being denied at Sea, he tried on land.
25
Charging his men upon his native soil
To land both him and me: O, is it not strange,
That men should work so many ways to spoil
Their souls, when thus from virtues path they range?
Now to be brief, he brought me to a Graunge
That stood remote from any town or place,
And there (perforce) he did my corpse embrace.
26
Which having done, I tore my amber tresses,
Railing against the Panther truculent,
And by my furious spleen the Tyrant ghesses,
Of his foul fact what would be the event;
Therefore he thought his mischief to prevent.
And cause to none I should bewray my wrong,
He drew his knife and quite cut out my tongue.
27
Thus rape was seconded by cruelty,
One vice another always does succeed
When Satan has man's heart in custody;
By heavens ordinance it is decreed
The reprobate cannot from bonds be freed,
Till the full measure of his sin runs o'r:
Vice unrepented still increases more.
28
So this fell miscreant, shame of his kind,
Having by force stolen my virginity,
Was loath to leave that instrument behind
Which to the world might blaze his villainy:
O monstrous rape, perfidious treachery!
What words shall I or any use to express
This man's (nay rather monsters) wickedness?
29
Or unto whom may I him well compare?
To The Emperor Nero surely and no other,
Who in this sacrilegious kind did dare
Incestuously to ravish his own mother,
And after killed her: thou may be his brother,
For he that his wives sister will deflower
Would use his mother so were she in's power.
30
Now what becomes of me poor Philomel,
Being left spoyld and mangled in this manner,
I by my self (alone) am left to dwell,
Where none me knows or hears of my dishonor.
Tereus goes to his Queen, and fawnes upon her,
Patiently praying her his news to brook,
For death her sister Philomel had took.
31
She shriekes and cries with lachrimable mean,
And by no means can pacified be,
Sister, says she, alas, and art thou gone?
I Will not be long before I follow thee.
Dear love, set bounds unto thy grief, quoth he,
Thou shall in me find husband, father, sister:
With that, as Judas did his Lord, he kissed her.
32
With these his subtle words of adulation,
And many fained tears to force belief,
The Queen at last left off her lamentation,
Or at the least gave limits to her grief;
Little mistrusting him her bosom thief:
O how hypocrisy can for a while
Cover men's sins, and Judgments wit beguile!
33
But such foul crimes though in dark corners done
When heaven does see fit time, shall be revealed
And open laid in the sight of the Sun,
Even when the Author thinks it is most concealed:
So I having to the just gods appealed
For justice and revenge at last did find
A means to fit the monster in his kind.
34
I with my needle showed my curious skill,
A handkerchiefe with letters plain I wrought,
Which being finished (by Jove's sacred will)
Did publish what I in my bosom thought;
A Gentleman by chance that way was brought,
He having lost his way in the dead of night
Found out this lodge, afar off seeing light.
35
Thither he rode, and at the window called
I prisoner like looked out, but could not tell
With words my mind, yet how I came in thrall.
And how abused, with signs I showed him well;
He pitying me (wretched Philomel)
The handkerchiefe wherein my mind was seen
I threw to him to carry to the Queen.
36
He faithfully delivered his charge
As did befit one whom he seemed to be;
The Queen by this did understand (at large)
My woe wrought by her husbands villainy;
Yet what she knew she covered secretly,
Until she found a time revenge to work;
O mark what plots in women's minds do lurk.
37
For such revenge (at length) she wrought indeed
As staynes her sex (as foul as be did his.)
O that I might now from my task be freed;
I mourn for all the story; chiefly this;
I coadjutor was in her amiss:
Ah now, methinkes, I hear some bashful dame
Say, Philomel, fie, hold thy peace for shame.
38
To this I answer Twere a deed unjust,
Seeing I have so lavish bin to tell
Each circumstance of Terous lawless lust,
And barbarous cruelty, both sprung from hell,
To hide my sisters fault no Philomel,
Proceed aright the second part to sing
Of thy sad song without dissembling,
39
And tell thine own blame too, as well as hers
So shall thou not of falsehood be accused;
Be bold for he or she that truth prefers,
(And loath to be by flattery abused
If thou tell true) will hold thee more excused:
Come briefly to it, or else thy long digression
Will lengthen out the list of thy transgression.
40
Then this it is; when Progne (as I said)
Well understood where I her sister was,
She studying how to have me thence convay'd;
Mark what the Destinies soon brought to pass;
It was a custom through the realm of Thrace
For women (like mad Bedlams forth to range
About the country clad in garments strange.
41
In celebration of mad Bacchus feasts
(A gesture proper to his Deity,
Whose power does metamorphose men to beasts,
When w^^ of them has got the masterie)
Among these Bachanalian ^ides went she,
I mean, my sister; through which prete^^
She came to visit me with woe perple^^.
42
She took me from that place (disconsolate)
And brought me with her privately to the Court;
Tereus (mistrusting no such divelish hate,
Nor that he was detected in such sort)
Did entertain his Queen with Princely sport,
And she for him a sumptuous feast did make:
To tell what Cares she got, my heart does ache*
43
Her own dear Son) by Tereus on her got)
Unnaturally she killed: Oh bloody beast,
Nay, worse than any beast! for they will not
Suffer their young of harm to taste the least,
This Banquet did excel Lycaons feast;
For here a Mother of her Son made meat,
Which his own Father greedily did eat.
44
Oh flinty-hearted Progne! what although
Tereus offended thee beyond compare,
Could nothing serve but to requite him so?
Had thou not in thy child the greatest share,
Which in thy body thou nine months did bear?
Yet blaming thee, I must my self condemn,
For I consented to the death of him.
45
The pretty Infant seeing her to sit
So pensively (as one deprived of joy)
He runs to her (according to his wit)
And asks the cause of her so sad annoy:
Mother (says he) am I not your best boy?
Come kiss me then; and I Will go call my Dad,
To come and play with you, and make you glad.
46
But she (not like a Woman, but a Tiger)
Did cast him from her in disdainefull wise,
Then did she take him (Oh unheard of rigor!)
And cut his head off: this could not suffice,
But of his little limbs she made mine'd pies,
Which at the banquet was the chiefest dish:
Thus cursed Tereus fed on his own flesh.
47
This barbarous action gives the world good cause
To enter into consultation just,
For surely none can tell, without great pause,
Which fact was worst: or Tereus beastly lust,
Or Pragnes monstrous murder. Sure I must
Censure her deed oth' two to be the worst,
To kill her infant whom she bare and nursed.
48
He that upon his foe would vengeance take
And in most wrathful manner wreak his spleen)
Let him a woman of his counsel make,
Their hearts most cruel are, as may be seen
By the relation of this furious Queen.
Fie, Philomel, thou will thy self abuse,
If for her sake thou all her sex accuse.
49
Tush, why should I be partial in this case,
I Will tell the truth; and yet I do not say,
Though this one woman did her sex disgrace,
That others imitate her wicked way;
And yet, alas, too many go astray
In these last times; for Infants every year,
Are by their mothers murdered (as I hear.)
50
Which makes me to take up a just complaint
Against the female sex for cruelty,
And as my own disaster I do paint,
Procured by my brothers luxury
^^en so I have, (and it is but equity)
Demonstrated, or will ere I have done,
Progne's foul crime in killing her own son.
51
Tereus having well fed, calls for young Jtis,
Dear Queen, where is my little boy, quoth he,
In whom next thee my temporal delight is?
I think he is near enough to you, quoth she,
Nearer than he is now he cannot be:
Much good may't do you Sir, for you have eat,
I tell you true, no ordinary meat.
52
With that I Philomel that stood unseene,
Behind a cloth of arras, with the head
O'th infant, given me by my sister Queen,
Stepped forth, and hearing what before she said,
Of the event I naught at all did dread,
That Tereus more might see his wretched case
I threw the head of Jtis in his face.
53
Look how a Lion, roused from his sleep,
Runs furiously against those did him wake;
So Tereus to the heart was struck so deep,
That more than terror made his joints to quakes
O wife, quoth he, what vengeance did thou take?
'Twas I offended, why did not kill me?
As for young Jtis what offense did he?
54
Was he not thine own flesh as well as mine?
How had thou then the heart to see him bleed?
My fault (I do confess) was great, but thine
As far and more from nature does exceed,
No woman ever did so vile a deed:
Oh how am I accursed of all that be,
I have devoured what was begot by me.
55
But I his guiltless death will vindicate,
On both your bodies, (monsters that you are.)
This said, he did no time procrastinate,
But drew his sword, and both our deaths did swear,
Because in the child's death we both had share.
Mine was the wrong at first, yet I confess,
I must plead guilty, though my fault was less.
56
We fled his fury, he with sword in hand,
Pursued us, armed with revenge and steel;
But heavenly powers, that had my wrongs well scanned
(Though we were worthy) would not let us feel
The stroke of death: all three from head to heel
Transformed were (if you will trust Ovids words)
From humane Creatures unto senseless Birds.
57
I Philomel (turned to a Nightingale)
Fled to the woods, and against a bryer or thorn,
I sit and warble out my mournful tale:
To sleep I always have with heed forborne,
But sweetly sing at evening, noone, and morn.
No time yields rest unto my dulcide throat,
But still I ply my lachrimable note.
58
My sister Progne metamorphos'd was
Into a Swallow (as the Poet says:)
Both of us all the Winter time do pass
Unseen of any, till Hyperious rays
Increase in hot influence, and the days
Are drawn in length by Natures annual course,
The Swallow is a sign of Summers force.
59
Upon her breast her mark of guilt she bears,
Her back, head, wings and train do mourn in fable,
No pleasant note she sings, as any hears,
But sounds forth accents fad and untunable,
Her flesh unfit to furnish any table,
And if in any's hand she chance to dye,
It Is counted ominous I know not why.
60
In sign of her unnatural cookery,
Within a smokie Chimney still she builds,
While I (with other Birds) abrod do fly,
In pleasant woods, forests, and fragrant fields:
My tune a comfort unto mankind yields.
When April comes, then Country milkmaids long
And strive to hear the Nightingales sweet song.
61
Yet still alone I love to sit and sing,
Delighted best in melancholy shade:
My Harmony does make the woods to ring:
And by some learned Clerks it has been said,
That if a snake (whereof I am afraid)
Should me devour, a Scorpions form she will take
Which to prevent, I keep my self awake.
62
Tereus was made a Lapwing, he does cry
For his son Jtis, as aloft he flies,
Which words being reverst, do signify
It Is I; who by one horrid enterprise,
Did cause such floods of mischief to arise:
My wife, her sister, and my own dear child,
I have quite overthrone, oh monster vild!
63
Upon his head a tuft of feathers grow,
A sign of Regal state, which he did wrong*
And if you mark his nature, it does show
His sordid deeds, for he delights in dung:
He has a bill exceeding sharp and long,
A figure of that knife (it seems to be)
Wherewith he did cut out the tongue of me.
64
Thus all of us were rest of humane shape,
A just reward for our inhumane deeds:
All this was first occasioned by the rape
Of Philomel: Rape further mischief breeds,
The nature of these birds who-ever reads,
Shall find so correspondent to my words,
That no vain syllable my song affords.
65
When old Pandion heard this tragic newer,
You will not marvel if I say he wept,
All transitory joys he did refuse,
And spent those hours wherein he should have slept,
In sobs and groans, which him awake still kept;
Ah miserable man, methinks I see
The character of Priam now in thee.
66
Alas, says he, you gods why are you so
Unkind, to let me live against my will?
Why am I kept more misery to know?
More, said I: no, that cannot be; yes still,
To bear the burden of ones former ill
Adds every hour more horror to the heart,
Nothing but death can case my careful smart.
67
I that within few years was so enriched,
As no Prince could be more with daughters twain,
Which at an instant both away are twitch'd
With Son in law, and grandchild; none remain:
Why then does time procrastinate my pain?
Ah Philomel, thou and the little boy;
Above the rest procure my sad annoy.
68
Wretch that I was, why did I suffer thee
To go with that capritious ravisher?
Had I at home detained thee still with me,
Thou might have bin now safe; could I prefer
The sly persuasions of a flatterer
Before my care paternall over thee:
The world may say the greatest fault's in me.
69
No father, i will excuse thee: for no harm
Thou meant'st to me, nor would have let me go,
But I (as well as Tereus) did thee charm,
With oily words: loved my sister so,
And that fond love was cause of this my woe:
Who would have thought her husband could have bin
So impious to attempt that horrid sin.
70
The aged Prince having with languishment
A little while inforcedly drawn breath,
His gray hairs were to the earth with sorrows sent,
Never went man more willing to his death;
His living virtues won a Cypress wreath:
And his true loving subjects with salt tears
VVatred his Sepulcher for many years.
71
The reason why the Poet says we three,
I, and my sister, with her husband were,
Transformed into birds, was cause that we
Were all unworthy humane shapes to bear,
As by our deeds prodigious does appear:
The moral of the story is the chief,
As for the changing forms it is past belief.
72
Yet there is no doubt but I poor Philomel,
Have nothing sung but what you may believe;
Birds seldom use any untruthes to tell,
If you will not take my warrant I shall grieve;
Whether you do or no let me perceive
That you all shun the vices mentioned in it,
Then i will rejoice because my song's in print.
FINIS.

