Good Counsel for young VVooers:
Showing the Way, the Means, and the Skill,
To woo any Woman, be she what she will:
Then all young men that are minded to woo,
Come hear this new Ballad, and buy't ere you go.
To a dainty new tune, or else it may be Sung to the tune of Pretty Bessee.


COme all you young Pupils that yet have no skill,
In wooing to get a fine Lasses good will.
you will be ruled, and take my advice,
e teach you to woo and speed in a trice,
^^u must not be daunted what ever she say,
^^e may speed to morrow that is cast off to day.
If you will woo a Wench with a black brow,
Accept of my Counsel, and I Will tell you how,
You must kiss her, and coll her until she does yield:
A faint hearted Soldier will never win field.
^ou must set her beauty at the highest rate,
and never leave wooing her early and late.
^ell her that her brow like a black Loadst^ne draws,
^hy Iron heart to her, as Iet will do strawes,
When she does conceive and perceive thy respect,
^re long thy industry shall find an effect.
Then you that will woo a wench with a black brow,
Accept of my counsel, etc.
For take this from me, a black w^nch is still proud,
and loves well to hear her praise set forth aloud,
^lthough she accuse thee of flattery of^t,
And tell thee she cannot abide to be scoft.)
Yet never leave praising her, for if thou do,
Thy speeches, thy pauies, and thy love is all lost.
T^^n if you will woo a Wench with black brow,
A^^^^^ of my Counsel, etc.
Comply with her h^^our in every thing right,
For that is the chief course that can give her delight,
If thou see her merry, then laugh sing and i^^^,
Or tell some love tales, this a maiden lik^^ (...),
And when she is sad then put ^^nger in the eye.
For wooers (like women) must often feign a cry.
Then if you will woo a wench with a black brow,
Accept of my Counsel, etc.
If great be her Portion, and thou be but poor,
Thy duty and pains must be so much the more,
Thou must vow good husbandry during thy life,
What will thou not promise to get such a wife,
Gowns, Kirtles, and toys of the fashion all new,
What though al thy words prove not afterward true.
Then i^ you will woo a Wench with a black brow,
Accept of my Counsel, etc.
If thou from her fight have been too long a^^ay
Then redeem thy negligence with longer stay,
And if she be angry be sure go not thence,
Until thou force her with thy fault to dispense,
And tell her thou will not only stay all day,
But (if she please) thou will her all night ^bey.
Then if you will woo a Wench with a black brow,
Accept of my counsel, and I Will tell you how,
You must kiss her and coll her until she do yield:
For a faint-hearted Soldier will never win field.
The second part, To the same tune.


Have her to weddings, plays, and merry meetings,
Where she may notice take of Lovers greetings,
Such ob^cts oftentimes a motive may be
To make her love the if she were a Lady,
For when a Maid see's what is done by another,
It more will persuade then advice from her Mother.
Then if you will woo a Wench with a black brow,
Accept of my counsel, and I Will tell you how,
You must kiss her and coll her, until she do yi^ld:
For a saint-hearted Soldier will never win field.
If unto a Fair thou do go far or nigh,
Although thou have other great matters to buy,
Yet when thou come home again be not thou sparing,
To say thou went only to buy her a fayring,
By this she will think thou will be a kind wretch,
That would go so far off a fayring to fetch.
Then you that will woo a Wench, etc.
If she be in presence when others are by,
Where words must be wanting there woo with thy eye,
Although it see me strange yet experience does prove,
That the eye does convey the first motion of Love,
And thou mai^t perceive by her eye whether she,
Do well correspond in affection with thee.
Then if thou will woo a Wench, etc.
When by these means (or by any of them)
Thou have got this favor of thy precious Gent,
Be careful to hold and keep what thou have got,
The Proverb says strike the Iron while it is hot,
For if thou protract and let slip thy occasion.
She Is not so soon won with a second pers^asion.
Then if thou will, etc.
Thou well may perceive by the words that are past
That I do advise thee to marry in haste.
A thing may be dashed when it comes to the push,
And one bird in hand is worth two in the bush,
One day, nay one hour, (if thou ^ike thy wife)
May make thee or mar thee all the days of thy life
Then if you will woo a Wench, etc.
Although in my counsel I let others pass,
And only have mention made of a black Less,
Yet be thy sweet heart, either black, brown or rudi
These Lessons kind Wooer are fit for the study,
Be she fair or foul, b^ she Widow or Maid,
In wooing, a man must do as I have said.
All you that will woo a VVench, etc.
And now with this counsel my ditty I Will end,
And if any Carper my skill discommend,
He Will show little wisdom my counsel to blame;
For the wisest Wooer may follow the same,
And if they will not for my part let them choose,
But once more I will them these Lines to peruse.
Then if you will woo a VVench with a black bro^
Accept of my counsel; and I Will tell you how,
You must kiss her and coll her, until she do yield,
A faint-hearted Soldier will never win field.
M. P.

FINIS.
Printed at London for F. G.


