CHRISTIAN SEE TO THY CONSCIENCE, OR A Treatise of the nature, the kinds and
manifold differences of Conscience, all very briefly, and yet more fully laid
open then hitherto, By Richard Bernard, Parson of Batcombe in Somersetshire.
Anno 1630.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Angel. 1631.

REVERENDISS. IN CHRISTO PATRI GVALTERO, prouidentia Diuina Bath. and Wellensi
Episcopo, Dioecesano suo colendissimo auspicatum aduentum, and mansionem
prosperam.
Honorande Praesul,
EX terreno hoc diuersorio ad coelestes mansiones tres huiusce Sedis Episcopos,
iure ac merito reuerendos, haud plurium annorum curriculo promouit Pater ille
coelestis. Quos omnes pro singulari suo in me amore ac humanitate, ego, prout
par fuit grato homini, summa obseruantia and obsequio colui. Illorum it aque
obitus non potui non agree, ac dolenter far. Primus horum occurrit Iacobus
Patronus meus amantissimus, ob munisicentiae laudem celebris, and a Sereniss.
R. Iacobo honoribus non vulgaribus or natus. Hic mihi author fuit, vt
relictonatali solo, transirem in has or as ad munus pastorale exercendum in ea
statione, quam sub vestro praesidio per Dei gratiam etiamnu^ obtineo. Secundus
fuit Arthurus ob vitae innocentiam, ac probitate^, ob insigne^ doctrina^, nec
non alias dignas Theologo virtutes clarisiimus. Is quanta me affabilitate,
quanta benignitate semper amplectebatur, alienum censeo a mea modestia
praedicare. Tertius, isijue nouissimus Leonardus ob grauitatem, animique
maximas dotes merito suspiciendus; erat mihi a pueritia notus. Qui, sicut etiam
maiores eius ex eodem erant oppido, quo ipsemet, oriundi: cuius etiam auia in
sacro Baptismi lauacro Susceptrix mihi contigit. Hos, inquam, tales, ac tam
illustres Praesules morte ereptos non leuiter dolui. Et sane diutius doluissem,
nisi mecum reputassem Dei Opt. Max. prouidentiam, qui post eos in coelestem
patriam reduces, dignatus fuerit te ad eiusdem honoris fastigium euectum mihi,
meisque fratribus, ac Symmystis very, piique Episcopi exemplar exhibere. Quo
nomine and tuo ad nos aduentui impense gratulati sumus, pro tantoque in nos
collato beneficio gratias immortales immortali Deo quotidie agnoscendas, and
agendas libentes profitemur. Ecquid enim optatius, aut salutarius huic Dioecesi
nostrae potuit contingere, quam Episcopus prudentissimus simul and
vigilantissimus, qui probe nouit operarios in Christi vinea desudantes
corroborare? torpentes, and somniculosos excitare, populum dissolutum in
ordinem redigere, lupos rapaces fugare, subdolas vulpeculas a Christi ouili
procul arcere, teneros agnellos lactare, palantes ouiculas in viam veritatis
reducere, in eaque retinere, and a rabiosis canibus incolumes protegere? Haec
mihi meditanti venit in mentem, si qua ratione possem pro meo modulo nostram
hanc communem laetitiam testatam reddere testimonio aliquo, eoque publico, quod
quidem tantae authoritatis atque eruditionis viro non indignum, aut ingratum
fore sperarem. Cum autem istum de Conscientia Tractatum qualemcunque ad manum
iam recens concinnatum, and absolutum haberem, fretus ea, qua erga omnes vti
soles, humanitate, ac facilitate, eo audaciae prouectus fui, vt eundem sub tui
nominis auspicio in lucem prodire, aliisque communicari curarem. Non enim
dubitandum vllo modo censui, quin dignabitur tua clementia vel minimos Cleri
tui conatus, ad pictatem promouendam and aliorum aedificationem susceptos, tuae
gratiae aura fouere, eorumque recta studia tueri authoritate tua legitim a.
Lectores non admodum iniqui opusculum hoc ad popularem captum exaratum a nobis,
animoque ac stylo simplici expressum comperient, vti spero, haud plane
infrugiferum inter aliorum etiam virorum doctorum varios Tractatus de eodem
argumento non ita pridem editos. Nihil sane, nisi animo fallor, magis
necessarium doceri, nihil ad salutem consequendam conducibilius Christianorum
animis inculcari poterit, quam Conscientiae recte formandae, and confirmandae
ratio, hoc praesertim deprauato saeculo; quo tam multi Famam, tam pauci
Conscientiam verentur: vt Plinij verbis vtar. Quo^ si meam hanc in tua bonitate
collocatam confidentiam non tibi ingratam fore intellexero, satis superque me
beabit Paternitas tua. Neque quidquam restat aliud, quod vltra vel nunc expeto,
vel in posterum expecto. Quin potius statui mecum, assiduis votis ac precibus
apud Christum Iesum communem nostrum omnium Pastorem and saluatorem contendere,
vt benedictionis sitae* affl^tu omnes tuos pios conatus foelices esse velit,
tibi, tuisque abunde omnia fausta and salutaria conferat, tuamq^e famam ac
laudem rebus laudabiliter gestis partam ad sui ipsius gloriam, tuique ipsius
sempiternam salutem perennare dignetur.

Batcomb. postrid. Call. Ian. 1630. T. Domin. ad omnia obsequia in Christo
paratiss. Ric. Bernardus.

To the right Worshipful, and worthily honored, Sir Robert Gorge, Knight; And
to his truly religious Lady, the peace of a good Conscience here, with
perfection of blessedness hereafter.
Right Worshipful,
I Have done my best endeavor to lay open before men's eyes what Conscience is,
because I gladly would have every one to be acquainted with Conscience. For the
too much neglect thereof it may be said to most, as once Christ spoke to
Mary's Sister (when he saw her over much busied about provision for the body)
Martha, Martha, thou art troubled about many things, but one thing is needful.
Many men know much, and are toiled in the world with a croude of cares and
earthly undertakings. They seek after these frail, fading, and transitory
things, and some after mere speculatiue knowledge. But most neglect this most
needful point: whereupon it happens, that for the most part men generally
slight the practice of that which they daily hear and understand: and the
only reason is, they are unwilling to be acquainted with Conscience. This
Fellow Conscience is too precise for loose Libertines; He will mar the
Market of covetous worldlings, of ouer-cunning Crafts-men, deceitful
Tradesmen, and fraudulent Merchants. He is to waspish to be in company with
merry Mates, and too sullen for such as cannot endure to become sorrowful for
sin. Conscience, they think, will cast them into a Melancholicke fit, and
move their secure hearts out of their bed of rest; therefore will they take no
knowledge of it, till they needs must: which will certainly be at one time or
another. For it is in every man, and will have to do with us, sooner or later,
here or hereafter, and that whether we will or no. But better it were for us
voluntarily to be acquainted with it, then of necessity.

All holy books tend to inform us of Conscience, to reform the evil, to
direct the good, and so to rectify us: for effecting of this, the Book of
Nature, the Law written in the heart, the Law of the ten Precepts, the Law of
Faith, the holy Gospel, are all helps. All these are for instruction of
Conscience, and to make us conscionable.

Not only these books of Gods own making, but also Books, Sermons, and
pious Labors of all holy men do aim at this, to work Conscience in us.

Conscience is it self a The excellency of Conscience.
Book, whereof all other Books are expositions: It is as the Text, they the
interpretation. In reading therefore these, we must have an eye to it: our
knowledge in them must inform us in this; else we read them to no purpose.
They that grow cunning in the Book of Conscience by reading Gods and good Men's
Books, are undoubtedly the best Christians, the best Lawyers to plead their
own Cause, and the best Judges to Judge of themselves aright.

This book is of Gods own hand writing; it is also very legible to any that
will give themselves to read it.

If we open this book, mark it, and consider well what it advises, what is
it that shall not then be reformed? It is the fashion of people generally to
cry out of the world, and the manners thereof, in the mean space they know not
the cause, or will not know it, and yet is it near them, and within them; and
that is the badnesse of men's Consciences. For amend these, and the world shall
not be blamed; for as men's consciences be so is it also: reform these and
reform it; better them, and the World will be good enough, and the complaint
will cease.

Conscience as it is good or evil, so it makes or mars a man: by a good
Conscience he becomes good, thinks, desires, affects, and speaks of good
things; and does them: by a bad Conscience he turns a clean contrary
course: For as our Consciences be, even so are we: if it be naught, we are
vicious, we are vain, lewd and naught too: if it be good, we fly from sin as
from a serpent, and fear to offend God and our Neighbor.

Conscience is appointed by God to be our careful watchman, to eye us well,
to record all our thoughts, sayings, and doings, and so to witness against or
with us unto God, when he shall call us to an account. It attends when God
shall summon us; then will it plead hard, howsoever it seems now to be silent
in most.

By Conscience we become well acquainted with our selves, else to our selves we
remain mere strangers; for nothing within us but it can make us to know our
selves, which is the most excellent point of knowledge. To see themselves many
look into glasses; Let us look then into this glass of Conscience, that we
may see our selves, and that not only in some outward part, as by the
Artificial glass we do, but by this also as well inward as outward. By the
artificial a man may see himself, and soon forget what manner of one he was;
but this will not only show us what we be, but will also keep us in
remembrance of our selves, that in no business we shall forget our selves.

Conscience is a thing so divine, and has such acquaintance with God, as it
can and will tell us whether God be with us or against us, whether he be friend
or foe, and how our case stands between him and us: which to know, is so
necessary and behoouefull, as all knowledge in respect of this is but vain,
and in the end to little purpose.

Conscience next under God, is that to which we may most safely commend and
commit our selves, our whole estate, the disposing and ordering of all our
affairs: It is a good counselor to us alive, and a most faithful Executer
of our last will and Testament, left in other men's hands for our Children and
posterity.

Conscience is only that which will and can make us honest men, and of credit
among men: for as our Conscience is known to be, so are we reputed, and so
shall we be trusted. It is that which always we must bring with us for our
surety in all promises, contracts, and bargains, or else none will credit us.
The word of Conscience, when it is once known, will procure us more credit,
then we for the present are worth. The honesty of it is above all bonds: It
will carry great matters in few words, when without it by many words we shall
not be trusted for trifles: For Conscience will not give it word for any
dishonest man, though clothed in silk and satin, yea, though he have Lands and
large revenues, Conscience will not be bound for him. It only will be surety
for honest men, whom it both may urge, and will make them keep day with others
punctually.

As for Time seruers, loose companions, shifting Fellows, Hypocrites, cogging
Merchants, and irreligious persons: it will have nothing to do with them; which
appears by this, for that it forbids such to use their wits to coozen and
to defraud one another. But for whom it once gives its word, it is still
calling on them, and charging them to remember honesty, equity, fidelity, and
to do as they would be done unto.

Conscience is the chiefest maintainer of justice and equity among men: And men
generally are content with what it decrees, concludes, and allows, as may
appear by such speeches as these, In Conscience give what you think fit; I
appeal to your Conscience in this and that: between God and your Conscience
be it.

From Conscience do arise all the commendations of all our actions, or the
discommendations. If any do ill, straightway Conscience is questioned, Is this
your Conscience? Can you do this of your Conscience?

Conscience is a man's best friend, or his worst foe, in trouble and distress,
here in this life, at death, and at the last judgment. It will speak with or
against a man, as the cause requires; It pleads without fee; it respects no
person, be he Poor or Rich. It will side with none, it hates to the death
partiality, lying, equiuocating, flattery and all falsehood.

Conscience is the consort of charity, of faith, of truth, and of uprightness;
It is the Caske wherein to keep the mystery of faith and true godliness:
without which all these perish. A man making shipwreck of Conscience loses
all power of religion, of which he has no more, then he makes Conscience of.

Conscience, is that whose advise a man must first take in all his actions,
before he undertakes to do them. For if it be either neglected, or opposed, or
carelessly slighted, the act will turn to sin.

Conscience in a word is Gods Record, out of which he will take notice of
every man: and as there he finds him, so will he judge him, and thereafter
pronounce sentence, either of absolution or condemnation, at the last day.

And therefore by this so large an Epistle (Right worshipful) you may see how
it is not only fit, but very necessary also to be acquainted with Conscience;
which in most is without all authority to bind them to the good behauior, so
loosely, so licentiously do most men live. But blessed be God, that you have
better learned Christ, and have felt the commanding power of the word, and the
comfort of a good Conscience by showing your selves Patterns to that your well
reformed Family; In which true piety is attended upon with love unfeigned one
toward another, and your profession adorned with works of charity abroad.
Your frequent reading of holy Scriptures, I well know, affords you examples not
a few of holy duties: but you want not a rare president at home, that most
honorable Lady Marchioness, your noble Mother. Whose singular humility, great
bounty, desire to please God, love to his word in the powerful plainness
thereof, and performance of good duties are much to be admired especially in so
great a Personage, in one so very aged and full of days, in one so long
brought up in her former years in the most eminent place of royal service
under that famous Queen Elizabeth. I hope I need not to stir your ready
minds to a thankful acknowledging to God of this and other his mercies, nor to
excite you to strive for the everlasting hope of blessedness; seeing that your
justifying Conscience, accompanying your justifying faith, as I am persuaded,
gives you good assurance in your ways of well doing. For your happy
continuance wherein, I am bold in this ample manner to present unto your
courteous acceptance the excellency of Conscience and to commend the same to
your Christian meditations. And so I humbly take leave, in my hearty prayers
commending that right Honorable Lady, with your worthy Selves, beloved
Children, and all your religious household to the favor and guidance of the
Almighty; ever resting,

Your worships in any Christian service at command, Ric. Bernard.
Batcomb. Calend. Ian. 1630.
THE CONTENTS of the ensuing Treatise.
THere is such a thing as is called Conscience. Chap. 1. Conscience is distinct
from all other faculties of the soul. Chap. 2. Of the rule and power of it
over them, and how known. Chap. 3. Of the name of Conscience, and of the
distinct knowledge thereof from the understanding. Chap. 4. What this knowledge
of Conscience is, and how described. Chap. 5. Of Con-science, as it is
knowledge with another. Chap. 6. Of the rule binding Conscience. Chap. 7. With
whom Conscience has to do. Chap. 8. What it meddles with inwardly in man.
Chap. 9. What outwardly it has to do, concerning him whose Conscience it is.
Chap. 10. Of the first act and office of Conscience. Chap. 11. Of the second.
Chap. 12. Of the third, touching things commanded, forbidden, indifferent.
Chap. 13. Of the fourth act. Chapter 14. Of the fifth act witnessing with or
against us; and here are three questions touching the quality of Conscience
accusing. Chap. 15. Of the sixth and last act of Conscience. Chap. 16. Of the
reasons why God has placed such a thing within Man. Chap. 17. Of the
excellency of the Conscience above all other faculties of the soul. Chap. 18.
Of the causes why men are not subject to the power of Conscience as they ought.
Chapter 19. What is to be done to make us become obedient to Conscience. Chap. 20.
Of the kinds of Conscience, and first of the evil Conscience, Chap. 21. where
is showed in whom it is, how it comes and continues, and the remedy to amend
it. Of the twofold distinction of the evil Conscience, the still and stirring.
Chap. 22. Of the still evil Conscience in general, of the causes how to know
it, of the effects, with the remedies. Chap. 23. Of the dead Conscience. Chap.
24. Of the blind Conscience in Heathen, in Christians; the misery of such so
led, and the remedy. Chap. 25. Of the sleepy Conscience, with the causes, and
the remedy. Chap. 26. Of the secure Conscience, in whom it is, the causes
thereof, and the remedies. Chap. 27. Of the lukewarm Conscience. Chap. 28. Of
the large Conscience. Chap. 29. The Cheuerill Conscience. Chap. 30. The
benumbed Conscience. Chap. 31. And cauterized Conscience, with all their causes
and remedies. Chapter 32. Of the stirring ill Conscience in general, with the
causes, effects, and remedies. C. 33. Of the erroneous Conscience, with the
difference between it and the blind Conscience, in whom it is, the causes
thereof, effects, and remedy. Chap. 34. with certain questions about the same.
Of the superstitious Conscience, and whereabout it is exercised, with the
causes and remedy. Chap. 35. Of the scrupulous Conscience, the causes, effects,
and remedies. Chap. 36. Of the terrifying Conscience, with the causes, effects,
and remedies. Chap. 37. Of the desperate Conscience, the causes thereof,
effects, and remedies. Chap. 38. Of the good Conscience in general. Chap. 39.
Of the natural good Conscience. Chap. 40. Of the moral good Conscience with
the helps thereto, the goodness of it, and yet insufficient to assure a man
of hope in heaven: who they be which only have this Conscience. Chap. 41. Of
the regenerate Conscience, what it is, in whom it is, the causes, the
excellency, and effects of it. Chap. 42. Of the Gospel binding this
Conscience, to what it binds, and yet from what it freeth the regenerate
Conscience, of the difference between the Conscience regenerate and
unregenerate. Chap. 43. Of the tender Conscience, in whom it is, the effects of
it, means to get it, that it may be troublesome; the difference between it
and scrupulositie, and how to keep it from it. Chap. 44. Of the wounded
Conscience, the causes, the continuance longer or shorter time; the effects and
preparatiues to cure it, of the sovereign Salve, and Cordialls after; how to
keep from a wounded Conscience, of the difference between it and the
desperate: and between it and melancholic passion. Chap. 45. 46. 47. Of the
quiet good Conscience, how obtained, the effects, with the difference between
the quiet ill Conscience and it. Chap. 48. Of the upright Conscience, how
gotten, and the effect thereof. Chap. 49. Of the pure Conscience, in whom it
is, how gotten, the effects of it, the signs thereof, how to keep it pure.
Chapter 50. Of the justifying Conscience, how it justifies, wherein it consists,
how it differs from a justifying faith, of the comfortable effects thereof, and
how to keeke it. Chap. 51. Of the singular benefit of the regenerate, quiet,
pure, upright, and justifying Conscience. Chap. 52. Of the difference between
Confidence of a good Conscience, and presumption from a deceitful heart, Chapter
53. where is set down in whom the one and the other is, with their differing
causes and effects. Lastly, of Conscience continuance, here in this life, at
death, at last Day, in Heaven, and in Hell. Chap. 54.
CHRISTIAN SEE TO THY CONSCIENCE.
CHAP. 1. That there is such a thing in Man as is called Conscience.
COnscience is Gods so powerful a Vicegerent, as there is none that is not
void of reason, but does acknowledge, at one time, or other, the authority
thereof.

It is that which Jew and Gentile, Pagan and Christian; yea, the worst that may
be among them, has had experience of: But what to call it, the wisest have
questioned. Some affirm it to be a power, or faculty; some, an act; some, an
habit; some other, a Created quality: they all agree not in one. Neither do
they all consent to tell us, where it is in the Soul; though Divines place it
in the Understanding.

The Hebrew Tongue in holy Writ, has no proper name for it: but calls it
sometimes Spirit, Pro. 18. 14. and most commonly, the heart, Job 27. 6. 2. Sam.
24 10. Eccles. 7. 22. In the New Testament it is called likewise by the name of
Spirit, Romans 8. 16. the Spirit of man, 1. Cor. 2. 11. and the heart, Act. 2.
37. 1. Ioh. 3. 20. But more distinctly by the name Conscience. The first that
so named it, was John, Ioh. 8. 9. (if he wrote before Saint Paul) or else Paul
was the first, who often speaks of it in his Epistles, Romans 2. 15. and 9. 1.
Heb. 9. and 10. 2. 22. and 13. 18. as also in his Sermons, as Luke records.
Act. 23. 1. and 24. 16. The Common subject in whom Romans 2. 15.
it is, is the reasonable soul of every man. It is in devils, for they
believe, and they Iam. 2.
tremble by the power of their Conscience: so he that never feels the work of
it, is worse then a Devil: and he that has but a trembling Conscience, is no
better then a Devil.

CHAP. 2. That it is distinct from all other faculties of the soul.
THough sometime in holy Scripture, it be called by the name of Spirit, and
heart; and learned men vary in the appellation, as also some do in placing of
it within the soul; yet is it distinct from the Understanding, from the
Memory, Will, and Heart of Man. It is an other thing created of God, besides
all these in man's soul. First, none that write of it, do make them one with
it. Secondly, the holy Ghost by his Penmen, gives it a distinct name from the
rest. Thirdly, it has differing properties from them all, as shall appear by
the offices thereof in this Treatise. Fourthly, Man has a kind of power (as I
may say) over the rest, to set his mind a working, to invent this, or that; so
his Memory to keep; his Will to approve, or disallow. But Conscience is such a
thing, as he cannot work it to his will and pleasure: It commands him; he
has no rule over it, to make it speak, or be silent when he list. Fifthly,
Saint Paul plainly puts a difference between the Mind and Conscience, Tit.
1. 15. and between it and the heart, 1. Tim. 1. 5. Lastly, it has such an
ouer-ruling power, over Men and Devils, as it neither is, nor can be awed by
any, but only by God himself; and therefore must be acknowledged some
distinct thing from the rest.

CHAP. 3. That it has power and rule in, and over all the faculties of the
soul: and how to know when, and what it works in them.
THough Conscience be a distinct thing in the soul from all other faculties;
yet has it to do with all of them, and works in every one of them; as,

In the Understanding it is, when it is as a Directour, a Judge; either
condemning, or absoluing.

In the M^mo^y it is, when it is as a Register, and as a privy Witness of our
past thoughts, words and deeds; either so thought, spoken, and done; or not at
all, or not so, or so.

In the Will it is, when it makes it Will what it ought, and to Will the
contrary. It was the work of Conscience upon the Will, in the wilful Son, who
though he said, he Eccles. 7. 23. 1. King. 2. 44. Reu. 20. 12.
would not go; yet after repented, and willingly went into the Vineyard to
work, Mat. 21. 19.

In the heart it is, and among the affections, when it comfort, and works
gladness; or else causes sorrow, fear, and trembling, 2. Cor. 1. 12. Act.
24. 25.

Thus we see Conscience not to be confined to any part of the soul, but
works every where in it. But so divine and heavenly a thing it is, and of so
great excellency, as we may rather guess at it, then tell indeed what it is:
yea, as it is said of God himself, we may rather tell what a one he is, than
what he is; even so of Conscience, which yet from that which has been said, I
may thus guess to set it forth.

That it is a faculty in the soul, having all the rest attendants so, as it
commands the whole man in the execution of it offices.

The truth of all this, will appear in all the following Discourse, from the
name, nature, offices, kinds, and effects thereof, of all which, severally in
their due order.

CHAP. 4. Of the name Conscience, and of the knowledge thereof, distinct from
the understanding.
THis divine thing in the soul, less then God, and above Man, as a middle
between both, is called Conscience. It is a word Conscientia, (...),
compounded of Con, and science; Con is as much as with; and science is
knowledge; as much as to say, knowledge with an other: So it contains two
things, Knowledge, and knowledge with an other.

First then, Conscience is a kind of knowledge, as the word science imports,
which in Latin is scientia, and comes of scio, to know; in Greek (...),
which is of (...), video, scio, considero; for Conscience sees, knows, and
considers, before it does his office. Yea, the Scripture gives knowledge
unto it; Thy heart; that is, thy Conscience knows, says Eccles. 7. 22.
Solomon: if it had not Knowledge, it should be blind. For albeit Conscience
works not, without the information of the Understanding; yet it self knows,
and manifests it self, by a distinct act from the mere understanding of a
thing, yet not separated from it. For this is certain, that Conscience acts
beyond that, which the Mind knows; which a man neither does, nor can know
without his Conscience: for,

1. The Understanding, it can, and does apprehend, discourse, and judge, but it
is Conscience which tells him, that he does apprehend, discourse, and judge;
and not merely the Understanding it self.

2. The Understanding knows things, without any reflection upon it self, to
know it self, or to make man know himself: But Conscience knows only, with
a reflection to make a man to know it, and himself also.

3. The Understanding apprehends crosses, and afflictions; it can truly
discourse of their nature, and judge thereof; whether corporal, or spiritual;
whether great, or but light crosses; yet without application to a man's self,
as deserving them. But Conscience can tell him often, why they come upon him.
This made Jonah to acknowledge, Ioh. 1. 12.
that for his sin, the Tempest was upon the Sea. This made Joseph's Genesis 42.
21.
brethren to consider, why the trouble was upon them, when they stood before
Joseph, and came down to buy Corn into Egypt. This instructed David, to 2.
Sam. 24. 27.
apply the cause of the Pestilence to himself. Thus we see how they differ
the one from the other.

This is carefully to be observed, and distinctly to be discerned: for,

1. This will make us know the difference between knowledge, and conscionable
knowledge; between remembering, and conscionable remembering; between willing
and affecting, and conscionable willing and affecting.

2. By this we may know, how we may come to rectify our Understanding,
Memory, Will, and Affections, which these faculties of themselves can never
do; nor Man, by any of them, come to see them out of order, to amend them; but
only by the light of his Conscience; which shows us how they be employed,
whether about good or ill, and so thereafter to judge of them, and of our
selves by it.

3. By this we shall not be deceived, as most be, by a high conceit of
themselves, and of their ways and courses, who may have natural knowledge,
and great learning, and a commendable behavior thorough civil education, and
yet not conscionable, without which, the other is nothing.

CHAP. 5. What this knowledge of Conscience is; and how it may be described.
THis distinct knowledge of Conscience may be thus set forth:

That it is a certain, particular, applicatorie knowledge in Man's Soul,
reflecting upon himself, concerning matters between God and him.

For the better understanding hereof, I will explain it at large in Sections.

Section 1. A certain Knowledge.
THe knowledge of Conscience comes not with an If, or An, as opinionatiue,
resting on conjectures and probabilities; for it is grounded on sure
Principles, and upon Gods Word, and speaks with authority from God; else it
neither could, nor would so work upon Man's Will and Heart, to awe him, and
keep him under obedience to God, as it does. But here, thus speaking of it, it
is to be understood, as conceived in it self, free from the cloudy Mists of a
misleading understanding, and as it is truly informed, to which, so considered,
we must give credit, and obey it, as Gods voice from heaven.

Section 2. A particular Knowledge.
THe Conscience takes notice only of particulars, with the consideration of
the circumstances concurring in the action, as did Judas his Conscience in
betraying Mat. 27.
of Christ; and the Conscience of Joseph's brethren, Genesis 42. 21
in their pitiless act against him. Conscience never employeth it self (in
it proper office) about generals; but as they be applied in particular to
this, or that, with the circumstances.

For generals are but grounds to work upon in the application by Conscience.
Hence it is, that none so bad, but they will say, that we must serve God; that
it is our duty to do, as we would be done unto; that we must avoid that
which is displeasing to God; that we may not requite murder; we may not
commit adultery, nor steal, nor lie, and so forth: But they will not apply
these things particularly to themselves, acknowledging their failing in their
duties, and their own committing of evil: because in the generals, their
Consciences work not, but in the sight of the particulars.

Section 3. It is applicatory.
COnscience loves home; it is no stragler abroad, but keeps within him, whose
conscience it is. If it concern not him whose it is, it meddles not; it is no
busie-body. Wit may, and will be walking out a doors, and too often busy it
self in other men's matters, which nothing concern him: but this Conscience
will never do. Let busie-braines note this well; and learn from their
Conscience to keep within their own bounds.

As Conscience meddles with particulars only; so be they such, as may be
brought home: for till then, Conscience stirs not, either about good, or
evil. David understanding, that it was his duty to seek Gods face, his
Conscience made him say; Thy face, Psalm. 27. 8.
Lord, will I seek. When he heard Nathans Parable, his 2. Sam. 12.
Understanding was busied much about the cruelty of another: but Conscience
said nothing to him, till Nathan applied, and said, Thou art the Man: then it
spoke within, and willed him to say, I have sinned.

By this may we see, why the vain people can be content to hear Sermons,
that apply not home to them, that which is taught; but cannot endure
application: because this only works upon the heart for reformation. If there
be no application to our selves, there will never be any amendment. This
Jeremy tells us, and shows why the people repented not; for thus says he; No
man said, What have I done? Ier. 8. 6.
Applicatory Knowledge, is conscionable Knowledge; the other is only
Braine-knowledge, without reformation; without consolation.

Section 4. It is a reflecting Knowledge.
THe knowledge of conscience is with a reflection; what it knows, it turns it
back upon a man's self, to make a man to know himself, as he is, in every
thing without deceit; even as the eye looking into a true glass, by the
reflection thereof, makes a man to see himself what a one he is; fair, or
deformed; clean, or defiled.

Now because this Simily A Simily taken from a glass, to set out Conscience*
will greatly help to the illustration of this Point, if it be enlarged; let
the Reader here observe six things; the clear seeing eye; the looking into
the glass; the glass it self; the reflection of it; the cause of the
reflection; and the use and benefit hereof.

1. Is the seeing eye; for the eye must not be blind, nor a winking eye, nor
the sleepy eye, nor a squint eye, nor a purblind eye; but an outright, and a
clearesighted eye.

This eye is the Understanding, not blind, not shut against the light, not
careless in an affected ignorance, not looking away, not distracted this way
and that way at one time, not gross; but a clear Understanding, apt to
conceive, discern, and judge aright.

2. Is the act of the eye looking into the glass: for it is not enough to have
a clear sight, if we use it not.

This looking, is the act of the Understanding, taking knowledge of such
things, as may inform the Conscience.

3. Is the glass it self, into which, the eye does look to see himself.

This glass is Gods Law, which the Understanding apprehends, and clearly
knows.

4. The reflection of the glass, is the returning of that, which the eye sees
upon the party beholding; so that in a reflection, there is a seeing forward
and back again at once.

This is the knowledge of the Conscience, seeing and applying the Law.

5. Is the cause of the reflection of the glass, which is the steeling of it;
without which there would be no reflection.

This steeling, is the taking of Gods Law and word in his true and proper sense.

6. The use and benefit of this steeling is two fold: First, To limit the
sight, that it cannot look through the glass, nor beyond it. Secondly, To
represent him to himself that looks into the glass; which otherwise it could
not do.

So the holding of the true and propersense,

1. Limits the Understanding so, that it cannot go beyond the rule of the Word.

2. It makes Conscience truly to show a Man unto himself, even as he is.

If this be so, that the Understanding is so bounded; and that through the
Word, men that look into it so see themselves by their Consciences, two
questions may be here propounded.

1. Quest. How comes in to pass, that so many, though they understand their
duties, yet neglect them?

Answ. Because they look into the glass of Gods Law with a squint eye, having
their minds upon two things at once; the Precept of God, but withal Ioh. 12.
42 and 5. 44.
they consider their profit, or their pleasure, or their reputation with men;
and how far these and Gods Word may stand together. They be like Iohanam,
the son of Careas, and others, who would know Gods Word by Jeremy, Ier. 42.
2. and 43. 2. 3.
and took an Oath to obey it; but yet in mind, with this condition, if it
should agree with their Wills; which was, to go into Egypt, else not:
Therefore when it crossed their hope and expectation, they despised it. These
squinteyed fellows will never resign themselves to the rule of the Word, nor
ever become truly obedient.

2. Because, though they look into this Law, yet are not their minds fixed so
long upon it till the Knowledge be reflecting, and the Conscience bound to work
obedience upon the heart. Some look on Gods Word, as many do upon a glass,
only with a glimpse, and a cast of the eye, and pass away; and so nothing the
better.

3. Because, though they see it, and stay upon the same sometime; yet they use
their Wit to find distinctions, to vnty the bond of Conscience; or else to
pervert the sense, that so they may turn it another way: and by this means do
continue their untoward courses, though they read the scriptures, and hear
the Law very often.

2. Quest. If Conscience thus reflect upon a Man, to make him see himself, how
happens it, that every one is not reformed?

Answ. I answer: first, because it happens to some, as Saint James speaks,
they look into the glass; But presently forget what manner of persons they
are. For where Memory fails, for the time the Understanding cannot inform
Conscience; and therefore it works not in Man to amend him. Secondly, Because
he wants water to wash off his filth. This water wanting, though a Man see his
foul spots; yet can he not be clean. The spiritual water is the sanctifying
Spirit of God, Ioh. 7. 38. 39. Which he that wants, though he by the Law
see his sin, yet cannot he be cleansed.

Section 5. It is the Knowledge of matters between God and Man.
COnscience is exercised in and about such matters only, as have some relation
to God; and whatsoever it takes knowledge of, it knows it with respect to him
and his Laws; with out which it lets the thoughts, words, deeds, inventions,
exercise of wit, Judgment and Memory go free; if a man stand not upon the
good, or evil, the lawfulness, or unlawfulness, the offensiuenesse or
vnoffensiuenesse of the thing between God and him.

For it is placed in Man between God and Man; to speak, command, and testify
from God to Man, and from Man to God. Hence it is, that whatsoever is done for
Conscience sake, is all one as done for the Lords sake; for they are put one
for another, Romans 13. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 13.

Therefore hence learn, that if Conscience begin once to speak, know this,
that then there is some matter to be considered of between God and us: for
this is as Gods Bailiffe, telling us that some suit is to be commenced against
us in his behalf. And thus much for the word science in Conscience.

CHAP. VI. Of Con-science, as it is a conjoined Knowledge with another.
THe knowledge of Conscience is not a knowledge single, and alone by it self,
but with another: whence it has the name of Con science, knowing together with
another; which is fiuefold as in the ensuing Sections shall be made manifest, in
the more fully unfolding of this name, compounded of Con, and science.

Section 1. It knows with God.
COnscience has acquaintance with God, knowing with God, and God with it:
therefore Saint Paul puts them together, Romans 9. 1. and he says; that the holy
Ghost witnesses with it, Romans 8. 15. so as if it acquit and justify, so will
God, and say the same which a Man truly vtters from his Conscience, Genesis 20. 5.
6. And if it accuse and condemn; so will God, 1. Ioh. 3. 20. 21.

Therefore we see hence, that whatsoever we think, speak, or do; we have two
witnesses, either with us or against us, sufficient to make us joyful in
well-doing against all men's censures, or to deiect us in ill doing, though all
the World applaud us.

Section 2. It knows with the help of the Understanding.
COnscience, for the exercise of it knowledge, has the help of the
Understanding: Therefore the Apostle puts the Mind and the Conscience
together, Tit. 1. 15.

For the Understanding first discerns of truth and falsehood, good and evil;
and then propounds the same to Conscience for approbation, or disallowing;
for doing, or not doing. Hence Conscience begins it work; and as the
Understanding is clear, quick, sound, and certain; even so, and thereafter,
does the Conscience know and proceed to the execution of it offices.

By this we see how necessary Knowledge is for the furthering of the work of
Conscience.

Section 3. It knows with the help of Memory.
COnscience takes information from the Understanding, but yet by the aid of
Memory, which reteineth that, which the Understanding by reasoning has
concluded; which conclusion the Memory holds; and so the Understanding by it
carries it and propounds it to Conscience. If Memory fail, our Knowledge is
therein so far lost: for what we remember not, we know not; and so no
Conscience of that.

Therefore to have Conscience, let us labor to keep in Memory what duties we
do know. Forgetfulness of that which is taught, is one maine reason why so
many make so little Conscience of that which is daily taught unto them.

Section 4. It knows with the Rule.
COnscience is such a knowing, as it sees the act with the rule; two things at
one time by reflection, right out, not a squint; where the rule is beheld, and
the act together, It is Scientia and iuris and facti simul.
there is Conscience. If they be separated, beholding the one, and not the
other; there is science, but no Conscience.

By this may we know when we do a thing of very Conscience; when we look to
the Rule of our action, and upon our action how it accords with the Rule. If
this be so, Oh, how many thousands are there, which make no Conscience in most
things which they think, speak, and do. For though the Rule be known, it is
without application to the act; and what they think, speak, or do, it is
without consideration of the Rule: and so no Conscience. For, to do a thing of
Conscience, there must be observed these five things. First, That there is a
Rule. Secondly, What it is. Thirdly, The authority of it to bind. Fourthly,
The constant remembrance of it. Fifthly, The application of it to the act, for
the well ruling and guiding of it. All come to Church, people pray, receive the
Sacrament; but most do not thus of Conscience, because they mind not the Word
of God, and the act with application to themselves, observing how the Rule and
act agree and disagree in their doings.

Section 5. It knows with a framed conclusion.
COnscience is a kind of Conscientia quasi concludens scientia.
concluding science; for it frames, as it were syllogistically, reasons,
either with or against a Man: first the Understanding takes a proposition from
the Rule, and propounds it to Conscience, thus, He that 2. Sam. 12. 5.
is a merciless and cruel man is worthy of death: So said David's
understanding from Nathans Parable. Then, upon Nathans application to David,
the knowledge of his Conscience said, But I am this merciless and cruel man.
And thereupon it makes him to conclude, I am worthy of death; and so shows
it self to be Conscience. And as it concludes against a Man, so it will for a
Man, thus: He that does that which he does in the integrity of his heart, and
innocence of his hands, shall find favor with God. This Abimelechs
understanding propounded. Then the science or knowledge of his Conscience
makes him assume: But that which I have done, I have done in the integrity of
my heart, and innocence of my hands: upon this assumption to show it self
Con-science, it forces him to conclude; Therefore I shall find favor with
God. And thus much for the name, why it is called Conscience in all these
forenamed respects.

CHAP. 7. Of the Rule which binds Conscience thus to conclude.
Having before made mention of a Rule, and of the authority thereof, by which
Conscience works, it is fit to know what it is.

The Rule is but one only, which is Gods Law and Will revealed for Man's
direction, in every duty to be performed to God, or Man: a Rule for life and
practice.

Though this Rule be but one, it is Considerable three ways: first, as it is
in nature: Secondly, as it is in the Law, and old Testament: Thirdly, as it is
in the Gospel, and new Testament.

Section 1. Of the Rule in Nature.
THis Rule in nature is Gods Law once written perfectly in Adams heart, whereby
he knew his duty to God, to himself, and to his Neighbor; and whereby his
Conscience was bound to stir him up to all duties of holiness and
righteousness.

But now since the fall, the perfection of it was lost, and now only are
remainders thereof in us, yet are these relics of that perfect Law, first,
called a Law still and conuincing, Romans 2. 14. 15. Secondly, Truth., Romans 1.
18. 19. Thirdly, being a law and truth, it is certain and infallible.
Fourthly, It is a teaching law, 1. Cor. 11. 14. In which place, it is called
Nature, that is, the Law of nature: by which men know not only sin in
general, but also many sins in particular, and the judgment of God due for
the same, Romans 1. 32.

The matter of this Law are certain general Notions, and common Principles of
truth, and of knowing good and evil. So certain, infallible, and durable, as
neither Devils, nor iniquity it self, can blot out of Man's Understanding and
Conscience; such as these be:

That there is a God; that he knows all things, that he is to be worshipped
and served; that it is a good thing to please God; that the soul of man is
immortal; that men must love one another; that we are to do, as we would be
done unto; that right is right; that it is good reason that every one have his
own; that one must live by another; that honest things are to be loved; and
many such like, which are called the light of nature, Sparkles of Gods image
after which Man was created; and is that which is commonly called the
Synteresis of Conscience.

The end of this is, for such as be out of the Church, to be as a Law for
direction of Conscience, and for common equity, and preservation of human
societies to live one with an other in some sort peaceably: and to make all men
to be without excuse before God, Romans 1. 20.

By this the Heathen Philosophers wrote their Ethics, and Politics; and many
in their own persons were morally honest, and left examples of their virtues.

Yea, such is the truth of this light of Nature, and so convincing, as it shall
be at the last day the rule, by which all the pagans, and Heathen people, shall
be judged, and condemned.

Section 2. Of the same Rule in the Decalogue.
THe Law and light of Nature is one and the same for substance with the Law of
the ten Commandments, which was written by God himself, and given to Moses
for his people Israel.

That was, and is in the heart, this written in Tables of stone; that consists
of general notions, this is expressed in more special precepts; that obscure
and dark, this more clear; that as the Text, this as a Commentary; that is
in all without study, this atteined by reading, hearing, and instruction; as by
that men shall be judged, so also by this, at last day, Romans 2. 12.

This Decalogue, set forth in two Tables, is more largely expounded by the rest
of holy Writings in the old Testament.

Section 3. Of the same Rule in the New Testament.
THe Law of Nature being in the Decalogue set more clearly forth, it self is
explained also more amply in the old Testament; and likewise in the New
Testament. In which,

1. The law of nature is mentioned, Romans 2. 12. 14. of which a Principle is
delivered by Christ. Mat. 7. 12.

2. The precepts of the Moral Law are repeated, Matthew. 19. 18. 19. Romans 13. 9.

3. They are expounded in the new Testament more spiritually, and that by our
Savior Christ, Matthew. 5. 21. 27. 28. 33. 34. 37.

So as this Rule and Law of God, in Nature, in the Decalogue, and in the
Gospel, is one and the same; the first written in the heart, Romans 2. 15, the
same written in Tables of stone more fully, and expounded by the Prophets; and
again written in the heart of those with whom God makes his new Covenant of
grace, 2. Cor. 3. 3. Ier. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 10. So as they differ not, but in
degree of a more large exposition of one an other; as thus,

The Law in Nature says, Thou shall not commit adultery; the Decalogue goes
further, and says, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife: then comes a
more spiritual exposition thereof in the Gospel, and says, Thou shall not
look upon a woman to lust after her; for he that so does, has committed
adultery with her already in his heart. So the Law in Nature says, Thou shall
not murder; the Decalogue says also, Thou shall not kill; but the Gospel
extends it to anger, railing speeches); Matthew. 5. 22, and tells us plainly,
that he that hates his brother is a murderer, 1. Ioh. 3. 15.

Though the sense be enlarged, yet the Law is one and the same; and this is the
Rule which guides and binds Conscience, properly and immediately from God.

Man's Law also binds Conscience; for obedience is due for Conscience sake,
Romans 13. 5. that is, for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2. 13. So far, as the Laws
of men have ground and warrant from Gods Law, but if contrary thereto,
Conscience is free, Exo. 1. 17. Dan. 3. 18. Act. 4. 19. and 5. For man has not
power over Conscience, but only God.

CHAP. 8. With whom it is, that Conscience, by this bond of the Law, has to
do.
COnscience is bound to have to do only with him whose Conscience it is.

For it is a reflecting knowledge upon a man's self, as is before declared. And
we read in scripture, that David's Conscience smote himself, 2. Sam. 24. 10.
and the Conscience of the Jews was pricked: every one felt the sting thereof
within himself, Act. 2. 37.

Hence it is clear then, that such as complain, that at Easter they cannot
come to the holy Communion, because their Conscience troubles them, for the
wrong another does them, that they falsely belie Conscience; for it meddles not
with other men's actions against thee, but only with thine against others. If
it be Conscience, then it would tell thee of thine impatiency, of thine
uncharitableness, and malice against him thou do complain of; and not of
his injury done thee; for this may be Knowledge, but is no act of Conscience.

Quest. Here it may he asked, whether my Conscience has never any thing to do
with other men?

Answ. Nor properly, as the words, and deeds be an other man's, but as any way
they become mine, by assent, consent, Counsel, command, or occasioned by my
example, and so forth. The sins of Ely his Sons were his by conniuencie; the
murdering of Naboth, by Iesabels command, became Ahabs sin through consent.
Vriahs death was made David's by command. Judas treason, the Scribes and
Pharisees were guilty of, by hireing him to do it for money; whereupon
Conscience accuses.

Conscience meddles with me, in behalf of another, as far as I am to think
or speak of him, as in Conscience I take him to be. Iury-men give in their
Virdict upon others from their Conscience in this respect. Hence is it that we
use to say, of my Conscience he is an honest Man; Hereupon also it is, that one
will appeal to the Consciences of other men for justification, and approbation
in their faithfulness, as we may read that S. Paul did in his appeal to the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4. 2. and 5. 11.

CHAP. 9. What it is, which Conscience meddles with in him whose it is, and how
far.
COnscience has great employment, and much business, with the whole Man; with
all his thoughts, words, and deeds, as they have any relation between God and
him.

It has to do with Man, as far as the rule, which binds it, has to do
with Man, in commanding, and in forbidding him any thing, or any way directing
him in any thing. Now for that particulars may more set out the power and
authority of Conscience, I will instance wherein Conscience has to do, as
far as I find in holy Writ, and as our own experience will witness:

Section 1. With Understanding.
FIrst, it has to do with the understanding, the Informer it self, which
sets Conscience on work: and this it does touching the right use and well
employing of the Wit and Understanding. Paul's Conscience had to do with his
Wisdom in the exercise of preaching, 2. Cor. 1. 12. Conscience will tell us,
whether our Wisdom Iam. 3. 16. 17.
be earthly, sensual, devilish, or heavenly. We must therefore take care of
the use of our Wit for Conscience sake.

Section 2. With thoughts.
COnscience meddles with Thoughts; because the Rule has to do with them: Mat.
9. 4. Heb. 4. 12. 2. Cor. 10. 5. and therefore Conscience. Whereupon David
checks himself touching his Thoughts, Psalm. 77. 10. 11. The Godly by
experience, feel the work of Conscience herein: and men use to appeal to
their Consciences, and to call them for witness touching Thoughts. Hence is it
that men will say; My Conscience tells me, I never thought it, and so forth.
Thought therefore is not free: Conscience has charge over it, by the Rule
binding, which binds it.

Section 3. With the Memory.
IT has to do with Memory, as it reteineth evil, and forgets that which is
good: for the Rule, that is, the Word does bind us to remember, and not forget
our duty; Eccles. 12. 1. Heb. 13. 2. 16. Therefore exercise Memory well, else
Conscience will round thee for it, and God will punish thee, Psalm. 50. 22.

Section 4. With the Will, and Affections of the heart.
COnscience looks to the bent and inclination of the Will; by which Paul could
say, Will is present with me, Romans 7. 18. It observes the heart; for it was
Paul's Conscience, that could make him speak of the simplicity and sincerity of
his heart, 2. Cor. 1. 12. so it made Abimelech speak, Genesis 20. 6. and Hezekiah
of their uprightness of heart, Isai. 38. yea, it is so acquainted with the
heart, as it is often called the Heart, 2. Sa. 24. 10. Act. 2. 37. And has to
do with the Affections; for the rule binds Conscience both for the
wel-ordering of them; also to place them aright, and to moderate them.
Therefore Saint Paul's Conscience could witness both of his joy, 2. Cor. 1. 12.
and of his sorrow. Romans 9. 2.

Section 5. With Conscience it self.
COnscience is so upright, that it meddles with it self, by the reflecting
Knowledge upon it self, from the Rule, as the eye sees it self by the
reflection of a Glass: for it being informed and rectified, it will censure
the former deadness, and erroneousnesse thereof, according to the binding
power of the Rule directing the Conscience.

Thus we see how, and with what it has to do with in the Man whose Conscience
it is.

CHAP. 10. What Conscience has to do with him, in respect of his outward
actions, whose Conscience it is.
Whatsoever it be, in word or deed which has any relation to God, and comes
under the Rule of Gods Word, that same is it which Conscience must, and will
meddle with: as by these ensuing particulars it may appear.

1. It has to do in Baptism, answering to God for the baptized (if one of
years) as others do for an Infant to the Minister, 1. Pet. 3. 21.

2. With Ministers in preaching, concerning the matter, as also for the manner
of their preaching, 2. Cor. 1. 12. and how thereby they profit their Hearers,
2. Cor. 4. 2. and 5. 11. or deceive them with doctrines of Devils, through a
seared Conscience, 1. Timoth. 4. 2.

3. With our hearing and learning, as also with us, for the keeping of the
mystery of Faith, 1. Tim. 3. 9. So as lose Conscience, we lose our Religion,
1. Tim. 1. 19.

4. With us, in the defense of our Religion, and in making an answer for it; as
also how, and in what a commendable manner we do it; to wit, readily, meekely,
and reverently, as it becomes Christians, 1. Pet. 3. 15. 16.

5. With us, in our moral honesty, as we be natural men, led according to
the light of nature, and Principles of Reason, Romans 2. 15.

6. With us, touching our serving of God purely, 2. Tim. 1. 3. without dead
works, not resting in the outward act,. Heb. 9. 9. 14. as also concerning
Idollworship, to which no allowance must be given, 1. Cor. 8. 7. 10. As soon
as Naaman acknowledged the true God, his Conscience wrought in him to disauow
Rimmon their false God. Conscience is a great stirrer in matters of Religion,
yea in matters seeming indifferent, 1. Cor. 8. 13. by which scandal may arise.

7. With us, about the means of our atonement with God; both under the Law,
as now under the Gospel, Heb. 9. 9. 14. through Christ's blood, by which it is
so pacified, as it is not popishly troubled about making any sacrifice for
sin, Heb. 10. 2. 8.

8. With us, about our drawing near to God with confidence and assurance, 1.
Ioh. 3. 20. 21. Heb. 10. 22.

9. With us, concerning our words, as our swearing and cursing of others,
Eccles. 7. 22. as Shemei did David, 1. King. 2. 44. and Peter himself; for the
Rule, Christ's words, came to his remembrance, and then his Conscience wrought
sorrow: for the Rule touches our words, Mat. 5. 22. and 12. 36. 37.

10. With us, about our whole life and conversation, Act. 23. 1. Heb. 13. 18.
2. Cor. 1. 12. And here, if we sin secretly and be holy in show, as Scribes
and Pharisees, Ioh. 8. 9. It looks to our charity, which must come from a
pure heart, and a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1. 5. It observes how we can and do
endure injuries and wrongs offered; and with what patience we can bear them,
1. Pet. 2. 19. 20. It marks our obedience to authority, Romans 13. 3.

11. With us, touching our affection in desiring the salvation of others, Romans
9. 1. 2. and that we pray for such as be faithful Ministers of Christ, and
thank God for them, 2. Tim. 1. 3. 4.

12. With us, when we are ready to go awry, and out of the way, Isai. 30. 21.
and to fall from the truth; for it would not have us, nor will suffer us to
fall from our Religion, except we put it away, as did Hymeneus and Alexander,
because it too busily troubled them, 1. Tim. 1. 19.

Thus we see what a charge Conscience has upon it, and how many things it
has to look unto within, and without us.

CHAP. 11. Of the acts and offices of Conscience: and first here of the first
act.
COnscience must needs have much to do; for it has many offices, whereof the
first is to be Man's Ouer-seer By the help of the Understanding it is the eye,
looking through the whole Man, within and without: him, for his thoughts, words,
and deeds. This is the Lords Candle, searching all the inward parts of the
belly, Prou. 20. 27. But how is this? By beholding the Rule with the Act, as
before is noted: for by this, David's Conscience, expressed by the word reins,
taught him, Psalm. 16. 7. 8. setting the Lord, that is, his Commandments
before him, as the Rule for direction. The Rule and Act seen together is the
very life of Conscience: these two together make Conscience, as body and soul
make a Man.

If these be feuered, Man is not led by Conscience, but by some other thing, as
Sense, Will, Appetite, Fantasy, Imagination, examples of other, custom,
commands, counsel and advise of men; or by Satan's suggestion deluding and
beguiling.

Remember this Ouerseer, this Eye, if I may so say, of God within us; for what
it sees, God sees; we care to hide ourwayes from men; but we cannot cover
them from our Consciences, which will be as a thousand witnesses one day, and
now here behold us as we be.

CHAP. 12. Of the second act of Conscience.
COnscience seeing, and diligently observing Man in all his courses open and
secret, within him and without him; it then acquaints himself with himself
making him to see, and know himself to be truly that which indeed he is, by
beholding the Rule with his actions. The glass without the eye seeing into it,
cannot show to a man his countenance; nor the eye, if the glass be wanting;
but both together: So is it in this; the eye of Conscience beholding the Rule,
and reflecting upon man's thoughts, words, and deeds, it tells him plainly
between God and him, that he is honest or dishonest, chaste or unclean,
merciful or a niggard, compassionate or hardhearted, humble or proud, upright
or fraudulent, easily entreated or reuengefull.

Therefore learn truly of thy Conscience what thou art, and how thy state
stands between God and thee. Rest not upon thy conceit, nor upon the report of
thy Neighbors, neither upon men's flatteries, nor upon men's evil speeches; but
go to the plain dealing of thy Conscience looking to the Rule, and what it
says that believe to be true, whether it speak well or ill. For it fears not
to tell thee the truth, it cannot flatter, lie, nor cogge, neither will it
slander thee, nor lay any thing to thy charge unjustly: but as the Rule and Act
agree, so will it tell thee what thou art in Gods presence.

CHAP. 13. Of the third act and office of Conscience.
COnscience playing the part of a true friend, and not of a flatterer, and
discovering man to himself concerning his ways, either good or evil, in the
next place it becomes to be his Director and Teacher, as David's Conscience
taught him, Psalm. 16. 7. It is like a good Schoolmasters, teaching and well
ordering his Scholars.

Now this office of Conscience is exercised, as a Guide and Director, in three
things, either commanded, or forbidden, or indifferent.

Section 1. Of things commanded.
COnscience directs in duties commanded, and this it does by instigation,
upon the Understandings information, Isai. 30. 21. In which place the Knowledge
informs and says, This is the way; then the Conscience stirs and sets Man
forward, saying, Walk in it. Thus did it with Pilate, who was informed that
Christ was righteous, that he of envy was delivered to him; yea also he
himself found nothing in Christ worthy of death; therefore his conscience moved
him to do him justice, it said to him, Deliver him, set him free, pronounce him
innocent, wash thy hands of innocent blood. This office of Conscience made him
for a while so bestir himself, as Matthew shows Chap. 27. though passion of
worldly fear ouer-bore it at the last.

Section 2. Of things forbidden.
COnscience as it stirs up man to his duty; so it seeks to restrain and
bridle from evil. For upon information of any thing to be sin, it presently
sends out a prohibition. Reuben knew it was not lawful to kill his brother
Joseph; therefore said Conscience to him, beware thou then, do it not, but
seek to deliver him out of the hands of the rest, as he did, Genesis 37. 21.
Joseph knew adultery to be sin against God, therefore conscience forbids him,
and commanded him to deny her request, and to fly out of the room Genesis 39. 8.
9. 12.
where she was, as he did.

Section 3. Of things indifferent, and Rules thereof.
COnscience directs a man even in and about things of themselves indifferent,
which are neither commanded nor forbidden: because the word prescribes rules
to be observed in the use of indifferent things, which rules are these.

1. That it be expedient and profitable, 1. Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23. 2. That it
be not to the loss of Christian liberty, to be brought under the power
thereof, 1. Cor. 6. 12. 3. That we become not an offense, Romans 14. 20. or a
stumbling block to the weak, and cause them by our example to be emboldened
to do that, which otherwise their conscience does not approve of, Romans 14. 13.
1. Cor. 8. 9. 10. 13. this is called the wounding of their conscience, 1. Cor.
8. 12. 4. That the thing tend to edifying; that is, to instruct and further
others in the study of piety, and of welldoing, To. 14. 19. 1. Cor. 10. 23. 5.
That it be for decency and order, 1. Cor. 14. 40. 6. That it tend to peace,
not grieuing others, to make them to speak evil, Romans 14. 15. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
30. 7. And lastly, that God may thereby be glorified, 1. Cor. 10. 31.

To these Rules Conscience has an eye in the use of things indifferent; of
which, in respect of themselves, no question for conscience sake should be
made, 1. Cor. 10. 25. 27. but only as the Rules bind Conscience in the use
thereof, according to which it warrants or inhibits us. Thus it dealt with Paul,
allowing him liberty to please all men (in things indifferent) to gain some
to God, 1. Cor. 10. 33. but otherwise, when it should offend any good
Christian, then it restrained him, though the matter in it self was very
indifferent, 1. Cor. 8. 13. Romans 14. 21.

Thus we see how Conscience directs in all these three; yet not at all times
alike, no not in the best: and with some difference in men, as in apprehension
they be quick or slow, or sound of judgment or weak to judge: for thereafter
does Conscience more or less move to well doing, or more or less restrain
and bridle from evil.

Seeing this is the act of Conscience in all these, let us hearken thereunto:
and do what we do for Conscience sake, that is, because our Conscience
dictates to us our duty herein from the Lord, To. 13. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 13.

If this be so, then hence may be reproved, First, such as regard not
Conscience direction, neither in things commanded, nor forbidden, but live as
void of all Conscience* Secondly, such as hearken to it sometime, and in some
things; but in other things, at some other time regard it not. Thirdly, such as
think Conscience to have nothing to do in things indifferent, and therefore
do they take what liberty they list herein, not caring to be offensive, and to
grieve others: but let such consider these things: First, that the Apostle has
prescribed Rules herein, which Conscience binds unto. Secondly, that he
propounds his own example, as one strictly observing the same. Thirdly, that
he presses the keeping of the Rule, 1. Corint. 10. 28. 29. Fourthly, that he
disswadeth from the careless breach of the Rules, Romans 14. and 1. Cor. 8. and
10. And thus much for the third act and office of Conscience: which too many
are ignorant of, and few regard to take notice of, and to follow as they ought.

CHAP. 16. Of the fourth act and office of Conscience.
COnscience, upon it directing of man, does observe him well, whether he does
obey, or disobey, and thereafter sets down both his obedience and rebellion,
and so it becomes Gods Register or Notarie, to keep in record all things which
man does here in the body, whether it be good or evil, against the Judgment
Day, where account must be made of all things, secret as well as open, 2. Cor.
5. 10. Eccles. 12. 14.

Thus is Conscience continually exercised, though it seem to be dead, and to
say nothing: for this must we know, That though Conscience be not ever
speaking to Rebels against God, yet is it ever writing. Therefore has it the
name of a book, Revel. 20. 12. in which God will have set down all things. By
this is it, that God will set all wicked men's sins before every one of them
in order, Psalm. 50. 21. Of this writing speaks Job, Chap. 13. 26. who thereby
was made to behold the sins of his youth: by this, after many years, the
Patriarchs did see their own envy, their unnatural cruelty to their brother,
Genesis 42. 21. for time blots out no sin, but repentance, and pardon from
heaven.

Let us therefore now learn to take heed what we do; for God has set a Spy
over us to watch our ways, and to note them down, all our thoughts,
affections, inclinations, purposes, resolutions, words and deeds, to remember
us of them before God, when he shall please to call us to an account.

As this is terrible to the wicked upon due consideration of his manifold
evils; so is it comfortable to such as live godly, for their well-doing is
written up for their consolation, though the ungrateful World take no notice
thereof, and forget them.

CHAP. 15. Of the fifth act and office of Conscience.
COnscience, as a faithful Scribe, having written down every thing, good and
bad, it becomes a witness, Romans 9. 1. My Conscience bears witness, says
Saint Paul: which act of it is twofold, either with us, or against us, as we
may see in Romans 2. 15.

Section 1. Of Conscience witnessing with us.
THis act of Conscience is called excusing, To. 2. 15. and in witnessing for us
it has respect both to time and thing.

1. For time, either past, or present, or to come: concerning time past, we see
an example in Job, whose conscience, by the help of Memory, witnessed many
good things for him, Chap. 23. 11. 12. and 29 12. 17. So likewise in Joseph,
Genesis 40. 15. and in Saint Paul, Act. 23. 1. and in the Prophet Samuel, 1. Sam.
12. 3. for what they spoke for their justification, it was uttered by the
warrant of Conscience in such holy men: and not from an impudency of face, as
the wicked do.

For the time present, we have an example in Saint Paul, who had his Conscience
witnessing with him for his present estate, 1. Cor. 4. 4. for his words, and
also for the inward affection of the heart, To. 9. 1. 2. The like we have in
Peter after his fall, whose Conscience, after repentance unfeigned, made him to
appeal to Christ touching his love: his conscience encouraged him to say to
Christ, Thou know that I love thee, Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 17.

Thus we see how Conscience witnesses for us for time past and present. Some
men's consciences may bear witness for the time past, as Hymeneus, and
Alexanders, and Demas might; but not for the present, because they fell away.
But a Paul's conscience will witness for the time past, and time present too,
2. Tim. 1. 3. Heb. 13. 18.

Touching the time to come, conscience is not altogether silent: not that it
can witness for us, what we yet never thought, spoke, or did; but, in respect
of our resolution for the time to come, it can witness with us, that we do
resolve to do well, and endeavor it, as Paul speaks, Act. 24. 16. and as Job
said, that his heart should not reproach him so long as he lived, Job 27. 6.

2. For the thing it bears us witness of, which is both for matter and manner.
For matter, Nehemiah his conscience stood for him, Nehem. 13. 14. 22. for
manner, Saint Paul's in his teaching, 2. Cor. 1. 12. that it was in godly
simplicity and sincerity: so Abimelechs conscience witnessed for his integrity
and innocence in taking Sarah, Genesis 20. 6. For both matter and manner, in
Hezekiah, Isai. 38 3. he walked with God, and this he did uprightly.

Labor to have Conscience witness both; for many men's consciences will
witness for them, that they have been at Church, heard the Word, prayed, sung
Psalms, received the Sacraments; but it will not witness for them, for the
name of doing; but rather condemn them for their vnpreparednes, their
hypocrisy, mere formality, etc.

Section 2. Of Conscience witnessing against us.
THis act of Conscience is called accusing, To. 2. 15. and as in excusing it
has regard to time and thing; so here in this likewise.

Concerning the time; First, past, it accused Joseph's brethren of that which
was committed long before, Genesis 42. 21. so it did Shimei, 1. Kin. 2. 44. David,
2. Sam. 24. 10. Adonibezek, Judge. 1. 5. and the Jews, Act. 2. 37. Secondly,
for the time present, it wrought upon the Scribes and Pharisees, Ioh. 8. 7 9.
So upon Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 6. the Lepers of Samaria, 2. King. 7. 9. and upon
Felix, Act. 24. 25. accusing them for their sinful courses wherein they lived;
as also of their irresolution to mend for the time to come.

As touching matter and manner, Conscience will not halt. It will tell David of
his blood-guiltinesse, 2. Sam. 12. Psalm. 51. and it will accuse Judas for his
treason. As also other for the ill manner, and by-end in their otherwise good
actions; as Hamor and Sichemites for receiving circumcision for worldly and
carnal respects: Iehu for his counterfeit zeal; Scribes and Pharisees for
their fasting, praying, giving of alms; Simeon and Leui for pretending
Religion to be revenged; some for following Christ for loaves, Ioh. 6. 22. 24.
and the Jews for their hypocritical fasting for a day, Isai. 38. And thus
much for the fifth act and office of Conscience.

Section 3. Of some questions propounded and answered concerning the accusation
of Conscience.
Quest. 1. WHether this power to accuse was in Adam before his fall?

Answ. It was, but not in act; because there was in him no matter, or cause
whereby conscience should accuse him: yet that it had power, it is clear; for
presently upon his transgression it accused him. And the Text says, that their
eyes were opened, that is, the eye of the Understanding, and the eye of the
Conscience, by which they knew what they had committed against God. Their eyes
were opened, but no new quality wrought in the soul, other then they had
before.

Quest. 2. If aptness to accuse was in the Creation, it may be asked, Whether
it be now an evil Conscience that accuses.

Answ. It is not simply evil: First, because this power was and is from God.
Secondly, because God does approve of it when it accuses rightly, 1. Ioh. 3.
23. Thirdly, because herein it is as Gods Register book, by which he will
proceed against the wicked at last day, Revel. 20. Fourthly, because it is a
means of much good, through Gods blessing, as of sorrow for sin, of fear to
offend, and becomes as a preparatiue to repentance sometime, Act. 2. 37.
Fifthly, because it is in the best of Gods children, and a blessed means to
work in them renewed repentance upon a fall.

Quest. 3. If it be not to be called an evil Conscience, whether may it be
termed a good Conscience?

Answ. From the accusation simply it cannot be called a good conscience:
First, because it is a defectiuenesse, in respect of that peace which man had
in the Creation, and shall enjoy in heaven. Secondly, because it follows upon
Adams fall as a punishment for sin here, and the worm in hell hereafter.
Thirdly, for that all the wicked have an accusing conscience, but not a good
conscience.

Therefore the conscience, from the very act of accusing, cannot have the name
of either a good or an evil conscience, but as the person is, in whom it is.
For if he be evil, his conscience is evil, though in some thing it excuse
him: and if he be a good man, his conscience is good, though it sometime
accuse him.

CHAP. 16. Of the sixth act and office of Conscience.
WHen Conscience has eyed well Man, made him acquainted with himself, written
down his thoughts, his doings, and sayings, accused or excused him, then it
sits down, as a just Judge of Oyer and Terminer, to hear and determine, to
give sentence, against which there is no appeal to be made.

This sentence is twofold, either to acquit and absolve, or to bind and
condemn, Romans 14. 22. 1. Co. 11. 31. 1. Ioh. 3. 20. 21.

In condemning, it makes him see his sin, and so causes him to think and
speak basely of himself, and of his ill deeds, as David did; I have done very
foolishly, 2. Sam. 24. 10. and was as a beast, Psalm. 73. 22. and to confess
with the prodigal son, that he is unworthy to be called Gods child, Luke
15. Lastly, it will make him apply, as justly deserved, the hand of God against
him, as Jonah did, Chap. 1. 12. and David, 2. Sam. 24 17. and withal to
acknowledge the Lord to be righteous, as did Rehoboam, 2. Chron. 12. 6.

In absoluing it does not reproach a man, Job 27. 6. but does make him stand
upon his innocence (wherein he is guiltless) as it did David against Saul's
malice, envy, and false accusations.

This Judge let us take notice of, and labor for absolution from it, and
beware of its sentence of condemnation, for God will second it; who is greater
then thy conscience, 1. Ioh. 3. 20.

Quest. How may we know when Conscience does indeed absolve or condemn.

Answ. By the effect and work of it upon the heart presently upon the sentence
given.

1. If it acquit, then it will make the heart rejoice, 2. Cor. 1. 12. It will
comfort him against all that may be said against him, as Job was by it, say
his comfortles friends against him what they could. It will make him lightly to
esteem the perverse opinions, and vain censuring of him, 1. Cor. 4. 3. It
will make him bold toward God, 1. Ioh. 3. 21. and before men, as bold as a
Lion, without fear, as Paul was before the Council, because he had lived in
all good conscience, Act. 23. 1.

2. If it condemn, then the heart is made sad and sorrowful, as it was in
Judas: then it works shame, Genesis 3. fear, Wisd. 17. 11. trembling in a Felix,
and horror in Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 6. and disquiets the whole Man. And thus
much for all the offices of Conscience.

CHAP. 17. Of the reasons why God has placed such a thing in the soul of man.
GOd has been pleased to place this thing which we call Conscience, to
exercise its offices in man for many reasons.

1. To be a witness for God, in his just proceeding against man, to enforce
him to say, that God is just.

2. To make a man, in despite of all Atheistical suggestions from Satan, to
acknowledge a God, and that he is, first, a God of power, that can set such an
ouer-ruler in man. Secondly, a God of wisdom, that has put such a Spy in
man, as can search into the heart; and such an Intelligencer, as can find out
the deceits thereof, and make man acquainted therewith. Thirdly, a God of mercy,
that was pleased to give unto Man such a trusty Aduiser, and such a faithful
Counselor to direct him, if he will be advised and counseled. 4. A God of
justice, that has so ready a Tormenter in Man to punish him, if needs he will
be rebellious, and porsist in sin.

3. To procure due reverence, and obedience to Gods commands, to his service
and worship, and to all his ordinances, which without this Conscience Man
corrupt would never do.

4. For Man's special good sundry ways; as first, to make a Man to know
himself, and to see into himself, for the better ordering and disposing of
himself toward God and Man. Secondly, to hearken unto Gods word, and to make
use thereof, inwardly and outwardly, in life and conversation, which men would
never do, if they had no conscience. Thirdly, to know how to apply to our
selves Gods judgments, with fear and awfulnesse to his Majesty. Fourthly, to
uphold humane society in families, in Towns, Cities, in Church and
Commonweal. For if in any of these any thing be amiss, it is because men have
not Conscience ruling, nor the Court of Conscience kept within them.

CHAP. 18. Of the excellency of Conscience above all other faculties in the
soul.
COnscience, that prepotent faculty, far excels all the other faculties
many ways.

1. It is the most principal part of Gods Image in Man, and most resembling
God in sincerity, uprightness, impartialitie without sinister respect, it is
all one to the rich and poor; it encourages the meanest in a virtuous course,
and will not flatter the greatest in any evil way.

2. It is as Gods Vicegerent over all the rest, and over the whole Man; it
commands and rules him and them; it keeps Court, to which every power of the
soul owes homage and service; to which Court they must come upon summons, to
the sentence whereof they must stand without appeal.

3. It retains more rectitude and original purity (if any at all remain)
then any of the other. For it would never fail in performance of its duty, if
the other did not fail it, and corrupt it.

4. It is that only which discouers a man to himself, and all that which is
in him, to make him judge of himself aright.

5. It is not subject to Man, nor can a Devil ouerbeare it, but it will make
him to tremble.

6. It is that which only can and does in Man frame him to that which is good,
and restrain him from evil, which power is not in any of all the other
faculties.

7. And lastly, it is that within Man which God will judge him by at the last
day, Revel. 20.

Therefore seeing it is so excellent, and excelling the rest, let us most
esteem it, and make most of it, as our dearest friend, or our dreadfulst foe.

CHAP. 19. That all men, as they ought, are not subject to the authority of
Conscience, and what be the causes thereof.
THough Conscience be so excellent, and have from God over Man so great
authority, yet is it of most but poorly obeyed: for some will allow what
Conscience condemns, Romans 14. 22. Some will deny, as Caine, what it tells him
is true: some will not amend, though it make them, like a Foelix, to tremble:
some will put it away, that it may not trouble them in their falling away, as
did Hymeneus and Alexander; in the most it has little command, and the
principal reasons are these.

1. Is from Conscience it self, which since Adams fall has lost of it
sovereignty, and commands but weakly in most, by reason of that hereditary
corruption which sticks to it, as well as to the other faculties.

2. Is abuse of the wit for men's private ends, which made Ahitophel join with
Absalom against David, and Jeroboam to set up his golden Calves: for the
Conscience of either of these could not but tell them, that they did most
wickedly against both God and man: The abuse of wit, in finding subtle
distinctions to deceive Conscience, is that which makes the Word to have no
power to bind, nor Conscience to use it authority over man: but men will run
into errors, superstitions, and other evils many, and manifold.

3. Is wilfulness, as in some Israelites, Deuteronomy. 1. 42. 43: and once in David,
when he would number the people, 2. Sam. 24. Satan prevailing therein, 1.
Chro. 21. This made Jonah disobey God, yea to contend with him, and Simeon and
Leui to be brethren in evil, and cruelty. Genesis 49. 6. Where this
wilfulness is, it makes him presume against his conscience, as did Jeroboam,
and Amaziah, and Ioash, when the Prophets did reprove them.

4. Is violence of affection, ouer-swaying Conscience, silencing it, or giving
a deaf ear to it: violent lust ouerbore Conscience in Ammon abusing his
Sister Thamar, David in adultery with Bathshebah, Ruben in abusing his Fathers
concubine, and such other like examples. Covetous desires hinder Conscience
works, as we may see in Judas, and in those mentioned in Ezech. 33. 31. 32. a
crowd of worldly businesses, and desire to be rich, hinder the voice of
Conscience, that it cannot be heard, nor attended unto. Worldly fear, the
displeasure of the mighty will make a Pylate do against his conscience
clearly convicted, and conuicting him: Fear made Peter bar up his conscience
from commanding him a while; Desire of honor, and to keep a man's place in
greatness, 2. Sam. 2. 8. with 3. 9. 18.
will make an Abner, against his own knowledge and conscience, withstand David
in his right, and uphold an other in a wrong title. Anger in Jonah, and
reuengefullnesse in Simeon and Leui made them neglect Conscience. Hatred and
envy in Cain, in Ioh. 12. 42. 43.
Scribes and Pharisees love of man's praise, more then Gods, made the authority
of the Court of Conscience within many of the chief Rulers to be of no force.

4. Is not to give credit to Gods threats, but to make a peradventure of them.
This made Eve to slip by Conscience, as thousands now do, because they believe
not the threatenings of God in his word, and vttred by his ministers.

V. Is great prosperity. This made Manasses to run his sinful courses, not
hearkening to the Word and his conscience, till he was in misery, 2. Chro. 33.
10. 12. These are hindrances to the command of Conscience, and in most make it
to have little or no authority over them.

CHAP. 20. Of the things which will make Man to hearken unto Conscience.
TO further the authority of Conscience, and to make it preualent within us, we
must,

1. Be conversant in Gods Word, and suffer it to take place in us.

2. Believe certainly the Lords threats against sin, as Ahab did; for then
Conscience wrought in him something, 1. King. 21. 21. 28.

3. Remember what we hear from God, this wrought upon Peter's Conscience, Mat.
27.

4. Moderate ever our passions, and bridle lusts, that reason and religion may
take place.

5. Learn the end and use of adversity, of afflictions and crosses.

6. Admit of, and submit to a powerful ministry, such a ministry as Nathans
was to David, Paul's to Felix, John Baptists to Herod, and Peter's to the Jews,
Act. 2. And avoid flattering Teachers, for they strengthen men in sin, that
they cannot yield to Conscience. Ier. 23 14.

7. And lastly, be persuaded that the voice of Conscience is Gods voice within
us. By these may we advance the power and authority of Conscience over us, and
so become obedient thereunto. Now follows the kinds of Conscience.

CHAP. 21. Of the kinds of Conscience, and strst of the evil Conscience.
COnscience is in it self but one; yet, because of the qualities thereof, it
is said to be twofold, a bad and a good Conscience: that there is an evil
Conscience it is clear, of which Saint Paul speaks, Heb. 10. 22.

This evil Conscience is Heb. 9. 12.
the Conscience unpurged from dead works, and is in Tit. 1. 15.
every unregenerate whose mind is defiled.

There is a difference between evil in the Conscience, and an evil
Conscience; The evil in it may have respect to the impuritie of it remaining
in the very Regenerate; because it is not perfectly renewed; but some
corruption may stain it, as well as the other faculties: but the evil
Conscience is wholly corrupt.

Section 1. In whom it is.
THis evil Conscience is in every one borne after the flesh, in all the
Children of Adam, partakers of his fall. None borne in original sin has a
good conscience naturally; but it is corrupt from the womb, as the whole soul
is.

Section 2. How it comes to be so.
THe Conscience comes to be evil by the hereditary corruption, and inbred
polution; by the mind defiled by unbelief. Tit. 1. 15, and by dead works,
Heb. 9. 12. till it be purged by Christ's blood;

Section 3. How it continues to be evil.
THis evil Conscience so continues, First, by the forsaid ill birth in him
that is not borne anew: Secondly, by ill breeding and bad education, Thirdly,
For want of a faithful and painful ministry, for informing of judgment,
and rectifying of Conscience. Fourthly, The want of Gods blessing in the
ministry. For a Paul only plants, and an Apollos waters. Fifthly, hatred in an
Achab against a M^chaiah, 1. King. 22.
against an Eliah, envy in Scribes and Pharisees against Christ and his
Apostles, hating reproof, and Pro. 29. 1. Psalm. 50.
to be reformed. Sixthly, affecting soothing teachers, flattring friends,
believing them, and the deceitfulness of a man's own heart. Seventhly, the
turning of the grace of God into wantonness. Eighthly, to abuse the light of a
man's knowledge making it stoop to his will; Ninthly, to be blinded by Satan.
Lastly, pride and self conceitednesse, Psalm. 36. 2.
pleasing himself in his own way. These suffer not conscience to be reformed,
but keep it ill still.

Section 4. Of the means to be used for amending it.
NOthing is so bad, but good means may amend it; this evil Conscience may be
bettered, both in children, and in others of more years of discretion.

In children by good education and instruction in Gods word, by correction with
instruction, by restraint from evil words and deeds, and from evil company,
by timely employing them in some vocation, and by holding them under
government in a good course.

In other of years, by getting acquaintance with the rule, to understand it
well, by squaring their whole life thereafter, by daily searching and trying
their ways by the rule; and by observing their agreeing with it, to hold on
with increase, or the discord and disagreeing from it, and then endeavor to be
reformed. And thus much for the evil Conscience in general.

CHAP. 22. Of the twofold distinction of the evil Conscience.
THe evil Conscience spoken of in the former Chapter may be thus
distinguished, into either the still and quiet, or the stirring and unquiet ill
Conscience: both of these have their several differences.

The still evil Conscience may be thus diuersely called the dead Conscience,
the blind, the sleepie, the secure, the lukewarm, the large, the cheuerill,
the benumbed, and cauterized Conscience, all these nine differences will
appear in the handling.

The stirring evil Conscience may also diuersely be named: it may be called an
erroneous Conscience, a superstitious, a scrupulous, a terrifying, and a
desperate Conscience.

I know the learned handling the Treatise of Conscience do touch many of these,
as it were but by the way; and do not speak of the^ distinctly: but I find
clear differences between every of them, one from an other; And I observe
that the more particularly things are laid open, the more clearly man's
judgment is informed and the truth becomes the more evident. Let not any
herein unjustly censure me of too great curiosity: for, I suppose, I cannot be
too curious in finding out and discovery of Conscience.

CHAP. 23. Of the still and quiet ill Conscience.
THere is a still and quiet ill Conscience; yet not so still, and quiet, as not
stirring at all, but it is so termed, for that commonly and for the most part
it is still, or so weakly stirring, as if it stirred not at all. One compares
this to a dumb minister in a Parish, that either cannot or will not speak to
reform his people, but lets them quietly run on to destruction.

Section 1. In whom it is.
THis is the Conscience of all dull Nabals, and the muddy spirited; of such as
rest upon their conceited good and quiet natures; of such as be ciuilized and
rest upon their ciuility: of the high and proud conceited fellow in his outward
prosperity, wise in his own eyes, and clean in his own sight, yet not
cleansed from his filthiness: and it is the Conscience of all such, in whom the
strong man keeps peaceable possession. Luke 11. 21.

Section 2. It is an evil Conscience.
THis is an evil Conscience be it never so quiet, because it performs not it
office: because it lets man alone in his wicked courses, which a good
conscience neither can, nor will permit. Because it suffers a man to run to
hell headlong, without stay.

Section 3. The causes hereof.
THis ill Conscience thus quiet happens many ways. First, through ignorance,
and especially wilful, when a man knows not the rule that binds conscience,
nor cares at all to be acquainted with it, nor ruled by it. They say of the
Rule, as Pharaoh did of the Lord, who is the Lord, I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go.

2. Through selfe-pleasing and an unsound applauding of a man's self; because
he professes religion, though it be without power; because as a Herod he does
many things, and hears a John Baptist now and then, though in his beloved sin
he hates to be reformed: because he sees himself, perhaps, free from the
fall of a David, of a Noah, of a Lot, of a Peter.

3. By his blessing of Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
himself, upon the former grounds, against all threats and legal
denunciations, as not belonging unto him: but to persons more vile: for his
part he has made a covenant with death and hell, Isai. 28.

4. By seeing and knowing that his ways and course is conformable to the
common fashion and esteem of the world, that his state is quiet, and he
living Neighbourly as others do, and held to be a quiet man.

5. By avoiding whatsoever may stir the Conscience, to make it unquiet any
way; as the reading of Gods word, meditation upon his law, a sharp reproouing
ministry coming home to the heart.

And lastly, serious examination of themselves in Gods sight by his Law.

These be the causes, why many cry peace, peace, when there is no peace.

Section 4. How a man may know when his quiet Conscience is this ill Conscience.
THat a man therefore may not be deceived with this false peace; he may know
this quietness of his Conscience not to be good, thus.

1 From the false ground, of this quietness, such as before is mentioned, and
not from faith and repentance.

2. From the ever quietness thereof, never having felt it to disquiet thee:
for no man naturally being corrupt has a quiet good Conscience.

3. By it suffering thee in evils, and especially in these, In formal
worshipping of God, hearing, praying, receiving the Sacrament without any power
at all of Religion. In continual neglect of religious government of thy
family, In living out of, or idly in a calling; for such a one is slothful,
unprofitable, and wicked, Mat. 25, and therefore cannot have a good quiet
Conscience. In being respectlesse of thy Pastor, especially for seeking thy
reformation, in profaning the Lords day. Sins, which these quiet Consciences
never trouble themselves with: and yet are the most lively touchstone of an
unregenerate spirit.

4. By not daring to bring thy thoughts, words, and deeds to the rule, and
there take a straight account thereof, which a good Conscience dare do.

5. By thy unquietness, without comfort, at the preaching of the law, at the
pressing of the strict marks of Gods children, and the discovery thereby of thy
self to be none of them, but one as yet separated from them. A good conscience
will comfort a man in hearing such marks, and of such a close pressing of these
things to their consciences, because he that has a good Conscience has these
marks, and is free from the rigor and curse of the Law.

Lastly, by the trouble and fear it works in thee, in sickness because of
death, in time of affliction and Gods hand upon thee, apprehending GODS wrath,
without any comfort; for surely then the former quietness was not good:
because a good quiet conscience is not so terrifying at such times, but speaks
peace to him that has it, as well then, as in health, and prosperity, except
it happen otherwise under some strong temptation.

Section 5. Of the effects of this still, quiet ill Conscience.
IT shall be profitable to every man to try the quietness of his conscience;
for the effects of the still il Conscience are very fearful. First, it lulles
him a sleep in an unsanctified course of life, making him believe that he has
a good Conscience, because it is quiet. Secondly, it makes him hereupon
carnally secure till death and destruction come upon him; so it deceives him,
and damneth him. Here it lets him be wicked, and hereafter to become most
wretched: here at rest, there in torment: here it will not disquiet, but there
be the gnawing worm for ever.

Section 6. Of the remedy hereof.
THe fault of this ill conscience is, that it is still and quiet when it should
not; the remedy therefore is to make it speak when, and as often as it ought
in directing man that he go not amiss, and in checking man for sin when he
has trespassed, and this is, by removing the false grounds of this false peace
before named. Then secondly, by knowing the sound causes of a quiet conscience,
faith in Christ Jesus, repentance for sin, and a holy conversation and search
whether we have them. Thirdly, By informing our understandings of our duties
according to the Rule, and applying it daily to our conscience, till it speak,
and perform it offices, as the Rule binds it.

CHAP. 24. Of the dead Conscience, the first difference of the still quiet ill
Conscience.
THe dead Conscience is the quiet ill Conscience, as it were without all life
and motion, as a thing that is dead.

This is the Conscience of Infants, as not yet having the use of their
understanding: also of mad persons, which have lost their reason, frantic,
and lunatic. It is the conscience of all such Ephesians. 2. 1.
as be dead in sins and trespasses, as the prodigal Luke 15. 31. 1. Tim. 5. 6
son once, the wanton widow, and all mere natural persons accustomed to
sin, and such as be past Ephesians. 4. 18.
feeling, committing wickedness with greediness.

The causes of this deadness is the loss of the light of the understanding,
the life of conscience, without which it is dead. Also the vncapablenesse of
instruction in some sorts; and insensiblenesse of the authority of the Rule to
bind Conscience.

The remedy is the light of understanding, to labor for knowledge and
instruction, and to feel the power thereof upon Conscience.

CHAP. 25. Of the blind Conscience.
THe blind conscience is the still ill conscience, called the blindness of the
heart, Ephesians. 4. 18. for blindness properly cannot be ascribed to the heart;
but to the mind or conscience which is here meant by the heart, because the mind
is mentioned before in the text.

This is the conscience of all before conversion, living in gross ignorance
without understanding, of which there beetwo sorts.

Section 1. Of the blind Conscience of Heathen.
THe first sort are the Gentiles of whom the Apostle properly speaks in Ephesians.
4. The causes of which blindness he there sets down, to be their
understanding darkened, their ignorance, and their vnsensiblenes, being past
feeling, verse. 18. 19.

The woeful effects whereof were these, they gave themselves over to
lasciviousness; and they wrought all uncleanness with greediness, as the
text shows.

Section 2. Of the blind Conscience of Christians.
THe other sort of such as have this blind conscience are the grossly ignorant
Christians, such as live in wilful and affected ignorance, Pro. 1. 29. and
19. 2.
hating instruction, whose mind is not good; whom the Lord threats to show
neither favor nor Esaias 27* 11
mercy unto.

Of these blind Conscienced people there be two sorts. the stone-blind, and the
pur blind.

The stone-blind are such as have lost the very light of nature, as savage, as
heathen, who are called Darkness. These can see no more Ephesians. 8.
then men can see in darkness. Such be they as never had Gods sunshine of
his Word among them; but through rudeness are beastlike, and through
ignorance, but for only name of christians, are no better then heathen in
brutish qualities.

The Pur-blind are such as see only great things, and the same not far off
neither, of such speaks Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 1. 9.

These speak of God, of Christ, and the holy Ghost only by hear say. They
know Gods will only in gross in some generals; their best rule is some common
principles in nature, experience, and what they see others do, further they
cannot go.

Now as their understanding is, so is their conscience: which happens to them,
through want of knowledge and other graces, 2. Pet. 1. 5. 9. by their mind
defiled, and unbelief settled in them, Tit. 1. 15. By their self
conceitednesse, Reu. 3. 17.
which is the property of the blind and ignorant, and Mat. 23. 16 19.
of envious and malicious persons, who also are blind.

The effects of this blindness of mind and Conscience are, to be given over
Romans 1. 22.
to vile affections, idolatry, and filthy uncleanness of body. To be
disobedient Tit. 1. 16.
and to every good work void of judgment and reprobate denying God, very
Atheists, and abominable persons.

Section 3. Of the misery of such.
SVch as be blind in mind, and so have a blind conscience, are miserable, whose
misery may be lively set out by one that is bodily blind. This man, first, has
no direction by eyesight; no more the other by conscience. Secondly, He goes
whithen his will and affections lead him without sight, sort his without
conscience. Thirdly, when he goes whither he intends, by himself, it is
either by mere imagination, or by hearsay, as he is told of others, or by
custom, through often going, or by feeling; so is it with him that has a
blind conscience. His service to God is imaginary, or by tradition, or by
custom, but not by direction of Conscience seeing the rule, or from his
feeling of Gods common favors and outward blessings; which failing, they are
at their wits end, and make an end of their devotions. Fourthly, he needs a
leader, and is guided by him, but cannot judge well of him: So the blind
conscience is led by his minister, or by others, but cannot judge aright of
them. Fifthly, he, tho in danger near a pit, yet fears not, till he be in: no
more this, till he be in Hell. Sixthly, he will, by others telling untruly,
fear, where no danger is; so this will be terrified by doctrines and
commandments of men, as blind Papists be. Seventhly, he cannot see his
uncleanness, nor discern how it is with him: no more can this, who thinks,
through his blind conscience, that all is well with him, he is clean enough.
Lastly, he is never the better for sun shine: no more is this for the shining
light of the Gospel.

The remedy to cure this blindness of mind and conscience Re^u. 3. 18.
(for both ever go together) is that which

Christ prescribes to anoint Psalm. 19. 8. Ephesians. 1. 17. 18.
the eye with eiesalue: which is Gods Word and Spirit, by which the eyes be
opened: and with which S. Paul was sent to open peoples eyes, Act. 26. 18.

CHAP. 26. Of the sleepy Conscience.
THe sleepie conscience is the still ill conscience, doing it office after the
nature of one habitually slothful and lazy.

There is a difference between a sleepy conscience, and the conscience a sleep,
as much as between a sleepy and drowsy fellow, and he that is diligent and yet
some time falls a sleep.

A good man may have sometime his conscience a sleep, as David had, as the five
wise Virgins had, Mat. 25. 5, and as we read of the Cant. 5. 2.
Spouse in Canticles.

This happens of weakness and infirmity, through some violent and preualent
temptation: but it will quickly awaken upon the least knock of the voice of
Christ, Cant. 5. 2, upon a Nathans application, or upon a light affliction.

But the sleepie conscience, which is the conscience of every drowsy and lazy
Christian, who takes no pains for Religion, but is like a sleepie natured
fellow: who is soon asleep, hardly awakened, lazy in working, soon weary,
ready to give over, and no sooner left off but asleep again, doing nothing but
by enforcement, So fares it with a sleepy Conscience, which soon cease it
work, is hardly roused, works but weakly, soon giving over, and asleep
again, and cannot be kept on working, but by hearing of threats, and
beholding, but especially feeling the judgments of God.

Section 1. What makes this sleepy Conscience.
THis sleepy Conscience comes, first, from a lazy indisposition to get
knowledge. Secondly, From coldness in Religion, as sleep from cold humors,
and vaporous repletion of the brain. Thirdly, from doing our duties to God
perfunctorily resting upon the work wrought, without spirit or life in the
performance, as a lazy person does his work. Fourthly, from an auersenesse of
all good means, which may rouse up the Conscience from its sleepiness, as
hearing of sin sharply rebuked, and threats denounced. Fifthly, from earthly
contentment in pleasure, ease, profit, advancement, and vain company, which
rock the soul a sleep, making the mind and spirit drowzy in Christianduties,
whereby the Conscience is lulled a sleep.

Section 2. The remedies.
TO heal this drowzie sleepiness of Conscience, and thoroughly to awaken it,
is, first, to get the right knowledge of God, with a consideration of his
all-seeing presence before us, of his anger against sin, and power to punish,
and that he will do it justly without respect of person. Secondly, to set
before us Gods threats, the truth of his Word, punishments inflicted upon
others, not only sins committed, but severely for duties omitted. Thirdly, to
pray for a quickened spirit, and the spirit Ioh. 6. 63. Romans 8. 11.
that quickneth. Fourthly, to do ever our service to God, as in his presence,
with our minds raised up, our hearts awed with reverence of his Majesty; so as
in hearing we rouse up our spirits to hear attentively, to pray fervently, to
do what we do chearefully. Fifthly, to make an holy use of every cross,
even the least that may befall us, to provoke us to our duties. Sixthly, to
hear willingly words of reproof, and to admit of admonitions and
exhortations, as spurs to take off our dullness. Seventhly, to keep in
remembrance our duties, and to lay up in our hearts Gods Commandments, as
David did; and to ponder them, as Marie the Virgin did. Eighthly, to make some,
and in some cases, vows unto God, to prick us on in those necessary duties,
which we find our selves too slack in, as David did, Psalm. 119. 106. By these
forcible means, through Gods blessing, we shall awake our Consciences, to do
their offices lively.

CHAP. 27. Of the secure Conscience.
THe secure Conscience is another difference of the still ill Conscience, which
is somewhat like the former in some things, but differs in this, that it
freeth the heart from care altogether, the mind being employed to gather and
collect arguments for to prevent care and doubts about a man's state between
God and him.

Section 1. Whose Conscience this is.
THis is the Conscience of such as persuade Ier. 6. 13.
themselves of peace, crying Psa. 10. 6.
peace, peace, and say in heart, they shall never be moved; such as say in
their abundance, Soul take thy rest, eat now and Luke 12. 19.
drink, for thou have enough, be merry; such as write, though they look upon
the Articles between God and them, as many Churchwardens do in their Bill,
Omnia been. Such as, like the evil servant, will abuse his fellow-seruants,
will eat, drink, and Luke 12. 45.
be drunk; be carnally secure like those in Sodom, and in the old World, when
judgment hanged over their heads. Such as regard not the works of Esaias 5. 11.
12.
the Lord, but are sensual, despising the knowledge of God, and exercises of
religion, Job 21. 7. to 14.
in their outward prosperity.

Section 2. Of the causes hereof.
TO work this security in Conscience, the minds of such men are filled with
errors, and such Tenants they hold, as must needs make Conscience secure,
without working care and fear upon the heart; for they apprehend God to be
all of mercy, and separate him from all consideration of his justice in their
thought. They hold, that he which made all, will save all; that Christ died
also for all; that they do what they can, and as far as God will give them
leave, and more he will not require of them: that all sin, all are sinners,
even the precisest; the best do amiss sometime; and therefore they need not
make such a do to prevent sinning: that when they sin, they cry God mercy, and
hope therefore that he forgiues them; that when they sin in their mirth, they
think no ill; that in buying, selling, and in following of fashions, they do
but as the World does, as the times be, they must do as others do, if they
will live, and be esteemed of: that they may serve God at home, as well as at
Church; that occasions may make them ride on the Sabbath, go about worldly
business, and serve God too; that in laboring, though excessiuely, for to get,
they may so do, because of their charge; for he that prouides not for his
family, is worse then an Infidel: that they may do with their own what they
please: that they may make the best of it: that thoughts are free: that it is
best ever to do as most do; that the Religion of the present State is to be
so professed; that to be precise, as some be, is but a very foolery; that
there is time to repent at last gasp. These, and such like conceits of the
mind, makes Conscience secure, and the heart vain; the effects whereof are
licensiousnesse, neglect of all religious duties, and liberty to live even as
they list.

Section 3. Of the Remedies.
TO cure this secure Conscience, is to remove all these false conceits out of
the mind; to hold the way of life to be strait and narrow, and found of few;
to know the strict precepts in the Gospel, and that of denying a man's self,
and that of working out our salvation with fear and trembling: to consider how
far many have gone, and may go, and yet never come in heaven. To learn the
true and distinct properties of such as be godly, set down in holy writ. To
look to the life of our Lord Jesus, whose steps we are to follow. To remember
the sufferings of the Saints. To take good notice of Gods displeasure against
sin, even the least, as idle words, Adams eating of an Apple, Lots wife looking
back, the Man gathering of sticks on the Sabbath, Vzzah touching the Arc, the
Bethshemites but looking into it, and yet how the wrath of God came forth
against them. To meditate that death is certain, it may be sudden; that there
is a Judgment Day, where account must be made of every thing. By these truths
propounded to Conscience from judgment well informed, Conscience will work,
and shake men off from their security.

CHAP. 28. Of the lukewarm Conscience.
THe lukewarm Conscience is that evil Conscience, which is not tied to any
Religion particularly.

This is the Conscience of Adiaphorists, Time-seruers, men that be indifferent
for their Religion, this or that.

That which makes this, is first, their knowledge of many and differing
Religions in the World: Jewish, Turkish, and Christian. Secondly, their
observing of the varieties of Sects, and differing opinions in, and under one
and the same religion. Thirdly, their persuasion that yet in such
disagreements, every one living after his Faith, may be saved. Fourthly, their
want of judgment to discern true Religion from every false religion in their
true differences. Fifthly and lastly, from all these an evil Conclusion, which
is this, that it is no matter which they be of, so they be of one Religion.

Thus the Understanding deceived, it makes, as it were, the Conscience free,
vntieth it from the bond of any one particular Religion, whereupon follows
this luke-warmenesse, libertinisme, and indifferency to any Religion.

The Remedy for this is, Ephesians. 4. 5.
first, to know that there is but one Religion, whereof God is the Author, and
that all other are of the Devil, and tend unto death. Secondly, that there
must be opinions, yea heresies, that such as be approved 1. Cor. 11. 19.
may be made manifest. Thirdly, to have judgment to find out the true
Religion, and to be able to difference it from all false religions, or rather
superstitious See a little Book entitled, Good Christian look to thy Creed.
and Satanicall inventions. Fourthly, to strive to feel the power of this true
Religion; that so Conscience may be bound to hold us to the unfeigned
performance of the same.

CHAP. 29. Of the large Conscience.
THere is an evil large Conscience, a spacious and wide Conscience, like the
way to Hell.

This is the Conscience of such as can swallow down sins great and many;
that can admit of cart-loades thereof, without any rub or let to this
Conscience. This is the conscience of some worldlings, some of all sorts of
professions, usurers, extortioners and such like.

The cause of this spacious, and so large a Conscience, is the understanding
highly esteeming of profit and preferment; and in respect hereof
vnder-valueing, and vnder-prizing of Religion, of justice, and of upright
dealing.

Whence follows sinful practices to gain, and to come to advancement, giving
way to any sin that may hale in profit, make a man rich, and exalt his estate
in the World. No sin sticks in the way as sin, but only for the infamy
thereof, if openly known, or the danger of the Law, by which may ensue
punishment: otherwise, through largeness of Conscience, all is fish that comes
to net, all is lawful prey and booty, that may finely and cunningly be come
by.

The remedy to bound this wide conscience is by tying it strictly to the Rule
of righteousness, and by understanding justice, judgment, equity, and every
Prou. 2. 9.
good path for our right dealing.

CHAP. 30. Of the Cheuerill Conscience.
THere is a Cheueril ill Conscience, which is like Kids leather, which may be
made wide or strait.

This is the Conscience of him that can, as occasion serves his turn, make
large or straiten his conscience, playing fast or loose for his own advantage:
for he chooses, and picks out particular duties to observe, as best pleases
his humor, neglecting the rest.

This was the Conscience of Saul in his warfare 1. Sam. 15. and 14. 34. and 22.
17. 18.
against Amalek, who could spare the best, and destroy what was vile and
naught: he made conscience of the peoples eating of blood, but it was nothing
to hate David, to persecute him, and to murder 1. Chro. 13. 3.
the Lords Priests, and to neglect the Ark of God. This was Ioabs conscience,
he could abhor David's command to number the people; yet, to kill
treacherously Abner and Amasa, it was no scruple. Iehu could destroy the
idol-seruice to Baal; but hold up the golden Calves in Dan and Bethel. The
Scribes and Pharisees had their consciences strait to put Judas Mat. 27. 6.
wages into the Treasury, and to go into the Judgment Hall: but it was Ioh.
18. 28.
wide enough to give money to betray Christ, and to cause Pilate to put him to
death causelessly. Jews would not have Christ's Ioh. 19. 31.
body, and the two with him, to hang all night on the Cross, because of the
Sabbath following; but it troubled them not to consent to his death. Such a
conscience they had in 2. Cor. 11. 24.
whipping the Apostle, giving one stripe less then forty but not what cause
they had to whip him at all. Scribes and Pharisees could tithe Mint, Commin and
Annise; but yet let pass the weighty matters of the Law. This is a Papists
conscience, that will eat no flesh on Friday, but can seek by Gunpowder to
blow up the Parliament.

The Cause of such a Cheuerill Conscience is, First, that a man makes the Rule
of Conscience subject to his own will, by false interpretations, by subtle
distinctions; thereby weakening the power of the Rule, that it has not force
upon Conscience. Secondly, the secret and hypocritical reseruations in his
mind and heart in obeying the Rule, to which he never wholly can, nor will
submit himself. Thirdly, a deceitful and very false imagination of mind,
that the Rule is alterable, and may be enlarged, as may best serve their
turn, as Cardinal Cusanus once delivered in a letter to the Bohemians.

The Remedy is, to hold the Rule ever to be one and the same, impartial,
constant, unalterable, without varying, as God himself: also to be persuaded,
that we are to be wholly led by it, and not it to be framed to our own lusts.

CHAP. 31. Of the benumbed Conscience.
THe benumbed conscience is that which has lost it moving; as dead for a time,
as a member benumbed.

This is the conscience of such as have lost the feeling thereof by some foul
offense, lying therein without repentance. This may happen sometime to the
godly, to Joseph's Brethren, to a David for a while.

The causes hereof may be expressed by a similitude taken from a member
benumbed. First, A member becomes so, yea, the whole body after violent heat
and exercise by suddenly attracted cold. So a man very forward in Religion and
religious exercises, growing cold, by suddenly leaving them, living where the
word is not, and companying with others of no Religion, or with contemners of
it. Secondly, By a dead Palsy; So Conscience by some deadly sin. Thirdly, by
tying it hard so as the blood, wherein the life is, can have no passage, till
it be loosed; So Conscience is benumbed, when the mind is tied to the world so,
as it cannot be free to meditate upon Gods word: for the freedom of the mind
for holy meditation is as the life and blood to the Conscience. Fourthly, by
some violent blow: So Conscience by some violent suggestion of Satan, which for
the present may make a man senseless of his sinning. Fifthly, by being put out
of joint; So Conscience, which is put, as I may say, out of joint, when memory
has lost and forgotten what it should keep; to carry it from the mind to the
Conscience, touching things past, either of sin committed, or of duty omitted.
In this case, if memory fail, the understanding and Conscience are put out of
joint. Sixthly, a member becomes deadish by lying still, but crookedly, upon
some hard thing, and weight upon it, as the Arm will be, in bearing up the
head, and the elbow upon some hard board, or other thing. So Conscience is
benumbed, when the understanding is crookedly bent to crooked paths, the heart
hardened, and some heavy corruption pressing it down.

The effect is, that, during this time that the Conscience lies as dead, the
party is without remorse for sin; he cannot out of general reproves see
his fall, without a lively and clear application, as appears in David, when
Nathan spoke to him parabolically.

The Remedy is, to have the word applied, as a Nathan did it to David; and to
be content to be rubbed upon by wholesome reprofes, private admonitions, and
mutual exhortations, that the heart be not hardened by the deceitfulness Heb.
3. 13.
of sin.

CHAP. 32. Of the cauterized Conscience.
THe last and worst degree of an ill Conscience, is the seared and cauterized
Conscience; of which Saint Paul makes mention. 1. Tim. 4. 2. a Conscience
seared with an hot iron: so as it is of a crusty senslesnesse; for cut it,
prick it, yet it bleeds not.

This is the Conscience of Heretics deeply dyed with hypocrisy, led away with
the spirit of error, being seduced, and seducing others, teaching in stead of
the truth the Doctrine of Devils, 1. Tim. 4. 1, 2. Such as call evil good,
Isai. 5. 20.
and good evil, which put light for darkness, and darkness for light,
leading captive the simple, laden 2. Tim. 3. 6
with sin: such are the Priests and Jesuits, the Roman locusts, the
croaking froggs coming from the bottomless pit, Reu. 9. 16.
out of the mouth of the Beast, the Dragon, and the false prophet, that is,
upon the Popes command by the Devils suggestion, and as strengthened with the
authority of the dominion and jurisdiction usurped by that Antichrist. This is
also the Conscience of such as be past feeling in sin by custom, and
hardness of Ephesians. 4. 19. Romans 2. 2.
heart, which cannot repent.

This damned Conscience happens to some, by obstinately resisting the clear
truth for advantage sake: by continual custom of sinning, especially after
they have felt the smart for sin. For to such it happens, as to one tender
handed, who beginning to work with a hard instrument will have his hand
blistered, but after, by continual use, it will become hard and brawny. A man
making Conscience of sin, and feeling the sting thereof, if ever he fall to a
custom of sin, his heart grows hard, and his Conscience brawny and without
sense, so as he cannot repent and turn, no more then the Ethiopian can wash
white his skin, or the Leopard be freed from his spots. Ier. 13. 23.


The remedy to cure this is only the extraordinary work of God who can make
that possible, which with man is altogether impossible: else of these sorts, I
may say, as they write upon the door of the house infected with the Plague,
only this, Lord have mercy upon them: and so leave them incurable, save only
by him that can do all things what he will in heaven, and in earth.

And thus much hitherto for the evil still and quiet Conscience with the
diverse differences: now follows the stirring Conscience, and differences
thereof.

CHAP. 33. Of the stirring ill Conscience in general.
THe stirring ill Conscience is the Conscience busy in accusing, and is
unquiet, painful, and troublesome,

Section 1. In whom it is.
THis was the Conscience of Adam and Eve presently upon their fall; This is the
Conscience of the Romans 2. 15.
Heathen, and of every unregenerate man, all coming out of the loins of Adam,
not borne anew; whenever they sin, and do mind the Rule, it binds Conscience
to accuse.

Section 2. Of the causes thereof.
THis accusation of Conscience arises. First, of the guiltiness of sin,
known and observed by the Understanding to the informing of Conscience, as we
may learn out of Ioh. 8. 9. Act. 2. 37. Secondly from the dominion of the law
and power thereof Romans 2. 15. and 7. 9. 10.
over all unregenerate, binding the Conscience, as I have said, to accuse.
Thirdly, upon continuance in sin, and not truly repenting for the same: So long
will Conscience accuse, and cannot acquit, because a pardon has not been sued
out.

Section 3. Of the effects.
THe accusing Conscience has diverse effects; First, It will make man blush,
and be ashamed Genesis 3. and Romans 6. 21. Secondly, not to endure to hear one
speak of such sins whereof he is guilty, Ioh. 8. 9. Thirdly, It will work
fear upon the apprehension of only appearance of danger, as Joseph's brethren
did. Genesis 43. 18. and 45. 3. Fourthly, It makes men suspicious of the love of
others* whom they know they have justly offended, and who they know have power
to revenge themselves, Genesis 45. 3. Lastly it works fear of death, and makes
the unprepared to say, as the Israelits, and to cry out, we die, we all perish.
Number. 17. 12.

Section 4. Of the Remedies.
TO stay this accusation of Conscience, and to be freed from the pain of it,
is, First, To remove the guilt of sin, and to be cleansed there -- from, and
this is attained by the blood of Jesus Christ, who cleanses us from all sin,
1. Ioh. 1. 7. by the Fathers forgiving, this also cleanses us from all
iniquity. 1. Ioh. 1. 9. and by the holy Ghost sanctifying us. Tit. 3. 5. who
works faith in us, and persuades us of pardon. Secondly, By getting from under
the rigorous dominion of the Law, and malediction thereof, and that by Christ.
Romans 7. 4. Gal. 4. Thirdly, by repentance, confessing sin, and forsaking the
same, for so shall man receive mercy from God, and remission of sins, Prou.
28. 13. by Christ. Act. 3. 26. and 5. 31. And so Conscience will be appeased,
and made comfortable and truly quiet in Christ. Thus much for the stirring and
unquiet Conscience in general: now follow the differences.

CHAP. 34. Of the erroneous Conscience;
THe stirring Conscience erroneous, is that which works, and does it office,
but yet erroneously.

Section 1. Of the difference between the blind Conscience, and error in
Conscience and an erroneous Conscience.
HEre it is not amiss to show the difference of a blind and erroneous
conscience: the blind sees not the Rule, this does, though badly: that works
without the Rule, this by Rule, but amiss. Also here note a difference
between error in Conscience, and the Conscience erroneous. An error may be
in the Conscience of a Peter even an Apostle, as in his judging things common
and unclean, which God had cleansed, Act. 10. and in not being assured of the
vocation of the Gentiles, as also were some other believers Act. 11. 2 and this
is about some one or other particular matter: But the erroneous Conscience is
that which is most what misled in matters of a man's religion and his devotion.

Section 2. In what the erroneous Conscience does amiss.
THe act of this erroneous Conscience stands in two things.

1. In excusing where it ought to accuse, as it did Vzzah in touching the Ark,
and in Saul offering sacrifice, and in Vzziah attempting to burn incense: such
a Conscience had Rachel, Genesis 30. 6. and Leah, Genesis 30. 18. which made them
rejoice, as if God approved them, in that which was evil: this was Saint Paul's
Conscience before conversion, Act. 26. 9. and the Conscience of Christ's
enemies, Ioh. 16. 2. and of the Papists now, whose Conscience allows them to
equivocate in an oath, to neglect reading of Scripture, except they have
license, to hate our profession, to take carnal liberty on the Lords day, and
to seek the death of such as withstand them in their profession.

2. In accusing when it should excuse, when we do but what is lawful to be
done. It murmured against Peter when God bad Act. 10. 13. 14. 28.
him arise and eat; and so when he was to go unto the Gentiles, till God gave
him a special warrant: Thus it deals with Papists in keeping them from our
Church, from pious conscience and means of saving knowledge. Thus Ahaz
Conscience seemed to trouble him, as fearing to tempt God, when he was Isai. 7.
11. 12.
required to ask a sign, and yet would not.

Section 3. Whose conscience this is.
THis is the Conscience of all that be ignorant of the right rule of religion
and obedience, the conscience of the weak in understanding to judge and
discern of truth in their service and devotion to God: of young Nouices over
forward, before they know what is lawful and unlawful; of some zealous
without knowledge, as the Jews, and now Brownists, Romans 10. 2.
and Anabaptists, and fiery Papists, of all headstrong Factionists, and
presumptuous Spirits; of all Usurers, which hold their course lawful.

Section 4. Of the causes hereof.
FIrst, the ignorance of the true rule; so as a man does what seems good in
his own eyes, as some Isralites Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
did: Hereupon it is, that men take evil for good, good for evil, light for
darkness, darkness for light, vice for virtue, and virtue for vice: for
ignorance Mat. 22. 29 1. Tim. 1. 6. 7.
of scripture makes people to err.

2. The abuse of the true Rule, which is by false interpreting of it, as
Scribes and Pharisees did: by sticking Mat. 5. and 6
to the letter without the sense and true meaning, as Papists do, in taking
literally these words, this is my body, and as Usurers do the place of Matthew.
25. 27. by misalledging the Scripture, as Satan did, Mat. 4. and as do all
Heretics, and Schismatics: by making false conclusions from sound premises.

3. The having of a false Rule for direction, as bare opinions of the learned,
examples of the old, of the wise in the World, of great men, and rich men,
custom, multitude, men's own conceits, fantasies, and opinions from corrupted
reason. These all are crooked Rules, and make conscience anomalous, and the man
to do amiss.

Section 5. The effects of it.
THe Conscience so erring breeds in men heresy, schism, superstition,
wilworship, and idolatry: It heartens some to be obstinate Ioh. 16. 2.
in evil, yea, in persecuting the Godly, in the zeal of a false Religion.

Section 6. The remedy.
THe rectifying of this erroneous Conscience is this, to know the true Rule and
the true sense of it; to hold only to it, and rightly to use and apply it.

Section 7. Of certain questions.
FIrst Quest. Whether a man does well to be led by his erroneous Conscience?

Answ. No, First, because the conscience is deceived by the error of
understanding, which is in it self a sin, if it know not what it ought to
know, therefore a man is not to follow the error of Conscience. Secondly,
because that which Conscience excuses may be a flat sin; or that which it
accuses a man in may be a duty commanded by God: If so, then conscience
cannot dispense with man in sinning, nor absolve him from an imposed duty; for
God is greater then his Conscience: who binds it to direct man, in excusing and
accusing, rightly.

2. Quest. Whether a man may do contrary to his conscience when it erreth?

Ans. To answer to this, we must consider about what the conscience erreth,
whether in things simply commanded, or forbidden, or about things indifferent.

1. If about things of the first nature, man is to regard Gods authority over
him and his Conscience too; his covenant in baptism, and his bond there tying
him absolutely to the laws of his Soueraign, the God of Heaven. And therefore
is he to press his Conscience with the evidence of the commandment, to yield
obedience thereunto, and to force it by the clear authority of it to do as God
commands or forbids.

2. If about things indifferent, a man may not do against his Conscience; Romans
14. 22. 23. Happy is he (says the Apostle) that condemns not himself (to
wit, in and by his own Conscience) in that thing which he allows, (to wit,
in doing it) for he that doubts (that is, he that puts a difference and
discerns between one thing and an other, and yet cannot resolve himself
therein) sins if he do it. Now why he may not press Conscience and do
against it herein, is, for that God has left the matter free, and has not
enterposed his authority of command or forbidding, between the matter and a
man's conscience, to bind it this way or that way, but leaves it to the
guidance of the Rules of things indifferent, whereof the Church has authority
to judge, and so to interpose her power between Conscience and such matters,
according to those rules; with which a private man's Conscience must rest
satisfied; and if it be not, he must labor earnestly for resolution and
persuasion: in the mean space the Church is to bear with his weakness. Thus
much for the erroneous Conscience.

CHAP. 35. Of the superstitious Conscience.
THe next difference of the stirring ill Conscience is the superstitious
Conscience. This is the Conscience exercised about vain imaginations,
superstitious worship, and false fears.

Section 1. In whom it is.
THis is the Conscience of such as be awed by Spirits and Devils, by Ier. 10. 2.
signs in the Heavens, as the heathen be; of all idolaters, foolish
ceremonious will-worshippers, as were the Athenians, and now Act. 17. 22
Papists: Of all such as worship God in much servile fear and not willingly,
as many sottish people yet among us do: Of all witches, Wizzards Astrologers,
Charmers, obseruers of times, good and bad days, fortune-casters, and all that
rabble of rake-hels: Lastly it is the conscience of all timorous natures, given
to observe that which they call luck and chance.

Section 2. Of such things as about which this Conscience is exercised.
THis superstitious Conscience is exercised about two things, about will
worship, and opinions of some works of Gods providence. First, about will
worship, a service intended to God, but taken up of a man's own head, an humane
invention, Mar. 7. 4. by humane authority imposed, Col. 1. 22. and only by
custom confirmed, and therefore a vain worship, Mat. 15. 9. for this
superstitious Conscience herein puts religion where none is, in places, in
meats, in habits, in times, in external Luke 11. 39 Mark. 7. 4. Mat. 15. 2.
purifyings and washings, as Scribes and Pharisees did, and Papists now do.

Section 3. The causes hereof.
THis superstitious Conscience comes by the judgment deceived through Satan's
suggestions, and beguilings of men Col. 2. 18. so as the Conscience becomes
bound needlessly: and that by these means. First, By philosophical vain
deceits according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: for
worldly wisdom cannot instruct us in the saving knowledge of God. 1. Cor. 1.
21. Secondly, by humane traditions, made equal with or preferred before Gods
commandments, as they were by the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 15. 2. 6. the
following whereof is called by Saint Peter a vain conversation, which Christ
by his blood came to deliver us from, 1. Pet. 1. 18. Thirdly, By the precepts
and commandments of men, Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 20. 22. Fourthly, By custom,
which becomes as a law to the ruder sort to bind their Consciences. Fifthly, By
the show of wisdom, and shadow of great humility in such a voluntary worship,
Col. 2. 18. 23. Sixthly, By examples of Forefathers and Elders, which strike a
great stroke in many, as formerly it has done with such superstitious
hipocrits, as Christ calls them, Mar. 7. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Section 4. Of the remedy.
TO remove this superstition from Conscience, and to acquit it from such
slavish fear and bondage, is to settle judgment in five things. First, we
must know, that the doctrines and commandments of men bind not conscience of
themselves; but as they be grounded on Gods Word. Secondly, else the Scripture
condemns them: Matthew. 15. Mark. 7. Col. 2. 20. 21. 22. 1. Pet. 1. 18. as
vain worship and vain conversation. Thirdly, That we must know our Christian
liberty, purchased by Christ's blood, from these yoakes of bondage, 1. Pet. 1.
18. and that we must stand fast in this liberty, Gal. 5. 1. Fourthly, we are
to be resolved in this point that all will worship, though never so wisely
contrived by man, and though it carry never so fair a show, is condemned of
God, as the forenamed scriptures do show. Lastly, we must be well assured that
where God gives no law himself, there is no transgression, Romans 4. 15. and 5.
13. and so no bond to tie Conscience.

Section 5. Of the second thing about which the superstitions Conscience is
exercised.
THe other thing about which the Conscience of the superstitious is troubled,
is about some works of Gods providence, which men, though falsely, take to be
Gods forwarnings, and forbiddings, and as signs and tokens from him of some
good or of some ill to befall them, as a hare to cross in a morning, to
stumble in going out, salt falling, burning of the right or left cheek or ear,
finding of silver, gold, or old iron, sudden bleeding at the nose, and many
such observations of superstitious people.

Section 6. Of the causes hereof.
THe causes of this fear in this superstitious conscience, and the awing of it
in respect of this providence, are these. First, a strong conceit that there is
here in a will of God, forewarning people; whereupon the conscience becomes
bound, and the heart made fearful. Secondly, the observing of the event,
which happens according to the conceited opinion, to the more confirming
thereof, and the further binding of the superstitious to credit the same.

Section 7. Of the remedy.
TO heal this, and to free the Conscience from such a superstitious bond, and
the heart from this idle fear, note these things.

1. That God neither by his word foretells, nor by his providence does
prognosticate either good or ill in the falling out of such things.

2. That albeit such things happen according to men's vain imaginations, yet no
credit is to be given thereto, nor any conscience to be made thereof. First,
because the opinion in these things is Heathenish, and from pagans, which
Christians are therefore to Ier. 10. 1. 2.
detest, and not fear their fear. Secondly, because Satan works herein, and
seeks to weaken our faith in God. Thirdly, because these sometime have been
found false, by religious men's true observations; who contemn these fooleries.
Fourthly, because, if they prove true sometime, that's but to try us, whether we
will be wise, or become vain and superstitious. Lastly, because it is well
observed, that the more natural men be, and ignorant of the Gospel, the more
foolishly superstitious are they, the more fearful and vain in such
observations, and the more inthraled in their minds to such vanities. On the
contrary, the more people increase in knowledge of the Gospel, faith in
Christ, and be renewed in the inward man, the less they regard, yea, the more
they contemn these things, and are less troubled with them, as held
altogether idle and vain. And thus much for the superstitious Conscience.

CHAP. 36. Of the scrupulous Conscience.
THis scrupulous Conscience is the stirring ill Conscience about uncertainties,
of which the judgment is unresolved, and passes neither this way nor that way.

Section 1. In whom.
THis is the Conscience of the Ignorant, especially in particulars: Of such as
be Questionists, in and about commonly things indifferent, or disputable, not
necessary to life and salvation: of such as be like Scribes and Pharisees
straining at Gnats, and swallowing Mat. 23. 24 Eccl. 7. 16.
Camels: Of such as will be over righteous, just overmuch; straining duties
beyond the rule, or making somethings, which be indifferent, necessary to be
either done or left undone. These are troublers both of themselves, and of
others too, very often.

Section 2. The causes hereof.
THe Conscience of a godly man may have sometime a scruple in it, through
ignorance or error in some particular; but his Conscience, for a scruple, is
not to be called a scrupulous Conscience; for that which is scrupulous, is
commonly, and for the most part so.

This happens, first, through the judgment very unsettled, unresolved,
ambiguous, wavering this way and that way, suspicious, having no certain
ground to settle upon but only running upon conjectures, disputing too and
fro, with and against; so as Conscience is much troubled.

2. This happens by misapplying general rules about things indifferent,
according as they conceit, to particular actions: as to suppose, that they
edify not, that they be offensive, not decent, not to Gods glory: deciding
within themselves, sometimes positiuely, that which an other makes disputable,
by conference with whom their former conclusion is shaken, and so stand
unresolved in their judgment.

3. This scruple happens, when a thing indifferent is needlessly questioned
upon, which the Apostle labored to prevent among the Corinthians, saying, ask
no question for Conscience sake. 1. Cor. 10. 27. For in truth there is nothing
that more breeds scruple, than idle questioning of matters, which might be
well passed over.

4. By stretching a thing, for want of knowledge, beyond the nature of a thing
indifferent, and so taking it to be worse than it is, through some show of
evil in his apprehension, as some did among the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 8. 7.

5. By uncharitably expounding such things as be established and only proposed
as indifferent by authority, beyond the intent of the Church.

Lastly, by giving way to doubts, and to trouble themselves needlessly with
unprofitable disputations of things undetermined. Such perverse disputes the
Apostle liked not. 1. Tim. 6. 5.

Section 3. Of the effects.
FRom this scrupulositie arises inward trouble, fear, heart burning,
uncharitable censuring and judging one an other, and outward division, sects,
unwarrantable courses, oppositions, forcible impositions, and much evil every
way, for want of peaceablenesse both on the one hand, as also on the other.

Section 4. The Remedies.
TO take away this scrupulosity, and to reform the scrupulous Conscience;
First, be stored with principles and grounds of truth for help to discern
between one thing and an other. Secondly, to be studied well in cases of
Conscience, or to seek help of such as be. Thirdly, To know the Rules of
indifference before named, and Chap. 13.
withal to understand how to apply them aptly. Fourthly, to avoid needless
questions about things indifferent. Fifthly, To hold this firm, that what God
neither commands nor forbids, that's indifferent; and being no law, there is no
transgression; so the Conscience is free. Sixthly, To know that the Kingdom of
God stands not in things indifferent; Romans 15. 17. 18. neither in the doing,
nor in leaving of such things undone: but in matters of an higher nature.
Seventhly and lastly, beware of needless suspicions of evil, of nice
distinctions, of weak conclusions from sound premises, and so avoid what may
work scruple, and ensnare Conscience.

CHAP. 37. Of the terrifying Conscience.
THe Conscience terrifying, is the ill-stirring Conscience forcibly accusing
for the time with much fear.

Section 1. In whom.
THis was the Conscience of Cain, of Felix, which made him tremble; and of
Belshazzar, making his joints to loose, and his knees to knock together.

Section 2. Of the Causes.
THis terrifying Conscience comes by some heinous sins committed, and
whereof a man knows himself guilty, upon the preaching of judgment for such
sins, as we may see in Felix, Act. 24. Secondly, by apprehending some
extraordinary sign of Gods wrath, as Belshazzar did, Dan. 5. 6. Thirdly, some
fearful work of God suddenly done, as shaking of the earth, which made the
Jailer tremble, Act. 16. Fourthly, the belief of the truth of Gods threats,
with an apprehension of deserved damnation, will make Conscience to work upon
Devils, to make them tremble.

Section 3. Of the effects.
THis terrifying Conscience works fear, a dreadful sound is in his ear, Job
15. 21. He fears ill news, as Adonijah and his Guests did, 1. King 1. 49.
50. Secondly, he fears man's power coming out against him, when his
Conscience tells him of his evils done. So did Saul the host of the Philistims,
after he had been with the Witch, 1. Sam. 28. Thirdly, he fears death, to
him as a terrible Messenger, as Cain did. Fourthly, he fears the last
Judgment Day, as Felix did. He will fear sometime where no fear is, Prou.
28. 1. for God gives the wicked and hypocrites a trembling heart, Deuteronomy. 28.
65. It fills him with troubled thoughts, as it did Belshazzar, and Nero,
after he had caused Agrippina his Mother to be murdered; and Alexander to be
tormented, when he had slain his friend Clytus. It makes that he cannot
endure Gods presence, but will fly from it, as did Adam and Eve; nor to endure
a powerful Ministry; Felix could not suffer Paul's preaching, he trembled so
thereat.

Section 4. Of the remedies.
THe means to cure this terror of Conscience, is, as Paul exhorted the
Jailer, to believe in the Lord Jesus, Act. 16. 31. to repent, as Peter exhorted
those in Acts, Chap. 2. 38. to pray for the spirit of adoption, which puts away
servile fear, the spirit of bondage, and witnesses with our Spirit and
Conscience that we are the children of God, Romans 8. 15.

CHAP. 38. Of the desperate Conscience.
THis desperate Conscience is the last and highest degree of an ill stirring
Conscience. It differs from the other, which may be in one ordained to be
saved, as in the Jailer, Act. 16. but this is the effect of the former in
Abiects, as in Achitophels, and in Iudaslike persons.

This is the raging Conscience, restless like the Sea, or as a Dear shot with
the arrow sticking in him; or as a Band-Dog awakening, and ever barking, giving
no quiet or ease, day nor night.

Section 1. Of the Causes.
THis desperation arises, First, upon some sin committed against God or man,
contrary to the clear light of his reason: as Saul did against David by his
own confession, 1. Sam. 24. 16. 17. 21. and 25. 21. In like manner did
Achitophel, in taking part with Ahsalom against David; and Judas against
Christ, whom he acknowledged to be innocent, upon the torture of his
Conscience, Matthew. 27. 2. Secondly, it comes upon the aggrauation of sin,
as thinking it impardonable; that for it God has forsaken him, that there is
no mercy for him, that he is damned; as within themselves the desperate do
conclude, and do sometime utter as much, as a Sheriffs man did, who mocked
and abused one James Abbes a blessed Act and Monum.
Martyr, and as I my self knew an Attorney, who cried aloud, I am damned, I am
damned, and dyed miserably.

3. Satan helps on this, by suggesting Gods wrath, the external shame also
among men: and that there is no hope to recover out of so great a misery. By
this and the former the soul is in a devouring gulf of desperation ready to
swallow him up.

Section 2. Of the effects.
MOst lamentable is the state of any one in this Case, and under the power of
this desperate Conscience; for first, it makes a man restless and unquiet; he
is full of fears, his spirit perplexed, and grievously tormented with
apprehension of Hell, Death, and Damnation. 2. He can attain to no spiritual
comfort: for he sees God against him, the Devil he conceits is ready to take
him to him; he cannot believe any of the promises of life to belong at all to
him; he has no part in heaven, no hope to be with Christ and his Saints; but
fears desperately Hell and damnation. No outward thing can comfort him; the
bag full cannot joy a Judas; a Kingly state cannot afford solace to a Saul; nor
the deepenesse of wit and wisdom work consolation in the heart of an
Achitophel. Thirdly, hereupo^ this desperate Conscience makes men weary of
their lives, and at length causes them to lay violent hands upon themselves,
especially when they be in any worldly distress, as Nero the Tyrant did, and
Pilat, as Histories record; and as Saul, Judas, and Achitophel did: So likewise
one Clerk in King Edward the sixth days; one Pauier, Towne-Clerke of London;
one Leuar, a husbandman; and one Henry Smith, a Lawyer, Enemies to the Gospel,
and persecutors, hanged themselves, being desperate persons, who through
terror of Conscience hastened their untimely deaths.

Section 3. Of the Remedies.
TO cure this Conscience, natural gifts will not do it, no not an Achitophels
wit and wisdom; not worldly wealth, Judas bag of money could not ease him; not
Kingly nor Imperial dignity could relieve a Nero, an Alexander; not wine nor
wanton women, not mirth nor music, not feasting among Princes could quiet the
Conscience of a Belshazzar; much less can seeking to a Witch relieve the
distressed and terrifying desperate Conscience of a Saul: for no worldly,
natural, much less devilish means can cure a spiritual malady: but the true
remedy is to learn and believe these things.

1. That God is infinite in mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness, Joel
2. 13. Secondly, that he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should repent and live, Ezekiel. 18. 23. 22. which he confirms to us by
an oath, Chap. 33. 11. Thirdly, that he will pardon every true penitent; for
so has he promised, Ezekiel. 18. 27. 28. and this must they know, that not
sin, but the not repenting of sin damneth man: for if we repent, and
believe, we shall be saved. Fourthly, that God in Christ Jesus is well
pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. who is our Advocate with the Father, who is our
Propitiation for our sins, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2. Fifthly, that he is become all
in all for to pacify Gods wrath, and to procure his favor for us, 1. Cor. 1.
30. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Heb. 9. 12. and 10. 14. Romans 8. 1. 33. 34. Sixthly, that he
inuiteth us lovingly to come to him, and promises refreshment, Mat. 11. 28.
with these add a holy and reverent use of the Sacrament, for the exercise and
strengthening of faith in Christ offered to them therein, applied and received
particularly, greatly furthering to the comfort of Conscience, and to prevent
despair.

And thus much now at length touching the evil Conscience, still and stirring,
with all the differences of them both: now follows the good Conscience.

CHAP. 39. Of the good Conscience in general.
OF a good Conscience the Apostle makes mention very often, in diverse places,
as in Act. 23. 1. and 24. 16. 1. Tim. 1. 5. and Heb. 13. 18.

A good Conscience is that which performs it offices rightly for the comfort
of man. The goodness of it stands in seeing aright, in acquainting a man truly
with himself, in well directing of him, in witnessing with, and so rightly
excusing and acquiting him. This is the conscience, which Saint Paul speaks of,
without offense, that is, which has no stop, or impediment to hinder it from
excusing Act. 24. 16.

This Saint Paul knew he had, in this he lived, and this he endeavored to keep;
for he desired to live honestly, Heb. 13. 18.

This was it that made him rejoice, 2. Cor. 1. 12. to be without fear, and to
speak boldly to the faces of Gods Enemies, Act. 23. 1. not to be daunted
before the mighty in a good cause, no more then Paul was, Act. 24. 10. 16. nor
Peter with other Apostles Act. 5. 29. nor Luther when he entered into Worms,
not caring if all the tiles there had been Devils. This good Conscience bare up
Job against all his friends over uncharitable censure of him, in so great
affliction. This vpheld David in all his distresses, and Saul's persecuting of
him, and slanders raised upon him by his Courtiers. This made Saint Paul to 2.
Cor. 6. 8.
pass through honor and dishonor, good report and bad.

This good Conscience may be said to be threefold: the natural, moral, and
regenerate.

CHAP. 40. Of the natural good Conscience.
BY the natural good Conscience, I mean that which was in man by Creation, in
Adam before the fall.

The excellency hereof stood in these things, First, in bearing Adam witness
that he was good, holy, innocent, righteous, and therefore happy, and blessed.
Secondly, in bearing sway and rule in him, so as he was every way obedient to
Gods will. Thirdly, in comforting him in Gods presence with joy, without
terror or dread of divine majesty.

This was the goodness of his Conscience then, while he abode in his
innocence, harmless and without sin: And this shall be the goodness of it
when we attain to perfection in glory.

The causes hereof were, First, the perfection of Adams knowledge, who knew
exactly Gods will; and all and every duty on his part to be performed, to God,
to man, and to himself. Secondly, the perfection of his memory ever
constantly and firmly retaining those duties for observing of them; Thirdly,
the perfect freedom of the will, free from all perverseness and rebellion;
and inclined to all goodness, readily obeying the rule of reason and dictate
of Conscience. Fourthly, The hearts uprightness, with all purity and
sincerity. Lastly, the affections orderly settled, and free from sensuality,
inconstancy, disorder, and excess. Unruly passions bare then no sway.

But now since the fall, this natural Conscience has lost it sovereignty in
the gross vulgars, as well Christian, as heathen, who have only some common
principles but rudely apprehended, on which sometime their Conscience works;
otherwise, for the most part, they are led but by sense, or experience, or
examples, doing as they see others to do: and are little better then brute
beasts, through their sottish ignorance, savage qualities, unruly passions, and
beastly sensuality, doing many things against common reason, and the light of
nature it self, if they would but attend unto it. For want whereof they feel
in a manner no work of Conscience at all; so far have innumerable Pagans,
and a numberless number of the ruder sort, living among Christians, and under
that name most unworthily, degenerated from the goodness of the natural
Conscience, which was in Adam. The loss whereof is to be bewailed, we are to
labor for to repair it, and to desire the perfection thereof in Heaven.

CHAP. 41. Of the moral good Conscience.
THe moral good Conscience is that which is exercised in and about matters
only of right and wrong, and common civil honesty. This Conscience is in two
sorts, of some out of the Church, and of others within the Church.

Section 1. Of those out of the Church.
THere are many out of the Church, which have had and yet have this moral
Conscience, Ancient Heathen Philosophers, and many now among the Turks and
Persians, and other ciuilized Nations.

How far these may go with this their moral conscience commendably, it may
appear by these things, First, by some writing of moral virtues, ethics and
politics, excellent well. Secondly, by many golden sentences dispersed here
and there in their works. Thirdly, by wholesome laws enacted, and established
among them. Fourthly, By praise worthy examples left recorded to all
posterities, some for justice, some for temperance and chastity, some for
prudence, some for fortitude, and magnanimity, and so others for humility,
patience, charity, and the like, of which histories are full.

Section 2. Of their helps hereto.
THis their moral Conscience is gotten, First, by civil education, and by
being trained up in good manners. Secondly, by human sciences and good
literature, as ethics, Oeconomicks, and Politics. Thirdly, by the common
natural notions of right and wrong, which by education and instruction they
do improve and make better use of then others can. Fourthly, by some
acquaintance sometime with practical principles of supernatural truths, by
getting some light from Gods book, through acquaintance with some of the
Church. Thus of those out of the Church.

Section 3. Of those in the Church.
THere are not a few, which live in the bosom of the Church, and yet have no
more but a mere civil moral Conscience; ruled according to those common
natural principles, or somewhat better informed by learning the moral law of
the ten Commandments: beyond the letter whereof they hardly extend their
practice: but when the same is supported and countenanced with custom,
opinion, worldly wisdom, example of others, great or rich, or reputed men of
learning and understanding.

Section 4. Of the goodness of it.
YEt this moral Conscience is good, first, for that it is grounded upon Gods
Law, either written in the heart of natural men, Romans 2. 14. 15. or learned
out of the Book of God. Secondly, because this kind of Conscience will excuse
a man in some acts of morality, which is Romans 2. 15
not disapproued of God, as we may see in Abimelechs pleading for himself, Genesis
20. 6. and in the young rich man auerring his obedience to the Law, Matthew. 19.
20. of whom it is said, that Christ loved him, Mark. 10. 21. Thirdly, Saint
Paul's legal Conscience in moral justice, and his obedience to the Law, which,
I suppose, was comprehended within that, which he called a good Conscience in
Act. 23. 1. Fourthly, this moral Conscience produces much good for the
exercise of moral virtues in men's living together in societies, to preserve
justice, equity, to do good works, and to uphold a common peace among them.

Section 5. Of the insufficiency of it to assure a man of life.
Nevertheless, howsoever a Moralist may lift up himself, as the young rich
Man in the Gospel did, yet can it not give him assurance of eternal life; for
first, the Law cannot bind the Conscience of a Christian to believe his
salvation by the Law, because the Law is weak in this through man's
faultiness, and the Gospel teaches salvation another way. Secondly, the
Heathen, we see, have this moral Conscience, and many unregenerate persons in
the church. Thirdly, an excellent Moralist, in his own apprehension, for the
love of the World may leave Christ, as the young man did, Mat. 19. 22.
Fourthly, because a moral righteousness cannot exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees; but the righteousness, by which we must be saved,
must exceed that, Matthew. 5. 20.

Section 6. Of the reasons why God has given men such a Conscience.
THis moral Conscience it has pleased God to work in men's hearts, first, to
manifest the power of his Law in some, by which this Conscience either excuses
or accuses, Romans 2. 15. Secondly, to make men, which seek not after God
aright to glorify him, to be inexcusable, Romans 1. 20. Thirdly, to be convicted
in themselves, when they will be bold to sit down, and judge others, Romans 2. 1.
Fourthly, to know Gods judgment due for sin, Romans 1. 32. Fifthly, to
preserve societies in Families, in Towns, Cities, and Kingdoms: for without
this moral Conscience, men would turn beasts one against another. Sixthly, to
be a means, in the preaching of the Law, to make men to tremble, as Felix
did, and to move other-some to say with the Jews and the Jailer, What shall
we do to be saved? Act. 2. 36. 37. and 16. 30. For without this Conscience,
men would make no use, nor have any regard to the Law at all inwardly, but
only as outwardly they are forced thereunto: as we may see in such among us,
upon whose Consciences the Law has no operation nor power.

Section 7. Who they be that have only this moral Conscience.
NOw to know a mere Moralist, that has but this moral Conscience, thus they
may be discerned:

1. They never deny themselves; this precept of the Gospel they yet never
learned: for they are highly conceited of themselves, as was the young Man,
Mat. 19. 20.

2. They stand much upon their well-doing, as all Legalists do; both unto men,
as the prodigal Sons brother did, Luke 15. 29. so likewise unto God, as did
the proud Pharisie, Luke 18. 11. 12.

3. Their service in the first Table to God is performed upon a customarie
form: for they want herein sincerity, not striving against their inbred
corruption, in doing service to God. They are without holy zeal, they do it
not in fervent love; they are lukewarm, or cold in their Religion; they are
not like Paul against false doctrine, Gal. 3. 1. nor like the Pastor at Ephesus
against false Teachers, Revel. 2. 1 2. nor like Moses against idolatry, Exodus
32. nor like Nehemiah against profanation of the Sabbath, Neh. 13. 17. and
marriage with Idolaters, Verse. 25. for these things the Moralist shows neither
anger nor sorrow.

4. They will not suffer for Religion, their conscience cannot give them
encouragement to endure any trial for their profession, disgrace of the World,
loss of friends or preferment, discountenance of great persons, and such like,
these will make them slinke and start aside.

5. All the duties which they do, are ever such as tend to their own credit,
profit, esteem with men, and outward welfare; and are but common duties, such
as be praiseworthy in and among commonly reputed honest, loving, peaceable
Neighbors, keeping themselves to the letter of the Law: but for the spiritual
sense, the causes, the occasions, or degrees of such prescribed duties their
conscience meddles not with. Stricter duties beyond their sise and scantling
they mock at, they call foolish preciseness, and damn the parties for hollow
hypocrites. With Abraham they instruct not their household, Genesis 18. with David
they cast not out the wicked from dwelling with them, Psalm. 101. with Job they
pray not daily for them; they resolve not with Joshua to serve God with all
their household, Josh. 24. much less attain they the praise of a pious
Cornelius, Act. 10. 1. 2.

6. The evils which they do abandon, are only the more grosser sorts of
evils, scandalous among men, such as may bring them under the danger of humane
Laws, bring upon them disgrace with the World, outward shame and reproach,
punishment, loss or displeasure with their betters, and such like inducements
to prevent their sinning: but for sins of another nature, petty oaths, vain
thoughts of the heart, unsavory speeches, neglect of household duties,
Sabbath-breaking, and the like, the mere Moralists conscience troubles him
not: So that, albeit it be a good Conscience, in that it is exercised about the
practice of some virtues, and about restraining from some vices, yet it is not
to be rested upon, because of the failings in so many things.

CHAP. 42. Of the regenerate Conscience.
MAn through his fall lost the excellency of a good Conscience, which in the
regenerate man is in part renewed.

Section 1. What it is.
THis regenerate Conscience, is the Conscience reformed and informed by the
renewed mind in the saving knowledge of Gods will unto all sincere obedience to
the law and to the Gospel.

1. It is reformed, as be all other faculties of the soul, in a regenerate
man: for Conscience by sin was defiled, Tit. 1. 14. and therefore is to be
purged and sanctified. Heb. 9. 14.

2. It is informed by the mind renewed, which is a better intelligencer then
the moral conscience has: for the moralist has not his mind renewed, as the
regenerat man has, who knows what that good, acceptable, and perfect will of
Romans 12. 2
God is.

3. This Conscience is informed by the renewed mind, in the saving knowledge of
Gods will, according to the law written anew in the mind and heart, Heb. 8. 10.

4. This works sincere obedience, so that in simplicity and godly sincerity the
regenerate have their conversation in the World. 2. Cor. 1. 12.

Lastly, this obedience is performed both to the law and Gospel. For the
regenerat man's Conscience is bound as well by the Gospel, as by the law, unto
all holy obedience: and the mind renewed propounds the precepts of the one, as
well as of the other unto Conscience to work obedience.

Section 2. In whom it is.
THis Conscience regenerate is in all the Elect of God, called by the Gospel
of Jesus Christ; such as be borne again of water and the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 3.
5. and are made new Creatures in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 17. having Gods image
repaired in them, in knowledge, holiness and righteousness. Ephesians. 4. 24. Col.
3. 10. whereby they do wholly and entirely resign up themselves in obedience
and humility to be guided by such a Conscience without restriction or evasion,
in respect of pleasure, profit, or preferment, thoroughout the whole course of
their lives.

Section 3. Of the causes hereof.
THis regenerat Conscience is wrought by Gods Spirit which renews us, Tit. 3.
5. The isntrumental means is the Gospel, called the ministration of the
spirit, 2. Cor. 3. 8. because the spirit is received by it. Gal. 3.

Section 4. Of the excellency of it.
THis Conscience so regenerate, First, has acquaintance with Gods spirit. Romans
9. 1. 2. Secondly, upon this holy acquaintance they join together to bear the
regenerat man witness, that he is the Child of God, Romans 8. 16. that he is
desirous of others salvation, and grieved for their obstinacy and blindness.
Romans 9. 1. 2. Thirdly, Farther upon this acquaintance the Regenerat man has
now a kind of holy familiarity with God, yet so as it is with all reverence and
humility: He can now hear Gods law laid open without terror: He now can
pour out his soul before God, lay open all his sins in the sight of God
with hope of remission, which before he durst not, though never so morally
honest. Fourthly, This Conscience, through such spiritual acquaintance, is
always accompanied with spiritual graces, with unfeigned faith, a pure heart,
Christian charity, 1. Tim. 1. 5. with willingness to live honestly, Heb. 13.
18. with simplicity and godly sincerity, 2. Cor. 1. 12.

Section 5. Of the effects hereof.
SO as the effects of it cannot but be admirable; For, first, it exacts of us
attendance to Gods service, and herein it cannot endure dead works, from which
it is purged, Heb. 9. 14. so as it puts life in us, and cannot endure to have
us hear, read, pray, sing, nor preach, coldly, drowsily, deadly, nor to rest
upon the work wrought. Secondly, it requires universal obedience, for matter
in all things, for time always. Heb. 13. 18. Act. 23. 1. Thirdly, it
discovers unto our selves the most secret and intricate closet of the heart;
whatsoever is ill, it pursues it, till it work in the heart detestation.
Fourthly, it lets not the regenerat man slip without a caveat, and
remurmuration; and if he fall, it lets him not rest but pincheth and nippeth
him till he take knowledge of his sin, till he see it, sorrows for it, and
returns. It cannot endure to have him sink under sin; nor sleep securely
till he has sought reconciliation with God. Fifthly, If it find him to grow
slack in good duties, it will ever be telling him of it, it lets him not wax
remiss and careless, but by stinging instigations pricks him forward to his
due obedience. And therefore should we strive to get this Conscience, and
having it, to make much of it, as that which will guide us well, work us
peace, and never leave us, but will be our comfort in adversity, in temptation,
in death, and at Christ's appearing.

CHAP. 43. Of the Gospel binding the Conscience of the Regenerate.
THe regenerate man's Conscience is not only tied by natural Principles as all
men's be, nor by the Law of Moses, as moralists in the Church be; but also by
the authority and power of the Gospel.

Section 1. That the Gospel has a binding power.
FIrst, for the Gospel is a Law, 1. Chr. 16. 17. Psalm. 105. 10. and called the
Law of faith, Romans 3. 17. now it is the nature of the Law to bind according to
the authority of the Lawgiver, God himself, whose power is not less in the
Law of faith, and his will in the Gospel, then in that moral law. Secondly,
the Gospel does not only promise, but also commands and requires obedience
to it. It commands faith, 1. Ioh. 3. 23. repentance. Ma. 1. 15. Love, Ioh. 13.
34. and 18. 12. Charity, and bowels of mercy, kindness, humility of mind,
meekness. Col. 3. 12. to deny our selves, Mar. 8. 34. to mortify the deeds of
the flesh, Col. 3. 5. to seek the Kingdom of God, and the ritheousnesse
thereof, Mar. 6. 33. to have our conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. and to
wait with love for the appearing of the Lord Jesus, Luke 12. 35. 36. Mar. 13.
33. 34. 2. Tim. 4. These and many more precepts does the Gospel command, which
the moralist never thinks of, nor ever can attain unto. Thirdly, The Gospel
condemns unbelief, Ioh. 16. 9. 1. Ioh. 5. 10. and other sins. Fourthly, it
denounces vengeance against the contempt of it, and more severe wrath, then
against the transgressors of the law. 2. Th. 1. 8. Heb. 10. 29. Lastly men
shall be judged by the Gospel. Romans 2. 16. Therefore it is of a binding power.

For the renewed mind, being acquainted with the Gospel, propounds
Evangelical precepts to the regenerate Conscience, which it uses and applies
to enforce the Regenerate man to a true and sincere obedience, according to the
Gospel.

Section 2. Whom it binds.
THe Gospel has not so large an extent as the Law, which is in nature, and so
binds all mankind, but the Gospel binds such as do receive it; for the
receiving argues two things, first the enlightening of the understanding to
conceive the doctrine of the Gospel, and then faith to embrace it: which two
together bind conscience to the obedience of that which the Gospel commands:
Thus it binds all professors of it; but most powerfully the regenerate, to
whom it is most effectual by the special operation of Gods Spirit.

Section 3. To what it binds us:
THe Gospel does bind unto the precepts which it prescribes; such are those
before mentioned to believe, to repent, to love the brethren, to receive the
holy Sacraments, with the rest of the Commandments of the Gospel. It binds
also unto the law, to make it a rule of righteousness: for the Gospel, First,
commends the law unto us, as spiritual, holy, just, righteous, and good.
Romans 7. 12. 14. 1, Tim. 1. 8. Secondly, It repeateth the Commandments with
approbation and for continuing use. Romans 13. 9. Thirdly, it interprets the
Commandments and the imposed duties therein more largely, in a more spiritual
sense, Mat. 5. and 6. 1. Ioh. 3. 15. Fourthly, it urges the duties commanded
by the law to be done. Ephesians. 5. and 6. Col. 3. and 4. Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3. 1. 1.
Pet. 2. 13. and such virtues as it prescribes. Phil. 4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 32. 1. Tim.
6. 11. 18. 2. Pet. 1. 5. 6. 7. Fifthly, these are urged in Christ's name, as his
commandments, Ephesians. 6. 6. 1. Th. 4. 1. 2. 3. and as his wholesome words, 1. Tim.
6. 3. Sixthly, the doing of such duties are commended by Christ himself, Mat.
5. 19. By Saint James, cap. 2. 8. and by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7. 19. and by
Saint Peter 2. Pet. 1. 8. 9. Seventhly, the ministers of the Gospel are
commanded to teach such duties, 1. Tim. 6. 2. Tit. 2. 13. and 3. 1. 8. Lastly
the sins forbidden by the law are condemned in the Gospel, and dissuaded
from 1. Th. 5. 15. Ephesians. 4. 28. 31. Col. 3. 9. 1. Cor. 7. 8. 14. 1. Ioh. 5. 21.
And to avoid such sins, the Apostle says, was the commandment of Christ, 1.
These. 4. 2. 6. and to teach otherwise is contrary to wholesome doctrine, 1.
Timoth. 6. 3. and 1. 10. 11. Yea, Christ condemns the breach of the Law,
Matthew. 5. 19. and in the Gospel wrath is denounced against such as live in
wicked transgression against the Law, Romans 2. 8. Ninthly, they err therefore
that teach, that we under the Gospel are not tied to the Precepts of the Law,
to observe them as a rule of life: for the Law is established, Romans 3. 31. it
remains perpetually, Matthew. 5. 18. Christ came to fulfill it, not to destroy
it; and condemns such as teach the breach of the least Commandment, Matthew.
5. 17. 19.

Quest. Here it may be asked, in what manner does the Gospel bind the
regenerate Conscience to the Law.

Answ. It does it not as the Law requires, to wit, to obey it in the rigor
thereof, to be thereby justified, or else to remain accursed: but it binds,
according to it own nature, as the word of grace, that is, Euangelically; and
this is, first, to take it now as from the hand of Jesus the Lawgiver to us,
who has written it, by the new Covenant in our hearts by his holy Spirit.
Secondly, to observe it only as a rule of life; we having already attained to
the righteousness of the Law in full perfection, through faith in Christ.
Thirdly, to perform the prescribed duties thereof, by virtue Ioh. 15. 4. 5
Gal. 2. 20. Psalm. 40. 8.
from Christ, in obedience to him, willingly, without any servile fear, in
uprightness of heart, though imperfectly performed and done, to adorn the
doctrine of the Gospel of God our Savior Christ in all things. To this
Evangelical obedience the Gospel binds us, and not otherwise to the Law.

Section 4. From what things the regenerate man's Conscience, by this power of
the Gospel, is freed in respect of the Law.
Upon the Gospel thus binding to the Law Euangelically, the Conscience of the
Regenerate is free from the Ceremonial Law; because it is bound by the Gospel
to make him stand fast in the liberty purchased by Christ, Gal. 5. 1. who has
abolished the law of Commandments of ordinances, Ephesians. 2. 15. and blotted out
the handwriting of ordinances against us, Col. 2. 14. 16.

Hence is it, that the conscience of the Regenerate troubles him not about
meats, holy days, nor offering up any legal sacrifices, Heb. 10. 2.

It is also quit from the moral Law, in respect of the rigorous dominion of
it, in respect of justification by personal fulfilling it, in respect of the
malediction, and the irritation thereof, of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.
8.

Hence likewise it is, first, that the Regenerate conscience cannot urge us to
the exact fulfilling of the Law, nor can condemn us for that we do not
perfectly in our selves fulfill it. Because the Gospel and Law of faith binds
the Regenerate conscience (as it is regenerate) to the contrary, to wit, to
witness that we fulfill it in Christ, that therefore in him we cannot be
condemned, Romans 3. 1. 4. 32 33. for this: but if it accuse, it accuses for
want of sincerity sometime, and for failings, but cannot condemn us for not
perfectly fulfilling the Law.

2. Hence is it, that it urges not justification by works, nor condemns us
for not so seeking to be justified. Because by the Gospel the Regenerate is
bound to cast off righteousness by the works of the Law, Gal. 2. 16. and 5.
14. And to seek by faith to be justified (which is the righteousness taught
by the Gospel) Romans 3. 21. 22. without the works of the Law, Verse. 28.

3. Hence is it, that the Regenerate Conscience does not condemn the
regenerate man for the irritation, by reason of sin taking occasion from the
commandment to work all manner of concupiscence, as it does in others, Romans
7. 5. 8. Because the Conscience of the Regenerate is bound to bear him
witness, and so does witness, through the work of the Spirit by the Gospel,
that after the inner man he delights in the Law of God, and has a will to
do it, Romans 7. 22. Psalm. 1. 2. and 40. 8. that he would do more good then he
can, that he hates the evil he does, Romans 7. 15. 18. 19. that he has an
unfeigned resolution to keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 57. 107. and that
in studying the Law, by grace received from the Gospel, he is more delighted
in it, and more desirous to do it. Of all these conscience bears the
Regenerate man witness, and therefore cannot condemn him for that irritation
by the Law, through inbred corruption to grow worse.

4. And lastly hence is it, that it cannot, nor does not conclude the
malediction and curse of the Law upon the man regenerate; because now this his
Conscience is bound by the Gospel to witness his faith in Christ, by whom he
is freed from that curse, Gal. 3. 13. that he is the Child of God, Romans 8. 15.
and that therefore belongs to him the blessing with Abraham, Gal. 3. 14. and
eternal life by Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 23.

Thus may we see what a happy acquittance the regenerate Conscience has by the
power of the Gospel from the Law.

Section 5. Why the Regenerate man is yet so much troubled about the Law.
THis before being so, and the Conscience so freed by the authority of the
Gospel, it may be demanded here, Why a Regenerate man in his Conscience is
more troubled about his legal omissions, and committing of evil against the
Law, then for his omissions and commissions against the Gospel, he not being
now under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6. 14.

To this I answer, first, Because the law is better known then the Gospel,
the one being natural, the other spiritual. Secondly, for that the one is
more pressed upon Conscience, and more often laid to heart, then the other.
Thirdly, because the remainder of servile fear sooner apprehe^deth wrath by
breach of the Law, then filial fear the observance of duty from Gods
goodness and mercy. Fourthly, because of scandalls which are sooner taken,
when they are given, and more marked of the worst, when the regenerate do fall
in transgressing the law, then omission of euangelical duties or evils against
the gospel committed, which world lings, and naturalists take no notice of.
Fifthly, because of the more frequent use of the law for moral virtues within,
for oeconomicall duties, and offices of love to be performed one to an other,
and in commerce with men daily abroad, wherein a regenerate man finds his
often failings, by reason he knows the law in a high and spiritual sense;
Sixthly, because Evangelical precepts, of knowing Christ, of believing in him,
of repenting for sin, of Christian love, do express themselves in observing
the duties commanded in the law, of which the regenerate failing, Conscience
will accuse him. Seventhly, because the law more easily binds and works
upon the Conscience naturally; when the Gospel, though it bind, yet it does it
supernaturally, and that not without the special work of grace even in the
regenerate man. Eighthly, because the regenerate, in their failings to the law,
consider them only, and that too often, as sinning against the law, without any
apprehension of any their default therein toward the Gospel, when in deed,
and truth, their failing in obedience to the Gospel makes them transgressors
of the Law: for let a man have the virtue of Christ, have a lively faith,
Evangelical repentance and love; he will not easily fail of his duty
commanded in the law: but if he do, he will quickly see, by his sinning
against the law, that he has been disobedient against the Gospel.

Section 6. Of the difference between the Conscience regenerate and
unregenerate.
Seeing the regenerate Conscience under the Gospel will yet accuse and trouble
a regenerate man for transgression of the law, it may be demanded how the same
differs from the Conscience unregenerate?

I answer, they differ first in the binding power: the unregenerate only by
the law, as a Naturalist, but not by the Gospel; for it has no power nor
command over his conscience to work in him obedience, by reason, First, of
their strong corruptions not abated. Secondly, for want of the spirit of
illumination with sanctification. Thirdly, the vneffectuallnesse of the Gospel
in them, and lastly, because they do conceit the Gospel a law of liberty, not
requiring obedience at all. But the Conscience of the Regenerate is bound both
by the law and Gospel to obedience. Secondly they differ in excusing, and
witnessing for one. The unregenerate man's Conscience, though never so morally
honest, cannot excuse him, nor witness his righteousness before God. Romans 3.
19. 23. But the regenerate Conscience will, by virtue of the Gospel. The
unregenerate Conscience cannot witness for the unregenerate any one of these
three things, that he lives in new obedience to God, by Christ living in him,
as the regenerate conscience will. Gal. 2. 20. That he has the Spirit of
adoption, as the regenerate conscience does with the aid of Gods spirit. Romans
8. 15. And that, if he do fearfully fall, yet he loves the Lord; as the
regenerate Conscience in Peter will Ioh. 21. 15.
do, after true and hearty repentance. Thirdly, they differ in accusing. The
unregenerate Conscience in accusing may drive the unregenerate from the means
of salvation, as it did the Pharisees, make some tremble, Ioh. 8. 9. Acts 24.
as a Felix, but not reform them, it fills them with legal sorrow, as a Judas
to repent, but not with Euangelical. But now the conscience of the regenerate
accusing never drives them from the means, the ministry of the word, but it
works reformation, a godly sorrow in them as it 2. Sam. 12. 24.
did in David, and also in Peter, Mat. 27. and in the prodigal son, Luke 15.
And thus much for the regenerate Conscience; now follow the many differences
thereof, as the tender Conscience, the wounded Conscience, the quiet
conscience, the upright, the pure, the justifying, and confident Conscience.

CHAP. 44. Of the tender Conscience.
THe tender conscience is the passible conscience easily touched with the least
sin, in thought, word, and deed, as well in omission, as commission.

Section 1. In whom it is.
THis is the Conscience of a David, whose heart smote him in cutting off but
the lap of Saul's garment. This is the Conscience of a soft hearted Josias,
which will tremble and melt at the word. This is the Conscience of such as be
easy to be entreated, endued with wisdom from above, gentle and merciful;
This is the Conscience of all such as have bin wounded in spirit, such as have
felt the smart for sin, anguish of heart, and the burden of Gods displeasure
by former follies.

Section 2. Of the effects hereof.
THis tender conscience, so rarely to be found in these our days, has
singular effects; First, it makes a man humble in his own eyes; willing rather
to condemn himself for every sin, then to excuse, color, or defend any
sin. Secondly, it makes a man watchful; for it has a quick sight and
diligently attends unto the rule, carefully thereby to guide all his actions.
It is like the beasts in Reu. 4. full of eyes before, to prevent sin, behind,
to recall our selves, if any sin has of infirmity been committed. Thirdly,
it makes a man fearful to offend, and therefore moves him to avoid the very
appearance 1. These. 5. 22.
of evil, and to fly the occasions of sinning, as Joseph did, who would not
be in the room with his Mistress. Fourthly, It makes him upon this fear to
walk precisely, not doing (...). Ephesians. 5. 15. Mat. 2. 8.
any thing but upon a diligent inquisition; it will not permit a man to fall
upon a business rashly, at an hap hazard. This causes a man to be nice in
that, which other make a jest of; This tenderness made Daniel to refuse to
eat of Dan. 1. 6.
the Kings meat, to pray three times a day, when it endangered his life. This
made David, that he would 2. Sam. 23. 16.
not drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem: this made the sons of Ionadab
to Ier. 35. 14.
dwell in Tents, and to drink no wine: this made Mordecai Ester 3. 2.
not to bow his knee to Haman; Naboth not to sell to Ahab his Garden, and old
Eleazer not to dissemble 2. Match. 6.
the eating of a little swines flesh. Fifthly, this will make a man careful to
avoid offense in things questionable, whether good or ill, if it be in a man's
own power to do, or leave undone at his own pleasure. Sixthly, this will make
1. Cor. 8. 13
a Paul avoid offense in things indifferent, not to eat flesh all his life,
rather then scandalize an other. Seventhly, it makes a man peaceable, easily to
be entreated, to hear wholesome counsel, and repoofes, and to be glad to be
prevented in evil, as David was, when Abigail met him. Lastly it makes him
Luke 1.
live like a Zachary and an Elizabeth, and as Paul exhorts, blamelesly, and
Phil. 2. 15.
harmelesly, among others.

Section 3. Means to get and keep it.
THis rare and most singular blessing of God may, through the Lords grace and
help, be gotten, First, by daily increasing our knowledge in every particular
duty distinctly: Secondly, by continually remembering what we are to do.
Thirdly, by examining every day before we take our rest, wherein we have failed
in any duty, not only for substance, but also for circumstance; Fourthly, by
not letting slip any of our faults, nor slightly passing them by till we
feel sorrow of heart for them, and till we find in us a holy resolution to
amend the same.

Thus shall we come in time unto a tender conscience; now as thus we may get
it, so by the same means and practice we may keep it. Here these four
questions may fitly be propounded.

Section 4. Of the first question.
WHether a tender Conscience may not sometime he ouerbusie with a man, and in
something scrupulously trouble him?

Answ. Yes verily, and that first, through fear of sinning upon jealousy and
suspicion, not knowing Christian liberty in things indifferent. Romans 14. 1.
Secondly, through doubtful disputations, and none able, at the present, to
determine and decide the question: of which disputes the Apostle in that
fourteenth of the Romans forwarneth. Thirdly, through false teachers, seeking
to entangle, to ensnare, and beguile simple souls and tender hearts. These
brought the Galathians to the observing of days, and months, and times, and
years, Gal. 4. 10. being tenderly affected at the first to the truth, Verse.
15. These, it may seem, sought by vain Philosophy and Traditions to trouble
the Colossians with superstition in worshipping Angels, in a will worship, with
touch not, taste not, handle not, after the commandments of men, Col. 2.
Fourthly, through weakness of judgment to see and discern between things
lawful and unlawful, lawful 1. Cor. 10. 23.
and convenient: which differences not well observed, the tender conscience is
troubled with some serupulousnesse.

Section 5. Of the second question.
WHat difference there is between tenderness of Conscience, and scrupulositie
of Conscience.

Answ. Between these two there is great difference in many things.

1. In the causes; for tenderness is wrought by the grace of Gods Spirit,
through the binding power of Gods Word. Scrupulositie arises upon an
ouer-inquisitiuenesse of natural wit, inuenting of vnneces sary questions, and
busily putting troublesome cases to entangle conscience. The tender Conscience
is from a settled mind upon truths soberly received, and upon mature
deliberation: Scrupulositie is from fickleness of spirit upon various
conceptions of a man's own brarne ouer-hastily approved, or upon other men's
opinions rashly believed and settled.

2. They differ in the subject matter about which they are exercised. A tender
Conscience, if it be troubled, it is about necessary duties to God or Man, of
concerning themselves. Scrupulositie is busied about trifles, unnecessary
matters, and more concerning others then themselves. The tender Conscience, if
it be unquiet, it is by reason of some fair probabilities conceived in the
understanding, and the case very disputable. Scrupulositie is disquieted by
conjectures, loose imaginations, bare opinions of others, and in matters which
might easily be decided. The tender Conscience keeps within the bounds of a
man's own Calling; and sees that all be right there. Scrupulositie is ranging
abroad, makes a busy body, and an Intermedler without warrant, while much is
amiss at home.

3. They differ in their concomitants. Tenderness of Conscience is ever
accompanied with humility, meekness, peaceablenesse, with sincerity, and
with charity toward their opposites. Scrupulosity is high-minded, fierce,
impatient at opposition, wanting love to Opposites, and is often tainted with
hypocrisy.

4. They differ in their effects; for the tender Conscience makes a man to love
peace, to avoid vain disputations, and casting forth unnecessary doubts, it
hates also singularity, and cannot abide to be censorious. Scrupulositie is
contentious, factious; it is fed with disputes; it delights in doubtful
cases, affects singularity, is troublesome, and ouer-censorious.

5. They differ in the end: a tender conscience aims at the pleasing of God,
Romans 14. 6. and quiet living Heb. 12. 14
with others, as much as is possible, in holiness; being ever loath to trouble
others, or to be troublesome to it self. Scrupulositie seeks it own
satisfaction, and applies it self to side with others to make a faction. Thus
they differ.

Section 6. Of the third Question.
HOw the tender Conscience may be preserved against scrupulositie?

Answ. To prevent this scrupulositie, first, avoid the causes of a scrupulous
Conscience, of which before in the 35. Chapter, and also in answer to the first
of these questions in this Chapter, Sect. 4. Secondly, labor to have the Heb.
5. 14.
understanding exercised to discern both good and evil, and to approve by
knowledge the things that Phil. 1. 9. 10.
are different. Thirdly, cleave close to resolved cases, and be not carried
away with every wind of Ephesians. 4. 14.
doctrine. So shall thou prevent this scrupulositie.

Section 7. Of the fourth question.
But if a tender Conscience have a scruple, how may it be freed from it?

Answ. 1. Use the remedies before prescribed to cure the scrupulous Conscience,
Chap. 35. Sect. 4. Secondly, let not any scruple settle it self in the tender
Conscience, but go forth with to some godly and learned Divine, that can and
will remove it. Thirdly, in seeking resolution, object freely, but so as there
be an honest desire to receive satisfaction of Conscience. Fourthly, meditate
afterward much and more of the answers given, then still how to invent more
objections; and beware of cauilling against the answers, but rather press
Conscience daily with them, and use them as weapons against such scruples
arising, and against other which seek to uphold the scruple. And thus much of
the tender Conscience.

CHAP. 45. Of the wounded Conscience.
THis wounded Conscience is that affliction of spirit which man cannot bear,
Prou. 18. 14.

This may happen to good and holy men, as to a Job, Chap. 6. 4. in whom the
arrows of the Almighty stuck, the poison whereof drank up his spirit, and the
terrors of God set themselves in array against him. It may befall a David, as
we may read in Psalm. 38. 1. 5. and 102. 1. 10. and 88. 7. 15.

Section 1. Of the Causes.
THis wound of Conscience arises of sin against Conscience, 1. Cor. 8. 12.
such was David's great 2. Sam. 12. Psalm. 51.
sins of adultery and murder: or for breach of some vow solemnly made,
which God will require, Deuteronomy. 23. 21. Eccles. 5. 4. 5. 6. or for breach of a
faithful promise made in matter of moment to another. Of great affliction of
Conscience, for both these, home examples may be brought both of men and
women, and the wound hardly cured. The remembrance of sins past, in youth
committed, in time of great affliction may cause trouble; Job, Chap. 13. 26.
The Law powerfully enforced and applied, without meditation of the Gospel, may
cause this affliction upon lesser sins committed, then those condemned by the
letter of the Law, especially if the Conscience be tender, even for inward
thoughts of heart, conceived to be a man's own, when they be but mere
suggestions, and Satanicall blasphemies, as may be seen in that wounded
spirit, and most lamentably distressed soul here not far from us in this
Country.

Section 2. Of the short continuance of this wound in some.
THis Souls sickness, Pro. 18. 14.
greater then any bodily sickness, has not a like continuance in all. In some
it is but for a while, in Peter short; after he went out and wept bitterly, he
could speak comfortably to Christ, after his resurrection, of his love to him.
David had a bitter conflict after Nathan had reproved him, and the Child
stricken with sickness; so for numbering the people, after Gad had done the
Lords message to him: but he recovered in short space. Paul, who was called
Saul, lay in Act. 9. 9. 17 18.
affliction of spirit three days; but after Ananias came to him, he was
refreshed and comforted.

Thus it pleases God to deal with some, lest they should be swallowed up of
2. Cor. 2. 7.
too much sorrow. And those, which he thus shows mercy unto, are such as have
sinned, and greatly transgressed in some odious sin, as adultery, murder,
wilful perjury, incest, or bloodily persecuting Gods people, which are vast
sins deadlily wounding the Conscience. They are such as thoroughly and deeply
can, and do lay to heart their sins, with passionate apprehension of Gods
wrath, being quickly, and in a short space, at the depth of sorrow, and near
the gulf of despair. Therefore God will not suffer such long to continue so,
that they perish not: for God is gracious, and of great compassion, abundant
Exo. 34. 6. Ps. 86. 5. Joel 2. 13.
in goodness, and ready to forgive.

Section 3. Of the long continuance in this wound.
AS God speedily eases some, so he lets other, who have not fallen so
fearfully, nor apprehend in so violent a manner their offenses (though they
be made sad, and also be much perplexed with sorrow and grief for sin) to
lie longer under it. And it happens thus unto these:

1. Sometime from Gods restraining of his comfort for causes, best on own to
himself; yet let these cry to God, and beg of him, as David did, to say unto
their Psalm. 35. 3.
soul, I am thy salvation.

2. Satan's working what he can to make them despair, by casting into them
impure and blasphemous thoughts, and seeking to persuade them, that these are
not his, but the filth of their hearts, and malice against God; by telling
them, that they have sinned the sin against the holy Ghost: by aggravating
their sins, endeavoring thereby to persuade them, that their sins are
heinous in Gods sight, though hid from man; and therefore God has left them,
hears them not, helps them not; because of the greatness of their sins.
These, and other false suggestions he troubles them with; with which they
should not be troubled, because the Devil is a liar, and ever a deceiuer.

3. This affliction sometime continues longer, for want of timely comfort from
such as should afford him comfort. Therefore the Apostle had great care 2 Cor.
2. 7. 8. 11.
of this, lest the man, which had committed so foul a fact, should have been
swallowed up of too much sorrow because the Church failed to show him grace and
favor: He therefore persuades them to forgive him, and to comfort him, lest
Satan should get advantage: of whose devises, in this case, Gods Ministers, and
Gods faithful people should not be ignorant.

4. This continuance is in part from the party afflicted, and that many ways.
First, through ignorance and error of judgment in their own spiritual
estate with God, falsely supposing themselves to be worse then they are,
because of their often failings, as if Paul Romans 7. 19
failed not in that which he would have done: because of their falls, as if
excellent men had never fallen, not a Noah, Lot, Moses, Aaron, David, Peter,
and others, Because the affliction continues Ps. 13. and 77. 7. 8. 9. and 88.
14. 15. 16.
and they not delivered, as if David never said, shall I never be remembered;
and why castest thou off my soul? Let the Psalms quoted in the margin be
read, and see how he held himself as almost a forsaken Psalm. 22. 1.
man, who also cried out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

2. Through the weakness of their faith during the affliction, not being able
to apply the promises so comfortably, as they should: when yet, in this state,
they should remember what the Father of the Child said, Lord I believe Mark. 9.
help my unbelief, and found acceptance with Christ; they should say with
David, why art thou disquieted, O my soul, trust in Psalm. 42. 5.
God.

3. Through their false censure upon themselves, as, that they want graces,
because they be weak in them, or that they feel them not to work so lively,
as formerly they have felt them, or now perceive them to be in others: or that
their graces, which they have, are not true, but shadows, and the coun^erfeit
of graces, or that they are hard hearted, that they cannot repent unfeignedly,
but are full of hypocrisy. But this false and too base esteem of themselves
must they lay aside, and consider, First, that they show to much
unthankfulness to God for that which they have; when it becomes the upright
to Ps. 33. 1.
be thankful; Secondly, that they sin in belying themselves. Thirdly, that
they take part with Satan against their own souls: for this is that which
he does strive for, to make them to condemn themselves, thus falsely to bring
them to despair, and therefore should they not thus untruly be accusers of
themselves, and be their own enemies.

4. They continue thus See the remoouing of these in the book entitled, The
Christians daily walk in holy security and peace: 2. part, from page 39. to 174.
through manifold false fears, as that God will not pardon the^ that God loves
them not, that they are cast-awaies, that it is too late to repent, that if
they could repent, it would be held hypocrisy, and so to no purpose, that
their case is worse then any man's, and many such like.

5. Their replies which they make against offered comforts to prevent their
own peace and deliverance, of which, and how to answer them, see the forenamed
book, and the first Fol. 409.
volume of Master Perkins, touching consolations to a troubled Conscience.

6. And lastly, is their ignorance of the true remedies, or inability to apply
thsm rightly.

Section 4. Of the effects of Conscience afflicted.
THe sorrowful effects of a wounded spirit are not a few, as a deiection of
spirit without cheerfulness in religious exercises, as in hearing the word,
praying, receiving the Sacrament, Christian conference and the like. Terrors
and fear beset them sometime, and they are troubled with terrifying dreams;
sorrow of heart also oppresses their spirits. Hence is it that they neglect
their callings, lay aside the duties thereof, are careless of their very
necessary worldly business, and much addicted to solitariness, and to sit
musing in a dump. Their soul is vexed, and finds no rest: David's soul was
Psalm. 6. 3. 6. and 31. 10.
troubled within him, he was full of grief and sighs, wearied with groans,
and washed his couch with tears. This was it that made Peter to go out,
Matthew. 27.
and weep bitterly. This weakeneth the body: yea David tells us, that his
Ps. 31. 10.
strength failed him, and his bones were consumed by reason of his sin; for a
broken spirit dries the Pro. 17. 22.
bones. It will make a man weary of his life, and to utter sometimes very
uncomfortable words, such as Psalm. 77. 7. 8. 9.
these, will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more? Is his
mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore? Has God
forgot to be gracious? and has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Yea,
he will cry out, My God, my God, why have thou for saken Psalm. 22. 1.
me!

These and other such like be the lamentable effects of the wounded soul: and
therefore let us beware of wounding it; and if it be wounded labor the curing
of it. Now for the curing of it, note two things, the preparatiues and the
Remedy.

Section 5. Of the preparatiues to the curing of the wound.
THere are excellent preparatiues which help to make way to the remedy, and
they be these.

1. Resist the Devil and that in three things, never dispute with him, believe
him in nothing he says, and cast back his secret blasphemous suggestions
upon himself, when he would make them thine: thus resisting he will fly
James 4.
from thee.

2. Beware of all causeless fears, and groundless suspicions of Gods favor
and love.

3. Do not deny Gods graces in thee, extenuate them not, nor undervalue any of
his gifts, whereby thou should falsely mistake thy self, and judge of thy
self worse, then thou have cause to do.

4. Know and believe, that it is not sinning, but the not repenting of sin
that damneth man. For the best have sinned: and note also a difference between
the regenerate and unregenerate in sinning: for in the one the man sins; in
the other, it is not he that does it, but sin that dwells in him. Romans 7.
20.

5. Understand that weakness and imperfection of graces and heavenly gifts
makes not a nullity thereof, not that therefore they are not true graces in them.

6. Conceive thus much that the least degree and measure of Gods graces, are
true graces, are a testimony of Gods good favor, and aduanceth a man above
his natural condition and state.

7. Take heed of making sense and feeling the Judge of thy spiritual estate
with God, whilst thou art in affliction of Conscience, and in perplexity of
spirit: for Cant. 3. 1. and 5. 6.
the Spouse may seek her beloved, and not find him for a while; he may
withdraw himself for a space, and not be found, nor answer. And consider
withal, that it is one thing to have graces, and an other to feel them
lively at the present. Graces in their working are sometimes weak, it ebbes,
and flows; waxes and waineth; is more strong and lively at one time, and
less at an other: so that a good Christian prays not, believes not, hears
not, ioyeth not, loves not goodness nor good men ever a like. For he that
faith he is always the same in all holy duties did never any such duty well,
and much deceives himself.

8. Thou must know a comfortable lesson, which is this, that a Christian man's
obedience to the law is not legal now, but Evangelical, performed under the
Covenant of grace, and not from the Covenant of of works, which lies not upon
any in Jesus Christ.

9. When any comfortless or desperate thoughts molest thee, check thy self
with David, and say, Ps. 77. 10.
It is my infirmity, I will remember the years of the right hand of the most
Highest: call to mind thy former comforts, thy foretaste of Gods favor, and
experience of his love, and meditate and stay on that. 10. And lastly, in what
anguish soever thou be, yet cease not, neglect not to pray, to cry and call, to
cast up eiaculations from thy Psalm. 77. 2.
heart unto God: for David sought God, when his soul was without comfort, yea,
in the sorrows of death, and pains of Hell, even then he prayed Ps. 116. 4.
and said, O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. By these preparatiues the
Medicine for the soul will work.

Section 6. Of the sovereign salve to cure the wound.
THe afflicted and sick Patient having received these ten preparatiues, the
Medicine will work well. In the ministering whereof note, first, what it is;
secondly, who must administer the Physic; thirdly, what is the isntrumental
means for it; fourthly, after the receipt, what be the Cordials for comfort.

The remedy for curing fully the wound is only one, and that is the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ with faith in him. For if we be truly informed in
these things, first, what Christ is in his person; secondly, what he was
ordained to be for us; thirdly, what here he has done for us; fourthly, what
he now does for us; and fifthly, what he will do for us hereafter, at his
second coming: Then knowing, first, what we by him are freed from; secondly,
what we are made by him; thirdly, what we have here attained unto by him;
fourthly, and what in the end we shall be by him:

By the knowledge of all these things, distinctly marked and understood, our
faith will wholly rest upon him, our Conscience will be greatly comforted, and
all the objections met with, and fully answered, which may be made by Satan,
or by man himself, and so the wound perfectly cured.

Section 7. By whom to be administered.
THe Physician to administer the Medicine, is inward and outward. The inward
and principal is Gods holy Spirit, who begets faith, confirms it, makes man
to take hold on Christ, and gives him spiritual comfort; this is he that is
called the Comforter, without whom no comfort spiritual; we must therefore
pray for this holy Spirit, because God has promised him, Luke 11. 13.

The outward, is Gods 2. Sam. 12. Act. 2. 37. 38. and 16. 2. King. 22
Minister, a Nathan to David, Peter and the other Apostles to the Jews, Paul
and Sylas to the Jailer, Huldah to Josias. For the Minister must be a faithful
Messenger from God, to whom God has given ministerial authority to bind and
to loose. He must be learned in the School Esaias 50. 4.
of temptations, and know how to deliver a word in season to the wearied soul.
He must be one that under afflictions has tasted of Gods comforts, so as he
can tell to comfort others 2. Cot. 1. 4.
with those comforts wherewith he himself has been comforted. Such a one
knows how aptly to apply the salve to the wound, for the best working of it.

Section 8. Of the isntrumental means.
THe means to be used in administering this spiritual physic, is only the
Gospel of Christ, from out of which all those former things touching Christ
and our selves are to be learned. For this is the power of God to salvation;
Romans 1. 16.
this is the ministration of the spirit and righteousness; this is it by which
2. Cor. 3. 8. 9 Ephesians. 1. 13.
faith is wrought, and we made to trust in the Lord Jesus. And therefore to
heal the wounded Conscience the Gospel must be well known.

Section 9. Of the Cordials to strengthen the heart settled upon Christ.
FOr the better working of the heavenly and precious Potion, and for the
comforting of the heart upon the receipt more and more, these Cordials must be
given, which are meditations full of consolation.

1. That we are not under Romans 6. 14
the Law, but under Grace; we are in the covenant of Grace.

2. That this covenant is confirmed to every true Christian by an oath, and
Heb. 6. 18.
sealed by the precious Heb. 9. 12.
blood of Jesus Christ.

3. That part of this covenant is, that Gods law should be written in our Heb.
8. 10.
hearts, to make us affect it, and in our minds, to cause us to understand it,
and that God will remember our Heb. 10. 17
sins and iniquities no more.

4. That Jesus Christ, upon this his Fathers covenant and promise, inuiteth
Mat. 11. 28
all that travel, and are heavy laden, promising to refresh them.

5. That now we may boldly go to him, believe 1. Ioh. 3. 23
in him, not think it presumption to take hold of him, for we are commanded
to believe in him, in whom God is ever well Mat. 3. 17.
pleased.

6. That God in Christ is become our Father, full of compassion to pity us,
gracious to hear our requests, Ps. 86. 15.
long-suffring to forbear us, and plentiful in mercy to pardon, and
plentiful in truth, to keep with us what he has promised: He will not the
death of Ezech. 33. 11.
a sinner, but rather that he should live. If we confess 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
our sins, we are bound to believe them pardoned, as he is faithful and
just, who has promised to forgive them. He will look upon the humble and
poor Esaias 66. 2. and 57. 15.
in spirit, the contrite heart, and one that trembles at his word will he
dwell Ps. 11. 27.
with, and will not despise such a one.

7. And lastly, meditate upon the holy sacrament; and use it often; for great
comfort may an afflicted spirit reap thereby, if men did well know how to use
it aright.

Section 10. How to keep us from the wound of Conscience.
IT is not enough to be nealed, but when we are sound so to keep us. It is
here then fit to know how we may keep our Conscience from wounding. And this
is to keep our selves from sin; for this only wounds it. Now to do this,

1. Make Gods word ever the rule of all our actions; and enquire from it, what
warrant for the matter, for the manner, for the end, how convenient and
seasonable, and how lawful for thee. Then in doing see and observe the
agreement touching these things with the rule;

2. Bridle will and affections, and keep them ever under reason, and this
under religion.

3. Hearken to the dictate of Conscience, and take heed of sinning against the
light thereof.

4. Make not light of any sin, the very least sin, seem it never so little
in thine own, or in the eyes of other men: for the not avoiding little sins,
is to make way for greater transgressions. And here note five things not to
be careless of the least sin. First, that Gods wisdom is in the Law
forbidding that sin. Secondly, that God has power to maintain his Law.
Thirdly, that he is just to punish the contempt of his wisdom and power.
Fourthly, that not the least sin can be redeemed but by the precious blood of
Christ. Lastly, that little sins, in man's conceit have been most severely
punished, as Lots wife for looking back, Vzzah for touching the Arc; all
mankind for Adams eating of the forbidden fruit.

5. Be very willing and glad to be prevented in sin, by check of Conscience, by
reproof of thy Teacher, by Christian admonition, by any cross in the way, and
by others example. And if thou be ouer-taken, ly not in it, return speedily,
and ask heartily forgiveness. Thus shall thou preserve thy Conscience from
any deadly wound.

CHAP. 46. Of the difference between the wounded Conscience and the desperate
Conscience.
Seeing the effects of a wounded spirit in the regenerate are very lamentable,
and that such a one may utter desperate speeches, yea more, sometime become so
weary of life, as he or she may seek their own death: it may be asked how the
desperate and this do differ?

I answer, that the difference is much between them in many respects.

1. Of the parties, the afflicted Conscience may befall a David, and is the
Conscience of the regenerate, though it afflict them sore: but the desperate
Conscience happens to a Saul, a Judas: either to men lewdly vicious, or
deeply hipocrites.

2. They differ in the causes; The desperate conscience is from Gods justice to
punish the wicked; the other is a fatherly chastisment of God, and for trial.
The desperate conscience arises from apprehension of Gods fierce anger and
wrath for sin, for fear of vengeance, from loss, from outward crosses,
shame, and reproach among men; The other is most from the consideration of
sin, and want of grace, of which things they most complain; and more bewail
these, then grieve or fret at cross, shame, disgrace, or terrified; with
apprehension of Gods heavy indignation, desperately as others be.

3. They differ in the manner of working, the desperate is very violent,
condemning, damning, and making a man to give way wholly to the terrors
thereof, and to the suggestions of Satan; for they are wholly under the power
of the Law; they have no part in the saving power of the Gospel; neither have
they any assistance from God, Job 8. 20.

The other is very troublesome, but not so violent, but reproves, argues,
conuinceth, and murmureth ever against man; but yet is he not wholly given
over to the terror thereof, nor to Satan's malicious suggestions. Because they
are not under the Law, but under Grace, their graces also do work as their
faith and hope, though but weakly for the present; and God does not utterly
forsake them, Job 8. 20. neither does he suffer them to be tempted above that
which they are able to bear, 1. Cor. 10. 13.

4. They differ in some effects: the desperate conscience makes man to seek
ease, and to get freed from the torture here, if he may; not to change his
former evil life, but to live quietly, as before, in his vain course of his
conversation, vexed to have in this world a Hell, of which he is regardlesse
till after death.

But the wounded soul seeks deliverance, not to follow the world for
profits, or pleasures but with a resolution ^o walk: more carefully in holy
duties, and to have his heart set at liberty, to run more chearefully the way
of Gods Commandments.

5. They differ in the remedies used to cure the grief. The desperate
conscience drives men to vain company, foolish pastimes, wanton delights, or
to thrust them into worldly businesses, or to seek help of ill instruments,
Witches, Wizards, as Saul did; or to go to their companions in sin, as Judas
did, but without comfort.

The afflicted spirit is not moved to any of these, but flies from them, and
hates them; it finds no rest by worldly vain, and fleshly means: it therefore
seeks spiritual means, godly men's advise, Christian conference, and labors
continually with earnest desire to feel comfort in a favorable acceptance
with God, through faith in Jesus Christ.

6. And lastly they differ in the end, the desperate Conscience works man's
destruction, and makes some to kill themselves, or to die with damnation upon
themselves in their own mouths; or else suddenly 1. Sam. 25. 37.
with terror have their hearts die within them, and become as a stone, like
Nabal.

But the godly, afflicted in conscience, attaineth to Psa. 37. 37.
a more happy end, and that is peace after much and long conflict, as examples
have showed.

CHAP. 47. Of the difference between the afflicted Conscience, and the passion
of Melancholy.
IT is the fashion of vain men to judge the wound of Conscience, Melancholy,
because they are altogether ignorant of the one, and not so of the other;
according to their natural knowledge therefore they fondly judge of a
spiritual malady. And for that they may sometime meet together, to the greater
grief of the aflicted spirit, and not discerning the one from the other, they
rashly judge all to be only a fit of Melancholy, when as they differ much.

For first, the Melancholic humor works a sad pensiveness in such, as be
never troubled about cases of Conscience, nor ever grieved for sin, or
failing in religious duties: but the wound of Conscience works heaviness of
heart for these things:

2. Melancholy fills the head often with vain fantasies and imaginations of
such things, as if the parties had lost their wits and understandings, the
conceits being to others so evidently false and foolish. But he that is wounded
in spirit, loses not his right apprehension of the just cause of sorrow,
neither is he so mistaken in his imagination as the other be.

3. Melancholic passions arise from natural causes in the body; the other
from the sight of sin in the soul.

4. This may be somewhat discerned by bodily complexion, so cannot the other:
for affliction of conscience may befall such, whose complexion is s^^guine, as
David's was, as by his description may appear, 1. Sam. 16. 12. and 17. 42.
and by his delight in Music.

5. The mere melancholic person grieueth not for Gods dishonor, for other
men's rebellions against God, and because men keep not Gods Law; he is not
touched with these things, as a David was, and afflicted souls be for their
own sins, which moves them to mourn and lament for others.

6. The melancholy is cured by physic, as being a bodily disease: but so is
not the wound of spirit.

7. The melancholic cured and amended, is not joyous in the Lord, speaks not
of spiritual comforts, and peace obtained with God by faith, nor delights in
the company of the godly, nor in any holy conference with them, nor seeks
after spiritual means, nor finds comfort in meditation, hearing and reading
of Gods Word, often praying, and many eiaculations unto God: but the afflicted
in Conscience cured, takes delight in these things, and does express much joy
herein, even to the rejoicing of the hearts of the pious, and
religiously-minded.

Lastly, the melancholic humor is never so cured, but the parties of that
complexion will easily be overtaken therewith, either upon no occasion, or
upon light crosses of the world, and discontentments, and so be cast into a
sudden dumpishnesse, without being able to render a sound reason thereof. But
men of wounded conscience once cured, and their peace obtained with God, they
are never sad but for some new sin, or being in company with such as grieve
the^ by sinning; the worlds crosses may trouble them; but finding inward peace,
they are cheerful, or soon made cheerful by comfortable conference with
religious people. The Melancholic humor and the wound of conscience do very
much differ one from the other, and require differing remedies, and differing
Phisicians to cure the same.

CHAP. 48. Of the quiet good Conscience.
WE may see by that which has before been delivered in the 44. Chapter, that a
good Conscience regenerated may be yet sometimes troubled, which is as a
disease for a time, till it be healed, and made a quiet Conscience. Which is
the peaceable Conscience clearing, acquiting, and absoluing, like Saint Paul's,
who knew 1. Cor. 44.
nothing by himself. This is the Conscience of an Henoth walking with God; of
an Abraham, upright in his walking before God; and of a Zachary and Elizabeth,
living blameless in all the Commandments of God.

Section 1. How come by.
THis peaceable Conscience is attained by having Jesus Christ, Melchizedech
Heb. 7. 2.
for our righteousness, and our King of Mat. 11. 28
peace, for he it is, that gives his rest and peace. Secondly, by justifying
faith, Ioh. 14. 27
apprehending, and applying his righteousness, for so have we peace with Romans
5. 1.
God, which works peace of Conscience. Thirdly, by assurance of pardon for
sin, through Jesus Christ: for what can then disquiet Conscience? David's
Conscience was quiet after he had obtained pardon; and where there is
remission, Heb. 10. 2. 18.
there is no more sacrifice for sin, nor conscience of sin to vex and
trouble the penitent. Fourthly, by being a lively member, and subject of the
Kingdom of God, and of Christ: because there is joy and peace To. 14. 17.
in the holy Ghost. Fifthly, by God Spirit, the fruit whereof, among other, is
peace. Sixthly, by the exercise Gal. 5. 22.
of prayer, and making our requests known unto God, so shall the peace of God
Phil. 4. 6. 7.
keep our minds and hearts through Christ: and God will be favorable to us;
and the light of his countenance Job 33. 26.
will afford us peace; so as we may then say with David, Return to thy rest,
Ps. 116. 4. 7
O my soul, when we perceive that God has heard our prayers. Seventhly, by
walking in the old way, Ie^. 6. 16.
and good way; for such shall find rest. Eighthly, by the work of
righteousness, which is peace, and the effect, quietness and assurance for
ever, Esaias 32. 17.

Section 2. Of the effects of it, and how to keep it.
THe quiet Conscience is a continual Feast; it comforts us in going to God,
and it makes us cheerful in holy duties, and in performing the duties of our
Calling, and therein to 2. Cor. 1. 12
rejoice. Therefore must we take care to keep it, which is by avoiding all
sin (for that only disquiets it) and by seeking rest and comfort ever in
Jesus Christ his righteousness; we living in all holy obedience, to the
adorning of our Christian profession.

Section 3. Of the difference of this good quiet Conscience, from the evil
quiet Conscience.
IT shall not be impertinent here to set down how these two may be discerned
one from the other, lest men deceive themselves.

The evil quiet Conscience arises of ignorance and presumption of Gods mercy
in Christ. It comes through custom of sinning, by an impenitent hard heart;
often upon worldly prosperity, earthly contentment in pleasures, profits, and
preferments; but chiefly for want of searching their ways; for a man of an ill
Conscience dares not make a diligent search into his soul touching his estate
between God and him, because he has not an acquittance to show for his
discharge.

But the quiet good conscience arises upon sound knowledge, from assurance of
Gods favor through Christ, the soul being a dorned with graces, and the life
of the man virtuous; it comes through a through search of his ways, and an
acquittance obtained for a full discharge of all his debt unto God. Other
differences may be collected out of the former Sections in this Chapter, and
from the 23. Chapter, Section 3. and 4. where is handled the still and quiet
ill Conscience.

Section 4. Whether this Conscience never stirs.
HEre it may be demanded, Whether this so quiet a Conscience ever rests
quiet?

Answ. It is quiet, but yet so, as it will not fail to perform it duty to him
whose it is, when he is either ready to fall, or has slipped a little out of
the way: but it does it friendly, as I may say; it flies not furiously into
the face of the offender, as the ill quiet Conscience will; but lovingly with a
quiet check seeks to prevent sin, or to recall one back for sin, and having
obtained the effect of reproof, it rests, and is quiet; yea, it comfort,
and encourages to well-doing, which the other ill conscience cannot, nor does
not.

CHAP. 49. Of the upright Conscience.
THe Conscience upright is that which is set right up, not declining this way
or that way; not carried to the right hand nor to the left, but is kept upright.

1. From every crooked rule that might lead it awry, which crooked rule is any
other than Gods Word, between God and Conscience.

2. From every crooked path, as the Psalmist speaks; Ps. 125. 5.
now every crooked path or way is every unwarrantable action and aberration
from the right rule.

3. From any halting between two opinions in matter of Religion, as between
the true and false God, between the true and the superstitious worship;
between Gods precepts and man's ordinances, and between Gods written Word, and
feigned traditions.

4. From all by and sinister respects in obeying Gods will, and doing duties
unto men: or in avoiding sin and evil.

This is the Conscience of upright men, of such as have honest intentions
always in their actions, the plain hearted, and sincere minded.

Section 2. How gotten.
THis upright Conscience is come by, First, by setting God before us, as being
ever in his sight and he looking upon us: as Saint Paul did, who said, Act.
23. 1. and 24. 16.
that he had lived in all good Conscience before God, and he endeavored to
keep it toward God and man. For it cannot be, but he that walks before
God, having him before his eyes, must needs be upright, they are commanded
together unto Genesis 17. 1.
Abraham. Secondly, by having the word of God for warrant in all our courses
for this will all o make us upright, if Gods laws and statutes be before us,
for thus came David 2. Sam. 22. 2^* 24.
to be upright. Neither can this be separated from the former; for he sets not
God truly before him, that neglects his word, and casts that behind him.

Section 3. Of the effects.
SIngular are the effects which flow from this upright Conscience.

1. It makes a man in his enterprises ever to ask counsel of God, and to
enquire at the word of the Lord: as Iehosophat did, when Ahab would have him go
into a war with 1. King. 22. 5.
him.

2. It will make him direct Pro. 21. 29.
his steps according to it, and make a David to wish Psa. 119. 5.
that his ways were ever so guided.

3. It will cause a man to cast off all inward reseruations within himself,
and to resign himself to the rule of the word wholly: and to say, not my
will, O Lord, but thy will be done.

4. It will not allow in a man partial obedience, neither to strain at Gnats,
and to swallow Camels, nor strain at Camels, great and foul and infamous
evils, and swallow Gnats, lesser sins: for the upright Conscience makes a
man's throat so narrow, as he cannot swallow a Camel without choking, nor the
least Gnat without coughing-

5. It will not permit at any hand a man to look a squint, two ways at once,
in his obedience to Gods will: that is, so to the pleasing of God, as withal
to please man: So to obey Gods precepts, as yet the same may stand with his
profit, and with his own preferment, or credit and esteem with men.

6. It will make man walk uprightly, not to turn this Ps^. 15. 2. Isai. 30.
21. 1. King. 22. 14. Job. 33. 3. Psalm. 15. 2.
nor that way; and also to speak uprightly, as Michaiah would and did, and as
did Elihu, and all that go to heaven should do.

7. This keeps a man from playing the dissembler, the hypocrite, the
time-seruer: to have two faces under one hood, and within him a heart and a
heart; to have heart and tongue at o^^des, speech and affection vnt^^eable,
outward gesture and inward thought, unlike; pretenses and intention to differ
it cannot possibly endure.

6. It can enable a man in distres to plead his vprightnes, Job. 10. 7. Isai.
38. 3.
as did Job and Hezekiah.

Therefore let us labor to get and keep this Conscience: for God requires
truth in the inward parts. And the want of this upright Conscience is the cause
of all fraud, cousenages, and villainies committed any where in all the world.

The means to get it, is consideration of Gods allseeing eye, and the word for
the rule and warrant in all our actions. Now the same that begets it keeps it,
making a Paul to have his conversation in all simplicity and godly sincerity
with cheerfulness.

CHAP. 50. Of the pure Conscience.
THis is the Conscience which ever accompanies uprightness, for he Job. 8. 6.
that has the one has also the other; he that is pure is upright.

Of this pure Conscience the Apostle makes mention, 1. Tim. 3. 9. 2. Tim. 1.
3. This is the conscience that cannot endure defilement.

Section 1. In whom it is, and how attained.
THis is the Conscience of such as be sanctified by Gods spirit; for the 1.
Pet. 1. 22.
Spirit purifieth the soul; And faith purges the Act. 15. 9.
heart and conscience; taking hold of Christ by Heb. 9. 14.
whose blood the Conscience is purged from dead works. Moreover it becomes
pure by the purity of the mind; the minds 2. Pet. 3. 1.
of the regenerate are pure; and therefore so is their Conscience: for upon the
defilement of the mind, the Conscience (says the Apostle) Tit. 1. 15.
is defiled. Lastly it is pure by the wisdom given Iam. 3. 17
of God, from above; for it being pure, and the light of the Conscience, it
must also be pure.

Section 2. Of the effects hereof.
THis sanctified, purged and pure Conscience works first, a detestation of
all uncleanness: for it looks to the rule with a pure mind, and the purity
of wisdom from above, 2. Cor. 7. 1. Iam. 1. 27.
which rule forbids all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, all defilements
and Isai. 30. 22.
spots of the world; and all Jude verse. 23.
fleshly service and impurity in Religion. And therefore Conscience auoideth
all such filth, and uncleanness whatsoever.

Secondly, it stirs up a man to purity, as the Rule commands it, and religion
tieth unto it. Hence is it, Tit. 1. 15. Psalm. 18. 26. Prou. 15. 26.
that from this pure Conscience men regenerate are called Pure; and because
this purity of it causes them to fly all impurities in Religion and in
conversation (which other of defiled minds: and Consciences make no matter of)
they are reproached with the ignominious name of Puritans, the name of old
Heretics, called Catharists and Nouatians, whose heresy these so nicknamed
are far from.

Section 3. Of the signs of this pure Conscience.
NOw lest any be deceived by presuming of this pure Conscience, as if they had
it which have it not, the word of God gives us evidence hereof, to know where
it is. First, it holds the mystery of 1. Tim. 3. 9 and. 1. 5.
faith; for this is kept in a pure conscience. Secondly, it is accompanied with
a Heb. 9. 14.
pure heart. Thirdly, he 2. Tim. 1. 3.
that has it serves God purely, following the steps of holy forefathers.
Fourthly and lastly, it is showed by a pure life: for this must needs come from
thence: because if the word be pure, the rule of it, Religion pure, the Gospel
pure, the heart pure, the mind Heb. 13. 18.
pure, Conscience pure, then must needs the life be Prou. 21. 8.
pure, in living honestly, in working righteousness, Phil. 1. 10.
and walking without giving offense.

Section 4. How to keep it pure.
WHen the Conscience becomes pure, it is to be kept pure; which is by
avoiding that which may defile it, which is sin; for it is called
filthiness, and Christ tells Iam. 1. 21. Mat. 15. 18. 19.
us, that it defiles the man. We must labor for Gods spirit, faith, purity of
mind, and for the wisdom which is from above, which makes Conscience pure,
and will so keep it.

CHAP. 50. Of the justifying Conscience.
THe last difference of the regenerate Conscience is the Conscience justifying.
This witnesses our righteousness before God, even that which the law
requires: and this it does, not by the law but by the Gospel, in all those in
whom it is the power of God to salvation, and are justified by faith in Christ.

Section 1. How the Conscience comes to justify.
Q. HEre it may be asked how the Conscience by the Gospel does so justify a
man?

Answ. First, The Gospel commands to believe in Christ Jesus. 1. Ioh. 3. 23.
Secondly, it teaches first to reject righteousness of works by the law in
our own persons: Romans 3. 20. Phil. 3. 9. the Gospel is utterly against this.
Secondly, it teaches, and reuealeth not an other righteousnes^^, but an other
way to attain it, which is not by works, but by faith in Christ; for the
Gospel Romans 10. 30. 31. 32. and 3. 28. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Romans 4. 23. 24.
has made known, that the righteousness of the law is in Christ, and that
such as believe in him, have it imputed to them, and so become they righteous
before God. Thirdly, what the Gospel commands and teaches, that it makes
Ephesians. 1. 13.
good, through the effectualnesse of the Spirit; and so binds Conscience to
believe and obey the same. If any professing the Gospel feel not this binding
power, it is for that they remain ignorant of it, or that their knowledge is
not sanctified to them, or for that it is not pressed home to the Conscience.

Section 2. In what the justifying Conscience does stand: and how it differs
from a justifying faith.
Q. HEre it may be demanded wherein is this justification of Conscience?

Answ. It stands in the witnessing of our faith in four things. First, that we
believe what Christ Jesus is in himself, as the Eunuch did, Act. 8. 37.
Secondly, that we believe what he 1. Cor. 1. 30
was made for us that believe in him, even our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, Romans 10. 4. 30. and 3. 26.
the end of the law for righteousness to all that believe, and our iustifier;
Thirdly, that we do believe to be justified by him, and only stand just by
his righteousness imputed Gal. 2. 16.
without the works of the Law. Fourthly, that we believe in thus believing,
that God for his Son Romans 4. 3. 5. 23. 24. 2. Cor. 5. 21.
Jesus Christ's sake will, yea and does account us righteous before him. All
these acts of faith it does 1. Ioh. 5. 10
witness for us unto God: and this is the witness within us.

Some may say, we have often heard of a justifying faith, but not so of a
justifying Conscience, and therefore desire to know the difference of them.

Answ. Justifying faith is the isntrumental means by which we apply Christ to
us for our justification: Justifying Conscience is the witnessing of those
forenamed acts of faith for us unto God. Faith is as one receiving money and
paying it to his credit our to acquit him of his debt, Conscience is a witness
standing by, justifying that payment by which he is freed from the debt.

Section 3. Of the comfort which arises from this justification of Conscience.
SIngular is the consolation which a godly Christian reapeth by this Conscience
so witnessing his faith in Jesus Christ, as before is showed. For what benefit
by Christ through faith is obtained in Gods mercy, in that this Conscience
does comfort us; Now the benefit is manifold, First, It comfort against Romans
8. 4.
the terror of the law, for in Christ we fulfill it. Secondly, against the
Romans 5. 10.
fear of Gods justice; for atonement is made, his wrath appeased, and he
reconciled. Thirdly, against 2. Cor. 5. 18.
all Satan's accusings; for Christ has overcome him for us. Fourthly, against
Ioh. 14. 30.
falls of infirmity and sinning after we be in Christ: for Christ's blood
cleanses Heb. 2. 14. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Mat. 1.
from all sins; He saues his people from their sins, and when they do sin,
he is their Advocate with the 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
Father, and their propitiatiation. Fifthly, against fainting under
afflictions: for they are changed from punishments into chastisements, Heb. 12.
5. 6.
and from the sign of Gods anger, into the witness of his love: for as many
as he loves, he chastises, and scourges. Sixthly, against all sad sorrow
because of our great imperfections, our too much ignorance, our
unrighteousness, our defect in holiness, and the remainders of sin and
corruption in us. For Jesus Christ is our purity, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
and redemption. Seventhly, against the fear of death: for he has overcome
death, abolished 2. Tim. 1. 10. Ioh. 10. 28.
it, and given life and immortality. Lastly, against the dread of damnation,
Romans 81. 33. 34.
Hell, and destruction. For Christ has freed and justified us, who can then
condemn? Conscience, by witnessing our faith in Christ, affords us
consolation against the fear and dread of all these things. We must therefore
labor for it by the means whereby it is attained, of which before; So must
we endeavor to keep it when we have it.

Section 4. How to keep this justifying Conscience.
TO keep this comfortable conscience, there are two things to be observed of
us;

1. To take heed of such things as may overthrow it and make us to lose it, and
they chiefly are these three. First, to uphold a covenant of works between
God and us his people professing the Gospel. Secondly, to maintain
justification by works, and not by faith without the works of the Law.
Thirdly, to lose our faith. For he that loses his faith, loses his good
Conscience: 1. Tim. 1. 19.
And whosoever do hold a covenant of works, and righteousness thereby are in
bondaged to the Law; are fallen from grace propounded Gal. 5. 4.
by the Gospel; they cannot attain to righteousness; Romans 9. 30. 31. 32. and
10. 2.
Christ profits them nothing; so remain they under the curse, from which by
Christ only they must be freed. Therefore such cannot Gal. 3. 13. and 5. 4.
have this justifying Conscience, but by these means do lose it, because it
witnesses it through faith of the Gospel, and not by the Law.

2. To keep this Conscience, as we must take heed of that which may overthrow
it, so must we be careful to maintain and nourish that which will preserve
it, and that is, by strengthening of our faith, by holding to the Covenant of
Grace; by meditating upon not only the sufficiency, but also upon the
efficacy of Christ his satisfaction, and merit of his obedience particularly
for every one of us, believing to be saved only by him: by considering of Gods
faithfulness and truth in his gracious promises made to us in Christ; and by
the frequent use of the Lords supper; in which our faith may be greatly
strengthened, First, by beholding God the Father giving Christ his Son.
Secondly, by considering how Christ offered himself. Thirdly, by both these to
gather the infinite love of both toward us; Fourthly, by assuring our selves,
first, that we may apply Christ particularly: secondly, that Christ is received
into us, for I am in Ioh. 17.
them, says he. Thirdly, That we can no more lose. Christ, then the elements
which we have received. Thus by the Sacrament may our faith be strengthened,
and so our justifying Conscience preserved; which witnesses only so, as we
have faith to believe; so as if faith fail, it fails, if faith have it work,
then this Conscience has it work, and affords us singular comfort between
God and us. And thus much now at the length concerning a good Conscience and
all the differences thereof: the general fruit and benefit of all follows.

CHAP. 52. Of the singular effect which arises from a good Conscience
regenerate, quiet, upright, pure, and justifying.
WHen man has attained to a good Conscience regenerat, and that it be quiet,
pure, upright, and witnessing our faith in the Lord Jesus, through the binding
power of the Gospel, it works a holy and reverent boldness, with confidence
1. Ioh. 3. 21. Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb. 4. 16. Ioh. 21. 17. 2. Tim. 4. 7.
to have access unto God, to make us, even after fearful falls (being truly
penitent) to appeal to God concerning our love to him; to be assured of our
salvation, to be comforted in great afflictions, being able to say, let him
slay me, Ioh. 13. 15. 18. and 16. 19.
yet will I trust in him; I shall be justified, for my record is in heaven, and
witness 2. Cor. 5. 6. 8.
on high; and lastly to desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. For
through this good Conscience so quiet, pure, and upright, Psa. 44. 8.
our hearts are freed from fears, and we have a holy glorying in the Lord,
with giving him thanks, and praise for our place Romans 8. 33. (...).
and atonement with God: concluding that nothing can separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus. But here lest many be deceived, it shall not
be amiss to show a difference between this holy Confidence arising from
Conscience, and fleshly presumption, of which in the Chapter following.

CHAP. 53. Of the difference between confidence from a good Conscience, and
presumption from a deceitful heart.
THere be two rocks on which man split their Souls; the one is desperation
which most fear, and fewest feel; the other presumption, which almost none
dread, and yet by it most are tumbled into Hell, before they be aware: not one
of ten thousands shall we hear of despairing, but ten thousands to one of
them presuming, as the whole World in the days of Noah, a whole City, yea many
Cities, while one Lot feared, and the rest by presumption perished.

Now holy Confidence with a good Conscience preserves from both, from the one,
and from the other; so that a godly man shall neither despair nor presume.
Confidence is opposite to despair, and therefore need I not set out their
differences; but confidence and presumption have some semblances; and therefore
it is fit they should be well discerned one from the other.

Section 1. In whom they be, and their natures or properties.
THe one is in the regenerate, and is supernatural, in one of a good
Conscience, qualified with grace: The other in the unregenerate; and is
natural in one of an ill Conscience, and without grace. Presumption takes all
for granted without examination; and can give no good reason of his state
between God and him: but confidence from a good Conscience trusts upon sound
trial, serious searching out of a man's standing, and is able to yield
sufficient reason of that Confidence: presumption gives nature it swing, so
does not this holy confidence, but restrains it.

Section 3. Of their differing causes.
PResumption is from self conceit, and wrought by Satan, who suggesteth
persuasion of mercy, though men live never so wickedly without any care of
religious duties. Confidence from a good Conscience is wrought by Gods spirit,
and so holds fast upon Gods mercy, not separated from a reverent awe of God,
and holy obedience. Presumption grows upon outward prosperity, worldly
preferments, and carthly contentments: But confidence from a good Conscience
grows upon inward peace with God, when the World frowneth, and affords
nothing but discontentments. Presumption g^tteth strength from other men's
sins, from such as sin as they do, or do worse in some evils but
especially from the falls of the godly: But this holy confidence is thereby
somewhat shaken, and that through fear of falling. Presumption is ignorant, and
is built upon some erroneous conceits; as that, God made all, so will he be
merciful and save all, contrary to Isai. 27. 11. that Christ died for all,
and yet will at last day damn many; that God requires no more of man, then he
is able to perform; that many make more ado to go to heaven, then needs;
that there needs not so much teaching and preaching, that all that can be said,
is to love God above all, and our Neighbor as our selves and such like false
imaginations. But spiritual confidence is grounded upon sound knowledge, and
rejects these rotten props, and fals^ities, and knows the way to Heaven to
be strait, and few find it.

Section 4. Of their differing effects.
Presumption makes a man to think repentance an easy act, and therefore to
defer of his repentance from time to time til he can find leisure to repent.
So does not this confidence: but judges it hard; and fears to put it off,
laboring to show forth repentance and the fruits thereof daily. Presumption
makes a man to neglect the means of salvation, preaching of Gods word, holy
meditation, fervent prayer. This holy confidence moves us to the use of the
means, and therein to delight and to exercise our selves therein. Presumption
makes a man in the use of the means, hearing, praying, receiving the
Sacrament, to do them as duties to be done: but without any care of the manner,
effect, and fruit reaped thereby. But this heavenly confidence in holy
exercises and duties makes a man to do them as with the matter, so to have
regard to the manner, observing the effects and expressing the fruits
afterward. Presumption makes a man proud and wilful, 1. Pet. 2. 10
especially in prosperity; but basely to be dejected and cast down in
adversity. This confidence, from a good Conscience, works gracious humility,
self denial even in prosperity, and is not without comfort and courage in
adversity. Presumption makes a Deuteronomy. 1. 43. Ier. 43. 2. 4. 7.
man bold to sin, as the Israelites did, proud Iohanan, and Amaziah the 2.
Chr. 25.
King; though fore warned to the contrary. This confidence restrains from
sin, and makes a man to fear that he offend not, especially being fore
warned. Presumption cannot encourage a man to go to God, and there to lay open
all his sins before him particularly, but only to confess in general that
he is a sinner. But this conscionable confidence affords a man comfort in so
doing so as he dare do it with persuasion of mercy. Presumption will never
hearten a man to suffer boldly for religion, but makes him to fear, faint, and
to start back in such a case. But this confidence from a good Conscience makes
a man stout in Gods cause, and to rejoice in tribulation for righteousness
sake. Lastly presumption carries a man to Hell; but this confidence brings
to Heaven. And thus far touching the difference of these two.

CHAP. 54. Of the time, of Conscience continuance in it working.
NOw follows the last point in this Treatise of Conscience to be handled, and
that is concerning the time and continuance of it working; of which there is a
fourefold consideration, first, here, secondly, at death. Thirdly, at last day,
and Fourthly, after the day of judgment.

Section 1. Of Conscience working here.
THat it has it operation in this life, while men remain among men, and
converse with men, the whole discourse in this book shows; men's experience
can bear witness of it; and examples of men in Conscience tormented give
evidence hereof in all ages.

Section 2. Of the working at death.
WHen death the dreadful messenger to the damned comes, if those woeful ones
do but once bethink themselves that they are going before God, that now they
must away to their appointed place, death being the reward of sin, Conscience
cannot but then begin to work, as it has done of some in a fearful manner
upon sickness, Se Acts and Monuments. fol. 1913.
and in their deathbed; Yea, it has grievously afflicted sometime very godly
men; of both sorts instances may be given.

Section 3. Of the working of it at the last day.
WHen Christ shall come to judgment, and when every one shall appear before
his tribunal seat to render an account of all that which has been done in
the body, whether good or evil, then the books shall be opened, even the books
of Reu. 20.
their Consciences, in which have been registered up men's sins, the most secret,
Romans 2. 16. Eccles. 12. 14. 1. Cor. 4. 5. 1. Ioh. 4. 17.
and hidden, the very Counsels of the heart: Then the wicked shall tremble, but
the godly shall have boldness: for it is the day of their full redemption, and
their Conscience shall comfort them in beholding their Redeemer, their Savior.

Section 4. Of the durablenesse of it in Heaven.
COnscience good and upright goes with men into heaven; for Gods will as a
Rule still remains known to them: they have also the use of their
understanding in and concerning the rule, the will of God; They act and do
according to Gods will, which cannot want application upon the act correspondent
to the rule, and therefore must there needs be Conscience, which being here in
the godly imperfect, must needs be there in perfection upon their complete and
perfect obedience. Adam in his state of innocence and perfection had
Conscience; the same is renewed in the elect Saints of God here; at death it
remains, and at the last day men shall find it in them: And may any imagine
then, that it shall be wanting in heaven? No verily: for here it is good men's
chiefest comfort under God, and there also it shall be their consolation, and
that upon the same grounds as here though imperfect, but there in perfection:
Now the grounds of comfort from Conscience in this life are these.

1. Our avoiding of sin, and mastery over corruptions: now, in Heaven we shall
in this respect have Conscience to comfort us; for no unclean thing shall come
in there; flesh and blood cannot enter into that Kingdom; no more sinning
there, corruption has put on incorruption; and weak man and sinful has on
him there fullness of sanctity.

2. Our obedience here to Gods law makes conscience to comfort us; much more in
Heaven where it shall be in full perfection, even legal obedience in every man's
person then; so as there imputed righteousness by faith cease: legal
righteousness was in Adam himself for direction; Evangelical is now for
supportation, and found in an other, which is during our time here; but in
heaven legal obedience and righteousness shall be found in all the Saints
after the judgment day.

3. Our conversation, being here sincere, loving, simple, without fraud: which
ioyed Saint Paul's 2. Cor. 1. 12.
Conscience: Now in heaven the fellowship is perfectly sincere, and loving, full
of true affection of love, without Hypocrisy, simulation and deceit, performed
in simplicity of heart and soul, all of one mind and will. There is no envy,
no grudging, no maligning, nor ill speaking. Conscience clears them of all
these, and comforts them in their happy and most blessed society together.

4. Our having here Gods spirit; which does Romans 8.
witness with our Consciences, that we are now Gods Children: Now in heaven
shall Conscience, through Gods spirit, herein greatly comfort us; assuring us
for ever to be the Lords without wavering or doubting.

5. Our here fellowship with the Father and the Son, 1. Ioh. 1. 3. but in
Heaven evident, more excellent and glorious.

Upon these grounds, Conscience as it did in Adam, when he was in the state of
innocence, does now.

1. It bears witness to the godly of all these things, and that they are
endued with perfect knowledge there, with perfect holiness and righteousness,
and even with that image of God, after which they at the beginning were
created, now in all perfection both of body and soul.

2. It hereupon does comfort them unspeakably, the inexpressible joy thereof is
as an heaven in it self unto them, by the comfort whereof they converse with
Angels, as fellow servants, and live in Gods holy presence, reioicing with
thanksgiving and praises endlesly.

Section 5. Of Conscience working in the damned in Hell.
COnscience as it witnesses for the blessed Ones in Heaven, and comfort
them: So in Hell it witnesses against the damned, and tormenteth them, and is
called ehe Mar. 9. 44. 46.
worm that never dies; and it is well compared thus, to a worm, and to a
worm that never dies. It is compared first to a worm.

1. A worm is bred of corruption, so comes this Hell-worme of Conscience from
filthy corrupt lusts within us. Secondly, a worm lies gnawing and griping in
the stomach and bowels; so this Hell-worme in the soul and heart of man.
Thirdly, A worm in moving turns too and fro, this way, and that way; So this
Hell-worme in moving works torture and pangs now one way, now another: by
setting sins before them, which is a great plague, Psalm. 50. 21. threatened by
the Lord. It was an anguish and bitterness to Jobs soul, to be made to
remember Job. 13. 26.
the sins of his youth. For hereby they know that God keeps in remembrance
all their sins, and has them set before Hos. 7. 2.
his face, and therefore his H^s. 7. 2. Ps. 90. 7. 8.
anger and wrath seizes upon them. Secondly, by applying the desert of the
torments and plagues in Hell, as justly deserved for such sins. For when they
seek for mercy, this Hellworme of Conscience will reply, and say as Abraham in
the Parable, Remember thou tookest thy pleasures, thou gapedst for profits,
did hunt after preferment, nothing could withhold thee, thou would be
filthy in uncleanness, in adultery, fornication, drunkenness and gluttony;
thou would oppress, coozen and defraud to get wealth, now art thou tormented
and tortured, and shall be. Thirdly, by telling them, when they look up, and
see the godly in felicity, that they are unworthy of that happiness: because
they despised God, Gods Word, Gods Ministers, and Gods people; and therefore
have lost for ever their portion there now; thus this Hellworme tormenteth them.

Secondly, it is a worm that never dies. Here worms in the stomach or
belly may be killed, and by Physic avoided; but no means to kill this: it
never dies, but is ever without end tormenting and afflicting, torturing and
restlesly vexing the damned there.

The woeful effects are these: They are in restless pain, and seek for ease,
as the Parable of Dives shows; Luke 16. 24.
but now the time of mercy is past, and no ease in the least degree to be
expected from God: for he endured their sins; and they must now endure his
plagues. Secondly, they desire to die, and to out off their days, wishing a
final consumption; but this cannot be; they once dyed, now they: must diue as
dying, and dyingi yet live most miserably in unspeakable: torment. Thirdly,
they weep and gnash their Mat. 8. 12. and 13. 42.
teeth, as such do as be tormented with worms.

They weep and lament, and that upon a four fold consideration; first, for the
loss of heaven and that happiness there; just cause of sorrow and
lamentation, for the loss is vnualewable; Heaven for Hell; others admitted in,
Luke 13. 28
and they thrust out; this makes them weep. Secondly, then because of the
Revel. 21. 8
torment, the grawing worm, the flames of fire, in a Lake of fire and
brimstone, a burning sornace. Thirdly, for that they are with the Devils and
his angels, Matthew. 25.
their companions in that endless woe. Lastly, because they cry to God, they
cry to the Lord Jesus, and none will hear nor pity them; no (if they knew one
another) not parents their children, not children their parents, not the
husband his wife, nor the wife her husband would show any pity; for Jesus
Christ will now do nothing for them. Is not here cause then of weeping and
lamentation?

They gnash with their teeth; which is a sign of anger and extreme impatiency
Job 16. 9.
and rage; for they are mad, first, against themselves for being the cause of
their own confusion and damnation, as the Hellworme will tell them. Secondly,
against those hellish spirits for enticing them to sin, for hardening their
hearts in sinning. Thirdly, against one another for causing, occasioning,
counselling, countenancing, and furthering one another in evil: Oh how many
children will curse their parents for ill education! Oh how many servants will
have cause to curse their masters for neglecting their poor souls, and for
suffering them in wicked courses! Oh how many people will curse bitterly their
blind, or careless Pastors! Oh that men could hear their complaints, their
cries, and bitter wailings, to terrify us from joining together in
wickedness! Let it not seem incredible to suppose, that they will break into
bitter curses; for if torment moved patient Job to curse the day that ever he
Job 3.
was borne, and blessed Jeremy to break into curses;. 20. 14.
as the wicked people will do here; shall we think it strange, that these
damned wretches should fall into cursing there? Fourthly, against the godly to
see them in felicity: this here will make them gnash with Psa. 112. 10
their teeth; they are still so full of envy and hatred against them, that then
they will be enraged to see them blessed, and themselves accursed. Lastly, they
will rage against God, and blaspheme him, so the wicked will do, because of
their torments; for repent they Revel. 16. 9. 11.
cannot, neither will they give glory unto God.

Consider these woeful effects of this Hell-worme hereafter, which now lies at
rest within thee, that have hardened thy heart in wickedness. Oh betimes,
look to thy Conscience, make it thy friend, that God may be also thy friend,
lest it become thy foe, and be the Hel-worme among the damned fiends, there to
torment thee for ever and ever.

FINIS.

