A lamentable relation of a fearful fight at sea, upon our English Coast,
between the Spaniard and the Hollander, who after their first meeting and fight
which was on Friday the sixth of Septembr last past: and the final fight on
Friday being the eleventh of October following: The event whereof you may hear
in this following Ditty.

To the tune of, Let us to the Wars again.
IN every place where men did meet,
The talk was of the Spanish Fleet,
Which the stout Dutchmen with great boast,
Besieged upon our English coast:
Now every several expectation
Is satisfied by this relation.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate twixt christian men.
It was a pitiful conclusion,
Of Christian blood so much effusion,
That who the story reads or hears,
If he can escape the shedding tears,
It Is what the writter could not miss,
When he the story wrote of this.
Great pity this that any pen,
Should note such hate twixt Christian men.
This Spanish Navy (as it is said)
To th'Cardinall Infanto's aid,
Was carrying men and money store,
Hoping to land on Flanders shore:
But their intention now is void,
The Dutch has them almost destroyed.
Great pity it is that any pen,
Should note such hate tvvixt Christian men.
The Hollender who long has been
Against the Spaniard armde with spleen,
Waits all occasions that he may,
To circumvent him any way,
As now for him he laid a train
To catch him far enough from Spain.
Great pity it is that any pen,
Should note such hate tvvixt Christan men.
The Spaniards being pestered sore,
With what they could have wished on shore,
Unarmed men for sea unfit,
Few of them being preparde for it,
And lying long on our cold clime,
Many were thrown ore board that time:
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate tvvixt Christian men.
The Hollender with fresh supply,
Insulteth ore his enemy,
Vowing the total overthrow
Of th'Spanish Navy at one blow.
To say the truth their odds was much;
Fourscore Spaniards, sixscore Dutch.
Great pity it is that any pen, etc.
On Friday morning that sad time,
This bloody battle was in prime,
The stately Admiral of Spain,
Weighed Anchor, and put forth to th'Main,
The Hollend Admiral did the like,
One did against another strike.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate tvvixt Christian men.
A certain space they did abide,
Fighting all stoutly on each side,
So that the Ordinance of the Dutch,
Has Lower Deal spoild very much.
Out of the Town the people fled,
Yet many cattle were struck dead.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate tvvixt Christian men.
At last the Spanish Navy stout,
(Overcome with force) was put to rout,
And of their ships full twenty four,
Were gravelled on our English shore,
At Dover and at other Ports,
Where ships for saftie often resorts.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate twixt Christian men.
Eight of the Spanish ships that day
Were burnt and utterly cast away,
The Admiral when he did see
His ship perforce must taken be,
He with a manly resolution,
Set it on fire in the conclusion.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note snch hate tvvixt Christian men.
It was a spictacle of woe,
(Grant Lord that time the like nere show)
To see men from a fired ship.
How they out of the Port-holes scip,
Each one pronouncing this good word,
Have mercy on my soul O Lord.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate tvvixt Christian men.
What loss the Hollander has had,
Was not in this relation sad,
Mentiond at all, but at the last,
Will bring to memory things forepast,
But certainly we may conjecture,
That Canons preach a bloody Lecture.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate tvvixt Christian men.
A thousand men or rather more,
Are of the Spaniards swom on shore,
At Dover, Deal, and Waymouth, they
Are living all this present day,
This was the fiercest fight at Sea,
That has been fought this many a day.
Great pity it is that any pen
Should note such hate tvvixt Christian men.
A multitude the sea cast up,
Which all had tasted of deaths cup,
Some without heads, some wanting arms,
Some legs, all showing what great harms
Proceed from that inveterate spleen,
Which has long time inventing been.
Great pity it is that any pen, etc.
I often have heard that winters thunder,
To us produces Summers wonder,
The fourteenth of January last,
Thunder and Lightnings made us aghast,
And now this thundering on the main,
Hapt on our coast'twixt Holland and Spain
Great pity it is that any pen, etc.
O that all Christians would accord,
To fight the battle of our Lord,
Against the Infidel and Turk,
That upon our dissension work,
He counts it a most politic matter,
Always to fish in troubled water.
But God grant peace, and right all wrongs,
By giving right, where right belongs.
FINIS.
By Martin Parkin.
Printed at London by M. F. for Tho. Lambert.


