A RVLE OF GOOD LIFE: Written by the mellifluous Doctor S. BERNARD (Monk and
Abbot of the holy Order of S. BENET) especially for Virgins, and other
Religious women; and may profitably be read likewise by all others, that
aspire to Christian perfection.

Faithfully translated into English by the R. Father Antonie Batt, Monk of the
holy Order aforesaid, of the Congregation of England.

Printed at Doway, by LAVRENCE KELLAM. 1633.

To the Venerable, Religious, and devout sister, DAME FRANCIS GAWEN, Of the
holy Order of S. BENET, and first Abbess of the cloister of our Lady of
comfort in Cambray.
THE rule of our blessed Savior (right religious and devout spouse of Christ
Jesus) ordains that we give not that which is holy to dogs, nor cast
pearls before swine. Ma. 7. I persuade my self, that I observe this rule of
our Lord, by dedicating this holy Treatise, this heavenly pearl, this perfect
Institution of a virginal life, to one that is totallie dedicated to Christ, as
desiring to be not unworthy of the name of his done, his love, his spouse. To
such a soul ought such pearls to be addressed. As for dogged hearts, that
tear in pieces those that endeavor to feed them with celestial documents: or
swinish souls, who delight only in the draught and dirt of vanity and vice:
I know full well, that such lecture as this is, will be unsavory and unwelcome
unto the^; and therefore my thoughts never directed it that way. To you
therefore (religious and devout Dame) do I address it, who by your own
practice, both in your own self, and in the direction of other souls, can
best judge of it, and most contently savor it. Vouchsafe to receive it as a
remembrance of an old servant and well-willer of your family, particularly
obliged to your worthy brother; and by spiritual generation become now

Your unworthy, but most loving brother, in Christ Jesus. Bro: ANTONIE BATT.

AN EPIGRAMME IN Praise of the work.
SAcred religion, virtue, sanctity.
Obedience, goodness, mercy, chastity,
Wisdom, compassion, charity, pure love,
Thoughts most divine (which, flowi^g from above,
Enlighten the sad soul) eternal rest,
These to the life, you may find here expressed.
Each chapter tenders to the willing eye
Rules, how to live, and living how to die.
It Is not enough to know, but there must be.
A real practice, fair concordancie.
Which to attain, these precepts so divine,
The time, the means and manner do define.
So rich a work deserves a just regard,
Where small employments find a great reward.
Read then, peruse, observe and vieu it well.
Enlightened grace disperseth clouds of hell.
AN OTHER TO THE same effect.
IF you reflect on goodness, and would be
A blessed member of eternity:
You first must seek the way, and truly learn
The means: whereby you rightly may discern
Both good and ill: which known, it is then most fit,
You choose the better part, and practice it.
To give this work perfection, vie^ this card,
Which shows the way, the means, and the reward.
The heart of man at large may plainly here,
Behold the justice of his hope and fear.
The Characters, deciphering good and bad,
Inuit the one, the other do disuade.
In such a modest, grave, and winning way,
You cannot err: but in that glorious day.
Receive the crown, which is prepared for those,
With Marie who the better part have chose.
AN EPIGRAMME IN praise of Virginity.
Chaste, pure, unspotted, virgin beauty flies,
With sacred wings to the celestial skies:
She conquers nature, masters flesh and blood,
A work of worth; which rightly understood,
Outvies the very Angels; since that they
Have no corporeal motives: which do sway,
And lead desire: They without flesh surviue,
Which she triumpha^t does from flesh derive.
Her proper honor, and the glory win,
To have been chaste, in spite of time and sin.
Nature, youth, beauty, heat of blood, desire,
Fall all to short; if treason thy conspire,
She like a marble rock does firmly stand,
And makes her conquest famous, hand to hand.
Victorious virtue does more purely shine,
When earthly bodies equal those divine.
THE TRANSLATOR TO the Virgin Reader.
YOu Virgin votresses, whose chaster vows
No fond desire, or unclean thought allows;
You that are seated on the glorious hill,
Whiles wedlock does the lower valley fill:
To you S. Bernard does this work bequeath,
To make you fix on heaven and not beneath.
Let married wives the earth replenish: You,
Must make heaven fuller: it is a tribute due
To that great King you serve: Your actions be.
Fit Sacrifices for eternity.
The partie-colourd lambs may well deserve,
The Virgin Queen the milk white Virgins serve.
Guard then your lamps, prepare your selves to meet
With oil, with incence, and with odours sweet,
The lovely bridegroom: See the La^be attends.
To bid you well-come, his devoted friends.
Here is a precious Magasine; then take,
It Is his disire, that wrote it for your sake.
Bro: ANTONIE BATT.

LICENTIA ET APPROBATIO PRAESIDIS.
NOs Frater Sigebertus Bagshaw Congregationis Anglicanae Ordinis Sancti
Benedicti Presbyter and Monachus eiusdemque Congregationis Praeses generalis,
per praesentes facultatem concedimus typis mandandi d^uosum tractatum melliflui
Doctoris Sancti Patris nostri Bernardi, de modo been viueudi, a Reuerendo Patre
Antonio Batt Secretario nostro in idioma Anglicum traductum. In cuius rei fidem
his subscripsimus, sigillumque nostrum apposuimus die 6. Iunij anno Domini.
1633.

F. SIGIBERTVS BAGSHAW Praeses Generalis qui supra. Locus * sigilli.

APPROBATIO ORDINARII.
LIbrum hunc de Modo been viuendi, qui inter deuota S. Bernardi opuscula sedem
meruit, Anglice traductum per R. P. Antonium Batt Congregationis Anglicanae
Benedictinae Monachum, nihil continere fidei Catholicae, aut bonis moribus
repugnans: sed nec de vlla circa fidem, aliamque materiam controuersia
tractare, attestatus est mihi Eximius dominus and R. admodum P. Leander a S.
Martino eiusdem Congregationis monachus and Prior Duacensis. Quare sub eius
data fide in lucem publicari poterit. Actum Duaci die 17. Iunij 1633.

MATHIAS NAVEVS S. Theologiae Doctor, Canonicus Tornacensis, ad S. Petrum
Parochus, and librorum Censor.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE TREATISE ENSVING.
OF faith. Fol. 5. Of hope. 8. Of the grace of God. 10. Of the fear of God.
19. Of charity. 31. Of the beginnings of such as are converted. 40. Of
conversion. 48 Of the contempt of the world. 57. Of the habit or attire. 64. Of
compunction of heart. 72 Of sadness or heaviness of heart. 83 Of the love of God.
90 Of the love of our neighbor. 9^ Of compassion. 106. Of mercy. 110 Of the
examples of the Saints. 112 Of contention. 122 Of discipline. 131 Of
obedience. 140 Of perseverance. 150 Of virginity. 162 Of chastity. 166 Of
fornication. 173 Of abstinence. 184. Of drunkenness. 192. Of sin. 198. Of the
confession of our sins, and of p^^ rce. 204. Of communicating or communion.
221. Of our thoughts or cogitations. 230. Of silence. 235. Of liyng. 239. Of
perjury. 241. Of detraction. 244. Of envy. 247. Of anger. 249. Of hatred.
251. Of pride. 254. Of boasting. 257. Of humility. 262. Of patience. 266. Of
concord. 269. Of sufferance or forbearance 275. Of sickness. 280. Of avarice.
289. Of inordinate affection desire. 291. Of poverty. 294. Of murmuring. 301.
Of propriety. 309. Of prayer. 315. Of reading. 320. Of working. 323. Of the
psalms and himnes. 328. Of the active and contemplative life. 340 Of
curiosity. 355. Of watchfulnes. 359. Of wisdom or discretion. 371. That a
virgin ought to avoid the company of lay women. 379. That a virgin ought not
to love the company of men. 386. That a virgin ought to shun the company of
young men. 392. That a virgin ought not to converse with bad men. 395. That a
virgin ought not to receive tokens or letters in secret. 399. That a Virgin
ought devoutly to perform, what she has promised to God. 410. That a virgin
ought always to consider the reason why she came to religion. 415. That a
virgin ought not to seek to please men by the beauty of her co^tenance. 419.
That a Virgin ought not to laugh immoderately. 426. That a Virgin ought not to
desire to gad abroad, and see cities. 434 Of temptation 441. Of dreams. 452.
Of the shortness of our lives. 456. Of death. 464. Of judgment. 469. Of
exhortation. 475. Of obsecration. 477.
The end of the Table.
A RVLE OF GOOD LIFE: Written by the mellifluous Doctor S. Bernard (Monk and
Abbot of the holy Order of S. Bennet) especially for Virgins and other
Religious women, and may profitabe read likewise by all others that aspire to
Christian perfection.
The Preface of the Author to the Treatise following.
MOST dear sister in Christ you have entreated me a long time, that I would
write some thing for you, which might animate you in the way of perfection. But
for that (according to the old proverb) it is pride to undertake to teach any
one that is better then our selves, I have thought my self unworthy to take so
great a matter in hand, and therefore I have long deferred, to do that which
you have demanded. But because you have again and again entreated me; I have
on the other side called to mind the sentence of our Lord, saying: * Wosoeuer
will force thee one mile, go with him other twain: and to every one that
asks thee give. (L V C. 6.) Being thus on every side anxious, at length,
compelled by your charity, and assisted by your prayers, I have gathered
together certain crummes from under the table of the Fathers, and albeit not
so well as I ought, yet as well as I have been able, which in this book I
represe^t unto you.

Now therefore (most dear sister) accept this little Treatise, and place it,
as a mirror before your eyes, and be always looking upon it, as upon a
looking glass. For Gods precepts are as it were looking glasses, in which our
souls ought to be always looking, to mark the spots of their impuritie
whatsoever they be, because no man is altogether clean from the filth of
iniquity: by the^ likewise they do amend the faults of their cogitations, and
adorn their bright countenance, as it were by beholding their own image:
because whiles they apply themselves to our Lords precepts with their whole
attentio^, they doubtless know by them, what is pleasing or displeasing in
themselves, to their celestial bridegroom.

Wherefore I admonish you (venerable sister) to read this book with a willing
mind, yea to read it over again and again, and thereby you shall know how to
love God and your neighbor, how to despise all earthly and tra^sitorie things
how to covet those that are heavenly and celestial, how to endure patiently for
the love of Christ all wordly prosperity, and to despise adversity: how to
render or give thanks to God when you are sick, and how to behave your self
humbly in time of health, how finally you are to comport yourselfe, that in
prosperity you be not proud, not in adversity dismayed.

My beloved sister in Christ, let your wisdom peruse this book with due care
and diligence, and daily lament my faults and offenses. That albeit I am
unworthy to obtain forgiveness, yet by your holy prayers I may merit pardon of
my sins. Almighty God keep and preserve you (venerable sister) from all
evil, and bring you, with all those that serve him in your company, to life
eternal. Amen.

Of faith. CHAPTER I.
OUR Lord says in the Ghospel: * All things are possible to him that
believes (MARC. 9.) No man can attain to eternal bliss, but by faith.
Howbeit he is blessed, that rightly believes, and by rightly believing, lives
well, and by living well, observes the right faith. Whereupon blessed Isidorus
says: Without faith no man can please God. Faith is not e^forced out of any
one by violence, but persuaded by reason and examples For they, from whom it
is violently exacted, cannot persevere in it. As for examples sake: a young
tree, if the top thereof be violently bowed down, as soon as it is let go,
returns forthwith into his former place again. * Faith without works is
dead. (Ia^ 2.) and he flatereth himself of only faith to little purpose, that
is not adorned with good works.

He that carries his Cross, must die to the world: for to carry the cross,
is to mortify himself. To carry the cross and not to die, is but a point of
hypocrisy. * Whosoever shall not, stagger in his heart but believe that
watsoeuer he says shall be done: it shall be done unto him. (LVC. 11.) * He
that believes in the son of God has life everlasting but he that is
incredulous to the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains
upon him (IO. 8.) * Even as the body without the spirit is dead, so also faith
without works is dead. (Iam. 2.)

Most dear sister, great doubtless is the dignity of faith, howbeit without
charity, it is nothing worth. Wherefore venerable sister, preserve in you the
right faith, hold the true faith: keep the unspotted faith, let the right
faith remain in you let the faith of an vncorrupt confession be in you. Speak
nothing rashly of Christ, think or imagine nothing of God that is wicked or
lewd, least you offend his love. Be upright in faith, have a holy conversation
in a right faith, and deny not God by your works, on whom you call by your
faith. Evil mixed with good does defile many things. One thing that is bad,
does corrupt many that are good. Being perfect in faith, offend not in your
actions. Defile not your faith by living amiss. Corrupt not the integrity of
your faith by your bad manners. Mingle not vice with virtue, adioyne not evil
to good. Loving sister God preserve you in health. Amen.

Of hope. CHAP. II.
* OUR Lord says in the Gospel, Have confidence, fear, lie not. (MATH. 14.)
* Hope that is seen, is not hope, for that which a man sees, wherefore does
he hope it? But if we hope for that which we se not, we expect by patience.
(ROMANS 8.) Whereupon Solomon says. * The expectation of the just is joy, but
the hope of the impious shall perish. (PROVE. 10.) Therefore most dear sister,
do you likewise expect our Lord, and depart from evil, and he will exalt you
in the day of his visitation, that is at the day of your death, or at the day
of doom.

They that cease not to commit sin do expect Gods mercy in vain: which they
might expect well, if they would depart from evil. Whereupon blessed Isidorus
says: We ought to fear, least through the hope which God promises us, we
persist in doing amiss. Neither must we again despair of Gods mercy and
compassion, for that he does strictly restrain us from sin: but (which is
better) let us eschew both these dangers, by shunning sin, and by Gods pity
hoping for pardon. For every just man labors between hope and fear: for
that one while hope makes him joyful, an otherwhile the horror of hell makes
him fearful. For he that despaireth of the pardon of his sin, does more
condemn himself by despair, then by the evil he has done.

Wherefore beloved sister, let your hope be firm in Christ Jesus your
bridegroom, because mercy shall compass hose about, that hope in our Lord.
(Psalm. 10.) * Hope firmly in our Lord, and do good, inhabit the earth, and
(in his heavenly kingdom) you shall be fed with his riches. (psalm. 26.)
Venerable sister, lay aside injustice, and hope in Gods mercy and compassion,
cast aside iniquity, and hope for salvation. Amend your self, and hope in
Gods mercy. Expel from you wickedness, and hope for forgiveness. Correct your
life, and hope for life everlasting: to which he vouchsafe to bring you, who
has chosen you before the world began. Amen.

Of the grace of God. CHAP. III.
THE Apostle S. Paul says: * Where sin abounded, grace did more abound:
that as sin reigned to death death, so also grace may reign by justice to
life everlasting. (Romans 5.) * For the stipends of sin are death, but the
grace of God, life euerlisting. (Romans 6.) * But to every one of us is given
grace according to the measure of the donation of Christ (Ephesians. 4.) Most dear
sister, according as S. Isidorus says. Ma^s going forward, is the gift of
God. If therefore we go forward by the gift of God, it is requisite, that in
respect of our good works we praise not our selves, but God: neither can any
one be amended of himself, but of God. Man has no good thing, that is
properly his own, whose way is not his own according as the Prophet does
affirm, who says: * I know Lord, that man's way is not his own, neither is it
in a man to walk, and to direct his stepps (IERE. 10.) When he receives any
gift, let him seek no more then what he receives, least whiles he assaieth
to get away the office of an other member, he loose that which he merited
before. For he disturbeth the whole order of the body, who being not content
with his own office, seeks to get ^^at which belongs unto an other.

In the division of gifts, men receive diverse gifts of God. Neither are all
gifts granted unto one man, but for humilities sake God has ordained this
order, that one may have that, whereby he may be admired in an other. For the
vision of Ezechiel (chap. 3.) concerning the wings of living creatures,
striking one against an other, does signify the virtues of holy men, provoking
one an other by mutual affection, and instructing one an other by successiue
examples.

Moreover honest virgin, I would not have you ignorant, that without the before
going, accompanying, and assisting grace of God, we can do no good. The grace
of God does prevent us, that we may desire good, is does accompany us, that we
may begin good, it does cooperate with us, that we may perform good. From God
therefore is given us a good will, a beginning, and performance. From God are
given us virtues, but vices and sins do arise from our selves. Charity,
modesty and chastity are given us from God: but pride, avarice, and
covetousness, are from our selves. Without God we can do no good, but by Gods
grace we can do ma^y good things. Without the grace of God we are slow, dull,
and tepid to do any thing that is good, but by Gods grace we become grateful,
and careful and devout in good works. Without God we are ready presently to
commit sin, but by the grace of God we are freed from the same. Without God
we affect earthly and tra^sitorie things more then is fitting, but by the grace
of God we despise whatsoever is in this world, and desire heaven. We are
excluded our of paradise for the sin of the first man, but by the grace of
God we hope to attain thither again. By the sin of the first man we descend
into hell, but by the grace of God we hope to ascend into heaven, For if we be
potent, rich or wise, we ought to ascribe it wholly to Gods grace. Yea I would
have you know (most reverend sister) that all good things, which we have in
this world, we have by the grace of God. For all evils or miseries happen unto
us for our sins: howbeit God by his holy mercy and grace gives us good
things. Crosses and calamities befall us for our sins, but our prosperity
proceeds from Gods grace. Adversities befall us for our iniquities, but by
Gods grace all things necessary are bestowed upon us, and for our vices
adversities do befall us.

Wherefore o spouse of Christ, it is very requisite, that we continually call
to mind with all thankfullnes of heart, the benefits, which we have received
from God. Whereupon the Church in the Canticles speaks of Christ her
bridegroom, saying: * We will rejoice and be glad in thee, mindful of thy
breasts above wine: the righteous love thee (Cant. I.) As if-shee should say:
Being mindful of thy grace, mercy, and benefits they love thee: that is, they
love thee that are right of heart.

They are right of heart, who attribute nothing to their own merits in respect
of their justice or holiness, but ascribe all to the gift of thy grace. Being
mindful of thy grace, by which they are saved, they love thee.

Honest virgin, be always mindful, that whatsoever good is in you, is from
the grace of God. Hear S. Paul the Apostle, speaking of himself: * By the
grace of God, I am that which I am: (1. Cor. 15.) so you likewise (most dear
sister) by the grace of God are that, which you are. For your contempt of the
world, your forsaking the house of your father, your vouchsafing to be the
handmaid of God, your determinate resolution to serve God in religion, and
lastly your solemn vow or Profession to live amongst Gods handmaids, all these
benefits have happened unto you by means of God grace. For in that you are a
Virgin, and prudent and wise, it does not proceed from your self, but from
Gods grace.

A question. Tell me I pray you, dear brother, what means that which we read
in holy Write, that no man is good, just, or holy, saving God only?

The answer. Dear sister, even as it is written, so it is truly: God only is
good, just, and holy; because he is good by himself: but men are good, not by
themselves, but by God: and therefore God only is good, because he is good by
himself. Howbeit men are good, just, and holy; not by themselves, but by the
grace of God almighty. Which thing the bridegroom of the Church Christ Jesus
does very well signify in the Canticles, saying: * I am the flower of the
field, and the lilly of the valley, (Cant. 2.) for that I spread abroad the
sweet savor of my virtue throughout whole world. I, says he, am the flower of
the Field and the lilie of the valley: that is, I am the holiness, goodness, and
justice of those, who with humility trust in me: Because none of them can he
holy, good, or just without me, even as I have said in the Gospel: * Because
without me you ca^ do nothing. (Io. 15.) I am the Flower of the Field, and
lilie of the valley. (Cant. 2.) For like as a Field is adorned and beautified
with flowers: so the whole world is adorned and beautified with the Faith and
knowledge of Christ. I am the Flower of the Field and lilie of the valley:
because I do give my grace to those men more amply, who trust not in their
own goodness, nor in their own merits, but in me. I admonish you therefore,
dear sister: to the end you attribute nothing to your own merits, or presu^e
nothing of your self. Place nothing in your own virtue, trust not in your
own forces, put no confidence in your own boldness. Ascribe all things to Gods
divine gift and grace. Give God thanks in all your doings. Give God thanks
in all your actions. Give God thanks in your whole conversation. Let your
confidence be continually in Christ, who has created you of nothing.

Of the fear of God. CHAP. IV.
1. MOst dear sister, hear what I say, consider what I counsel you, listen to
what I speak. * Fear God above all things; and observe his commandments
(Eccle. 12.) because * the eyes of our Lord are toward them that fear him,
(Eccles. 15)* and in them that hope upon his mercy (Psalm. 146.) Solomon also
says: *Fear God, and depart from evil (Prou. 3.) *He that fears our Lord
neglects nothing: (Eccl. 7.) (And in an other place: * The fear of our Lord
is glory, and gloriatio^, and joy, and a crown of exultation. The, fear of
our Lord shall delight the heart and shall give joy, gla^nes in length of
days: (Eccli. 1.) For he that is without fear shall not be able to be
justified. The fear of our Lord is wisdom and discipline.

2. Be not incredulous to the fear of our Lord; and come not to him with a
double heart. Ye that fear our Lord expect his mercy: and dec^^ne nor from
him, least you fall: Ye that fear our Lord, hope in him: and mercy shall come
to you for your delectation. Ye that fear our Lord believe him, and your
reward shall not be void. Ye that fear our Lord, love him, and your hearts
shall be illuminated. They that fear our Lord will not be incredulous to his
words, and they that love him, will keep his way. They that fear our Lord,
will seek after the things, that are pleasing to him: and they that love him,
shall be filled with his law. They that fear our Lord, will prepare their
hearts, and in his sight will sanctify their souls. They that fear our Lord,
will keep his commandments, and will have patience even until his
visitation. * The eyes of our Lord are toward them that f^are him, and he
knows all their works. (Eccles. 15.) The consummation of the fear of God is
wisdom and understanding. [Eccl. 21.] To him that fears our Lord evils
shall not ^appen: but in temptation God will keep him and deliver him from
evils. [Eccl. 33. * The spirit of them that fear God is sough^ and at his
sight shall be blessed. [Eccles. 34.] The fear of our Lord is as a Paradise of
blessing, and a glory shall cover the same. [Eccles. 40.] Blessed is the man
to whom is given to have the fear of God (Ec. 25.) The fear of God is the
beginning of his love. O dear sister, nothing does so keep us free from
sin, as the fear of hell, and the love of God. To fear God is to commit no
sin, and to omit no good that is to be done. * The fear of our Lord is a
fountain of life. (Prou. 14.) * With him that fears our Lord it shall be
well in the later end, and in the day of his death he shall be blessed. (Eccli.
1.)

Venerable sister, it is good for us to fear God, because the fear of our
Lord expels sin. The fear of our Lord does always amend. The fear of
our Lord does repress vice. The fear of our Lord does make a man careful and
sollicitous: but where there is not fear, there is perdition of soul. Where
there is not fear, there is dissolution of life: where there is not fear,
there is abou^dance of sins. Therefore honest virgin, let fear and hope
always be in your heart: let fear and confidence be jointly in your. Let hope
and fear persevere equally in you. So hope in Gods mercy, that you fear his
justice. Howbeit (most loving sister in Christ) I would have you to know, that
there are four fears: to wit, humane, servile, initial, and chaste. Humane
fear (as Cassiadorus says) is, when we fear to suffer corporal dangers, or
to loose our earthly substance, for which we offend. This wordly fear is
naught, and in the first degree is forsaken with the world, and by our Lord is
for bidden in the Gospel, saying: * Fear ye not them that kill the body etc.
(Mat. 10.)

The second fear is servile, as S. Augustine says: Through the fear of hell
a man departs from sin, and all the good works, which he does, he does
not for the love of God, but for the fear of hell. He fears as a servant,
who does the good, which he does, not for fear of loosing the good, which he
^oueth not, but for fear of suffering the evil, which he fears. He fears
not to loose the embracements of his most beautiful bridegroom, but least he
be thrown down leadlong into the pains of eternal perdition. Of this servile
fear S. Paul says: * You have not received the spirit of servitude again in
fear: but you have received the spirit of adoption of sons. (Romans 8.) that
is, a filial spirit. This servile fear is good and profitable, allbeit
insufficient and imperfect, by which the custom of justice does increase by
little and little.

When a man begins to believe the day of judgment, he begins to fear.
If he begins to believe, he begins likewise to fear: but for that ^e
fears, he has not yet a perfect confidence in the day of judgment. Charity
is not yet perfect in him, that as yet fears: because if charity where
perfect in him, he would not fear. Perfect charity would cause in a man
perfect justice, and a man would have no cause to fear: but he would have just
cause to desire, that iniquity may pass, and the kingdom of God may come.
What is perfect charity, but perfect sanctity? He has in himself perfect
charity, that lives perfectly. He that lives perfectly, has nothing whereby
to be damned in hell, but rather whereby to be crowned in heaven. He that has
perfect charity in himself, fears not to be punished in hell, but hope^h to
glory with God in heaven. Whereupon it is said in the psalm: * All that love
thy name shall glory in thee. (Psalm. 5.) Fear therefore is not in charity,
but perfect charity drives forth fear. Fear first comes into the heart of
man, that a place may be prepared for charity.

To this servile fear succeeds a third Fear, to wit initial, when a man
begins to do good for the love of God, which he did before for the fear of
hell. Of this initial fear the Prophet David says in the Psalm: * The fear
of our Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Psalm. 110. Initial fear is when a man
begins to love God, whom before he feared; and by this means servile fear
is excluded from the heart.

To this initial fear succeeds a fourth fear, called chaste; by which we
fear least our bridegroom (to wit Christ Jesus) delay, or depart from us:
least we affro^t, or offend him, and least we loose him. This chaste fear
proceeds from love. This chaste fear arises from love. Of this fear we read
in the psalm: * The fear of our Lord is holy, permanent for ever and ever.
(Psalm. 18.) Fear first comes into the heart of man. And why? That it may
prepare a place for charity. and by how much the more that charity does begin
to dwell in the heart of man, by so much the more fear does decrease: by how
much the more charity is in the heart of man, by so much the less fear is
Why. Because charity chaseth it forth.

Listen dear sister, and I will tell you a fit similitude. Oftentimes we see
that the thread is introduced by means of the bristle or big rough hair:
when any thing is sown, first the bristle enters in, and after the bristle
enters the thread: so fear e^treth first into the mind of man, and after
fear charity: fear enters in that it may bring in charity: but after that
charity is entered, it drives forth fear. This fear is holy, for that it
begets holiness in the mind of a man. This fear is holy, for that it
brings perfect charity into the mind of a man. For perfect charity is
perfect sanctity. This fear is chaste, for that is does not admit adulterous
love; and this, because it loves God above all things, and prefers nothing
before his love. This fear likewise is termed filial, for that it does not
fear God as a servant fears a cruel master, but as a son fears a most
loving father. This Fear is therefore termed filial, for that it does not
fear as a servant, but as a son.

But whence is it, that the Prophet David says. * The fear of our Lord is
holy, permanent for ever and ever. (Psalm. 18.) sithe^ce S. John says Perfect
charity casts forth fear (1. Io. c. 4.) This is that which we said before,
that he has a chaste and holy fear, who does not fear, God for fear of hell,
or for fear of torments, but for love and reverence. And this fear (to wit,
the reverence of God) remains for ever and ever. But he that fears God for
fear of the pains of hell, has not a chaste but a servile fear in himself,
for that he has not perfect charity. For if he did perfectly love God, he
would have perfect justice in himself, and would fear God, not for fear of
torme^^s, but with fear and reverence. And therefore fear of pain or
torments is not in charity, because perfect charity chaseth it forth. The
servant fears his master in one sort, and the son his father in an other.
The servant fears his master with despair and hatred: the son fears his
father with reverence and love.

Now therefore most reverend sister, I admonish you, that you fear God with
love and reverence. For I would not have you lie always groaning under the
yoke of fear; but rather that you should lift up yourselfe by love to our lord
your father, who has made you as his daughter. Moreover I admonish you, that
you love God chastely, and prefer nothing before his love: but that you
despise for his love all wordly things whatsoever. Again I advise you, and
entreat you (most honest. Virgin) that you amend your life with all care and
diligence: and therefore let your discourse be chaste, your gate honest, your
countenance humble, your tongue affable, your mind full of love, your hands
full of good works, and this by the assistance of our Lord, without whom you
can do nothing that is good. Most loving sister in Christ if you will hear me
as a brother, and fear God with your whole heart and affection, you shall have
many good things not only in this life, but also in the life to come. Amen.

Of Charity. CHAPT V.
* THE King has brought me into the wine cellar, and has ordered in me
charirie. (Cant. 2.) This wine cellar is the church, in which is the wine of
Evangelical preaching. Into this cellar therefore the spouse of the
bridegroom (to wit a holy soul) is brought and charity is ordered in her:
because all things are not to be loved alike but after a different manner. We
ought not to love all things equally, but some less and some more. For to know
what to do and yet not to know what order we are to keep in our proceedings,
is not perfect knowledge. If we do not love those things which we ought to
love: or if we love those things which we ought not to love, we have not
charity. And if we love those things more which we ought to love less: or if
we love those things less, which we ought to love more, our charity is not
ordinate.

This therefore is ordinate charity, that we love God before all things, and
above all things. We ought to love God with our whole heart, that is with our
whole understanding, and with our whole soul, and with our whole will, and
with our whole mind, and with our whole memory: to the end that we direct all
our understanding, and all our thoughts, and all our life to him from whom we
have all good things: or let nor part of our life be left idle, but let every
thing that comes into our mind be directed to that stream, where the force
of love does run. Therefore most dear sister, it is a thing most worthy and
most necessary for us, that we love God (who is the supreme good in all
things, and above all things. Wherefore to love the chiefest or supreme good,
is the highest happiness or felic^tie: because by how much the more every one
loves God, by so much the more he shall be blessed. He that loves God is good.
If good, ergo blessed. Whereupon Solomon says in the Canticles: * Love is as
strong, as death. (Cant. 8.) Doubtless the love of God is said to be as strong
as death, because like as death does violently separate the soul from the
body: so the love of God does violently separate a man from the world, and
from the love of all things transitory. Verily the love of God is as strong as
death: because when we are mortified by the love of God from sin and vice:
that which death does do in the bodily senses, the same does the love of God
effect in worldly desires:

God ought to be loved in respect of himself, for that he is most good, and
has created us of nothing. Charity is love, because God is to be loved in
respect of himself, and our neighbor for God. In the first place God is loved
(as is already said) in all things, and above all things. In the second place
our neighbor is loved in God, that is, in good. Charity has two
commandments, the one pertaining to the love of God, which is the greatest
commandment: The other pertaining to the love of our neighbor, which is like
unto this: according as is written: * Thou shall love the lord thy God with thy
whole heart, and thy whole soul, and with all thy strength and with all thy
mi^d: and thy neighbor as thy self. (Luc. 10.) As if he should say: Thou
oughtst to love thy neighbor to the same end as thou love thy self; to wit,
that he may be good and virtuous, and may be able to attain to eternal
happiness. Of this love of God and our neighbor, the bridegroom, (to wit,
Christ Jesus) speaks in the Canticles to his spouse, that is to say, to the
Church, or to a devout soul, saying: * How beautiful are thy breasts, my
sister spouse: thy breasts are more beautiful then wine, and the odor of
thine ointments above all aromatical spices (Cant. 4.) What is understood by
breasts more fitly in this place, then the love of God and our neighbor: of
which we have spoken before? by which breasts a devout mind does by her love no
wrish all her senses, is linked to her God by a most intimate affection, and
affords to her neighbors all the good she can. And the odor of thine
ointments above all aromatical spices. By ointments we understand those
virtues, which proceed from charity. We ought to love o^r neighbor in that
which is good: because he that loves his neighbor in wickedness or sin; does
not love his ne^ghbour, but hate him. * He that loves not ^is brother, whom
he sees: how can he love God, whom he sees not? (1. Io. 4.) No no: there is
no likelihoode of it. Let us therefore love one an other, because charity is
from God. And he that loves his brother is borne of God, and sees God. He
that loves his brother, whom he sees with the eyes of his body, sees with
the eyes of his mind God remaining in himself, to wit, charity; because God
is charity. And he that loves not his brother, whom he sees with the eyes
of his body, sees not with the eyes of his mind God remaining in himself, to
wit charity: because if there were charity in him, God were in him, because
God is charity.

We ought likewise to love our kins folk, if they are good, and if they serve
God. We ought more to love strangers, that are conjoined unto us by the bond of
Christian charity, then our own kindred that do not love, no serve God. And
why? Because the cordial link of charity is more holy then the carnal bond of
the body. We ought to love all such as are Christians: but sit hence we cannot
do good to all, we ought to help those especialy, who are nearest united unto
us as it were by chance, either in respect of place or time, or any such
occasion. We ought with like love and affection to w^sh life everlasting to all
men. We ought to love all men with the like affection of charity; to wit, that
they may serve God and be saved. Howbeit we are not bound to do works of
mercy to all men in the same measure; but to some less, and to others more.
Dearly beloved sister, if we will observe true and perfect charity, we may by
Gods assistance attain to our eternal country.

Moreover we ought for Gods sake to love our enemies, like as he himself
says in the Gospel: * love your enemies, do good to them that hate you and
pray for the^ that persecute and abuse you: that you may be the children of
your father, which is in heaven. (Mat. 5.) Thus then you see (venerable sister)
the necessity of charity, without which no man is able to please God
almighty. He loves not God, that hates man. Neither does he love God, that
contemns his commandments. Charity is the root of all virtues. For
without charity whatsoever we do, does nothing at all avail us. Our study
and labor is to little purpose, if we have not charity; because God is
charity. There reigns coue^^usnes and carnalitie, where there is not
charity. Then a man is grown to the perfection of virtue, when he is full of
charity. Without the love of charity, albeit any one does believe rightly;
yet he cannot attain to eternal felicity.

The virtue of charity likewise is of so great estimation, that if it be
wanting, all other virtues are had in vain. He that loves not God, loves not
h^mselfe. Now therefore I admon^s^ you (most ho^est virgin that by love you
will seek to be linked to Christ Jesus your inuis^ble bridegroom and that you
bu^ne with t e desire of him. Desire nothing that is in this world. Esteem ^he
length of th^s life present to be a torment, hasten to go forth of th^s world.
Admit no earthly comfort or solace, but seek and sigh after Christ (whom you
love) with your whole mind and forces. Let the heal^h of your body for Christ's
sake seem nothing worth unto you, le^ the dart of his love wound you, that ye^
may be able to say truly: I am wounded with charity. My dear sister in
Christ, hear the words of Christ Jesus your bridegroom: * He that loves me,
shall be loved of my father: and I will love him, and will manifest my self
unto him. (Io. 14.) Love him therefore (most loving sister) in this vale of
misery, that he together with the father may vochsafe to love you, in eternal
felicity. Amen

Of the beginnings of such as are converted. CHAPTER IV.
A Reward is pro^ised to such as begin, but it is given to those that persevere
to the end, according as it is written: * He that shall persevere to the end, he
shall be saved. (Mat. 10.) For then our conversion is pleasing to God, when we
bring that good, which we do begin, to its desired end. For so it is written: *
Woe be to them, that have lost patience: (Eccles. 2.) that is, have not
finished the good work, which they did enterprise. There are many men, who of
mere devotion are converted to God. There are many likewise, who are converted
to God, being constrained through affliction, who would never have been
converted through devotion, as the Psalmist does very well say: * In bit and
bridle bind fast their cheeks, that approach not to thee. (Psalm. 31.) Let
every one that is converted, begin from the bewayling of his sins, and so
let him pass to the desire of eternal happiness.

Most dear sister, we ought first to wash away with tears the evils which we
have committed, that afterward we may contemplate that which we seek, with the
clear eye sight of our mind: to the e^d, that the mist of sin being wiped
away by our weeping, we may with the clean eyes of our heart behold the bright
things of heaven. It is expedient for every one that is newly converted, that
after fear he arise to God as a son; least he always remain confounded
under fear as a servant. Such as are newly converted ought to be comforted and
encouraged with gentle speeches; least if they begin to be exasperated, they
return terrified to their former offenses. For he that does not instruct and
chastise a Nouice with lenity and sweetness, knows rather how to exasperate,
then to correct what is amiss. First a Nouice is to be corrected and chast^sed
from doing amiss: and afterward from thinking amiss.

Every new conversion has some thing of the old man remaining. Wherefore no
virtue ought to be done openly in the sight of men, until the old conversation
be wholly rooted out of the mind. Every one does then feel himself most
troubled and tempted, when he comes first to the service of God. So the
people of Israel were oppressed by the Egyptians with a more heavy burden,
when the knowledge of God was by Moses manifested unto them. (Exodus 1. and 2.)
For vices have peace in a man before his conversion: but when they are
expelled, they arise more greiuously against him. Many after their conversion
are troubled with unchaste motions: which notwithstanding they endure not to
their damnation, but to their trial and probation: to wit, that they may
always have an enemy to resist to keep them doing, yet so as that they
consent not to his suggestion.

Aremisse or slack conversion does bring many into their former errors, and
resolve them into their wonted negligence. He that is tepid in his conversion,
does not see that idle words and vain cogitations are hurtful: but as soon
as his mind does awake from sloth, he immediately fears those things, which
erst he esteemed little, as the mortal enemies of his soul. Slouthfulnes and
fraud are to be feared in every work of God. We do God wrong, when we praise
not God, but our selves by the good deed which we have done. We commit
slouthfulnes, when we do those things carelessly which belong to Gods service.
Every worldly art or Science has quick and nimble artisans, and such as
practice the same with diligence. Why? What is the reason? Because they have
the reward of their work present before them. But the art of divine fear has
ma^y tepid folowers, froze^ as it were to death with the cold of lasines. And
this does happen, for that the guerdon of their labor is not given in this
present life, but in the life to come.

Those that are newly converted to God, ought not to be employed in external
cares of the world. For if they be entangled with them: they presently (as
young trees newly planted, and not having as yet taken root) are shaken to and
fro, and begin to wither: neither is mutatio^ or change of place always good
for the souls of those that are newly converted. Howbeit it happens oftentimes
to some, that the place of their abode being changed, the affection of their
mind is likewise altered. For it is convenient, that every one should depart
even corporally from that place, where he reme^breth that he has been subject
to vice.

Venerable sister, hear what I say: many are converted to God, not so much
with their mind, as with their body: which I cannot speak without great
grief and groaning: they wear the habit of religion, but want a religious mi^d
and meani^g. Many come to the Monastery, not so much for the salvation of
their soul, as for the necessity of their body, who worship not God, but
their belly; of whom the Apostle does say: * Whose God is their belly.
(Phillip. 3.) Their intention is not, that they may syncerely serve God, but
that they may eat and drink their fill, and be well clothed, and that it may
go well with them in this world. And for that they love things transitory and
earthly, they loose those that are heavenly. And according to the saying of our
Lord: * The^ they receive their reward in this world. (Mat. 6.) Wherefore dear
sister, we must be careful, least we love transitory and earthly things more
then is needful: and for this reason the Psalmist does admonish us saying: *
If riches abound, set not your heart upon them. (Psalm. 41) True it is, we are
to use earthly things according as necessity does require but heavenly things
are those which we ought chiefly to desire. We ought to spend our goods
temporal and tend to those especially that are eternal. For that multitude of
sweetness is exceeding great and full of admiration, which God has hidden for
them that love him. Of which it is written: * That neither eye has seen, not
ear has heard, neither has it ascended into the heart of man, what things
God has prepared for the^ that love him. (1. Cor. 2.) Whereupon the Prophet
says. * I shall be filled, when thy glory shall appear, (Ps. 16.) Wherefore
most amiable sister in Christ, (...) that fulness be our happiness. Amen.

Of Conversion CHAP. VII.
Our lord says in the Gospel. * If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. (Mat. 16.) But what is it for
a man to deny himself, unless to renounce his own pleasures? To the end,
that he, that was proud, become humble: and he that was angry, become gentle:
and he that was luxurious, become chaste, and he that was a drunkard, become
sober: and he that was covetous, become liberal. For if any one does so
renounce all things, which he does possess, as that he does not likewise
renounce his bad customs, and ma^ners, he is not Christ's disciple. He that
does renounce his bad customs and manners, does deny himself. Those things
which the lovers of the world do seek, as delightful; the servants of God do
shun, as hurtful. The servants of God are more delighted in adversities,
then in worldly prosperities.

Most dear sister, those things that are in the world, are contrary to the
servants of God, to the end that when they feel these things contrary unto
them, they should heartily sigh after the kingdom of heaven. He is ordinarily
gracious in the sight of God, that is contemptible in the eye of the world. For
it cannot be, but that those things are beloved of God, which are odious to the
world. Holy men are pilgrims and strangers in the world. whereupon Peter was
reprehended, for that he desired to have a tabernacle made on the mountain:
because Saints have no tabernacle in this world, for whom there is prepared a
country and house in heaven. Venerable sister, all things temporal do dry
and wither away like herbs parched with the sun, and therefore the servants
of God do contemn and despise these transitory things in hope of those
eternal, which are always flowrishing and green? and not without just reason,
for that they see no stabilitie in them.

Holy men, who perfectly, contemn the world, do so die to this world, that
they are delighted to live only to God. And by how much the more they withdraw
themselves from the conversation of earthly things, by so much the more they
contemplate with the eyes of their mind, the presence of God, and the assembly
of his holy Angels. For albeit God does protect the life of his elect in the
midst of carnal men: yet it is rarely seen, that a man living amidst the
pleasures of the world, is free from sin. He will not be always secure, who
is next door to danger. Dear sister, it is good that a man be corporally
removed from the world: but it is much more laudable and profitable, that he be
withdrawn from the world in will. He therefore is perfect, who in body and
mind is sequestered from the world Whereupon blessed Job says: * Th^^ ^lde ass
contemns the multitude o^ ^e city. (Job. 39.) And the servant of G^ ^co
contemns humane company.

They that pe^fectly despise the world, desire the adversities of this life,
and contemn prosperity: and so by contemning this life temporal, they find
that which is eternal. For that mind is far from God, to whom this miserable
life seems sweet. For it knows not, what heavenly thing it ought to covet,
or what earthly thing it ought to contemn. For as it is written. * He that
adds knowledge, adds also labor. (Eccles. 1.) By how much the more a man
is able to know what heavenly things are to be desired: by so much the more he
ought to grieve at the earthly and transitory things, with which he is
entangled: The servant of God that busieth himself in the temporal good of his
kindred, separate^h himself from the love of God. Wherefore a religious man
ought so to do good to his parents and kinsfolk, that by doing them a carnal
courtesy or good turn, he decline not from his spiritual good work or
virtuous resolution.

My dear sister in Christ, hear what S. Isidorus says, Many Chanons, Monks,
and Nu^es are e^ta^gled with earthly cares, and ph^ensies, brawles, and
businesses, through love to their parents; and for their ^emporal good, loose
their own soul. Howbeit an ordinate discretion is to be used, tha^ what we
mercifully bestow upon strangers, we deny not to our parents. For it is
fitting that we give to our parents, what we piously bestow upon strangers. For
that is carnally imparted to our parents, which is religiously given to
strangers.

Honest sister, we ought not to hate our parents, but their impediments; which
lead us aside from our good purposes. By the kine of the Philisteans, which
carried the arc of our Lord into the Land of Israel (1. King. 6.) We
figuratively understand those, who for the love of God have left the world. For
like as the Philisteans yoked the kine to the waine, and shut up their calves
at home, and laid the arc of the testament of our Lord upon the waine: so the
yoke of Christ (which is sweet and light is laid upon the necks of Gods
servants. And like as the kine did bellow through the love of their calves, and
yet went not aside, either to the right hand or to the left but went forward in
the right way, until they came to Bethsames, which is in the entrance of the
land of Israel: so Gods servants ought to go foreward in the right way,
neither ought they for the love of their parents to decline to the right hand
or to the left, from their good works or purposes; but to keep in the right
way to Bethsames; that is, until they attain to the entrance of celestial
happiness. And like as ^he kine went on bellowing for their calves: so Gods
servants ought to bellow or groan for their parents, that is, they ough^ to
pray for them, that God will assist them with his grace, and deliver them from
evil, and confirm them in goodness.

Most loving sister in Christ, we ought not (as I have said already) to ^ate
our parents, but to love the^. But if, as S. Augustine says, they hinder us
in the way of perfect^o^, we are not bound so much as to bury them. You, dear
sister, have gone with Abraham forth of your country, and out of your kin^ed,
and out of your fathers house (Genesis 12.) and have come into the Land, which God
^ath showed you; that is, into a Monastery. Werefore, I pray, that you may
persevere by living virtuously therein, that after your bodily death, you may
rest in the bosom of Abraham, that is, in the kindome of heaven. You, beloved
sister, have gone with Lot out of Sodom (Genesis 19.) that is, out of a secular
life and conversation: and therefore I admon^sh you, not to look back with h^s
wife: least, (which God forbid) you be made an example to all men for your bad
life. Yea rather I entreat you, that with Lot you save your self in the
mountain, that s, in the Mona^^erie, and be an example to others of sanctity

You, most virtuous Virgin, have with Iosue issued forth of Egypt, that is,
out of the world: and do remain with him in the desert, that is, in the
monastery, in which God does rain down manna unto you: that is, he gives
you the bread of his heavenly word. Wherefore most loving sister in Christ, I
admoinsh you, that you persevere in the monastery, as you have begun: that by
watching, praying, singing, and courageously fighting against the devil; all
your enemies being foiled, and all the delights of the world being subdued,
you may with the same Iosue attain to the Land of promise, that is to the
country of celestial happiness, and there deserve to see the face of that never
wearied sun of justice. Amen.

Of the contempt of the world. CHAPT VIII.
MOST dear sister, listen what our Lord Jesus Christ says in the Gospel. *
Fuetie one that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife or children, or lands for my sake: shall receive an hundred fold, and
shall possess life everlasting. (Matthew. 19.) Wherefore it is good for us to
forsake (for our Lords sake) all things temporal, that from him we may receive
things eternal. * Whosoever will be a friend of this world, is made an enemy
of God. (Iam 2.) Therefore, dear sister in Christ let us not love the world,
least we become the enemies of God. He easily co^temneth all things here on
earth that daily thinks o^ his death. If we daily call our death to
remembrance, we shall willingly despise all earthly things. If we have the day
of our death in our mind, we shall quickly contemn whatsoever is in the world.

Question. O dear brother, I would willingly leave for the name of our Lord,
all things that are in the world, if I had any thing: but because I have
neither gold, nor silver, nor the riches of this world, I know not what I shall
leave for the name of my Lord.

The answer. O spouse of Christ, You leave much, if you leave the desire of
having: you leave much, if you desire to have nothing. You leave much, if you
forsake all carnal desires: you leave much, if for the love of God you despise
all worldly pleasures. You leave much, if you renounce all earthly desires, and
God does much more love men's souls, then earthly riches. God does much more
love a mind that is holy and free from vice, then any earthly substance.
Venerable sister, the kingdom of God is as much worth, as you have. God asks
nothing of you, which he has not given you. Give him therefore that, which he
has given you, to wit, a mind that is holy, and chaste, poor, and modest,
devout and religious, and adorned with good manners.

Therefore honest sister, the kingdom of God is as much wor^h, as you are.
Bestow your self upon Christ your bridegroom, and buy his kingdom of him. Be
not troubled at the p^ice. Let not the price cause in you any disturbance. Let
it not seem unto you to be a hard and difficult matter, sithence Jesus Christ
the king of heaven gave himself, that he might deliver you from the power of
the devil, and purchase you to God the Father. Wherefore give your self to him
willingly, who has redeemed you out of the hand of your enemy. Give your
self to him entirely, because he (that he might save you) gave himself
entirely. My beloved sister in Christ, despise all riches temporal, that you
may obtain those that are eternal.

Riches lead a man to the danger of body and soul, riches draw a man down
to hell. Many have been in danger by reason of their riches: many have endured
many miseries and sorrows by mean of their temporal substance. Riche^ have
been the cause of many men's death, many have been made away by means of
their wealth. They have never true repose, that entangle themselves in worldly
cares. For the cares of the world disturb the m^d. A mind busied in earthly
affairs, is always full o^ a^guish.

Venerable spouse of Christ, if you desire to live quiet, seek none of those
things, that are in the world. You shall always have quietness of mind, if you
separate your self from the cares of the world. You shall always enjoy inward
peace, if you sequester your self from the hurly-burly of earthly actions:
because riches are seldom or never gotten without offense. It is rarely seen,
that they that possess riches, attain to true rest of mind They that entangle
themselves with the cares of the world, do separate themselves from the love of
God. He that fixes his affection on things transitory, cannot be delighted in
God almighty. The cares of things temporal do auert the mind from things
eternal. No man can at once truly covet the glory of God, and the glory of
the world. It is hard at once to apply our selves to heavenly cares, and
earthly affairs: it is hard at once to love God and worldly pleasures. No man
can at once love God and the world perfectly: both of them at once cannot be
loved equally.

Honest virgin, hear what I say: albeit a man glister with the glory of the
world, albeit he be clothed in purple and gold: albeit he be clad in rich
array, and appear never so glorious and gay: albeit he shine adorned with
pearls and precious stones, albeit he be vested in rich and costly robes,
albeit he be attended upon by a multitude of servants, albeit he be defended
with swords and halberts: albeit he be compassed about with innumerable troops
of attenda^ts, and saved from danger by whole squadrons of soldiers; yet he is
still in anguish and pain: he is still in peril, and perplexity of mind.
Albeit he lie in a soft silk bed, yet he is disquieted and troubled: and
albeit his bed be adorned with gold and silver, and framed of the softest
dou^ie feathers, yet he is still frail, and subject to sickness and death it
self.

My most loving sister in Christ, I have for this cause said this, that you may
know how vain the glori^ of this world is. Wherefore venerable sister, that
you may be able to purchase those riches that are celestial, contemn those
that are terrestial: willingly despise all earthly preferments, that you may
attain to celestial contentments. Refuse things temporal, that you may have
those that are eternal: give those that are small, that you may obtain from
God those that are most ample. Shun here on earth the company of men, that
you may enjoy the society of Angels in heaven: to which he vouchsafe to bring
you, who has redeemed you with his precious blood. Amen.

Of the habit, or attire. CHAP. IX.
OUR Lord Jesus Christ (...) in the Gospel: * Behold the (...) are clothed in
soft garments ar^ (...) king houses. (Matt. 11.) They are termed soft garments,
for that they soften and ^^feminate the mind. The court of an earthly king is
delighted in clothing, that it soft and gentle; but the Church of Christ is
delighted in that which is rough and humble. The garments of Gods servants and
handmaids ought to be such, as that they make no show of novelty, no show of
superfluity, no show of vanity, no show of pride or vain glory. Whereupon
S. Hierome does say: It is not gay clothing that makes a gay cleark or
Churchman, but cleannes of mind. Let us therefore (dear sister) adorn our
selves with spiritual ornaments: that is to say, with charity, humility,
meekenes obedience, and patience. These are the garments with which we may
please our celestial bridegroom Christ Jesus. Christ the invisible bridegroom
does not exact beauty without, but within, like as it is written in the
Psalm: * All the glory of the daughter of the king is within. (Psalm. 44.)

Wherefore dear sister in Christ, let your riches be good manners, let your
beauty and comelines be a life adorned with virtues. Most loving sister, I
wish that that may be said of you, which we read in the Canticle^: * Thou art
all fair o my love, and there is not a spot in thee. * (Cant. 4. And again:
Come from Libanus my spouse, come from Libanus: come, thou shall be crowned.
(ibid.) That soul is truly blessed, which does serve the celestial bridegroom
Christ Jesus without spot or bleamish. So you shall be blessed (venerable
sister) if you serve your celestial bridegroom Christ Jesus after the same
manner. Endeavor therefore to please Christ, not by gay garments, but by good
manners: not by outward beauty of the body, but by inward of the mind.
Endeavor to please him, not by your face, but by your affection. Let your
garments and other attire be neither over good, nor over thread bare: but let
your clothing be answearable to your calling. For so S. Augustine writes o^
himself. I confess, that I am ashamed to wear over good garments. And
again: It does not beseem this profession, it does not beseem this my
preaching it does not beseem these members, it does not beseem these gray
hayres.

Honest virgin, let the clothes which you wear, be clean: yet not for beauty
but for the necessity of your body: least whiles your wear over fine
apparaile, you fall into filthi^es of soul: because, by how ^uch the more the
body is externally for vain glory decked and adorned, by so much the more the
soul becomes internally filth y and deformed. Therefore loving sister in
Christ, show your profession by your clothing and going. In your gate or going
be simple, and plain. Let no vnseemelines, lasciuiousnes, wantonness, pride, or
lightn^s, appear in your pace. For the mind is seen in the gesture of the
body, the gesture of the body is the table or index of the mind. The bodies
gestures does bewray the mind, most dear sister. Let no token of leuitie
therefore appear in your gesture, let not your gesture offend the eyes of an
other. Be not as a gay fight to gaze upon, give not others any just occasion to
speak amiss either of your carriage or clothing.

Beloved sister, cleanse your conscience from all malice, that it may happily
be said unto you by your bridegroom Christ Jesus.* Behold thou art fair, o my
love, behold thou art fair, thine eyes are as of doves (Cant. 1) Thou art
fair in respect of thy corporal perfection, and the cleannes of thy
cogitation. Behold thou art fair, having a clean and simple intention,
because whatsoever thou do, thou do not that thou may be seen of men,
but that thou may please God alone. Thine eyes are as of doves, for that
thou do keep thy self free from all dissimulation, fiction and malice This
I have said, (my most loving sister in Christ) to the end you should rather
rejoice inwardly in your soul at your virtue and religious per^ection, then
outwardly in your body at your gay clothing. For as S. Gregory says: No man
coueteth gay clothing, but for vain glory, to wit, that he may be either
praised thereby, or appear more honorable then others. No man desires to be
clothed in rich garments, but when he may be seen by others. It is evident
then, that he seeks gay clothing for vain glory.

Venerable sister, by this we may know that we love the world, if we love to be
well apparailed. He that loves not the world, cares not how he is clothed.
When a man rejoices at his corporal beauty or feature, his mind departs
from the love of his Creator. By how much the more we rejoice at the comlines
of our body, by so much the more we are separated from the love of God
almighty. By how much the more we take content in things earthly and temporal,
by so much the less we desire those that are heavenly and eternal. Verily a
religious woeman deserves to be reprehended, if she love to be trimmely
attired. The spouse of Christ is not without blame, if she affect fine
clothing The handmaid of Christ, that has perfectly forsaken the world,
desires to be poorly apparailed. The hand maid of Christ that desires fine
array, has not as yet despised the world perfectly. A black garment does
insinuat humility of mind, a poor weed does testify contempt of the world.
A black veil does demonstrat the cleannes and purity of the conscience, a
black veil is a sign of chastity, and holiness.

Now therefore most reverend sister, I admonish you, that you be such in deed,
as you are in weed. I desire you, that you will adorn the habit of our holy
order, by your good behavior. Your habit is holy, let your heart be holy: as
your garments are holy, so let your works be holy, and as your veil is
hallowed, so let every thing that you take in hand. Be not one thing within,
and an other without. Be not one thing in private, and an other in public: as
you desire to be esteemed, so be indeed; as you are in face, so be in fact, as
you are in countenance, so be in your actions. Amen.

Of compunction of hear CHAP. X.
COmpunction of heart is humility of mind, proceeding from the remembrance of
sin, and the fear of judgment. That compunction is perfect, which does
repel from it self all delight of carnal things, and fixes the intention of
the mind in the contemplation of God with all care and diligence. We find
compunction to be twofold. The one, by which the soul of every servant of
God is afflicted for the love of God, that is, when she calls to mind the
evils which she has committed. The other, when she is sorrowful and sad,
through the desire of eternal beatitude. The mind of a just man is moved to
compunction by four means, to wit, through the memory of her sins, through
the remembrance of the future pains, through the consideration of this present
pilgrimage, and lastly through the desire of the happiness of heaven, to wit,
that she may speedily attain unto the same. Every sinner knows that he is
then visited of our Lord, when he is moved to compunction of heart. For Peter
then weptt, when Christ beheld him, as it is written. * And our Lord turning,
looked on Peter, who immediately going forth a doors, wepot bitterly (Luc. 22.)
Whereupon the Psalmist likewise says. * The lightnings shined to the whole
world: the earth was moved, and troubled. (Psalm. 67.) Then the earth trembles,
when a sinner is moved to tears. Wherefore I admonish you, most dear sister,
that in your prayers you call your sins to remembrance with tears because
his prayers are not clean, that is void of compunction of heart, or
contrition. My most loving sister in Christ, hear the examples of Saints, who
by compunction and tears have obtained forgiveness of their sins. Anna the
mother of Samuel by compunction and tears deserved to have a son, and
besides obtained of God the gift of prophecy. (1. King. 1.) David by
compunction and tears obtained pardon of the murder and adultery, which he
had committed. For so he heard by the Prophet: * Our Lord has taken away thy
sin, thou shall not die. (2. King. 12.) Old Tobias by his compunction and
tears deserved to receive cure of his blindness, and comfort of his poverty.
For so the Angel Raphael said unto him. * Joy be to thee always: and he added:
Be of good che^re, it is very near, tha^ thou be cured (...) ^od. (Tob. 5.)
Marie Magdalene i^ (...) manner by compunction and tears deserned to hear
from our Lord: * Thy sins are forgiven thee (Luc. 7.) Venerable sister, I
have for this end rehearsed these examples of the Saints unto you, that tears
by co^punction may become sweet unto you. True compunction is a treasure much
to be desired, and an unspeakable joy to a man's mind. The soul that in prayer
has compunction, goes foreward in the way of salvation. A stout and valiant
man is no less laudable in weeping, then in war. Wherefore sithence we have
defiled our life after baptism, let us by our tears baptize it again. Where
tears do abound, there the fire of spiritual devotion is kindled, which does
illuminate the secrets of the mind. The tears of penitent men are reputed with
God for baptism. My dear sister in Christ, if you have co^^^nction according
to God, you shall (...) ^lessed. Compunction of heart is (...) health of the
soul: compunction of mind is the illumination of the soul, because the soul
is the^ enlightened, when she is moved to tears. Compunction of tears is
remission of sins, because our sins are then forgiven, when they are called
to remembrance with weeping and lamentation. Compunction causes the holy Ghost
to come unto the soul: because when the mind is visited by the holy Ghost,
forthwith a man bewaileth his sins.

A question. Dear brother, tell me I pray you, what are the motives of our
grief, for which we ought to weep in this life.

The answer. Loving sister, we ought to weep for our sins, and for the
misery of this world and for the compassion of neighbor, an^ for the love and
desire of the heavenly reward. He wept for his sins that said: * I will
every night wash my bed, I will water my couche with my tears. (Psalm. 6.) The
same holy man lamented for the miseries of the world, when he said: * Woe is
me, that my seiourning is prolonged, I have dwelt with the inhabitants of
Cedar: my soul has been long a seiourner. [Psal. 119.) Our Lord through
compassion wept over Lazarus. (Joan. 11.) and over the city of Jerusalem,
saying: Because if thou also had known, etc. (Luc. 19) Likewise the Apostle
S. Paul, that wills us to rejoice with them that rejoice and to weep with
them that weep, (Romans 12.) did grieve through compassion saying: Who is weak,
and I am not weak? [2. Cor. 11) The just did lament through the love of the
heavenly reward saying that of the Psalmist: Upon the rivers of Babylon, there
we sat and wept, whiles we remembered Sion. [Psal. 136.) This present life is a
death: because it is full of miseries: because it is not in the country, but
in the way, it is not in the house, but in the place of banishment. In this
world we are not in our city, but in the pilgrimage, as it is written, * We
have not here a permane^t city, but beke that whice is to come (Hech 13.)
Wherefore dear sister. I admonish you that you first lament for your sins:
secondly for the miseries of the world: thirdly through compassion toward your
neighbor: and lasthy through the love of God, and of the heavenly reward
Honest virgin, desire God with all devotion, that he will give you trute
contrition of heart, and compunction of mind. Compunction causes Christ the
only begotten son of God to come and abide in us, as our Lord himself
says: * If any one love me, he will keen my word and my father will love
him, and we will come to him and will make abode with him. (Io. 14.) Where
tears do abound, there greiuous temptations do not approach: and if at any
time they approach they take no root there. Devout tears do always cause a
great confidence. Amiable sister in Christ hear the voice of Christ Jesus your
bridegroom saying: Arise, make have my love, my dove, beatifull one, and come.
For winter is now past, the rain is gone, and depa^ted. The flowe^s have
appeared in our land: the time of pruning is come, the voice of the tuttle is
beard in our land: that is, the voice of the Apostles preaching in the Church.
The tu^tle is a most cha^t bird, which is always accustomed to build or abide
in high places or trees, signifying Apostles or other Doctors, who are able to
say: * Our conversation is in heaven: (Philip. 3.) which uses groaning instead
of singing; and signifies the lamentatio^ of the saints, who exhort their
friends to mourning and weeping, saying.* Be miserable, and mourn, and weep.
(Iam. 4.) Wherefore honest virgin, take example from this turtle, and lament
for the love of Jesus Christ your bridegroom until you be able to see hlm
reigning in the throne of his kingdom. It is better for you to lament for the
love of Jesus Christ, the^ for fear of hell.* Thy cheeks arc beautiful as
the turtle dove. (Cant. 1) It is the turtles nature that if either of them
loose his mate, he seeks not an other. O spouse of Christ be you like to this
turtle, and besides Christ Jesus your bridegroom, seek no other lover. O
spouse of Christ, be you like to the turtle, and lament day and night through a
desire of seeing Christ Jesus your bridegroom, who is already ascended to
heaven, that at length you may deserve to see his face, sitting at the right
hand of God the father. * Thy cheeks are beautiful as the turtle dove. In the
cheeks there is wont to be a modest bashfulnes. Venerable sister, you have the
cheeks of a turtle dove, if you love no other friend besides Christ. Therefore
most dear sister, incessantly wash away your sins with tears and
lamentations. Daily wash away your negligences by compunction, and tears. Wash
away the transgressions which you commit in ^e^igion, by weeping without
intermission: and by compunction and tears obtain remission of your sins:
by often teare^ and sighs, obtain eternal happiness. Lament your iniquities.
Deplore your offenses. With tears call to mind the evils, which you have
committed. Let floods of teare^ flow from your eyes. Cleanse with weeping, the
evils which you have done: cleanse with tears whatsoever you have done
amiss. Honest virgin, if you do not deplore your sins in this world, when
will you be able to say to God: * Thou have set my tears in thy sight? (Psalm.
55.) Most dear sister, if you do not bewail your iniquities during this
mortal life present, when will you say with David: * My tears have been
breades unto me day and n^ght? (Psalm. 41.) Wherefore o spouse of Christ, I
admonish you, that you lament your sins during this mortality, that you may
merit to be comforted in that heavenly country; as our Savior himself has
said: * Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. (Mat. 5.)

CHAP. XI. Of sadness or heaviness of heart.
Our lord says in the Gospel: * Amen, amen, I say unto you, that you shall
weep, and lament, but the world shall rejoice and you shall be sorrowful: but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy. (Io. 16.) Solomon also says: * A glad
heart cheereth the face: in pensiuenes of m^nd the spirit is cast down. (Prou.
15.) * A joyful mind makes a flowrishing age: a sorrowful spirit dries up
the bones. Prou. 17.) Son in good deeds g^ue not blame, and in every gift
give not the sadness of an evil word. (Prou. 18.) * The heaviness of the heart
is all plague. (Eccli. 25.) * Ioyfulnes of heart is the life of man. (Eccl.
30.) * A perverse heart will give sorrow, and a cunning man will resist it.
(Eccli. 36.) * For by heaviness death hastneth, and it covers the strength,
and sorrow of the heart boweth the neck. (Eccli. 38.) Moreover S. Athanasius
says: A sorrowful man is always imagining mischeife and hatred, and does
contristate the holy Ghost given him by God. The Apostle likewise tells us
the same, saying: * Contristate not the holy Spirit of God; in which you are
signed unto the day of redemption. (Ephesians. 4.)

Have a care therefore, most dear sister, not to contristate the holy Spirit
that dwells in you, least peradventure he forsake you. Take away all
aminositie and doubt, both which do contristate the holy Spirit. Take away
sorrowfulnes, which is the sister of animositie and doubtfulnes. Certainly
worldly sadness, of all bad spirits is the worst, and does most hurt to Gods
servants. Worldly sadness does hurt, and consume, and overthrow Gods servants.
For the holy Ghost cannot endure worldly sadness. Therefore dear sister, inure
your self to spiritual gladness, wlich is pleasing to God. All spiritual mirth
is always good, and thinks good, and contemns the vain sorrow of the
world. If spiritual mirth were not good, the Prophet would not have said: * Be
joyful in our Lord, and rejoice ye just, and glory all ye of right heart.
Psalm. 31. And again: * The just man shall rejoice in our Lord, and hope in
him: and all the right of heart shall be praised. (Psalm. 63.)

A Question. O most dear brother, if sadness be naught, and does hurt Gods
servants; why does Solomon say: * The heart of wisemen where sadness is, and the
heart of fools, where mirth? (Eccle. 7.)

The Answer. Venerable sister, this which Solomon says: * The heart of
wisemen where sadness is, and the heart of fools, where mirt^; is not to be
understood but of spiritual sadness, and secular mirth. As if he had said more
plainly. The heart of wisemen is where there is spiritual sadness, and the
heart of fools, where there is secular mirth. They that are sorrowful
according to God, are wise: contrarily those that are sorrowful according to
the world, are fools. Whereupon our Lord says in the Gospel: * Rejoice in
this, that your names are written in heaven. (Luc. 10.) And the Apostle S.
Paul. * As sorrowful, but always rejoicing. (2. Cor. 6.) And again: *
Rejoice in our Lord always: again I say rejoice: (Phillip. 4) spiritual
sadness therefore is good. Howbeit sadness, which proceeds from the desire of
temporal things, is amiss. Of spiritual sadness it is written. * Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. (Mat. 5.) But of secular sadness
Solomon says: * Sorrow has killed many, and there is no profit in it. (Eccli.
30.) Again of spiritual joy it is said: * Let the heart of them rejoice, that
seek our Lord. (Psalm. 104.) And again of worldly mirth it is said; * Woe be
to you, that now do laugh, because you shall mourn and weep. (Luc. 6.) Most
dear sister, hear likewise what S. Paul says: * The sorrow that is
according to God, works penance unto salvation, that is stable: but the
sorrow of the world works death. (2. Cor. 7.) The prayer of a man that is
always sad does no good, neither can it ascend unto God. Where sadness does
oppose it self to the holy Ghost as an obstacle, there prayer is not
acceptable: because it is weak, and cannot ascend to God.

Wherefore loving sister, cast aside sadness, cease to be melancholy; expel
sadness and sorrow from you. Be not addicted to too much sadness, persevere not in
pensiuenes; neither let your heart be the harbor or habitation of heaviness.
Sadness is one of the seven deady simes, and therefore to be eschewed by all
Gods servants. Whereupon S. Isidorus says: If thou live well and virtuously,
thou will never be sad or melancholy. A good life is always full of joy.
Werefore honest sister, expel from you all sorrow and discontent: because like
as the mothe eats the garment, and like as the worm gnaweth the wood: so
heaviness hurts the heart. Cleanse your heart therefore from all carnal and
secular sadness, and your prayer will be pleasing to God. Therefore venerable
sister, lament through the remembrance of your sins, and rejoice in the love
of your bridegroom Christ Jesus. Lament through the remembrance of your former
offenses, and rejoice through the hope of celestial happiness. Be sorrowful for
your former faults and negligences which you have done, and rejoice at the
promise of the kingdom of heaven. Grieve for your former sins and offenses,
and be glad through the joy of the eternal recompense. To which he vouchsafe to
bring you, for whom you have prepared a pleasant habitation in your virginal
body. Amen.

Of the love of God. CHAPT. XII.
Our Lord Jesus Christ says in the Gospel: * If any man love me, he will
keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will come to him and will
make abode with him. Likewise the Apostle S. John says: * Let us therefore
love God, because, God first has loved us. (1. Io. 14.) He that loves God
will crave pardon for his sins, and contain himself from them. Most dear
sister, love God and call upon hin for salvation, because love is life and
hatred is death. God will not only have himself loved with words, but with a
pure heart, and good works. He loves not God, that contemns Gods
commandments. The mind of a man, that loves God, is not in earth, but in
heaven: because it alwaye^ desires heavenly things. I admonish you, most dear
sister, that you love God above all things: because he has loved you above all
things.

We ought to love God more then our parents. Why? Because God has made us, and
our pate^^s with his own hands, that is, by his own power and puissance: as
it is written:* He made us, and not we our selves. (Psa. 99.) Christ has g^uen
us more then our pare^^s, and for this cause we ought to love Christ more then
our parents. It is a foolishnes to love any thing more then God: because he
that loves any creature more then the Creator, does sin. And he that
prefers the love of any creature before the love of the Creator, does err.
God therefore ought to be loved of us above all things. Say, I pray you o
honest virgin, with love and affection towar^s Christ: * My beloved to me, and
I to him, who feede^h among the lil^es till the day break and the shadows
decline. O spouse of Christ, say yet more plainly, I beseech you: let my be
loved be linked to me in the bond of love and charity, and let me be
conjoined, and coupled to him by the interchange of mutual amity. Who feeds
among the lilies; that is to say, is delighted and solaced among the white and
odoriferous virtues of the Saints and amidst the quires of virgins, till the
day break, and the shadows decline: until the clouds of this pre^e^t life
pass and the day appear, that is, until that clearenes of bliss come, which
shall continue for ever.

Most dear sister, it is justice to love God with our whole heart, and to
adhere to him with out whole will, who is the chiefest good. To love the
chiefest good is the chiefest beatitude. He that loves God, is good: if good,
then likewise blessed. By how much the more a man loves God, by so much the
more he shall be blessed. Love is the special and proper virtue of the
Saints. My most loving sister in Christ, I have said this, that no love of the
world may separate you from the love of Christ. O spouse of Christ, I yet
further entreat you, that you will tell us something of the love of your
celestial bridegroom. * A bundle of myrrh my boloued is to me he shall abide
between my breasts. The place of the heart is between the breasts, that is
between the pappes: my beloved therefore shall abide between my breasts;
that is, the memory, affection, and love of Christ Jesus my bridegroom, shall
always be between my breasts, that is, in my heart. So that at all times,
as well in prosperity, as in adversity, I will call to memory all the
benefits which he has bestowed upon me: because he has loved me, and died for
me; and has ascended into heaven; and to the end I may come unto him, he daily
calls me, saying: * Come from Libanus my spouse, come from Libanus, come:
thou shall be crowned. (Cant. 4.) Let the left hand of my bridegroom (Christ
Jesus) be under my head, that is to say: let the gift of the holy Ghost,
during this present life, rest in me: and let the understanding of the holy
scriptures be in my mind, that I may know him, and perfectly love him: (Cant.
2.) that is to say, make me to attain to eternal felicity.

O most dear sister, desire the handmaides of Christ that are with you, and
say to them: * Stay me up with flouers, compass me about with apples because I
Languish with the love of my beloved bridegroom Christ Jesus (Cant. 2.) O you
my sacred sisters who already love Christ above all things, and prefer
nothing before his love, stay me up with the examples of your good works: and
show me how I may be able to find Christ my beloved, because I languish through
his love, This love is sweet, this languishing is delightful; this sickness is
sacred; this affection is chaste, this conjunction is undefiled; this copulation
is uncorrupted; this embracing is unspotted. And you o sacred sisters, stay me
up with flowers, that is, with the examples of your holy conversation, because
I languish through the love of my bridegroom.

Most chaste virgin, you truly languish through the love of Jesus Christ your
bridegroom, if you despise and contemn all earthly things for the love of
him. Verily you lie sick in the bed of contemplatio^, if you love Christ above
all things. You are truly sick for the love of Christ, if you love heavenly
things, more then earthly, You truly lie sick and languishing for the love of
Christ, in the bed of internal love and sweetness, if you be strong in good
works, and weak in worldly businesses.

My most dear and loving sister, if you love Christ with your whole heart, and
prefer nothing before the love of him, you shall rejoice with the same Christ
Jesus your bridegroom in his heavenly kingdom. If you imitate Christ
sincerely and love him unfeigned by, you shall without all doubt rejoice with
him in his heavenly country: and shall follow him with the holy virgins
whither soever he goes. If you adhere to Christ with all devotion, and sigh to
him day and night in this present world, without doubt you shall rejoice with
him in his heavenly palace: and shall sing sweet hymns unto him among the
quires of virgins as it is written: Thou feeding there, where lillies spring,
While round about thee Virgins dance:
Thy spouses do to glory bring,
And them with high rewards advance.
The Virgins follow in thy ways,
Whither so ever thou do go:
They trace thy steps with songs of praise
And in sweet hymns, thy glory show.


This I have said, (most dear sister) to the end you should love Christ above
all things, and prefer nothing before his love. I desire you, be loved
sister, that you will admit no swetnes besides Christ seek no love besides
Christ, and love no beauty besides Christ. Weep and lament for the love of
Christ your redeemer, until you see him reigning at the right hand of his
heaven by Father. Amen.

Of the love of our neighbor. CHAPT. XIII.
MOst loving sister, listen what our Lord Jesus Christ says to his disciples.
* In this all men shall know, that you are my disciples, if you have love one
to an other. (Io. 13.) All. the faithful are Christ disciples. Every one is
his alisciple, whose doctrine he follows. He therefore that will be the
disciple of Christ, let him endeavor to love his neighbors as himself. * The
love of our neighbor wo^keth no evil. (Ro^. 13.) Why? Because * love is the
fulness of the law. And the Apostle S. Paul: * Walk in love as Christ also
loved us, and delivered himself for us. (Ephesians. 5.) Likewise the Apostle S.
John says: * He that loves his brother abides in the light, and scandal is
not in him. But he that hates his brother is in the darkness, and walk h in
the darkness, and knows not whiter he goes, because the darkness has bli^ded
his eyes. (1. Io. 2.) If any one shall say, that I love God, and hates his
brother he is a lier. For he that loves not his brother whom he sees: God
whom he sees not can he love? And this commendement we have from God that he
which loves God, love also his brother (1. Io. 4.) Solomon also says? * He
loves at all times that is a friend, and a brother is proved in distresses.
(Pro. 17.) S. Augustine likewise says thus: You conquer a man by humane
felicity; you conquer the devil by the love of your enemy.

Howbeit, dear sister, the love of Gods servants one toward another ought not
to be carnal, but spiritual. Nothing is more grateful to God then fraternal
love and affection nothing more delightful to the devil then discord and
dissension. Holy love is free from scandal. Esteem every faithful man to be
your brother. Remember that one supreme workman has made us. True love is
void of scandal and bitterness. Venerable sister, in the love of your neighbor
you shall know how you ought to attain to the love of God. Like as love does
lift up the mind, so malice does cast it down. You can neither love God truly
without your neighbor, nor your neighbor without God. Then you have true
charity indeed, when you love your friend in God, and your foe for God. The
more liberal you are in loving your neighbor, the more ample shall your reward
be hereafter. If you love your neighbor truly, your heart will be in rest and
tranquillity. But he that bateth his neighbor is enuelopped in darkness: and
therefore by loving your neighbor, you cleanse the eye of your mind to see God
the better. Howbeit most R. sister, I admonish you, that you love no man
carnally. Whereupon S. Isidorus says: He shows himself to be earthly
minded, that loves any mortal man carnally, more then is expedient.

We cannot abide in God, if we will not live at concord in this world: a true
friend is tried in time of need. If we will keep Gods commandments, we must
love our neighbors as our selves: because he that sincerely loves his
brother, does soon appease God the father. He that loves his neighbor,
cannot commit murder, nor aculterie, nor theft, nor perjury, nor bear false
witness, nor take any thing by force, not bear any one ill will, nor live at
variance. Wherefore honest virgin, let us always meditate and practice the
love of God and our neighbor, in which the whole law does depend and the
Prophe^s.

Moreover if our neighbor suffer any tribulation, or sickness, or loss, or is
cast into prison, it is a token that we are in the body of the Church, if we
condole for him: but if we condole not, we are already cut off from the body
of the Church. Charity, which does combinde and quicken all the members of the
Church, if it see us to rejoice at our neighbors misery, does immediately cut
us off from the body. So long a member grieueth, as it remains in the body.
But if it be cut off from the body, it can neither feel, nor grieve. If a
hand, or a foot, or some other member be cut off from the body, if the whole
body should afterward be divided in many parts, or cast into the fire; that
hand, or foot, or other member would then feel no pain, for that it is
already separated from the body. Such is the case of every Christian, which
does not grieve at an other man's loss, tribulation, necessity, or anguish;
but (which is worse) does rejoice, because he is already divided from the
body of the Church. But let us (honest virgin) love well and sincerely, if we
desire to keep true and perfect charity. Let us endeavor to love all good
Christians as our selves, that Christ being out head, we may merit to be his
members: that when Christ our life shall appear, we may appear with him in
glory, by the concord of charity, and the love of God, and our neighbor.

Then a friend is truly loved, when he is loved not for himself, but for God.
Whereupon blessed Isidorus says: He that inordinately loves his friend,
loves him more for himself, then for God. Then every one becomes contrary
to Gods divine justice and bounty; when he despises his friend, strooken with
any adversity. True friendship is infringed by no occasion, abolished by no
time: but whither soever time does turn it self, it continues constant and
firm. Seldom shall you find a friend, that remains faithful to the very
end. That is true friendship, that seeks nothing of the goods of his friend,
but his good will only: that is, does love his lover gratis without hope of
commodity.

Wherefore loving sister in Christ, I admonish you, that you love your friends
in God, that is, in good. Love likewise your enemies for God, as it is written:
* Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you. (Luc. 6.) And again: * If
thine enemy hunger, give him meat: if he thir^t, give him drink. (Romans 12.)
And a little before in the same chapter: * Bless them that persecute you:
bless, and curse not. Love is the sister of charity. Charity was never
without love; nor love without charity. Where^ore honest virgin we have need
of love, in which so great virtues do consist, and from which so great
commodities do arise.

Love has two wings. The right wing is the love of God: the left wing is the
love of our neigbour. No man with one wing will be able to soar up to heaven.
Why? Because neither the love of God alone without the love of our neighbor,
nor the love of our neighbor alone without the love of God is able to obtain
eternal beatitude. Wise virgin, take unto you these two wings; to wit, of the
love of God and your neighbor: that by practicing works of charity, you may
be able to fly freely; and arrive to that heavenly country. Amen.

Of compassion. CHAPT. XIV.
MOst dear sister, hear what our Lord Jesus Christ says. * All things
whatsoever you will that men do to you, do you also to them: for this is the
law and the Prophets. (Mat. 7.) And S. Paul says: * Rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep. (Romans 12.) And again: * Bear up the
weak, be patient to all. (1. These. 5.) Solomon also says: * He that
despises his neighbor, sins. (Prou. 14.) Keep loyalty with your
neighbor in his poverty, that you may also rejoice with him in his
prosperity. Remain faithful to your neighbor in time of distress, that you
may be coheire with him in his inheritance. He that diggeth a pit for his
neighbor, shall fall into it: and he that prepares a snare for his neighbor,
shall perish in it. Whereupon the Psalmist says: * He has opened a pit, and
dug it up: and he is fallen into the ditch, which he made. (Psalm. 7.) He
loves not his neighbor perfectly, that succourreth him not in time of
adversity. By how much the more we compassionately assist our neighbor, by so
much the more we approach to our Creator. We ought to care for our selves in
that manner, as that we neglect not the care of our neighbor.

Therefore dear sister, whatsoever you would not have to happen to your self,
wish not to happen to your neighbor. Condole at others calamities shed tears
for other men's miseries. Be sorrowful for the sorrows of other men: be infirm
with such as are infirm. Lament at other (...) losses, as if they were your
own: mourn with those that mourn. Be sorrowful with those that are sad:
weep with those that weep: condole with those that are heavy: comport your
self in that manner toward others, as you would they should toward you in
the like case. That which you would not willingly endure, do not to an other,
least the like happen to you. Be as favorable in other men's offenses, as in
your own: and consider not your self and others, after a different fashion.

If your enemy fall, do not rejoice or grow proud at his ruin: neither take
dilight at the news of his death, least peradventure some mishap befall you
for the same. Triumph not at the fall of your adversary, least perchance God
turn his wrath upon you. Forsome misery or other will befall him suddenly,
that rejoices at the fall of his enemy. Let humane affection therefore move
you to pity those that are wretched: let the sorrow of compassion make you
compassionate of such as are in need: let the love of commiseration make you to
feel the afflictions of your friend. If your enemy hunger, give him meat: if
he thirst, give him drink. Despise not the poor, contemn not the needy:
disdain not such as orphants or fatherless: let no man depart from you
contristated or discontent at your harsh carriage. Visit the sick, comfort the
weake-minded: that you may deserve to be comforted by our Lord in eternal
beatitude. Amen.

Of mercy. Capt. XV.
MOst dear sister, hear our Lord Jesus Christ saying in the Gospel: * Blessed
are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. (Mat. 5.) And again. * Be ye
therefore merciful, as also your father is merciful. (Luc. 6.) And the
Apostle S. Paul: * Be gentle one to an other, pardoning one an other, as also
God in Christ has pardoned you. (Ephesians. 5.) And in an other place. * Piety is
profitable to all things. (1. Tim. 4.) Solomon also says: * To do mercy and
judgment does more please our Lord, then victimes. (Prou. 21.) Mercy makes
place for every one, according to the merit of his works. * Man's compassion
is touching his neighbor: but the mercy of our Lord is upon all flesh.
(Eccli. 18.) He that does mercy, offers a sacrifice pleasing to God
almighty. Gods mercy takes his name from taking pity of other men's
misery. He that is not merciful toward an other, will not be able to find
mercy at the hands of his Creator.

Beloved Sister, let mercy and truth go befote you. Never forsake mercy. You
will do good to your soul, if you be merciful. He that is merciful to an
other, shall obtain mercy of our Lord. Venerable sister, whatsoever God has
given you, be ready to bestow in works of mercy. Show mercy without
murmuring. Such will be your work, as is your intention. Where there is no
good will, there is no mercy. That good which you do, do for mercy, not for
vain glory. Do nothing for praise, but for an eternal recompense. Do
nothing for any temporal respect, but for an everlasting reward. Do nothing
for fame, but for life everlasting. To which almighty God vouchsafe to bring
you, most reverend sister. Amen.

Of the examples of the Saints. CHAPT. XVI.
THe examples of holy men are exceeding profitable to stir us up to
amendment of our lives, and to egg us us foreward in the way of perfection.
Most dear sister, the falls and vprising of holy men are written for this
cause, that we (poor wretches) should not despair through the multitude of
our sins, but should be animated to rise again by penance after our fall:
that no man should despair of Gods goodness after sin, when he sees that
even Saints themselves after their fall have risen again. For this cause God
ha^h proposed the virtues of the Saints for our example and instruction: that
by following their foote-step^ we may attain to the kingdom of heaven: or if
we will not follow or imitate them in well doing, we may be inexcusable in
pain.

The Saints of God, aslong as they lived in this world, ceased not to be
fervent in good works: to wit, in fasting, in watching, in alms deeds, in
chastity in continency, in long an imitie, in patience, in sweetness, in
prayers, in persecutions, in benevolence, in hunger and thirst, in cold and
nakedness, and in many labors for the love of Christ. The Saints of God
despised this present world, that they might obtain that kingdom which shall
endure world without end: they received not here the promises, or earthly and
transitory riches, which lead such as abuse them to eternal perdition: but
abandoning this country with their whole intention, they lifted up their eyes
to the heavenly Jerusalem.

The Saints of God eschewed sin in thought, word, and deed, in their sight,
in their hearing, in their nod or becking; in their eyes, in their hands, and
in their feet: in chiding, brawling, and dissension: in vain glory, pride,
and boasting: in covetousness, in gluttony, in drowsines, in fornication, and
in drunkenness. Preserving their bodies and souls, they fasted two manner of
ways, to wit, from vice, and sinful actions. Abstinence from meat is good,
but abstinence from vice is much better. Whereupon the Church says of her
members, that is of the aforsaid holy Fathers: * My hands hane distilled
myrrh. (Cant. 5.) What do we understand by the hands, but the actions of the
Saints? and what is meant by myrrh, but the mortification of the flesh, and of
vices? The hands of the Church are holy men doing good works, of whom she
says: * They have wrought justice. (Heb. 11.) The hands of the Church
therefore do distill the myrrh of good works because they show unto us the
examples of virtuous actions, and declare unto us how we ought to mortify the
vices of our flesh. Whereupon one of them said: * If you live according to the
flesh, you shall die. (Romans 8.) And again: * Mortify your members, that are
upon the earth. (Colos. 3.) And again the Church says: * My fingers are full
of most approved myrrh. (Cant. 5.) Then verily our myrrh is most approved,
when our flesh is perfectly mortified, and our vices and sins are utterly
extinguished.

Wherefore beloved sister in Christ, if we desire to obtain the company of the
Saints, it is necessary that we follow their examples. If we sin and do
amiss, we have now no excuse. Why? For that the law of God does admonish us
daily, that we live virtuously: and the examples of the holy Fathers do
continually inuit us to do good works. And if now and then we follow the
example of wickedmen and sinners, why do we not follow the examples of the holy
Fathers? And if we are apt to imitate the wicked in wickedness, why are we slow
to imitate the good in goodness? Wherefore, venerable sister, let us be seech
God, that those virtues, which he has prepared for his Saints for their
crown, may not turn to our torment and damnation, but to our greater good and
salvation. Doubtless we believe, that if we follow the examples of holy men,
we shall after this life reign with them in heaven.

The more we read the lives of the holy Fathers, the more blame worthy we are,
if we refuse to follow their examples. Now o virtuous virgin, I beseech
almighty God, that he will bestow upon you those virtues of the holy Fathers:
to wit the humility of Christ, the devotion of Peter, the charity of John,
the obedience of Abraham, the patience of Isaac, the long sufferance of Jacob,
the chastity of Joseph, the meeknes of Moses, the constancy of Iosue, the
benignity of Samuel, the mercy of David, the abstinence o^ Daniel, and the
other worthy works of the ancient Saints, that after this mortal life, you
may be able to attain to their company.

Consider daily, o virgin of Christ, with what moderation, with what intention,
or with what compunction these holy me^ have pleased God. Whereupon in the
person of Christ in the Canticles of canticles it is said to the Church: * How
beautiful are thy paces in shoes, o Princes daughter. (Cant. 7.) Christ by
the power of his godhead is Prince of all things created: and therefore the
holy Church is called the daughter of the Prince, because by the pteaching of
Christ she is regenerated into a new life. Now what are the shoes of the
Church, but the examples of the holy Fathers, by which we are fenced in the way
of this world, that with these shoes we may pass through all tribulations. We
(dear sister in Christ) do likewise spiritually fence our feet with shoes,
when we take example of well living from the holy Fathers; that like them we
may vanguish worldly temptations. Again in the same Canticles the bridegroom
of the Church Christ Jesus speaks, saying: * I came down into the garden of
Nutts, to see the fruits of the vales, and to look if the vineyards had
flowrished, and the Pomegranats budded. (Cant. 6.) The vineyards flowrish, when
in the Church children are newly generated in the faith, and are prepared to a
holy conversation, as it were to the soliditie of good works. The Pomegranats
do budde, when perfect men by the examples of their good works do edify their
neighbors, and in newnes of holy conversation do renew them by their
preaching, and virtuous examples. Wherefore I admonish you, spiritual friend in
Christ, that in your whole life and conversation, you give good example to all
men.

Venerable sister, I desire, that by living virtuously, you shine to all the
handmaides of God, that are with you in the Monastery: because as S. Gregory
says: They that hide their good life from others, are kindled in themselves,
but are not an example of light unto others; but they that give light and
virtuous example unto others by their good life and doctrine, are as burning
lamps; for that they show unto others the way of salvation. Whereupon our Lord
says: * Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father, which is in heaven: (Mat. 5.) for that all
glory is to be given to God alone. Howbeit I admonish you, o virgin of Christ,
that your actions be so done in public as that your intention rema^ne in
private.

Wherefore most loving sister in Christ (as I have alrea^^e said) in all your
action, and in your whole conversation imitate the Saints of God, emulate
their virtues, set their sacred examples before your eyes, and by imitating
them consider what they have done. Set before you the examples of holy men; let
their examples inuit you to regular discipline. Consider their virtue that you
may do your duty: consider their virtue, that you likewise may live
virtuously: let not your life scandalize their doctrine: live so upright in
religion, that every one may speak in your commendation. Carry your self so
uprightly, thar every one may speak well of you; have a care of your good
name and credit, have a care that your good name and fame be not obscured or
touched with any bad rumor or report. Amen.

Of contention. CHAPT. XVII.
The Apostle S. Paul says: * Whereas there is among you emulation and
contention, are you not carnal, and walk according to man? (1. Cor, 5.) And
Solomon says: * Among the proud there are always brawles. (Prou. 13.) * An
evil man always seeks brawles, an evil Angel is sent aganist him (Pro
17.) He that walks by dangerous places, quickly falls: so he that daily
contendeth with his neighbors, quickly falls into scandal. Meek men do
always detest contentions, they that daily contend and brawle are loved but of
a few. Peace and concord are pleasing to every one, and therefore necessary
for all men.

Most dear sister, hear S. Augustine, saying: O how irreprehensible might we
be in our life and conversation, if we were so careful to amend our own
imperfections, as we are to carpe at those of other men. Howbeit if we well
consider our selves, we shall find many things amiss. This I would have you
know, that there is nothing more unseemly then contentions among religious men,
who by concord and love ought to shine in the world, like the stars in
heaven. Contentions are wont to have their original and of spring from envy
and detraction. But if detraction and debates be in the Cloister: where is
regular taciturnitie, were is the sanctity of religion, where is the silence
of the order, where is the good observance of the monastery, where is the bond
of charity, where is the place of unity, where is the concord of fraternity,
where is sociable love and amity? Ah, alas. Regular taciturnitie perishes,
the sanctity of religion vanishes, the silence of the order fails, the good
observance of the monastery runs to ruin, the charity of fraternity
comes to nothing.

If they which ought to live in peace, begin to contend, brawle, and detract
one an other, where is that sweet life, that quiet life, that peaceable life,
that modest life, that chaste life, that contemplative life, that Angelical
life, that ougt to be in a clayster? Certainly perfect peace cannot he there,
where a detracti^g tongue does rule and domineere: where brawlings and
contentions do reign, there cannot be perfect religion. Have a care therefore
dear sister, least by dissentions and contentions you loose your labor. Have
a care least you loose your time by detractio^s and brawling. Look to your
self with all diligence, least by scolding and contentions you loose the
celestial promises. Have a care, least by idle worde^ and speeches, you loose
eternal happiness. Wherefore bridle your tongue, and so you will become
religious: for if you bridle it not, you will soon become otherwise.

But if perchance you do not believe me, hear the Apostle S. James, Saying: *
If any man think himself to be religious, not brideling his tongue, but
seducing his heart: this man's religion is vain. (Iam. 1.) the tongue is a
little member in the body of man: howbeit if it be not governed warily, it
defiles and corrupts the whole body. For like as a little leaven corrupts
the whole paste, and as a small sparkle of fire burns a great forest: so the
tongue (if it be not brideled) does scandalize lords and governors, equals
and companions, subjects and such as are inferiors, and does set them at
strife and variance. A contentious tongue, if it be not curbed, permits no
man to live in quiet. A scolding tongue is full of poison: it it be not rebuked
when it speaks amiss; it moves all the standers by to offense.

Wherefore venerable sister, I give you this counsel, * that you stay your
tongue from evil and your lips, that they speak no guile. (Psalm. 33.)
Consider from whence you have come, and for what end. You have left the world,
and fled to the tents of God, that is, to a monastery: you have forsaken the
riches of the world, and have come to gain the riches of heaven, and for this
cause have chosen poverty. You have chosen poverty of your own accord, and
therefore ought to forget all things, which you have left for the love of God.
Have a care therefore not to prefer your self before others: the greater you
are, humble your self in all things: avoid the conuenticle of conspiracy and
detractio^: fly murmuring and whispering, and do not hearken to the same.
Listen not to murmurers, turn your ears from slaunderers, as from serpents.
Shun the society of slaunderers, for that (as ^erpents) they infuse deadly
poison into the ears of the hearers. He that does backbite, and he that
willingly listneth unto such a one, both of them do sin. He that does
slander or backbite an other, does not sin alone; but he likewise that does
willingly listen unto him. Honest virg^n, hear what King David says
concerning this thing: * I have not sitten (says he) with the council of
vanity, and with them that do unjust things I will not enter in. (Psalm 25.)
Do not you therefore sit with the council of vanity, neither keep company
with those that talk lewdly: contend not in any case, be not a friend of
discord and variance.

Contention breeds debate. Contention extinguisheth the peace of the heart.
Contention begets brawling. Contention causes quarrelling. Contention
stirs up hatred. Contention breaks concord. Contention troubles the eye
of the mind; as King David does testify: * Mine eye is troubled with fury.
(Psalm. 6.) And therefore loving sister in Christ, I give you this brotherly
caution, not to contend with an other upon any occasion. Contend not for meat,
or drink, or clothing, but receive from nhe hands of your superiors those
things which they shall give you, without murmuring: accept gratefully,
whatsoever they shall give you. If your sister receive better apparaile then
you, be not moved thereat. If your Abbess or Prioresse give you an old
threadbare coat, and your sister one that is tenn times better: let not this
make you murmr. If your sisters get the best garments, and leave you the
worst, never contend for such a trifle as this.

In things temporal choose not the best. In things transitory seek not that
which is most costly. In things of this world covet not that which is most
esteemed. Why? Because you have not come to riches, but to poverty. You have
not come to the monastery to have riches, but to get spiritual virtues. You
have not come to the cloister that you might shine in rich array, but that you
might serve God in simplicity. You have not come to religion, that you might
appear glorious in the eyes of men by being gallantly apparailed, but that by
humility you might please God. You have not come to this holy order, that you
might accomplish your own will and pleasure, but that you might obey the will
of an other, and contemn for the love of God all earthly things whatsoever.
For otherwise it had been better for you to have remained in the house of your
father, then in the monastery to seek af^e^ gorgeous attire. It had been
better for you in your fathers house to have taken solace, then to be an
occasion of scandal among the hand-maides of God about earthly and transitory
trash It had been better for you to have remained in your own land or
country, then to contend, scold, or murmr in the house of God almighty.
Wherefore most dear sister as I said before endeavor to strive about nothing,
saving only to please God alone. Amen.

Of Discipline. CHAPT. XVIII.
THAT most wise King Solomon says: * My son, hear the discipline of thy
father, and leave not the law of thy mother: that grace may be added to thy
head, and a cheine of gold to thy neck. (Pro 1.). Hold discipline, leave it
not: Keep it because the same is thy life. He that hates reprehensions is
unwise. He that forsakes reprehensio^s, erreth. He that despises discipline,
sins. He that keeps discipline, shall find life. But he that will not
keep discipline, shall find death. Poverty and ignominy to him that
forsakes discipline: but he that yields to him, that rebukes, shall be
glorified. A fool scorneth the discipline of his father, but he that regards
reprehension^ shall become more prudent. * Reprehension does more profit with a
wise man, then an hundred stripes with a fool. (Prou. 17.)

A wise and discreet man will not murmr against him, that chastises him.
Howbeit chastisement must be moderate. Whereupon S. Ambrose says: He that is
gently chastised does reverence him that chastises him: but he that is
chastised or rebuked over severely, does neither take it in good part, neither
is he amended thereby. They are sweetly to be tolerated, who by reason of their
weakness cannot be rebuked. According to the diversity of those that offend,
some are to be endured, others to be corrected, for that there are sondrie
sorts of sins.

The Prelates of the Church ought to bear with their subjects whom they
correct, and to correct those that they bear with all. Heerevpon Solomon
caused the image of a lion, and ox, and Cherub to be engraven upon the brazen
pillars of the temple of our Lord. What other thing do the brazen pillars
signify in the temple, but the Prelates in the Church? Whosoever do undertake
the solicitude of government, do as pillars bear the burden that is laid upon
it. Cherubi signifies fulness of knowledge. The Cherubins therefore are placed
upon the brazen pillars; because the Prelates of the Church ought to be full of
heavenly knowledge. By the lion is signified the terror of severity: and by
the ox the patience of leuitie or mercy. On the pillars therefore the lions
ar^ neither engraven without the oxen, nor the oxen without the lions. Because
the Prelates of the Church ought to correct their subjects sometimes by
severity sometimes by sweetness: sometimes by words at other times by blows:
because he that will not amend by fair means, must of necessity be corrected
and rebuked by force. For those wounds must be cut off by abscission, which
cannot be cured by any milder means.

He that being secretly admonished of his fault does neglect to amend, must
openly be rebuked: to the end that the wound, that cannot be cured in private,
may be amended in public. They that openly offend, ought openly to be
rebuked: that whiles they are healed by open reprehension, they likewise may be
corrected, that did amiss by imitating them: that whiles one is corrected, the
rest may be amended. It is better, that for the salvation of many, one be
condemned: then that by the licentious behavior of one, many be in hazard. S.
Gregory likewise says: There are many that listen when they are blamed, but
yet disdain to return to amendment. Let every one hear of the kingdom of
heaven what he affects: let him hear of hell what he fears: that if love
do not enuite him to virtue: fear at least may revoke him thereunto. S.
Isidorus also says: Just men take their reprehension in good part, when they
are rebuked for their faults.

Most dear sister, discipline is a mai^^resse not be despised: and therefore
we ought to love our superiors, and to listen to their words with all
meeknes, for that by their reprehensions and chastisements they take away from
us our own wills, and out worldly desires. Whereupon the Church or every
faithful soul says of Prelates or superiors in the Canticles: * The keepers
that go about the city found me: they struck me, and wounded we: the keepers
of the walls took away my cloak. (Cant. 5.) By the keepers of the city we
understand Prelates, who keep the state of the holy Church, who likewise find
a faithful soul, and strike the same by their preachings, exhortations, and
threatenings, and wound her with the love of Christ's charity: neither does this
suffice them, but they also take away her cloak from her; that is, all temporal
sub^^ance, and earthly delectation, that so they may send her (being free from
worldly riches and sin) to the kingdom of heaven.

Wherefore deate sister in Christ, it is very fitting that we love our
Prelates, as our parents; to the end that we may willingly receive from them
the discipline of our salvation, according to the counsel of King David, saying
* Apprehend discipline, least sometime our Lord be wrath, and you perish out of
the just way. (Psalm. 2.) If therefore we will not perish out of the just way of
salvation, it is expedient that we embrace discipline. If he that receiuet not
discipline, shall perish out of the just way: doubtless he shall be confirmed
in the just way, that receives discipline.

Now therefore venerable sister, I admonish you, that you willingly accept
discipline, that you may be freed from the anger of God almighty, and
confirmed in the iu^t way. Give him many thanks, that shall chastise you:
render him thanks, that shall rebuke you. If your Abbess or Prioresse shall
reprehend you for your good, be not greiued: when your Abbess or Prioresse
shall show you the way of salvation, listen willingly to their doctrine: when
any one does seek to advance you in the spiritual course which you have
undertaken: behave not your self rebellious toward him. Love them that shall
reprehend you for your offenses: love them that shall chastise you for your
negligences. Do nor revile them that rebuke you: neither render evil for good.
Answer not churlishly when they give you good instructions: neither render
them cross words for their courteous admonitions. And why so? * Because he
that loves discipline, loves wisdom. (Pro. 12.) And therefore if you will
love discipline, you will become wise. You will become prudent, if you will
patiently endure chiding: you will become patient, if you will humbly endure
correction.

Honest virgin, for this cause we are chastised of our Lord and of our
Superiors in this life: that with this world we be not damned. It is far
better for us to be corrected in this life by our Superiors for our
negligences: then to be damned in the life to come. It is better for us to be
chastised now by our Superiors for the transgressions and faults which we have
committed; then to be punished in the next world.

My most loving sister in Christ, it is better for you to be scourged by the
hand of your Abbess, then to endure eternal sorrow and angu^sh. It is better
for you to be whipped in this life by the hand of your Abbess or Prioresse,
then hereafter to endure those torments that are endless. It is better for
you to be chastised by the hand of your Abbess, then to sustain those
torments, which shall never cease. It is better for you to endure whipping in
this world from he hand of your Abbess or other Superior, then to endure
those infernal torments, which shall last for ever. It is better for you to be
temporally scourged with twigges by the hand of your Abbess or Prioresse, then
to be eternally scortched in those hellish flames. From which he vouchsafe to
deliver you, who with his precious blood has redeemed you. Amen.

Of obedience. CHAPT. XIX.
MOst dear sister, hear the words of the Apostle S. Paul: * Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God. And those
that are, of God are ordained. Therefore he that resists ^he power, resists
the ordinance of God. (To. 13.) Wherefore we ought not to contemn the powers,
whither they be ecclesiastical or civil: because all are ordained of God. And
therefore when we contradict our Superiors by disobedience, we do God wrong.
When by pride and disobedience we are rebellious to our Prelates, we do against
Gods precepts. When we behave our selves toward them stubbornly and
disobediently, we contemn God almighty, who says. * He that hears you
hears me: that is to say, he that is obedient to you, is obedient to me: and
he that despises you, despises me. Wherefore my most deate sister in Christ,
he that despises his Prelate, despises God: and he that honors his Prelate
honors God: and he that is obedient to his Prelate, is obedient to God.

This virtue of obedience the Prophet Samuel praises, saying: * Better is
ohedience then victimes and to harken, rather then to offer the fat of
ramme^. Because it is as it were the sin of enchantment, to resist: and as it
were the wickedness of idolatry, to refuse to obey. (King. 15.) Marie the
sister o^ Aaron through pride and disobedience murmured against Moses her
brother, and forth with she became a leaper. (Number. 12.). Marie which murmured
aganist Moses her brother, (that is, against her Prelate or superior)
signifies the soul of every man, which through disobedience and rebellion
murmureth against her Prelate, to whom she will not obey, nor receive the
precepts of salvation. And for that she will not admit the precepts of her
Prelate by humbly obeying him, she is stricken and defiled with the leaprosie
of sin. * Likewise Core, Dathan, and Abiron who through pride, ^^ubbornes,
and disobedience, murmured against Moses, and Aaron, were presently punished
for their presumption, as it is written in the Psalm, * The earth was opened,
and swallowed Dathan: and overwhelmed the congregation of Abiron. (Psalm. 105.)
And again. * A fire flamed up in theit sinagogue: the flame burnt the sinners.
(ibidem.) also king Ozias, when through pride disobedience, and stubbornes, he
had taken the censar in his hand to burn incense, and meant (contrary to the
law of God) to offer sacrifice, was stricken with a leaprosie by almighty God,
and received the print of his pride in his forehead. (Paral. 26.) King Saul
in like sort, for that he was disobedient, lo^^ his kingdom, and fell into the
hands of his enemies. Likewise the Prophet Jonas, through disobedience fled
from the face of God amighty, being sent to preach in Niniue; And for this his
fact a fish swallowed him, and carried him into the bottom of the sea. (Ion.
1.) Wherefore we ouht to beware, least through ^isobedie^ce we presume to arise
against our Prelates, and so our Lord punish us for resisting those that are
his vice gerents. Venerable sister, almighty Go^ for our good, has placed
Prelates in his Church, that they may provide for us, that they may render an
account to God for us, and may keep us from doing amiss. Whereupon the
Apostle S. Paul says: * Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them: for they
watch as being to render an account for your souls. (Heb. 13.) Prelates ought
to keep and govern our Lords flock with great solicitude and watchfulnes: of
w^ome it is written in the Canticles: * Behold th^ee-score valiants o^ the most
valiant of Israel, compass the little bed of Solomon: all holding swords, and
most cunning to battles: every man's sword upon his thigh, for fears by
night. (Cant. 3.) Our Savior Christ is the true Solomon, for that he is truly
peaceable, because he has made peace between God and man. The little bed of
Solomon is the congregation of the faithful, in which God does dwell and
repose. Threescore valiants compass the little bed of Solomon, to wit,
Prelates or superiors; who by defending, chastising, rebuking, correcting, and
admonishing, do enuiron and keep the Church of God from enemies visible and
invisible. Who in this respect are called valiant; for that the Prelates of the
Church ought to be perfect in the observance of Gods commandments: all
holding swords, that is, the spiritual word, for that by their preaching they
ought to repress the vices of their subjects. They are most cunning to
battles, because it is necessary, that they know how to fight against their
ghostly adversary. Every man's sword upon his thigh. The Prelates of our holy
mother the Church hold their swords upon their thigh, for that they ought
first to cut off vice in themselves, and then in their subjects. And all this
they do in respect of fears by night, that is, in respect of the secret
snares of the wicked spirits: who during the night of this world, do especially
lie in wait to entrap holy Prelates, that they being deceived, they may foul
and defile King Salomons bed, that is, the congregation of the servants of God.

Most dear sister, I have told you this for this cause, that you may know, how
humbly and devoutly we ought to obey our Prelates or Superiors. Obedience
alone is the virtue, which does engraffe other virtues into our mind, and does
keep them being engraffed; whereof Solomon says: Obedience is better then
victimes: because by victimes the flesh of an other is killed, but by obedience
our own will is bound and sacrificed. Whereupon it is truly said, that * an
obedient man speaks victories: (Prou. 21.) because he that for the love of
God humbly obeys an other man's voice, does in his heart conquer himself.
Adam fell into hell, for that he was disobedient: but Christ ascended into
heaven, because he obeyed God the Father even unto death. Like as by the
disobedience of Adam many became sinners: so by the obedience of Christ many
became righteous. And as by the sin of Adam all men are condemned to death:
so by the justice of Christ all men are justified unto life. And again: As the
disobedience of our first parents begot death: so the obedience of Christ begot
life.

Therefore dear sister, if for the love of Christ you will be obedient to your
Prelates and superiors, you shall reign with Christ in eternal happiness. Have
a care at no time to speak amiss of your mother, that is, of your Abbess or
Prioresse. Never show yourselfe rebellious to your Prelates, contradict your
superiors in no case. Contrariwise comport your self with reverence toward
all that are of better knowledge, and better life then your self. Reverence
every man according to the merit of his sanctity. Give greater reverence to
those of greater degree. Honor every man according to his dignity. Behave
not your self toward your superiors, as if you were their equal: obey your
Seniors, and humbly accomplish their will. Yield to the authority of your
elders: and be ready to serve your seniours. Be obedient to all, in things
that are good and laudable.

O spouse of Christ, obey men in that manner, as that you offend not your
Creator. Never be obedient in things that are evil. Obey not him that euilly
commands any thing: being bid to commit sin, consent not to the same. Obey
not in evil to any power or superior, although never so many pains,
punishments, or torments be inflicted upon you for your labor. It is better to
suffer death, then to commit deadly sin. It is better to be strangled, then
eternally damned. Neither is he free from fault, who consented, that evil
might be committed. Wherefore venerable sister, be obedient even unto death,
and God will give you a crown of life. Amen.

Of perseverance. CHAPT. XX.
MOst dear sister, listen to S. Hierome saying: We do not so much consider the
entrance or first beginnings of Christians, as the end and perseverance. The
Apo le S. Paul began amiss, but ended well: contrariwise Judas Ischarioth
began well, but ended ill. The beginning of Judas was commendable, but his end
was damnable. Whereupon S. Gregory says: The virtue or perfection of a good
work is perseverance. Our good works are to little purpose, if they be left
before the end of our lives. S. Isidorus likewise says to the same effect. God
does not judge a man according to his life past, but according to his end. For
every one at the day of his death shall be justified, or condemned. Whereupon
it is written: * If the tree shall fall to the south, or to the North; in what
place soever it shall fall, there shall it be. (Eccl. 11.) S. Marie Magdalen
deserved before all others to see our Savior first after his resurrection, for
that she perseuered constant in seeking him. For which cause it is likewise
said in the Canticles: * In my little bed in the nights I have sought him,
whom my soul loves. (Cant. 3.)

Wherefore I admonish you, honest virgin, that you seek the same Jesus Christ
you bridegroom in your bed: I mean in rest of mind, and quietness of
contemplation. In the nights seek him, that is, in this life sigh after him,
and desire him: that you may perfectly find him hereafter, and see him
reigning in the glory of his Father. Seek him without intermission by living
virtuously, that you may merit to see him in eternal felicity. I desire you o
spouse of Christ, that you will say with the Prophet David: * My soul has
thirsted after the strong living: when shall I come, and appear before the
face of God. (Psalm. 41) Verily your soul does thirst after God, if she love
him above all things. Verily your soul does thirst after God, if for his sake
she despise all earthly things. Verily your soul does thirst after God, if
she covet to see him raygning in celestial happiness. The same Prophet does
likewise admonish us, saying: * Seek ye our Lord and be confirmed: seek his
face always: (Psalm. 104.) that is, in prosperity and adversity, in poverty,
and plenty, in sickness and in health, in youth and in old age.

We ought to seek God with our whole mind, and intention that we may deserve
from him to be confirmed in holy conversation, and may merit to find and see
him in his heavenly kingdom. Let us cleanse our selves from all impuritie of
flesh and spirit; because none shall be able to be elevated to heaven at the
day of doom, but those that are chaste of body, neither shall any be able to
see the glory of Gods divine majesty, but those that are clean of heart.
Believe me (dear sister) the kingdom of heaven will not be given to such as
are idle and gad up and down, but to such as seek, ask, and knock for the
same. For so our Lord says: * Ask, and it shall be given to you: seek, and
you shall find: knock, and it shall be opened to you. (Mat. 7.) The entrance
therefore of the kingdom of heaven is to be asked by praying: it is to be
sought by living virtuously: it is to be knocked at by perserering in the
service of God almighty. It is not enough to begin good actions, but we must
likewise strive to persevere in them all the days of our life. * For it is
better not to know the way of justice, then after the knowledge to turn back.
(2. Pet. 2.) Whereupon our Lord says in the Gospel: * No man putting his hand
to the plough, and looking back, is apt for the kingdom of God. (Luc. 9.)

Therefore venerable sister it is requisite, that by the desire of eternal
beatitude we knock daily at the ears of almighty God, and do not desist from
those good works which we have begun, until he opening, we deserve to be
freed from the prison of this mortality, and attain to the gate of our
heavenly country. Amiable sister in Christ, it is good to persevere in Gods
service: because they that leave the Monastery, and return to the world,
become more black then coals. Why? Because by tepiditie of mind they are dead
and extinguished from the fire of the charity of God. Whereupon S. Isidorus
says: They that through the desire of the world, return from a good life to a
bad, are darkened, and through the blacknes of sin, defiled and obscured, and
estra^ged from the light of the brightness of God. They that run out of a
Monastery to the world, are separated from the society of Angels, and
associated to the devils. They that leave religion, and descend to a secular
course of life; are separated from the society of God, and made slaves under
the dominion of the devil.

Most loving sister in Christ, consider what you have done. Daily call to mind,
from whence, to what, and wherefore you are come. You for Gods sake have
forsaken and despised all things transitory, and for the love of him have made
choice of a Monastery. You have bought the kingdom of heaven, and given your
self for the purchase of the same. Endeavor therefore with great care and
solicitude, that you loose not that kingdom, which you have purchased: but
strive perpetually to possess that, which you have so much wished and desired.
Have a care, least you loose that kingdom of inestimable price, for which you
have given your self. Hear what the Apostle S. Paul does say: * He that
strives for the maisterie, is not crowned, unless he strive lawfully. He
strives lawfully, that perseuereth in the service of God witho^t dissimulation
or hypocrisy. He serves God in that manner as is fitting, who accomplisheth
that good work which he has begun. He employeth himself in good works like
a good Christian, who accomplisheth those things, which he has well begun.
Whereupon our holy mother the Church says of her members in the Canticles: *
The beams of our houses are of Cedar, our afters of cypress trees. (Cant. 1.)
The houses of the Church are the assemblies of the faithful serving God, and
perseuering in those things which appertain to Gods service. The Cedar
therefore and Cypress are trees of an incorruptible nature, and signify Gods
Saints, who burn with an vnfailing and vnfading desire of their Creator, and
persevere in good works to the very end of their lives.

Wherefore venerable sistet, be you also a cypress tree in the house of God,
and persevere in good life to the very end. Be you likewise a Cedat in Gods
house by giving good examples, and the sweet savor of a virtuous conversation
to your companions, Prudent virgin, I have said this in this regard, that with
your whole mind you despise the love of the world. I have said this in this
respect, that you never forsake a religions life; and seek after a recular. I
have said this to this end, that you never desire to forsake your monastery,
and (as a dog returning to his vomit) to return to worldly vanity. I
admonish you, to persevere all the days of your life in religion, and never
desire to return to the world again. I adminish you to love your monastery
with your whole heart, and esteem the world as base in comparison of it. I
admonish you to remain all the days of your life in the house of God, and
never to seek to return again to the world? Why? Because a monastical life
is addicted to contemplation, a worldly life is laboursome and troublesome; a
monastical life is holy, a secular life is full of sin and iniquity: a
monastical life is spiritual, a recular life is carnal: a monastical life is
heavenly, a secular life is earthly: a monastical life is free from earthly
affairs, a secular life is full of troubles and cares: a monastical life is
full of amity and affection, a secular life is full of strife and contention:
a monastical life is free from cares, a secular life is full of iarres: a
monastical life is peaceable and quiet, a secular life is full of discord and
debate: a monastical life is chaste and clean, a secular life is unchaste and
defiled with sin: a monastical life is virtuous, a secular life is virtuous:
a monastical life is full of virtues, a secular life is full of vices: a
monastical life is full of Sanctity, a secular life is full of iniquity.

Reverend sister, you have heard the commodities that are in a monastery, you
have heard the evils that are in the world: you have heard the virtues of a
monastery, you have heard the vices of the world: you have heard the salvation
of a monastery, you have heard the perdition of the world: you have heard life
you have heard death. Now therefore behold good and evil in your sight or
presence: behold perdition and salvation of soul set before your eyes. Behold
life and death before you. * Behold fire and water: stretch forth your hand,
and choose which you please. (Eccli. 1.) Behold the way of heaven, and the way
of hell. Behold the way which leads to life, and the way which leads to
death, walk in which you will. Only this I desire, that you will choose the
better.

Dear brother, I will accept your counsel, and will choose the better way. It
is good for me to follow good counsel and advice, and to walk with Gods
assistance in the way that leads to eternal happiness.

Honest virgin, for that you choose the ^etter way, I cannot choose but render
^hankes unto God almighty. Forsake ^ot therefore the good way, which you ^aue
already begun to walk in. Keep ^his good resolution which you have now made
all the days of your life, then your work will be perfect, if it persevere to
the very end. Salvation is promised to such as are perseuerant: the reward is
bestowed upon such as continue constant: he is not good, that does good, but
he that does it to the very end. If therefore you persevere in good works to
the very end of your life, you shall be saved.

CHAPT. XXI. Of virginity.
* THe wise virgins did take oil in their vessels with their lamps. (Mat.
25.) Most dear sister, hear what I say. Those that are virgins in mind and
body, are not foolish, but wise: and are able to go forth to meet the
bridegroom, because they have oil in their vessels, that is, cha^titie in
their minds. But those that are virgins in body, and not in mind, are not
wise, but foolish: neither are they able to go forth to meet the bridegroom,
because they have not oil in their vessels, that is, they have not chastity
in their minds. So says blessed Isidorus: She that is a Virgin in body and
not in mind, shall have no reward at the day of judgment. And our Lord in the
Gospel says of foolish virgins: * Amen I say to you, I know you not. (Mat.
25.) For this cause I admonish you (dear sister) that you be a virgin in mind
and body, that after this life ended, you may deserve to be placed by your
heavenly bridegroom Christ Jesus in the bed chamber of eternal beatitude.

Virginity is not commanded, but counseled, for that it is a thing so
superexcellent. Virginity is a double good, for that in this life it is void
of solicitude, and shall receive the reward of chastity in the next world.
Doubtless such as remain chaste and virgins, shall in heaven be equal to the
holy Angels. The felicity of virgins shall be greater in eternal happiness,
then that of others, a^ the Prophet Isay bears witness, who says: * Thus
says our Lord to Eunuchs: I will give unto them in my house, and within my
walls a place, and a name better the^ sons and daughters: an everlasting name
will I give them, which shall not perish. (Isay. 56.) All sin by penance
receives pardon: but virginity, if it be destained, can by no means be
repaired: for albeit any one may by penance receive pardon, yet he can never
recover his former incorruption.

Venerable sister, virginity of flesh is worth nothing, where integrity of
mind is wanting. Virgins glorying of their merits, are compared to hypocrites;
who outwardly desire the glory of their good actions, which they ought to have
inwardly in their consciences. For this is that which is said in the Gospel, *
that the virgins had not oil in their vessels, (Mat. 25.) that is; did not
reserve the testimony of their good works in their consciences: to wit, to
glory in the face in the sight of men, not in the heart in the sight of God.
S. Augustine of such virgins writes thus: Virginity of flesh nothing helps,
where anger of mind inhabiteth. There is great difference between the purity
of a virginal soul polluted with no contagion of sin, and that soul, that
has been subject to the lust of many men. Venerable sister, listen to S.
Hierome, saying: To have virginal flesh avails nothing, if any one marry in
mind. To keep corporal virginity likewise is altogether fruitless, if we
refrain not our eyes from concupisce^ce. Virginity in body will nothing
profit, if charity, or humility depart from the heart.

Wherefore honest sister in Christ I admonish you, that you remain a virgin in
mind and body. I admonish you likewise, that you take with you the oil of
good works, and with them adorn your lamp, and light it with sacred virtues,
that when a clamor shall be made: Behold the bridegroom comes, go ye forth
to meet him; you may be able to meet Christ Jesus your celestial bridegroom,
and be placed by him in the blessed bedchamber of heaven.

Of chastity. CHAPT. XXII.
MOst dear sister, I entreat you, that with all devotion you will listen to
the words of my admonition. The number of thirty is the first degree, and
signifies marriage. The number of sixty is the second degree, and signifies
the continency or chastity of widows. The number of an hundred is the third
degree, which is assigned to virgins for the crown of virginity. S. Isi^orus
says: Some liui^g lasciuiou^ly in their youth, will become continent in their
old age, and will then observe chastity, when luxury scorneth to acknowledge
them as his servants. Such have no reward, for that they have not felt any
laborious fight. But they shall have glory, that have fought courageously. For
the fruit of chastity is sweetness. Chastity is the vnbleamished beauty of
the Saints. Chastity is the security of the mind and the health of the
body. Luxury does weaken the body, and causes a man to become old and
decrepit on a soudaine.

Long chastity is reputed for virginity. And therefore venerable sister, the
beauty of chastity ought to be loved. Those that are continent, and live
chastely, prepare in themselves a dwelling place for God almighty. Werevpon the
Apostle does affirm, that those that live chastely are the temple of God, and
that the holy Ghost dwells in them. (1. Cor. 3.) Continency makes a man
most near to God. There God dwells, where continency remains. Chastity
linketh a man to heaven. Chastity conducted a man to a kingdom. The kingdom
of heaven is promised to such as live chastely. Such as live chastely, shall have
an inheritance in heaven. Coniugal chastity is good: vidual continency is
better: but virginal integrity is best of all.

A humble widow is better, then a proud virgin. A widow is better with
humility, then a virgin with pride. A widow bewayling her sins is more
prayse-worthy, then a virgin that vaunteth herself before men of her
virginity A widow lamenting her iniquities, is better, then a virgin extolling
her self of her merits. A virgin ought not to glory before men of the gift
of her virginity: for if she do so, she has no oil with her: her lamp is
extinquished, a virgin ought not to despise widows. A virgin that desires to
please God, must not contemn women that live chastely: for if she do this,
she will displease God, and hurt herself. A virgin that despises women that
live chastely and serve God, is abominable for her pride. Why, what is the
reason? Because a humble sinner is better, then a proud just man. Despise not
therefore (venerable sister) women that have come out of the world: that have
had husbands, and have brought forth children: because if you despise them, you
will be exceeding culpable before God.

Anna the Prophetess had been a married woman: and yet she prophesied of of
Christ, and deserved to see him (Luc. 5.) Marie Magdalen also was a secular
woman, living in the world among others, and yet * she saw Christ rising, and
merited to be the Apostle of the Apostles (Marc. 16.) Honest virgin, I have
said this to this end, that by no means you contemn Christ hand maids, who
have come out of the world to serve God. You ought not therefore to despise,
but rather to honor honest women, who have come out of the world to religion:
for that it is not fitting, that you contemn such as God has chosen.
Wherefore I admonish you, venerable sister, that for the love of Christ you
serve them, and love them as your mothe^s. Beloved sister in Christ, you ought
to serve them as if you were their daughter for this reason, for that God has
converted them from a secular life to himself: you therefore do an injury to
God, if you hate his hande-maides.

Moreover my most loving sister in Christ, I would not have you say: I am a
dry piece of wood: I would not have you say: I am a fruitless tree, because
if you love Christ your bridegroom, and fear him as you ought, you have seven
children. The first child is modesty or bashfullnes, the second patience, the
third sobriety, the fourth temperance, the fifth charity, the sixth
humility, the seventh chastity. Behold venerable sister, you have, by the
grace of the holy Ghost without labor or pain, brought forth seven children
to Christ in your uncorrupted womb, that that may be fulfilled in you, which
is written: Because the barren shall bring forth seven.

Therefore amiable sister in Christ, you ought to nourish, fo^ter, feed,
refresh, comfort, and chastise these children, which you have brought forth to
Christ Jesus your celestial bridegroom Nourish them by good manners. Foster
them in the bosom of internal contemplation. Feed them with the milk of
eternal sweetness. Refresh them with the love of supernal beatitude, and comfort
them with the bread of the celestial word. Chastise them with the rod of God,
and command them not to grow proud: also that they grow not light, and
transgressors of God^ law, and that they never depart, nor be separated from
you. You see dear sister, that Virgins have the principal place in the
kingdom of God, and not without just desert. For sithence they have contemned
this present world, for this cause they have attained to a celestial kingdom:
to which he vouchsafe to bring you, to whose service you have consecrated your
body and soul. Amen.

Of fornication. CHAPT. XXIII.
MY dear sister in Christ, I admonish you, that with all devotion and
diligence you listen to these words following of our Lord Jesus: * Let your
loins be girded, and candells burning in your hands. (Luc. 12.) We gird our
loins, when by continency we repress the lasciuiousnes of the flesh. We hold
candells burning in our hands, when we give good examples to our neighbors.
The fornication of the flesh (as S. Isidorus says) is adultery. The
fornication of the soul, is serving of idols. The darts of the eyes are the
first fornication, the second is of words: but he that is not taken by his
eyes, may resist words All vncleame pollution is called fornication, although
every one does enjoy sundry delights of filthiness. For from the delight of
committing fornication there spring up diverse heinous sins, by which the
kingdom of heaven is shut, and a man is separated from God.

Among the seven deadly sins forninication is the greatest: for that by the
uncleanness of the flesh a man does defile the temple of God, and taking the
member of Christ, makes it the member of a harlot. Wherefore honest virgin, if
it be true, that God lives in you, let fornication be dead in you. Luxury is
an enemy to God, and the destroyer both of heavenly grace, and earthly riches.
Fornication does not only defile the body but also the conscience. He that is
lascivious and lewd; allbeit he seem to live, yet he is dead. * Fornicators
and aduoterers God will judge, that is, will condemn them. Heb. 13.) Hear
therefore most dear sister, the words of S. Isidorus. To be defiled with
fornication is worse then any other sin. Fornication is greater then any
other sin whatsoever. Fornication is a grievous sin, fornication does
surpass all evils fornication is worse then death it self. It is better to
die, then to commit fornication, it is better to die, then to be defiled with a
sin so filthy: it is better to die, then by fornication to destroy both
soul and body.

Luxury leads a man to the pit of perdition: luxury drowneth a man in the
hellish lake of damnation: luxury sends a man to destruction. The eyes are
the messengers of fornication. The sight is the first occasion of fornication.
For the mind is captiuated by the eyes. The dart of love enters to the mind by
the eyes: the eiesight sends the darts of fornication into the mind: the eye
is the first dart of fornication. Wherefore dear sister in Christ, repress
your eyes: withdraw your sight. Fix not your eyes on the beauty of the flesh:
behold no man with this intention, that you covet him: look upon no man with
this intention, that you carnally love him. Gaze not upon any man's face, that
you may love him amiss: Turn away your eyes, that they see not vanity:
desire not any man's beauty.

Tell me, venerable sister, what profit is there in the beauty of the flesh?
Does not man wither and dry away as grass? and does not his beauty fly away
as a shadow? When death comes, tell me, I pray you, how much beauty will
remain in the body? When you see the whole body swollen and become stinking,
are you not wont to stop your nostrills, that you may not endure a smell so
loathsome? Tell me, I pray you, where is then the beauty of the countenance,
where are those fair words, which were wont to mollify the hearts of the
hearers? Where are then those sweet and pleasant speeches, which did move men
to mirth and gladness? Tell me honest virgin, where will then be immoderate
laughter, and unseemly jesting? Where will then be that vain and fool^sh
behavior, which was wont to move men to laughter? All is gone, all is come to
nothing, all as smoke is vanished away: lo this is the end of carnal beauty,
this is the end of the body.

Know therefore venerable sister as a thing most certain, that beauty is
vain. Solomon says the same. * Grace (says he) is deceitful, and beauty is
vain. (Pro. 31.) Wherefore most loving sister in Christ, if the beauty of the
flesh be vain, if the beauty of the flesh be worms and corruption, if the
beauty of the body be earth and ashes, have a care, least for this end you
look upon men, and covet their beauty. Why? * Because the world passes, and
the concupiscence thereof. (1. Io. 2.) All that is in the world, is the
concupiscence of the flesh, and the concupiscence of the e^es. The world
therefore for Christ's sake ought to be contemned, with all thing therein
contained. But you honest virgin (who for the love of Christ have left the
world, and entered into religion) ought not to be delighted in the beauty of
men.

I therefore counsel you (dear sister in Christ) that above all things you
love Jesus Christ your bridegroom, that you may be able to reign with him in
his heavenly kingdom. Certainly if the concupiscence of fornication does more
delight the mind, then the love of chastity: it is a token that sin does yet
reign in a man. But if the fairenes of chastity does more delight the mind,
then the foulness of fornication, it is an evident sign, that not sin, but
justice does now reign in a man. Although a man be chaste in body, yet if he
be lascivious in mind, it is apparent, that sin reigns in his heart.
Fornication of heart is serving of idols.

There is also a^ other spiritual fornication of which our Lord says: *
Whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her has already committed aduourrie
with her in his heart. (Mat. 5.) Men are more made subject to the devil by the
lasciuiousnes of the flesh, then by any other vice. Chastity is the beauty of
the soul, and by this virtue men are made equal in merit to the Angels of
God. Believe me (loving sister in Christ) many by the carelesnes of their eyes,
have incurred the danger of their souls.

A question. Dear brother, tell me if you please, have you known any man
deceived by the sight of his eyes?

The answer. O venerable sister, I know full many that have been deceived by
this guile, and by this means have been cast into the snare of the devil. I
will relate some for example. Dina the daughter of Jacob went forth to see the
women of that country, whom when Sichem had seen the son of Hemor the
Huite, the Prince of that land, he was in love with her; and he took her away
and lay with her, by force rauishing the virgin (Genesis 34.) And thus that poor
wench, by reason of her curiosity, lost her honesty and virginity. David
likewise on a certain day standing on the roof of his house, saw a woman; and
fell in love with her: for whose love he committed adultery and murder, and
so being deceived, did transgress the law of his Creator. (2. King. 11.) And
for that he saw that unawares which he ought not to have seen, he contracted a
bleamtsh all the days of his life in his credit and reputation. That most
strong Samson d^scending into the country of the Philistines, saw there a woman
and became enamoured of her, and slept in her bosom: but she shaued of the
hair of his head and delivered him into the hands of his enemies, who
immediately plucked out his eyes; and so he poor man (for that he saw that
which he should not have seen) lost his eyes, and was in danger to be slain.
(Judge. 16.)

Know therefore dear sister, that many men by means of their eyes, have
fallen into danger both of their bodies ad souls. Wherefore I counsel you
(amiable sister in Christ) that you make a covenant with your eyes, least you
see any thing unawares, which may turn to your prejudice. Have a care
likewise, that death enter not into your soul by the windows of your eyes.
Therefore most loving sister in Christ, (as I have already told you) if as yet
your flesh assault you, if as yet unclean titillations tempt you, if as yet
lust allure you, if as yet the remembrance of fornication trouble you, oppose
against it the memory of your death as a shield to defend you. Place the end
of your life before your eyes, call the day of your departure out of this world
to remembrance. Set before you the future torments: consider daily Gods severe
judgments; let the dreadful image of the day of doom be continually placed
before your eyes. Be always mindful of the horrible pains of hell. Let the
heat of hell extingu^sh in you the heat of lust. Let the remembrance of Gods
eternal anger and fury against sin and iniquity, quench the las^iuious heat
of your body. Let the flame of that infernal and unquenchable fire, quench in
you the heat of unlawful desire; let the greater hea^e overcome the lesser.
Let the greater heat vanquish the lesser. Let the c^as^^ng noise of those
hellish flames, put to flight all inordinate affections. As one nail drives
out an other; so oftentimes the heat of hell fire drives ou^ ^he heat of
carnal desire. Venerable si^^er, I earnestly beseech God almighty, that he
will give you true chastity both of mind and body. Amen.

Of abstinence. CHAPT. XXIV.
THis is perfect abstinence or fasting: when our outward man fasteth, and our
inward man prays. Prayer by fasting does more easily penetrate heaven. By
fasting and prayer the mind of a man is conjoined to the Angels, and united to
God. Fasting is an armor impregnable against the temptations of the devil. By
prayer and fasting the devils are overcome.

Dear sister in Christ, are you desirous to know by what luxury is best
extinguished?

Loving ^^other, I would very willingly, and therefore I entreat you to tell
me. Listen then most amiable sister in Christ: By fasting fornication is
conquered, by fasting lust is extinguished; lay aside fulness, and lust will
soon loose his forces. Abstinence subdueth the flesh abstinence represseth
lasciuiousnes, abstinence maistere^h carnal motions, abstinence defeateth
fornication of his forces: luxury is destroyed by hunger and thirst: hunger
and thirst overcome lust. The mind being cloyed with superfluity of fare,
loses the vigor of prayer: such as the flesh is, when it is long without
food, such is the soul, which is daily satiated with the word of God. S.
Hierome writing of abstinence says thus: Our fasts ought to be moderate,
least they over much weaken the stomach, because little and tempera^e meat is
profitable both for the body and soul. A fat belly does not beget a quick
wit. It is far better daily to eat a little, then eating seldom to feed to
the full. to eat sparingly, and to rise as it were with hunger, is better then
to fast three days together. I commend his fasting, that shunneth all sort of
sin. Abstine^ce from vice is better then abstinence from meat: that is not
to be reputed abstinence, after which fulness of belly does ensue. B. Isidorus
likewise says: He meditateth of meat and drink all the day long, who
prepares ^or himself dainty fare to give his gluttony in the evening. An
empty belly makes a man watch full in the service of God almighty. For he
that is full, falls fast asleep, for which cause we are not able to watch
when our belly is ^ull of meat.

Venerable sister, let your body wither away with fasting, through the desire
of the kingdom of heaven, that you may fulfill that which is written in the
Psalm. * My soul has thirsted to God, my flesh to him very many ways.
(Psa. 62.) For our flesh does then thirst to God, when through fasting it
becomes dry and withered. Dear sister in Christ, credit me; if in this life
you perfectly hunger and thirst after God, you shall be satiated by him in that
heavenly beatitude. Abstinence does quicken and mortify: it quickneth the
soul, mortifieth the body. Abstinence builds up virtues in the soul, and
th^oweth ^owne the vices of the body. We ought to despise gluttony with all
diligence, we ought to contemn the inordinate desire of meats and drinks, we
mu^^ not take over much care for our belly: because when our belly is
immoderately refreshed, the body is thereby stirred up to leacherie.

We must not eat, that our belly may be filled, but that our body may be
sustained; for where the belly is filled, there the fire of lust is kindled.
But that body that is weakened with abstinence, is free from the flame of
unlawful concupiscence. The rich glutton mentioned in the Gospel, that was
clothed in purple, and fared delitiously every day, for that in this world he
would not ab^ aine from meat, when afterward amidst the flames of hell fire,
he requested one only drop of water, he could not obtain it. (Luc. 16.) Like
as all spiritual virtues are rooted and erected in the soul by abst^nence: so
all vices are nourished and confirmed in the body by gluttony and excess.

No man can attain to spiritual perfection, unless he first vanquish in
himself the vice of overmuch eating. For this reason the three children were
not burned in the fiery fournace, for that they were addicted to abstinence.
For this cause Daniel was delivered from the mouth of the lions, for that he
was a lover of abstinence. No man is able to expel from himself the
temptations of the devil, unless he refrain in himself the inordinate
appetite of eating to the full.

A Question. Most dear brother, I pray you tell me, how I ought by abstinence
to chastise my body?

The Answer. Loving sister, you ought to chastise your body in that so^te,
that it grow not proud. Again, you ought to keep it in that subi^ction, that
it fall not into vice, yet with all to refresh it so, that it may do you
service. You must likewise so chastise it by abstinence, that it do not perish.
If you afflict your flesh over much you kill your fellow citizen: and again,
if you feed it more then is necessary, you nourish your enemy. Most dear
sister, as often as you fast, you ought to observe this, that you kill not your
body, but vice. Wherefore most loving sister in Christ, chastise your body by
abstinence; fast, and abstain from meats let your countenance and face look
pale through fasting: not red through over much eating and drinking. Let your
body be dry and withered, not fat and pampered. Pamper not your flesh for
worms: eat with that mediocritie, that you be always hungry: eat in that
moderate manner, that you always feel hunger: fill not your belly with more
then nature does require. Hunger, thirst and abstain, and dry up your body
with fasting.

Believe me venerable sister, you will never be able to vanquish temptations,
unless you chastise your body by abstinence: for by meat and drink luxury
does increase. Large commons cause carnalitie: lust is always a companion to
satietie. The cold of rising to matins, quenches the fire of lasciuiousnes.
There the devils are most bold, where they see most meat and drink. Most
amiable sister in Christ, as I have already told you, if you will perfectly
shun the temptations of the flesh, abstain not only from meats, but also
from all worldly delights: that after this present life ended, you may be able
to rejoice with the holy Angels in eternal beatitude. Amen.

Of drunkenness. CHAPT. XXV.
MY 'most dear si^ter, listen to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ: saying:
* Look well to your selves, least perhaps your heart be ouercharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness. (Luc. 21.) The Apostle S. Paul, also by way of
reprehending his disciples, used these words. * Be not drunk with wine,
wherein is riotousnes. (Ephesians. 5.) Solomon says likewise. * Wine is a
luxurious thing, and drunkenness tumultuous: whosoever is delighted there with
shall not be wise. (Pro. 20.) Behold not wine when it waxes yellow, when the
color thereof shall shine in the glass: it goes in pleasantly, but in the
end, it will bite like a snake, and as a basilisk it will power abroad poisons.
There is no secret, where drunkenness is. Wine has destroyed very many, and
brought them into danger both of soul and body. * Wine was created for
ioyfullnes, not for drunkenness (Eccl. 31.) Wheresoever fulness does abound,
there luxury does domineere. A belly that is strouted out with meat and
wine, has commonly luxury for his companion.

Drunkenness weakeneth the body, entangleth the soul. Drunkenness begets
perturpatio^ of mind. Drunke^nes encraeseth fury of heart. Drunkenness
nourishes the flame of fornication. Drunkenness does so alienate the mind, that
a man knows not himself. A drunken man is so alienated from himself, that
he knows not where he is.

Many think it a praise to drink much, and not to be drunk: whom the
Prophet rebukes, saying: * Woe to you that are mighty to drink wine, and
stout in drunkenness (Isai. 5.) And again: Woe to you, that rise early to
follow drunkenness, and to drink even until evening, that you may be enflamed
with wine. The Prophet Joel cries out likewise, saying: * Awake you that be
drunk, and weep, and howl all ye, that drink wine in sweetness. (Joel. 1.)
He says not, ye that drink wine in necessity, but ye that drink wine in
sweetness, that is in delight.

Drunkenness is a mortal sin. Drunkenness is a grievous crime. Drunkenness is
esteemed as great a sin, as murder adultery, or fornication. Drunkenness
does exclude a man out of the kingdom of God. Drunkenness does expel a man out
of Paradise. Drunkenness does cast a man down headlong into hell. Noe with
drinking wine was made drunk, and uncovered his priuities, which he had keept
covered before by the space of six hundred years. (Genesis 9.) Lot also being
drunk with wine, lay with hi^ own daughters, and perceived not his sin, for
that he was deprived of his senses, (Genes. 19.) Consider therefore dear
sister, how much drunkenness is to be detested and avoided of all the servants
of God.

A Question. Loving brother, is it a sin to drink wine?

The Answer. Venerable sister, it is not a sin to drink wine temperately,
that is, with sobriety. For so the Apo^tle S. Paul says to Timothy his
disciple. * Use a little wine for thy stomach, and thy often infirmities. (1.
Tim. 5.) Listen likewise what Solomon says: * Wine drunken moderately, is the
joy of the soul, and the heart. (Eccli. 31.) Wine immoderately drunken, is
poison. Wine without moderation overthrows the understanding: troubles the
mind: stirs up lust: increases, and nourishes the same. For God has given
us wine to recreate our hearts, not that we should be drunk therewith.

Wherefore honest virgin, let us drink, not as much as our sensuality does
desire, but as much as necessity does require. Let us take heed, least we
consume that in the vice of gluttony, which God has given us as a medecin
for our body. Let us take heed, least we turn that to the use of vice, which
God has given us for the health of our bodies. Let us take heed, least we
change the medicine of our flesh, into the vice of drunkenness. Many by wine are
made captive to the devil: neither is drunkenness any thing else, but a most
manifest devil. You therefore dear sister in Christ, drink wine moderately,
and it will give joy to your mind, health to your body. Drink wine soberly
without excess, and it will take from you lasines and slouthfulnes, and make
you solicitous and devout in Gods service. Why? Because wine temperately
drunken does stire up a man to prayer, and make him well disposed in the
service of his Creator. Wherefore dear sister, if you shall hear me as your
brother, and accomplish all these things, as I have said, you shall by so doing
show your self wise and discreet.

Of Sin. CHAPT. XXVI.
MOst dear sister, listen to our Lord saying in the Gospel: * Every one that
commits sin, is the servant of sin. (Io. 8.) Sin is committed two
ways, to wit, either through the love of desire, or dread of fear: when a man
will either have that which he does desire, or when he dreadeth to incur the
evil, which he does fear. Sin is committed four ways in heart, and as
many ways in work. Sin is committed in the heart by devilish suggestion,
by fleshly temptation, by consent of the mind, and by the defense of pride. It
is also committed in work, some times secretly, some times openly, some times
through custom, some times through despair. By these ways then we offend in
heart, and commit sin in work. Sin is committed by three means: to wit,
by ig orance, by humane frailty or weakness, and by industry, that is, of set
purpose.

By ignorance Eve sinned in Paradise, as the Apostle says: * Adam was not
seduced; but the woman being seduced, was in preuarication. (1. Tim. 2.) Adam
therefore sinned by industry or of set purpose, but Eve by ignorance. And he
that is deceived, sins by ignorance; but he that consents, by humane
frailty or weakness. Peter sinned, when he denied Christ for fear of a maid.
It is worse to sin throuh humane weakness, then through ignorance. And a
great deal worse then either of these, to sin by industry or of set
purpose. He likewise that sins publicly, offends more greiuously, then he
that sins secretly. He commits a double sin, that sins in public:
for that he both sins, and shows others how to do the like. It is a
certain part of justice for a man to acknowledge his sin, and to be inwardly
ashamed of the same. It is better and more laudable to abstain from committing
evil for the love of God, then for fear of hell. It is better likewise not to
sin, then to amend the same.

Every one that sins is proud: for by doing things prohibited, he
contemns the commandments of God. Hear therefore most dear sister what I
say, hear what I admonish: by one evil, many good things perish. Keep your
soul from sin: He that offends in one thing, is made guilty of all. (Iam.
2.) By one sin many good works are lost. Incline not your heart to that,
where in your body is delighted. Permit not your soul to be in the power of
your flesh, neither consent to carnal delights. Venerable sister, * if you live
according to the flesh, you shall die. (Romans 8.) Wherefore cleanse your
conscience from all sin: let your mind be pure: let your body be likewise
purged from all miquitie, and free from all impuritie. Let no spot of sin
remain in your heart. The body cannot be defiled, unless the mind be first
corrupted. I^ the soul fall, the body is immediately bent to evil. The soul
goes before the flesh. The soul marches fore mo^^ in the committing of
every fault; the body can do nothing but what the foul will have it.
Cleanse therefore your heart from vice, and your flesh will not do amiss.

A question. Loving brother, I pray you tell me, whether the soul o^ a sinner
be black and deformed: or the soul of a just man fair, and well favored?

The Answer. Dear sister in Christ, there are three things in this world more
black and deformed then any thing that can be imagined: to wit, the soul of a
sinner perseuering in sin, which is more black then any crow or raven: the
devils which snatch her away at the day of her departure: and hell, into which
she is cast: there is nothing more foul, black, or deformed in this world,
then these three recited. Again, there are three things, then which there are
none better: to with, the soul of a just man perseuering in good works, which
is beautiful as the sun; the holy Angels which receive her on the day of
her death: and paradise in which she is placed: among all creatures there are
none more beautiful or better then these.

The holy Angels do present the soul of a ^ust man before God, saying. Behold
him (o Lord) whom t^ou have chosen and taken; he shall alwaye^ dwell in thy
courts. Most amiable sister in Christ, if you cleanse your conscience from all
sin, and persevere in Gods service, as you have promised at your entrance in
to religion, you shall without all doubt rejoice in the heavenly bride-chamber
with Christ Jesus your bridegroom. Amen.

Of the confession of sins, and penance. CHAPT. XXVII.
THen a man begins to be just, when he begins to accuse himself of his
sins. Whereupon it is written: * The just is first accuser of himself (Pr.
18.) Howbeit there is nothing more wicked, then to acknowledge our fault, and
not to lament it. Every sinner ought for two respects to bewail his sins.
Fir^, for that through negligence he has not done good; secondly for that
through over much boldness he has committed evil. The good which he ought to
have done, he has omitted: and the evil, which he ought not to have done, he
has committed. That man does penance worthy of commendation who lamenteth his
former sins, and does not commit again things worthy of lamentation. For he
that bewaileth his sin, and commits the same again, is like a man that
should wash a new made brick: the more he washes, the more dirt he makes. But
when a man that is able to sin does penance, and amendeth his life from all
offense, such a man doubtless at the hour of his death, shall pass to
everlasting rest and repose. But he that lives amiss, and at the hour of his
death, doet, penance: like as his damnation is uncertain, so is also the
remission of his sins. Whosoever therefore desires to be secure at the hour
of his death of forgiveness, let him whiles he is in health do penance, let him
whiles he is whole and sound lament his sins And sithence the mercy of God
is a thing hidden, it bohoueth us to weep without intermission.

Most dear sister, li^^en to the words of blessed Isidorus. A penitent man
(says he) ought not to think himself secure of his sins. And why? Because
security causes negligence, and negligence oftentimes casts a careless man
into his his former sins. Now therefore most loving sister, listen to my
counsel, and amend your life whiles you are able. Make manifest your sins,
whiles God gives you license. Bewail your sins, whiles you have time and
space. Whiles you are able, do penance. Whiles you are able, confess your
sins. Bewail your sins, whiles you are yet living. Let the calling of such
as die, cause you to embrace virtue. Whiles you are able amend what is amiss:
whiles you are able, withdraw your self from sin and vice. Whiles you have
time, call to God for grace. Whiles you yet live in this mortal body, obtain
pardon of your sins. Before the day of death does approach, do penance.
Before the pit does swallow you up, do satisfaction for your offenses. Before
hell snatch you away, lament your sins.

Bewail your negligences, before you be drowned in the bottom of hell; where
there is no place of forgiveness, where there is no place of gladness, or leave
to do penance: where there is no permission of amending, or place of
confession. Why, what is the reason? Because in hell there is no redemption.
Albeit you are subject to sin, yet by penance you may obtain pardon. There
is no sin so grievous, which is not pardoned by penance. Despair does
augme^t sin, despair is a mo^^ grievous sin, despair is greater t en any
other sin. Wherefore beloved sister, believe as a thing most certain, that
in confession there is hope of pardon: and consequently do not by any means
doubt, or despair of Gods pity and compassion. In confession have a lively
confidence of Gods divine bounty and goodness.

Most dear brother, you say well, you give me good counsel.

THE CONFESSION OF A PENITENT WOMAN.

Woe is me sinful soul; alas, wretch that I am: who have fallen into so
great sins, into so great crimes, into so great negligences: what shall I
first bewail, what shall first lament? Poor wretch that I am: what
lamentation shall I first make? What tears shall I unworthy wight first power
forth? My memory is unable to recount the acts of my crimes so great and
abominable. O tears, whither have you withdrawn your selves? O tears, where
are you? Where are you, o fountains of tears? Be moved, I pray you, at my
weeping: o you fountains of tears flow upon my face, wet and bedew my
cheeks. Afford me bitter lamentation. Help me o my God, before I die, before
death overtake me, before hell snatch me, before the infernal flame burn me,
before those utter darknesses enwrap and cover me. Help me o my God, before I
come to those torments, before the fire of hell devour me, before I be
tormented in hell everlastingly. O my God, what shall I do at the dreadful
day of judgment? What answer shall I make at that strict and last account!
What shall I poor wretched sinner say, when I shall be presented before the
tribunal seat of Christ?

Woe be to that day, in which I sinned. Woe be to that day, when I offended.
Woe be to that day, when I transgressed the commandments of God. O that the
sun had never shined upon me. O that the sun had never risen upon me. O day
to be detested. O day to be abhorred. O day not worthy to be so much as once
named, which brought me into this world, which opened unto me the enclosure of
my mothers womb. It had been better for me not to have been borne at all,
then to be tormented everlastingly in hell: it had been better for be not to
have been borne, then to endure everlasting pains. It had been better for me
never to have seen worldly light, then after thi^ life to su^aine perpetual
torments.

Weep over me o heaven and earth, o all you creatures bewail my case. All you
that have sense of life, shed teres in my behalf. For verily I have sinned
grievously, I have sinned unfortunately, I have sinned wretchedly: my sins
are more in number then the sands of the sea. I have voluntarily promised to
live well: but those good things, which I have promised, I have never
performed. I have always returned to my former sins, I have multiplied my
faults, I have iterated or redoubled mine offenses. I have never amended my
manners. I have never ceased from doing amiss.

O ye holy men, pray to our Lord for me: o all ye Saints make intercession to
our Lord for me. All ye souls of just men make intercession for me: that so
perchance God may take pity of me, that so peradventure he may take away mine
iniquities. O my wretched soul, who will take pity of thee? Who will comfort
thee? O wretched soul! O soul, who will lament for thee? Where is the keeper
of men? where is the redeemer of souls? Where art thou o good shepherd? Why
ha^^ thou de^pised me? Why have thou turned away thy face from me; O my God,
^orget me not for ever; forsake me not everlastingly: leave me not in the power
of my ghostly adversary.

I am (I confess o Lord) a sinner, and unworthy of favor, and yet I fly to
thee for succor. Thou art meek, mild, and of much mercy. Thou despisest no
man, thou abhorrest no man, thou refusest no man. O Lord, make manifest thy
mercy in me. Deny not that (I beseech thee) to me, which thou have mercifully
granted to many. I do not defend my faults, I do not cover my sins. The
evil which I have committed does dislike me. I wretched wight have offended, I
confess my error, I lay open my sin. I acknowledge mine iniquity. I have
sinned, o sweet Savior, be merciful to me a sinner. Spare my faults, pardon
my sins, forgive me my crimes. If thou shall observe iniquities o Lord: Lord
who shall sustain it? No man durst approach to thine examination without
fear, neither shall the justice it self of a just man be secure: for what man
is so just in every thing, that he durst say, that he is without sin.

No man is without sin, no man is free from offense: no man is clean in thy
sight, yea even among the Saints no man is immaculate. * Behold they that
serve God, have not been stab^e: and in his Angels he found wickedness. (Job.
4.) * Behold the moon also does not shine and the stars are not clean in
his sight. (Job. 25.) The heavens likewise are not clean in his sight. If
therefore no man is holy in his sight, no man immaculate, how much more I, that
am a sinner, corruption, and meat for worms, who have drunk iniquity, as it
were water, and have multiplied my sins: Who do sit in the dust, who do dwell
in a house of clay, who have an earthly foundation: My God stretch forth thy
right hand to me a sinner.

Remember o Lord, that I am but arth. Remember, that I am but dust and ashes.
Give me a medicine, by which I may be healed. Give me a medicine, by which I
may be cured. I (alas, wretch that I am) have fallen into the pit of sin. I
have fallen into the bottom of hell. O my God, deliver my captive soul from
hell: let not that bottomless chaos include me: let not the pit of perdition
shut his mouth upon me. Let not that bottomless depth deny me to go forth.
Behold the dreadful day of judgment is now at hand, the last day is now come,
the day of death does now draw near: nothing remains for me but a grave,
nothing but a sepulcher. O Lord, pardon me I beseech thee, before I go to that
obscure country. O my God, vouchsafe to assist me, before I go to the land of
darkness and misery. O Redeemer of souls, succor me before my death, break
the bonds of my sins, before that dreadful hour approaches.

Dear si^^er in Christ, God be merciful unto you, and forgive you all your
sins. God grant you forgiveness of all your offenses. God forgive you,
whatsoever you have offended. God release you from all sin. Now therefore be
of good courage, dear sister; and resolve in your heart not to sin any more.
Have a care not to iterate your offenses: defile not your self with sin
again, now after forgiveness. Return not to sin after the lamentation o^
penance: do not that again, which may move you again to tears and
repentance. He is not a true penitent, but a derider of God, who does yet do
that, whereat he may be grieved: he does not seem to beseech God humbly, but
to mock and scorn him proudly, who as yet commits that evil, whereat he
seemed to be sorrowful. Whereupon B. Isidorus does affirm; That penance is
vain, that is defiled by a sin ensuing. And again: A wound that is
iterated, is more slowly healed. A man frequently sinning and mourning, does
scarcely deserve pardon.

Be therefore constant in penance, and forsake not that virtuous course of
life, which you have begun to practice. To such a persevere salvation is
promised, on such the reward of heaven is bestowed. Whereupon it is said: *
Blessed are they that keep judgment, and do justice at all time. (Psalm.
105.) And again: * He that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved.
(Mat. 10.) Honest virgin, I counsel you, that you always behave your self as
one ashamed with your countenance cast down, through the remembrance of your
sin: let a blushing bashfulnes appear always in your face, through the
memory of your offenses. Let the shame of your sin make you ashamed to look
up to heaven: walk with your countenance cast down on the ground: sorrowful
through mourning: going as one forlorn: wrapping your members in sackcloth,
and ashes.

Let the earth be your bed, the ground your cou^rlets. You are dust, and
therefore sit in the ^ust: you are ashes, and therefore let them be the place
of your repose. Be always weeping, always mourning, always sighing: always
sorrowful in your heart for your sins. Let sighs proceed from your brea^^,
groans from your heart. Let tears often flow from your eyes. Be always ready
to shed tears, as often as you call your bad life to remembrance. Venerable
Virgin, believe me, because the servants of God never ought to be secure in
this life, although they be just and good. The servants of God ought to be
vigilant at all times, and with tears to call their sins to remembrance.
Whereupon in praise of the bridegroom (to wit Christ) it is said in the
Canticles: * His hayres are as the branches of palm trees, black as a raven.
(Cant. 5.) What do we understand by the hayres of Christ, but faithful men?
who whiles they keep the faith of the blessed Trinity in their mind, and
perform what they believe adhearing to God, do do him honor, a^ hayres
hanging on the head. The palm tree is very high, and according to the name
there of signifies victory. Christ's hairs therefore are as the branches of
palme-trees: because, whiles each one of the elect does lift up himself to the
height of virtue, they at length by Gods grace arrive to the victory. Howbeit
they are black as a raven: because although they eleuate themselves to heaven
by their virtues yet they always acknowledge them, selves to be sinners.

So you, most loving sister in Christ, albeit you live well and religiously,
albeit you serve God justly and devoutly: yet I give you this admonition, that
you never desist from tears and lamentation. Let tear, be sweet unto you, let
mourning and lamentation delight you, never cease from mourning: by so much the
more be inclined to lamentation, by how much the more you have been addicted
to sin. A^ great as your intention has been to commit sin, so great let
your devotion be to make satisfaction. The medecin ought to be answerable to
the disease: mighty sins require many tears. Venerable sister, he vouch
safe to assist you, and afford you spiritual comfort, whom the holy Angels
adore in the heavenly court. Amen.

Of communicating or communion. CHAPT. XXVIII
* Whosoever shall eat th^is bread, or drink the chalice of our Lord
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body, and of the blood of our Lord (1.
Cor. 11. that is, he shall ^o^^^act sin, and commit a fault by such his fact.
Why? For that he goes amiss to that which is good. But let a man prove
himself and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of the chalice. As if he
had said: Let every one examine his life, and cleanse his hea^^ from all
malice, that he may worthily approach to so great a sacrament. For he that
eats and drinks unworthily: eats and drinks judgment to himself, to
wit, the cause of his damnation.

Whereupon blessed Isidorus likewise says: They that live lewdly in the
Church, and cease not to communicate, thinking that by this communion they may
be cleansed from their sins: let such men know, that this does nothing help
to their clea^sing, according as the Prophet testifies, saying: * What is it,
that my beloved has in my house done much wickedness; shall the holy flesh take
away from thee thy malices. (Ier. 11.) He therefore, that will receive ^he
body of Christ, must first endeavor to remain in the faith and love of
Christ. Hence it is, that our Lord says in the Gospel: * He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him. (Io. 6.) As if he
should say: He remains in me who fullfilleth my will by living virtuously.
For otherwise, unless he first remain in me by faith, and good works, and I
in him: he cannot eat my flesh, nor drink my blood. What is it then, which
men eat? Behold all do often receive the sacrament of the altar: yet one does
spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood and an other not,
but only the sacrament, that is, Christ's body under the sacrament, and not
the substance of the sacrament.

This Sacrament is called the proper body of Christ, borne of the Virg^n: but
the spiritual substance is the flesh of Christ. A good man therefore receives
the sacrament, and the substance of the sacrament: but a bad man, for that he
eareth unworthily, eats and drinks, (as the Apostle says 1. Cor. 11.)
judgment to himself: not proving himself first, nor discerning the body of
our Lord What then does the sinner eat, and what does he drink? Certaynely
not the flesh and blood spiritually to his salvation, but judgment to his
damnation, although h^ seem with the re^ to receive the sacrament of the
altar. One therefore receives the body of our Lord to hi^ salvation, an other
to his damnation. He that with Judas the traitor receives the body of our
Lord, with Judas is condemned: he that with Peter and the rest of the
faithful, receives the same devoutly and faithfully, is doubtless with Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles sanctified in Christ's body.

Li^^en therefore o spou^e of Crhist, to the words of S. Augustine: He that
with a c^ ast body and clean heart, with a pure conscience and devout mind
does approach to this communion of the altar: shall arrive to that altar, which
is Christ in heaven, before the eyes of God by a happy transmigration. Amiable
sister in Christ, hearken I pray you, to the wisdom of the serpent, The
serpent, when he means to go to drink, before he comes to the fountain,
vomitteth up all his poison. Do you therefore (most dear sister) imitate the
serpent in this point, that before you come to the fountain, that is, to the
communion of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, you vomit up out of
your heart all poison; to wit, hatred, anger, malice, envy, evil will, and
perverse cogitations. Forgive also all your fellows, and all your neighbors,
in whatsoever they have offended, that your offenses may be ^^kewise forgiven
you by God: even as our Lord himself says: * Forgive, and you shall be
forgiven. (Luc. 6.) If therefore you shall do all these things, as I have
said, you may approach to the living fountain, that is, to Christ, who is the
fountain of all good things.

Furthermore, he says of himself: * I am the living bread, which came down
from heaven. (Io. 6.) Of this bread David says in the Psalms. * Man did eat
the bread of Angels: (Psalm. 77.) for otherwise that bread, albeit it came from
heaven, and drink, for that it was corporal, was not food fit for Angels: but
that bread and drink, which was prefigured by this. Howbeit Christ is the
bread of Angels, and this sacrament is his true flesh, and true blood: which
sacrament man does spiritually eat and drink. And by this, whereby the
Angels live in heaven, by the same man lives here on earth; because all is
spiritual and divine, in that which a man receives. ^ut as the Apostle says;
Some have eaten the same spiritual food, and yet are dead: so likewise now in
the Church the body of our Lord is life to some; but to others it is a pain,
and the punishment of sin. The body of our Lord without all doubt is life to
those, to whom Christ is life: but to those it is death, who through sin and
ignorance, and negligence, are the members of the devil.

Wherefore most loving sister in Christ, I admonish you, that when you receive
the body of our Lord, you understand an other thing by your taste, then you
feel by your smell. Hear likewise o honest virgin, what the Priest says at
the consecration of the body of Christ. We entreat (says he) that this
oblation may be made blessed, by which we may be blessed. Enrolled, by which we
all may be enrolled; in heaven. Ratified, by which we may be nu^bered in the
bowels of Christ. Reasonable, by which we may be freed from a bestial
understanding. And that thou will vouchsafe to make it acceptable: that we,
likewise, (sithence we are displeasing to our selves) may become acceptable in
his only begotten o^ne Christ Jesus. Wherefore most virtuous Virgin (as we
have said already) Christ in himself feeds the holy Angels in heaven:
Christ also in h^mselfe refreshes the faithful here on earth. Christ by hope
satiateth the holy Angels in the heavenly country: Christ by faith feeds us
here on earth, least we faint in the way. Christ refreshes Angels and men of
himself, and yet remains whole in himself.

O how good is that bread, and how full of admiration, of which the Angels are
satiated in heaven, and men are refreshed here on earth; He, on whom the
Angels feed to the full in the heavenly country is man's food here on
earth, according to the measure of his imbecillitie, and this (as I have said
already) lea^t he faint in the way. Christ t e living bread, who is the
Angels refection, is himself likewise man's redemption and medicine. Now
therefore most dear sister, desire our Lord with all instancie, that he will
cleanse your conscience from all malice and envy; that so you may be able
worthily to receive the mystery* of the body and blood of Christ Jesus our
Lord. Amen.

Of our thoughts or cogitations. CHAPT. XXIX.
MOst dear sister, listen what our Lord does say by the mou^h of the Prophet
Isay: * Take away the evil of your cogitations from mine eyes. (Isai. 1.)
Although a man cease from doing amiss: yet if he have evil cogitations in his
heart, he is not altogether guiltless. Whereupon blessed Indorus says: We do
not only offend in our actions, but also in our cogitatio^s: if we take
delight, when they unlawfully occur to our remembrance. For as a viper is
slain by his own young-ones, remaining as yet within him: so our cogitations,
that are nowrished within us, are our destruction, because they consume our
soul with viper-like poison.

Wherefore dear sister in Christ, I admonish you to keep your heart with all
diligence; for that it is the original or source of our good or evil actions.
Whereupon it is written: * With all guard keep thy heart, because life
p^ocedeth from it. (Prou. 4.) Listen likewise most honest virgin, I pray you,
what the bridegroom says in the Canticles, in co^mendatio^ of his spouse the
Church. * The hairs of thy head, are as the purple of a King, tied to conduite
pipes, The hairs of the head of the Church, are the cogitations of a sacred
soul, which are said to be like the purple of a King joined to the conduite
pipes. For purple is bound in bundles in conduite pipes, upon which when water
is cast, it runs through the conduites to the garment, which is above, that
the garment may be dyed; and from thence it receives its name, that being dyed
with a purple color, it is called purple: all which things do agree very well
to a sacred soul. For the hairs of the head are the cogitations of the mind,
which are bound in conduites, because they are bound up in the holy Scriptures,
least they should hang loose and so be lost.

Keep your heart therefore (venerable virgin) from all contagion of sin. Let
no unclean cogitation enter into your mind: let your mind be always pure and
clean. For God does not only examine the flesh, but the mind: God judges the
consciences of men. God is also the judge of our cogitations: God judges the
soul, that delights in evil things. When any evil cogitation does occur,
consent not unto it, neither permit it to harbor in your heart. At what
howersoeuer an evil cogitation does come, expel the same. As Soon as the
scorpion does appear, crush h^s head. Crush the head of the scorpion, that is,
of the evil cogitation. There amend your fault, where it is ingendered, to wit,
in our heart; expel the head of the evil cogitation from your heart. There
offend, where you think that God is not. For before God nothing is secret. He
sees the things that are secret, who has made the things that are hidden and
concealed. Our Lord is every where present. The spirit of God fills the whole
world. The majesty of almighty God penetrateth all the elements: there is no
place without God. Our Lord knows the cogitations of men.

Dear sister, do you desire never to be sad or heavy?

Yes, dear brother very willingly.

Then live virtuously. For if you live virtuously and well, you will never be
sorrowful. A mind that is secure, easily endures sorrow. A good mind is
always full of joy. For if you persevere in virtue, sorrow will be far from
you. If you persevere in sanctity, sorrow will not occur unto you. If you
live virtuously and well, you will fear neither deat not hell. Howbeit, the
conscience of a sinner is always troubled. A man that is faulty is never free
from vexation, for that his own guilty conscience is a continual torment unto
him. Venerable sister, hear what our Lord says of the woman to the serpent: *
She shall bru^se thy head in pieces (Genesis 3.) The head of the serpent is
bruised in pieces, when a fault is there amended, where it did first arise.
Almighty God cleanse your heart from all evil contagion, that you may be able
to serve him without spot of sin. Amen.

Of silence CHAPT. XXX:
THE Prophet I say says: * The service of justice is silence, and security
for ever. (Isai. 32.) And again King David craves in begging wise, saying: *
Set o Lord a watch to my mouth: and a door round about my lips. (Psalm. 140.)
The holy Fathers observing silence with great diligence, have endeavored to
remain in solitarines, and to see how swoeet our Lord is. And neglecting the
cares of all earthly actions, have wholly addicted themselves to contemplation.
Most dear sister, avoid dishonest speeches, shun vnciuel discourses. A vain
discourse does easily defile the mind, and that is easily committed, which is
willingly hea^d. Let nothing proceed out of your mouth at any time, which may
make you ashamed: speak nothing at any time, which is not convenient. Let
nothing proceed out of your lips, which may offend the ears of the hearer:
fly filthiness of speech wi^h all dil gence and care.

A vain discourse does demonstrate a vain conscience: the tongue does show
the conscience: a man's conscience is known by his tongue: for according to his
words without, such he is thought to be within: * For of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. (Mat. 12.) Wherefore refrain your tongue from idle
speeches, restrain your tongue from impertinent discourses. Relate not filthy
fables, neither babble forth foolish words.

Idle talk will not escape judgment. * For every idle word, that men shall
speak, they shall render an account for it at the day of judgment. (Mat. 12.)
Every man's words shall stand before him at the day of doom. Let those things
which you speak be grave, and tend to edification. Let your discourse be void
of blame. Let not your tongue destroy you. Let not your tongue contemn you.
Speak not that which may give an advantage to your adue^sarie: let silence be
sweet and pleasing unto you. Put a guard to your mouth: Put a seal upon your
lips. Put a cloister of silence to your tongue. Know at what time you are to
speak. Consider when you speak.

Speak at times convenient, and at times convenient hold your peace Keep
silence until you are asked: let some demand open your mouth, let your words
be few: be not over lavish in speaking. Many words are not free from blame:
many words are not void of sin. A tatling virgin shows her self foolish,
a wise virgin uses few words. Wisdom makes a short discourse: to speak
much is mere foolishnes. Use therefore a measure and mean in your speaking.
Venerable sister, he vouchsafe to put a guard to your mouth, who has chosen
you to be his spouse. Amen.

Of lying. CHAPT. XXXI.
Liars cause by their lying, that even when they tell the truth, no man does
believe them. All kind of lying ought to be avoided with great carefulnes:
albeit there is a certain sort of lying, which is less grievous; as for
example, when we lie for the spiritual good or salvation of others. But for
that it is written: * The mouth of him that lies, kills the soul, (Wisd.
1.) perfect men do with great care avoid this kind of lying: that they neither
defend the vices of any one by their fallacy, nor hurt their own soul, by
seeking to do good to an other man's body. Howbeit we believe, that this kind
of lying is easily forgiven.

Mo ^ dear sister, I admonish you to avoid all kind of lying with very great
carefulnes, neither speak that which is false, either by occasion, or of set
purpose: lie not voluntarily, although it might redound to the good of others.
Defend not an other man's life by lying: no lie can stand with justice or
upright dealing: every lie is in all men a sin: whatsoever is different from
the truth or verity, is iniquity. Worldly laws punish forgers and
falsifiers: worldly laws punish liers. If lying is condemned by men, if
falsehood be punished in earthly courts: how much more before God, who is
witness both of our words and works? Before whom likewise every one shall
render an account of every idle word, that he speaks, and be punished for
his idle discourses. * Thou (says King David to God) wilt destroy all that
speak lie (Psalm. 5) * And a false witness (says Solomon) shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks lies, shall not escape (Prou. 19.) wherefore
venerable sister shun lying, speak not that which is false. Speak the
truth, lie not upon any pretense. Deceive no body by lying, but show your
self sincere: say not one thing, and do an other. Dear sister, God grant
that in all things, and in every occasion you may speak the truth. Amen.

Of perjury. CHAPT. XXXII.
OUR Lord says in the Gospel * Swear not by heaven, because it is the throne
of God: neither by the earth, because it is the foote-stoole of his feet:
neither by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King: Neither shall
thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black.
But let your talk be, yea, yea: no, no: and that which is over and above
these, is of evil. (Mat. 5.) As that man cannot lie, that speaks not: so he
cannot forswear himself, that desires not to swear. Although a man use
never so great art of words in swearing, yet God (who is the witness of the
conscience) so accepts the same, as he understands it, to whom it is
sworn. We ought not to accomplish the sin, which we swear to perform.

Venerable sister, will you have me to tell you how you shall never be
forsworn? Swear not at any time: if you swear not at all, you shall never be
forsworn: if you fear to be forsworn, swear not at all. Forbear to swear,
accustom not your self to swearing. It is a dangerous thing to swear, for
that the use of swearing causes a custom of forswearing. The use of swearing
frequently, brings a man to perjury. Let your usual speech be: It is so: or,
It is not so. The truth needs no oath. A faith-full affirmation is as good as
swearing. Let your protestation of the truth be a credible as an oath. Most
loving sister, the holy Ghost (who in your virginal body has built himself a
mansion) place in your mouth the seal of moderation. Amen.

Of detraction. CHAP. XXXIII.
MY dear sister in Christ, hear what I say, liste^ what I counsel you, be
attentive to what I speak. Detraction is a grievous vice, detraction is a
grievous sin. Detraction is a grieuou^ claim, detraction is a grievous
crime. All men dislike, and disprayse a detractor; all men do as it were point
at such a one with their finger. Hearken how hateful such a one was to King
David: One secretly (says he) detracting from his neighbor: him did I
persecute. (Psalm. 100.) This is a very filthy vice, neither do I scarce know
any worse.

Detractors do bark like dogs. L^ke as dogs do bite the feet of
passengers: so detractors do backbite the life of their neighbors. And
therefore venerable sister, cut off from your tongue the vice of detraction: do
not backbite, blame, or (like a dog) snaile at the life of other men. Defile
not your mouth with an other man's sin, do not slander a sinner, but rather
pity him. What you backbite in others, fear rather in your self: what you
reprehe^d in others: amend in your self. With the same diligence that you
reprehend others, seek to correct your self: when you backbite an other,
examine your self. When you backbite an other, blame your own sins: if you
will needs reprehend what is amiss, let it be your own offenses. Look not
upon the sins of other men, but upon your own. Consider not other men's
vices, but your own manifold imperfections.

You will never backbite others, if you seriously consider your self.
Wherefore be careful about your own reformation: be sollicitous about your
own correction and salvation. Hearken not to detractors: listen not to
whisperers. Detractors, and such as willingly hear them, are both guilty of
the same sin. He that detracteth, and he that listneth to a detractour, are
both culpable in the same degree and measure. Foul mouthed men shall not
possess the kingdom of heaven. A virgin that desires to attain to the
celestial bedchamber of her heavenly bridegroom, must beware of backbiting
other men. O Venerable Virgin, it you stop your ears from detractors, and
refrain your tongue (as I have said) from all bad discourse, you will doubtless
be reckoned among the wise virgins.

Of Envy. CHAPT. XXXIV.
AN envious man is a member of the devil, through whose enu e death has entered
into the world. Envy burns all the buddes of ver^ue. Envy by it^
pestiferous h^ate, consume^^ whatsoever is good. Envy is then oath of the
soul. ^^u^e hurts it self, before it hurts an other. Envy biteth it
self, before it bi^eth an other. Envy first of all gnaweth it^ own au^hor.
Envy eats the understanding of (...), bu^neth his breast, mangleth hi mind,
and a^ a certain plague or pestilence consumes his heart, and other v^tal
^^^^es. And therefore against envy does occur goodness: charity is prepared
to encounter this pestiferous vice. My most loving sister in Christ, grieve not
at the good of an other, pine not away at an others progress, be not afflicted
at an others happiness. There is no virtue, which has not the vice of envy for
its contrary. Only misery wants envy. And why? Because no man does envy
at him, that is in misery. A virgin, that desires to dwell in heaven, ought
not to envy at men. A virgin, which desires to enter with Christ to the
celestial marriage, ought not to be contristated at the prosperity of others.
Most dear sister, almighty God cleanse your heart from all envy and malice,
that you may be able to serve him without bleamish. Amen.

Of anger. CHAPT. XXXV
HOnest virgin, hear what Solomon does say: * A soft answer breaks anger;
and a ^ard word raises up fury. * (Prou, 15.) A sweet word multiplieth
friends, and appeaseth enemies. (Eccli. 6.) By so much every one is co^uinced
to be less prudent, by how much he is less patient. By anger the eye of the
mind (that is, the understanding) is troubled: by anger wise men loose their
wisdom; by anger a man becomes senseless and void of reason.

Some are soon agrie. and soon appeased: some contrariwise are slowly angry,
and slowly reconciled. Howbeit others (which is worse) are soon incited to
anger, and slowly inclined to peace. Nevertheless he is better, that is so one
angry and soon appeased, then he that is slowly angry, and slowly
reconciled. Most dear sister, hear likewise S. James saying: * Let every man
be swift to hear, ^ut slow to speak, and slow to anger (Ia. 1.) Why? for that
the anger of man works not the justice of God: and so consequently without
all doubt neither can the anger of a virgin work the justice of God.

A virgin, which ought to be the temple of God, mu^^ not by any means be
choleric. It beseems not Christ's spouse to be angry and furious. A virgin
which prepares a habitatio^ in her heart for Christ, must by all means expel
anger out of he^ brea^^. A virgin, which desiret^ to arrive with Christ to the
celestial bed chamber, must by all means possible avoid anger. Most loving
sister, if you chance to be angry, repress it with all celeritie: if you
chance to be angry on a sudden, mitigate the same. Temper your fury, temper
your indignation. Restrain the motion of your anger: refrain the vehement
passion of your choler. If you cannot avoid or temper your anger as is fitting:
at least let not fury carry you, nor anger inflame you, nor indignation
tra^sport you beyond the bounds of reason. Let not the sun go down upon
your anger. Amen.

Of hatred. CHAPT. XXXVI.
HONEST virgin, hear what I say* Hatred separateth a man from the Kingdom of
God. Hatred withldraweth a man from heaven. Hatred is neither abolished by
passion* nor purged by martyrdom: nor washed away by effusion of blood. *
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer (1. Io. 3.) He that hates his
brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness, and knows not whither
he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes. (1. Io. 2.) He loves not
God, that hates man: there is as great difference between anger and hatred,
as between a mote and a beam. For hatred is an inueterate anger. By anger the
eye of the mind is troubled, by hatred the eye of the heart is clean put out
and extinguished.

Most loving sister in Christ, listen to what I speak. If you chance to
contristat your sister in any thing, make her satisfaction. If you offend
against your sister, do penance before her. If you scandalize any one of the
hand-maides of God almighty, beseech her to forgive you. Strive to be
reconciled with all exp^ditio^: sleep not, until you have made satisfaction:
rest not, until you are returned into peace and union. If your enemy fall,
rejoice not at his misery, least paraduenture the like misfortune happen to
you: least God turn his anger from him upon you. Delight to be grieved over
him, that is afflicted. Condole other m^ns miseries: be sorrowful for other
men's calamities. Lament with those that make ^^m^ntation: weep with t^ose that
mourn.

Venerable sister, be not obdurate, be not hard hearted. Proceed not against
him or her that has offended you according to the ^ault ^ommitted, for that
you likewise must short^y vnde^goe the severe judgment of God. * Forgiu^, and
you shall be forgiven: (Luc. 6.) for you shall not obtain remission, unless you
grant pardon. Expel hatred out of your heart. Let not hatred remain in your
mind. Venerable sister, God give you the love of himself, and of your
neighbor. ^^en.

Of pride. CHAPT. XXXVII.
* PRide is the beginning of all sin. (Eccle. 10.) A proud man is hateful
both to God and men. Pride and covetousness are so linked together, as that the
one cannot be without the other. The devil by pride and covetousness said: * I
will ascend above the height of the clouds. (Esai. 14.) Christ by humility
said: * My soul is humbled in the dust. (Psalm. 43.) The devil by pride and
covetousness said: * I will be like to the highest. (Esai. 14.) Christ by
humility was made obedient unto his Father unto death. (Phillip. 2.) Lastly
the devil by pride is cast headlong into hell: but Christ by humility is
elevated into heaven. What is every sin, but a contempt of God, whereby we
contemn his precepts?

Most dear sister, believe me, the watchings prayers, fastings, almesdeedes,
and labors of many years, are esteemed nothing worth before God, if their end
be pride. Wherefore venerable sister, take heed of pride, beware of being high
minded. Why? Because pride has deposed the Angels, depressed the potent,
thrown down the proud. * God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. (Iam. 4.) I likewise counsel you, o spouse of Christ, that you more
rejoice at the society of the holy Angels, and hand-maides of God, then at
the nobility of your kidred. I beseech you, most loving sister, that you more
rejoice at the company of your poor fellow-virgins, then at the gentry of
your rich parents. Why? Be cause there is no acception of persons with God. He
that despises him that is in need, does an injury to God. He that contemns
the poor, does vpbraid his Creator. Venerable sister, God almighty give you
profound humility and true charity. Amen.

Of boasting. CHAP XXXVIII.
WE ought to beware of boasting, both in our words and actions. Wherefore
dear sister, look carefully to your self, and arrogate noth^ng to your self
of those things that are in you saving your sins only. Beware of boasting,
fly the desire of vain glory, seek not to be great in the mouths of men.
Ascribe nothing to your self, vaunt not of your self, presume nothing of your
self? do not proudly extol your self, attribute nothing to your self; boast
not of your good works, be not puffed up with humane praise. Contemn the
praises of men, never seek to know whether any do praise or discommend you.
Let not praise deceive you, nor dispraise dismay you.

He that affects not praise, feels not reproach. Those virgins that vaunt
of th it merits before men, have not oil in their vessels: for that through
the desire of vain glory, they deprive themselves of that reward, which they
did merit from our Lord. Those that love vain glory, let them always behold
their own baseness, and lament to have lost that good work, which they have
done for humane praise. Whereupon our Lord says in the Gospel: * I say to you,
they have received their reward. (Mat. 6.) Saints by vain glory are made
subject to the devils, as we see in King Ezechias, who, for that he
va^negloriously manifested his riches to the Chaldeans, heard presently by the
Prophet, that he should loose them. (4. King 20.) The Pharise likewise, who
came to the temple to pray, lost the merits of his good works, by reason of
his vaunthing and vain glory (Luc. 18.) Like as an Eagle descends from
aloft, allured thereunto through the greedines of her pray: so a man descends
from the height of virtue to vice, through the desire of vain glory.

My dear sister in Christ, place not your conscience in an other man's tongue.
Yea, albeit an other man's tongue praise you, and not your own: albeit an other
man's mouth commend you, and not your own: yet censure your self according to
your own examination, not according to the opinion of other men. No man can
better know what you are then your self, who are witness to your self.

A Question. Venerable sister, will you that I tell you, how you may increase
in all sort of virtue?

The answer. Yes, dear brother, very willingly, and I entreat you to tell me.

Hearken therefore venerable sister. If you will augment all your virtues, and
not loose them: hide your virtues for fear of pride and elation, hide your
good works for fear of arrogancy and boasting. Seek not to have your good
works seen. Conceal your virtues, disclose your sins, reveal your
imperfection. Keep close your good works. If you have said or done any thing
that is good, never blase it abroad. As for your evil cogitations disclose
them with speed. For a sin that is disclosed is soon cured: but a crime that
is kept secret, is increased if it lie hid, of little it becomes great.
Sin, by discovering it, does decrease; and increases, if it be kept close.
Contrariwise virtues do increase in secret, decrease in public. Virtues are
annihilated by vain gloriously revealing them, they are multiplied by humbly
hiding them.

Wherefore honest sister, let God at all times be the end of your intentions
and actions. In all your works rely upon his assistance. Ascribe all things
to his divine grace and goodness. Attribute nothing to your own merits. Presume
nothing of your own virtue and forces. Place not your confidence in your own
boldness. Most dear sister, listen to the Apostle, saying: * He that does
glory, let him glory in our Lord. (1. Cor. 1.) And therefore venerable
Virgin, let your glory and commendation be always in Christ Jesus your
bridegroom. Amen.

Of humility. CHAPT. XXXIX.
MOst dear sister, hear what our Lord Jesus Christ your bridegroom says in
the Gospel: to wit. * Learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart.
(Mat. 11.) Venerable sister, * humble your self under the mighty hand of God,
that he may exalt you in the time of visitation. (1. Pet. 5.) The conscience of
a virgin ought always to be humble and sad: to the end, that by humility she
may not grow proud, and by profitable sadness her heart may not become
lascivious and lewd. Humility is a virgins cheifest virtue and praise: for
pride is her greatest reproach and disgrace. A humble virgin, albeit she be
poor in habit, is nevertheless glorious through virtue in the sight of God.
But a proud virgin, although to humane eyes she seem beautiful, fair, and
neat, yet in Gods sight she is base, foul, and a reprobate. Why? Because the
soul of a just man is the seat of God almighty. As our Lord himself says:
* To whom shall I have respect, but to the poor little one, and the contrite
of spirit, and him that trembles at my words?

My beloved sister in Christ, be humble: grounded in humility, be the last and
least of all. Most dear sister, prefer your self before none: esteem your
self better then none. Yea esteem all others to be better then your self. *
The greater you are, humble your self in all things, and you shall find grace
before God. (Eccli. 3.) If you retain humility, you shall obtain glory. For
by how much ^he more humble you shall be, by so much the more great will be
your height of glory. Descend, that you may ascend: be humbled, that you may
be exalted: least being exalted you be humbled. Because * every one, that
exalts himself, shall be humbled: and he that humbles himself, shall be
axalted. For he that is extolled, shall be humbled. The higher the place is, by
so much the fall is more greiuous: the higher we clime up; the greater is our
fall, if our foot slip. Humility knows not what falling ^s, humility never
suffered any such mischance: humilities foot did never slip, humility never
took any hurt

Remember o spouse of Christ, in what humble manner God came into the world.
Remember how in the form of a servant he humbled himself so far forth, as
that he became obedient even unto death. Amiable sister, walk as he has
walked. Follow his example, imitate his foote-steps. Become base, contemptible,
abject, and displeasing to your self. For he that is base in his own sight is
great before God: he that is displeasing to himself, does please God. Most
dear sister, be little in your own eyes, that you may be great in the eyes of
God. By so much the more beautiful you shall be in Gods sight, by how much the
more base you shall be in your own conceit. Venerable sister, if you re^aine
profound humility, you shall rejoice with the wise virgins in the heavenly
city. Amen.

Of patience. CHAPT. XL.
Our Lord says in the Gospel: * Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall
be called the children of God. (Mat. 5.) If t^erefore dear sister, such as are
peacemakers are blessed, and shallb^ called the children of God, then witho^t
all doubt patience is very necessary and expedient. * Patience has a perfect
wo^ke. (Iac. 1.) A patient virgin is wise: an impatient virgin is not wise, but
foolish.

Venerable sister, you may be a martyr without being slain, if you truly
conserve patience in your mind. He that is not peaceable, shall not merit the
company of the Angels: he that is angry and envious, shall be partaker with
the devils. He that is not patient, drives away concord: he that ^s not
patient, stirs up discord. A virgin that is meek and mild, is nothing
moved, although she be wronged. A virg^n that is peaceable and quiet,
prepares a mansion for Christ in her heart. Why? Because Christ is peace, *
and in peace is the place of his repose. (Psalm. 75.) The son of peace ought
to love peace.

Prepare your self rather to suffer, then to offer wrong. Learn rather to
en^ure, then to do evil. Be patient and meek, mild, modest, and swee^. Love
peace, like peace, live in peace with all men. Embrace all men with the arms
of charity and mansuetude: prove by your comportment, that you love more then
you are beloved: show, I say, by the sweet affection of your heart, that you
are more affectionate, then affectioned. Be not fickle in your friendship. Be
constant and firm toward your friend. Have always patience of mind. Be kind
and courteous in your carriage, affable in your words. Behave your self
pleasant toward all men. Avoid all occasion of dissension. Show your self an
enemy of discord and variance, and live always in peace.

Most dear sister, if it be possible have peace with all men. By your patience
vanquish the reproaches of detractors. Break the darts of their contumelious
speeches upon the shield of your patience. Against the sword of their
opprobrious speeches, oppose the shield of a good conscience. You shall show
your virtue to be great, if you do not hurt him, by whom you are hurt. You
shall show the greatness of your fortitude, if you pardon, although you be
wronged. Your name and fame will be diuulged, if you spare him, on whom you
might be revenged. Venerable sister, the peace of God, which surpasses all
understanding, keep your heart, and soul, Amen.

Of concord. CHAPT. XLI.
* Six things there are, which our Lord hates, and the seventh his soul
detesteth, to wit him that sows discordes among brethren. (Prou. 6.) That man
is accursed that sows dissension among the servants of God. He that breaks
peace and concord, does against God. He does Christ an injury, who among his
servants sows enmity. Why? Because Christ is our peace, who has made both
one; to wit, Angels and men to be at concord and union. The concord of the
wicked, is the contrariety of the good. As we wish, that the good may have
peace: so we ought to wish, that the concord of the wicked may perish. Concord
to commit sin, is ill: but concord to do good, to follow justice, to serve
God, is good and commendable. We are gathered together into one place for this
end, that in the service of God we may all have one spirit and mind. All that
dwell in the house of God, ought to have one soul, and one heart.

It nothing helps to dwell together in one house, if diversity of wills
separate us God loves unity of mind, more then unity of place: behold we are
in this house many men, diverse manners, diverse hearts, diverse souls. One
life, one intention, one love toward our Creator, ought to unite all these
together. We ought therefore in this to be of one mind and one will, that we
may serve God: and that we may love God with our whole heart, and our whole
soul, and our neighbor as our selves. The virtue therefore of concord, is
necessary and expedient. But if I will do mine own will, and this man his,
and that man his, there will follow divisions: chiding, chaffings, and
scoldings must neede^ arise, which are the works of the flesh: and, as the
Apostle has avouched: * They, which do such things, shall not obtain the
kingdom of God. (Gal. 5.)

Most dear sister, believe me; our fasting^, our praye^s, our very
sacrific^s, are not so pleasing to God, as peace and concord. And for this
cause our Savior says in the Gospel: * Go fi^^^ to be reconciled to thy
brother; and then coming thou shall offer thy gift. (Mat. 5.) Venerable
sister, great is the virtue of concord in the sight of God: without which our
sacrifices are not acceptable to him, by which our sins are abolished. We
must know, that when we came to religion, we undertook to wrestle with the
devil.

A question. Dear brother, tell me, if there be any thing, which the devil
dreadeth?

The answer. Amiable sister, there is noth^g which the devil fears so much,
as concord and charity. For if we give away all that we have for the love of
God: the devil fears not this, beca^se he ha^h noth ng. If we ^ast, the devil
fears not this, because he never eats. If we watch, the devil fears not
this, because he never sleeps. But if we observe charity and concord; o this
is that, which makes the devil afraid. Why, what is the reason? Because we
observe that on earth, which he would not observe in heaven. For this respect
likewise, our holy mother the Church is said to be terrible, as the army of a
camp set in array: because like as the enemies are afraid, when they see an
army come marching toward them in battle array: so the devil is afraid, when
he beholds spiritual men armed with the harness of virtues, to live together
in concord and unity. He grieueth exceedingly as one vanquished and put to
shame, when he sees that he cannot divide and penetrate their squadrons by
discord and dissension.

Wherefore we ought to live all in the house of God as men of one heart and
will, that by this means we may overcome the devil. The hand-maide of God,
that desires to live in peace and concord, must first of all leave the bad
custome^, which she had learned in the world, least she be perverse and
inordinate: lea t she live irreligiously in the cloister, and so trouble or
scandalize the rest of Chri^ts hand-maides by her bad behavior. She ought
likewise to measure her actions, her motions, her speeches, and her whole life:
that she may be able religiously to agree with those, with whom she lives.
Wherefore I admonish you dear si^ter, that you live charitably and humbly with
all the hand-maides of God, in the monastery.

Venerable si^ter, inuit such as hate you to peace and amity: reca^l such as
are contentious to concord and charity. Let there be no speech of chiding or
discontent, which may hinder concord and agreement. O spouse of Christ, let
that charity, which has separated you from the world, conioyne and unite you
to God. Amen.

Of sufferance or forbearance. CHAPT. XLII.
MOst dear sister, learn modesty of Christ, learn long sufferance or
forbearance. Seriously consider his example, and so no in^uries will make you
sorrowful. For he suffering for us, has left us an example of patience.
Because being ^^riken with the palms of men^ hands, scourged with whippes,
besmeared with spittle, fastened with nails, crowned wit thorns, condemned to
the death of the cross, he always held his peace. For when any one does
reproach you, it happens unto you for your sins: when you are wronged, your
sins are the cause: what adversity soever does happen unto you, it happens
for your offenses. You will endure adversity with greater patience, if you
consider the cause.

When therefore you are reviled or wronged, betake your self to prayer: when
any one does curse you, bless him, and speak him fair: bless him I say,
that curses you. For curses add blessings: assuage him that is angry with
patience, dissolve his fury with fair words, vanquish his wickedness by your
meeknes, his malice by your goodness. By your goodness conquerre the malice of
others. By your stillnes dissipate their stubbernnes.

Venerable sister, prepare your heart for prosperity and adversity, and
endure the one and the other, as they shall happen unto you. Be ready for all
events whether good or bad, that whatsoever does happen or occur unto you,
you may sustain it with a quiet mind. Let pass opprobrious speeches, making
no more account of them, then if they were spoken to others. Take no notice of
the errors of detractors.

Honest virgin, although every one provoke you, although every one molest
you, although every one vex you, although every one insult over you,
although every one rail at you, although every one find fault with you,
although every one scold and chide you, although every one reproach you,
although every one wrong you, although every one mock and scoff at you; yet
do you say nothing, yet do you hold your peace, yet do you make as if you heard
them not, yet do you let all pass, yet do not you reply, yet do you keep
silence, yet do not you answer any thing that is amiss, yet do not you give
bad speeches, yet do not you retort reproaches, or reply any thing which may
turn to the others disgrace. Do you observe the peace of silence, for by so
doing you will the sooner vanqu^sh.

O spouse of Christ, strive and wrestle against temporal troubles. Be constant
in all occurrences, endure all things with patience: one of necessity must
suffer that patiently, which does happen to many. Both he that does afflict,
and he that is afflicted, is mortal. Both he that does injury, and he that
suffers injury, shall die. Amiable sister, believe me, no man could oppose
himself against you, vnleee God had given him leave so to do. The devil could
have no power to molest you in the lest thing, unless God did permit him.* By
many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. (Act. 14.) * The
passions of this time are not condign to the glory to come, which shall be
revealed in us. (Romans 8.)

Most dear sister, it is impossible that you be a woman, and not taste of woe
and affliction. We sustain all things in this world by the like event. There
is no man remaining in th^s li e, which does not some times sigh and lament.
This life is full of tears. This life begins with weeping. An infant, when
he is borne, begins his life with lamentation. An infant when he comes
forth of his mothers womb, does fir begin to mourn, before he begin to
laugh. We are cast weeping into thi^ miserable life. Tribulation is profitable,
the affliction^ of this life are profitable. By how much the more we are
wearied and weakened in this world: by so much the more we shall be comforted
and strengthened in the next. The more we are afflicted during this present
time, the more we shall rejoice in the world to come. If we are here perplexed
with diversities of affliction, we shall be found purged at the day of doom.
Amen.

Of sickness. CHAPT. XLIII.
Our Lord speaking of his servants, says i^ the Apoca^yps: * I, whom I l^ue,
do ^ebuke and cha^^ise. (Apoc. 3. Go ^hast^s^^h men three manner of ways ^n
the life. That ^^ to say: he strike^h ^he r proba e ^o ^amnation. He corrects
the e^ect, which he sees to do amiss, for their amendment and purgation. He
chastises the just for the increase of their glory and crown. God struck
the Egyptians with plagues to their damnation: (Evod. 7.) he afflicted poor
Lazarus for his purgation: (Luc. 6.) he likewise punished Job for his
approbation: (Job 1.) he also scourges a man before sin, least he become
bad, as S. Paul for example, who by the in^^igation of the Angel of satan was
troubled with carnal temptations. (2. Cor. 12.) Man likewise is purged by God
after sin, that he may be amended; as that man, which was delivered to satan
for the destruction of the flesh, tha^ his spirit might be saved in the day of
our Lord Jesus Christ. (1. Cor. 5.)

They that are strong and soun^, it is good for them to be sick now and then,
least finding themselves bea^tly and strong, they take greater delight in
tra^sitorie and earthly things, then is fitting. That health of body is ill
which leads a man to sickness of soul. And that sickness of body is very
good and commendable, which conducteth a man to health of soul. The Apostle
praises sickness of body, saying: * When I am weak, then I am strong, to wit,
in spirit. (2. Cor. 12.)

A man must not murmr in time of affliction, for in that he is cha tised, he
is amended from sin. We shall endure corporal sickness with greater patience,
if we call the evils, which we have committed, to remembrance. A man likewise
mu^^ not murmur in time of sickness. Why? Because he is iu^ged by him, whose
iu^gements are always just. He that is sick, and murmureth against God,
complains against the justice of his judge, and by this means provoke God^
anger against himself. It cannot but be just that pleases a just judge.* For
whom our Lord loves he chastises and he scourges every child, that he
receives* and as a father in the son, pleases himself. (Prou. 3.) In this
life God spares sinners, and punishes the just: In the next life God, spares
the just, and punishes sinners: he that in this life does not deserve to be
scourged, shall in the next be eternally tormented.

Most dear sister, grief and sorrow are common to all men: there is no man in
this world, which is not sorrowful now and then* God always afflicts those,
whom he has preor^ained to everlasting happiness. Venerable sister, be not sad
in time of sickness. In your sicknesses give God thanks. Wis^ rather to be well
in mind, then in body. Desire rather to be sound in affection, then in flesh.

Corporal maladies are spiritual remedies. Sickness hurts the body, heals
the mind* For sickness purges vices and enfeebleth the forces of lascivious
wantonness. Know that by sorrow and affl^ction you are proved, not empaired: The
gold is tried in the furnace, that it may be free from dross: you are tried in
the furnace of affliction, and refined in the fire of persecu^ion, that you may
become pu^e from vice. You are as it were mel e^, that you may be purified from
the scumme of sin: all these things, which you suffer, are for your
probation. Wherefore my beloved sister in Christ, do nor murmr in your
sicknesses: do not blaspheme, nor say: Why do I sustain ^hese evils? Do not
say why am I afflicted? why do I endure these miseries.

Dear brother, I pray you, tell me, what I ought to say in my sickness,, or
how I ought to accuse my self.

Honest si^^er, accuse your self after this manner: I have sinned, neither
have I received, as I have deserved. The punishment which I sustain, is not
equal to my sin. My misery is not answerable to my demerit. My crosses are
not correspondent to my bad carriage. The measure of my pains are unequal to
the merit of my sins. My punishment is far short of what I have deserved. O
spouse of Christ, do you desire to be purged from your sins? Accuse your
self, and extol Gods justice in your pains. It is sufficient for your
purgation, if you refer these things which you suffer, to Gods justice, if
you humbly give God thanks in time of your sickness. For God corrects you with
the rod of his fatherly chastisement, he fatherly chastises you for your
amendment. And he that did cast you away by sparing you, does call unto you to
return by punishing you.

Venerable Virgin, consider all the torments, pains, tribulations, and
vexations of the world, that possibly can be imagined by the heart of man:
compare these to hell, and they will seem nothing. Amiable sister, if you
fear, fear the pains of hell. For these pains of the world are temporal,
those eternal: these by death have an end, and last no longer; those by death
beg^n, and endure for ever. If therefore, you will be converted and return to
God, these your suff^rings will turn to your good. He that i^ pun ^hed after
his conversion, is thereby purged from sin. For he that is here corrected
being chastised, shall be freed in the next world but they that amend not even
when they are corrected, are temporally puni head, and shall be eternally d^n^d.
They are both judged first in this world, and shall be in the next afterward.
To these is due a two fold pain and damnation; to these does appertain a
double percussion: because they have both here the sentence of torments, and
there the supply of punishments. The hand of God therefore has delivered you
to be punished; the indignation of God has commanded, that you be afflicted,
he has ordained in is anger, that you have a taste of all adversities
whatsoever.

Reverend sister, whenever you feel your self wearied with sicknesses,
wa^t^^ with disease, afflicted wit^ infi^m^^^es, troubled with passion^ of the
soul^, tormented with grief of mind, tosse^ to and fro wi^h son ^i^e
temptations: w^en^oeuer I say you feel these things, know that it is Gods
justice that does (...) in respect of your sins. Your own weapons fight
against you. You are hurt with your own arrows; you are wounded with your
own darts For by those things, by which you have sinned, you are tormented.
For that you have followed the flesh, you are afflicted in the flesh. In that
you groan, and are grieved, in which you have sinned.

Amiable sister, you are punished in the same flesh, in which you have done
amiss. You are censured to be punished in the same, in which was the cause of
sin. O spouse of Christ, you are justly blamed, justly scourged, justly
judged and condemned. The storm of tribulation does justly ouerwhelme you, the
punishment of justice does justly oppress you.

Of avarice. CHAP. XLIV.
OUR Lord says in the Gospel: * See* and beware of all aua^i^e: for not in
any ma^s abou^da^ce does his life consist, of those things, which he possesses
(Lu. 12) And the Apostle S. Paul: * Fornication and all uncleanness, or avarice,
Let it not so much as be named among you, as it beco^me^h S. (Ephesians. 5.) And
again. * For understanding know you this, that no fornicator, or unclean or
covetous person (which is the service of idols) has inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of Go^. (ibidem) W erevpon. Solomon says. * He that
pursues avarice disturbeth his house. (Prou 15.) A covetous man shall not be
filled with money: and he that loves riches, shall not take fruit of them.
(Eccles. 5.

There is nothing worse then to love money: For such a man, is ready to sell
hi^ soul. Like as avarice casts a man down into t e pit of perdition: so
giving of alms lifts him up to heaven. A covetous man is like to hell: for
as hell is never satisfied with souls: so a covetous man is never satisfied
with riches. Even as he that is sick of a dropsy, the more he drinks, the
more he thirsts: so a covetous man the more he gets, the more he desires.
Avarice, and inordinate affection or desire are sisters* and pride is their
mother. Pride was never without inordinate affection nor inordinate affection
without avarice.

Venerable sister * Let not your hand be stretched out to receive, and closed
to give. (Eccli. 4.) Let it more delight you to give then to receive. * It is a
more blessed thing to give, rather then to take. (Act. 20.) Most dear sister,
let not avarice take root in your heart: let not avarice abide in your breast.
Expel from you the love of riches. If for the love of Christ you shall
perfectly contemn all things transitory: you shall with the same Jesus Christ
your bridegroom rejoice everlastingly in his heavenly country. Amen.

Of inordinate affection or desire. CHAPT. XLV.
Covetousness is the root of all evils (1. Tim. 6.) No man can perfectly
undertake spiritual warre-fare unless he first vanquish the pleasures of the
flesh: that mind cannot be free to contemplate God, which inordinately
affects the earthly and transitory things of this world: the eye of the mind
cannot contemplate the high things of heaven, if the dust of earthly desires
shut the same. Covetousness is a grievous sin, it is the material cause of all
crimes. It is no marvel if those men after death are adjudged to hell fire;
who whiles they lived, did not extinguish the flame of their inordinate
affection and desire.

Most dear sister, although you have no money, yet if you have a desire of
having, your external poverty profits nothing: corporal nakedness will do
you no good, if you have a desire to be well clothed. Judas through covetousness
sold Christ. (Mat. 26.) We are borne naked into this world, and must depart
naked out of this world. (Job 1.) Why then do we desire earthly and transitory
things? If therefore we believe, that the riches of this world are so fleeting,
why do we so exceedingly affect them? If we love the earthly and transitory
things of this world more the^ is fitting, we doubtless do offend by so doing.

Wherefore dear sister consider your estate, and know that those few things,
which you have already are sufficient. If therefore covetousness be the root
of all evils, as I have before said: it is expedient that you expel it from
your heart. and to the end greater inconveniences may not ensue, let not the
perverse desire of this vice dwell in you. Venerable sister almighty God give
you grace to despise for his sake the prosperity of this present life, and to
fear no adversity thereof. Amen.

Of poverty. CHAP. XLVI.
* BLessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. (Mat.
5.) Many are poor, whom this their poverty makes not blessed, but
wretched; for that they endure it not for the love of God, but by constraint.
There are also other poor, whom poverty makes not wretc^ed but blessed; who
endure the same ^or the love of God: and of these it is said: Blessed are the
poor in spirit.

Most dear sister, to you I return the subject of my discourse. You have
heard of the tribulation and patience of Job, and therefore I admonish you,
that you be neither dismayed in time of adversity, nor grow proud in time of
pro^peritie. You read, that the Patria^ches were rich in wealth, but humble in
mind, as Abraham for example, who said: I will speak to my Lord, whereas I am
dust and ashes. (Genesis 18.)

You therefore, venerable si^^er, shall be happy, if you always g^ue God
thanks in prosperity and adversity, and esteem the felicity of th^s
present life as smoke, or as a vapor, that suddenly passes away. For the
Apostle S. Paul says. * If in this life only we be hoping in Christ, we are
more miserable, then all men. (1. Cor. 15.) For Christ, least we should love
gold, has taught us in his life to contemn such gifts and commodities as are
offered least we should fear hunger, he has fasted for forty days
together, least ye should fear nakedness and cold, he has commanded his
disciples to have but one coat: least we should fear tribulation, he for our
sakes has willingly endured the same: and least death should seem dread full
unto us he has voluntarily sustained death for us. * All that is in the world,
is the concupiscence of the flesh, and the concup^scence of the eyes, and the
pride of life: which is not of the father, but is of the world. And the world
passes, and the concupiscence thereof. (1. Io. 2.)

Wherefore dear sister, let us not love those things, which are in the world,
least we perish with the world. David was a King, and albeit he did abound with
silver and gold, and ruled with a strong hand (according to the interpretation
of his name) over many people, yet he thought humbly of himself, and said, * I
am poor, and in labors from my youth. (Psalm. 67. And again: I am needy, and
poor. (Psalm. 69) And in an other place: * I am a stranger with thee and a
pilgrim, as all my fathers. (Psalm. 38.)

Venerable sister, let not transitory allurements or contentmens delight your
mind: let neither temporal commodities make you merry, nor earthly losses and
crosses make you mourn. For so it is written: If riches abound, set not your
heart upon them. Those things which ye possess with love, we loose with
grief. Listen o spouse of Christ, what I say: He to whom all things in heaven
and ear^h do offer their seru ce, became poor for v^. Why, what was the cause?
That by his poverty he might m^ke (...) rich.

You therefo^^ hon^st virgin, walk in the way, in which Christ Jesus your
brid^^roome ha^h gone before you: (...) your heavenly captain with unwearied
steps. Doublesse if you shall overtake him, you shall reign with him.

Venerable sister, behold the virginity and poverty of the blessed virgin
Marie: who wa so rich in our Lord and Savior, that she deserved to be his
mother: a d yet withal was so destitute of all worldly wealth, that she had
neither midwife nor handmaid to assist and attend upon her at his birth: she
was likewise so needy and poor, that for want of better lodging; in ^eed of a
bed, she laid her child in a manger. (Luc. 2. Moreover S. Joseph, to whom
she was espoused, was also very poor: in so much that he got hi living by
playing the carpenter. In like sort we read of the holy Apostles, that they
served God in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, ^n cold and nakedness. 2.
Cor. 11.) O spouse of Christ, you have examples, by which you may contemn
earthly riches, and covet heavenly happiness. * For they that will be made rich
in this world, fall into temp^ation, and the snare of the devil, and many
desires unprofitable and hurtful, which drown men into de^^ruction and
perdition. (1. Tim. 6. They easily contemn earthly riches, who perfectly hope
for h^au^nly: because voluntary poverty leads a man to eternal felicit^e.

We came not to religion, that we might pass over our time therein in
pleasures; but that by watching, praying, fasting, singing, and fighting
against our spiritual aduetsaries, we might by Christ's assistance attain to
that kingdom, which is promised us. For for ^his cause we come naked into this
world, and are presented naked to baptism, that being naked and without
impediment we might arrive to heaven. What an absurd and unseemly thing is it,
and contrary to reason, that he that was borne naked, and came into the world
having just nothing, should desire to enter rich into heaven? * It is easier
for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven. (Mat. 19.) It is better to want, then to
superabound. He is over covetous, to whom God does not suffice. Dear si^^er,
if for the love of Christ we shall willingly in this world endure hunger and
thirst and nakedness, and other corporal affliction; we shall rejoice with the
same our Lord Jesus Christ in his heavenly kingdom. Amen.

Of murmuring. CHAPT. XLVII.
THe lodging of our heart is sanctified by the grace of God, and by the
inhabitation of his holy spirit, when there is charity, peace, goodness,
hum^litie, concord, gentlene, and other such virtues abiding in us. These are
our riches, to wit, good manner and virtue s. But if we begin to brawle,
murmr, and contend among our selves, we are presently deprived of all these
spiritual graces. Why? Because virtues cannot remain with vices. * For a
little leaven corrupts the whole paste. (1. Cor. 5.) Every servant of God
ought seriously to consider, how great an evil he does incur. I^ for temporal
things he murmr: for by this means he that ought to be rich becomes poor.

What are our riches? certainly virtues. We therefore loose our virtues, if we
murmr for meat or drink, or such like corporal commodities. Murmuring is a
grievous sin: whereupon S. Gregory says: No man that murmure^h receives
the kingdom of heaven: no man can murmr, that receives the same. The heart
of a fool is as the wheel of a carte carriyng hay, murmuring and making a
scrik^ng noise as it goes on the way. Many religious men and women behave
themselves after the same manner: who are subject to many carnal desires, and
never cease to murmr.

Wherefore venerable sister, it is requisite, that we follow the counsel of S.
Paul, saying: * Neither do you murmr as certain of them murmured to wit, in
the wilderness and perished by the destroyer. (1. Cor. 10.) It is a dangerous
thing therefore for us to murmr, least perhaps we perish by the destroyer in
the monastery, as they perished in the wilderness. Let us therefore keep our
tongues from murmuring, least (which God forbid) as they perished in this
world, we perish in the world to come. Let us not mu^mure, least as they
perished in this life, we perish in the next. Let us beware of all murmuring,
least peradventure we suffer that in our souls, which they suffered in their
bodies. Again the Apostle does counsel v^, saying: * Neither let us tempt
Christ, as certain of them tempted, and perished by serpents. (ibidem. He
tempts Christ, who murmureth for meat, or drink, or apparaile, as it is
written of the same people: * And they tempted God in their hearts: so that
they asked meats for their lives. (Psalm. 77. And again: * And they murmured
in their tabernacles: they heard not the voice of our Lord. (Psalm. 105.)

He tempts Christ, who in the monastery murmureth by asking more then he
does need. He does against Christ, who in the monastery demands more then
is requisite. He sins against Christ, who in the monastery does scandalize
his superiors, by importunatly urging them for earthly and transitory things.
And have perished by serpents. Why have they perished by serpents, unless for
that a serpent is full of poison; and every one that murmureth, has the
poison of the devil an his tongue? This the Apostle S. James does avouch,
saying: * The tongue is an unquiet evil, full of deadly poyso^. (Iam. 3.
Whherefore we ought very carefully to avoid murmuring, least we perish through
such a deadly and devilish poison.

My beloved sister in Christ, hear what our Lord says in his holy Gospel: * I
say to you, be not careful for your life, what you shall eat, neither for
your body, what raiment you shall put on. (Mat. 6.) As if he should say more
plainly: God that has given you a soul, will also give you food: and he that
has given you a body, will also give you raiment. Our Savior goes on,
saying: * Behold the fowls of the air, that they sow not, neither reap, nor
gather into barnes: and your heavenly father feeds them (ibidem.) that is to
say: If God provide for the birds, which are to day, and shall die to morrow,
whose soul is mortal: how much more will he give meat and raiment to his
servants and handmaides, whose soul is immortal, and to whom the kingdom of
heaven is promised? And again: Consider the lillies of the field how they
grow: they labor not, neither do they spinne: that is, they neither weaue, nor
make thread: and yet God most gloriously clotheth them: how much more will he
cloth his servants and handmades, that faithfully serve him

God will not kill the souls of his servants with hunger, or thirst, or
nakedness. And therefore he adds: Seek first the kingdom of God, and the
justice of him: and all these things shall be given you besides. As if ^e had
said: * Serve our Lord in fear, and rejoice to him (day and night) with
trembling; and he will give you all things necessary both in this life, and in
the life to come. * They that seek after our Lord shall not be diminished of
any good. (Psalm. 33.) Most dear sister, God, who has brought you out of your
Fathers house, will give you all the good, which your heart can wish, if you
continue constant in his service. Amen.

Of propriety. CHAPT. XLVIII.
MOst dear sister, let propriety (which among the servants of God is esteemed
a great fault) be never found in you. All things, which are in a monastery,
are common to the whole community. If therefore the handmaid of God has any
thing proper or in secret, whereof the rest of the religious sisters are
ignorant, it is plain theft, and consequently a sin. Why? Because she has
all things in common with the rest of Gods handmaides, and yet hides some
thing as peculiar to her self. To keep any thing closely, and to hide it as
peculiar to ones self, not common to the rest of the handmaides of God: this I
say is plain theft, and apparent fraud. This is a great sin, this is the way
to hell, this is the beaten way, by which thieves have gone to the devil. So
much the Apostle S. Paul has avouched: * Neither thieves (says he) nor
extorsioners shall possess the kingdom of God (1. Cor. 6.) The handmaid of
God, which separatetth her self from the communion of the monastery, by
reserving in secret to her own use: must consequently expect to be separated
from the society of eternal bliss.

Many come to the common society of a monastery: But yet (which I cannot
recount without great grief of heart) all do not live therein with that
Euangelical purity and perfection as is requisite. In a monastery there are
the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ: there is also Judas Iscariote the betrayer
of our Lord, and Ananias with Saphira his wife: there likewise is Giezi the
disciple of Helisoeus. They therefore, that for the love of God, and gaining of
everlasting life, forsake all things which they have in this world in imitation
of the Apostles; shall rejoice with the same Apostles, and be rewarded with
everlasting happiness. But he, that after his coming to religion, does presume
to commit fraud in the goods of the monastery, is a Judas, and shall suffer
the punishment of Judas in hell: for that, when he appropriateth any thing as
peculiar to himself, he presumes to commit cosenage in that which is common
to all.

They likewise, who leaving the world, are converted to God, if in those things
which they had in the world, they reserve one part to themselves, and give the
other part with themselves to the monastery, they deserve the sentence of
malediction with Ananias and Saphira his wife. But he that comes out of the
world to religion, if he desire, or seek to have that in religion, which he
could not have before his entrance into the same, without doubt the leprosy of
Giezi will adhere unto him: and the leprosy which Giezi sustained in body, he
shall sustain in soul.

Virtuous sister, as I told you before, there is great difference between
those, who in a monastery live like unto these; and th^se, that religiously
forsake all, like unto the Apostles. To those, who of those things which they
had in the world, or have in the monastery do hide nothing, does agree that
saying of the Psalmist: * It is good for me to cleave to God: to put my hope in
our Lord God: (Psalm. 72.) as also that other saying: * Cast thy care upon our
Lord, and he will nowrish thee: (Psalm. 54.) To those, who like Judas retain any
thing proper to themselves, or keep any thing belonging to the monastery
secret or close, does agree that other verse: * They ascend even to the
heavens, and they descend even to the depthes, their soul pined away in
evils. Psalm. 106.) But to those, who with Ananias and Saphira give one part of
those things, which they had to the monastery, and reserve the other proper to
themselves, those words of King Dau id may very fitly be applied: * Who trust
in their strength; and glory in the multitude of their riches. (Psalm. 48.) To
those likewise, who like Giezi, seek those things in the monastery, which
they could not have in the world, does agree that other saying of the Psalmist:
* Behold the man, that has not put God for his helper: but has hoped in the
multitude of his riches, and has prevailed in his vanity. (Psalm. 51.)

Wherefore venerable sister, do not you conceal, hide, or keep any thing
secret. Keep nothing in hugger-mugger: hide nothing in corners. Whatsoever you
have, have it with license: have it with the benediction of your superiors.
Without the leave of your Abbess or Prioresse have nothing, without their
benediction take nothing, without their license give nothing. Honest virgin,
cast your care upon our Lord, and he will nowrish you. Amen.

Of Prayer. CHAPT. XLIX.
MOst dear sister, hear what I say. To pray before the time, is providence.
To pray at the time appointed, ^s obedience. To pass over the time of prayer
is negligence. Prayer ought to be by so much the more frequent, by how much the
more profitable it is, and expedient: Our Lord says in the Gospel. * All
things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer believing, you shall receive. (Mat.
21.) And the Apostle S. Paul does counsel us, saying. * Pray without
intermission, (1. These. 5.) S. James likewise does avouch: * That the continual
prayer of a just man avails much. Iam. 5.

Venerable sister, * Before prayer prepare your soul: and be not as a man that
tempts God. (Eccli. 18.) In prayer prepare your self, and lay open the
hidden secrets of your heart, that you may obtain greater grace from God. Then
you pray truly as is fitting, when you think of no other thing. The judge does
so much the sooner listen to the petition of a sinner, if he see him amend his
bad behavior. Prayer ought to proceed rather from the heart, then from the
lips. It is better to pray with the silence of the heart, then with mere
words, without the intention of the mind. That prayer proceeds from a pure
affection, which is said in his due time without distraction. For that mind is
far from God, which in prayer is busied in thought of the world.

There a^e two things in prayer, which hinder a man from obtaining that which
he does desire, to wit, if as yet he be addicted to sin, or does not heartely
pardon him that does offend him. Our mind is celestial: and does then rightly
contemplate God in prayer, when it is hindered with no earthly care or error.
When any man prays he enuiteth the holy Ghost to come unto him: who being
come, all the temptations of the devils, which are wont to, trouble men's
minds, do speedily depart and give place as not being able to endure his
presence. He that is wronged, let him not desist to pray for those that do him
wrong: otherwise he sins according to our Lords sentence that prays not
for his enemies. Like as no medicine does good to any hurt, aslong as the
weapon remains in it: so his prayer does him no profit, that has hatred in
his heart. He stretches forth his hands to God not without offense, who when
he prays dorh vauntingly make manifest his good works: like the Pharisee
mentioned in the Gospel. (Luc. 18.) who boastingly prayed in the temple, and
praised himself more then God the giver of whatsoever is good and laudable.

Dear sister, pray incessa^tly with tears Pray continually, pray to God night
and day. Let your prayer be without ceasing, let your prayer be often. Let it
be your usual weapon. Let your mouth never cease from praying, insist in
prayer, and never desist from the same. Always lament and mourn, arise to
prayer in the night season; watch, and pray often. Pass over the night in
prayer and supplication, apply your self to nigh^ly watching. Having shut
your eyes a little pray again.

Frequent prayer does repel the darts of the devil: frequent prayer does make
the weapons of the devil to be little available. Prayer is the first help
against the invasions of temptations: prayer does subdue the assaults of our
ghostly enemies: it vanquisheth the devils: it overcomes the unclean
spirits. By prayer the devils are conquered, the adverse parties are put to
flight. Honest Virgin, let your prayer be pure. I admonish you most dear
sister, that you pray for goodmen, that they may persevere in goodness. I
entreat you also to pray for bad men, that they may be converted from their
wickedness. Pray for your friends, pray likewise for your enemies. Pray also for
all the faithful both living and dead. Let your prayer be directed as incense
in the sight of God. Amen.

Of reading. CHAPT. L.
BY prayer we are cleansed from our sins: by reading we are taught how to
behave our selves in our actions. Both of these are good, at times convenient.
But if we want time to practice both, it is better to pray, then to read: for
when we pray, we talk with God: when we read, God talks with us. Most dear
sister, if you will at all times converse with God; at all times either pray,
or read. Reading of good books is very profitable and expedient. For by
reading we learn what to do, of what to take heed, whither to tend.
Whereupon the Psalmist says: * Thy word is a lamp to my feet, and a light
to my paths. (Psalm. 118.) By reading we grow to have greater understanding.
Reading does instruct us to prayer, and action. Reading does inform us in the
active and contemplative life. Wherefore it is said in the Psalms. * Blessed
is the man, that shall meditate in the law of our Lord day and night. (Psalm. 1.)

Reading and prayer are the weapons, by which the devil is vanquished; these
are the instruments, by which eternal happiness is purchased. By prayer and
reading vices are destroyed, and virtues are nowrished. The handmaid of God
ought always to pray and read. Whereupon it is written in the Psalms. * Then
I shall not be confounded, when I shall look thoroughly in all thy
commandments. (Psalm. 118.)

Wherefore dear sister in Christ, give yourselfe often to prayer: persevere in
meditation of the holy scripture. Let Gods law be your continual conversation:
be perpetually perusing the same: use to read often; let the reading of Gods
divine law be your daily meditation. Reading, delivers a man from error and
falsehood, and withdraws him from the vanity of the world. By reading (as I
have already said) your wit and understanding will be increased. For reading
teaches you what to do, it discerns, what you ought to eschew; it shows
whither you are to tend. You profit much by reading, if you put that which you
read, in execution. Venerable sister, almighty God vouchsafe to open your
heart in his law, and in his precepts. Amen.

Of working. CHAPT. LI.
THe Prophet Jeremy says: * Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to our
Lord into the heavens. (Lament. 3.) He that prays and works, lifts up his
heart to God with his hands. But he that prays, and works not, lifts up
his heart to God, and not his hands. Contrariwise he that works, and prays
not, lifts up his hands to God, and not his heart. And therefore venerable
sister, it is necessary, that we eleuate our heart to God by prayer, and
stretch forth our hands unto him by manual labor. Why? Least we be reprehended
for neglecting the commandments of God, whiles we seek to obtain salvation
by only prayer, or by only working. Whereupon the Apo ^le S. Paul pronounces
this precept, to wit.* That if any one will not work, neither let him eat.
(1. These 3.) The handmaid of Christ ought at all times, either to p^ay, read,
or wo^ke, least perchance the spirit of fornication deceive her mind being
busied in nothing. Carnal pleasure is subdued by labor.

Most dear sister, divide the day into three parts: in the first, pray; in the
second, read; in the third, labor. King Solomon by idleness fell into many
fornications, and by the desire of fornication adored idols. Venerable si^ter,
these three things are very necessary for the obtaining of salvation, to wit,
prayer, reading, and working. By prayer we are purged, by reading we are
instructed, by working we become blessed: like as the holy Ghost says in the
Psalm: * Because thou shall eat the labors of thy hands; blessed art thou,
and it shall be well with thee. (Psa. 127.) If at any time you cease from
reading, you ought to work, that you may be never idle: because idleness is the
enemy of the soul. The devil quickly deceives him, whom he finds idle:
the devil daily enters into the monastery, and if he find any one idle, he
accuses him without delay.

O spouse of Christ have a care, least when the devil enters into the cloister
and searches into the actio^^ of every sister he find not some thing whereof
to accuse you in particular. For this cause I admonish you, my most dear
sister in Christ, that for the love of Christ Jesus your beloved bridegroom,
you be not idle at any time. I entreat you, that you will declare the love
which you bear to Christ to your companions, not only by your words, but
also by your acctions. Whereupon the bridegroom, to wit Christ, does entreat
his spouse that is, a devout soul in the Canticles, saying. * Put me as a
seal upon thy heart as a seal upon thy arm. (Cant. 8.) In our heart are
cogitations, in our arms, actions. The beloved therefore is put as a seal
upon the heart and upon the arm of his spouse: because it appears both by
the will and action, how much he is beloved of a devout soul, for that the
love of God is never idle. For if it be love, it works great matters: but if
it works not, it is no love.

I enter at you therefore venerable virgin, that you love God with a sincere
affection, and for the love of him be always doing some thing. If you love God
truly, you will never be idle: if you love God as you ought, you will abhor
idleness for his sake: if you love God unfeignedly; idleness will seem teadious
unto you. He that loves God with his whole will, does for the love of him
loath to be idle. The kingdom of God will not be given to the followers of
idleness, but to such as are diligent in our Lords service. The kingdom of God
will not be given to such as gad or wander up and down, but to such as labor
for the love of God, according to their vocation. They that are slow and tepid
in doing good, shall have no place in the kingdom of God. Lasciuiousnes does
soon deceive such as are addicted to idleness: lasciuiousnes does soon deceive
him that does gad up and down: lasciuiousnes does inflame him worst of all,
that it finds idle.

Lust yields to labor, gives back to travail, retireth from such as refuse
to be idle. A man by labor oftentimes vanquisheth lust, because the body
being wearied with labor does not delight in lewdnes. Wherefore am^able sister
in Christ, beware of idleness. Do not love to be idle, but tire your body with
travail. Be always doing some thing that is good, seek some profitable
work, in which the intention of your mind may be busied: Let God at all times
be the scope or end of your actions and intentions. Amen.

Of the psalms and hymns. CHAPT. LII.
MOst dear sister, when you sing the Psalms and hymns in the sight of God,
consider that in your mind, which you sing with your voice. Let your mind agree
with your voice: let it sing in tune with your tongue in the quire; do not
think one thing, and sing an other. If your mind sing one thing, and your
voice an other, you loose the fruict of your labor. If your body stand in the
Church, and your mind wander abroad, then doubtless you will loose your reward.
Whereupon it is said by the Prophet Isay. * This people honors me with their
lips: but their heart is far from me. For as the Apostle says I will pray
in the spirit, I will pray also in the vnderstan^^ng: I will sing in the
spirit, I will sing also in the understanding. (1. Cor. 14.) It is therefore
good to praise God at all times with the vnd rstanding. It is also good to
glorify God with the sound of the voice, with hymns and Psalms, and
spiritual songs.

Like as we are aided by prayers: so we are recreated by singing the psalms.
The singing of spiritual sonnetts, does comfort heavy hearts. The singing in
the Church does rejoice men's minds, it delights such as are discontent,
causes such as are careless to become diligent, enuiteth sinners to weep and
lament: for albeit the hearts of worldly men are never so much void of remorce,
yet as soon as they hear ^he sweetness of the psalms, they are converted to
the love of goodness. There are iue^se who through the sweetness of the psalms,
are moved to compunction and sorrow for their sins. P^^yer only in this life
is powered forth for the forg^uenes of sins; but the singing of the psalm,
does signify the perp^tual praise of God in eternal happiness; as it is
written: * Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, o Lord: for ever and ever
they shall praise thee. (Psalm. 83.)

Whosoever does faithfully and attentively sing the psalms, does in a manner
become consederate with the holy Angels. How so? what is the reason? Because
man according to his measure praises him here on earth: whom the Angels
without intermission do adore and glorify in heaven. The singing of the
psalms at some times stirs us up to tears and compunction, at other times
it enuiteth us to prayer and devotion.

The Psalms make the night vigills to become pleasant unto us, enuiting us to
praise God in this wise: * Reio^ce ye just in our Lord; praising b^commeth the
righteous. (Psalm. 32.) The Psalms denounce unto us the fir^^ howe^ of the day
with exultation of light, by saying: * O God save me in thy name, and in thy
strength judge me. (Psalm. 53.) The psalms do consecrate unto us the third
hour of the day, when they say: * And let thy mercy come upon me o Lord: thy
salvation according to thy word. (Psalm. 118.) The psalms do make us glad at
the sixth hour, in the breaking of bread. The psalms do break our fast at the
ninth hour of the day, and satiat our heart^ with spiritual sweetness and
suauitie. The psalms do commend us to God at the hour of vespers or euensong,
by saying in this wise: Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight: the
elevation of my hands as even ng sacrifice. (Psalm. 140.) The psalms do
admonish us to bless our Lord at Complyne, saying: * Lo now b^esse our Lord,
all ye the servants of our Lord. Psalm. 133.)

My beloved sister in Christ, I would have you to be always mind full, that
God is much delighted with the music of a sacred soul. By affection, love
and devotion of heart; sing psalms, hymns, and spiritual canticles to God.
Whereupon the bridegroom (to wit Christ) does admonish his spouse (to wit, the
Church, or a devout soul in the Canticles, saying: * Show me thy face, let thy
voice sound in mine ears; for thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely. (Cant.
2.) Thou my beloved, says he, who lie in the bed of most sweet
contemplation, in which thou desire to please me in psalms, hymns, and
spiritual canticles and prayers; come, and show me thy face; that is, issue
forth from the closet of your heart, and for examples sake show the beauty of
your good works to others: that when they shall see your good works, they may
glorify your father, which is in heaven. Let your voice sound in my ears: to
wit, the voice of preaching, the voice of praise and thanksgiving, the voice
of joy and iubile: which may stir up others to praise and glorify me.

The singing of the psalms does delight the ears of the hearers, and
instructs the souls of the faithful to live well. Let the voices of the
singers agree; and let us intermingle words of praise with the holy Angels of
God, whom^ we cannot see. The servants of God ought at all times to praise the
name of God: for so much those supreme waters do insinuat, of whom it is said:
* All the waters, that are above the heavens, bless ye our Lord. Da^. 3.)
Because the elect shall not cease for ever to praise the name of our Lord. But
of the lower waters, it is said* * Let the waters, that are under heaven, be
gathered together into one place. (Genesis 1.) Because the reprobate, who are now
dispersed through the whole world, shall be gathered together into hell, there
to be tormented.

The faithful ought to sing praises to God without intermission, for that God
is delighted in them. This the bridegroom, to wit Christ, does testify, who
in the Canticles speaks to his spouse, that is to a devout soul, saying *
Thou that dwell in the gardens. (Cant. 8.) The Chu^^h, or every devout
soul dwells in the gardens: for that it is alread^e replenished wi^h the
g^eenesse and hope of good and virtuous actions. She therefore that already
dwells in the garde^s, ought to make the bridegroom to hear her voice, that
is the melodious harmony of good preaching or of holy iubilatio^: or let her
sound forth the voice of divine praise, in which he may be delighted, which he
hears and to which his friends to wit, all the elect do listen, who desire to
hear the words of life, to wit, the lessons Psalms, hymns, and spiritual
Canticles, that by this means they may be revived through the remembrance of
that celestial hpppines.

Wherefore most reverend sister, as I said before, it is very necessary, that
you praise almighty God your Creator all your life long, for that by praising
him you are promised pardon. Praise him therefore in your heart, praise him in
your voice, praise him in the voice of iubilation, praise him like wise in the
secret of contemplation, praise him in the closet of your mind, praise him in
the iubilation of your voice.

For albeit we be sinners, and unworthy to sing Gods praises: yet we must not
cease to praise him, sithence that by praising him, we hope to obtain pardon
of our sins. Whereupon the divine voice says in the psalms: * The sacrifice
of praise shall glorify me: and there i^ the way, by which I will show him the
salvation of God. Psalm. 49.) As if he should say more plainly: In the psalms
is the way of praise, by which you may arrive to eternal happiness: but if I do
not show the same unto thee, thou thy self can not find it. Wherefore most
dear sister, sithence the way of our salvation is in the hand of God, I
admonish you, that you permit not his praise at any time to depart from your
mouth.

My most loving sister in Christ, God is your praise: be you therefore his
praise, that so his praise may at all times be in your mouth. Amen.

Of the active and contemplative life. CHAPT. LIII.
Jacob saw in his sleep a ladder standing upon the earth, and the top
thereof touching heaven: the Angels also of God ascending and descending by
it. (Genesis 28.) In this ladder are placed all those that are predestined to
life everlasting: and every one has a place in this ladder, that appertains
to the kingdom of heaven. This ladder is the whole Church, which in part
wageth war as yet here on earth, and in part reigns already in heaven.

In this ladder are three rows or ranks of men, to wit, seculars, actiues,
and contemplatiues. Seculars are in the lowest degree. Actiues are in a higher
place. But contemplatiues are placed above all the rest. And of these three
ranks of men some are in the mill, others are in the field, and others are in
the bed. The mill is a secular course of life. The field is the mind of a
secular man. In the field are the preachers of Gods word. In the bed is the
love of the bridegroom, to wit Christ. They that are in the mill go round
about the earth, who seek and love earthly things. They that are in the field
till the ground, who sow the word of God in the ears of men. They are in the
bed, who despise and contemn the world.

At the foot of this ladder are worldly men: in the midst of the ladder are
such as are given to action: in the top of this ladder are such as are
addicted to contemplation, being as it were already placed in heaven; for that
they think on heavenly things. These are the Angels of God ascending by the
ladder; because they ascend by contemplation to God, and descend by compassion
to their neighbor. The active life is innocence of good works: the
contemplative life is the speculation of the things above. The active life is
common to many, but the contemplative only to a few. The active life does
dispose of worldly things virtuously: but the contemplative life renouncing the
world, does delight to live to God only.

A demand. Dear brother, I entreat you to show me the difference between the
active and the contemplative life.

The answer. Most loving sister, between the active and co^templatiue life
there is exceeding great difference. The active life is to give food to the
hungry, to teach our neighbor the word of wisdom, to correct such as go
astray, to reduce the proud to the path of humility, to recall such as are at
variance to concord and amity: to visit the sick, to bury the dead, to
redeem captives, and such as are put in prison, to dispose whatsoever is
expedient for every one, to provide whatsoever is necessary for every one.
Behold dear sister in Christ, you have heard the works of the active life;
now, if you please, you shall hear the virtues of the contemplative life.

The contemplative life is to have perfect charity with God and man, to rest
from external action, to adhere to the sole desire of our maker, and through
the vehemency of this desire, to desire nothing else whatsoever: to cast aside
all the cares of the world, through an arde^t affection of beholding the face
of God: in so much that a contemplative man knows now how to bear the burden
of his corruptible flesh (though not without grief and anguish) and to wish
with his whole desires, to be present amidist the melodious quires of Angels,
to covet to be admitted into the company of those heavenly citizens, and to
rejoice in the sight of Go^ through the gift of immortal happiness.

Venerable sister, you have heard the active life, you have likewise heard the
contemplative life described unto you now therefore I entreat, that with Marie
Magdalen you choose the better pa^ to wit the co^templatiue life. The active
life is good but the contemplative i^ much better. He that behaueth himself
well first in the active life, is thereb^ made more fit to ascend to the
contemplative. Whosoever affects worldly glory, carnal pleasures, or any
other earthly delectation, is thereby made unfit for contemplation. Jacob may
serve for an example unto you of the active and contemplative life, who when he
loved Rachel, that signifies the contemplative life, had Lia given him to be
his wife, which signifies the active life.

The active life does serve God in the labors of this world, by harboring,
feeding, and clothing, visiting, conforting, and burying such as are poor and
needy, and by she wing toward them the other works of mercy. And yet not
withstanding Lia is fruitful in children, because many are addicted to action,
few to contemplation. Howbeit Rachel by interpretation signifies a sheep, or
one seeing the beginning: because contemplative men are simple and innocent
like sheep, and void of all wordly perturbation: that adhearing only to
divine contemplation, they may see him, who says of himself: * I am the
beginning, who also do speak unto you. (Io. 8.) Rachel has two children, for
that there are two sorts of contemplative men. For some live in common in
monasteries* others are addicted to solitarines, and live requestred from all
others.

The contemplative life is more blessed and perfect then the active. Like as
the Eagle does fix her eyes upon the beams of the sun, neither does she at
any time look aside, saving only when she desires to refresh her body with
food: so likewise holy men do return from contemplation to the active life now
and then: considering those high things so to be profitable, that
notwithstanding these humble things in respect of our poverty are likewise
needful. Whereupon the bridegroom, to wit Christ, does exhort his spouse, to
wit a devout soul given to contemplation, in the Ca^ticles, saying: * Arise,
make haste, my love, my dove, beautiful one and come. (Cant. 2.) As if he had
said more plainly: Arise, make haste my love by faith and charity: my dove by
innocence and simplicity: my beautiful one by virtue and chastity. Arise
from that your most sweet bed, that is, from the contented rest of
contemplation, in which you desire to please me alone, in psalms, hymns,
prayers, and spiritual Canticles of devotion. Make haste therefore, and come:
that is, come forth for the profit of your neighbor: that you may likewise
cause them to become your imitators by the office of preaching, and virtuous
examples, and conduct them to the salvation of their souls.

The vision of the living creatures mentioned in Ezechiel, (chapt. 1.) which
went and returned not, pertains to the perseverance of the active life. And
again the living creatures, which went, and returned after the similitude of
glistering lightning, do pertain to the measure of contemplation, in which
whiles every one does bend his affection, being beaten back through his own
frail condition, he forthwith returns down again. And again the eye sight
of his mind being renewed, he ascends again to those things, from whence he
had descended, which in the active life cannot be done: from which if any one
descend for never so small a space, he is forthwith enueloped in the filth of
vice.

The mind is often elevated from the earth to heaven, and being oppressed
through the burden of humane corruption, it descends down from heaven to the
earth again. God visits many worldly men, and by his grace eleuateth them to
the height of contemplation: God likewise by his just and secret judgments
forsakes many contemplative men, being fallen down to delight in earthly
actions. Like as he that lies buried in a sepulcher does cease from all
earthly care; so a contemplative man does cease from all worldly work, or
business whatsoever. And even as men ascending from the active life, are as it
were interred in the tranquillity of contemplation: so those that ascend from
a secular life to the active, a rereceiued, and as it were buried in the same.
And consequently as the active life is the sepulcher of a secular life, so a
contemplative life is the monument of the active life.

Holy men like as now and then they go forth from the secrecy of
contemplation to virtuous action, so they return again from the active life
to the closet of inward contemplation: that they may praise God inwardly, where
they have received that, which outwardly they do to his glory. Like as God
will that now and then contemplative men go forth to the active life, that
they may do good to others: so now and then his will is, that no man disturb
them, but that they repose in the secrecy of most sweet contemplation: which
the brideg^oome does well insinuat in the Canticles, when he adiureth the
daughters of Jerusalem, not to awaken his spouse, saying: * I adjure you, o
daughters of Jerusalem by the ^oes, and the hearts of the fields, that you raise
not, nor make the beloved to awake, until her self will. (Cant. 2.) That is
to say: Do ye not raise, nor awaken a soul that is addicted to divine
contemplation, that is busied in divine prayer and reading: neither do you
disquiet her with external businesses, until she will her self: that is,
until the time of contemplation being accomplished, and corporal weakn^s or
sickness councelling her thereunto, she her self desire to be raised up from
the sleep of internal rest, and inward sweetness.

Howbeit aslong as we live in this world, no man can perfectly contemplate God.
Whereupon S. John says in the Apocalypse: * There was made silence in heaven,
as it were half an hour. (Apoc. 8.) For the soul of a just man is truly
termed heaven: like as our Lord says by the Prophet: * Heaven is my seat.
(Isai. 66.) When therefore the rest of a contemplative life is made in the
mind, there is made silence in heaven, that is, in the soul of man; for that
the noise of earthly things and businesses does cease in the cogitation.
Whereupon in the same Canticles the spouse says of her self. * I sleep, and
my heart watches: (Cant. 5.) as if a devour mind should speak more plainly,
saying: Whiles I outwardly sleep from worldly tumults and cares, I inwardly
meditate upon heavenly and spiritual affairs.

The ark of Noah likewise which is said to have had a double loft or vaute,
does signify active and contemplative men: whereof the active stand below, and
the contemplative above. And for that the arc is also said to have been
triple vauted (that is, to have had three loftes one above an other) this does
insinuate, that in the holy Church there are three orders, to wit, married
folks, bachelours, and virgins. Of this contemplative life our Lord says in
the Gospel: * If thou will be perfect, go sell the things, that thou have, and
give to the poor, and thou shall have a treasure in heaven; and come, follow
me. (Mat. 19.) And of Marie Magdalen he says: Marie has chosen the best part,
which shall not be taken away from her. (Luc. 10.) The contemplative life shall
not be taken away in this world, neither in the next. But the active life shall
be taken away from a man in the world to come. The active life has an end in
this world, but not the contemplative, because it continues for ever. The
active life shall fail in this world, but the conte^platiue begins here,
and shall be perfected in heaven.

Hones^ virgin, I council you that for the love of God you despise this
present world; for the love of God withdraw your self from the cares of the
world. Endeavor to serve God without the hinderance of the world: let no
worldly solicitude withdraw you from the fear of God. Let no worldly business
withdraw you from Gods service: cast away from you whatsoever may hinder your
good purposes. Whatsoever the world does love and commend, do you hate and
condemn with your whole mind. Be you dead to the world, and the world to you.
As one dead, separate your self from the love of this present life. As one
dead despise the glory of the world.

My most loving sister in Christ, as one already dead and buried, have no care
of the world. As one lying dead in your sepulcher, sequester your self from
all earthly affairs. My amiable sister in Christ, contemn that living which
you cannot have being dead and gone. If you shall do this, then doubtless after
death you shall obtain everlasting bliss. Amen.

Of curiosity. CHAPT. LIIII.
MOst dear sister, I advise you, that from day to day you study to go
f^reward in virtue, and that you consider not the evils, which others do, but
the good works, which you are bound to do. Whereupon a certain wise man
says: * In superfluous things, search not many ways. (Eccli. 3.) It is not
needful that you know those things, that are remote from humane senses. It is
very meet that he omit to censure other men's minds, who cannot perfectly know
their hearts and cogitations. Why? Because our judgment is uncertain, *
until our Lord do come, who also will lighten the hidden things of darkness,
and will manifest the counsels of the hearts. (1. Cor. 4.) It is also very
meet that he cease to sin, that means to reprehend the life of an other man.

Foolish men, whiles they seek to carpe at other men's faults, show their
own. So long a man knows not his own sins (which he ought to know and
lament with tears) as he curiously considers the faults of others. But when
a man returns to himself, and considers himself well, he searches no
more what to reprehend in others, because he finds many things in himself
for which he ought to be sorrowful. He that considers himself well, finds
many things in himself, which he may bewail. Whereupon S. Gregory says: We
ought by so much the less to consider other men's hearts, by how much we know
that we are unable to bring to light the darkness of their thoughts. Also S.
Isidorus says: We more easily carpe at other men's vices; then consider their
virtues: neither are we curious to know any man's good, but enquire only what
evil he has committed.

Wherefore my beloved sister in Christ, I give you this admonition, that you be
always more ready to reprehend your own faults, then those of other men.
Rather look upon your own imperfections, then those of others. Be careful of
your own correction, be solicitous of your own salvation, be provident of
your own amendment: be not inquisitiue into other men's affairs, never desire
to know what men say among themselves. Seek not to know what other men say, or
do. Beware of curiosity. Trouble not your self about the life of others, let
no curiosity deceive your mind, let no desire of this detestable vice overtake
you unawares, least forgetting your own manners, you curiously consider those
of others.

O spouse of Christ, correct your own fault with as great circumspection, as
you are car^full to carpe at those of other men: be not desirous to know those
things, that are hidden. Be not enquisitiue about those things, whereof you
ought not to enquire: let pass as a secret, what you have learned by the
authority of the holy scripture. Seek no more, then what is written, search
after no more then what the holy Scriptures do set down? never desire to know
more then is sitting.

Venerable si^e^, know for certain, that curiosity is a dangerous
presumption. Curiosity is a damnable science, it provoke to heresy, it
casts down the mind headlong into sacrilegious fables, it makes men hold in
obscure causes, it makes the^ hasty in unknown matters. Most loving sister,
amend your life with all diligence; that after this life you may merit to
attain to eternal happiness. Amen.

Of VVatchfulnes. CHAPT LV.
Loving sister, listen to our Lord Jesus Christ speaking in the Gospel, saying:
* Watch ye, for you know not when the Lord of the house co^me^h. (Marc. 13.)
And again: That which I say to you, I say to all: watch. (mat. 13.) The
Apo^^le S. Peter likewise writes thus: * Be wise, and watch in prayers (1.
Pet. 4. S. Paul also to enduce us to watchfulnes gives us this fore-warning: *
When men shall say; peace and security: then shall sudden destruction come
upon them. (1. These. 5.) And Solomon says: * There are just men and wise, and
their works are in the hand of God, and yet man knows not, whether he be
worthy of love or hatred. (Ecc. 9.) Why, what is the reason? Because all things
(says he) are reserved uncertain for the time to come.

Dear sister in Christ, for this cause our Lord has concealed from us the
time of his coming, that we through long expectation being uncertain, should
at all times believe the true judge to be approaching, for that we know not,
when he will come. Whereupon S. Gregory g^ueth us this good admonition. The
mirth (says he) of this present life ought to be passed over in that sort,
that the bitterness of the judgment following never depart from our thought.
Oftentimes the devil deceives a man to sin, and when he sees him sorrowful
for the same, he deceives him again by security of mind.

And therefore dear sister in Christ, it is very expedient, that at all times
when we do any thing that is good, we call to mind the evil, which we have
committed: that whiles we assuredly know ou^ faults, we never unadvisedly
rejoice at our good works. For this cause our Lord would have us ignorant of
the end of our life, that we might always stand in fear thereof: that
sithence we are unable to see it, we might daily prepare our selves for it. S.
Isidorus likewise, least we should think our selves secure in this life, does
admonish us, saying: Neither let a just man trust in his justice, nor a sinner
despair any thing of Gods mercy and favor: but let him have in his heart
hope and fear jointly together* let him hope of Gods mercy in that wise, that
he always fear his justice.

Although the conversation of holy men be never so praiseworthy, yet it is
unknown to mortal men, what there end will be. And therefore a man ought
never to be without ear: for that the satisfaction of penance is poised in the
balance of Gods divine iu^g^ment, not according ^o humane censure. Whereupon
Cesarius gives us this caution: By how much we are ^e^^^e o^ things past an^
gone: by so much we ought ^o be careful of thing to come.

Venerable si^e^, hold this as an infallible truth, that the whole l^fe of a
wise man is the meditation of death. And therefore my dear si^ter in Christ,
if you be at all times watchful in Gods service, you shall by so doing show
your self truly wise. If you daily eleuate your mind to God, and have in
remembrance the day of your death, you shall be blessed according to that which
a certa^ne wise man says. * Blessed is the man, that is alwaye^ fearful.
(Prou. 28. For this cause I admonish you honest Virgin, that you be always
fearful and suspicious of your end. Be always crafty and careful against
the tentat^ons of the devil. Watch continually, and fight incessantly against
your ancient adversary. Pray day and night with all wat^hfulne, and combat
with courage against the devils treacherie^. During your whole life be at all
times heedfull and wary, and strive with all dil gence against the wily shifts
of your gho^tly enemy.

H^a^e likewise honest virgin, what Jesus Christ your beloved bridegroom
says in the Gospel. Blessed is the servant, whom when his Lord comes, he
shall find watching. (mat. 24.) If therefore you shall watch to the same our
Lord Jesus Christ with your whole mind, you shall be numbered among the blessed
in eternal beatitude. You shall be blessed, if with all devotion you lift up
the eyes of your mind, to that true light which is God. You shall be blessed
doubtless, if you watch to God with all diligence, because God has promised a
crown to such as are watchful in h^s se^uice.

Whereupon it is said of the eyes of the bridegroom in the Canticles. * His
eyes as doves upon the little rivers of waters, which are washed with milk and
sit beside the most full streams. (Ca^t. 5.) The eyes of the bride groom are
holy men, who live simply like doves, and show the way of salvation to others
by their preaching and examples. They are said to sit upon the rivers of
waters, because they always converse in the refection of the holy scriptures:
who are washed with milk, for that by Gods grace, they are cleansed in
baptism from their sins. Now what can we better understand by those most
full streams, beside which they sit, then the profound and hidden sayings of
the holy scriptures, with which we refresh our selves, whiles we drink the^ by
reading them, of hearing them read by other^? For like as doves are wont to sit
near unto the streams of waters, that in the water they may see the shadow of
such birds a^ fly over them, and by the same may shun the talents of the
greedy falco^: so holy men do see the snares of the devils in the holy
scriptures, as it were in the waters, and by the description which they see,
they do as it were by the shadow know their enemy, and so escape his subtlety.

Do you most honest sister comport your self after the same manner, be
diligent in meditating daily on the holy scripture, for by thi^ means you will
be ma^e skillful, how you may he able to avoid the deceipts of your adversary
the devil. Honest virgin, I admonish you further, that you wholly ^ commit your
self to the direction of the holy Scripture: that is to say, that you do
nothing else, but what you hear from ^he oracle of the holy Scriptures, because
there you shall fin^, how you may shune the devils snares. I admonish you
likewise, t^a^ for fear of ravenous birds (that s the devils) you sit upon
the rivers o^ the holy Scriptures, lea^t you unaware, (which God forbid) become
a prey to your enemies. I entreat you also that you continually watch upon the
rivers of the holy Scriptures, and that with all care and diligence yo se^ke to
shun the snares of your enem^^s.

A^as fools that we are, whence is it that we do not know nor understand, that
our cogitations are apparent and known in the sight of ou^ Lord, before they
are put in execution? For the Psalmist sa^^h: * God searches the heart an^
raines. (Psalm. 7.) Therefore most loving sister, let us consider at all t m^s,
that we and in Gods presence, and w^^h all acknowledge, that we are ^a^th and
ashes. Behold our God most terrible to behold, rendering to ^u^^^e one according
to his wo^kes, is at hand, and will not delay; he himself will come, and will
save v^. (Isay. 55.) Let us therefore wa ch with all perseverance and devotion,
that when he shall come, and knock, he may not find us sleeping, but watching
in this praises, and in his love, and in his holy service. * Let us walk
whiles we have the light, that the darkness overtake us not. (Io. 12) For so the
wisdom of God says in the Proverbs: * Blessed is the man that hears me, and
that watches at my doors daily, and waits at the posts of my doors: He that
shall find me, shall find life, and shall draw salvation of our Lord. (Prou. 8.)

Wherefore o Virgin of Christ, I admoni^h you, that you behave your self
watchful toward God with all care and diligence, to the end you may find him
your friend in the day of distress. Honest Virgin, let no h^ppe find you
unprovided, let there be no event, which your meditation does not prevent: make
this supposition, that there is nothing, which may not happen. Th^^ke always
upon future misery: in time of felicity consider that there come a time of
adversity. Ponder always in your mind, that some michance or other may happen
ere it be long. It is the part of a wise man to foresee such dangers as are
like to ensue.

All things that are thought upon before hand, are by so much the better
endured: evils that are expected, are the more patiently sustained, a thing
that is fore seen, is the more welcome, when it does come. Premeditation does
repress sudden invasions: premeditation does attenuat future troubles:
foresight does assuage the coming of evils, and gains the conquest or
unexpected calamities. Those things are most grievous to be endured, which are
not thought upon before hand. Those things are most bitter, into which we fall
unawares. Unexpected evils do afflict more then others. A sudden mischief
does molest very much: that which is not fore seen, does most of all trouble
the mind. A sudden tempest of the sea does cause fear: a foe unlooked for,
does cause terror: sudden events are most irk some, sudden accidents are
most unwelcome.

Wherefore my most dear sister in Christ, prepare your heart both for
prosperity and adversity. * In the day of good things be not unmindful of
evils, and in the day of evils be not unmindful of good things. (Eccli. 11.)
Be watchful in your senses, lea^t you be defiled with vain cogitations. Love
the knowledge of the scriptures, and contemn the vices of the flesh. Most
^eare sister, if you be watchful to God with your whole heart, and serve him
all the time of your life with all devotion, with out all doubt you shall
reign with him in his heavenly kingdom. Amen.

Of vvisdome or discretion. CHAPT. LVI.
MOst dear sister, listen to our Lord Jesus Christ, saying in the Gospel: Be
ye wise as serpents, and simple as doves. (Mat. 10.) Solomon also says: * The
simplicity of the just shall direct them, and the supplanting of the perverse
shall wast them. (Prou. 11.^ * The strength of the simple the way of our Lord:
and fear is to them that work evil. (Prou. 10.) * The justice of the simple
shall direct his way: and the impious shall fall in his impiety. Prou. 11.) *
The innocent believes every word. (Prou. 14.) * He that deceives the just
in a wicked way, shall fall into his destruction: and the simple shall possess
his goods. (Prou. 28.) * Men of blood hate the simple: but just men seek his
soul. (Prou. 29.)

Holy rusticitie is only profitable to it self, and as much as it does edify
and do good in the Church of Christ by the merit of life, so much it does
disedifie and do hurt, if it does not resist those that gainsay the truth.
S. Hierome likewise says: In the servants and handmaides of God attire of
body is not to be expected, but simplicity of mind. Let neither a simple man,
nor a plain honest man think, that sanctity does merely consist in
rusticitie of speech, but only in a pure and simple conscience. Of two
imperfections it is better to have a holy rusticitie or rudenes, then a
sinful eloquence. A sacred rusticitie is more praise worthy, then verbal
loquacitie.

Dear sister in Christ, if our intention be simple and sincere before God, our
actions will not be sinful nor obscure in his sight. They that know not how to
be chaste by justice, cannot be innocent by simplicity or plainnes. The Saints
and such as are elected, begin the way of righteousness and simplicity with
fear, but end with charity. For God is not only a beholder of our words,
but also of our heart, and loves them that serve him in simplicity of heart.
Whereupon the bridegroom speaks in the Canticles, saying: * My dove is one,
my perfect one: she is the only to her mother, the elect to her that bare
her. (Cant. 6.) Our mother is the regenerating grace of God, which chooses one
dove only: because it only collecteth those, that remain in simplicity, and
are not divided from unity. For many faithful aslong as they attend to God,
aslong as they cherish one an other through one desire of Christ, aslong as
having one heart and one soul they co^ioyne themselves in charity, of many
members they make one body, in which living all in simplicity of unity, they
remain one dove only.

Those things which men contemn and deride, are in great estimation before
God. Let us therefore venerable sister, desire almighty God to send down the
holy Ghost from heaven unto us; who may make us to have the simplicity of the
dove, and the wisdom of the serpent, that we may be simple in malice, and wise
in good works. For the serpent is a crafty creature, as we read of the Aspe
in particular, who seeing the inchanter coming, puts one ear close to the
ground, and with his tail stops the other, to the end he may not hear the
voice of the inchanter. Where upon the Prophet speaking of cruel men, and such
as are wise in wickedness, uses these words. * They have fury according to
the similitude of a serpent: as of the Aspe that is deaf, and stops his
ears: which will not hear the voice of the inchanters and of the sorcerer
enchanting wisely. (Psalm. 57.)

Do you therefore (most loving sister) imitate the serpent in this point; that
is, shut your ears, that you hear not evil words. Honest virgin, beseech
almighty God, that the oil of a sinner may not fat your head. (Psalm. 140.)
By the oil of a sinner, I mean the praise of a flatterer. The serpent does
shut his ear, that he may not hear the inchanter: do you shut your ear in
like manner, that you may not hear a slaunderer. The Aspe is careful and
crafty, least he hear the charm or inchantement, and so die: be you likewise
circumspect and careful, least evil words enter in by your ears, and kill
your soul.

Wherefore o spouse of Christ, neither the wisdom of the serpent ought to be
in you without the simplicity of the dove, nor the simplicit e of the dove
without the wisdom of the serpent: to the end that the craft and wisdom of
the serpent may stir up the simplicity of the dove, to beware of evil* and
the simplicity of the dove may temper the wisdom of the serpent, that it may
do that which is good and laudable.

My most loving sister in Christ, the dove has likewise seven virtues in her,
which you by the grace of the holy Ghost may ^aue in your se^fe. The dove ^ften
sits upon the rivers of waters, ^at seeing the hawk coming, she may diue
into the water, and so escape his talents: in feeding she selecteth the
choicest grains of corn; s^ee often nowrisheth others young ones: she
strikes not with her bill: she is void of gall: she builds her nest in the
holes of walls: and uses groaning ins^ed of other sweet songs. Desire God
therefore honest Virgin, with all diligence; that ^e will bestow upon you these
doue-like virtues: to wit, that you may sit upon the rivers of the holy
scriptures, and by their admonition and counsel, may escape the invasion of the
devil. In the holy scriptu^es select the choicest sentences, by which you may
be refresh^d and fed: Nourish other^ young ones, that is men first alienated
from God, and convert them to God by your words and examples. Strike not with
your bill: that is, do your neighbor no wrong, neither speak any thing
amiss of him. Be void of gall: that is, be not angry or spiteful. Build your
nest in the holes of rocks or walls that is, put your co^fide^ce in our
Saviors sufferings. Use groaning insteede of other sweet songs: that is, as
wordly me^ rejoice in worldly songs, so do you take delight in groaning and
spiritual sadness.

Wherefore venerable sister, (as I told you before) it behooves you both to
understand and to beware of the snares of your enemy with all diligence and
care. You ought by integrity of life so to be simple and innocent, that you be
therewithal like wise discreet and prudent. He that having simplicity, does
not mingle wisdom with it, is (according to the saying of the Prophet) * as a
dove seduced, not having a heart. (Ose. 7.) He is therefore a dove, because
simple and innocent: yet not having a heart, because not wise and discreet.
Again I admonish you (most dear sister) that you prepare in your self a
worthy habitation for Christ, that he coming with the Father and the holy
Ghost, may vouchsafe to make to himself a ma^sion in you in the house of your
breast. Amen.

That a Virgin ought to avoid the company of lay women. CHAPT. LVII.
MOst dear sister, avoid the company of worldly women. Let not worldly
women, which have not the same profession with you, be admitted into your
company; because what they love, that they commend unto you. Behold, what they
love, that they say unto you: therefore you ought to avoid the company of
worldly women, because they love the world, and thereof they will be tatling:
they love earthly things, and of such they will discourse: they covet
transitory things, and consequently will fill your ear full of such matters.
For so the common Proverb goes: Every one prayseth that, which he loves.
And therefore a worldly woman praises the world, because she loves the
world: certainly if she loved heavenly things, she would praise them.
Doubtless if she affected heavenly things, she would approve them, she
would applaud them, and endeavor to induce you to be of the same opinion.

Wherefore dear sister I counsel you, to shun secular weomen, and not to
admit them into your company? Why, for what cause? * For that evil words
corrupt good manners. (1. Cor. 15.)

What makes the wife of a mortal man with the spouse of Christ? Or what does a
woman that is married, with a virgin dedicated to God? What has a secular
woman to do with Chri^ s spouse? What has a secular woman to do with a Nun
or religious woman? Or what makes a woman that loves the world, with a woman
that has left the world? What makes a married woman with a woman espoused to
Christ the celestial bridegroom? What makes she that loves a man, with her
that loves Christ? Why should a woman that embraces not the same course of
life with you, be admitted into your company? Why should a secular woman, that
wears not your habit, be admitted into your fellowship? What does a secular
woman in your company, that bears not the yoke of Christ with you? Why should
a secular woman, that has not submitted her neck with you to the yoke of
Christ, be admitted to your conference? She is different in clothing,
different in affection. And as she is different in attire, so likewise in
desire.

A secular woman, is the instrument of Satan. Her siren-like songs and
persuasions are as so many worldly allurements or devilish enticeme^ts, full
well agreeing to the shape of a siren or meremaide: which according to the
description of hystoriographers, is from the nauel upward like a most fair and
beautiful virgin, but from the nauel down to the feet, she is like to a
fish. A mere-maid has the head of a virgin, and the hinder parts of a fish.
Her voice is most sweet and most melodious, and most delightful to the hearers
howbeit by her sweet songs and melodies, she oftentimes deceives the
mariners, and causes them to perish. The mariners oftentimes listen as they
sail on the seas to the sweet voices of the mere-maides, and by their sweet
voices and music, are deceived, and suffer shipwreck. Like as the meare-maid
by her sweet songs deceives the mariners, so a secular woman by her
deceitful speeches deceives Christ's servants. And as the mere-maid by her
sweet melody is wont to make mariners to go astray on the sea, and
consequently to be cast away: so a secular woman by her sweet and deceitful
discourses is wont to withdraw Gods servants from their good purposes, and to
bring them in danger of loosing their souls.

And therefore my dear sister in Christ, shun the songs of such sirens*
least whiles you delightfully listen to their earthly allurements, you swerve
from the right course. For what other thing are the words of worldly weomen,
but as it were so many songs of deceit full sirens? Fly therefore the songs of
the sirens: and shut your ears from the tongue of an enticing woman. Shun
the communication of a worldly woman with as great care and heed, as you would
the hi^sing of a serpent. Beware, least as the serpent deceived Eve in the
pleasant garden of Eden, so the venomous tongue of an enti^ing woman deceive
you in the delightful paradise of religion. Take heed least a vain and
prattling woman infect your ears with deadly poison. Take heed, least death
enter in by your windows, that is, into your soul by your eyes, and ears.

Venerable sister, when you see a woman, whose affection is fixed upon earthly
things, fortify your heart with the shield of faith: and arm your fore head
against her with the victorious sign of the cross. Honest sister, I permit
you to talk with a secular woman in this respect only: to wit, that by your
holy admonitions you may persuade her to leave the world, and come to the
monastery. In this respect only I give you leave to talk with a secular
woman, that you may advise her to loath the world and to love heaven; and to
forsake the world, and serve God in religion. Again, that by your good
counsel, she may contemn transitory things, and covet those that are
eternal. Most dear sister, if you shall do as I have said, you shall both
preserve your self from evil in this world, and in the world to come shall
receive from our Lord a crown of glory in heaven. Amen.

That a Virgin ought not to love the company of men. CHAPT. LVIII.
MOst dear sister, if you ought so carefully to fly woeme^, how much more
ought you to shun the company of men? And if you are to avoid the tatling of
weomen with so great care and circumspection, how much more must you seek to
shun the deceits of men? If you ought to shut your ears with that diligence
from the words of weomen, how much more ought you to shut them from the
seducing words of men?

My dear sister in Christ, I admonish you, that albeit a man be never so holy,
yet admit him not into your company. Although he be holy and just, yet let him
have no familiarity with you. Although he be religious, yet converse not with
him over much. Although he be good and godly, yet admit him not over often into
your company. Why? Least by the familiarity of visiting, the chastity of both
ru^ne to ruin: least by over frequent seeing, the honesty of both come to
nothing: least by daily seeing, the good name of both be called in question:
least by over often seeing, both parties loose their fame and reputation.

He shows himself to have less charity toward God then is fitting, that
gives occasion of offending. He shows himself likewise to have less love
toward his neighbor then is expedient, that gives him occasion to offend:
for albeit he do not amiss in outward action, yet he nourishes that bad
opinion, which others have of him. A man oftentimes offends by keeping
overmuch company. Familiarity oftentimes overcomes those, whom vice could
not subdue. Oftentimes the occasion of doing ill, has caused and does cause a
will. They, whom pleasure could not subdue, are oftimes conquered by
continually keeping company. Two of different sex sitting together alone, are
by so much the more prone to feel carnal titillations in that part, by which
they are borne. The natural flame likewise of the flesh is easily set on fire,
of it touch any thing, that is apt to cause an unlawful desire.

A man and a woman are by nature different, who if they be together, albeit
they sin not, yet by often keeping company, they are the cause of a bad
report. What man can carrrie fire in his bosom, and escape burning? Fire and
tow being put together, do make the flame to be g^eater. Although they be of a
contrary nature, yet if ^hey be put together, they beget fire: so a man and a
woman, if they be often seen to be together alone, although they do no harm,
yet by being together over often, they loose their good name and reputation,
and cause others to murmr against them. A religious man and a religious
woman, if they talk together over often give others (...) occas o of
murmuring. The Sex of a man and a women are different: and therefore if they
meet together over often, there arises an occasion of sinning. What then does
fire and flax do together?

Who is so bereaved of understanding, as to put a serpent in his bosom? Who is
so void of consideration as to bear fire about him in his clo^hing? Why does a
woman, that has vowed her chastity to God, keep company weth a man? Why,
does a woman love the familiarity of a man, who for the love of God has
con^emned the world and all transitory things? Why does she love the presence
of men, that longs to enter into the heavenly bedcha^ber with Christ her
bridegroom? Why does a woman, that has cons^crated her self to God in
religion, desire to hear the deceitful words of men? Why does she, that in
the world refused to marry, desire to see men's faces now in the monastery?

Wherefore be^oued sister in Christ, if you desire to be secure from
fornication, remain sep^r^te in mind and body from the company of men: if you
perfectly desire to preserve your chastity for the love of Christ your
bridegroom, estrange your self from the society of men. If you place your
self near a serpent, or any such venomous creature, you cannot for any long
time be secure. If you sit near the fire, you will at length be melted,
although you were made of iron. If you put your self in danger, you will not
long remain unhurt or secure from the wounds of sin.

Listen therefore my most loving sister in Christ, listen to the good counsel
which I will give you. Let not men know your name let them not see your face:
yea albeit they hear your name, let them not know your countenance. Listen
also honest virg^n to the words of S. Paul the Apostle. * We must have good^e^
mo^^e of them that are without. (1. Tim. 3.) We must therefore have a good life
in respect o ou^selue^, and a good fame or rep^^ation in r^spect of others.
Venerable (...), it for the love of God you shall here (...) the company of
men, you st^^^ by Go^s grace enjoy the company of the Ang lls in heaven. Amen.

That a virgin ought to shun the company of young men. CHAPT. LIX.
MY most dear sister, if you ought to shun t e company of holy men with so
great carefullnes, least both their and your sanctity perish* how much more
ought you to shun the company of young men, who follow the obscure ways and
del^g^tes of this present life? And i^ you oug^^ to s^^e the company of holy
men with so great care and so^icitude, how much more ought you to shun the
company of young men, following the concupiscences of his wicked world? To this
end does the devil object young men to a religious woman's sight; that those,
whom she sees by day, she may think upon by ^^ght and that their late
fight and corporal shape may continually (...). W^erevpon the Prophet says: *
Dea h i^ come up through ur windows, it is entered into our houses. Ier. 9. The
devils allow does not penetrat the (...) parts of the mind, bu^ ^y the s^nses
of the hour.

My dear sister in Christ, m^n are to be loved, not present, but absent. Men
are to be loved; not within, but doors without. You ought to love me^ in your
heart, not in your house. Love men in your mind, yet when they are far
dist^nt. Men are to be loved, ^or that they are the work o^ God, yet not
within your house or place of abo^e. Men are to be loved, not for the beauty
of their body, but for that they are the workmansh^p of God almighty.

Again dear sister, I g^ue you this brotherly admonition, that you never
talk alone with any man. Let no man talk alone with you: neither speak with
any man without two or three sisters in your company. The spouse of Christ
ought not to talk alone with any man, unless it be with her ouerseer or
ghostly father, when she does penance for her sins. A Nun or religious
woman, that desires to talk alone with any man; shows, that foolishnes
reigns in her mind, Listen therefore loving sister to what I will say: i^ you
covet to continue truly chaste, sequester your self from the company of men,
for the love of Christ. If here on ^aith for the love of Christ you truly
contemn the company of men, you shall without all doubt ra gne with him
hereafter in heaven. Amen.

That a virgin ought not to converse with bad men. CHAPT. LX.
MOst virtuous virgin, listen to the words of Solomon. * My son, if sinners
shall entice thee, condescend not to them. (Prou. 1.) * Do not envy an vniu^t
man, nor imitate his ways. (Prou. 3.^ * Depart from a wicked man, and evil
shall fail from you. (Eccli. 7.) * Let just men be your guests, and let your
gloriation be in the fear of God. (Eccli. 9.) What man soever you know
observing the fear of God, esteem such a one as your friend: but with bad men
have no familiarity or freindship. Because according to the saying o^ S.
Ambrose: The life of holy men ought to be a rule of good life unto others. For
he that keeps company with a holy man, will thereby learn both to spe^ke and
do that which is good, to the end that his mind may from day to day be
enflamed in the love of God.

He is not much to be commended, that is good with those that are good, but he
is truly worthy to be praised, who is good with such as are bad. Verily that
man is exceeding lau^able, that is good even among such as are evil. Like as
he is to be blamed, that is bad among such as are good: so he is to be praised,
that is good among those that are bad. The words of such as fear God, are the
words of life, and healh of soul to such a^ follow and aff^^t them. Even as
the sun rising does expel darkness: so the doctrine of the Saints does drive
away the darkness of vice from our senses. Whereupon the Prophet Da^id said:
With the holy thou shall be holy; and with the perverse thou shall be perverted.
(Ps. 17.)

Wherefore dear sister in Christ, if you desire to live well, fly the company
of such as are evil. Avoid such as are evil, beware of the wick^d, fly such
as are addicted to lewdnes, despise those that love lasinesse. Fly the company
of men, especial^y of the younger sort, that are prone to sin converse
neither with those that are light in their conversation, nor with those that
are foo^ sh and vain. Keep company wit^ those that are good, desire the
society of such as are virtuous, let such be your indiuidual companions, such
I mean, as are most rema^ka^le for their holyn^s. If you be companion ^f the^r
conversation, you will (...) par^ner of their virtue an perfect^on. He that
walks with who men, ^s w^se^ he that walks with fool^s, ^s fool sh. For
birds of a fear he^, are went ^o flo^k together and l^ke to like, quoth the
(...) to the coll^ar.

It i^ a perilous thing to live with those that are evil: it is a pe^nitious
thing to converse with su h as are of a perue^^e will. It is better to be hate^
o^ bad men, then to be their companion. Like as the conuersing and living
together of good men does contain many comoditie^: so the society of bad men
does cause many inconveniences. For he that touches that which is unclean,
shall be polluted: and he that touches that which is filthy, shall be defiled.
Wherefo^e venerable sister, if you w ll will^ngly hearken to my words, and
accomplish them in effect, you shall be reckoned among Gods elect.

That a virgin ought not to receive letters or tokens in secret. CHAPT LXI.
MOst dear sister, hear what I say. The handmaid of Christ, that receives
letters or token^ in secret, does contrary to the rule of our most holy Father
S. Bennet. (Chapt. 54.) She that receives letters or any other gift from
men, commits no small offense or sin, because she does contrary to the
custom and constitutions of religion. She does very ill, who in respect of
gifts and commodities temporal, fears not to transgress her most holy rule.
A Nun or religious woman, that desiret^ to enter to the marriage with Christ
her celestial bridegroom, must not give handkerchiefes, comb, points,
looking glasses, or garters to men. She that expects Christ with her lamp
burning, must not receive secular gifts from men, to wit, combs,
looking-glasses, and other such like things. She that for the love of Christ
lives veiled, ought not to receive from her friends the vain gifts of the
world. She that for the love of God has taken ^ sacred veil upon her head,
does commit no small o^^^nce, if she receive (...) gift from her (...) ^s or
kindred. A ^elig^ous woman, that is delighted and ^eceiued with such toys and
trifles of ^h^s life; shows hereby, that she is (...) ^igh^ housewife.

Wh^^^vpon S. Hierome says: Holy lou^ ^llow^^h not o^ letters of love or
complements, or of hand-kerchiefs, o^ o^ ^requen^ tokens or presents. As (...)
he sh^ul^ say: If there were a holy (...) lou^ in the (...) of a religious
woman, sh^e would not accept vain and superfluous gift, from men. A N^n^e,
(...) ^ha^^ and religious mind, does no^ desire to receive gui^t; from her
secular friends, but fro Christ, for whose sake she has forsaken and
contemned all temporal thing: what commodities soever she does covet, she
ought to covet from him only; with whom she hops to rejoice in the
heavenly country. A chaste woman, coueteth not the contentments of the earth,
but of heau^n. By how much the more she is delighted in the gifts of this
world, by so mu h the more she is estranged and removed from the love of God.

If religious women do the same in the monastery, which secular women are
wont to do in the world, they are doubtless very culpable before God for so
doing, and here is no difference between secular and religious women. But if
there be no d^fference between secular and relig^ous woeme^, it is like that
their conditions a^e both one. Ergo if N^nne; receive presents and pleasant
gifts from their friends, according to the custom of harlots, where is their
honesty, where is their religiositie, where is their chastity, where is their
purity, where is their holiness. If religious women, who by their good
works ought to please God, please their worldly friends in that which is
amiss, by g^uing them lascivious gifts; where is shamefastnes, where is
continency, where is reverence, where i^ bash^ulnes?

In like manner, if rel^gious women, do more desire to please worldly men,
then Christ the eternal King in heaven: where is the obse^uance of religion,
where is the austeritie of monastical discipline, where is the fervor of
contemplation, where is cleannes of mind, where is contrition of heart and
compunction, where is the solicitude of prayer and deuot^on, where is sighing
and groaning, in fine where in the habit and behau^our of a Nun? If religious
women are delighted in gu^fts, like unto worldly people, where is the contempt
of the world, where the fear of hell, where is the remembrance of judgment,
and of those eternal torments, where is the love of God? If religious women
covet vain gifts and presents, where is the memory of their faults, where
are the tears of their eyes, where is the remembrance of their sins and
iniquities? All such virtues and holy exercises are by such wenches as these
esteemed more base then the very dust of the earth, they are contemned,
despised, and accounted nothing worth.

Verily a religious woman, that receives any thing from men, in which she may
be delighted, seems to hate her holy order and habit. She that takes
greater pleasure in the gifts and presents of her friends, then in the
precepts of her holy order, violateth those good purposes, which she made at
her first entrance into the cloister. Of such the Prophet says: * Their right
hand is replen^sh^d with gifts. (Psalm. 25.) As if he had said: Although their
works seem to be good: yet they more rejoice in gifts, then in good works.
They had rather receive presents from men, then an eternal recompense from
Christ their bridegeoome. A religious woman, that perfectly loves Christ her
Creator, accepts no more then mere necessity does requ^re, for that she
prefers Christ before all other things whatsoever. Whereupon in the
Canticles it is said to the Church: * Thy cheeks are beautiful, as the turtle
doves. Cant. 1.)

The Church, o^ every devout soul is compared to the tu^tle dove* for that
she perfectly loves Christ, and prefers nothing before his love. If the
turtle by any m shap chance to loose her mate, she n^u^r se^k^th any more
after an other, for that she admits not of any love that is adulterate or
impure: so a rel g^ous woman, that perfectly loves Christ her bridegroom,
admits not any more of any love that is vncha^ or vnclea^e: that is, she
loves not men any more out of a sinful affection. A religious woman, tha
loves any man more there Christ her beloved, is not cha^^, bu^ corrupted:
because she contemns Christ, to whom she was betrothed.

A Nun, at her first entrance into religion, accepts Christ for her
bridegroom. If afterward sh^e carnally love any man more then Christ, she
commits adultery: although not ^n body, yet at least in mind, according to
that which our Savior says in the Gospel: * Whosoever shall see a woman to
lu^t after her, ha^h a^readie committed aduou^rie with her in his heart: (Mat.
5.) so in l^ke sort a woman commits a^uou^rie with a man, if in ^er heart
she covet him, or carnally love him.

Wherefore most dear sister in Chri t, I a^mon^sh you, that above all things
you lou^ Christ your bridegroom, and desire to receive gifts from him alone.
I en reat you, that you will love Christ Jesus your brideg^oome above all
things, and for his sak^ refuse secular tokens. Doub^lesse he that does affect
earthly tokens, does not hope after heavenly h^pines. Because tha^ gift, blind
the eyes of the w^se and change the words of the ^ust. (Deu^. 16.) C^rta^ne^y
if g^^fts blind the eyes of the wise, they will likewise blind the eyes of such
a^ are religiou^, without Gods peculiar grace and assistance. If gifts (as it
is true) blind the eyes of wise men: they will also dazzle the eyes o Gods
servants, except he particularly protect them.

Whereupon S. Isidorus says: The eye of the mind, which the just does shut,
cannot look aloft. As if he had said in more express terms: The eye of the
mind cannot perfectly contemplate heavenly things, that is shut with the du^t
of earthly concupiscence. The mind of a religious man or woman cannot be free
to contemplate God, if as yet the dust of earthly desires do dim or dazzle it.
If the mind of a religious woman be as yet delighted in earthly tokens: it is a
token that it does not perfectly contemplate heavenly things. If it desire to
please men by receiving or sending tokens* it is a token that it does not
perfectly love God the g uer of all good things. For they are not pleasing in
Gods eyes, that seek to please others in such vanities. Whereupon the Prophet
David does affirm: * God has dissipated the bones of them that please men:
they are confounded because God has despised them. (Psalm. 52.) I desire you
likewise venerable sister in Christ, that with all devotion you will listen to
the Prophet Isay, saying: * He that shakes his hands from all gift, this man
shall dwell on high, the munitions of rocks shall be his highness, his eyes
shall see the King in his glory. Isai. 33.) As if he had said more plainly*
He that shakes his hand from al gifts for the love of God almighty, shall
dwell on high, that is, in heavenly felicity, and shall see the King of kings
in his glory. He that refuses vain and superfluous gifts for the love of
God almighty, shall see God in his majesty, and shall rejoice for ever with
all the Saints in his glory.

Wherefore most amiable sister in C^^^^, I entreat you to follow the advice of
this holy Prophet, and shake your hands from all gu^ft: if you desire to dwell
on high, sh^ke your hands from all guif^ or van the and superfluity. Again I
advise you, that you endeavor by the grace o^ God, to imitate him, who said: *
But I in justice shall appear in his sight: I shall be filled, when thy glory
shall appear. (Psa. 16.) Amen.

That a virgin ought devoutly to perform what she has promised to God.
CHAPT. LXII.
MOst dear sister, consider seriously what you have vowed to God: give your
self wholly unto him, according as you have promised. Accuse your self of your
sins, praise God for his benefi^s. Ascribe nothing to your self, that is
good or laudable: acknowledge al^ ^o proceed from him, that ha^h g^uen you
all. A^knowledge him to be merci^ull, your self a sinner: him to be true, your
self a lier. I entreat you, loving sister, that you will say with the P^^phet:
* I will enter into thy house, that is, into the monastery: in holocausts,
that is, in the spirit of contrition and compunction: I will render thee my
vows: (Psalm. 65.) that is, I will there offer my w^ole self unto thee, on the
altar of my heart, which I have consecrated unto thee. It is necessar^e, that
he, tha^ denie^h to be saved, do with all d^uotion render and accomplish tos^
good things, which he has vowed to God.

W^osoeuer does desire to attain to eternal beatitude: must of necessity
endeavor to perform those good things, which he has promised to God.
Whereupon the Prophet says: * Vow ye, and render to our Lord your God. (Psalm.
75.) As if he had said. Vow, and render your selves. Because it is requisite,
that he that does vow, do likewise render: for that by vowing, he has made
himself a debitour. Whatsoever therefore you have vowed, pay it: and it is
much better not to vow, then after a vow not to perform the things promised.

There are also certain vows common to all, others more particular or
special. Those are common vows, which we make in baptism, to wit not to
offend God, and to renounce the devil, and his works, and the vanities of the
world. But particular or special vows are, when any one does vow to become a
Monk, or a Chanon, or an Heremit, or some such like. Which if he that ha^h
vowed, perform not, he cannot be saved. Why? Because he that ha^h promised to
God to live well: if by good works he do not perfo^me, what he has promised,
he cannot be saved. Whosoever does neglect to accomplish those good things,
which he has promised to God; will never be able to attain to those things,
which God has promised. He that will not render to God those good things,
which he has promised ^im: how can he expect to receive from God, those good
things, which God has promised him? How can he expect a celestial gift from
God, that will not fulfill his vow to God? Or how does he think to receive
celestial gifts from God that neglects to perform his vows to God? Because
he is not faithful, but an infidel. He that neglects to p^rforme h s vow^s,
shall be damned among the infidel, who in good things does not accomplish his
vow.

Wher^fore my dear si^ter in Christ, I admon sh you, that you perform that
good, which you hau^ promise. B^ not rash in speaking, and ho^ in ^o ng. Do not
rash^y vow to do any thing p^^^ume no h ng without ma u^e co^^eration of you^
fo^^e, before han^. Promise not that, wh ch you are not able to p^rforme. You
w^ll be very cu^pable in the sight of God, if you ^o no^ perform ^he good,
which you have p omised. Those that fulfill not their vows, do off nd God
very much. They shall be reput^d among the infidells, that perform not their
vows. For it is better not to promise, then not to accomplish.

Howbeit venerable sister, in bad promis^s break your word, in an vn^eemely
vow, change what you had determined. Per^orme not the evil, which you have
p^omised: fulfill not that which you have unadvisedly vowed. That promise is
wicked, which with wickedness is performed. Now therefore o ^pouse of Christ, as
I have inculcated unto you often, if you shall with all devotion perform those
good things to God, which you have promised him, you shall receive from him
those eternal benefits which he has promised you. Amen.

That a Virgin ought alvvayes to consider the reason, vhy she came to
religion. CHAPT. LXIII.
MOst dear si^^er, consider what you are: know your self: call to mind the
reason of your being, the cause why you were borne, the original of your
offspring* upon what conditition you were created, to what end you are placed in
this world. Remember wha^ you are, observe the order of your nature. Let your
carriage be according to your calling. Live according to the condition of your
creation. Do all things with moderation. In all your action keep the mean:
do neither more nor less, short or beyon^ that which i^ fi^ting. Even in good
things the^e ought to be no excess.

All things are profi able, and perfect in their kind, that consi in the mean,
all things are good and laudable, that are done with moderation. Howbeit good
things themselves become hurtful by immoderate use: for all excess is
esteemed a vice. To do all things with moderation, is esteemed wisdom. Make
not that which of it self is good, to become bad by indiscretion.

Dear sister, consider likewise by premeditation, what is fitting for every
time. Consider before hand what you ought to do, and where, and when; who, and
for how long you are to do the same. By discretion search out the causes of
things. Examine all your actions with all diligence. Consider with all
carefulnes, how you are to begin, and how you are to accomplish your good
pretenses. Use discretion in all your actions. Your perf^ction will appear, if
you do all things after a discreet manner. Whatsoever good you do with
discretion, will be a virtue: whatsoever you do otherwise, will be reputed a
v^ce. For virtue without discretion does argue imperfection. Virtue without
discretion is esteemed little better then a sin. By evil custom many things
are corrupted, by evil use many thing are abused. Many things contrary to good
manners are employed otherwise the^ they ought. Let use therefore give place to
authority or prescription. Let law and reason overcome bad cu^tome.

Honest Virgin, I admon^sh you, that you retain a firm faith in your heart,
the shield of salvation on your head, the sign of the cross on your forehead,
the word of truth in your mouth, a good will in your mind, the fear, and true
love o^ God and of your ne^g^bour in your breast, the gi^^le of chastie in you^
body, honesty in your actions, sobriety in your comportment or carriage,
humility in prosperity, patience in a^uersitie, simplicity in your
conue^sation and be^auiour, a firm confidence in your Creator, a love of li^e
everlasting, perseverance in good works to the very end. Amen.

That a Virgin ought not to seek to please men by the beauty of her
countenance. CHAPT. LXIIII.
MOst dear si^^er, let us beware of pernicious beauty or fairenes, for that
the branches of all mischief do budde out from thence. He that loves the
beauty of ^he body, deceives himself. Why? Because the beauty of the body
^s deceitful, and vain it is earth and ashes, and the deceiving of man.
Wherevpo^ Solomon does affirm: * Grace is deceitful, and beauty is vain.
(Prou. 31. There have been, and are at this present very many, that have
been deceived through the beauty of the body.

Foolish men by considering the beauty of the body, fall nto the snare of
their ghostly enemy: by gazing upon the comelines of a fair face, they are
caught in the devils net, ear they are awares. Many through the beauty of
the body, become bond-slaues to sin and iniquity. God does not exact
comelines of body, but seemelines of soul. God loves spiritual comlines,
more the^ corporal: Christ is not delig^ted in corporel beauty, but in
spiritual purity. Where ore dear sister in Christ I aduize you, that you love
that beauty, in which God is delighted. Never look upon men with this
fantasy, that you may love their beauty. Never cast your eyes upon men with
thi^ intention, that you may be delighted in the comelines of their person:
N^uer gaze upon men with this fond pretense, that you may be enamoured of their
fairenes.

I likewise admonish you, that you never adorn your self with this sinister
intention, that you may please men. N^uer adorn your counte^ance with th^s
fond pretense, that you may be pleasing in their eyes. Let not your intention
be, that you may seem ^aire before men: for if you ^rick and trim up your
self with an affectat^on to seem fair in the sight of men, you do wrong to
Chri Jesus your cele ial brid groom. Si h^nce you are betrothed to Christ
Ie^us, if you desire to expose your self to the sight of mortal eyes, you are
not chaste, but an adulteress. As an adulteress you do Christ wrong, if you
show your beauty, that you may be liked and loved of men. How ca^ you be
excused from committing whoredom, if you love me^, more then Ch is it your
bridegroom? Or how can you be excused f^o^ ^o^mi^ting a ulterie, who do love
me^ more the^ Christ, to whom you have vowed your vi^g nitie? With what face
can you say, I am not an adulteress, who have given your self to Christ in a
religio house, and yet are desirous to please men through the beauty of your
contenance? By doing thus, you show you^ self to be but a queen, for this is
the fash^on of queanes, and secular women: to wit, to paint their faces, that
^hey may appear beautiful in the sight of men. O what an unseemly and absurd
thing is it, tha^ Nuns and religious women should do that, which who^es and
secular women do in the world?

Wherefore hone^t si^ter, hear what I say, mark what I admonish you. Never
deck up your countenance, that you may p^ease men, bu^ adorn the face of your
conscience with virtues within, tha^ you may be able to please Christ Jesus
your celestial bridegroom. God i^ not delighted in the beauty of the body,
but in the beauty of the mind: he is not delighted in the composition of the
countenance, but in composed manners: ^e is not delighted in the corporal
composition, but in a holy and spiritual conversation. When a devout soul is
adorned with good manners for the love of Christ within, then it becomes
fair an^ pleasing unto him: which the bridegroom does insinuat v^rie well in
the Canti^le, where he speaks to the spouse, saying. * How beauti^ull art
thou an^ how comely my deare^t, in delights. Cant. 7.] As ^f he should say.
How beautiful art thou my dearest? that is, thou art beau ifull by living
justly, virtuously, and ^el giously, and thou art my deare^t by loving me above
all things. Thou art therefore fair and beautiful, for that thou do
converse in good works by living well: and in this respect thou art my
dearest, for that thou do love me perfectly, because thou do not love any
other friend more then me. Thou art not only my friend, but also my dear ^,
because thou do more desire to please me by good worke^ internally, then
externally to please men by the beauty of thy body. For this cause thou art
not only my friend, but my dear in delights.

A holy and devout soul is said to be most dear in delights, that is, in the
delights of the holy scriptures: because he does never attain to the love and
familiarity of Christ in any perfect manner, that contemns to abound in the
deligh es of the holy scrip ure. He alone will be able to attain to the love
of Christ Jesus, who recreateth himself in the deligh^es of the holy
scriptures* such a one both loves Christ, and is beloved of Christ. But he
that more desires to please men by the beauty of his countenance, then Christ
by his good works and actions, does neither love Christ, nor ^s beloved of
Christ.

Wherefore I admon^sh you most dear sister, that you love Christ above all
things, because God the father has chosen you in him before all ages. I
entreat you likewise, that you covet to p^ease him alone, and that you will not
accept of that temporal or transitory praise, that is offered you by men. Amen.

That a Virgin out not to laugh immoderatly. CHAPT. LXV.
MOst dear sister, listen to the wo^^e, of that mo t wise Solomon: * L^ug^^er
I have reputed error; and to joy (...) have said: Why art thou dece^^^ in
vain? (Eccles. 2.) We term (...) an error, when we ought to do^ on^ thing and
do an other. Then there ^ e an errou^ ^s committed* when he (...) ^ug^^ to
veep^, does laugh and and ^ee ea^. Laughter for this cause is called (...)
erro^r, for that during the tim^ that any one does laugh, he forgets the day
of his death. He is truly deceived in vain, that takes content in temporal
delectation. They are truly deceived, that rejoice at the prosperity of th s
world: because if they would call the day of t^eir death to remembr nce, they
would ra her lament their sins then laug^ at fond and vain things.

Those that laugh at frivolous and the vain things, if they did remember the
calamiti s that are l^ke to all upon ^^m; would not laugh, but mou^ne.
Whereupon Salomo al^o (...). Laughter shall b^ m ngl^d with sorrow: and
mou^ning occupiet the later en s of joy. (Prou. 14.) Our Lord likewise says in
the Go^pel: * Blessed are they that mou^n^; ^o^ t ey shall be con^o^ted. (Man.
5. He says no^, Blessed are they that laugh; but, Blessed are th y that
mou^ne: because they indeed, are blessed that mourn for their sins, not they
that laugh at vain t^ings. They that mourn^ according to God, are blessed;
because they shall be conforted. Moreover the Apostle S. James does blame such
as laugh at vain thing, sayi^g. * Your laughter shall be turned in to
lamentation, and joy into mourning. (Iam. 4. A fool in laugh^er exalts his
voice: but a wise man will scarce laugh secretly. (Eccli. 21.)

Wherefore dear si^ter, eschew laughter as an error, and change temporal
mirth into mourning. Why? Certainly to th^s end, that by lamenting uring this
your p^lgrimage, you may become blessed. I mean, that at the hour of your
death you may be found blessed, if you bewail your offenses in this world.
Acknowledge your self to be a p^lgrime or stranger in the world, because here
is not your country, but in heaven; you have not here a permanent city:
because God ha^h promised you a celestial Hi^ru^alem in that ete^nal beatitu^e,
to which the Prophet David did desire to attain, when he said. * I rejoiced in
those thing which were said to me: we shall g^^ in^o the house of our Lord
(Psalm. 121.) The lik^ desire had that se^uant of Chri, which said: * I desire
to be disso^ued, and to be with Christ. (Phil^p. 1. He also covered to attain
to heau^n, who lamented his ouerlong abode in thi^ world in this manner: * Woe
^s ^one, that my seiou^ning is prolonged: I have dwelt with the i^habitants of
Ceda^. (Ps. 119.) When ^e said this, he did not laugh at worldly vanities, bu^
rather l^mented the tediousnes of this his earthly pilgrimage.

Therefore honest Virgin^ let your joy be always in heaven. Let the mirth of
your heart be always accompanied with modesty an^ stillne, according as the
Apostle does admon^sh us: * Rejoice (says he) in our Lord a^wayes* again I
say rejoice. (Philip. 4.) An^ in an other place. The fruit o^ the spirit, is
charity, joy, peace, etc. (Galat. 5.) Such a joy does not trouble the mind
through immederatnes of laughter, but does eleuate the soul th^^ugh a ^esire
o^ attaining to that heavenly country, wh^r^ sh^e may hear that joyful
welcome pronounced unto her. * Enter into the joy of thy Lord. Mat. 25.

The face of a man is the looking glass of his heart. By laughter a man may
easily know the heart of a r^lig^ous woman. Laughter and vnprofi^able jesting
do ^^nou^ce the vain conscience of a N^^^^e: laughter and unseemly jesting do
oftentimes m^ke known the heart of a religious woman. For if she had a cha^^
heart, she would never laugh in that immodest so^^. I^ her mind were not i^
pure, she would not laugh after that lasciu^ous manner. For so our Lord says.
* Out of the aboun^an^e of the heart the mouth speaks. Mat. 12.)

The laugh^er therefore and lightness of a Virgin^ countenance proceeds from
the aboun^ance of her most vain con^^ience. If there were not vanity in the
m^nd of a woman, she would never laug^ at things that are vain. A cha^^ mind
is more del^ghted in mourning, then in mirth. Certainly if the mi^^ of a
religious woman were truly cha^^, she would rather love to weep, then to
laugh and ^est. If she would call to mind ^er neglig^nces, and the infernal
torments, she would prefer tears, before temporal contentments. Where
laughter and iest^ng do abound, there charity does not reign. If a religious
woman did pe^fectly love Christ her brideg oome, she wo^ld not laugh but
incessan^ly mourn through a desire of seeing and enjoying him: because he that
perfectly loves Christ, ^o^h l^kewise fear: be does ^o laug^, but lament
through ^he love of so true a lover. I wonder why sh^e should desire laughing
and ie ing w o for this respect came to relig on, that she might bewail her
sins. I won^e^ she is not ashame^, who when she laugheth, laugheth so loud.
What an vns emely thing is it, that she should laugh and rest, who during the
time of thi^ p^^g^image, ought to lament her sins p^^?

How i^ it that we poote miserable me^ pass over our time in laughing and
ies^ing, w^o must render an accomp^ to God of all ou^ actions in the sight of
the Angels, and of all the Saints of heaven. It were therefore much better
for us to pass over thi^ life in lamentation and teare^: that by ^h^s means
we may obtain pardon from our Lord in the l^fe to come for all our offenses. I
therefore beseech you v^nerable sister; that you will abstain from i^sting and
laughter: and will incessantly power forth teare^ for your manifeld offenses:
shanne jesting and laughing, and incessantly bewail your sins.

Listen o spouse of Christ, what the bridegroom says to the spouse in the
Canticles. * Thine eie^ are as the fishpooles in Hesebon. (Cant. 7.) The eyes o
the spouse are sitly termed a f shpoole, because when a devout soul does
lament in respect of this her pilgrimage, she washes her self by the grace
of God from her sin. So a religious woman ought to mourn and lament without
intermission, that she may wash herself clean from her sins. Wherefore
most dear sister, if during this life we bestow our time in tears, and
estrange our selves from worldly vanities, we may ^ustly hope to obtain pardon
of our offenses.

That a virgin ought not to desire to gad abroad, and see cities. CHAPT. LXVI.
MOst virtuous sister, listen how the Prophet Hieremie bewayle^h our
iniquities, saying: * How is the gold dark^ned, the bent color changed? The
stones of the sanctuary are dispersed in the head of all the streets.
(Lament. 4. By gold we understand the life of religiou^ men, which in former
times wa^ bright and glistering by the glory of virtues: but now is become
da^k^ and obscure by unseemly actions. The best color of gold signifies the
habit of sanctity, which by good work^s was heretofore precious and much
est^^med, but now by vices and secular act^ons it is changed, and accounted
bas^ and, contemned. Verily that most exc^^len^ habit of relig^ou^ men, to wit,
of Monk s, Chanons, and Nuns is changed, when it is ^ather made and adorned
to please men, then to please God. Verily the most excellent color of gold is
changed, when the habit of such as are rel^g^ous is rather fitted, to seem
gratefu l in the sight of men by vain g^orie, the^ before God by humility.
Verily the holy habits of such as are religious are exceedingly changed in
these our days: sithence they are rather accommo^ated to seem pleasing in the
palace of some ea^thly Prince, then in the sight of God the Creator of all
thing.

It follows: The stones of the sanctuary are dispersed in the head of all
streets. (ibidem.) The stones of ^he sanctuary sig^ifie religious men, who
ought never to wander abroad, but to remain alwaye^ in the enclosure of the
monastery before the eyes of God. But now a days the stone^ of the sa^ctuarie
are dispersed in the head of all the streets, when such a^ are relig^ous
trau^rse up and down, searching after vain and worldly things.

The stones of the sanctuary are dispersed in the head of all the re^tes,
sithence relig ou men had rather be conversant in the palace o^ the King or
Prince of their country, then to ab abide with in the bounds of their mona
erie. They are dispersed, sithence they more desire to li^ten to worldly and
super^^uous speec es, then to the precepts of the holy Scriptures. They are
dispersed in the head of the streets, sithence they take greater delectation
in the banque^s and discourse^ of rich men, then in the pouerti^ and abstinence
of their religious brethren.

The servants of good ought rather to make choice of p^ase and beans, so they
may stay at home, then of the rarest fare, that the world ca^ afford them.
Religious me^ ought rather to make choice to seed upon herbs among their
brethren, then upon diversity of dainty dish^s among rich men. Religious m^n
ought rather to rejoice to sit at me^^ in the company of her poor brethren,
then to sit at the table of a mighty King. Why? Because (a^ S. Augustine does
avouch) it is better to want a little, then to have too much. It is better to
endure want in religion for the love of God, then to have much riches in the
world. Wherefore it is necessary, that every religious man, if he desire to
be saved, contemn the world, and shut h^mselfe up with in the enclosure of his
Convent. A religious man ought to shun the company of seculars, and search
only after the society of Gods servants. Religious men ought to prefer
their cloister, before the Kings court.

Now therefore hear what I will say, listen to what I will advise you. It is
better for you to rema^ne in your monastery, then to circuit the streets of
the city: choose rather to remain at home, then to gad abroad to see cities
and towns. It is better to repose at home in your cell, then to appear in the
sight of the people. If you shall enclose your self in your cloister, you
shall be loved of Christ your Savior. Which the bridegroom does well insinuat
in the Canticles, speak^ng there in this manner to his spouse: * My sister
spouse is a garden enclosed, a garden enclosed, a fountain sealed up. (Cant.
4.)

Every devout soul is understood to be a garden enclosed: because whiles she
nourishes virtues, she brings forth flowers, and with these she
nourishes, and refreshes her self: having always a care to preserve those
fruits, which she produces. Verily a devout soul is fitly termed a garden
enclosed: because whiles she withdraws her self from the tumults of the
world for the obtaining of eternal beatitude: whiles she f^ieth the company
of men: while^ sh^e hides those good works which she does for fear of
ostentation: whiles she encloseth her self for the love of God, that sh^e may
not be seen of men: whiles she contemne^h humane praise and commendation,
she hedgeth herself about by this her good intention, to the end that the
ancient enemy of mankind may not be able to rush in, to bereave her of the
precious frui^s growing within her garden. She is also said to be a fountain
sealed, because whiles she daily thinks upon heavenly things, and
continually gatheteth together the knowledge of the holy scriptures within the
recepta^le of her remembrance, a holy mind cease not to produce in her self
l^uing water^, with which she may be able to refresh her thirsty neigboures.

Wherefore most dear sister, as I told you before, if for the love of Christ
you shall (during your life) enclose your self within the walls of your
clo^ster, and shall perfectly adhere to the precepts of your holy Rule and
order: you shall after this life rejoice for ever with the same our Lord Jesus
Christ your bridegroom, in his heavenly bride-chamber. Amen.

Of temptation. CHAPT LXVII.
MOst honest sister, listen to the Apole S. James, saying: * Resist the devil,
and he will fly from you. Iam. 4.) S. Hierome also says. There is nothing
stronger then him, that ouercometh the devil: and there i^ nothing weaker then
him, that is vanquished by his own flesh. The fiery darts of the devil are to
be extingu^shed by the cold of Matins, and by the austeritie of fastings. Our
crafty enemy does continually seek, by what means he may deceive us, and
does not only endeavor to kill our bodies, but also (as a ravenous woolfe) to
devour our souls. The devil does disperse the souls of faithful men, when
he destroys them by temptation: howbeit the devil does not tempt the elect,
more then God does permit him. When the devil tempts the servants of God, he
(even against his will, does them good, sithence that by his temptations, he
teaches them to take heed.

Oftentimes those temp^ations, which the devil does stir up to destroy men,
God uses as a means to advance them in the way of per^ection. The seruan^s of
God were never able to sustain the devils temptations, if the pity of God
did not temper or re^taine their fiercenes. Although the devil do at all times
desire to tempt Gods servants, yet he cannot accomplish his malicious purpose,
unless God g ue him license. Wherefore although the whole will of the devil be
unjust and wrongful, yet his power by Gods permission, is right and lawful.

The devil of him self does unjustly seek to tempt the servants of God:
howbeit he could not temp^ those that are to be tempted, unless God gave him
leave to do it. Whereupon it is written of the devil in the first book of
Kings ^Chapt. 16.) that the evil spirit of our Lord vexed Saul. For that he
vexed him iu^^ly he is called the spirit of our Lord. But why was he evil? And
if he were evil, why was he the spirit of our Lord? But in this place in two
words is comprehended the just power of God, and the unjust will of the devil.
For he was an evil spirit by the evil will or desire which he had to do hurt;
and he was also the spirit of our Lord, by the just power which he had received.

The devil is not a commander of sin, but only a stirrer up to the same:
neither i^ he able in any other place to kindle the fuel of concupiscence, but
where he first sees g^eiuous delectations of unclean t^oughts. But if we
expel such unclean imaginations out of our mind, the diu^l forth with
departs ashamed, and the weapons of his temptations are weakened and abated.
The devil oftimes under the show of good, endeauou^e^h to deceive the seruan^s
of God, to wit, when he counterfeiteth himself to be an Angel of light: but
the descretion of holy me^ ought to be so great, tha^ they may be able to
discern between good and bad, least the devil deceive them by his su^^iltie
and fraud. For this is the demand of Iosue saying. * Art thou ou^s, or our
adversaries. (Ios 5.) For this ca^se likewise it was said to ^he Prophet
Jeremy: * If thou will s^parate the precious thing from the vile, thou shall
be as my mou^h. (Ierem. 15.) The devil in the eyes of secular men seems
terrible, but in the eyes of Gods elect he is base and vile.

Such a^ are incre^ulou^, fear the devil as if he were a lion* bu^ they that
are strong in faith, desp^se the devil a a worm: and when they see him, they
contemn him. The devil is like a slipperie snake or serpent to whose head
(that is, to whose first sugge^tion) if we resist not, he slip h wholly before
he is felt, into the very bowell^ or en^rals of our heart. The diue^ls
temp^ations are at first easily overcome: but if they be not carefully avoided,
but do pass into custom, they at length prevail very strongly, so that they
are either never sub^ued, or with great difficulty.

When the devil seeks to deceive any man, he first considers his nature and
disposition, and there bends the engine of his temptation, where he sees a
man most apt ^o fall into sin. Whereupon B. Isidorus says: The devil
tempts a man most on that part, where he sees him by the humor abounding
most inclined to sin; that according to a man's complexion he may accommodate
his temptation: L^ke as he that goes about to make a water course does not
bring it along by any other part or place, but where he knows that it will
run with greatest ease. The devil at all times seeks to deceive a man, but
especially at his end. And this is that, which in the beginning was said to the
serpent. * Thou shall lie in wait of his heel. (Genesis 3.) Then the devil lies
in wait of the heel of man, when he endeavors at the end of his life to
deceive him: because the devil does what he can to deceive a man at the hour
of his departure, whom he could not deceive during his whole life before.
Wherefore although a man be iu^^, yet let him never trust to h^mselfe in that
manner, as to think h mselfe secure: but let him always humbly beware, and
carefully fear, least he be deceived at the hour of his departure.

Wherefore beloved sister in Christ, it is necessary that we desire God
almighty, that he permit us not to be tempted above our strength or ability:
because God always restrains the force of the devil, to the end he hurt not,
as much as he will. Whereupon the holy Ghost rebukes the devil in the Cant
cles saying: * Arise Northwind, and come South wind, blow through my garden,
and let the aromatical spic^s th^^eof flow. (Cant. 4.) By the Northwin^, which
in winter causes frost, an^ mak^th men to become slo^ and dull, what o her
thing is vnder^^ood but the devil? who when he tempts and possesses all the
reprobate, he makes them to become cold and dull in doing good. But by the
South wind (which is a hot wind, and disperseth the frost) is meant t e holy
Ghost, which tou hing the m^ndes of the elect, does free them from all dulnes
and cold, and does ^ause them to become f^^uent in the love of God. Let the
No^^h wind therefore arise, that i^, le^ the diu^l depart f om ^he Church, or
from every fait full sou e, least he tempt more then is expedient; and let the
South wind come, and blow through the garden of the bridegroom, and let the
aromatical spices thereof flow: let the holy Ghost, I mean, come, and infuse
the fire of charity into men's minds and free them from temptation, and the
frost of negligence. Which whiles he does do, the aromatical spices flow:
because the holy Ghost coming, the heart which before was as it were nu^med
with cold, does stir up it self to produce virtues, and as a garden brings
forth flowers, and after flowers f^uits that are fragrant and refreshing, by
which it feeds and refreshes it self and others, by examples of piety and
devotion.

A question. Most dear brother, I pray you tell me, what (think you is the
best remedy against the temptations of my ghostly enemy?

The answer. My beloved sister in Christ, I know not a more sovereign
medicine against the temptations of the devil or of sin, then that, the more
his temptations gro^ greater, the more time you bestow in prayer. If therefore
the wicked and unclean cogitations of this world trouble your heart, and
persuade you to any thing that is unlawful or unmeet; let them by pure
prayers and sacred vigills be put to flight. Present your self daily in time
of prayer with all devotion before God almighty, that you may escape the
emminent temptation of the devil with greater facility. Know this, venerable
sister, that we ought not only to fight against the devils temptations, but
also against the vices of our o^ne flesh. Why? because * the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. (Gal. 5.) And therefore
we ought to pray with constancy and perseverance, until by Gods grace we be
able to vanquish the suggestions of our carnal desires, and the temptations of
our ghostly enemies.

Frequent prayer does extinguish our unlawful desires to evil: frequent
prayer does subdue the darts of the devil. Prayer is the first fortress
against the assaults of temptations.

Wherefore most dear sister, as I have told you already, by pure prayers and
sacred vigills, you may easily s^b^ue the temptations of your ghostly
adversary. But if as yet you feel the vexations of the flesh; if you are
troubled with fleshly motions, if the remembrance of dishonest pleasures does
provoke your mind to any uncivil thing: if your flesh impugn you, if
lasciu^ousnes tempt you, if lust allure you to sin: lay before you the
remembrance of death: set before you the future judgment: call to mind the
future torments: p^ace before you those perpetual punishments: set before your
eyes those infernal flames that are eternal: call to remembrance the most
horrible pains of hell. Let the memory of the heat of hell fire, extingu^sh
in you the heat of unlawful desire. Amen.

Of dreams. CHAPT. LXVIII.
MOst honest sister, listen to what I shall say. Oftentimes the diuell^
occurring in the night season, do by visions trouble the minds of men.
Oftentimes likewise assaulting them openly, they wh^p and lash them wel^
fauouredly. Dreams are caused by diverse means. Some ^reames happen through
repletion and over much fulness: others through exinanition or to much emptines,
which are things well known by experience: some dreams likewise arise from
our own cogitations. For oftentimes those things, which we think upon in the
day time, we dream of in the night season. Many dreams are caused through the
illusion of unclean spirits, Solomon testifying the same, who says: * Dreams
have made many to err, and they that hoped in them, have failed. (Eccli. 34.)

Howbeit some visions come to pass by a just means, that is, by the mystery
of divine revelation, as in the old Testament we read of Joseph the son of
Jacob, who by a dream was declared to be preferred before his brethren: (Genesis
37.) or a^ w^ rea^ in the Gospel of Joseph the spouse of the blessed Virgin
Marie, who by a dream was a^mon^shed to flee with the child into Egypt. (Mat.
2.) Sometimes likewise there happen permixt visions, that is, cogitations
together with illusions: as also cogitations together with re^el^tions:
according a^ Daniel in his words to Nabuchodonosor does testify, saying: *
Thou o King beganst to ^hinke in thy bed, what should be hereafter: and he
that reueal^th mystery, showed thee what things are to come. (Dan. 2.) H^wbeit
a^^hough some dreams are true, yet we ought not easily to give credit ^n^o
them, because they proceed from diue^se imagina^ions, neither can we perfectly
know from whence they come. We ought not therefore to be over facil in
bele^uing dreams: least perchance Satan transforming himself into an ang^l of
light, deceive such as are over credulou^ to listen to such fancies.

Sometimes the devils deceive certain curious persons that are obseruers of
dreams, so craftily, that some dreams come to pass even as they say: and
therefore now and then they tell somethings true, that they may deceive in
many. But albeit dreams fall out as the devils do foretell them, yet we
ought not to believe them; least they proceed from an illusion, according to
the ^estimonie of the scripture, saying: * If they say unto you, and it falls
out so indeed, do not believe it. (Deuteronomy. 13.)

Dreams are like to south saying; and they that observe them, are friends and
followers of such heathenish superstition. No credit therefore ought to be
given to dream, although they seem to be true. He that puts his hope in
dreams and divination, trusts not in God: and he is like to him, that
follows the wind, or seeks to kerch a shadow. Lying diuinations and
deceitful dreams are both vain. We ought not to give credit to dreams,
least we be deceived by them. Let our hope be always firm in God, and let us
make no account of dreams: for this is a thing very laudable, and well
beseeming us.

Wherefore most dear sister, I admonish you, that you addict not your mind to
dreams or diuinations: but let your whole hope and confidence be settled in
almighty God the creator of all things. For if you observe diuinations or
dreams you will be deceived ere you are awares. During your whole life
contemn diuinations and dreams, and place your whole hope in the providence
of God, and all things will happen prosperously unto you, both in this, and the
next world.

Of the shortness of our lives. CHAPT. LXIX.
MOst dear sister, liste^ to the words of Solomon: * Whatsoever thy hand is
able to do, work it instantly; for neither work, nor reason, nor wisdom,
nor knowledge shall be in hell, whether thou do hasten. (Eccli. 9. In this
present life only, it is lawful to do good. For in the life to come we
expect no wo^king, but a reward for the good wo^kes, which we have done. This
life is short and frail. Whereupon S. Isido^us says: He that considers the
length of this present life, not acco^^ing to the space, but according to the
en^ thereon, does profitably ponder by th^s means, how short an^ ^^serable it
^s.

Wherefore my beloved sister in Christ, i^ you se^ke true life, t^n^^ towa^^s
t^a^ lif^ which is true, ^or which you are a Christ^an, that is, toward life
eu^rla^^ing. That li^e is vital, th s mo^tal. And ^^e^^fore you ought to die to
the world in f^^sh, ^ea^^ you die in soul to C^^i^^. T^^n eu^^^e one is
though^ to ^u, when ^y^ g a^^o^^^ng, to (...) world, i^ ^ue^h only in Go^, in
whom (...) ha^h prom^^^ ^ to l^ue. The delay of this (...) to a just man seem
^^^^ksome a^^ ^ediou^, for that he ^^^a^ne^h n^^ to h^s desired coun^ie so
soon as he cou^^ wish. The time of our departure ou^ of this life i^
uncertain and unknown to man^ an^ of^^ntimes when a man thinks le^st of
death, he dies on a so^aine. Wherefore let every one hast^n to amend
whatsoever he hat done amiss, least he die in ^is iniquities, and so his ^ire
and lewdnes en^^ a once.

Those, whom the devil provoke to v^ce while they are living, he
endeavors to draw when ^^ey ^y to torments on a ^o ^ai^^. Although a man in
th s ^^e be u^t an^ per^ect, yet at the how^r o^ his ^^partu^e he fears,
least he be wor^hy of p^n shment. A quiet call^ng does commend the end or iu^t
men; that by thy we may under and, that the h^ly Angell^ are p^^s^nt to assi
them, for ^h^^ ^hey depart th s life without any g ieuous vexation or t^oubl of
min^.

C^^^^^ I^^us the son of God receiu^ h h s ^ (...) departing out o^ this life
wi g^^a^ honor in eternal beatitude. W^^r^vpon ^he ^pouse says in the
Canticles: * My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the bed of aromatical
spices. (Cant. 6.) He is said to go down, for that visiting his Church, he
comes to those with greater grace, whom he knows to breath forth the sweet
smell of a good fame to their neighbors by their pious works, and virtuous
examples. He is fed in garde^s, when he is delighted in virtues of devout
souls. He gathers lilies, when he cutteth down his elect from this life
that lasts but a moment, and makes them to pass to the joys of that other
life, which shall never have end. Of such it is said. * Precious in the sight
of our Lord, is the death of his Saints (Psalm. 15.) The web of a piece of
cloth is ^orne out by threads, and the life ^ man is by each day wasted and
deyed.

At the hour of death the souls of the elect are exceedingly affrighted,
being uncertain whether they shall pass to a reward, or to punishment.
Howbeit some of the elect are purged at the end of their lives from their
venial sins. Others again at the hour of their death become merry and
rejoice, through the contemplation of eternal happiness. Almighty God would
have the day of our death to be unknown unto us for this respect, that we
being ignorant of it, might always think it to be near at hand, and might be
by so much the more careful to do good, by how much the more uncertain we
are when we shall be called out of this world. The diuell^ at the hour of
death seize upon the souls of wicked men, that they may be tormentors in
pain, that were persuaders in sin. Then those wicked spirits enquire after
their wo^k^s when the soul departs out of the body and then they repeat the
villainies, which they have persuaded; that they may draw the soul with them to
eternal punishment. The wicked man after death is led to be tormented in hell
fire: but the ^ust man after labor does rest secure. Like as b^at^u^^ after
death does make the elect to become joyful and gla^: so w^ ought to believe
that an vnqu^n^heable fire does tormen^ the wicked.

My beloved sister in C rist, I have tol^ you th s for this c^u^^, ^at you may
know that it is (...) we continually ^esp^^^ (...) and have the day of ou^
(...) mb^a^^^. (...) are (...) S. I^mes the ^p^^^le sai^. * What ^s (...), bu^
(...) vapor, ^pp^a^^g for (...) little (...). 4. S^lo^on (...) says. * Boa^^
^ot for tomorrow, b^^ng ^gnorant what the day to come may bring forth. (Prou.
27.) Wherefore venerable sister you ought to live warily, and to consider the
en^ of your life daily: that you may be able to despise the allu^eme^^ of his
world, and attain to eternal beatitu^e. * In all you works remember your
la^^r end, and you will no^ sin o^ (...) Eccli. 7.) for if you always
consider them, you w^ll not offen^ at all, o^ ver^e ^e^dome.

For t^is cause (dea^e sister) I admonish y^u, that you ^^ke no ^elight in the
things of th s world, which are vain an^ transitory: for that without all
doubt y^u are to the. Place not your hope in ^h ngs tempo al, be^^u^e ^o auo ^
death s a th ng impossible. Why does the in se^a^ le n^sh ^^o^ce in earthly
things, wh ch is p^^pare^ to be meat for worm^s. Most (...), I have said this
for this reason, that you never forget the state of your condition. Remember
that you are du^^, and into dust you shall re urne: for so our Lord said to the
first man Adam. (Genesis 3.) Call likewise to remembrance what Job says of
^imselfe: * As rottennes I am to be consumed, and a^ a garment, that is eaten
of the moth. (Job 13.) Set the memory of death before you as a mirror: set
before you the day of your departure. Let the day of your death be continually
in your remembrance, and let the considera^ion thereof keep you from doing
amiss. Amen.

Of death. CHAPT. LXIX.
VEnerable sister, listen I pray you, to the words of a certain wise man: * O
death, how bitter is thy memory to a man, that has peace in his riches.
(Eccli. 41.) And again: * O death, thy judgment is good to a needy man, and
him that is diminished in strength, and fails in age (ibidem) Like unto this,
is that which S. Isidorus says: O death how sweet art thou to such as are
wretched, how sweet art hou to such as live in misery and affliction: how
delightful art thou to such as lament and mourn. Death adds an end to all
the miseries of this life. Death adds an end to all earthly miseries, it
cutteth off all worldly calamities. Death yields and end to the tribulations
of this world but (alas death comes slowly, when he is most desired.
Wherefore most dear sister, it is better to die well, the^ ^o live ill; it is
better not to be, then to be in misery.

A question. Dear bro^her, I entreat you to tell me, whether, we ought to
bewail such as are dead, or lament for our frien^s that are departed?

The answer. Loving sister, To this, which you ask: S. Isidorus shall give you
an answer. Although p^etie or compassion (says he^ does bid us to weep for
the faithful that are dead and gone; yet faith do h forbid us to lament for
them. We ought not therefore to weep for the faithful tha^ are departed, but
rather to g^ue thanks to God, for that he has vouchsafed to free them from
the misery of this world: and ^ath made them to pass (as we p^ously believe)
to a place of repose, light and peace. We ought not to lament for such a^ die
in Christ, whom we doubt not to pass to perpetualie.

Honest virgin, hear what I say: Those men are to be lamented when they die,
whom the devils snatch away with shame and ignominy; not those whom the
Angels receive with honor and glory. Or those are to be lamented, whom the
devils draw to the pains of hell: not those, whom the Angels carry to the
joys celestial. Or those are to be lamented, who after death are buried in
hell by the devils: not those that are placed in heaven by the Angels. T^ose
are to be lamented that die ill: not those that end well. Those are to be
lamented, that are prevented by a bad death: not those that are honored by a
good death.

Virgin of Christ, hear what I say: When I weep for those that die well, I
hurt my self, and do them no good at all: when I weep for those that are
dead, it hurts me, and does them no good. Let those therefore weep and take
on for their friends and kinds-folke that are dead and gone, that deny the
resurrection, or think that after death there is no rising again. We
therefore most dear sister, who believe that our friends desceased do reign
with Christ in heaven, ought not to weep, but to pray for them. We ought not
to weep for our dead friends according to the manner of worldlings, but rather
to make intercession to our Lord for them by our prayers, that he will
vouchsafe to release them from their pains.

Of judgment. CHAPT. LXX.
THere is a twofold judgment: the one by which men are judged in this life:
the other, by which they shall be judged in the life to come. For this cause
some are judged here by poverty, sicknesses, and sond^ie tribulations of this
world, to the end they may not be judged in the next world. Therefore to some,
temporal pain is as a purgation to purge them from their sins: but the
damnation of some is begun here, and their perfect perdition is prepared
there. Some are judged in this world by tribulation: others by the inquisition
of the strict judge shall be judged by fire in the world to come, neither shall
the justice of just men be assured of pardon. Heerevpon Job speaking of God,
says: * Both the innocent and the impious he consumes. (Job. 9.) For the
innocent is consumed by God, when his very innocence being clearly examined,
and compared to the innocence of God, becomes nothing in comparison thereof.
The impious also is consumed by God, when by the subtilitie of the divine
examination, his impiety is sought for and sifted, and justly condemned.

Christ at the day of judgment (according to the diversity of merits) will
appear to the elect sweet and affable: but to the reprobate he will appear
terrible. At the day of judgment every one shall find the judge, according as
he finds his own conscience in so much that Christ remaining in his calmnes,
he shall appear terrible only to those, whom their bad conscience does
accuse.

Most dear sister, hear what blessed Isidorus says: No man is without sin,
neither can any one be secure of Gods judgment, sithence we must render an
account even of our idle words. Woe be to us miserable sinners! woe be to us
wretched caitiffs. What answer shall we make at that day, who not only by
idle words, but also by evil works do offend daily, and do never cease from
committing iniquity? If in the judgment of almighty God the just man shall
not be secure: how shall we sinners appear? If at the examination of the
severe judge, the justice of the just man shall not be assured: what shall we
do at that day, that do daily offend? If at the day of judgment the just man
shall scarcely be saved, where shall we appear at that day, that have so often
offended?

No man at that day shall be without dread, when the heavens and the earth
shall be moved, and all the element through exceeding heat shall be dissolved,
of which day it is also said * That day a day of wrath, a day of tribulation
and distress, a day of calamity and misery, a day of darkness and mist, a day
of cloud and whirlewind: a day of the trumpet and sound, in which the stou^
and strong shall be troubled and affliccted. (Sophon. 1.)

O dear brother, what shall we say at that day, when that austere Judge shall
come to judgment? For you by making mention of his coming, have made me to
weep. You by bringing that dreadful day of judgment into my remembrance,
have forced me to break forth into tears.

My beloved sister in Christ, you have done well and like a good religious
woman: if with fear you have wept by thinking of the strict Judges coming:
because we ought now before the day of doom, to prevent his face in
confession, (Psalm. 95.) and to appear before him with tears and lamentation.
* For now is the acceptable time, now is the day of Sa^uation. (2. Cor. 6.)
Whereupon it is said in the holy scripture: * Seek ye our Lord, whiles he may
be found: invoke him, whiles he is near. (Isai. 55.) He shall be seen in
the next life, but it shall be a far off.

Wherefore most dear sister, it is ne^essarie, that we seek our Lord with our
whole heart, and with our whole mind in this present life, if we desire to find
him in the next. If we devoutly seek him during this present life, and cease
from doing ill: we shall obtain mercy of him at the day of judgment, because
he is benign and merciful. For it is written of him. * Our Lord is sweet to
all: and his commiserations are over all his works. (Psalm. 144.) Let us
therefore most loving sister, beseech that terrible and most just judge with
devotion and tear, that at the day of judgment he will not render unto us
according to our iniquities, but according to his mercies: and that he will not
permit us with the wicked to hear that terrible sentence * Get you away from
me you accursed into fire everlasting: (Mat. 25.) But that he will make us with
the elect to hear. * Come ye blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. (ibidem.)

Of exhortation. CHAPT. LXXII.
MOst dear sister, now by the grace of God I direct the ship of my speech
toward the haven: but yet notwithstanding I cannot but turn toward you in a
word or two before the conclusion. You have entreated me to write you some
instructions or admonitions to animate you to virtue. And I although not as well
as I ought, yet by the grace of God, as well as I could, have collected certain
sentences out of the writings of the holy Fathers, which I here present unto
you in this present treatise.

Behold therofore my beloved sister in Christ, you have here instructions how
to live well. You have both counsel to live well, and also a Rule. N^ ignorance
can now excuse you from sinne^ you cannot now be ignoran^ of the way of well
doing. If hereafter you do amiss, you cannot plead ignorance. Why? Because
you have now an ordinance given you, which you ought to follow: the way to live
well is now showed you You are now informed how you ought to converse in
religion, and how you are to comport your self in the same. You have now a
religious rule; you now know what it is to live well. See therefore that you
offend no more. See that from hence foreward you show your self fervent in
doing good.

By living amiss you contemn those good things which you read. If by living
amiss you contemn those good things which you read, you will be very
culpable in the sigh^ of God. Why, what is ^he reason? * Because it is better
not to know the way of salvation, then after the knowledge thereof, to turn
back from the same. (2. Pet. 2.) Retain therefore this gift which you have
received, in mind and work. Accomplish in action, what you have learned by
instruction. Vene^able sister, I charge you again and again, that you ob^e^ue
the exhortations contained in this book, as carefully as you can.

Of obsecration. CHAPT. LXXIII.
I Beseech you most dear sister in Christ, that you will be pleased to listen
willingly to those things, which I much desire to say unto you: and for that I
love you dea^ely in Christ, for this cause I am not asham^d to lay open unto
you my conscience. Nevertheless I am afraid, least by man fest ng unto you my
sins, I offend and defile your chaste ears. Howbeit I entreat you most dear
sister, that you will pardon me an worthy sinner. I wretched man and most
wicked sinner, have defiled my life almost from my very youth. I have always
joined new sins to my old: I have from t^me to time added sin to sin: I
have never ceased from sinning. The good which I ought to have done, I have
omitted: and the evil which I ought not to have done, I have committed.

I wretched man am not worthy to behold the height of heaven through the
multitude of mine iniquity: because I have provoked the anger of almighty God
against me, and have thought, spoken, and done, innumerable evil before him
from my very infancy, until this present day. I unhappy man have sinned in
my infancy, I have sinned being a boy, being a stripling, being a man of ripe
years, and lastly (which is worst of all and most dangerous) I have sinned in
my old age. I have fallen wretched man into the mire of mischief. I have
fallen being guilty into the pit of sin. I have fallen being faulty into
the gulf of iniquity. I unhappy man have fallen into the depth of wickedness.
I wretched man have descended into the filth of vice. I wretched man, I (alas)
unfortunate man, have fallen, and of my self am unable to rise again.

I therefore entreat you most loving sister, to lift me up with the hand of
your prayer. Stretch forth the hand of your prayer unto me, and pluck me out of
the depth of iniquity. Lend me the hand of you holy intercession, and deliver
me out of the pit of sin. Most dear sister, I assure my self, that if you
accomplish the covenant, wh^^h you have made with Christ* you shall both
purchase a crown of glory for your self in eternal happiness, and obtain
pardon for me in this l^fe, of all mine offenses. If you devoutly perform
those things which you have promised to Christ; you shall both ob aine pardon
for me an unworthy sinner, and you with the holy Virgins shall rejoice in the
heavenly bedchamber.

Honest virgin, I am assured, neither do I doubt of what I say: that your
vi^ginal prayers will be able to pu^chase pardon for me, albeit unworthy. If
you persevere in the service of God like as you have promised, you will both
obtain pardon for the offenses, which I have committed, and be exalted among
the quires of virgins world without end. Honest virgin, I entreat you to li en
to what I say with an attentive mind. You are my most devout sister in Christ,
by whose intercession I hope to be cleansed from the filth of my sins.

If you honorable Virgin, be a Virgin acceptable to God, and if you rest with
your bridegroom Christ Jesus in his chaste bed, you shall obtain of him for my
salvation whatsoever you shall demand. If you dear sister, shall embrace
Christ with in the chaste arms of your soul, you doubtless will be able to
abtaine forgiveness for mine offenses, be they never so foul. If you adhere to
the embraceme^ts of Christ with the most ardent odor of virginity, you will
easily obtain pardon for me, though otherwise unworthy.

If you love Christ Jesus your celestial bridegroom above all things, and
repose in his love as in the truest sweetness you may easily procure absolution
of my sins. Jesus Christ will not contristat you by denying your petition,
but will grant whatsoever you shall ask of him, who has coupled you unto
himself by the sweet link of affection: his love toward you i^ greater then
can be expressed, for that he has redeemed you with his own blood. Your love
therefore toward Christ your bridegroom, will be a means to purchase pardon
for my sins. I trust to obtain forgiveness, if you most dear sister (whom I
love much) shall enter with Christ into the heavenly bride-chamber to the
marriage. You venerable sister will be a comfort to me at the dread full day of
judgment when I shall stand trembling before the tribunal seat of God, where
I must render an account of all the sins and negligences which I have
committed. Because the merit of your sacred virginity, will diminish the pain
of mine iniquity. Amen.

FINIS

