COP^^ OF A LATE DECREE OF the Sorbone (...), for the condemning of that
impious and haericall opinion touching the murdering (...); Generally
maintained by the Jesuits, And amongst the rest, of late by IOANNES MARIANA, a
Spaniard* Together, with the Arrest of the Parliament, for (...) that Decree,
And the condem^^ (...) Marianas Book (...) burnt by the Executioner.

Taken out of the Register of the Parliament, and translated into English.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by R.B. ANNO 1610.

THE PREAMBLE.
IT has been long since observed, that England whilst it was in captivity
and bondage under the Bishop of Rome, was of all other Countries most oppressed
with his intolerable exactions, and most heavy impositions. In so much as this
our most noble Country was termed by the Frenchmen the Popes Ass; and one of
the Popes own Cardinals, in the days of Innocentius 4. understanding of the
polling and pillage which the Roman Collectors and ministers did use in this
Country, to the great grief of the inhabitants thereof, of, did in compassion
use these words to the said Pope, Anglia nostris iniurijs multoties laesa,
quasi Asina Balaam, calcaribus and fustibus caesa, tandem loquitur and
obloquitur, and se nimis and intolerabiliter conqueritur fatigatam, and
instaurabiliter damnificatam; England many times wounded with our injuries, and
beaten as it had been Balaams ass, with spurs and clubs, at the last does
speak and repine at it, and does complain, that she was too much and
intolerably wearied, and irrecouerably damnified. Into which blockish thraldom
this kingdom was brought, through the lewdness, false practices, and
impostures of the Priests, who by their counterfeit miracles, and Revelations,
touching the several pains and punishment of souls in Purgatory, so
terrified the minds of men and women (brought up in ignorance and more then
Aegyptiacall darkness) as they led them hither and thither like brute beasts,
for the compassing of their own designs, that they, and the Pope their master
might tyrannize as they list. And although the iuggling and fraud of the Bishop
of Rome, and his traitorous brood, is now more publicly known to all the
world, and especially to us here in England, then it was in former times: Yet
as if we meant to be Asses still, it is incredible, how many are daily seduced
with toys and bables by such lewd Priests and Jesuits, as having been
traitorously brought up in the Seminaries beyond the Seas, and learned all the
false sleights and iuggling tricks that those places can afford, do lurk,
upon their stealth into England, in many corners within this Realm, studying
with all their skill, not only to imitate their Predecessors in all their
wicked and lewd practices, but to go therein far beyond them; as being
Vipers of a more detestable generation, then we ever heard of in this Country,
or in any other Christian Kingdom or Nation in the days and times of our
forefathers. And as it is observed by Philo the Jew, of the old Scribes and
Pharisees before the coming of our Savior CHRIST, how mightily they prevailed
and were followed by women; so now it happens and falls out in this Kingdom
with that sex, that these new Scribes and Pharisees, the Jesuits and Priests
that adhere unto them, do strangely bewitch them, having more secret
conversation with them, under pretense of Confession, then in some politic
considerations perhaps is convenient. It is too well known to this false brood
of Romish Priests and hypocrites, how easily, and by what light sleights women
may be seduced: neither are they ignorant, when they have so done, what
mischief does thereby (for the most part) happen, in those families, where
such seduced women do live and bear rule, they being commonly very passionate
and violent in their affections and opinions. But it were less hurt, if these
new Scribes and Pharisees did limit their false practices to the inueygling and
seducing of women, and that they did not in like sort seek with all their
Engines and deuilish stratagems to infect with their poison young Gentlemen,
and such others of the Laity, as they can by any means induce to give ear
unto them; most men (not well grounded) being soon weary of the present estate
wherein they live, and ever desirous of Novelties, (especially we in England,)
if they tend to superstition and Idolatry: Whereby it falls out, according to
the nature of pestilent corruption and poison, which works very violently
when it is taken, that the late sort of Recusants in England, men and women of
all sorts (which have been perverted and poisoned by the said new Jesuitical
brood, and other Impostors of their strain) are grown into great fury,
enduring with no patience at all, to be in any wise impugned. For the more
violent the poisoned opinions are, wherewith they are perverted, the more
desperate and audacious they are become, to uphold and defend them. The
Powder Treason in England had many abetters; and that lewd Jesuit Garnet,
drawn and hanged for his Treason, is now become a Martyr, and wants not the
confirmation of his Martyrdom by a strange miracle in a straw, devised and
published by two lewd Recusants in London, one Griffin a tailor, and Wilkinson
a young silk man* And it is not to be doubted, a Jesuit very lately having
written an Apology in the behalf of the said lewd Traitor, (the same being
approved by the General of the Jesuits in Rome, after it was allowed by three
other Jesuits) but that our Recusants in England of the furious stamp, will
hereafter, as they dare, justify the said villainous Traitor. When the Oath
of Allegiance Anno 3. Regis Iacobi was made and confirmed by Act of Parliament,
it is probably supposed, that all the Recusants in England would willingly have
taken it, as sundry of them began, had not the Jesuits opposed themselves, and
procured the Pope to command the contrary. Since which time it is evident, how
many have refused, (as being bewitched and cast into a reprobate sense) to
receive the said Oath, diverse even of the more moderate sort, as well Priests
as other persons, pretending that they cannot in conscience receive it, because
the traiterous positions concerning the deposing or murdering of Princes by
their Subjects (there being little difference betwixt them, in that it has
been seldom seen, that such traiterous Subjects as were able to depose their
Sovereigns, did ever think it policy to suffer them to live) are there
termed to be Haereticall. False and diabolical assuredly they are, and
directly contrary to the two first Commandments of the second Table, Honor
thy father and mother; and Thou shall do no murder; And then, if they have
been wilfully and publicly defended by any, why they should not be
acknowledged for damnable Haeresies, I for my part cannot discern. For I agree
in judgment herein with Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln (in the days of Henry
the 3. King of this Realm) where he defines Haeresie in these words; Haeresis
est sententia humano sensu electa, Scripturae sacrae contraria, palam edocta,
pertinaciter defensa: Haeresie is an opinion chosen by humane sense, contrary
to the Scripture, publicly taught, and wilfully defended. How these false
lewd and traitorous opinions have been published to the world, and shamefully
maintained, it does appear by diverse books and Treatises, printed and
diuulged, to the perpetual shame of the Authors and approuers of them: As by
the book entitled De iusta abdicatione Hen. 3. and by another not long since,
Viz. December. 13. An. 1598. allowed to be Printed In Coenobio Madriti, at
Madrill in Spain, by Friar Peter de Onna the Principal of that Order, and
compiled by John Mariana, a Spanish Jesuit, at that time Scholemaster to the
now King. This second book is thus entitled, Iohannis Marianae Hispani e
societate Jesus, De Rege and Regis institutione libri tres ad Philippum 3.
Hispaniae Regem Catholicum; Three books of John Mariana, a Spaniard, of the
society of Jesus, Of a King, and Of the instruction, or bringing up of a King,
to Philip the 3. the Catholic king of Spain. And the Author of it has the
now Kings License, that none within his dominions under a certain penalty,
shall print it, nisi de Authoris voluntate, without the Authors consent. In
this book the murdering of Princes by private persons, is in direct terms
fully approved, and particularly the butcherous and traitorous slaughter of the
French King Henry the 3. by James Clement a Dominicane. Against which
traitorous, deuilish and hretical doctrine, diverse learned men have opposed
themselves, and lately the University of Paris, upon the barbarous murder of
their late renowned King Henry the 4. who besides their detestation of that
fact, do fully conclude the said new conceit of murdering of Kings and
Sovereign Princes, to be a very lewd and haereticall opinion. The Act of whose
proceedings coming to my friends hands, together with the Arrest of the
Parliament of Paris, for the condemning, drawing through the streets, and
burning of the said book of John Mariana, he has thought it fit to offer to
the Press to be published in Print, if so it might seem good to some in
Authority: to the end that thereby, if it were possible, not only the
malignant humors of the more furious sort of our Popish Recusants, might be
abated, when they shall find their treacherous and traitorous schoolemasters,
the Jesuits, with their adherents, to be condemned for Haereticks; but that
also the milder and more moderate sort of Priests, and other Recusants, might
be induced not to refuse the said Oath of Allegiance, because the said conceits
of murdering of Princes (a consequent in effect of deposing them) is therein
termed an Haereticall opinion. And so I refer you to the Acts themselves, as
they were copied out of the Register of the Parliament of Paris.

J. B.

ANNO DOM.M.DC.X.
CVM SACRA THEOLOGIAE facultas, ob festa Pentecostes, and Comitia priuata,
inter viros selectos Ordinis Theologiae, in presenti negotio agitata, suos
statos and ordinarios Conuentus prima aut secunda die Iunij habere non
potuisset, illos in diem quartum Iunij transtulit, atque omnes Magistros
Theologiae, in vim obedientiae, quam emisso sacramento Facultati sposponderunt,
in Collegium SORBONICVM conuocauit, vbi post Missam de Sancto Spiritu more
solito celebratam, deliberarunt super executione Senatusconsulti, cuius haec
summa est.

CVria Parlamenti, Decurijs, maiore rerum Capitalium, atque Edictivnd
congregatis, procedendo ad iudicium and litem capitalem, ac extraordinariam,
Cognitoris generalis Regis postulatione instructam, aduersus nefandissimum,
crudelisimum, and execratissimum parricidium, in sacratam personam HENRICI 4.
Regis patratum, audito Cognitore generali Regio, decreuit, atque decernit, vt
diligentia and procuratione Decani and Syndici Facultatis Theologiae, eadem
facultas quam primum conuocetur, ad deliberandum super confirmatione Decreti
praedictae Facultatis, quod die xiij. Decembris Anno M. CCCC. XIII. a centum
quadraginta and vno Theologis eiusdem facultatis constitutum, dehinc Concilij
Constantiensis authoritate roboratum fuit. Quo Decreto definitur; Nemini
licitum esse, quacunque occasion, causa vel praetextu quaesito, Sacrosanctis
Regum and aliorum Principum supremorum personis vim infer; Deinde, vt
Decretum quod in eiusdem facultatis Comitijs statuetur, omnium Doctorum, qui
Comitijs and deliberationi interfuerint, nec non etiam omnium Baccalaureorum,
qui cursum Theologicum decurrunt, syngraphis muniatur; Quo tum demum, audito
super ear Cognitore generali Regio, Curia decernat quod iustum and rationi
conform erit. Datum in Parlamento xxvij. Maij, Anno Domini 1610. Signatum.
Voisin.

ITaque eadem sacra facultas, vt mandato amplissimi Ordinis, tam iusta and
necessaria praecipientis obtemperaret, primum priuata, deinde publica habuit
Comitia. Considerans autem sibi ex officio incumbere, vt suam Censuram and
Iudicium doctrinale cunctis illud poscentibus declaret, atque Parisiensem
Academiam a primis suis incunabilis parentem and alumnam optimae ac
saluberrimae Doctrinae perpetuo extitisse, and tranquillitatem Reip. ab ordine,
ordinem porro and pacem (secundum Deum opt. Max.) a Regum and Principum salute
pendere; ac solius esse principis aut potestatis politicae, gladio vti; atque
insuper paucis ab hinc annis nonnulla peregrina, seditiosa atque impia dogmata
inualuisse, quib. plerique priuati homines dementati, Sacrosanctos Reges and
Principes excrranda appellatione Tyranni contaminare, hocque nefario praetextu,
necnon Religionis, pietatis, aut boni publici iuuandi, vel promouendi specie,
in Sacrosancta Regum and Principum capita conspirare, suasque manus parricidas
sacro Illorum sanguine cruentare, and continuo patentissimam fenestram aperire
non horrent ad perfidiam, ad frauds, insidias, proditiones, populorum
interneciones, vrbium, Prouinciarum, ac Regnorum florentissimorum excidia, and
alia innumerabilia nequitiae genera, quae ciuilia aut interna bella concomitari
solent, haec demum pestifera and diabolica dogmata hodie in causa esse, vt qui
discessionem ab Ecclesia Catholica Romana fecerint, in suo errore obdurescant,
virosque religiosos, Doctores and Praelatos Catholicos, quanquam insontes,
quasi talia docerent vel authorarent, fugiant and detestentur:

Eadem (inquam) Facultas haec and similia considerate perpendens, magna
animorum consensione and alacritate, ista peregrina and seditiosa dogmata,
velut impia, haeretica, societati civilly, paci and tranquillitati publicae, ac
Religioni Catholicae penitus contraria execratur, atque condemnat. In cuius rei
fidem, ac testimonium, Decretum antiquum sibi de integro renouandum esse duxit,
quod ducentis ab hinc annis a 141 Theologis sancitum fuit, in condemnationem
huius execrabilis propositionis.

Quilibet Tyrannus potest and debet licite and meritorie occidi, a quocunque
suo vassallo aut subdito, and per quemcunque modum, per insidias and per
adulationes, non obstante quocunque iuramento, aut confoederatione facta apud
eum, non expectando sententiam aut mandatum Iudicis cuiuscunque. Haec assertio
sic generaliter posita, and secundum acceptionem huius vocabuli (Tyrannus) est
error in nostra fide, and doctrina bonorum morum, and est contra praeceptum
Dei, Non occides: and contra hoc, quod dicit Dominus noster, Omnes qui gladium
acceperint, gladio peribunt. Item haec Assertio vergit in subuersionem totius
Reipub. and vniuscuiusque Regis aut Principis. Item dat viam and licentiam ad
plura alia mala, and ad frauds and violationes fidei, and iuramenti, and ad
proditiones, and generaliter ad omnem inobedientiam subiecti ad Dominum suum,
and ad omnem infidelitatem and diffidentian vnius ad alterum, and consequenter
ad aeternam damnationem. Item ille qui affirmat obstinate talem errorem, and
alios qui inde sequuntur, est haereticus, and tanquam haereticus debet puniri,
etia^ post suam mortem. Notetur in Decretis xxiij. ix. V. and Act. Anno M.
CCCC. XIII. die Mercurij xiij. Decembris.

Quae Censura Facultatis Parisiensis in Synodo Constantiensi, Sessione xv. Anno
M. CCCC. XV. pridie Nonas Iulij, his conceptis verbis comprobata fuit.

PRaecipua sollicitudine volens haec sacrosancta Synodus, ad extirpationem
erroru^ and haeresium in diuersis mundi partibus inualescentium prouidere,
sicut tenetur, and ad hoc collecta est, nuper accepit, quod nonnullae
assertiones in fide, and bonis moribus, ac multipliciter scandalosae, totiusque
Reip. statum, and ordinem subuertere molientes, dogmatisatae sunt; inter quas
haec Assertio delata est; Quilibet Tyrannus potest and debet licite and
meritorie occidi per quemcunque vassallu^ suum, vel subditum, etiam per
clanculares insidias, and subtiles blanditias vel adulationes, non obstante
quocunque prstito Iuramento, vel confoederatione facta, nec expectata
sententia, vel Mandato Iudicis cuiuscunque.

Aduersus hunc errorem satagens haec sancta Synodus insurgere, and ipsum
funditus tollere, praehabita deliberatione matura declarat, decernit, and
definit, huiusmodi doctrinam erroneam esse in fide and moribus, ipsamque
tanquam haereticam, scandalosam, and ad frandes, deceptiones, mendacia,
proditiones, periuria, vias dantem, reprobat, and condemnat. Declarat insuper,
decernit, and defifinit, quod pertinaciter doctrinam hanc perniciosissimam
asserentes, sunt haeretici, and tanquam tales, iuxta Canonicas sanctiones
puniendi.

Sacra igitur Facultas stricte, accurateque, exploratis omnium and singulorum
Doctorum suffragijs, Primo statuit antiquissimam illam Censuram Facultatis,
Synodi Constantiensis sanctione firmatam, non modo iterari, verum etiam omnium
hominum animis inculcari debere. Secundo censet seditiosum, impium, and
haereticum esse, quocunque quaesito color, a subdito, vassallo, aut extraneo,
sacris Regum and Principum personis vim inferri. Tertio statuit, vt omnes
Doctores and Baccalaurei Theologiae, quo die in instituta and Articulos
Facultatis iurare consueuerunt, in hoc similiter Decretum iurent, ac syngraphae
suae appositione obtestentur, se illius veritatem, docendo and concionando,
diligenter explicaturos. Quarto, vt haec Acta cum Latin tum Gallice typis
mandentur, and promulgentur.

De mandato Domini Decani and sacrae Facultatis Theologiae Parisiensis, Sign
DE LA COVR.
Collatione facta. Sign. VOYSIN.

VEu, par la COVR, les Grand Chamber, Tournelles, and l'Edict assemblees, le
Decret de la Faculte de Theology Assemblee le quatriesme du present mois de
Iuin, suiuant l'Arrest du 27. May precedent sur le renouuellement de la Censure
doctrinale de la dicte Faculte faicte en l'an 1413; confirmee par le S. Concile
de Constance; Que c'est heresy pleine d'impiete, de maintenir qu'il soit
loisible aux subjects, ou estrangers soubsquelque pretexte and occasion, qui
puisse estre, d'attenter au persons sacrees des Roys, and Princes Souuerains;
Le liver de IEAN MARIANA, intitule De Rege and Regis institutione, imprime tant
a Mayence qu'autres lieux, contenant plusieurs blasphemes execrables contre le
feu Roy HENRY 3. de tresheureuse memoire; les persons and estats des Roys,
and Princes souuerains; and aultres Propositions contraires au dict Decret;
Conclusions du Procureur general du Roy; Lamatiere mise en deliberation;

La dicte Cour a ordonne, and ordonne, que le dict Decret du 4. du present Mois
de Iuin, sera registre es Registres d'Icelle; ouy and ce requerant le Procureur
general du Roy; and leu par chacun an a pareil iour, 4. de Iuin, in l'assemblee
de la dicte Faculte, and publie au premier iour de Dimanche es Prosnes des
Paroisses de ceste Ville, and Faulxbourgs de Paris: Ordonne, que le liver de
MARIANA sera brusle par l'Executeur de la haute Justice deuant l'Eglise de
Paris. Et a fait and fait inhibitions and defenses a toutes persons de
quelque estat, qualite and condition qu'elles soyent, sur peine de crime de
lose Majesty, d'escrire ou fair imprimer aucuns livers, ou Traite
contreuenants au dict Decret, and Arrest d'Icelle. Ordonne, que copies
collationnees aux Originaux du dict Decret, and present Arrest seront enuoyees
aux Bailliages and seneschaussees de ce Ressort, pour yestre leaves and publiees
en la form and maniere accostumee; and outre es Prosnes des Parroisses des
Villes, Faulxbourgs and autres Bourgs, le premier Dimanche du Mois de Iuin.
Enioint aux Baillifs and Seneschaux proceder a la dicte publication, and aux
substituts du Procureur general du Roy, tenir la main a l'execution; and
certifier la Cour de leur diligence au mois. Fait en Parliament le 8. de Iuin.
Mil* six cent dix.

COPIED OVT OF THE Acts of the Court of Parliament.
ANNO DOMINI 1610.
THE SACRED FACVLTIE OF DIVINES, not being able, by reason of the feast of
Pentecost, and of some private meetings held touching this present business by
certain selected persons of that Order, to keep their annual, and ordinary
Assemblies on the first and second of June, assigned them over unto the fourth
of the same, and summoned by virtue of their obedience sworn unto that
Faculty, all the Graduats in Divinity, unto the College of the SORBONE. Where
after celebration of the Mass de sancto Spiritu, (as the usual manner is) they
entered into consultation touching the performance and execution of the Arrest
of Parliament: the tenor whereof ensues.

THE COURT, the Great Chamber, the Tournell, and the Chamber of the Edict
being assembled, and proceeding to judgment in the process criminal and
extraordinary, commenced and prosecuted at the suit of the Kings Attorney
General, against the most barbarous, bloody, and execrable murder committed
upon the sacred person of King HENRY the fourth, the matter being set forth by
the Kings said Attorney, has ordered, and does hereby order, that by the
diligence and procurement of the Deane and Syndicke of the Faculty of Divines,
the said Faculty be forthwith assembled, to consult together touching the
confirmation of a certain Decree made the 13. of December 1413. by 141.
Divines of that Faculty, and afterward ratified by the authority of the
Counsel of Constance. In which Decree it is defined: That it is not lawful
for any man upon what occasion, cause, or devised color soever, to attempt any
violence against the sacred persons of Kings and Sovereign Princes. Next, that
order betaken, that what shall be decreed in the assembly of the said Faculty,
be confirmed by the subscription of all the Doctors, and Bachelors now passing
their course in Divinity, which shall be present at the said meeting and
consultation. That thereupon the Court, calling the Kings Attorney thereunto,
may take such course as shall be agreeable to justice and equity. Given in
Parliament on the 27. of May, AN NO DOM. 1610. Signed. Voisin.

WHerefore, the said sacred Faculty, for the performance of the direction and
commandment of the said Court in a matter so just and requisite, did first
assemble themselves privately, and then in public. And weighing with
themselves; That they were in duty bound to yield their opinion and judgment
in points of doctrine to whosoever should demand it: That the University of
Paris has ever from her first original, been the mother and nourse of the most
Catholic, and wholesome doctrine: That the peace of a State depends chiefly
upon Order, and both order and peace (next and immediately under God,) upon the
safety and preservation of Kings and Princes: That it only appertains unto
the Prince and Civil power to use the sword: That notwithstanding within these
later years, certain strange, seditious, and impious Positions have taken
footing, whereby many private persons being transported, fear not to stain
anointed Kings and Princes with the detestable term and style of Tyrants, and
under this accursed pretense, or by color of furthering or advancing Religion,
piety, or the public good, do conspire against the anointed persons of
Kings and Princes, imbrewing their murtherous hands with their sacred blood,
and thereby opening a large window to all infidelity, practices, treacheries,
treasons, slaughters of people, ruins of Cities, Countries, and most
flourishing kingdoms, and a thousand sorts of mischiefs besides, (the
ordinary attendants of Civil, and intestine wars:) and that lastly these
pestilent and diabolical points of doctrine, are the cause that such as have
departed from the Catholic Roman Church, are obdurate in their errors,
shunning, and detesting (although without cause) other Religious persons, and
Catholic Doctors and Prelates, as if they were the Authors or patrones of
those opinions:

These and such like reasons the Faculty maturely pondering, does with great
unanimity of consent and alacrity, accurse and condemn the said strange and
seditious opinions, as impious, haereticall, and most repugnant to Civil
society, to the peace and good of the State, and to Catholic religion. In
confirmation and witness whereof, they thought it fit to renew the ancient
Decree established two hundred years ago by 141. Divines, in condemnation of
this damnable Position: That every Tyrant may and ought lawfully and
meritoriously to be murdered by any his vassal or subject whatsoever, and by
what mean soever, whether by treachery, or subtle insinuation,
notwithstanding any Oath or promised Allegiance made unto him, nay, not so much
as expecting the sentence or warrant of any Judge whatsoever.

This Assertion being thus generally laid, and as this word Tyrannus, is or
may be taken, is an error in faith, and in the doctrine of good manners, being
flatly repugnant to that Commandment of God: Thou shall not kill: and to that
saying of our Savior: That whosoever shall strike with the sword, shall perish
with the sword. The same also tends to the subversion of the whole Common
wealth, and of all Kings and Princes: giving way, and free liberty to a world
of mischiefs, fraud, breach of faith and oath, treason, and in a word to all
disobedience of the Subject toward his Lord, and to all disloyalty and
distrust of the one to the other, and consequently to eternal damnation.
Whosoever therefore shall obstinately maintain the said error and others therout
ensuing, is an haereticke, and to be punished as an haereticke, even after
death. Let it be recorded in the decrees 23.9. V. and dated 1413. on Wednesday
the thirteenth of December.

This Censure of the Faculty of Paris was after ratified in the Council of
Constance sess. 15. on the 6. of July, 1415: in these words:

THis sacred Synod having an especial care (as in truth it ought, being to
that purpose assembled) to provide for the extirpation of all errors and
haeresies, which have set foot into diverse parts of the world, has been
lately advertised, that certain Assertions have been published very
scandalous as well in faith and manners, as sundrywise else, and tending to the
overthrow of the whole State and government of the Common wealth, amongst which
this is delivered to be one: That every Tyrant may and ought lawfully and
meritoriously to be murdered by any his Vassal or Subject whatsoever, either
by close treachery, or by smooth practices, and insinuations, notwithstanding
any Oath taken or promise of Allegiance made unto him: nay not so much as
expecting the sentence or warrant of any Judge whatsoever.

Against which error this holy Synod addressing it self to make head, and
utterly to extinguish the same, after mature deliberation does pronounce,
decree, and define, that this doctrine is erroneous in faith and manners, and
does reject and condemn it, as haereticall and scandalous, opening a gap to
fraud, deceit, dissimulation, treason, and perjury. It does moreover declare,
decree, and define, that they who shall obstinately maintain this pernicious
doctrine, are haereticks, and as such to be punished, according to the
Canonical decrees.

Wherefore, the sacred Faculty, having strictly and carefully demanded the
suffrages of all and every of the Doctors, does determine; first, that the
said most ancient Censure of the Faculty confirmed by the Decree of the
Counsel of Constance, ought not only to be renewed, but by frequent iteration
to be imprinted in the minds of all men. Secondly, that it is traitorous,
wicked, and haereticall, that any subject, vassal, or stranger should upon any
pretext whatsoever, offer violence unto the sacred persons of Kings and
Princes. Thirdly it decrees, that all Doctors, and Bachelours of Divinity,
upon that day when they are accustomed to swear unto the Orders, and Articles
of the Faculty, they do likewise swear unto this decree, and by their
subscription promise, that they will in their Lectures and Sermons diligently
set forth the truth thereof. Fourthly, that these Acts be published in Print,
as well in Latin, as in French.

By the direction of the Deane, and Sacred Faculty of Divines at Paris. Signed
DE LA COVR.
Compared with the original, Signed. VOISIN.

THERE being viewed by the Court, the great Chamber, the Tournell and the
Chamber of the Edict assembled, the Decree of the Faculty of Divines meeting
together on the 24. of this present month of June, according to an Arrest of
the 27. of May last past, for the renewing of the censure and doctrinall
resolution of the said Faculty, delivered in the year 1413. and confirmed by
the holy Council of Constance, that it is a very impious haeresie, to
maintain it to be lawful for Subjects or strangers, upon what pretense and
occasion soever, to attempt upon the sacred persons of Kings and Sovereign
Princes: there being also viewed a certain book written by JOHN MARIANA,
entitled: De Rege and Regis institutione: printed as well at Mayence as
elsewhere, containing many detestable blasphemies against the late King of
happy memory HENRY the third; and aagainst the persons and States of Kings and
Sovereign Princes, and diverse other Positions contrary to the said Decree: the
Kings Attorney General having concluded, and the matter put to consultation:

THE said Court has ordered and does order, that the said Decree of the
fourth of this present Month of June, shall be registered in the Records of the
same, at the motion and request of the Kings Attorney general, and read
yearly on the same day of the 4. of June in the assembly of the said Faculty,
and that it shall be published on the next Sunday in service time in the Churches
of the City and Suburbs of Paris: It decrees moreover, that Marianas said
book shall be burnt by the common Executioner before our Ladies Church in
Paris: and does inhibite and forbid all persons of what estate, quality, or
condition soever, on pain of high Treason, to write, or cause to be printed
the said books or Tractats, being repugnant to the Decree aforesaid, and to
the Sentence of this Court. It decrees, that copies examined by the originals
of the said Decree, and of this present Arrest, shall be sent abroad into the
Balliages, and Shriualties, of this precinct, there to be read and published in
the form and manner accustomed; and moreover in time of Service in the Churches
of all Cities, Suburbs, and other towns on the first Sunday in June. It
enioyneth the Bailiffes and Shiriffes to proceed to the said publication, and
to the Deputies of the Kings Attorney general to see to the execution, and to
certify the Court of their diligence in this behalf. Given in Parliament the
8. of June 1610.

THat you be not ignorant of one particular occasion of these proceedings
against Marianas book (which my friend in his Preface has not touched)
concurring with the general detestation of that impious doctrine of murder,
the practice whereof we have seen upon the persons of two late Kings of
France, HENRY the third and fourth: you shall understand that Rauillac, the
villain, who gave that accursed stroke, which has made all France to bleed,
being (as in his Examinations he delivered) a long time in deliberation ere he
could resolve, that it was lawful to kill the King: falling upon that book of
Mariana, he found his conscience (as he said) cleared of all scruple in that
point, and himself fully resolved to undertake it. And certainly the cordial
doctrine, which he from thence received, so settled his resolution before hand,
so steeled his heart in the execution, and after the deed seared and mortified
his conscience in such sort, as that he was so far from any remorse of the
fact, as the conscience and comfort thereof seemed to harden him against all
sense of his punishment. For being urged by torture to confess the truth by
whom he was set on work, I will give you a taste of one or two of his
confessions, as I received them from thence. At one time being examined upon
the rack, who were his perswaders to that accursed deed: he desired to be
loosed, and he would confess the truth: which being done, and he set on his
feet, he stretching out himself, told them: The truth was, that now he found
himself at much more ease, then before, when he was on the torture. And this
was all the truth, he would at that time confess. At another time President
Iannin being appointed to examine him, and pressing him very straightly to
confess, who had incited him to this fact: he bad the Clerk set down that
President Iannin had incited him thereunto: who detesting the villains
desperate audaciousnesse therein: he replied again; Well Sir, if I should say
so much at my death, I believe it would trouble you. These things being
advertised from thence, I thought fit to impart unto you, as arguments of the
Caitises impenitency, and final obduration, touching that execrable fact,
grounded upon the doctrine so condemned: the first sparks whereof being (as
appears) kindled in France about two hundred years since, were then trod
under foot by the Sorbone and the Council of Constance: but since have been
revived by the Jesuits (the most industrious purueyours for the Popes Court)
and by their Lectures and books nourished and brought to those flames that now
we see: as it has been not seldom objected unto them, but never yet by them
well denied; I am sure the doctrine never publicly condemned by any resolution
of their schools, as heretofore, and of late by the College of Sorbone. So as
whosoever put the knife into the villains hand, it is evident, that the
metal whereof it was made, (I mean the aforesaid doctrine) was tempered in
their forge, and their books (as it is confessed) gave edge unto it. Neither
to say truth, can it ever be imagined, that these wretched souls (such as
this Rauillac and before him John Chastel) being perplexed in conscience, and
almost brought to the pit of despair, with remorse of some sins of frailty,
durst ever have adventured upon a malicious and deliberate purpose of murder,
especially of their Sovereign; had they not been resolved in conscience by
their ghostly fathers, (which office the Jesuits have almost engrossed to
themselves) that howsoever it were a very dangerous sin to murder a private
person: yet was it a merit, able to redeem a world of former sins, to kill
a king, such a one, as they should point out unto them. But whatsoever the
ground may be, certain it is, there is a very hard opinion conceived of them
in France touching the late murder of the King, as may appear by a brief
Pasquill set up in Paris to that purpose, the occasion whereof was this. After
the Jesuits had stood a while banished by the Arrest of Parliament, it is too
well known how the late King (though against the general wish of the whole
State, and the advice of many his loyal servants) repealed that Arrest,
defaced the Marble Pillar, wherein their banishment and the causes thereof were
recorded, recalled them home into his Realm (all men wondering to what purpose
it might be, unless it were to that, which since has happened) took some of
them too near his bosom, and that he might assure (if it were possible) their
loyalty unto him, erected for their society a stately College in la Flesche,
the place where he himself was borne. These religious persons, in exchange of
such his gracious favors toward them, bare him likewise so zealous an
affection, as they were never satisfied, until they had gotten his heart into
their hands (the richest treasure he could have endowed them withal) to
initiate therewith the Chapel of their new erected College. Which being
obtained, and delivered unto them in a box of Silver, laid on a pillow of red
Velvet, they received with solemn countenance, to carry in triumph to their
said College. At whose departure it is by the way reported, that a chief
President of Paris, let fall a question unto them, coming to take their leave:
Whether the Kings tooth which Chastel stroke out, were likewise enclosed in the
box with the heart. This favor of obtaining the Kings heart to bury in their
College, gave occasion (amongst many other) of this Pasquill: Ce n'est, qu'a
vous (trouppe sacree)
Quo'n doibt bailler le Coeur des Roys:
Quand les grands Cerfs sont aux abboys,
On en doibt aux chiens la Curee.
It Is you alone (you sacred crew)
To whom the hearts of Kings are due.
When the great Hearts are hunted hard,
The entrails are the Hounds reward.


The riddle may perhaps seem at the first somewhat obscure, but I know you will
read it without a Light. And therefore I spare my pains to expound it, having
already done more then I could well do, to turn it in rhyme. And so having
acquainted you with those aduertisements which came to my hands touching this
business, being certified hither by a very credible Author, which I have to
show; I cease to trouble you.

J. W.


