An Admonition To all such as shall intend hereafter to enter the state of
Matrimony, godlily and agreeably to laws
FIrst, that they contract not with such persons as be hereafter expressed, nor
with any of like degree, against the law of God, and the laws of the Realm.

Secondly, that they make no secret contracts, without consent and counsel of
their Parents or Elders, under whose authority they be: contrary to Gods
laws, and man's ordinances.

Thirdly, that they contract not anew with any other upon divorce and
separation made by the Judge for a time, the laws yet standing to the
contrary.

MArriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled. But whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13.

To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her husband. He that can not contain, let him marry: For better it is to
marry, then to burn. 1. Cor. 7.

Unto the married I command, not I, but the Lord: Let not the wife depart from
her husband. But if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled
unto her husband. And let not the husband put away his wife. 1. Cor. 7.

LEVITICUS. XVIII. and XX. None shall come near to any of the kindred of his
flesh to uncover her shame: I am the Lord.
A man may not marry his A Woman may not marry with her Secundus gradus in
linea recta ascendente. Secundus gradus in recta linea ascendente Con. Auia 1
Grandmother. 1 Grandfather. Con. Auus af Aui relicta 2 Grandfathers wife. 2
Grandmothers husband. af. Au^ae relictus af. Prosocrus, vel socrus magna. 3
Wives Grandmother. 3 Husbands grandfather. af. Prosocer, vel socer magnus
Secundus gradus, inaequalis, in linea transuersa ascendente. Secundus gradus
inaequalis in linea transuersali ascendente. (...) Amita 4 Fathers sister. 4
Fathers brother. Con. Patruus (...) Matertera 5 Mothers sister. 5 Mothers
brother. con. Auunculus (...) Patrui relicta 6 Fathers brothers wife. 6 Fathers
sisters husband. af. Amitae relictus (...) (...) relicta 7 Mothers brothers
wife. 7 Mothers sisters husband. af. Materterae relictus (...) (...) 8 Wives
fathers sister. 8 Husbands fathers brother. af. Patruus mariti (...) (...) 9
Wives mothers sister. 9 Husbands mothers brother. af. Auunculus mariti, (...)
recta ascendente. Primus gradus in linea recta ascendente. (...) (...) 10
Mother. 10 Father. Con. Pater (...) (...) ^1 Stepmother. 11 Stepfather. af.
Vitricus (...) (...) 12 Wives mother. 12 Husbands father. af. Socer (...)
descendente. Primus gradus in linea recta descendente. Con. Filia 13 Daughter.
13 Son. Con. Filius af. Priuigna 14 Wives daughter. 14 Husbands son. af.
Priuignus af. Nurus 15 Sons wife. 15 Daughters husband. af. Gener Primees
gradus aequalis in linea tra^suersali Primus gradus aequalis in linea
tra^suersali Con. Soror 16 Sister. 16 Brother. Con. Frater af. Soror vxoris 17
Wives sister. 17 Husbands brother. af. Leuir af. Fratris relicta 18 Brothers
wife. 18 Sisters husband. af. Sororis relictus Secundus gradus in linea recta
descendente Secundus gradus in linea recta descendente Con Neptis ex filio 19
Sons daughter. 19 Sons son. Con. Nepos ex filio con. Neptis ex filia 20
Daughters daughter. 20 Daughters son. con. Nepos ex filia af. Pronurus.i.
relicta nepotis ex filio 21 Sons sons wife. 21 Sons daughters husband.
af. Progener.i. relictus neptis ex filio af. Pronurus.i. relicta nepotis ex
filia 22 Daughters sons wife. 22 Daughters daughters husband. af. Progener.i.
relictus neptis ex filia af. Priuigni filia 23 Wives sons daughter. 23
Husbands sons son. af. Priuigni filius af. Priuignae filia 24 Wives
daughters daughter. 24 Husbands daughters son. af. Priuignae filius Secundus
gradus inaequalis, in linea transuersali descendente. Secundus gradus
inaequalis, in linea transuersali descendente. Con. Neptis ex fratre 25
Brothers daughter. 25 Brothers son. Con. Nepos ex fratre con. Neptis ex
sorore 26 Sisters daughter. 26 Sisters son. con. Nepos ex sorore af. Nepotis
exfra rerelicta 27 Brothers sons wife. 27 Brothers daughters husband. af.
Neptis ex fratre relictus af. Nepotis ex sorore relicta 28 Sisters sons wife.
28 Sisters daughters husband. af. Neptis ex sorore relictus af. Neptis vxoris
ex fratre 29 Wives brothers daughter. 29 Husbands brothers son. af. Leuiris
filius.i. nepos mariti ex fratre af. Neptis vxoris ex sorore. 30 Wives sisters
daughter. 30 Husbands sisters son. af. Gloris filius.i. nepos mariti ex
sorore.

1 IT is to be noted, that those persons which be in the direct line, ascendent
and descendent, can not marry together, although they be never so far
asunder in degree.

2 It is also to be noted, that consanguinitie and affinity (letting and
dissoluing Matrimony) is contracted as well in them and by them, which be of
kindred by the one side, as in and by them, which be of kindred by both sides.

3 Item, that by the laws, Consanguinitie and afinitie (letting and dissoluing
Matrimony) is contracted as well by unlawful company of man and woman, as by
lawful marriage.

4 Item, in contracting betwixt persons doubtful, which be not expressed in
this table, it is most sure, first to consult with men learned in the laws, to
understand what is lawful, what is honest and expedient, before the finishing
of their contracts.

5 Item that no Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall solemnize Matrimony out of his
or their cure or Parish Church or Chapel, and shall not solemnize the same in
private houses, nor lawless or exempt Churches, under the pains of the law,
forbidding the same. And that the Curate have the Certificates, when the
parties dwell in diverse parishes.

6 Item the bands of Matrimony ought to be openly denounced in the Church by
the Minister, three several Sundays or festival days, to the intent, that
who will and can allege any impediment, may be heard, and that stay may be
made till further trial, if any exception be made there against it upon
sufficient caution.

7 Item, who shall maliciously object a frivolous impediment against a lawful
Matrimony, to disturb the same, is subject to the pains of the law.

8 Item, who shall presume to contract in the degrees prohibited (though he do
it ignorantly) besides that the fruit of such copulation may be judged
unlawful, is also punishable at the Ordinaries discretion.

9 Item, if any minister shall conioyne any such, or shall be present at such
contracts making, he ought to be suspended from his ministry for three
years: and otherwise to be punished according to the laws.

10 Item, it is further ordained, that no Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do preach,
treat, or expound of his own voluntary invention, any matter of
controversy in the Scriptures, if he be under the degree of a master of Art,
except he be licensed by his Ordinary thereunto, but only for the
instruction of the people, read the Homelies already set forth, and such
other form of doctrine as shall be hereafter by authority published. And shall
not innouate or alter any thing in the Church, or use any old Rite or
Ceremony, which be not set forth by public authority.

Set forth by the most reverend father in God, Matthew Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.

