A Bill of Fare: For, A Saturday nights Supper, A Sunday morning Breakfast, and
A Monday Dinner, Described in a pleasant new merry Ditie. To the tune of Cook
Laurel, or, Michaelmas Term.


I Will tell you a Jest, which you will hardly believe:
No matter for that, you shall hear't right or wrong,
A hungry appetite may perhaps grieve,
To hear such a Banquet set forth in a Song,
He rather would have it then hear on it he will say,
But I cannot promise him such a fair sight;
All that I can do, is with words to display,
What we had to Supper on Saturday night.
Inprimis, four Fancies, two boyld, and two roast,
A large dish of En^imions (good for one's drink)
Sir Pelican Chickens as hot as a toast,
And six Birds of Paradise, bra^e meat I think,
A couple of Phoenix, a Cock and a Hen,
That late from Arabia had tan^ their flight.
I think such a Banquet was never made for men,
As we had to Supper on Saturday night.
Two pair of Elephants Pettitoes boyld,
A green Dragon Spitchcock (an excellent dish)
One mess by the Cook was like to be spoiled,
And yet by good hap 'twas to every one's wish:
It was a Rhenoceros boyld in Alegant,
To all who did taste it, gave great delight:
Judge whether we have not occasion to vaunt
Of this our rare Supper on Saturday night.
A Calves head was roast with a pudding in the belly,
(Of which all the women did heartily feed)
A dish of Irish Hearts horns boyld to a Ielly,
(Which most men esteemed as a good dish indeed)
I had almost forgotten to name a sowc'd Owl,
Brought up to the Master o'th Feast as his right,
He loved it he said above all other Foul,
And this was out Supper on Saturday night.
The next in due course was four golden Horshooes,
Exactly dissolved through a Woodcocks bill,
Six Camelions in greene-sawce (Maids commonly choose)
This dish every day if they may have their will,
The chine of a Lion, the haunch of a Bear,
Well larded with Brimstone and Quicksiluer bright:
Judge Gentlemen, was not this excellent cheer,
That we had to Supper on Saturday night.
A whole Horse sowst after the Russian manner,
Twelve Pigs of a strange Capadocian Bitch,
Six dozen of Estridges roast, (which a Tanner
Did send out of Asia by an old Witch)
A Leg of an Eagle carbonadoed (in Snow)
The Pluck of a Grampoise stewed till it was white,
And thus in particular I let you know,
What we had to Supper on Saturday night.
Then came in an Ell of a Iackanapes tail,
Served in upon Sippits as dainty as may be:
O that is a dainty, which rather then fail,
Might well serve to feast an Utopian Lady:
Twelve Maids were stewed in the shell of a Shrimp,
And cause it was meat that was held very light,
They had for their Sauce a salt pickled Pimpe,
And this was our Supper on Saturday night.
The second part, To the same tune.
TWo Bears sowst pig fashion sent w^ole to the ^^ard,
And 4 black swans served by 2 in a dish,
With a Lobster fried in steaks: take my word,
I know not well whether it was Flesh or Fish,
Two Cockatrices, and three Baboones boyld,
Two dry Salamanders, a very strange sight,
A Ioale of a Whale soundly buttered and oiled,
And this was our Supper on Saturday night.
A good dish of Modicums, I know not what,
In Barbary Vinegar boyld very soft,
I mused how my Hostis became so huge fat,
I find it is with eating these Modicums often:
A Gross of Canary birds roasted alive,
That out of the dishes (for sport) took their flight,
And every one present to catch them did strive:
This was our rare Supper on Saturday night.
A shoale of Red-herrings with b^ls 'bout their neekes,
Which made such rare sport that I never saw such,
They leaped and danced with other fine tricks,
A man may admire how they could do so much.
Two Porposes parboild in May-dew and Roses,
That unto the smell yielded so much delight i
Some (fearing to lose them) laid hold on their noses,
All this was at Supper on Saturday night.
Three dozen of Welsh Ambassadors baked,
Which made such a nois it was heard through ye town
Some hearing the echo their foreheads so ak^t,
That many a smile was overcome with a frown:
A dish of Bonitoes, or Fish that can fly.
That out of the Indies came hither by flight,
To close up our stomachs, a Gridiron Pie
We had to our Supper on Saturday night.
But what comes after must not be forgotten,
The Fruit and the Cheese as they follow by course,
A West-Indian Cheese (not a bit of it rotten,
That's made of no worse then the milk of a Horse)
A dish of Pine-apples, two bushels at least,
An hundred of Cokernuts for our delight.
The world may admire at this wonderful Feast,
Which we had at Supper on Saturday night.
Six Pump^ans codled with exquisite Art,
To pleasure the palate of every one there.
Then we at the last had a great Cabbage Tart;
Thus have I exactly described our Cheer:
What all this amounted to, I cannot tell,
It cost me just nothing, no faith not a mite,
The Master o'th Feast (whom I know very well)
Did pay for this Supper on Saturday night.
We rose from our mirth with the 12 a clock Chimes,
Went every one home as his way did direct;
And I for my part on the morning betimes,
Had a Breakfast prepared, which I did not expect:
My wife, because she was not bidden to Supper,
(It seems by the story) she bare me a spite:
The Breakfast she gave me, to you I will utter,
It passed our Supper on Saturday night.
Sunday morning Breakfast.
FIrst had I a dish of Maundering broth,
So scolding hot that I could not abide it,
But I like a patient man (though I was loath)
Must swallow all down, cause my wife did provide it,
A many small Reasons she put in the same,
Her Nose yielded Pepper that keenly did bite;
Thought I here is a Breakfast, I thank my good dame,
That passes our Supper on Saturday night.
A great Carpe Pie, and a dish of sad Po^ts,
With Crocodile Vinegar, sauce very tart,
Quoth she thou last night wast among thy sound tre^ts,
Now fall to thy Breakfast, and comfort thy heart:
Then had I a Cup full of stout Wormwood Beer,
It seems that in Physic she has good insight,
This showed me the difference 'twixt the homely cheer
And our dainty Supper on Saturday night.
Monday Dinner.
ON this sorry Fare all that day I did feed,
And on Monday morning on purpose to win her,
I went and got money to furnish her need,
And now you shall hear what I had to my Dinner:
A Pie made of Conies, with Ducks and Pigs eyes,
With a deal of sweet Honey my taste to delight:
With sweet Lamb and Chicken my mind to suffice,
These passed my Supper on Saturday night.
Another Pie made with a many Sheep eyes,
With sweet Sugar Candy that pleased my pallet,
These several Banquets my Muse did advise,
And with her assistance I made this mad Ballet.
There Is no man that is wise will my pains reprehend
For most married men will confess I say right;
Yet on no occasion this Ditie was pend,
But to show our rare Supper on Saturday night.
FINIS.
M. P.
London, Printed by M.P. for Fr: Grove, near the Sarazens head without Newgate.


