THE Second part of the Book of Christian exercise, appertayning to
RESOLVTION.

Or a Christian directorie, guiding all men to their salvation.

Written by the former Author. R. P.

PSALM. 62. ver. 4. One thing have I requested at Gods hands, and that will I
demand still: which is, to dwell in his house all the days of my life: to the
end I may know and do his will.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlwoode and Simon Waterson. Anno. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Thomas Heneage, Knight: vize Chamberlain to her
excellent Majesty, Treasurer of her royal Chamber, and one of her Highness
most honorable privy Council: All happiness in this life, and in the life
to come heartily wished.

To the Christian Reader, health.
GEntle Reader, not many years since, a book was published of Christian
exercise, appertaining to Resolution: written by a Jesuit beyond the Seas, yet
an Englishman, named Ma. Robert Parsons, which Book, Ma. Edm. Bunney having
dilligently perused, committed to the public view of all indifferent
judgments: as glad that so good matter proceeded from such infected people,
and that good might arise thereby to the benefit of others. Since the
manifestation of that book, the first Author thereof, named Ma. Parsons, has
enlarged the same Book, with a second part and new additions, wherein he has
concluded and finished his whole intent of the Resolution, and that upon some
special causes, as himself sets down. For having enlarged diverse points,
which before he omitted, and coming to the reasons of this new supply, in his
Praeface he says in this manner.

Being admonished by the writings of diverse, that since the publishing of my
first book, it has been misliked in two principal points. First, that I
speak so much of good works, and so little of faith. Secondly, that I talked
so largely of Gods justice, and so breefely of his mercy. Beside, conceiving
by the information of many, that diverse persons, having a desire in themselves
to read the former Book, but yet being weak and fearful to be touched so
near in conscience, as they imagined that book did: durst never intermedle
therewith, being informed there was nothing in the same wherewith to
entertain themselves, but only such vehement matter of persuasion, as would
greatly trouble and afflict them. For remedy of which inconueniencie, I have
framed this second part of that work, and therein inserted diverse Chapters and
discourses of matters more plausible, and of themselves more indifferent:
wherewith the Reader may sollace his mind, at such times as he finds the
same not willing, to feel the spur of more earnest motion to perfection.

Hereupon grew the cause of his framing this second Book, which performs
what you have read in his own writing. And considering how diverse were
desirous to have this latter part, because they had thorowlie read the other:
after passage the perusing of sundry learned men, who have thought it as
worthy to be seen as the first, it is (gentle Reader) presented to thy view,
read it indifferently, and judge thereof as thou find occasion.

A necessary Table, guiding the Reader to every Chapter in this Book, as also
to every particular argument handled in each Chapter.
The first Chapter. Of the manifold perils that ensue to the world by
inconsideration: and how necessary it is for every man to enter into
cogitation of his own estate.
The several matters handled in this Chapter.
THE charitable proceeding of GOD by his Prophets, in foretelling men of their
wickedness, and revealing the causes thereof. Page. 1. The danger of
inconsideration, declared in two special causes. page. 2. The complaint of the
Prophet Jeremy, for inconsideration. page. 4. The mystery and sealed secret
of inconsideration. page. 5. Lack of consideration, cause of eternal
destruction: a point that fools will not consider. page. 7. Inconsideration,
the cause of so much sin at this day. page. 8. Wilful malice, obstinate
corruption in the vanities of this life, and idle negligence: three special
causes of inconsideration. 10, 11, 12. How we must stand upon our watch: that
consideration is the only door to our watch: with the many commodities and
effects thereof. 14,15,16. That all virtues are stirred up and quickened by
consideration. 17. How holy men exercised themselves in consideration: namely
the three first Patriarchs. Moses, Joshua, King David, king Solomon, and king
Ezechias: as also what fruit holy Job gathered by consideration: and two
principal effects ensuing thereon. 18. 19. 20. The importance of
consideration breefelie described. page, 22.
The second Chapter. That there is a God, which rewards good and evil:
against all the Atheists of old, and of our time. With the proofs alleged
for the same, both by Jew and Gentile.
The matters handled in this Chapter, are divided into four Sections.
The first Section.
If there be a God, he is a just rewarder. 31. The works of the world declare
the workman. 31. How the miracles of heaven do teach to know GOD. 33. In what
manner the earth teaches us there is a God. 34. How the Sea does wonderfully
show there is a God. 35. The parts of man in body and soul, do amply declare
GOD. 36.
The second Section.
How the Heathen proved there was a God by their Phylosophie. 38. The three
arguments of the natural Philosopher, Ex motu, ex fine, and Ex causa
efficiente. 39,40,41,42. The four arguments of the Metaphisicke or
supernatural Philosopher. The first, ens finitu^. 44. The second, that every
multitude or distinction of things, proceeds from some unity as from his
fountain. 46. The third, subordination of creatures in this world. 47. The
fourth, providence in making the very least creature in the world. 49. The
fifth, immortality of the soul of man. 52. And the meaning of old
Philosophers touching Anima mundi. 53.
The three Arguments of the Morrall Philosopher.
1. How in the natural inclination of man, there is a disposition to confess
some God or Deity. 54. The reason why there can be but one God. 56. All old
Philosophers acknowledged one God. 59. Cicero his opinion of the Panime Gods,
how they were made. 60. 2. The second argument of Morrall Phylosophie, de
vltimo fine, et summo hominis bono. 61 Every thing in this world has a
natural desire to his end. 61. The contention of Philosophers about the
felicity of man. 63. How nothing in this life can be our felicity. page. 64.
How far Morrall Phylosophie teaches, in determining man's felicity. 65. 3.
The third argument, touching reward and punishment. 66.
The third Section.
How the Jews were able to prove God. 68. Their first proof of Scripture, is
antiquity. 70. The manner of writing, authorizing, and conseruing the
Scriptures, the second proof. 72. Consideration of the particular men that
wrote them, and their sincerity: the third proof. 75. Consent and approbation
of all later writers of the Bible, that ensued after Moses: the fourth proof.
page, 81. The subject handled in the Scriptures, with the end whereto thy
level: the fifth proof. 82. The peculier style and phrase which they vse^ the
sixth proof. 85. The contents of the Scriptures: the seventh proof. 90. The
circumstaunces of prophecies set down in the Scriptures. page. 94.
1. The prophecy to Abraham for his posterity. 95. 2. The prophecy for the
government of Judah 96. 3. The prophecy for the greatness of Ephraim above
Manasses. 99. 4. The foresight of Moses. 101. 5. The prophecy for the
perpetual desolation of Jericho. 101. 6. The prophecy for the birth and acts
of King Josias. page, 102. 7. The prophecy for the destruction of Jerusalem
and Babylon. 105. 8. The wonderful prophecy for Cyrus King of Persia. 106. 9.
The prophecies and doings of Jeremy in the siege of Jerusalem. 108.
Approbation of Heathen Writers: the eight proof. 114 1. The creation of the
world. 115 2. The floode of Noe. 115. 3. The long life of the first fathers.
116. 4. Of the Tower of Babylon. 117. 5. Of Abraham and his affairs. 117 6. Of
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, etc. 118. 7. Of Moses and his acts. 119. 8. The
story of Joshua, the Judges, and the kings. 120 9. The things that ensued after
King Salomons days. 121.
The fourth Section.
The conclusion of the Chapter, with the application. page, 122, No excuse can
avail of the ignorance of God. page, 123, The applycation to our selves of
the premises. page, 125.
The third Chapter. Of the final end and cause why man was created by God, and
placed in this world. And of the obligation he has thereby, to attend to the
affair for which he came hither.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
How man was made to serve God, and therefore cannot be free, or at his own
appointment. 128, Man shall be accountant of every idle word he utters. 129,
Profitable demaundes and considerations for a man to think upon. 130, How a
man may take a scantling of his own estate with God: by following the right
course for which he was sent, and shunning the wrong and dangerous course.
132, The reason why so few are saved. 133, A perfect example of a good
conversion. 134, The complaint of worldlings in the end of their life. page,
138 A comparison expressing our grief in the end for running a wrong course.
page, 140 The misery of a soul that has gone awry, at the last day. 140 Two
rare examples of humane felicity, in Herod the first, and Agrippa, with their
several, strange, and wonderful ends, 142, 143, 144, Error in our course of
life, is not pardoned. 146, A rare chance that happened to Baltasar king of
Babylon. page, 148, If God examine straightly the actions of Infidels, much more
will he do of careless Christians. 148, The dangerous and most dreadful
division from God, our Savior, and the Communion of Saints. page, 149.
The fourth Chapter. That the service which God requires of man in this
present life, is Religion: with the particular confirmations of Christian
Religion, above all other in the world.
What special points are handled in this Chapter, and first for the foremost
part.
An answer to the demand, what service God requires of us, concerning
religion, piety, and obseruaunce, with their differences. 151,152, The
internal and external acts and operations of Religion. page, 152 No way left
to obtain this service, but the light and instruction of Christian Religion.
153, How men in old time were saved without Christian Religion. 154, The
difference between our belief and the old Fathers. 155, Diverse testimonies
from GOD, of the things that we believe. The principal heads of this Chapter,
divided into three parts, and handled in four Sections. 1. The things that
past before the nativity and incarnation of Christ. 160. 2. The things done
and verified from that time, until his ascension. 160. 3. Such events as
happened for confirmation of his Deity, after his departure. page, 160,

The first Section.
How Christ was foretold both to Jew and Gentile, declared in four
considerations. 161. The first consideration, touching the Messiah promised.
161 The first covenant to Adam in Paradise. 162, The same promise to Abraham
and Isaac. 163, Jacobs prophecy of the coming of Christ. 164, Moses prophecy
of Christ, living in the wildern^sse with the people, etc. page, 166, David's
prophecy of Christ, four hundred years after. page, 167, Ieremies prophecy
of Christ, four hundred years after David. page, 169, Ezechiels prophecy of
Christ, wherein he is called by the name of David. 170 The prophecies of Esaias,
touching Christ, with his wonderful properties. 171, 172, Daniels prophecy of
Christ, in the end of Babilons captivity. page, 173,
The second Consideration: that Christ should be both God and man, six ways
proved. page, 176, 1. That he should crush the devil, and break his head.
page, 177, 2. That he should be a Ruler in Israel, and his name God. page,
178, 3. That he should be called Iehoua, with the interpretation of the
Rabbines. 179, 4. That he should be called the very Son of God. page, 182,
5. That he should be the word of the father. 183, 6. Learned Philo his
discourse for the return home of the banished Jews. page, 185,
The third consideration: whether Christ should change the law of Moses or no.
187, Moses Law was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to perfection. page, 187,
The new Law of Christ, and the perfections thereof. page, 189, The
reprobation of the old Law, with a promise of a new. 191,
The fourth consideration: wherein all particulers are fore-tolde of Christ, for
his incarnation, birth, life, death, and resurrection. 193, 194, The fifth
consideration: touching manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles. 195, Three
particular ways, whereby the Gentiles might hear of Christ. page, 197,
Prophecies touching Christ, among the Gentiles by the Sibyls. 200, Of what
importance and authority, the Greek verses of the Sibyls were. page, 201,
Four several proofs for credit of the Sibyls verses. 202, 203, 205, Of the
confession of Oracles, concerning Christ's coming. page, 209, 210,
The second Section.
How the former predections were fulfilled in our Savior Christ, at his
being upon earth. 212, The first consideration: of the appointed time for
Christ's birth. 215, 1. proof. The general state of the world at Christ's
nativity: the three Monarchies of the Assirians, Persians, and Grecians being
ended, and the Romans entered into the fourth. page, 216, 2. proof. The
peace of all the world at his coming. page, 217, 3. proof. The Scepter of
Judah, and most horrible murders committed by Herod. 218, 219, The prophecy of
Jacob touching the Scepter of Judah. page, 221, That the Scepter never failed in
Judah, until Herod's time. page, 221, 4. proof. The destruction of the second
Temple. page, 222, The building of the second Temple, less gorgeous then the
first. page, 223 Five special prerogatives of the first Temple. page, 225, The
second Temple to be destroyed, presently after Christ's passion. 226, 5.
proof. The seauentie-two Hebdomades prophesied by Daniell. page, 227, Why the
Angel named seauentie Hebdomades in this place. 228, The exact number of
weeks, from the building of the second Temple, to the death of Christ,
sixtie-two. 229, 6. proof. The traditions and observations of the old Jews
themselves. page, 230, Christ hydeth himself in the Sea. 233, 7. proof. That
out of Jury should rise a general Lord of the universal world. 233. 8.
proof. The general expectation of the people. page, 234,
The second Consideration: concerning the birth of Christ, etc. page, 237,
Jesus line and stock, directly of the Trybe of Judah, and lineally by his
mother of the peculiar house of David. page, 237, The manner of his conception,
and the message made by the Angel, etc. 238, Jesus nativity, and in what
manner. page, 239, The place appointed for the birth of the Messiah. page, 241,
The singing of the Angels, and of the name of Jesus. page, 243, The coming of
the three Magi, or wise men of the East. page, 244 Prophecies of things that
should fall out in Bethleem. 246. Heathen testimonies for the star which
guided the wise men. 247, The presentation of Jesus in Jerusalem. 248, Christ's
flight into Egypt for fear of Herod. page, 249, The benefit that Egypt
received, by Christ's flight unto it. page, 250,
The third consideration, showing the life, conversation, doctrine, and
miracles of Jesus. page, 251. Saint John Baptist the Messenger of the
Testament. page, 252 The order of Jesus preaching and doctrine. 253, The
comparison of Christ's Law with that of Moses. page, 254, The meaning and
effect of Christ's doctrine. 255 The life and conversation of Jesus, testified
by his greatest adversaries. page, 256, Of Jesus miracles: and of the
predictions of the Messiah his miracles. 257, The confession of Jesus miracles,
by his very enemies. page, 259 The calling of his Apostles and other folowers.
page, 260, External miracles done by Jesus, above all power of human
capacity. page, 261,
The fourth consideration: delivering the passion, resurrection and ascension
of Jesus. page, 264, Christ's ascending to Jerusalem to reciue his passion.
265. His barbarous abusage foretold by prophecy, as also his death most
plainly. 266, The wonderful prediction of his passion, set down by the
Prophet Esaias, etc. 267, The particulers of his passion, fore-tolde by Sibylla.
268, Of the miracles that fell out in his death and passion. page, 269, His
resurrection exactly foretold both to Jew and Gentile. 271 The appearings
which Jesus made after his resurrection. page, 273. Circumstaunces confirming
the true resurrection of Jesus. 275. The great change in his Disciples by his
Resurrection. 276, The examination of the matter by Pilate. 277 Pilats Letters
to Tyberius, and his proceeding thereupon. 278. The opinion of the wiser sort
of Jews, touching Jesus resurrection in that time. 279, Likeli-hoodes of
truth, concerning Jesus ascension. page, 280.

The third Section.
How Jesus proved his Deity after his departure to heaven. 282. The first
consideration: declaring the sustentation, protection, increase, and
continuation of Christ's little Church and kingdom, that himself first
planted, and left upon earth. page, 283, The state of Christ's first Church in
persecution. 284, The coming of the holy Ghost, and what comforts he brought
with him. 285, The wonderful quick increase of Christ his Church. 287. The
increase of Christians against nature. 288.
The second consideration: concerning the Apostles of Christ. 290. The miracles
reported of the Apostles could not be feigned, neither durst any impugn their
miracles, but by calumniation. 292, 293. The success of the Apostles. 295, The
assurance and joyful ending of the Apostles. 296.
The third consideration: treating of the Evangelists. 297. The dyfferent
qualities and circumstaunces of the four Evangelists. 298. Circumstances of
truth in the Evangelists. 299, The publishing of the Gospels: and the manner
of style used by the Evangelists. 300. A special point to be observed in the
Evangelists. 301. No doubt but we have the true writings of the Evangelists.
page, 303.
The fourth consideration: of Martyrs, that by their blood should confirm this
doctrine. page, 304 Three points to be considered in our Martyrs, and the
singular alacrity of Christians in their sufferings. page, 305. Jesus
assistance to his Martyrs. page, 306,
The fifth consideration: concerning the subjection of the infernal spyrits.
307 Of the myraculous ceassing of Oracles, at Christ's appearing. 309, The
wonderful authority of Christians over spyrits. page, 312,
The sixth consideration: of the punishment of Christ's enemies here on earth.
315, Herod Ascolonita: Archelaus: Herod Antipas: Herodias daughter: Herod
Agrippa: and the stock of Herod soon extinguished. 316,317, The punishment
of the Romans. 318, The chastisement of Jerusalem, and of the Jewish people.
320, With what circumstaunces Christ's death was punished upon the Jews. 321,
A marvelous providence of GOD, for delivering the Christians that were in
Jerusalem, at the time of the destruction thereof. 323. The Jewish misery
after the destruction of Jerusalem. page, 324. The final desolation of the
Jewish Nation. 325.
The seventh consideration; the fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as
Jesus uttered on earth. page, 326. The circumstaunces of the time when Jesus
spoke his words, and when they were written. 328. The testimony of a Heathen,
for the fulfilling of Christ's prophecies. 329. Other prophecies of Jesus,
fulfilled to his Disciples. 329, Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
331.

The fourth Section.
The sum of the three former Sections, with eight demonstratiue reasons for
better satis-factio^. 332. 333. 334. 335. 336. 337. The conclusion of the
Chapter, with an admonishment. 338. An illation upon the premises, with an
exhortation. 340.
The fifth Chapter. How a man may judge or discern of himself, whether he be
a true Christian or not: with a declaration of the two parts belonging to that
profession: which are, belief and life.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The first part, concerning our belief, how to examine the truth thereof.
page, 345. The matters of faith and belief, easy among Christians. page. 346.
The direct holy way of Christians under the Gospel. page, 347. No heresy
finally prevailed against the Sciptures. page, 352. The spiritual sword,
wherewith our Savior Christ prevailed against Satan, the head Lord and
master of all heretics. 353. What the diligent reading of the Scriptures
leads us unto, forsaking the by paths of men's inventions, and traditions.
355. A description of the form, force, and nature of faith. 356. The fulness of
faith, conteyneth in it three especial things 358. That which is meat to the
flesh, that is faith to the soul. 359. A conclusion of this first part,
according to Saint Jerome. 360. The second part of this Chapter, concerning
life and manners. 362. Two causes of heresy, according to the opinion of the
holy Fathers, of Christ's primative Church. 363. The doings of Precismatiques,
in handling the Scriptures. 363. The observation of S. Cyprian, concerning the
original causes of heretics. 364. Many causes of evil life, as erring in
belief. 364. The effect of Christ's most excellent Sermon on the Mountain.
365. A similitude touching faith and works. 367. The sum of faith and
works, according to James. page. 369. What we promise in our Baptism. 373.
The sixth Chapter. Of the only impediment, which is wont to let sinners from
resolution: which is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercy, through the
multitude and greeuousnesse of their offenses.
Despair an ordinary temptation to the greatest sinners. page. 377. The
shipwreck of souls ouerloden with sin. 378. The woeful misery of desperation.
page. 379 The thing wherein GOD most delights, is mercy. 380. A merueylous
example of GODS Clemency. page. 381. An other example of Gods wonderful
mercy. 382. Judgment and Justice, to be used in true repentance: that is,
Judgment upon our selves, and justice toward others. 383. The division of
this Chapter, into four especial parts. 384. The first part touching the love
that God bears toward man. 384. The first cause why God loves us: for that
he is our Creator, and we are his own works. 385. Every man is given by
nature to love his own. 386. The confidence of Job, in that GOD made him. 386.
The assured hope David had, in that he was Gods wormanshippe. 387, The second
reason of assurance of Gods love, for that he is our Father, 388. What a
Father God is. 390. Christ's most comfortable embassage. 390. How greatly the
respect of a Father moves GOD. 391. The Fathers liberal heart to the
prodigal son. 392. What the name of Father does importe. 393. The third
argument of Gods love: the giueing of his Son for us. 394. The conclusion of
this point made by Saint Paul. 395.
The second part: how God expresses his love toward sinners. 396. Two rare
points of clemency in God. 397. God that is offended, seeks atonement with
us. 398. Gods wooing of Jerusalem: his protestation: his cunctation: his
chiding: his fair speech: his complaynt: his kind speech: his conference: his
sweet conclusion. 398. 399. 400. A consideration, upon the former treaty of
God with Jerusalem. 400. Gods tender love to Ierusalen, when he was to destroy
it. 401. A pitiful complaint used by God, for the wilfulnes of his people.
402. The wonderful proceeding of God with Jerusalem. 403. The obstinacy of the
Jewish nation 404. Epithetons given by God to the people of Israel. 404. A
wounderfull poin includedt in Gods promise to a sinner. 405. What joy there is
made at a sinners conversion. 405.
The third part: what assurance GOD gives to them that repent. 406. The
promises of GOD to sinners that repent. 407. Four universalities, in Gods
promises to sinners. 409. Three especial points of great comfort. 409. How
God has performed his promises, to sinners that have repented. 410. Never
sinner repented, that was not pardoned. 411. The reiection of Caine, and Esau.
412. The infinite sins of the Jewish people, and their infinite pardons,
received at gods hands. 412. The examples of Manasses and the Ninevites 413. A
speech of GOD, to be heedefully considered. 415. Examples of mercies in the new
Testament. page. 416. The wonderful clemency of Jesus our Savior. 417. Great
and many causes of assured hope in Christ. 418.

The fourth part: being the aplication of all that has been said before. 420.
Saint Paul's exhortation to confidence. 420. An excellent discourse, and
exhortation of Saint Chrysostom. 421. The speech of the devil to a soul
laden with sin. 422, Saint Chrisostomes counsel, against the Deuilles
temptation. 423 No time to late to repent. 424. An exhortation and admonition
of Saint Augustine. 425. A similitude of the body, to express the misery of
the soul by multiplying sin. 426. Godly men's words ought to move us
greatly. 427. A notable ciscourse of S. Augustine, touching our conversion.
428. Hell was not made for man, but for the Deuilll. 429. In this life
repentance is available, but not after. 429.
FINIS.
OF THE MANIFOLD PERILS THAT ENSVE TO THE WORLD by inconsideration.
And how necessary it is for every man to enter into cogitation of his own
estate.
CHAP. I.
THE Prophets and Saints of GOD, The charitable proceeding of GOD by his
Prophets.
who from time to time have been sent by his merciful providence, to advertise
and warn sinners of their perilous estate and condition for sin; have not
only foretold them of their wickedness and imminent dangers for the same, but
also have revealed the causes thereof, whereby they might the easier provide
remedy for the inconveniences to come.

Such is the charitable proceedings of our most merciful Lord with the
children of men. And among other causes, none is more general or more often
alleged, then the lack of consideration, The danger of inconsideratio^.
by which, as by a common snare and deceit of our adversary, most men fall
into sin, and are holden also perpetually in the same, to their final
destruction and eternal perdition. So Esaias the Prophet, speaking of the
careless nobility and gentry of Jury, that gave themselves to banqueting
and disport, without consideration of their duties toward God; repeateth often
the threat of woe against them, and then puts down the cause in these
words: Esaias. 5.
The lute, and harp, and tymprel, and shalme, and good wine, abounds in your
banquets, but the works of God you respect not, nor have you consideration of
his doings. And then ensues: The sensual life of the Jewish gentry.
Therefore has hell enlarged his soul, and opened his mouth without all
measure or limitation, and the stout, and high, and glorious of this people
shall descend into it.

Here are two causes as (ye see) and two effects lincked together, of these
Jews damnation, the one depending of the other. For as good cheer and
sensuality brought these men to inconsideration of Gods works and proceedings
toward sinners: so inconsideration brought them to the mouth and pits brimme
of hell. I say, that inconsideration of Gods works toward sinners, brought
them to this perrill, for that it follows in the very same place: And the
Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and our holy God shall be
sanctified in justice: as if he had said, that albeit you will not consider now
Gods judgments and justice, amidst the heat and pleasure of your feastings:
yet shall he by excercising the same upon you hereafter, be known, exalted,
and sanctified throughout the world. The like discourse makes God himself by
the same Prophet, to the daughter of Babylon, and by her, to every sinful and
sensual soul figured by that name. Esaias. 47.
Come down (says he) and sit in the duste thou daughter of Babylon: The
daughter of Babylon, forgets her end.
thou have said, I shall be a Lady for ever, and have not put upon thy heart
the things thou should, nor have thou had remembrance of thy last end etc.
Now therefore harken thou delicate (daughter) which dwell so confidently:
there shall come upon thee an evil, whereof thou shall not know the offspring,
and a calamity shall rush upon thee, from which thou shall not be able to
deliver thee. A misery shall overtake thee upon the sudden, which thou shall
not know, etc.

Holy Jeremy, after he had weighed with himself what miseries for sin
the Prophets Esaias, Amos, Osee, Joel, Abdias, Micheas, Nahum, Sophonias, and
himself, (all which Prophets lived within the compass of one hundred years)
had foretold to be imminent upon the world: not only to Samaria and the ten
Trybes of Israel, 4. Regum. 15. et 17.
which were now already carried into banishment to the furthest parts of the
East: but also to the states and Countries that most flourished at that time,
(as by name to Babylon, Egypt, Damasco, Tyrus, Sidon, Moab, and finally to
Jerusalem and Judea it self, which he foresawe should soon after most
pitifully be destroyed,) when he saw also by long experience, that neither
his words, nor the words and cries of the other forenamed Prophets, The
complaint of Jeremy for inconsideratio^.
could any thing move the hearts of wicked men: he brake forth into this most
lamentable complaint; Jeremy. 12.
Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, quia nullus est qui recogitet cord. The
whole earth falls into extreme ruin and desolation, for that there is no
man which considers deeply in his heart.

This complaint made good Jeremy in his days for compassion of his people,
that ran miserably to perdition for want of consideration. And the same
complaint with much more reason, may every good Christian make at this time,
for the infinite souls of such as perish daily by inconsideration. Whereby, as
by a general and remediless enchauntment, many thousand souls are brought a
sleep, and do find themselves within the gates of hell, before they mysdoubt
any such inconvenience, being led through the vale of this present life as
it were blindfolded, with the veil of careless negligence (like beasts to
the slaughter house) and never permitted to see their own danger, until it be
too late to remedy the same.

Propterea captiuus ductus est populus meus, quia non habuit scientiam, Esaias, 5.
says GOD by the mouth of Esaias. Therefore, and for this cause, is my people
led away captive in all bondage and slavery to perdition, for that they have
no knowledge, no understanding of their own estate, no foresight of the times
to come, no consideration of their danger. Heerehence flows all the misery
of my people, and yet this is a mystery that all men will not know.

Will you see what a mystery and sealed secret this is? harken then how one
describes the same, The mystery of inconsideration.
and with what circumstaunces. Furthermore (says he) a certain hidden word was
spoken unto me, Job. 4.
and mine ear, as it were by stealth, received the veins of his whyspering:
it was in the horror of a vision by night, when dead sleep is wont to
possess men. Fear came upon me and trembling, and all my bones were
extremely terrified. At length a spirit past by, in my presence, whereat the
hayres of my flesh stood up in horror. There stood before me one whose face
I knew not. His image was before mine eyes, and I heard his voice as the sound
of a soft air.

Hitherto is described in what manner and order this secret was revealed: but
now what said this vision or spirit (think you) at the last? truly, he made
a short discourse, to prove by the fall of the Angels for their sin, Job. 4.
that much more, qui habitant domos luteas, et terrenum habent fundamentum,
consume^tur velut atinea, et de mane vsque ad vesperam succidentur. A
collection to be noted.
They who dwell in houses of mortar, (as all men do, whose bodies are of flesh)
and they which have their ^oundation of earth, (as most folk of this world
have, that put their confidence in things of this life,) they must all consume
by little and little, as the cloth does by the Mothe, and at length they must
upon the sudden, (within less space perhaps then is from morning to night)
be cut down and dispatched when they think least of it.

And to show that herein stands a point of high secrecy (I mean to
consider and ponder well this discourse) he makes his conclusion in these
words immediately following; et quia nullus intelligit, in aeternum peribunt.

And for that few or none of these men before mentioned, who have such earthly
foundations, do understand this point aright, Lack of consideration, cause of
eternal destruction.
(I mean of their sudden death, and cutting off from this world) therefore
must they perish eternally, and this is a secret which few men will believe.
Vir insipiens non cognoscet, (says David) et stultus non intelliget haec:
Psalm. 91. A point that fools will not consider.
an unadvised man will not learn these things, nor will a fool understand
them: but what things? it ensues in the same place: how wonderful the works
of God, and how deep his cogitations are about sinners, who spring up as
grass (and flourish in this world) vt intereant in seculum seculi, to the end
they may perish for ever and ever.

The Prophet Daniell had many visions, and strange revelations of great and
high mysteries: but one amongst all other (and this the least) of the most
dreadful judgments of God upon sinners in the end of the world. The vision
was by the great river Tygris: Daniel. 10.
where, as diverse Angels were attending about the banks: so upon the water it
self stood one in the likeness of a man, of exceeding dreadful majesty; his
apparel being only lynnen, through which his body shyned like precious
stone: A most terrible vision of Daniell, wherein he saw Christ.
his eyes like burning lamps: his face like flashing lightning: his arms and
legs like brass inflamed, and his voice as the shoute of a whole multitude
of people that should speak together.

This was Christ by all interpretation, at whose terrible presence when Daniell
fell down dead, he was erected again by an Angel, and made strong to abide
the vision, and so having heard and seen the most wonderful things that in
his book he recounteth, he was bold to ask a question or two, for better
understanding thereof, and his first question was, Daniell. 12.
how long it should be, ere these wonderful things took their end?
whereunto the man upon the water answered, by stretching out both his brazen
arms to heaven, and swearing strangly by him that lived for ever and ever;
that it should be a time, and times, and half a time. Which answer, Daniell
not understanding, began to question further, but he was cut of with this
dyspatch: A secret.
Go thy way. Daniell, for these speeches are shut up and sealed until the time
preordained. And yet for his further instruction, it was added in the same
place; Daniell. 12.
Impie agent impii, nec intelligent: wicked men will always do wickedlie,
Wilful ignorance.
and will not understand these mysteries, albeit we should never so much
expound them.

Whereby, as by all the rest that hitherto has been alleged, is made
apparent, that inconsideration, negligence, careless ignorance, and lack of
understanding in our own estates, and in Gods judgments and proceedings with
iniquity and sin, has been a bane, and a common perdition of retchlesse men
from time to time.

And if we will turn our eyes to this our age, The cause of so much sin at
this day.
much more shall we see the same to be true. For what is the cause (think you)
why at this day we have so many of those people, whom holy Job does call
abominable, that drink up iniquity as beasts do water, Job. 15.
that, commit all sin, all injustice, all turpitude, without remorse or
scruple of conscience? what is the cause of this (I say) but lack of
consideration, lack of understanding, lack of knowledge? For as Christ said
to Jerusalem touching her destruction, Luke. 19.
si cognouisses et tu, etc. If thou also (o sinful soul) did know, what
hangs over thy head for this careless life of thine: if thou (daughter of
Babylon) would remember and ponder in thy heart, what shall be the end of thy
delights, thou would not live so pleasantly as thou do, Luke. 9.
Nunc autem abscondita sunt ab occulis tuis. But now (says Christ) these
things are hidden from thine eyes.

Not, but that thou may have known them if thou would, but for that thou
art one of them, who say to God, Voluntary inconsideration.
scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus, we will not have understanding of thy ways;
one of them, Job. 21.
qui sunt rebels lumini, that are rebellious against the light, and
illumination of Gods grace, one of them, Job. 23.
qui nolunt intelligere vt been agant: that will not understand to do well.
And finally, one of them, Proverb. 28.
qui declinant aures ne audiant legem, that turn away their ears to the end
they may not hear Gods law; Ibidem.
quorum oration est execrabilis, whose not only life, but also prayer is
execrable and detestable in the sight of their maker.

Truly, nothing in reason can be less tolerable in the presence of Gods
majesty, then whereas he has published a law unto us with so great charge to
bear it in mind, to ponder in heart, Deu. 6. et 11. Joshua. 1. Psalm. 118.
to study and meditate upon it both day and night, at home and abroad, at our
vprising and our down lying, to make it our cogitation, our discourse, our
talk, our exercise, our rumination, Eccle. 6. et 22.
and our delight; that we should notwithstanding contemn the same, as to make
it no part of our thought but rather to flee the knowledge thereof, as we see
most men of the world do, for not troubling their consciences.

But the holy Ghost has laid down the reason hereof long ago in these words:
Eccle. 17. The first cause why men fly consideration.
Cum sit timida nequitia testimonium condemnationis. For that wickedness in it
self is always fearful, it gives witness against it self of damnation,
whenever it thinks of the Law of God, or of honesty. So Felix the
Governor of Jury, when S. Paul began to talk of justice, chastity, and
Gods judgments before him: Acts. 24.
he was wonderfully afearde, and said to Paul, that he should depart for
that time, and that he would call for him afterward, when occasion should
require. But he never did, and what was the cause? for that (as Josephus
testifies) he was a wicked man, Joseph. li. 20. antiq. cap. 5.
and Drusilla his fair Lady that was with him at Saint Paul's speech, was not
his true Wife, but taken by allurement and violence from another, and therefore
it offended the^ both to hear preaching of chastity.

This then is one principal cause, why men of this world will not enter into
consideration of their own estate, and of Gods commandments, least they
should read and see their own faults, and bear witness against themselves
of their own condemnation. Whereunto the Scripture annexeth another cause, not
far unlike to this, The second cause why me^ fly consideration.
which is, that worldly men do so drown themselves in the cares and
cogitations of this life, as they leave in their minds no place to think upon
Gods affairs, which are the business of their own souls. This expresses
Jeremy the Prophet most effectually, Jeremy. 7.
when having made his complaint, that notwithstanding his preaching and crying
in the Temple gate, for long time together, where all the people passed by him
and heard him; yet no man (says he) would enter into consideration, or say
with himself, what have I done? and reason: Jeremy. 8.
Omnes enim conuersi sunt ad cursum suum, quasi equus impetu vadens ad
praelium. All men are set upon their own courses and ways, and do run in
the same with as great vehemency and fearce obstination, as a furious armed
horse, when he hears the Trumpet in the beginning of a battle. By which
comparison, the holy Ghost expresses very lively, the irrecouerable state of
a settled worldly man, that follows greedily his own designments in the
negotiation of earth.

These are two of the chief causes of inconsideration, I mean wilful
malice, and obstinate corruption in the vanities of this life. And yet
mentions the Scripture, a third sort also of inconsiderate men, The third
cause of inco^sideration.
who neither of direct malice, nor yet of great occupation in worldly
affairs, do neglect consideration, but rather of a certain lightness and
idle negligence, for that they will not trouble their heads with any thing but
disport and recreation, of whom it is written: Wisdom. 15.
aestimanerunt lusum esse vitam nostram. They esteem this life of ours to be
but a play-game. And in another place of the same men: Ecclesi. ^.
Ita securi viuunt quasi iustorum facta habeant. They live as securely and
confidently without care and cogitation, as if they had the good works of just
men to stand for them. But as the holy Ghost pronounces in the same place;
hoc vanissimum, this is vanity and folly in the highest degree.

For as in things of this life, he were but a foolish Merchant, A comparison.
that for quietness sake would never look into his account Book, whether he
were behind hand or before: and as that Shyppe-maister were greatly to be
laughed at, that for avoiding of care, would sit down and make good cheer,
and let the ship go whether she would: so much more in the business of our
soul, it is madness and folly, to fly consideration for eschewing of trouble,
seeing in the end this negligence must needs turn upon us more trouble and
and irremediable calamity.

For as Jeremy says to all such men, Ierem. 30.23.
in nouissimo die intelligitis ea, in the end of your days, you shall not
choose but know, and see and understand these things, which now for delicacie
you will not take the pains to think of. But when shall this be trow you? he
tells plainly in the same place: In the end evil men shall understand,
whether they will or no.
when the fury of our Lord shall come forth as a whirlwind, and shall rush
and rest upon your heads as a tempest: then shall you know and understand
these things.

The example of the Babylonians.
It seems that the Babylonians were a people very faulty in this point of
consideration (as all wealthy people are) not only by that which before has
been touched of the daughter of Babylon, that would not consider her ending
days; but also, for that not long before the most terrible destruction of that
great City by the Medes and Persians, God cried unto her in these words,
Esaias, 21.
My dearly beloved Babylon, put aside the table and stand upon thy watch: rise
up you Princes from eating and drinking: take your Targets in your hands; go,
and set a watchman upon the walls, and whatsoever he seeeth, let him tell you.

And then was there a watchman set upon the walls, and a Lion to denounce with
open mouth, whatsoever danger he saw coming toward them. And GOD taught
the Prophet to cry in this sort to their Sentinel or watchman; Custos quid de
nocte? custos quid de nocte? Thou watchman, what see thou coming toward
thee by night? what espiest thou (o Sentinel) drawing on us in the darkness?

By all which circumstaunce, what else is insinuated, but that God would have us
stand upon our watch, We must stand upon our watch.
for that his judgments are to come upon the world by night, Luke. 12.
when men least think thereof? they are to come as a thief at midnight, as
also in another place we are admonished: and therefore happy is the man that
shall be found watchful. But now the door and sole entrance into this
watch, Consideration the only door to our watch.
whereof the security of our eternal life depends, can be nothing else but
consideration, for that where no consideration is, there can be no watch, nor
foresight, nor knowledge of our estate; and consequently no hope of
salvation, as holy S. Bernard holds; Bern. lib. 1. de consid.
which thing caused that blessed man to write five whole Books of
consideration to Eugenius.

Consideration is the thing that brings us to know GOD and our selves. And
touching God, it lays before us his Majesty, his mercy, his judgments, his
commandments, his promises, his threatenings, his proceeding with other men
before us, whereby we may gather, what we also in time must expect at his
hands.

And for our selves, The many commodities of consideration.
consideration the key that opens the door to the closet of our heart, where
al our books of account do lie: it is the looking glass, or rather the very
eye of our soul, whereby she takes the view of herself, and looks into all
her whole estate; into her riches, her debts, her duties, her neglige^ces, her
good gifts, her defects, her safety, her danger, her way she walks in, her
course she follows, her pace she holds, and finally the place and end
whereunto she draws. And without this consideration she runs on headlong
into a thousand brakes and briars, stumbling at every step into some one
inconvenience or other, and continually in perrill of some great and deadly
mischief.

And wonderful (truly) it is, that in all other business of this life, men can
see and confess, that nothing may be begun, prosecuted, or well ended
without consideration, and yet in this great affayre, of winning heaven, or
falling into hell, few think consideration greatly necessary to be used.

I might stand here to show the infinite other effects and commodities of
consideration, Effects of consideration.
as that it is the watch or larum bell, that stirs up and awaketh all the
powers of our mind: the match or tynder, that conceiueth and nourishes the
fire of devotion: the bellows that enkindeleth and inflameth the same, the
spur that pricketh forward to all virtuous, zealous, and heroycall acts;
and the thing indeed, that gives both light, life, and motion to our soul.

Our faith is confirmed and increased by consideration of Gods works and
miracles; our hope by consideration of his promises, and of the true
performaunce thereof to all them that ever trusted in him: How all virtues are
stirred up and quickened by consideration.
our charity or love to God, by consideration of his benefits and innumerable
deserts toward us: our humility by consideration of his greatness and of our
own infirmity: our courage and fortitude, by contemplation of his assistaunce
in all causes for his honor: our contempt of the world by consideration of the
joys of heaven eternal: and so all other virtues both morrall and divine, do
take their heat, quickening, and vital spirit from consideration.

By the exercise of consideration and meditation, holy David says, Psalm. 38.
that he felt a burning fire to flame within his breast; that is, the fire of
zeal, the fire of fervor in Religion, the fire of devotion, the fire of love
toward God and his neighbor. And in anoplace he says, Psalm. 76.
that by the same exercise he swept and purged his own spirit: which is to be
understood, from the duste of this world, from the dregs of sin, from the
contamination and coinquination of human creatures, for that consideration
indeed, is the very fan that seuereth and drives away the chafe from the
corn.

For which cause we shall never read of any holy man from the beginning of
the world, neither before Christ nor after, who used not much and familiarlie
this most blessed exercise of consideration and pondering. The exercise of
holy men touching consideration.
And for the first three Patriarchs, it shall be sufficient to remember the
custom of young Isaac recorded in Genesis. Which was to go forth toward
night into the fields, Genesis. 24. The first three Patriarchs.
ad meditandum, that is, to meditate, consider and ponder, upon the works,
judgments, and commandments of GOD. And this he did being yet but a child
and unmarried, (far different from the custom of young Gentlemen now
adays, who frequent the fields to follow their vanities:) and as little Isaac
could not have this custom but from his Father Abraham, so (no doubt) but he
taught the same to his son Jacob, and Jacob again to his posterity.

Moses and Joshua.
And as for Moses and his successor Joshua, it may easily be imagined how they
used this exercise, by the most earnest exhortations, which they made thereof
to others, in their speech and wrytings. Deu. 6. et 11.
The good kings of Judah also, notwithstanding their many great temporal
a^faires, Joshua 1.
do testify of themselves concerning this exercise; as David almost every
where, K. David.
that the commandments of God were his daily meditation, not only by day,
and that tota die all the day, Psalm 38. 62. and 118.
et per singulos dies, every day, and in matutino, in the morning, et septies
in die, seven times a day: but also he insinnuateth this custom by night:
Psalm. 76.
meditatus sum nocte cum cord meo, I do meditate by night in my heart upon thy
commandments o Lord; signifying here by, both his watchfulness by night,
when other men were a sleep, and the hearty care that he had of this exercise
which we esteem so little.

Solomon also King David's son, so long as he lived in the grace and favor
of God, K. Solomon.
observed this exercise of his Father, and exhorts other men, Eccle. 6.
to have continual and daily cogitation in this affair. Which if himself had
continued still, it is likely he had never fallen from God by women as he did.
The good King Ezechias, K. Ezechias.
is reported to have meditated like a Dove, that is, in silence and
solitariness with himself alone, which is the true way of profitable
meditation. Esaias. 58.
Esaias testifies of his own watching by night in this exercise, Esaias. 26.
and how he did the same with his spirit alone, in the very bowels of his heart.

Holy Job makes mention, not only of his manner of considering, The
consideration that Job used, and the fruits thereof.
but what also he considered, and what effect he found in him self by the
same. First he considered (as I said) the ways, foote-steppes, and
commandments of GOD, and then his dreadful power: to wit, how no man was
able to auert or turn away his cogitation, but that his soul did what it
pleased, and by this (says he) co^siderans eum timore solicitor: Job. cap. 23.
I am made sollicitous or watchful with fear: when I do consider him. In
which words he insinuates two most excellent effects of consideration; Two
effects of consideration.
First, the fear of God, of which it is written, salutis thesaurus timor
Domini, Esaias. 32.
the fear of God is the treasure of salvation; and the second, that by this
fear he was made sollicitous, watchful, and dilligent in Gods service, of
which the Prophet Micheas says thus. Miche. 6.
I will tell thee (O man) what is good, and what our Lord requires at thy
hands: to wit, to do judgment and love mercy, and to walk sollicitous and
watchful with thy God.

But thou o holy and blessed man Job, did this exercise of consideration, A
consideration upon the doings of Job. Job. cap. 9.
bring forth in thee so great fear and terror of God? and so careful
watchfulness for observing his commandments? now I see well the cause why
thou writest of thy self: that thou did doubt and fear all thy works and
actions, were they never so circumspect. But what shall we say now adays
(most happy Saint) who do not doubt so much as our own disolute, careless,
and immoderate actions, who feel no terror of God at all, nor do use any one
jot of watchfulness in observing his commandments? truly, this proceeds
of nothing else but of inconsideration: it proceeds of lack of knowledge
both of God and of our selves. For (doubtless) if we know either of these two
things aright, (as indeed neither of them can be well understood without the
other) it could not be, but that many of us would change our wrong courses.

O merciful Lord, what sinful man in the world would live as he does, if he
knew either thee or himself as he should do? I mean, if he considered
what thou art: and what thou have been to other that lived and continued in
sin as he does? Not without great cause, cried so often and earnestly to
thee, that holy Doctor of thy Church, for obtaining of these two points at thy
hands: Augustine, in lib. confess.
vt cognoscam te, vt cognoscam me: that I may know thee, and that I may know
my self, says he, that is, that I may consider, and feel the true knowledge
hereof, for many men do know, but with little commodity.

We know and believe in gross the mysteries of our faith, Knowledge and
belief in gross.
that there is a God which rewards good and evil, that he is terrible in
his counsels upon the sons of men: that there is a hell for sinners, a heaven
for good livers, a most dreadful day of judgment to come, a strayte account to
be demanded, and the like. All this we know and believe in general, as
merchandise wrapped up together in a bundle. But for that we unfold not
these things, nor rest upon them in particular: for that we let them not down
into our hearts, nor do ruminate on them with leisure and attention: for that
we chew the^ not well in mind by deep consideration, nor do digest them in
heart, by the heat of meditation: they remain with us as a sword in his
scaberde, and do help us as little unto good life, A similitude.
(for which they were revealed) as a preservative in our pocket never aplyed,
can help our health. We bear the general knowledge of these mysteries locked
up in our breasts, as sealed bags of treasure that we never told nor
opened: and consequently, we have neither feeling, sense, or motion thereby,
even as a man may carry fire about him in a flynt stone without heat, and
perfumes in a pommander without smell, except the one be beaten, and the other
chafed.

The importance of consideration.
All stands then (good Reader) in this one point, for direction of our selves
in this life, and for reaping benefit by the mysteries of our faith and
Religion; that we alot our selves time to meditate, ponder, and consider what
these things do teach us. For as the sick man, that had most excellent
remedies and precious potions set before him, could expect no profit or ease
thereby, if he only did look upon them, or smelled the^, or took them into
his mouth alone, or should cast them forth of his stomach again, before they
were settled, or had time to work their operation: even so is it in this case
of ours. And therefore with great reason said Saint Paul to Timothy, after
he had taught him a long lesson, 1. Tim. 4.
Haec meditare, meditate, consider, and ponder upon these things which I have
showed you, as if in other speeches he had said: all that hitherto I have
told you, or written for your instruction, and all that ever you have heard
or learned besides, will avail you nothing for your salvation, except you
meditate and ponder upon the same, and do suck out the juice thereof, by
often consideration.

Wherefore to conclude this chapter, The conclusion of the Chapter.
my dear and well-beloved brother, for that consideration is so precious and
profitable, so needeful and necessary a thing as has been declared; I thought
it convenient in this first front and enteraunce of my Book, to place the
mention and dilligent recommendation thereof, as a thing most requisite for all
that ensues. For without consideration, neither this that I have said already,
nor any thing else that shall or may be said hereafter, can yield thee profit,
as by most lamentable experience we see daily in the world, where many
millions of me^ pass over their whole age without taking profit of so many
good Books, The misery of the world.
so many preachings, so many virtuous examples, so many terrible chastiseme^ts
of GOD upon sinners; which every where they see before their face. But yet for
that they will not, or have not leisure, or dare not, or have no grace to enter
into consideration thereof: they pass over all, as sick men do pylles,
diuerting as much as they may, both their eyes and cogitations, from all such
matters as are ungrateful unto them.

Jeremy. 30. and 23.
But as good Jeremy says, the time will come, when they shall be enforced to
see and know, and consider these things, when perhaps it will be too late to
reap any comfort or consolation thereby. Wherefore (dear brother) that which
perforce thou must do in time to come) and that perchance to thy greater
damnation, (I mean to enter into consideration of thine own estate) do that
now willingly to thy comfort and consolation, for preparing the way to thy
salvation. Prevent the day and redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.
according to S. Paul's wise counsel: run not headlong with the world to
perdition: stay some time as holy Jeremy admonishes thee, and say to thy
self, Jeremy. 7.
what do I? whether do I go? what course hold I? what shall be my end? Take
some time from thy pleasures, and from the company of thy pleasant friends, to
do this, although it be with loss of some pastime and recreation: for I
assure thee, it will recompense it self in the end, and make thee merry when
thy laughing friends shall weep.

The effect of all the considerations that ensue, is, rightly to know GOD, The
effect of all the chapters following.
for by knowing him, we shall know our selves, and all things else which are
necessray for us to know: and without knowing him, al knowledge in the world is
vanity, and mere folly. John. 17.
Haec est vita aeterna (says Christ to his Father) vt te cognoscant solum Deum
verum: et quem misisti Iesum Christum. This is life everlasting, that men know
thee which art only true God, and Jesus Christ who^ thou have sent.

Gods nature and essence we cannot know in this life; but the only mean to
know God in this world, The way to know GOD in this life.
is, to know his Majesty, to know his mercy, to know his justice, to know
his judgments; to know his hatred to sin, his favor to the good, his
benefits, and promises to all: his grace, his threats, his ways, his
commandments, his dealings toward other men before us; all which things the
considerations following do set before our eyes, and consequently they do
teach us to know God aright. Read then therefore (dear brother) with
attention, and remember the words that God uses to us all; Psalm. 45.
vacate and videte quoniam ego sum Deus. Take leisure, and consider that I am a
God. It must not be done in haste, nor (as the fashion is) for curiosity
only, to read three or four leaves in one place, and so in another: but it
must be done with such serious attention, as appertains to so great a
business, which (in truth) is the weightiest that possible under heaven may
be taken in hand. It is the business whereof Christ meant especially, when he
said, Luke. 10.
vnum est necessarium, one only thing is necessary. For that all other things
in this world, are but tryfles to this, and this alone of it self, of more
importance then they all.

THAT THERE IS A GOD, WHICH REVVARDETH GOOD AND evil, against all Atheists of
old, and of our time.
With the proofs alleged for the same, both by Jew and Gentile.
CHAP. II.
IT is a thing both common and ordinary in sciences and arts, A common custom
in sciences to suppose principles.
when they are learned or delivered by other, to suppose diverse points and
p^inciples, and to pass them over without proof, as either known before to
the learner, or else so manifest, easy, and evident of themselves, as they
need no other proof, but only declaration.

So when we take in hand to instruct a man in chyualrie, An example in
chivalry.
or feats of arms, we do suppose that he knows before (were he never so
rude,) what a man, what a horse, what armor, what fighting means: as also
that war is lawful and expedient in diverse causes; that Princes of the
world may wage the same; that soldiers have to live in order and dyscipline
under their regiment; and that Kings for this cause do hold their Generals,
Lieutenants, Coronels, Captains, and other like officers, in their bands,
garrisons, camps, and armies.

In handycraftes.
In manual arts and occupations likewise, it is evident, that diverse things
must be presupposed to be foreknowne by the learner, as in husbandry or
agriculture; in building, in painting, and other such exercises, when a man is
to be taught or instructed, it were not convenient for the teacher, to stand
upon every point or matter that appertains to the same, but must leave and
pass over many things as apparent of them selves, or easily to be discerned of
every learner by nature, sense, reason, or common experience.

In liberal sciences.
But yet in liberal sciences and professions of learning, is this more
apparent, where not only such common and vulgar points are to be presumed,
without proof or dyscourse; Grounds to be granted in sciences.
but also certain propositions are to be granted in the beginning, as
grounds whereupon to build all the rest that ensues. So the Logitian (for
example) will have you yield ere he enter with you; In Logic.
that contradictorie propositions cannot be together either false or true,
neither, that one thing may be affirmed and denied of another in one and the
self same respect and time.

The Moral Philosopher will have you grant at the beginning, In Morrall
phylosophie.
that there is both good and evil in men's actions: and that the one is to be
followed, and the other refused. The Natural Philosopher will have you
confess, In Natural phylosophie.
that all physical bodies which depend of nature, have motion in themselves,
and are subject to alterations, and what soever is moved, is moved of
another. The Mathematique at his first entrance, In the Mathematickes.
will demand your assent, that every whole, is bigger then his parts: as
also, the Metaphysique or supernatural Philosopher, The Metaphysicke.
that nothing can be and not be, at one time. And so other such like principles
and common grounds, in these and al other sciences are to be demanded,
granted, and agreed upon at the beginning, for the better pursuit and
establishment of that which has to follow, being things in themselves (as
you see) either by nature, common sense, or experience, most clear and
manifest.

And is not this also in Divinity (trow you) and in the affairs that we have
now in In Divinity.
hand? yes truly, if we believe S. Paul^ who writes thus to the Hebrews:
Hebrews. 11.
Cred^^ oportet accedentem ad Deum, quia est, et inqu^rentibus se remunerator
sit. He that is in coming toward God, must believe that then is a GOD, and
that he is a rewarder of suc^ as seek him. Behold here two principles
wherein a man must be resolved before he^ can seek or draw near unto God. Two
principles in Divinity.
The one that there is a GOD: and the other, that the

Which two principles or general ground are so evident indeed of their own
natures and so ingraffed by Gods own hand, into the mind and understanding of
every particular man, at his nativity, (according to the saying of the
Prophet: the light of thy count^naunce is sealed upon us O Lord, Psalm. 4.
) that were not the times we live in, too-too wicked, and the shameless
induration of sinners intolerable: we should not need to stand upon the
proof of these points, for confirmation of our cause that we now entreat,
of resolution; but rather supposing and assuring our selves, that no reasonable
creature living could doubt of these principles; should pursue only the
consideration of other things that might stir up our wills to performanc^ of our
duties toward this God that has created us, and remains to pay our reward
at the end.

But for so much as iniquity has so advanced her self at this day in the
hearts of many, The cause of this Chapter.
as not only to contemn and offend their maker, but also to deny him, for
patronage of their evil life, and for extinguishing the worm of their own
afflicted and most miserable consciences: I am enforced before all other
things, to discover this fond and foul error of theirs, and to remove also
this refuge of desperate iniquity, by showing the invincible verity of these
two principles, the one depending of the other, in such sort, as the first
being proved, the second has of necessity to follow. For if once it be
manifest, that there is a GOD, If there be a God, he is a just rewarder.
which has care and providence of all those, whom he has created and
governs; then must it ensue by force of all consequence, that he is also to
reward the same men according to their good living, and deserts of this life.

First then to prove this principle, that there is a GOD: I need use no other
argument or reason in the world, but only to refer each man to his own See
Lactantius at large, in his book of the workmanshippe of the world.
sense, in beholding the world, whereof every part and portion is a most clear
glass, representing God unto us, or rather a fair Table, The works of the
world do declare the worke-man.
wherein God has drawn and imprinted himself, in so manifest charecters and
legible Letters: as the symplest man living, may read and understand the same.

In respect here of said the wise man so long ago. That vain and foolish
were all those, who considering the works that are seen in this world, could
not thereby rise to understand the worke-man. And he gives this reason,
Sapiens. 3.
a magnitudine enim spec^^^ creaturae, cognoscibiliter poterit Creator horu^
videri. For that by the greatness of beauty in the creature, may the Creator
thereof be seen and known. Which Saint Paul confirms, when he says:
Romans. 1.
that the invisible things of God, may be seen and known by the visible
creatures of this world. Which is to be understood in this sense, that as a
prisoner in a dungion, may easily by a little beam that shyneth in at a
chynck, conceive there is a Sun, from whence that beam descends: and as a
trauayler in the wilderness that falls upon some channel or brook, may
ascend by the same to the well or Fountain: even so he, that beholds and
considers the wonderful works of this world, may thereby conceive also,
the wonderful Artificer or worke-man that made them.

A similitude.
If a man should pass by sea into some foreign, strange, or savage Country,
where nothing else but birds and beasts do appear: yet if he should epsy
some exquisite building, or other work of art and reason in the place, he
would presently assure himself, that some men dwelt or had been in that
Country, for that such things could not be done by beasts or unreasonable
creatures: even so in the view and consideration of this world.

If we cast our eyes upon the heavens, The heavens teach God.
we remain astonished, with the miracles that we behold: but who made them?
we see the skies of exceeding great highness: dystinguished with colors, and
beauty most admirable; adorned with stars and Plannets innumerable, and
these so qualified with their diverse, different, and unequal motions, as albeit
they never move or go together, yet do they never give let or hinderaunce
the one to the other, nor change their course out of order or season.

Quis enarrabit caelorum rationem, and concentum caeli, quis dormire faciet?
Job. 28.
Who is able to declare the reason of these heavens, or who can make cease or
sleep, the uniform course of their motions, says GOD to Job? As who would
say, that because no man or mortal creature can do this; therefore may we
imagine of what power and perfection their maker is. Which K. David had done
when he pronounced, caeli enarrant gloriam Dei, and opera manuum eius,
annunciat firmamentum: the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
does preach the works of his hands unto us.

If we pull down our eyes from heaven to earth, The earth teaches us God.
we behold the same of an infinite bigness, distinguished with hills and
dales, woods and pastures, covered with all variety of grass, herbs,
flowers, and leaves; moystened with Rivers, as a body with veins, inhabited
by creatures of innumerable kinds and qualities; enriched with inestimable and
endless treasures: and yet it self standing, or hanging rather with all his
weight and poyse, in the midst of the air, as a little balle without proppe or
pyller. At which devise and most wonderful miracle, God himself, as it were,
glorying, said unto Job. Job. cap. 38.
Where were thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth? Tell me if thou
have understanding, who measured it out, or drew his line upon the same?
Whereupon are fastened the pillars of his foundation, or who laid the first
corner stone thereof?

The sea shows GOD.
If we look neither up nor down, but cast our countenance only aside, we
epsy the Sea on each hand of us, that enuironeth round about the land. A
vaste creature, that contains more wonders then man's tongue can express. A
bottomless gulf, that with out running over, receives all Rivers which
perpetually do flow. A restless fight and turmoyle of waters, that never
repose neither day or night. A dreadful, raging, and furious element, that
swells and roareth, and threatens the land, as though it would devour it
all at once. And albeit in situation it be higher then the earth, Arist. lib.
de mirabilibus.
as the Philosopher shows, and do make assaults daily toward the same
with most terrible cries, and waves mounted even to the sky; yet when it
draws near to the land, and to his appointed borders: it stays upon the
sudden, though nothing be there to let it, and is enforced to recoyle back
again, murmuring as it were, for that it is not permitted to pass any further.

Of which restraint, God asks Job this question. Job. 38.
Who has shut up the Sea with gates, when he breaks forth in rage as
from his mothers, womb? Whereunto no man being able to give answer, God
answers himself in these words. I have limited him with my bounds, and I
have set him both a door and a bar, and have said unto him, hitherto shall
thou come, and shall not pass further: here shall thou break thy swelling
waves.

This in sum, is of things without us. But if we should leave these, and
enter to seek God within our selves, The things in man declare GOD.
whether we consider our bodies or our souls, or any one part thereof, we
shall find so many strange things, or rather so many seas of miracles and
wonders, that preach and teach their maker unto us; as we shall not only
perceive and see God most evidently, Iamblicus de Mist. cap. 1.
but rather (as a certain old Heathen has written) we shall feel and handle
him in his works. Which kind of speech also S. Paul himself doubts not to
use, affirming that God has given space to every man in this life to seek
him, si forte attractent eum aut inueniant, Acts. cap. 17.
if perhaps they would handle him, or find him out. Which manner of words do
signify, that by consideration of Gods creatures, and especially of the
wonders in man himself, we may come to see and perceive the Creator so
cleerelie, that in a sort we may be said to feel and handle him. So jointly
do all things concur to the manifestation of their maker: so manifestly
and effectually do they teach, demonstrate, and paint out God unto us;
nothing being so little, that declares not his greatness: nothing so great,
which acknowledges not his sovereignty: nothing so low, that leads us not
up to behold his Majesty: nothing so high, that descends not to teach us
this verity.

It were a labor without end, to go about in this place to allege what
might be be said in the proof of this principle, that there is a GOD: seeing
there was never yet learned man in the world, either Gentile or other, that
acknowledged and confirmed not the same, being driven thereunto by the
manifest evidence of the truth it self.

If you object against me Diagoras, Protagoras, Theodorus Cyrenensis, Bion
Borysthines, Epicurus, Old Atheists.
and some few others, that were open Atheists and denied God: Laertius. lib.
2. et 4. de vit. phylos.
I answer, that some of these were utterly unlearned, and rather sensual
beasts then reasonable men; and consequently might deny any thing, according
to the saying of holy David: the fool said in his heart, there is no God.
Psalm. 13. and 52.
Others that had some smack of learning, rather iested at the falshoode of
their own Panisme idols, then denied the being of one true God.

But the most part of these men indeed, and such others as in old time were
accounted Atheists; denied not GOD so much in words, as in life and facts;
such as S. Paul called Atheists in his days, Romans. 1. Phillip. 3.
that obeyed their bellies, and followed their pleasures in sin and
sensuality: not vouchsafing to think of God in this life, (such was the
Epicure, and many other are at this day of his profession) but yet, Lactant.
lib. 3. institutio.
(as Lactantius well notes) when the same men came to be sober, and speak of
judgment (as at their death, or other time of distress and misery,) they were
as ready to confess GOD, as any other whatsoever.

But for learned men, and people of dyscretion, sobriety, and judgment, there
was never yet any (were he Jew or Gentile) that doubted in this verity, but
had means of probations to confirm the same, as more particulerlie in the
rest of this Chapter shall be declared.

How the Heathen proved there was a GOD. SECT. 2.
AMong the Gentiles or Heathen people, those men were always of most credit
and estimation, that professed the love of wisdom, and for that respect were
termed Philosophers. Philosophers.
Who being divided into diverse sorts and sects, had four principal sciences,
whereof they made profession, each one of these having other lower scien^es
comprehended under it.

Four principal sciences.
The first of these four, is called Natural phylosophie; the second, Morral;
the third, Supernatural, or Metaphysick; the fourth, Mathematique. And for the
first three, they have each one their proper means and peculier proofs,
whereby to convince, that there is a GOD. The fourth, which is the
Mathematique, The Mathematique proves not God.
for that it has no consideration at all, of the efficient or final cause of
things, (under which two respects and consideration only God may be known
and declared to men in this world:) therefore this science has no proper mean
peculier to it self, for proving this verity, as the other sciences have; but
receives the same as borrowed of the former.

THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHER.
THE Natural Philosopher among the Gentiles, had infinite arguments to prove
by the creatures that there was a God, but all he reduced to three principal
and general heads, which he termed ex Motu, ex Fine, and ex Causa efficiente.
That is, arguments drawn from the Motions, from the Ends, and from the Cause
efficient of creatures that we behold; which terms, the examples following
shall make clear and manifest.

The argument of Motion, stands upon this general ground in phylosophie, The
first argument in Natural phylosophie.
that what soever is moved, is moved of another. Aristo. lib. 7. et 8. phy.
Wherein also is observed, that in the motions of creatures, there is a
subordination the one to the other. As for example; these inferior bodies upon
earth, are moved and altered by the air and other elements: and the elements
are moved by the influence and motion of the Moon, Sun, and other heavenly
bodies; these Plannets again are moved from the highest Orb or Sphere of
all, Primum mobile.
that is called the first moveable, above which we can go no further among
creatures.

Now then asks the Philosopher here, who moves this first moveable? for if
you say that it moves it self, it is against our former ground, that nothing
is moved in nature, but of another. And if you say, that some other thing
moves it; then is the question again, who moves that other? and so from
one to one, until you come to some thing that moves, and is not moved of an
other, and that must be God, which is above all nature.

Plato. lib. 10. de legib.

Aristo. lib. 8. phys. cap. 5.


This was the common argument of Plato, and of Aristotle, and of all the best
Philosophers. And they thought it a demo^stration unavoidable, and it seems
they were admonished of this argument by consideraon of the clock, An argument
taken from the Clock.
whose hammer when it strikes, shows the next wheel whereby it is moved:
and that wheel shows to another wheel; and so from one to one, until you
come to him that was the first cause of motion to all the wheels, that is, to
the Clock-maker himself.

Aristotle, to King Alexander, uses this pretty similitude. Arist. libro. de
mundo.
That as in a Quyar of singers, when the foreman has given the first tune or
note, there insueth presently a sweet harmony, and consent of all other
voices, both great and small, sharp and mean: so God in the creation of this
world, A similitude.
having given once the first pushe or motion to the highest heaven, called
Primum mobile, there insueth upon the same, all other motions of heavens,
planets, elements, and other bodies, in most admirable order, concord, and
congruetie, for conservation and government of the whole. And thus is GOD
proved by the argument of motion.

The other two arguments of the End, and of the Cause efficient of creatures,
The second argument of Natural phylosophie.
are made evident in a certain manner by this that has been spoken of
motion. For seeing by experience, that every thing brought forth in nature,
has a peculier end appointed, whereto it is directed by the self same
nature, (as we see the bird is directed to build her nest by nature, the Fox
to make his den, and so the like in all other creatures:) the Philosopher
asks here, what thing is that, which directs nature her self, seeing each
thing must have somewhat to direct it to his end? And no answer can be made,
but that the Director of Nature, must be some thing above nature, which is God
himself. This argument of the final End, is most excellently handled, by
Philo Iudeus, Phylo. lib. de ^pificio mundi.
in his learned treatise of the worke-manship of the world.

The third argument of Natural phylosophie.
From the Cause efficient, the Philosopher disputes thus. It is evident by all
reason, in respect of the corruptions, alterations, and perpetual motions of
all creatures, that this world had a beginning; and vide Plutarch de placitis
Phylos.

Arist. lib. 8. phys. et lib. de Genesis et corrup.

Arist. lib. de mundo. et vide Plotin. lib. de mundo.


all excellent Philosophers that ever were, have agreed thereupon, except
Aristotle for a time, who held a fantasy, that the world had no beginning; but
was from all eternity, albeit at last in his old age, he confessed the
contrarie^ in his book to King Alexander.

This then being so, that this world had a beginning, it must needs follow
also, that it had an efficient Cause. Now then is the question, who is that
Efficient cause that made the world? if you say, that it made it self, it is
absurd; for how could it have power to make it self, before it self was,
and before it had any being at al? If you say that some thing within the world,
made the world: that is, that some one part of the world, made the whole:
this is more absurd; for it is, as if a man should say, that the finger, (and
this before it was a finger, or part of the body) did make the whole body.

Wherefore we must confess by force of this argument, that a greater and more
excellent thing, then is the whole world put together, or then any part
thereof made the world, and was the Cause efficient of the frame that we see;
and this can be nothing else but God that is above the world. So that heerby we
see, how many ways the Natural Philosopher is fraught with arguments, to
prove there is a God, and that by reason only, without all light or
assistaunce of faith.

THE METAPHISIQVE, AND HIS ARGVMENTS.
But the Metaphysicke, or Supernatural Philosopher among the Gentiles, as he
to whom it appertained most in special to handle these high and supernatural
affairs, had many more arguments, and demonstrations, to prove and convince
the being of one God.

And first of all he said, that it could not stand with any possibility in
his science, The first argument in Metaphysicke.
that ens finitum, a thing finite, or closed with in bounds and limits, (as
this world and every creature therein is,) could be, but from some Maker or
Creator. For (says he) the thing that in it self is not infinite, has his
bounds and limits, and consequently there must be some thing, that assigned
these bounds and limits. And seeing in this world there is no creature so
great, which has not bounds and limits: we must of necessity imagine some
infinite supreme Creator or Maker that limited these creatures, even as we
see, that the Potter (at his pleasure) gives bounds and limits to the pot
that he frames.

This argument the Metaphysicke confirms by a ruled principle in his science,
A maxim in Metaphysick.
that every thing which is by participation, must be reduced and referred to
some other thing, that is not by participation, but of it self. Arist. lib. 2.
metaphy. capit. 2.
And he calls a thing by participation, which is not in the fullest or
highest degree of perfection in his kind, but may have addition made unto it.
As for example; water, or any thing else that is heated by the fire, is hot by
participation, and not of it self, for that it may always be hoter, and have
addition of heat made unto it; But fire is ho^e of it self, and not by
participation, for that it has heat in the highest degree, and in that kind
can receive no addition; wherefore the heat of all other things, which are
hot by participation of fire, are reduced (concerning their heat) to the
heat of fire, as to their original.

Now then (says the Metaphysick) we see by experience, that all the
creatures and parts of this world, are things by participation only, for that
they are infinite in nature, and have limitations in all their perfections, and
may receive additions to the same, How all creatures are by participation of
GOD.
and consequently, they must of necessity be referred to some higher cause
that is infinite in perfection, and consists of it self alone, without
participation from others: and this is God, who being absolute, endless, and
without all limitation of perfection in himself, deriueth from his own
incomprehensible infiniteness, certain limited natures and perfections to
every creature; which perfections is creatures, are nothing else, but little
particles, and participations of the bottomless sea of perfections in the
Creator, whereunto they are to be referred and reduced, as the beam to the
Sun, and the brook to the Fountain.

A second argument uses the Metaphysicke, The second argument in Metaphysick.
grounded upon certain rules of unity, whereof one principal is, Multitude.
that every multitude or distinction of things, proceeds from some unity,
as from his fountain. Plato. in Parmen.
This he shows by many examples of things in this world. For we see by
experience, that the diverse motions or moving of the lower Spheres or bodies
celestial, do proceed of the moving of one highest sphere, and are to be
referred to the same, Primum mobile.
as to their fountain. Many Rivers are reduced to one well or offspring:
innumerable beams to one Sun: and all the boughs of a tree, to one stock.

In the body of Man, which for his beauty and variety is called, the little
world, MICROCOSMOS.
the veins which are without number, have all one beginning in the liver, the
arteres, in the heart, the sinnowes, in the brain. And that which is more, the
infinite actions of life, sense, The infinite things that proceed from the
soul.
and reason in man, as generations, corruptions, nourishments, digestions, and
alterations; feeling, smelling, tasting, seeing, hearing, moving, speaking,
thinking, remembering, discoursing, and ten hundredth thousand particular
actions, operations, and motions besides, which are exercised in man's body,
under these or other such names and appellations; all these (I say) being
infinite in number, most admirable in order, and distinct in every their
office and operation, do receive notwithstanding their beginning from one most
simple unity, and indivisible substance, called the soul, which produces,
governs, and directs them all, to so innumerable, different, and contrary
functions.

By this concludes the Metaphysick, that as among the creatures, we find
this most excellent order and connection of things, whereby one brings forth
many, and every multitude is referred to his unity: so much more in all
reason, must the whole frame of creatures contained in this world, (wherein
there are so many millions of multitudes with their unities,) be referred to
one most simple and abstract unity, that gave beginning to them all, and this
is GOD.

A third argument uses the Metaphysicke, The third argument in Metaphysick.
Subordinatio^.
derived from the subordination of creatures in this world; which subordination
is such, and so wonderful; as we see no creature by nature serves it self,
but another, and altogether do conspire in serving the common.

We see the heavens do move about continually without ceasing, and this not
to serve themselves, but inferior creatures, less excellent then themselves.
We see that water moysteneth the ground, the air cools, opens, and
cherishes the same, the Sun heateth and quickens it, the Moon and Stars
pour forth their influence, the winds refresh it, and all this not for
themselves, but for other. The earth again, that receives these services,
uses not the same for herself, or for her own commodity, but to bring forth
grass wherewith to feed Cattaile, and they feed not for themselves, but to
give nourishment unto man.

A similitude.
Now then (says the Metaphysick) if a man that stood a far off upon a
mountain, should see in a field under him, a great, huge, and main Army of
soldiers, most excellent well appointed; each one in order agreeing with the
other; divided into ranks, Squadrons, Companies, and offices; subordinate the
one to the other by degrees; and yet all tending one way, all their faces bent
upon one place, all moving, marching, and turning together: all endeavoring
with alacrity toward the performance of one common service by mutual
assistance, without discention, discord, difference, or clamor: he that
should see this (says the Metaphysicke) as he could not but imagine some
general high Captain to be among these soldiers, whom all obeyed, and from
whose supreme commandment and order, this most excellent subordination,
agreement, and union proceeded; so much more, upon consideration of the former
coherence, consent and miraculous subordination of creatures among themselves
in their operations, must we infer, that they have some general commander
over them all, by whose supreme disposition, each creature has his charge and
peculier task appointed, which he must perform, for the common and universal
service of the whole.

The fourth reason or argument alleged by the Supernatural Philosopher, The
fourth argument in Metaphysick.
is, of the marvelous providence, Providence.
art and wisdom, discovered in the making of every least creature within the
world. For seeing there is nothing so little, nothing so base or contemptible,
within the compass of this heaven that covers us, but if you consider it,
you find, both art, order, proportion, beauty, and excellency in the same:
this cannot proceed of fortune, as foolish Lucretius made diverse books
against the workmanship of the world.
Lucretius and some other would have it, for that fortune is casualtie without
order, rule, or certainty, and therefore needs it must come from the wisdom
and providence of some omnipotent Creator.

If you take a fly, or a flea, or a leaf from a tree, or any other, the least
creature that is extant in the world, and consider the same attentively: you
shall find more miracles, then parts therein; you shall find such proportion
of members, such variety of colors, such distinction of offices, such
correspondence of instruments, and those so fit, so well framed, so coherent,
and so subordinate: as the more ye contemplate, the more ye shall marvel,
neither is there any one thing in the world more effectual, to draw a man to
the love and admiration of his Creator, then to exercise himself often in this
contemplation, for if his heart be not of stone, this will move his affection.

Galen. lib. 5. de vsu part.
We read of Galen, a profane and very irreligious Physician, who as himself
confesses in a certain place, taking upon him to consider of the parts of
man's body; and finding much wisdom in the order, use, and disposition of the
same, sought first to give the praise and glory thereof to nature, or to some
other cause then to God. But in process of time, being oppressed (as it were)
with the exceeding great wysedom, cunning, and providence, which he discovered
in every least parcel and particle of man's body, wherein nothing was
redundant, nothing defective, nothing possible to be added, altered or better
devised: he b^ake forth into these words: Lib. 3. de vsu part.
Compono hic profecto canticum in Creatoris nostri laudem, quod vltrares suas
ornare voluit, melius quam vlla art possent. Here truly do I make a song in
the praise of our Creator, for that of his own accord, it has pleased him to
adorn and beautify his things better, then by any art possible it could be
imagined.

Hereby then does the Metaphysick gather and conclude most evidently, that
there is a GOD, a Creator, a most wise and powrful artificer that made all
things: such a one, as exceeds all bounds of nature, and of human
ability. For if all the world should join together, they could not make
the least creature which we see in this world. He concludes also, that the
foresight and providence of this Creator is infinite, for things to come in
all eternity; and finally, that his wisdom and cogitations are inscrutable.
And albeit sometime he reveal unto us some part thereof; yet often again we
err therein. For which cause, a wise Heathen Platonic concludes thus, A
wonderful speech of a Heathen.
after long search about these affairs. I will praise God (says he) in those
things I understand, and I will admyre him in those things which I understand
not. For I see that my self oftentimes, do things wherein my servant are
blind and conceive no reason; Plotin. lib. de proui.
As also I have seen little children, cast into the fire Jewels of great
price, and their fathers writings of great learning and wisdom, for that they
were not of capacity to understand the value, and worthiness of the thing.

The fifth argument in Metaphysicke.
One argument more will I allege of the Metaphysicke, grounded upon the
immortality of man's soul; Immortality of the soul.
which immortality, is proved with one consent of all learned men, (as Plato
alleges) for that it is a spirit and immateriall substance, Plato. lib. 10.
de repub.
whose nature depends not of the state of our mortal body, for so by
experience we see daily, that in old men and wythered sickly bodies, the
mind and soul is more quick, clear; pregnant, and lively then it was in
youth, when the body was most lusty.

The same is also proved by the unquenchable desire which our mind has of
learning, knowledge, wisdom, and other such spiritual and immateriall
things, wherein her thyrst by nature is so great, as it cannot be satis-fied in
this life, neither can the objects of sense and bodily pleasures, or any other
commodity or delight of this material world, content or satiate the restless
desire of this immateriall creature. Which is an evident argument to the
Philosopher, that some other object and contentation, When the desire of our
soul shall be satis-fied.
is prepared for her in another world, and that of such excellency, and
supereminent perfection, as it shall have in it all wisdom, all learning, all
knowledge, all beauty, and all other causes of love, joy, and contentation,
wherein our soul may rest for ever.

This being so (says the Philosopher) that the soul and mind of man is
immortal, of necessity it must ensue, that an immortal Creator sent the same
into our bodies, and that to him again it must return after her departure
from this life here. This was the true meaning indeed ( Themist. in lib de
anima.
how soever some later interpreters have mis-understood the same) of that
ancient doctrine of old Philosophers, which Plutarch alleges out of
Pythagoras and Plato: Plut. de placit. Philoso.
affirming, that all particular souls of men, came sent from one general and
common soul of the whole world, as sparcles from the fire, and beams from
the common Sun: and that after their separation from their bodies, they shall
return again to that general soul, called anima mundi, The meaning of old
Philosophers, touching Anima mundj.
the soul of the world, (for that it gives life and being to the world)
and so to remain with that general soul eternally.

This was the doctrine of old Philosophers, which seems indeed, to have
been nothing else, (though delivered in other speeches) but that which Solomon
himself affirms in plainer words, Eccle. 12.
et spiritus redibit ad Deum, qui dedit illum: and our soul or spirit shall
return to God that gave it unto us. And this may suffice for a taste of that
which the Metaphysicke or Supernatural Philosopher can say for proof, that
there is a GOD.

THE MORRAL PHILOSOPHER.
THere remains yet a third part of human wisdom or phylosophie, called
Morrall, whose reasons and arguments for proof of this verity, I have of
purpose referred to the last place, for that they be more plain and easy then
the former, and more sensible to the capacity of every simple and unlearned
reader.

The first argument of Morrall phylosophie.
For first of all, he observes in the very natural inclination of man, (be
his manners otherwise never so evil) that there is a certain propension and
disposition to confess some God or Deity; as by example he proves in all
Nations, were they never so fierce or barbarous, yet always confessed they some
God by nature, though no man did teach or instruct them therein. The same is
confirmed, by the common use of all Heathens, in Tertullian handles this point
excellently in Apolog.
lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven, in any sudden distress that
comes upon them. Which imports that nature her self has ingrafted this
feeling, that there is a God. Yea, further he alleges, that by experience of
all ages, it has been proved, that Atheists themselves, that is, such men, as
in their health and prosperity, for more liberty of sinful life, would
strive against the being of any GOD; when they came to die, or fall into any
great misery, they of all other men, would show themselves most fearful of
this God, as Seneca declares, Seneca. lib. 1. de ira.
and as Suetonius shows in the example of Caligula. Sueton in Callig.
Which is a token, that their conscience enforced them to believe a Godhead.

Nay, Zeno the Philosopher was wont to say, The saying of Zeno touching the
death of Atheists.
that it seemed to him a more substantial proof of this verity, to hear an
Atheist at his dying day, preach God from a pair of gallows, or rather such
place of misery, (when he asked God and nature forgiveness) the^ to hear all the
Philosophers in the world dispute the point; for that at this instant of death
and misery, it is like, that such good fellows, do speak in earnest and
sobriety of spirit, who before in their wantonness, impugned God, either of
vanity, ambition, sensuality, or dissimulation.

Now then, when the Morrall Philosopher has proved by this natural
inclination of man, that there is a God, which has imprinted in us such a
feeling of himself, as no conscience can deny him, when it comes to speak
sincerely: then steppeth he a degree further, and proves that this God which
is acknowledged, can be but one; The reason why there can be but one GOD.
for that, if he be God, he must be infinite: and if he be infinite, he can
have no companion, for that two infinite things cannot stand together, without
impeachment the one of the others infinity.

Lact. lib. 2. diui. instit cap. 2.
He proves the same by the custom of most Gentiles, who (as Lactantius well
noted in his time) when they swore, or cursed, or prayed, or wished any thing
heartily, (especially in affliction, that lighteneth the understanding:) their
fashion was to say, Deus, es non dij.
God, and not the Gods. And for the learneder sort of the^, how soever they
dissembled, and applied themselves outwardly to the error of the common
people: yet in earnest they never spoke of more then of one God, as Plato
signifies of himself to Dionysius King of Sicilie, in a certain Letter,
wherein he gave him a sign when he spoke in earnest, and when in jest. Plato.
ep 13. ad Dionys.
Hinc disces tu, scribam ego serio, nec ne: cum serio, ordior Epistolam ab vno
Deo, cum secus, a pluribus. By this sign shall ye know, whether I write in
earnest or not: For when I write in earnest, I begin my Letter with one God,
and when I write not in earnest, I do begin my Letter in the name of many gods.

Julian the Apostata, in his three most scornful books that he wrote
against us Christians, Cyrillus. lib. 2. contra Julian.
(whom contemptuously he called Galileans) endeavoring by all his means to
advance and set forth the honor of Paganism, alleges this Plato for a
chief pyller and father thereof, and dares prefer him before our Moses:
Plotinus Enne^ 1. lib. 8.1. 2. ^^ Eu. 6. lib. 4. cap. 12.3.4. Porphy. lib. 2.
de abst. et lib. de occa. cap. 21.
and yet you see what he testifies of himself. And that this was his
perpetual opinion, three of his most worthiest scholars, I mean, three of the
most learned that ever professed the Platonicke sect, Plotinus, Porphyrius, and
Proclus, Procl. in theolo. Platon. et lib. de anima. et Daem. 1.31.42.53.
all Heathens themselves, do testify and prove in diverse parts of their
works, assuring, that both they and their Master Plato, never believed in
deed but only one God. And as for Socrates that was Platos Master, Socrates.
and pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo, to be the wisest man in all Greece;
Apuleius, Alegus, et Laerti. in vita Socratis.
the world knows that he was put to death for jesting at the multitude of
gods among the Gentiles.

Aristotle that ensued after Plato, began the sect of Peripatetickes,
Aristotle, and the Peripatetickes.
and was a man so much given to the search of Nature, as in many things he
forgot the Author of Nature, or at least wise he treated little, and very
doubtfully thereof, yet in his old age, when he came to write the book of
the world to King Alexander, (which Book S. Iustine the Martyr esteemed
greatly, Justin. in Apolo.
and called it the Epitome of all Aristotle's true phylosophie;) he resolves
the matter more cleerelie, saying thus of GOD: Arist. lib. de. mundo.
He is the father of gods and men; he is the maker and conseruer of all things
that be in the world. And he adds further in the self same place, that the
multitude of many gods, Theo. in metaph. Alex.
was invented to express the power of this one God, by the multitude of his
ministers: Aphrod. lib. de provident.
so that he makes all gods to be servant besides only one. Which sentence
of their Master, Theophrastus and Aphrodiseus, two principal Peripatetickes,
do confirm at large.

Zeno and the Stoickes.
Zeno the chief and father of all the Stoickes was wont to say, as Aristotle
reports, that, either one God, or no God. Which opinion is auerred every
where, by Plutarch and Seneca, Plut. de oracul. defect. de tranq. de quest.
Plat. Seneca. de vita beat. de prouid. in epist.

Epict. apud Arrianum.


two most excellent writers, and great admirers of the Stoicke severity. And
before them, by Epictetus, a man of singular account in that sect, whose
words were esteemed oracles. Dicendum ante omnia, vnum esse D^um, omnia
regere, omnibus prouidere. Before all things (says he) we must affirm that
there is one God, and that this God governs all, and has providence over all.

The Academickes.
As for the Academikes, who made the fourth division or sect of Philosophers,
it is sufficient which I have mentioned before, that Socrates their founder,
was caused to die for his opinion in this matter; albeit it seem, that such as
insued in that sect, whose profession was to dyspute and doubt of every
thing, So in this time of variety of sects.
came at length, by their much iangling and dysputing, to believe and hold
nothing. Whereof Cicero himself may be an example, who in his books De
natura Deorum, follows so far the Academical vein of doubtful dysputing
to and fro, about the nature of gods: as he may seem, (and so did he to
diverse Christians of the Primative Church) to be very irresolute whether there
were any God or no. Albeit in the end, he make show to conclude very
plainly and peremptorily with the Stoics. Arnob. contrae gentes.


All the four sects of Philosophers then, All old Philosophers acknowledged
one GOD.
who in their times bare the credit of learning and wisdom, made profession
of one GOD, when they came to speak as they thought. But if we ascend up
higher to the days before these sects began, that is, to Vide apud
Plutarch. de placitis. Philos. Trismeg. in Paemand. et in Asclep.
Pythagoras, and Archytas Tarentinus, and before them again, to Mercurius
Trismegistus, that was the first parent of Phylosophie to the Egiptians: we
shall find them so resolute and plain in this point, as no Christian can be
more. Wherefore he that desires to see innumerable examples, as well of these
men's sayings, as of other learned Heathens of all ages: let him read but S.
Cyril^ first book against Julian the Apostata, or Lactantius his first and
second books against the Gentiles, and he shall remain satis-fied.

The recollection of the first argument in Morrall Phylosophie.
This then is the Morrall Philosophers first argument: the inclination of all
people to believe a Godhead: the instinct of nature to confess it, the force
of man's conscience to fear it, the custom of all Nations to adore it. And
finally, the consent and full agreement of all learned and wise men, in
applying this Godhead not to many, but to one only, that made this world, and
governs the same. Non hominibus, non daemonibus, non diis ipsis, quos non
naturae ratione, sed honoris causa Deos nominamus. Trismeg. in P^man. cap 2.3.
4.5.6. etc, In Asclep. cap. 1. 2. 6. etc.
We do not attribute the appellation of true God (says Trismegistus) either
unto men, or unto devils, or unto the multitude of other gods themselves, for
that we call them gods, not in respect of their natures, but for honors sake.
That is, we call them gods, to honor them for their famous acts, and not for
that we think them in nature true gods. Which Cicero confirms in these
words; Cicero his opinion of the multitude of Panyme gods how they were made.
The life of man and common custom, has now received, to lift up to heaven
by fame and good will, such men, as for their benefits are accounted excellent.
And heerehence it comes, that Hercules, Castor, Pollux, AEsculapius, and
Liber, are now become gods, and heaven almost is filled with mankind.

The second argument of Morrall phylosophie, The second argument of Morrall
phylosophie.
is, de vltimo fine, and summo hominis bono: that is, concerning the last end
of man, and of his highest or supreme felicity, where by the being of God is
also confirmed. And albeit I have said somewhat of man's end before: yet that
which in this place I am to add, is more proper and peculier to Morral
phylosophie. For as other sciences may and do consider the final ends of
other creatures, which are diverse, and yet all concur for the service of man:
so this science of Morrall phylosophie, does properly consider the final end
of man himself, calling it, summum bonum, his greatest and highest happiness,
whereunto he was created, and whereunto he tends in this life, and wherein he
rests and reposeth without further motion or appetite, when he has obtained
it.

For better understanding whereof, Every thing in this world has a natural
desire to his end.
it is to be considered, that every thing in this world has some particular
end, together with an appetite and desire ingrafted by nature to that end:
which desire cease when the end is obtained. As for example, a stone has a
natural appetite to go down-warde to the Center or middle of the earth, and
so it rests in no place, (except by violence it be stayde) until it come
thither. On the contrary, fire, reposeth no where, (except it be restrained)
until it mount above the air to his peculier and natural place of abode,
where, of it self it rests. And so in other things that are without sense,
there is a certain appetite and desire to their end, which end being once
obtained, that desire and appetite, of it self reposeth.

In beasts likewise we behold, that they have a desire to fill their bellies,
and to satisfy their other senses, which being satis-fied, they remain
contented, and desire nothing else, until the same appetite of sense want his
object again. Whereby we perceive, that sensuality or contentation of the
senses, The felicity of beasts.
is the final end desired of beasts, and their very summum bonum, or
supreme felicity.

But in man, albeit for maintenance of the body, there be this appetite also
to satis-fie his senses, according to the lower proportion of his mind, that
is called sensatiue: yet according to the higher part of his mind, whose name
is Reason, or the reasonable part, (which is the only part indeed, that is
peculier to man, and distinguishes him from unreasonable beasts,) he has an
appetite of some more high and excellent object, then is the contentation of
these senses: for that by experience we see and feel, that oftentimes, when
the senses be all satis-fyed, yet is the mind not quiet, which argues, that
sensuality, or sensual delectation, is not our summum bonum, wherein our mind
must rest, and enjoy her felicity.

Hereupon have Philosophers and wise men fallen to dyspute in all ages, what
should be the final felicity and summum bonum of mankind? And Cicero says,
that this point, is, cardo totius phylosophiae: Cic. lib. definib. bonorum et
malorum.
the very hook or hindge whereupon all phylosophie hangs. For that this
being once found out, clear it is, that all other things and actions, are to
to be referred to the obtaining of this end and happiness. And therefore
about this point there has been marvelous contention and sight among
Philosophers; The contention of Philosophers about the felicity of man.
the Stoickes refuting the Epicures, and the Peripateticks refuting again the
Stoics, and the Platoniques, (who went nerest the truth) impugning and
refuting both the one and the other: and this dyssention went so far forth, the
one part assigning one thing, and the other another, to be this felicity or
summum bonum, that Marcus Varro, a most learned Roman, Aug. lib 19. de ciuit.
cap. 1.
gathered two hundredth fourscore and eight dyfferent opinions (as S. Austine
notes) about this matter.

And finally, when all was said and examined, Plato found, that nothing which
might be named or imagined in this life, could be the felicity or summum
bonum of man, for that it could not satis-fie the desire of our mind. And
therefore he pronounces this general sentence. It is impossible that men
should find their felicity, (or summum bonum) in this life, seek what way
they will, but in the next life without all doubt it must be found. The
sentence of Plato in Phaedon.
The reason of which sentence and determination was, for that Plato was able to
refute any thing, that the other Philosophers did or could name, to be our
felicity and final end in this life; were it Riches, Honors, Pleasures,
morral virtues, or other like, which each sect did assign.

As for example, he proved that riches could not be our summum bonum or
happiness, How nothing in this life can be our felicity
for that they are uncertain, vndurable, vain, variable, and things that bring
with them more danger oftentimes and trouble of mind, then poverty does.
Honors he refelled, for that besides their vanity, they depend of the mouth
and minds of other men, who are changeable and inconstant. Pleasures of the
body and voluptuousnes, for that they are common to us with beasts, and
always have annexed their sting, and dyscontentation, when they are past.
Morrall virtues, for that they consist in a certain perpetual fight and war
with our own passions, which never give us rest or repose in this life.
Finally, whether soever we turn our selves, or what soever we lay our hands
upon in this life, to make our felicity or summum bonum, it fails us (says
Plato) neither gives it any durable contentation to our mind, wherefore this
felicity is to be sought and obtained in the life to come.

Thus far^ arryueth Morrall Phylosophie by reason, How far Morrall
phylosophie reaches in determining man's felicity.
to prove, that man's felicity or final end, cannot be in any thing of this
life or world. It proves also by the same reason, (as in part it has been
touched before) that this felicity of our mind in the life to come, must be a
spiritual and immateriall object, for that our mind and soul is a spirit: it
must be immortal, for that our soul is immortal. But what? goes yet human
phylosophie any further? or can Plato assign the particular point wherein it
stands? Hear his words, and confess, that not without reason he was called
Divine. In this it co^^isteth (says he) vt coniungamur Deo qui omnis
beatitudinis, fastigium, meta, finis. Plato in Phaed.
That we be joined to God, who is the top, the butte, and the end of all
blessedness. And can any Christian (think you) say more then this? Yet harken
what a scholar of his says, for explication of his Masters sentence.
Supremus hominis finis, supremum bonum, id est Deus. Plotinus. Enu. 1. lib. 4.
cap. 1.
The final end of man whereto he tends, is a supreme or sovereign good
thing, and this is God himself. By which words we see, that these Heathens,
by the end of man, could find out GOD, which was the second argument
propounded in Morrall phylosophie.

The third argument in Morrall Phylosophie, touching reward and punishment.
A third argument uses the Morral philosopher, for proof of God, (which shall
be the last I will allege in this place) deduced from consideration of good
and evil, vice and virtue, and especially of the reward which by nature,
reason and equity, is due to the one; as also of the punishment belonging to
the other. For (says he) as in all other things, creatures and actions of
this world, that pass from the Creator, we see proportion, order, justice,
wisdom, and providence observed; so, much more must we assure our selves,
that the same is observed in the same Creators actions and proceedings toward
man, that is the chief and principal of all other his creatures.

Now then we see and behold, that all other creatures, are directed to their
ends by nature, and do receive comfort and contentation so long as they hold
that course: and loss, disease, and grief, as soon as they break and swerve
from the same. Only man, has reason given him whereby to know and judge of
his end; and the holy Scriptures, whereby he may either direct his way to the
same by virtue, or run astray by following of wickedness. Whereupon it
ensues, that in all equity and justice, there must remain reward for such
as do well; and follow the right pathe assigned them to their end and
felicity, which is by good life: and punishment for the other that abandoneth
the same, for pleasure and sensuality.

But we see in this world (says the Philosopher) that most wicked men do
receive least punishment; and many there be, (as Princes and high Potentates)
whose lives and actions, be they never so vicious, yet are they above the
correction of mortal men: and many poor men in the contrary part, who for
their virtue, patience, and honesty, receive nothing in this life, but envy,
malice, contempt, reproach, despyte, and oppression. See of this matter
Sociates in apolog.
Wherefore (says he) either wants there providence and equity in the
government and dysposition of these great affairs, which we see not to want in
things of lesser moment; Plato in Cratill. et in Gorgia. et in phaed. et in
li. 10. de legibus. Plut. de Sera numinis vindicta. and others.
or else must there be a place of punishment, and reward in the life to come,
upon the souls of such as pass from hence, and a just and powerful Judge to
make recompense of these inequalities and iniustices permitted in this world.
Which Judge can be none but the Creator himself.

And so hitherto have I declared, how every particular science among the
Gentiles had particular means and ways to demonstrate GOD, by contemplation
of his creatures, and by force of reason, which no man could deny. Now
remains it to show, how the Jew or faithful Israelite, before Christ's
appearaunce, was able to confirm this verity to a Heathen, which shall be the
subject of the section ensuing.

How the Jews were able to prove GOD. SECT. 3.
THE people of Israel, that for many years and ages, were the peculier
people and partage of GOD; The people of Israel Gods partage.
as they dwelt environed with Gentiles of each side, that impugned their
Religion and worship of one God, and had many weak-lings among them selves,
that were often tempted to doubt of the same Religion, by the example of so
many Nations and Countries about them, that made profession of a contrary
Religion: so had the Divines and learned men of this people, diu^rs forcible
proofs, and most reasonable arguments peculier to themselves, (besides the
gift of faith or any other demo^stration that hitherto has been alleged) to
confirm their brethren in the belief of one God, and to convince all
Atheists or Infidels in the world.

And albeit these proofs which they used were many, as the Creation of the
world by one God: Diverse things whereby the Jews show GOD.
the dividing of the Hebrew Religion from the beginning: the conversation of
God with Abraham, of whom the Jews descended: the miraculous delivering of
that nation from Egypt: the law received from Gods own mouth by Moses: the
strange enteraunce of Jews into the Land of promise: the extinguishing of the
Gentiles which before inhabited there: the erection of the Jewish Monarchy,
and protection thereof against al Nations: the miraculous deeds and sayings of
Prophets: and a thousand reasons besides, which confirm most evidently, that
the Jews God, was the only true God: yet for that all these things and
sayings with an Infidel, had no more credit, then the wrytings or scriptures
wherein they were recorded, hereby it came to pass, that all which a Jew
could say for proof of GOD, more then a Gentile, depended only upon the
authority of his scriptures; and for this cause, he referred all his proofs
and arguments to evident the truth and certainty of these scriptures, which
thing once performed, the being of one God cannot be called in controversy:
for that these scriptures are nothing else but a narratio^ of the acts and
gestes of that only God, which the Jews profess.

We are now to see then, what the Jew was able to say for proof of his
scriptures, and consequently, for demonstration of God, Comfortable to hear
the certainty of Scriptures declared.
and of his judgments declared therein. Which discourse, as it was profitable
in old time, for stay and confirmation of all such, as were or might be
tempted with infidelity: so can it not be but very comfortable to us
Christians of these days, to behold the certainty of these scriptures laid
open before us, upon which the foundation of our whole faith depends.

THE FIRST PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
FIrst therefore, the Jew for proof of his Scriptures, Antiquity.
alleges the great and wonderful antiquity thereof. For as God (says he)
was before Idols, and truth before falsehood: so was the Scripture (which is
the story of the true GOD) long before the wrytings of Panyms or Infidels.
Josephus lib. 10. contra Appion, handles this at large.
Nay, further he shows, that the most part of things recounted in the Bible,
were done before most of the Panym gods were exstant, and that the very last
VVryters of the Hebrew Canon, which are Esdras, Aggeus, Zacharias, and
Malachie, ( Eusebius assigns them 570. in Chron.
almost six hundredth years before the coming of Christ, when the second
Monarchy of Persians began) were before most of the Heathen ancient
Hystoriographers; to wit, before Hellanicus, Herodotus, Pherecides, Thucydides,
and Xenophon. And albeit the Gentiles had some Poets before, as Orpheus, Homer,
Hesiodus, and Lycurgus the Lawmakers, that lived a good while after: yet the
eldest of these, arrived no higher then the days of K. Solomon, which was five
hundredth years after Moses, the first writer of the Bible. After whose time,
the most part of Heathen gods were long unborn, Euphemerus. Missen. in
Genealo. Deorum.
as Ceres, Vulcan, Mercury, Apollo, AEsculapius, Castor, Pollux, and Hercules,
as the Gentiles them selves in their Genealogies do confess. And as for
Abraham, that lived five hundred years before Moses, he was not only elder
then these gods which I have named, but also then Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, and
such other, who for dignities sake and antiquity, are called by the Gentiles
Dii maiorum gentium, Cic. de nat^^a Deorum.
the gods of greater Nations. And yet before Abraham do the scriptures
contain the story of two thousand years or there abouts.

So that by this it is evident, that the writing of Heathens, and the multitude
of their gods, are but late fables in respect of the old and venerable
antiquity of Hebrew Scriptures, and consequently, the authority of these
scriptures, must in reason be greater then of all other wrytings in the world
besides, seeing they were extant before all others, in those first times of
simplicity and sincerity, and were in part translated into diverse languages
before the Monarchy of the Persians, that is, Euse. lib. 9. de praep. Euang.
cap. 2.3.4
before any story of the Gentiles were written, as Eusebius out of many
heathen Authors declares.

THE SECOND PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
Their manner of writing and conseruing.
NExt to the reason of antiquity, is alleged the manner of writing,
authorysing, and co^seruing these scriptures, which is such, as greatly
confirms the certainty of things contained therein. For first what soever is
set down in these wrytings, was either taken immediately from the mouth of
God, as were the propheci^s and books of the law: or else collected from time
to time by general consent, according as matters and miracles fell out, as
were the book of Judges, the books of Kings and Chronicles, and some other
that contain records and Hystories of times. Which books were not gathered
by some one private man, upon hearsay, or his own imagination, long after
things done, as Heathen hystories, and other profane records and monuments
are, but, they were written by general agreement, in the self same days,
when things were in sight and knowledge of all men, and so could not be feygned.

Secondly, when books were written, they were not admitted into the common
authority of scriptures, How scriptures were authorized.
that is, of Gods word or divine wrytings, but upon great deliberation, and
most evident proof of their undoubted verity. For either the whole
congregation or sinagogue, who had the approving hereof, (and among who^
commonly were diverse Prophets) did know most certainly the things and
miracles to be true, (as did also the whole people) that were recorded in these
writings, concerning Hystories or else they saw the same confirmed from GOD, by
signs and wonders, as in the books of the Prophets, and of their lawgyuer
Moses it fell out.

Thirdly, when any thing was written and admitted for scripture, the care of
conservation thereof was such, The care of conservation.
and the reverence of Jews thereunto so great: as may easily assure us, that
no corruption or alteration could happen unto it. For first the thing was
coppied out into twelve Autenticall copies, for all the twelve Tribes: and then
again in every Trybe there were so many copies made as were particular
Sinagogues within that Trybe. All was done by special Notaries, Scribes,
ouer-seers, and witnesses. The copies after diligent reviewe taken, were laid
up by the whole congregation, in the Treasure house of the Temple, under diverse
locks and keys, not to be touched, but by men appointed, not to be used but
with singular reverence. To add, diminish, corrupt, or alter, was present
death by the laws of the Nation. And then how was it possible (says the Jew)
that among these wrytings, either falshoode should creep in, or truth once
received, could afterward be corrupted?

It is not possible (says he) in reason, and therefore observes he another
thing in this case, which in truth is of very great consideration: to wit,
that no other Nation under heaven, did ever so much esteem their own
wrytings, that they would offer to die for the same, as the Jews were ready to
do, The estimation that the Jews had of their Scriptures.
for every sentence and syllable of their scriptures. Wherefore also it did
proceed, that in all their miseries and afflictions (wherein they were a
spectacle to all the world) in all their flights and banishments, to Egypt,
Babylon, Persia, Media, and other corners of the earth, in all their spoils,
assaults, and deuastations at home: they yet ever had special care to conserve
these wrytings, more then their own lives, and so have kept the same without
mayme or corruption more ages together, then all Nations in the world have
done any other monuments.

THE THIRD PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
THE third persuasion which is used by the Jew for the verity of these
Scriptures, The sincerity of the writers.
is, the consideration of the particular men that wrote them: who were such, as
in reason cannot be suspected of deceit or falsehood. For as I have said, the
stories of the Bible, were written from time to time by public authority,
and by the testimony of all men that saw and knew the things that are
rehearsed. The Books of the prophecies were indicted by the Prophets
themselves, who were plain, simple, and sincere men, authorized from God by
continual miracles, and yet so scrupulous and timorous of their own speeches,
as they durst say nothing, but only, Our Lord says this, the Lord of hosts
commands that, etc.

And when they preached and read their wrytinges in the hearing of all the
people, they protested that it was not man's word, but Gods, and that for such
they left it in the public Treasury of their Nation, until by tract of
time, the event and fulfilling of their prophecies should prove them true, (as
always it did) and their own both li^es and deaths declare, The lives and
deaths of the Prophets.
that they meant no falsehood; their lives being such, as were not subject to
the corruption, pride, vanity, or ambition of this life (as other profane and
Heathen writers were) and their deaths for the most part, offered up in holy
martyrdom, for defense of that truth which they had preached and written: as
appears in See Epiphan. de vitis propheta.
Esaias, that was sawed in pieces by K. Manasses; in Jeremy, that was stoned to
death by the common people; in Ezechiell, that was slain by the Captain of
the Jews at Babylon; in Amos, whose brains were beaten out by Amasias the
wicked and idolatrous Priest in Bethel; in Micheas; whose neck was broken by
Ioam, son to King Achab; in Zacharias, that was slain at the Altar, and the
like.

And this for the Prophets of later times among the Jews. A peculier
consideration of Moses, first writer in the Bible.
But now, if we consider the first Prophet of all that wrote among that
people, I mean Moses, that was not only a Prophet, but also an
Hystoriographer a Law-gyuer, a Captain and a Priest: the first that ever
reduced that people to a commonwealth, and the first that put their acts and
gestes in writing, or rather the acts and gestes of the Almighty GOD toward
them: this man (I say) if we consider him only, (I mean the circumstaunces
of his person,) the Jew thinks this a sufficient motive to make any man of
reason believe what soever he has left written in the Bible, without further
confirmation.

And first for his antiquity, Eusebius. lib. 9. et 10. de prep. Euang. Joseph.
lib. 1. de content. Appio. et L. 2. anti.
I have spoken before, and the Heathens do confess: and for miracles done by
him, the greatest enemies that ever he had in the world, that is, Appion in
his fourth Book against the Jews, and Porphirie in his fourth book against
Christians, do acknowledge them; and Porphirie adioyneth more for proof
hereof, that he found the same confirmed by the story of one Saconiathon a
Gentile, who lived (as he says) at the same time with Moses. But what? all
those miracles (say they) were done by Arte-magick, and not by the power of
GOD, as Moses boasted.

But then asks them the Jew, where Moses a sheepehearde, could learn so
much Magic, or why could not the Magitians of Pharao, Exodus 3.4.8.
whose study was in that profession from their infancy, either do the like,
or at least wise deliver themselves from the plagues of Egypt? The myraculous
works of Moses. Exodus. 14.
why did they cry out, the finger of God is here? where did you ever hear of
such works done by Magic, as Moses did, when he divided the red Sea? when
he called into his Camp so many Quayles upon the sudden, Exodus. 16.
as suffised to feed six hundred thousand men, besides women and children?
Numb. 11.
When he made a rock to yield forth a fountain? when he caused a dew to fall
from heaven, Joshua. 5. Psalm. 77.
that nourished his whole Camp for forty years together? when he caused the
ground to open and swallowe down alive, Numb. 16.
three of the richest noble men of all his Army, together with their
Tabernacles, and all other bags and baggage? When he caused a fire to com
from heaven, Joseph. lib. 4. antiq. cap. 2. ^t. 3.
and consume fifty Gentlemen of the former rebels and adherents, without
hurting any one that stood about them?

These things did Moses, and many other in the sight of all his Army, that is,
in the sight of many hundred thousand people, among which, there were diverse
his emulators and sworn enemies, as by the story and scripture it self
appears. Core, Dathan, and Abiron with their faction, Numb. 16. Deuteronomy. 11.
Psalm. 1 25.
sought in all things to dysgrace him, and to diminish his credit: and
therefore if any one point of the miracles had been reproueable: Moses would
never have durst to put the same in writing, nor would the people have stood
with him, and much less have received his wrytinges for divine, and for Gods
own words, (being solicited against him by so potent means,) had not they
known all things to be most true therein contained, and had seen his strange
miracles, and familiarity with God.

But he dealt plainly and simply in this behalf: The plain and sincere
proceeding of Moses.
he wrote the things of his own doings, which every man present did know
to be true: and of Gods speeches and communications to himself, he wrote so
much as he was commanded, whereof both God, and his conscience did bear him
witness. He caused the whole to be read unto the people, and laid up in
the sacred Arc and Tabernacle, as Gods own writing, and covenant with that
Nation. He caused all the whole Army to swear and vow the obseruaunce
thereof. Numb. 20. and 17. Deuteronomy. 31.
And then drawing toward his death, he made a most excellent exhortation unto
them, persuading them sincerely to the service of their God: and confessing
his own infirmities, and how for his offenses he was to die, before their
entrance into the Land of promise. Exodus. 32. Genesis. 49. Numb. 12. Deuter.
14.
He concealed not the offense of his Brother Aaron, of his Graund-father Levy,
of his Sister Marie, and other of his kindred, (as worldly Princes for their
honors are wont to do,) neither did he go about to bring in government after
his decease, any one of his own sons, (which is greatly to be observed)
notwythstanding he left behind him goodly Gentlemen fit for that room, Numb.
27. Deute. 3.
and himself of power to place them, if he had endeavored: but he left the
government to a stranger, named Joshua, as God had commanded him.

All which things (says the Jew) do prove sufficiently, that Moses was no man
of ambition, or of worldly spirit, but a true Servant of God, and
consequently, that he wrought not by Magic or falsehood, but by the only
power of his Lord and Master, and that his writings are true, and of the
same authority, that in his life and death he affirmed them to be, that is,
the undoubted word of Almighty God.

THE FOVRTH PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
This he confirms yet further by a fourth reason, which is, the consent and
approbation of all later writers of the Bible; Consent.
that ensued after Moses. For as among profane writers of worldly spirit, it
is a common fashion for him that follows, to reprehende the former, and to
hunt after praise by his auncetours disgrace: so in these writers of the Bible,
it is a most certain argument, that al were guided by one spirit from GOD,
that in continuance of so many ages and thousand years, no one yet ever
impugned the other, but always the later supposing and approouing the former
for true; does build thereupon, as upon a sure foundation. So the writings of
Joshua, do confirm and approve the writings of Moses: and the records of the
Judges, do reverence and allow the book of Joshua. The story of the Kings
and Chronicles, does refer it self to the story of Judges. One Prophet
confirms another. And finally, Christ approoueth them all, by the known
division of the Law, Psalms, and Prophets, which is a demonstration, that all
their spirits agreed in one. And thus hitherto has been declared the four
considerations, Four considerations external.
that are external or Considerations internal.
and look into the Text, and that which therein is contained: you shall see
Gods own hand, Gods own charecters, Gods own sign and seal, and
subscription to the paper. You shall see Gods omnipotency, Gods spirit, Gods
providence, no less in these letters of his book, then you beheld the same
before, in the tables of his creatures. Nay, much more, (says he) for that
these letters were devised for declaration of those tables, to the end, that
such as for their blindness could not see him in his creatures, might learn
at least to read him in his scriptures.

THE FIFTH PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
Their argument and end.
COnsider then first (says he) the subject or argument which the Scriptures
do handle, together with their scope and end, whereunto they do level. You
shall find, that the first is nothing else, but the acts and gestes of one
eternal God, as before has been mentioned; and the second nothing else, but the
only glory and exaltation of the same great GOD, together with the salvation
of mankind upon earth. And shall you find any wrytings in the world
besides, that have so worthy an argument, or so high an end? Read all the
volumes and monuments of the Pagans; turn over all their Authors, of what
kind, name, or profession so ever, and see what mention they make of these two
things, I mean, of the honor of God, and the salvation of man? Read their
Philosophers, Philosophers.
and see, whether ever they name or pretend these things. Read their
Historiographers, Hystoriographers.
and mark how many battles and victories they attribute unto God? They will
describe to you often the particular commendation of every Captain: they will
defraude no one Soldier of his praise in the victory: they will attribute
much to the wysedom of their General; much to his courage: much to ^^s
watchfulnes: much to his fortune. They will attribute to the place, to the
wind, to the wether, to the shyning of the Sun, to the raising of the duste
in the enemies eyes, to the flying of some little bird in the air, and to a
thousand such petty observations besides; but to God nothing. Where as
contrariwise in the scriptures, it is in every battle recorded. God delivered
them into their enemies hands: God ouerthrewe them: God gave the victory.

Again, consider the Laws and Lawemakers among the Gentiles, Heathen
Lawmakers.
as Lycurgus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and the like, and see whether you may find
any one such Law, or tending to such an end, as this of the Jews: Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: and shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. Deute. 6.
Consider in all the South-sayers and Divines among the Gentiles, Prophets and
Soothsayers.
whether they used to say in their predictions, as the Prophets of Israel did,
Dominus dixit, the Lord has spoken it, or else Ego dico, I do speak it.
Compare their versifyers and Poets with those of the scripture, Versifyers and
Poets.
and see, whether they have labored in the praise of men, or of God. And
whereas heathen Poets, have filled up their Books (as also the most part of
ours at this day,) with matter of carnal love: mark where any of the^ ever
brake forth into such pan^^ of spiritual chaste love, as holy David did,
when he said: Psalm. 17.
I will love thee my God, my strength, my firmament, my refuge, my deliverer,
my helper, my protector, and the horn of my salvation. And again in another
verse. The vehement love of David. Psalm. 72.
What have I desired upon earth besides thee? my flesh and heart have fainted
for thee, thou God of my heart, thou GOD art my part and portion everlasting?

By all which is evident, that as profane wrytinges and writers, Profane
writers treat only of men.
which do treat of men, extol men, seek the grace of men, refer all to
the commodity and good liking of men, do proceed of the spirit of man, and
are subject to those infirmities of falsehoode, error, and vanity, wherewith
man is entangled in this life: so the Scriptures, which handle matters above
the compass of flesh and blood; that refer all to God, and supernatural
ends; could not proceed of nature or of human spirit. For that by nature,
the Jews were men as the Gentiles were, and had their infirmities of flesh
and blood as the other had. And therefore it must needs be concluded, that
these high and supernatural writings among them, proceeded from God that
specially directed them, and gave them light of understanding, above all other
nations, and people in the world.

THE SIXTH PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
NExt after the argument and end of the Scriptures, Their style.
the Jew wylleth us to consider the peculier style and phrase which they use;
for that (says he) it being different from all manner of wrytings in the
world, and inimitable to man: it does dyscouer the finger of God by which it
was framed. See S. Augustine of this at large, lib. 12. de ciuit. Dei.
For where as human writers do labor much in adoring their style, and in
reducing their words to number, weight, measure and sound, with addition of
many figures, and other ornaments, for allurement of the Reader: the Scripture
takes quite another course, and uses a most marvelous simplicity,
Simplicity.
thereby to accomodate it self to the capacity of the weakest; but yet,
always carrying with it so great profunditie, Profunditie.
as the best learned in the search thereof, shall confess their own
ignorance. For examples sake, consider but the very first words of the Bible;
Genesis. 1.
In the beginning, God created heaven and earth: and the earth was empty and
void, and darkness was upon the face of the depth: and the spirit of God was
carried upon the waters: and GOD said, let light be made, and light was made,
etc. What can be more plain and simple, the^ this narration, to instruct the
most unlearned about the beginning and creation of the world? and yet, when
learned men come to examine every point thereof, how and what, and where, and in
what manner, and when, things were done; it astonisheth them all, to consider
the difficulties which they find, and the depth of so infinite inscrutable
mysteries.

Besides this, there goes in the same simplicity, a strange majesty, The
gravity and majesty of speech in the scriptures.
and gravity of speech, declaring sufficiently from how great and potent a
Prince it proceeds. For as great Monarchs in their Edicts and proclamations,
are wont to speak unto their subjects, not in figures or rethoricall phrases,
but plainly, breefelie, and peremptorily to show their authority: so the
scriptures, to declare whose Edicts they be, do use the like manner of phrase
and style to all the world, without alluring or flattering any man, and without
respect of Monarche, Emperor, King, Prince, or Potentate Deuteronomy. 4. 16. and 22.
Fac hoc et viues: do this, and thou shall live. Si peccaueris in me, morieris
in aeternum: if thou sin against me, thou shall die everlastingly.

And albeit (as I have said) the Scriptures do use this simplicity of
speech, and do not admit that kind of painted and artificial style, which
human writers do so much covet: yet in persuading, instructing, moving of
affections, The force of the scriptures, in moving of affections.
and all other effects which speech or writing can work: there is no
comparison, (a thing most wonderful) between any other wrytings in the world
and these. Whereof I could allege many proofs and examples, but that it
were too-long. Let any man read attentively, but the first Chapter of the
prophecy of Esaias, and compare it with any one part or parcel of Tullies or
Demostines orations, and see whether the difference of words, be as great as
the difference of motions? Let diverse hymns and holy Psalms of the
scriptures, be conferred with the most patheticall poems, that man's wit has
invented, and see whether there be any comparison in stirring and fiering of
affections, or no?

This am I sure, that Josephus the Jew, who for glory of his eloquence,
Flauius. Josephus. de Antiq. Iudaic.
had his Image of metal, erected by Titus the Emperor in the marketplace of
Rome, wrote the the same story, See S. Ierom. lib. de scrip. Ecclesi.
which the scriptures contain, and bestowed much labor and humane cunning
therein. But yet even in those places, where he endeavored most to show his
art, Genesis. 22.
as in the sacrifice of Isaac by his father, and in the meeting of Iephte with
his only daughter, Judges. 11.
which by vow he was constrained to put to death; the Scriptures are able to
pearce the heart, and wring out tears of the reader, whom Josephus will not
greatly move with his rethorical narration, though otherwise very learned
and arteficiallie penned.

Two miracles reported by Aristaeus.
Aristaeus that learned Gentile, of whom we have made mention before, who was
in special favor with Ptolomie, the second great Monarche of Egypt, (about
three hundred years before our Savior Christ his nativity, (and a chief
dooer in procuring the translation of the Hebrew Bible into the Greek
language, Aristaeus. libello de translat. Bibliorum, et apud Euse. lib. 8. d^
praep. euang. cap. 1.
reported of his own knowledge to the said King Ptolomie, two strange
accidents which had happened in his time, and which he had understood of the
parties themselves, to whom they had happened. The first was, of Theopompus,
Theopompus.
an eloquent Hystoriographer, who having translated many things out of the
Bible, and endeavoring to adorn the same with vain colloures of eloquence;
could not perform his desire, but was stricken with a suddayne maze and
giddines in the head, and was warned in his sleep, not to proceed any
further in that work after that sort, for that such manner of style was
too-base for so high matters, as the scriptures contained.

The other example was of one Theodectes a writer of Tragaedies, Theodectes.
who told Aristaeus, that he once attempted to bring certain matters out of
the Jews Bible, into a Pagan tragaedie, and that thereupon he was presently
stricken blind; wherewith he being astonished, and falling to repentance for
that he had done, and desisting from the enterprise, (as also Theopompus did)
they were both of them restored again to their former healthes. And thus much
did these three Pagans confess, of the authority, divinity, and peculier
sacred style of our scriptures.

THE SEVENTH PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
BUT now further it insueth in order, that after the subject and phrase, we
should consider a little the contents of these Scriptures, The Contents.
which will perhaps, more clearly direct us to the view of their Author,
then any thing else that hitherto has been said. And for our present purpose,
I will note only two special things contained in the Bible. The first shall
be certain high and hidden doctrines, High doctrines.
which are above the reach and capacity of human reason, and consequently
could never fall into man's brain to invent them. As for example; that all this
wonderful frame of the world, was created of nothing, whereas Phylosophie
says, that of nothing, nothing can be made. That Angels being created
spirits, were damned eternally for their sins; that Adam by dysobedience in
Paradise, drew all his posterity into the obligation of that his sin; and
that, the woman's seed should deliver us from the same. That God is one in
substance, and three in person; that the second of these persons being God,
should become man, and die upon a Cross for the ransom of mankind; that
after him, the way to all felicity and honor, should be by contempt,
suffering, and dishonor. These doctrines (I say) and many more, contained in
the Bible, being things above man's capacity to devise, and nothing agreeing
with humane reason: most evidently do declare, that God was the Author and
enditor of the scriptures, for that by him only, and from no other, these high
and secret mysteries could be revealed.

The second thing contained in the scriptures, that could not proceed but
from God alone, are certain prophecies and foretellings of things to come.
The prophecies in scripture do declare their Author.
Wherein God himself provoke the Idols of the Gentiles, to make experience
of their power, in these words: Esaias. 41, 23.
Declare unto us what shall ensue hereafter, and thereby we shall know that
you are Gods indeed. Which is to be understood, if they could foretell
particularly and plainly, what is to come, in things meerlie contingent or
depending of man's will: they should thereby declare their power to be divine.

For albeit these Idols of the Gentiles, as Apollo, and other that gave forth
Oracles, (which were nothing else indeed, but certain wicked spyrits, that
took upon them these names,) did some-time happen upon the truth, and
foretell things to come: How the devils and other creatures may fore-tel
things to come.
as also some Astrologers, Soothsayers, and Magitians do, either by
foresight in the stars and other elements, or by the assistaunce of these
wicked spirits and devils: yet are the things which they pronosticate, either
natural and not contingent: and so may be foreseen and foretold in their
causes; (as rain, heat, cold, winds, and the like:) or else, if they be
mere accidental: these predictions of theyrs, are only conjectures, and so
most incertaine, and subject to errors.

The opinion of a Heathen touching the prophecies of his gods.
This testifies Porphirie the great Patron of Paganism, in a special book
of the aunswers of the gods, wherein he swears, that he has gathered truly
without addition or detraction, the Oracles that was most famous before his
time, with the false and uncertain event thereof; in consideration of which
event, he sets down his judgment of their power in predictions, after this
manner. Porphy. lib. de resp. et oracu.
The Gods do foretell some natural things to come, for that they do observe
the order and coniu^ction of their natural causes: but of things that are
contingent, or do depend of man's will, they have but conjectures only, in
that by their subtlety and celeritie, they prevent us. But yet they
oftentimes do lie, and deceive us in both kinds: for that, as natural
things are variable, so man's will is much more mutable.

Thus far Porphyrie of the prophecies of his gods, whereunto agrees another
Heathen, of great credit among the Gretians, named Oenomaus, Oenomaus de
falsitate oraculorum, et de artificibus maleficijs
who for that he had been much delighted with Oracles, and more deceived: wrote
a special book in the end, of their falshoode and lies; and yet shows,
that in many things wherein they deceived, it was not easy to convince them of
open falshoode, for that they would inuolue their aunswers (of purpose,) with
such obscurities, generalities, equivocations, and doubtfulnesse, as always
they would leave themselves a corner wherein to save their credits, when the
event should prove false. As for example, when Cresus that famous and rich
Monarche of Lydia, consulted with the Oracle of Apollo, Deceitful Oracles.
whether he should make war against the Persians, and thereby obtain their
Empire, or no? Apollo; desirous of blood-shedde, (as all wicked spirits are)
gave his oracle in these words, for deceiving of Cresus. If Craesus without
fear, shall pass over Halys: Eusebius. lib. 5. de praep. euange. capit. 10.
(this was a River that lay between him and Persia) he shall bring to
confusion a great rich kingdom. Upon which words, Cresus passed over his
army, in hope to get Persia, but soon after he lost Lydia, by evil
understanding of this doubtful prophecy.

The circumstaunces of prophecies set down in the scriptures.
This then is the imbecilitie of both human and angelical power, in
pronosticating things to come, which are mere contingent. In which kind,
notwithstanding, seeing that the scriptures have many, and almost infinite
prophecies, fore-tolde many years, (and sometimes ages) before they came to
pass: set down in plain, particular, and resolute speech: at such time as
there was neither cause to conjecture them, nor probability that ever they
should be true; delivered by simple and unlearned persons, that could
foresee nothing by skill or art; and yet that all these by their events, have
proved most true, and never any one jot in the same have failed: this (I
say) alone, does convince most apparentlie, (all proofs and reasons, and
other arguments laid aside,) that these Scriptures are of GOD, and of his
eternal and infallible spyrite. And therefore of these prophecies, I will
allege in this place, some few examples.

The prophecy to Abraham for his posterity.
ABraham the first Father and special Patriarch of the Jews, had many
prophecies and predictions made unto him, as of his issue, when he had yet
none, nor ever like to have: of his inheriting the Land of Canaan, and the
like. But this which follows, is wonderful, of his posterities descent into
Egypt; Gene. 12. 13. 15. 17. 18. etc.
of their time of servitude, and manner of deliverance thence; the same being
foretold more then four hundred years before it was fulfilled:) and at that
time when no likelihood thereof in the world appeared. The words are these.
Gene. 15.
Know thou before hand, that thy issue shall be a stranger in a foreign Land,
and they shall subject them to servitude, and shall afflict them for four
hundred years: but yet I will judge the nation unto who^ they have been
slaves, and after that, they shall depart thence with great riches. This is the
prophecy, and how exactlie it was afterward fulfilled, by the ruin of the
Egyptians, and deliverance of the Israelites, even at that time which is here
appointed: not only the book of Exodus does declare, Exodus. 1^. Gala. 3.
where the whole story is laid down at large, but also the consent of Porphy.
lib. 4. contra Christia.
Heathen writers, as before has been touched. And it is specially to be
noted, Appion. lib. 4. contra. Iudaeos.
that this prophecy was so common and well known among all the Jews, from
Abraham's time down unto Moses, and so delivered by tradition from fathers unto
their children: as it was the only comfort and stay, not only of all that
people in their servitude of Egypt: but also of Moses and others, that governed
the people afterward, for forty years together in the desert, and was the
only mean indeed, whereby to pacify them in their distresses and myseries;
and therefore Moses in every exhortation almost, makes mention of this promise
and prophecy, as of a thing well known unto them all, and not devised or
invented by himself or any other.


LOng after this, Jacob that was Abraham's Nephewe, being in Egypt, and making
his testament; said of his fourth son Judah. Judah, thy brother shall praise thee,
and the children of thy father shall bow unto thee, etc. The Scepter shall not
be taken from Judah, until he come that is to be sent, and he shall be the
expectation of Nations. Genesis. 49.
Which later part of the prophecy, all Hebrews do expound that it was meant
of the coming of Messiah, which was fulfilled almost two thousand years
after, at the coming of Christ, as shall be showed in another special
Chapter. Josephus. de antiq. lib. 14.
For at that time, King Herod a stranger, put out quite the line of Judah, from
the government of Jury. But for the first part, touching Judas Scepter, it is
wonderful to consider the circumstaunces of this prophecy.

For first, when it was spoken and uttered by Jacob, there was no probability
of any Scepter at al, to be among the Jews, for that the Israelites or sons
of Jacob at that day, were poor and few in number, and never like to be a
distinct Nation of themselves, or to depart forth of Egypt again. And
secondly, if any such thing should come to pass, as they might be a people,
and have a Scepter of government of their own. Yet was it not likely, that
Judah and his posterity should possess the same, Vulikelihoods of this
prophecy.
for that he had three elder brothers, to wit, Ruben, Simeon, and Leui: who in
all likeli-hoode were to go before him. And thirdly, when Moses recorded and
put in writing this prophecy, (which was diverse hundred years after Jacob had
spoken it,) it was much less likely, that ever it should be true, for that
Moses then present in government, Exodus, 2, Joshua, 19.
was of the tribe of Leui, and Joshua designed by God for his successor, was of
the Tribe of Ephraim, and not of Judah: which makes greatly for the certainty
of this record. For that it is most apparent, that Moses would never have put
such a prophecy in writing, to the dysgrace of his own Tribe, and to the
prejudice and offense of Ruben, Simeon, Ephraim, and other Tribes; neither
would they ever have suffered such a derogation, but that it was evident to
the^ by tradition, that their Grandsire Jacob had spoken it, albeit then
presently there was no great likeli-hood, that ever after, it should come to
be fulfilled.

And this was for the time of Moses, but yet consider further, that from Moses
to Samuel, (that was last of all the Judges,) there passed four hundred
years more, 1, Regum, 1, and 8.
and yet was there no appearaunce of fulfilling this prophecy in Israel; for
that the Trybe of Judah was not established in that government. At length they
came to have Kings to rule, 1. Regum. 9.
and then was there chosen one Saul to that place, not of the Trybe of Judah,
but of Benjamin, and he endued with diverse children to succeed him. And who
would then have thought, that this prophecy could ever have been fulfilled?
but yet for that it was Gods word, it must needs take place: and therefore
when no man thought thereof, there was a poor David.
Shepherd chosen out of the Trybe of Judah, to be a King, and the regiment and
Scepter so established in his posterity, 1, Regum, 16
that albeit many of his descendents offended God more grievously the^ ever did
Saul, who was put out before: 3, Regu, 12, 2. Para. 11.
and albeit ten Trybes at once brake from Judah, and never returned to obedience
again, but conspired with the Gentiles and other enemies on every side, to
extinguish the said kingdom and regiment of Judah: The wonderful providence of
God toward the house of Judah.
yet for the fulfilling of this prophecy, the government of Judah held out
still, for more then a thousand and two hundred years together, until Herod's
time, (as I have already said) which is more, then any one family in the
world besides, Eusebius. in Chron.
can show for his nobility or continuance in government.

The prophecy for the greatness of Ephraim above Manasses.
THE same Jacob, when he came to bless his little Nephews Manasses and
Ephraim, that were Joseph's children: though himself were now dim of sight,
and could not well discern them, yet did he put his right hand upon the
head of the younger, and his left hand upon the elder, and that of purpose,
as it proved afterward. For when Joseph their father misliked the placing of
their Graund-fathers hands, and would have removed the right hand from
Ephraim, and have placed it upon the head of Manasses, that was the elder
brother, Jacob would not suffer him, but answered. Genesis. 48.
I know my son, I know, that Manasses is the elder: and he shall be
multiplied into many people, but yet his younger brother shall be greater then
he. Joshua. 16. and 17.
Which afterward was fulfilled, for that Ephraim was always the greater and
stronger Trybe, and in fine, became the head of the kingdom of Israel, or of
the ten Tribes, whereof there was no suspicion or likelihood, when Jacob spoke
this, Ecclesi. 47. Esaias, 7. and 28. Jeremy. 31. Ezechiel. 37. Osee. 5.
or when Moses recorded it. And how then came Jacob to foresee this, so many
hundred years before? as also to foresee and foretell the particular places
of his childrens habitations in the land of promise? Genesis. 49.
as Zabulon at the sea side; Aser in the fertile pastures; Joshua. 14. Exodus 12.
Gal^. 3. Acts. 13.
and other the like, that fell out by casting lots, after four hundred years
and more. Wherehence had he this (I say) to foretell what lots so long after
should appoint, but only from GOD, who governed their lots.

The foresight of Moses.
THE like may be asked concerning Moses, who before his death in the desert,
divided out the Land of Canaan, Numb. 34. 35. 36. Joshua. 15.16.17
to every Tribe, even as though he had been in possession thereof, and as
afterward it fell out by casting of lottes, as in the book of Joshua it does
appear. And could any human wit or science (think you) foresee, what each
Trybe should attain (after his death) by drawing of lottes? Again, the same
Moses foresaw and fore-tolde in public hearing of all the people, how in
times to com, long after his death, Deuteronomy. 31. 32.
the Jews should forsake God, and for their sins be cast into many
banishments, and finally be forsaken, and the Gentiles received in their room,
Deu. 32. v. 21
as indeed it came to pass. And whence (trow you) could he learn this, but
from God alone?

The prophecy for the perpetual desolation of Jericho.
IN the Book of Joshua, there is a curse laid upon the place where Jericho
stood, and upon whatsoever person should go about to rebuilde the same, to
wit, Iosua^ 6,
That in his eldest son he should lay the foundations, and in his youngest
son should he build the gates thereof: which is to say, that before the
foundations were laid, and gates builded, he should be punished with the death
of all his children. Which thing was fulfilled almost five hundred years
after, in one Hiel, who presumed under wicked King Achab, to rebuilde Jericho
again, and was terrified from the same, by the sudden death of Abiram and
Segul his children, as the book of kings reports, 3, Reg. 16.
according to the words of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand of Joshua,
the son of Nun. And since that time to this, no man either Jew or Gentile,
has taken upon him to raise again the said City, albeit the situation be
most pleasant, as by relation of stories and Geographers appears.


3, Regum. 12
IN the third Book of Kings it is recorded, that when Jeroboam had withdrawn
ten Trybes from the obedience of Roboam, King of Judah: to the end they might
never have occasion to reunite themselves again to Judah, by their going to
sacrifice in Jerusalem, (as by the Law they were appointed) he builded for
them, a goodly gorgious high Altar in Bethel, and there commanded them to do
their devotions. And when he was one day there present himself, and offering
his incense upon the said Altar, and all the people looking on: there came a
man of God, (says the scripture) and stood before the Altar, and cried out
aloude, and spoke these words: 3, Reg. 13.
O Altar, Altar, this says the Lord: behold a child shall be borne of the
house of David, whose name shall be Josias, and he shall sa^rifice upon thee,
these idolatrous priests that now burn francumsense upon thee, and he shall
burn the bones of men upon thee.

Thus spoke that man of God in the presence and hearing of all the people, more
then three hundred years before Josias was borne: and it was registered
presently, according to the manner of that time, (which I have noted before)
and with the same were registered also, the miracles which happened about that
fact: as that, the Altar cleft into upon the man's words: and Jeroboam
extending out his hand to apprehende him, lost presently the use and feeling
thereof, until it was restored again by the said holy man's prayers: who
notwithstanding, for that he disobeyed Gods commandment in his return, and
eat with a Prophet of Samaria, (which was forbidden him:) he was slain in his
way home-warde by a Lion, Disobedience punished grievously in Gods dearest.
and his body was brought back again and buried in Bethel, nygh the said
Altar, amongst the sepulchers of those Idolatrous Priests of that place, but
yet with a superscription upon his Tomb, containing his name, and what had
happened.

There passed three hundred years and Josias was borne, 4, Reg. 23
and came to reign in Judah, and one day coming to Bethell to overthrow the
Altar, and to destroy the sepulchers of those Idolatrous Priests that had
been buried in that place: when he began to break their Tombs: he found by
chance the sepulcher of the said man of God, with the superscription upon it.
By which superscription and relation of the Citizens of Bethell, when he
perceived that it was the Sepulcher of him that had foretold his birth, his
name, and his doings, so many hundred years before he was borne: he let the
same stand untouched, Chap. 23.
as the fourth Book of Kings does declare.

Now consider, whether among any people in the world, but only among the Jews,
there were ever any such prophecy, so certain, so particular, so long
fore-tolde before the time, and so exactly fulfilled? But yet the holy
scriptures are full of the like, and time permits me only to touch some
few of the principal.

The prophecy for the destruction of
Esaias the Prophet, is wonderful in foretelling the mysteries and acts of the
Messiah, his nativity, his life, and all the perticulers that happened in his
passion. In so much, that S. Jerome says, Hieron. in prolog. Galeat.
he may seem rather to write a story of deeds past, then a prophecy of
events to come. But yet among other things, it is to be noted, that he living
in a peaceable and prosperous time in Judah, when the Jews were in amity and
great security with the Babylonians, he fore-sawe and foretold the
destruction of Jerusalem by the said Babylonians, and the grievous captivity
of the Jews under them; 4. Reg. 20. verse. 17. Esaias. 5.
as also the destruction of Babylon again by Cyrus King of Persia, whose
express name and greatness, he published in writing almost two hundred years
before he was borne: saying in the person of GOD; First, to Ezechias King of
Judah, that rejoiced in the freendship he had with Babylon: 4. Reg. 20.
behold, the days shall com, when all that thou and thy fathers have laid up,
shall be carried away to Babylon, and thy children shall be Eunuchs in the
King of Babilons Palace. And next, to Babylon he said: Esaias, 13.
The destruction of Babylon, which Esaias the son of Amos saw, etc, houle and
cry, for that the day of the Lord is at hand, etc.


THyrdly unto Cyrus (not yet borne) who was preordained to destroy the same,
and to restore the people of Israel from banishment; to rebuilde the Temple in
Jerusalem, he says thus; Esaias, 24.
I say to Cyrus, thou art my shepherd, and thou shall fulfill all my will. I
say to Jerusalem, thou shall be builded again. I say to the Temple, thou
shall be founded again. This says the Lord, to my anointed Cyrus, I will
go before thee, Esaias, 25.
and will humble the glorious people of the earth, in thy presence: I will break
their brazen gates, and crush in pieces their iron bars, for my servant Jacobs
sake have I called thee by thy Name, and have armed thee, where as thou This he
says, for that Cyrus was an Infidel.
know not me.

Can any thing be more clearly or myraculously spoken in the world, then to
name a Heathen not yet borne, that should conquer so strong a Monarchy as
Babylon was, at this time, and should build again the Temple of Jerusalem,
which others of his own Religion had destroyed before him? What cause, what
reason, what likeli-hoode could be of this? yet Esaias speaks it so
confidentlie, as he says, Esaias, 13.
that he saw it. And he names two witnesses thereof, that is, Vrias and
Zacharias, that were not borne in many years after, saying: Esaias, 8, v. 2.
and I took unto me two faithful witnesses, Vrias the Priest, and Zacharias
the son of Barachias. Iere, 26, v. 20
Whereof the first was a Prophet in Ieremies time, a hundred years after Esaias,
and the second lived fourscore years after that again, in the days of
Darius, as by the beginning of his prophecy appears: Zach, 1, v. 1.
and yet both (as you see) were distinctly named by Esaias long time before.

And whereas this book of Esaias was pronounced openly to the people (as other
prophecies were) and published into many thousand hands before the captivity
of Babylon fell out, Circumstances of certain truth.
and then carried also with the people, and dispersed in Chaldea, and other
parts of the world: there can be no possible suspicion of forgerie in this
matter, for that all the world both saw it, and red it, many years before
the thing came to pass: yea, when there was no opinion of any such
possibility to come.


THE same captivity and destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, was
prophesied by Jeremy, a hundred years after Esaias, and a little before the
matter came to pass: yea, whiles the Babylonians were about the walls of
Jerusalem, and besiedged the same for two years together, Jeremy was within,
and told every man that it was but in vain to defend the City, for that
God had now delivered it. And albeit he were accounted a Traitor for so
saying, (especially when by an Army of Egypt, that came to the aid of
Jerusalem from Pharao, the siedge of the Babylonians was raised for a certain
time,) yet Jeremy continued still in his asseueration, and said to Zedechias
the King, Iere. 37. v. 16
thou shall be delivered into the hands of the King of Babylon. And to the
people: Iere. 38. v. 3.
haec dicit Dominus, tradendo tradetur haec ciuitas, etc. This says the Lord,
this City most certainly shall be delivered into the hands of the
Babylonians. And so he continued notwithstanding he were put in prison, and
whipped, and threatened daily to be hanged: Jeremy 39.
until indeed the City was taken, and Zedechias eyes pulled out, his children
slain before his face, and all other things performed, 4. Reg. 24.25.
which Jeremy had prophesied and foretold them before.

And which was yet more marvelous, Jeremy did not only foretell the
perticulers of this captivity, but also the determinate time, how long it
should endure, saying: Iere. 25. v. 11.
And all this land of Jury, shall be into wilderness, and astoniednesse: and
all this people shall serve the King of Babylon for threescore and ten years,
The years foretold of the captivity of Babylon.
and when threescore and ten years shall be complete, I will visit upon the
King of Babylon, and upon that Nation says the Lord, and I will lay the same
into eternal desolation. But upon Judah will I cast my pleasant eyes, and will
bring them back to this land again. etc. In which prophecy is contained,
Iere, 24, v, 5, etc Iere, 29, v. 10
first the particular time how long this captivity should endure. Secondly, the
destruction of Babylon, and of that Monarchy by the Persians. And thirdly,
the returning home of the Jews again; which three things to have been
afterward fulfilled, not only Esdras that lived at that time, 1, Esdras. 1.
2. 3, Esdras, 2.
and was an actor in performance of the last: but all other Heathen Writers
besides, do record and testify.

And this prophecy of Jeremy, was so famous and certainly believed amongst
all the Jews, in the time of their captivity: as when the day of expiration
drew near, Daniell writes thus of himself. Daniell, 9. verse. 1,
In the first year of Darius, I Daniell, understood in the scriptures, the
number of the seauentie years whereof God spoke to Jeremy, that they should
be fulfilled, touching the desolation of Jerusalem: and I turned my face to my
Lord God, and besought him in fasting, and sackcloth, etc. Neither only the
Jews understood and believed this prophecy, but even Cyrus himself, that was
a Gentile, Gentiles believed the Scripture.
gave full credit thereunto, and thereby was induced to restore the Jews: as
appears both by his own words and proclamations, set down by Esdras that
Executed the same: 1. Esdras, 1. 3. Esdras, 2.
and by his deeds also, in restoring home the Jews, and rebuilding their
Temple at his own great charges, as all Historiographers of the Heathens do
confess.

I might here allege infinite other examples, and make no end, if I would
follow the multitude of prophecies which are dyspersed throughout the whole
scripture? I might show how Daniell foretold to Baltasar King of Babylon,
The prophecies of Daniel. Daniell, 5.
in the mydst of his triumph, and in the hearing of al his peers, the
destruction which insued upon him the very same night after.

I might here allege how the same Daniell in the first year of Darius the
Median, Daniell. 11.
in the beginning of that second Monarchy of Medians and Persians, foretold
Behold, three Kings shall yet stand in Persia, and the fourth shall be rich
above all the rest.
how many Kings should reign after him in Persia, and how the last (who was
the fourth after him, and his name also Darius) should fight against the
Grecians, and be overcome by a Grecian King, (which was Alexander,) and how
that kingdom also of Greece, Daniell. 11. verse, 2.
should be divided and torn in pieces, after Alexanders death, and not pass
to his posterity, Justin. hist. lib. 12. et. 13.
as Iustine and other Heathen Writers do testify that it was, by Antigonus,
Perdiccas, Seleuchus, Antiochus, Ptolomeus, and other Captains of Alexander,
that divided the same among themselves above a hundred years after Darius was
dead.

I might declare also, how the same Daniell fore-sawe and foretold, the four
great Monarchies of the world, The four M^narchies of Assyrians, Persians,
Grecians, and Romans.
and described the same as distinctly, as if he had lived in them all, and as
by experience we find since to be true. I might allege the particular
description, of the fight betwixt Darius and Alexander, set down by Daniell
under the names of the great Ram, Daniell, 2. Daniell, 8.
and the fierce Goat with one horn, which Goat himself interprets it to
be meant of a Grecian King, The foretelling of great Alexander.
that should conquer the Persians. And therefore Alexander (as Josephus9
reports) coming to Jerusalem about a hundred years after, Josephus. lib. 1.
de antiq. Iudaic. capit. 8.
and hearing this prophecy of Daniel interpreted unto him by Iaddus the High
Priest, assured himself that he was the man therein signified, and so a^^er
long sacrifice done to the God of Israel, (of whom he affirmed, that he had
appeared unto him in Macedon, and had exhorted him to take this war in hand,)
and after he had bestowed much honor and many benefits, upon the high
Priest, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, he went forward in his war against
Darius, with great alacrity, and had that famous victory which all the world
knows.

A hundred such prophecies more, which are as plain, as evident, and as
distinct as this, I might allege of Elias, Elizeus, Samuel, David, Ezechiell,
the twelve lesser Prophets, and of other which I have not named. And in very
truth the whole Scripture is nothing else but a divine kind of body,
replenished throughout with the vital spirit of prophecy, and every day some
prophecy or other is fulfilled, (though we mark it not) and shall be unto the
worlds end.

And the miracle of this matter is yet more increased, if we consider what
manner of people they were for the most part, What manner of persons our
Prophets were.
by whom these prophecies of hydden things were uttered: to wit, not such men
as could gather the foresight of things by Astronomy or Astrology, that is,
by contemplation of the stars, as some fond Gentiles did pretend, (though
Ptolomie deny that any such things can be foretold but only by inspiration
from God: Ptolom. in lib. de fructu.
) neither yet were they so sharp witted, as to attain to prophecy by strange
imaginations, as most vainly Auerroes and his followers hold that some men
may; Moses. Narbon. in li. Abubacher. et Auampare.
nor finally, were they so delicatly fed as by exact diet and rules of
Alchimye, to com to prophecy, as Alchimists dream that a man may do, and
that Appolonius Thyaneus did, Roger. Baco. lib. de sex scient. experimentalib.
who by styllified meats (as they speak) came to be stillified himself, and
so by help of his glass called Alchimufi, to foretell some matters and
affairs to come. Our Prophets (I say) knew none of these fantastical
devises, being for the most part poor, simple, and unlearned men, as in
particular was recorded, that David was a shepherd, and Amos was a keeper of
Oxen, Amos, 1.
yea, oftentimes they were women, Exodus 1^.
as Marie the sister of Aaron, called in the Scripture by the name of
Prophetess. Debora the wife of Lapidoth: Judge. 5. 1, Reg, 2,
Hanna the mother of Samuel, Elizabeth the mother of John Baptist, Anna the
daughter of Panuel: and finally, the most holy and blessed Virgin Marie, Luke,
1, and 2.
with the daughters of Phillip, and many such other, both in the old and new
Testament, who prophesied strangely, Acts. 21.
nor could possibly receive such foreknowledge of things to com, but only
from the spirit of the living God, and by inspiration of the holy Ghost, which
is a manifest demonstration, of the excellency of Holy writ, and of the
certainty contained therein.

THE EIGHT PROOF OF SCRIPTVRES.
Approbation of Heathen writers.
AND now, albeit this might seem sufficient in the judgment and conscience of
every reasonable man, (as the Jew supposes) to prove that the Scriptures be
only from God, and consequently by them, that there is a God; yet has he one
reason more to confirm their sincerity, which I will allege in this place,
and therewith make an end. His reason is, that although these holy writings,
(which proceed of Gods spirit) do not take their testimony or confirmation
from man: yet for more euidencie of the truth, GOD has so provided, that all the principal, most strange and wonderful things recounted in scripture,
should be reported also, and confirmed by Infidels, Pagans, Gentiles and Heathen
writers themselves; albeit in some points they differ from the Scripture, in
the manner of their narration, for that they adioyne superstitions thereunto.
Which makes the more for approbation of the things, for that hereby it
appears, they took not their stories directly from the Bible, but by
tradition, and most ancient antiquities of their own.

The creation of the world.
FIrst then he shows, that the creation of the world, Genesis, 1. and 2.
which is the marvel of all meruailes, with the infusion of man's soul from
God, is both granted and agreed upon, by all those Heathen Philosophers which
I have cited before, (albeit the particularities be not so set down by them,
as they are in Scriptures, and by all other, that do see in reason, that of
necessity, there must be yielded some Creator of these things.

The floude of Noe.
NExt to this, Gene. 6,7,8.
the floude of Noe is mentioned by diverse most ancient heathen writers:
Joseph. lib. 1, de antiq. Iudaic.
as by Baerosus Chaldeus, Ieronimus, Egyptius, Nicholaus, Damascenus, Abydenus,
and others, according as both Josephus and Eusebius do prove. Eusebius. lib,
9. de praep. euang. capit. 4.
And in Bresile, and other Countries dyscouered in our age, where never teachers
were known to be before, they talk of a certain drowning of the world, which
in time past happened: and do say, that this was left unto the^ by tradition
from time out of mind, by the first inhabitants of those places.


Genesis, 5, 10, and 11.
OF the long life of the first Patriarchs, according as the Scripture reports
it, not only the former Authors, but also Manethus, that gathered the
History of the Egyptians: Molus Hestiaeus, that wrote the acts of the
Phaenicians, Hesiodus, Hecateus Abderida, Helanicus, Acusilaus, and Ephorus,
do testify, that these first inhabitants of the world, lived commonly a
thousand years a-peece; and they allege the reason thereof to be, both for
the multiplication of people, and for bringing all Sciences to perfection,
especially Astronomy and Astrology, which, (as they write) could not be
brought to sufficient perfection, by any one man that had lived less then six
hundred years, in which space, the great year (as they call it) returns about.

Of the Tower of Babylon.
OF the Tower of Babylon, Genesis, 11.
and of the confusion of tongues at the same, Eusebius cites the testimonies
at large, both of Abydenus that lived about King Alexanders time, and of
Sibylla, as also the words of Hestiaeus concerning the Land of Sennaar,
Eusebius. li. 9. de praepar. cap. 4.
where it was builded. And these Gentiles do show by reason, that if there had
not been some such miracle in the division of tongues, Mark this reason.
no doubt but that all tongues being derived of one, (as all men are of one
father) the same tongues would have retained the self same roots and
principles, as in all dialects or deriuation of tongues we see that it comes
to pass. But now (say they) in many tongues at this day, we see that there is
no likelihood or affinity among them, but all different the one from the
other, and thereby it appears that they were made diverse and distinct even
from the beginning.

Of Abraham.
OF Abraham and his affairs, I have alleged some Heathen writers before,
Genesis, 11, 12 13, 14, etc.
as Berosus, Hecataeus, and Nicholaus Damascenus. But of all other, Alexander
Polyhistor alleges Eupolemus most at large, Alexander Polyhist. lib. de
Iudaic. historia.
of Abraham's being in Egypt, and of his teaching them Astronomy there: of his
fight and victory in the behalf of Lot: of his entertainment by King
Melchisedech, of his wife and sister Sara, and of other his doings, especially
of the sacrifice of his son Isaac. To whom also agrees Melo, Melo, lib. de
fraudibus Iudeorum.
in his books written against the Jews, and Artabanus. Artaban. in Iudeorum.
hist.
And of the strange Lake whereinto Sodom and Gomorra were turned by their
destruction, called Mare mortuum, Gal. de simply. Pausan. in Eliae. Solin. in
Polihist. Tacitus. lib. vlt. histo.
the dead Sea, wherein nothing can live. Both Galen, Paufanius, Solinus,
Tacitus, and Strabo, do testify and show, the particular wonders thereof.


FRom Abraham down to Moses, writes very particulerly the forenamed
Alexander, albeit he mingle sometimes certain fables, whereby appears that
he took his story not out of the Bible wholly. And he alleges one
Leodemus, Genesis, 15, 16 17. 18. etc.
who as he says lived with Moses, and wrote the self same things that Moses
did: so that these writers agree almost in all things, touching Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, and all their affairs, even unto Moses: and with these do concur
also Theodotus a most ancient Poet, Artabanus and Phylon, Gentiles. Aristaeus
in like manner about Aristotle's time, Aristeus. lib. de Job.
wrote a book of Job.

Of Moses.
OF Moses and his acts, not only the forenamed, Exodus. 2, 3. 4. 5, etc.
(especially Artabanus in his Book of the Jews) do make mention at large:
but many other also, as namely Eupolemus, out of whom Polyhistor recites very
long narrations of the wonderful and stupendous things done by Moses in
Egypt, for which he says, that in his time, he was worshipped as a God in that
Country, and called by many Mercurius. And that the Ethiopians learned
circumcision of him, which afterward always they retained, and so do unto
this day. And as for his miracles done in Egypt: his leading the people thence
by the red Sea: his living with them forty years in the wilderness: the
Heathen writers agree in all things with the Scriptures, saving only that
they recount diverse things to the praise of Moses, The description of Moses
person out of Heathen writers.
which he has not written of himself, adding also his description, to wit,
that he was a long tale man, with a yellow beard, and long hair, wherewith also
accords Numenius Pythagoricus, touching the acts of Moses, whose life he
says that he had read in the auncientest records that were to be had.


BUT the forenamed Eupolemus, goes yet forward, and pursues the story of
Joshua, of the Judges, of Saul, David, and of Solomon, eue^ unto the building of
the Temple, which he describes at large, with the particular Letters written
about that matter to the King of Tyrus, which Josephus says were in his days
kept in the records of the Tyrians. Josephus. lib. 8. de antiq. cap. 2.
And with Eupolemus, agree Polyhistor, and Hecataeus Abderita, that lived and
served in war with King Alexander the great, and they make mention among
other things, of the inestimable riches of Solomon, and of the treasures which
he had hid and buried, The treasures hidden in the Sepulcher of David.
(according to the fashion of that time) in the Sepulcher of his father David:
which to be no fable, (though not mentioned by the scripture) Josephus well
proves, for that Hircanus the high Priest and King of Jury, Josephus. lib.
13. de antiq. cap. 16.
being besieged in Jerusalem by Antiochus, surnamed Pius, not many years
before our Savior Christ his nativity: to redeem him self and the City,
and to pay for his peace, The same thing attempted Herod in his time, as
Josephus says, lib. 18. antiq.
opened the said sepulcher of David, and fetched out of one part thereof, three
thousand Talents in ready money, which amount to six hundred thousand pound
English, if we account the Talents, but at the least size, of talentum
Haebraicum.

The things that ensued after King Salomons days.
AND as for the things that ensued after Solomon, as the division of the Trybes
among themselves, and their diverse wars, afflictions, and transmigrations
into other Countries: many Heathen writers do mention and record them, and
among other, Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus. And the foresaid Alexander
Polyhistor, talking of the captitie of Babylon, says, that Jeremy the Prophet
told Ioachim his King, Jeremy, 37. 4, Reg, 24.
what would befall him, and that Nabuchodonoser hearing thereof, was moved
thereby to besiege Jerusalem.

Of the flight of Senacherib from the siege of Jerusalem, Of Senacherib.
and how he was killed at his return home, by his own sons in the temple,
according to the prophecy of Esaias, Esaias, 31. and 33, and 36. 4, Reg, 9.
and story of the book of Kings, for that he had blasphemed the Lord God of
Israel, Herodotus witnesses: Hero. lib. 2.
and that after his death he had a statue or Image of metal erected in his
memory, with this inscription in Greek. He that beholds me, let him learn
to be godly. Confer Xenophon also in his se^enth book De Cyropaedia, and you
shall see him agree with Daniell in his narrations of Babylon. Daniell. 16.


And finally, I will conclude with Josephus the learned Jew, that wrote
immediately after Christ's ascension, and protests, that the public
writings of the Syrians, Iosephu. lib. 1. de antiq. Iudaica.
Chaldeans, Phaenicians, and innumerable histories of the Grecians, are
sufficient to testify the antiquity, truth, authority, and certainty of the
holy Scriptures, if there were no other proof in the world besides.

The conclusion of this Chapter, with the application. SECT. 4.
THus far have I treated of the vvayes and means, which have been left unto
the world from the beginning, thereby to know and understand their Maker. In
treating which point, I have stayed my self the longer, for that it is the
ground and foundation of all that is, or may be said hereafter. It is the
first, final, and cheifest principle, of all our eternal salvation or
damnation, and the total weal or woe that must befall us, and possess us for
ever. Which ground and verity, if it be so certain and evident as before has
been showed, by all reason and proof, both divine and human: and that the
matter be so testified and proclaimed unto us, by all the creatures of heaven
and earth, and by the mouth and writing of our Creator himself, as no
ignorance or blindness can excuse the same, No excuse of the ignorance of GOD.
no slothfulness dissemble it, no wickedness deny it: what remains then,
but to consider with our selves, what service this GOD requires at our hands?
what gratitude, what duty, what honor for our creation? to the end, that as
we have proved him a most bountiful Creator, so we may find him a propitius
Judge, and munificent rewarder. For it is not probable, that his divine
Majesty, which has appointed every other creature to some action for his own
glory, (as has been declared at large before) should leave mankind only,
which is the worthiest of all the rest, without obligation to his service.

In which one point notwithstanding, though neeuer so clear, (such is the
fondnes of our corrupt nature without Gods holy grace:) failed those ancient
wise men of the world, The error of the old Philosophers.
of whom S. Paul speaks so much in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans, 1. and
2.
taking compassion of their case, and calling them fools, and all their great
learning and Phylosophie mere fondness: for that, whereas (by the means
before mentioned) they came to know God: they did not seek to glorify him,
as appertained unto God, nor yet did render him due thanks, but vanished away
in their cogitations, etc. Romans, 1.
That is, they took no profit by this knowledge of theyrs, but applied their
cogitations upon the vanities of this world, more then upon the honor and
service of this their God. Romans, 1. verse, 28.
For which cause, as S. Paul adioyneth presently in the same place, that for
so much as they did thus, and did not show forth by their life and works, that
they had the knowledge of God indeed: God delivered them over to a reprobate
sense, and suffered them to fall into horrible sins, which S. Paul does name
and detest in all that chapter: and finally concludes, that their everlasting
perdition ensued principally upon this one point: Romans, 1. verse, 32.
that whereas, they knew the justice of God, (by all the ways and arguments
that before have been declared:) yet would they not understand (says he) that
death was due to all such, which lived wickedly as they did.

And the same Apostle, upon consideration of these matters, wherein he
stands long for the importance thereof, pronounces in fine this general
sentence, A general sentence pronounced by S. Paul.
with great asseueration and vehemency of spirit: Romans, 1. verse, 18.
that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, upon all impiety and injustice
of those men, who hold the knowledge of God in unrighteousness. That is, who
being endued with the knowledge of God, do live notwithstanding
vnrighteouslie, or (as he said before) do consume their days in vanity,
nor making account of the service which they do owe to that God for their
creation and other benefits. Which thing, if S. Paul might truly say to
those Gentiles before his time, who had only natural knowledge and
understanding of God: that is, so much as by his creatures was to be gathered:
The application to our selves.
what may, or shall be said unto us, who have not only that light of nature
which they had, but also the wrytinges and law of God himself, communicated
specially unto the Jews: and above that also, have heard the voice of his
only son upon earth, and have received the doctrine of his most holy
Gospel, and yet do live as negligentlie (many of us) as did the very
Heathens, touching good life and virtue.

Surely in this case I must denounce against my self, that if it be true, (as
it cannot be false,) which this blessed Apostle affyrmeth here of these
Heathen Philosophers, that by that little knowledge they had of God, Romans. 1.
verse, 20.
they were made inexcusable, then by the most just and certain rule of Christ,
laid down by S. Luke, Luke. 12.
cui multum datum est, multum quaeretur ab eo, that of every man which has
received much, a great account shall be taken for the same; we are forced to
infer, that our account shall be the greater, and our selves much more
inexcusable before his divine majesty, then the very Gentiles and Heathens
are; if after all our knowledge and manifest understanding of his Godhead and
justice, we vanish away in our cogitations, as they did, and as the most part
of the world at this day are seen to do: that is, if we apply our cogitations
and cares, about the vain affairs of this temporal life and transitory
commodities, which we should bestow upon the service and honor of this our
Lord and Creator.

OF THE FINAL END AND CAUSE WHY MAN WAS CREATED BY GOD, and placed in this
world.
And of the obligation he has thereby, to attend to the affair for which he
came hither.
CHAP. III.
BY the Chapter precedent, I nothing doubt (gentle Reader) but if thou have
seen and perused the same, thou remainest sufficiently informed of thy
Creator. Now follows it by order of good consequence, that we consider with
some attention, A necessary consideration.
(for that it stands us much upon) what intent and purpose God had in
creating us, and this world for our sakes: and in placing us therein as Lords
of the same? By the former considerations we have learned, that as among other
creatures, nothing made it self: so nothing was made for it self, nor to serve
it self. The heavens (we see) do serve the air, the air serves the earth,
the earth serves the beasts, the beasts serve man: and then is the question,
who man was made to serve? for in him also holds the former reason, that
seeing he was not made by himself: it is not likely that he was made to serve
himfelfe.

If we co^sult with the scriptures heerin, we find a general sentence laid
down with out exception: Proverb, 16.
Vniuersa propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus, the lord has made al things
for himself. Man made to serve GOD.
And if all, then man (no doubt:) who is not the least of the rest which he
has made. And hereby it comes to pass, that man cannot be said to be free,
or at his own appointment or dysposition in this world, but obliged to
perform that thing, for which he was sent into this habitation. Which point
holy Job declares plainly, in a certain inuectiue that he makes against
such men, as were careless and negligent in consideration of this affayre.
Job, cap. 11.
A vain man, (says he) is lifted up in pride, and thinks himself to be
borne as free as the colt of a wild Ass. That is, he thinks himself bound
to nothing, subject to nothing, accountable for nothing that he does in this
life: but only borne free, to pass his time in disport and pleasure, as a
Colt in a desert, that has no Master to tame him. Which in other words the
Wiseman utters thus: Wisdom, 15^
He esteems this life of ours to be but a plai-game, and therefore cares not
how he lives, or wherein he spend and pass over the time. And this of the man
whom the scripture calls vain.

But now for the sober, wise, and discreet, of whom it is written, Proverb. 1^.
The way of life is upon the learned, to the end he may decline from the lowest
hell: they are far from so great folly, as to imagine that no account shall be
demanded of our being in this world: for that they have read, Eccle, 11, and
12.
that God shall bring into judgment whatsoever is done, for every fault that
is committed. And the Christian man knows further, by the mouth and
asseueration of his Savior and Redeemer, Math, 12.
that he shall be accountant for every idle word that he mys-vttereth; and
finally, there is no man that is either of reason, or conversant in the
writings and Testament of his Creator, Account to be rendered.
but remembers well, that among all other irritations, whereby the wicked man
is said to provoke Gods patience to indignation, none is more often repeated,
or more grievously taken, then, Psalm. 9,43. and 141.
that he said in his heart, God will ask no account.

With these men then alone shall be my speech in this present Chapter, who have
a desire to discharge well this account. For attayning whereof (truly) I can
give no better counsel, instruction, or advise, then to do in this case, as
a good Merchant-factor is wont to do, when he arriueth in foreign Countries,
or as a Soldier or Captain sent by his Prince to some great exployt, is
accustomed, when he comes to the place appointed: Profitable demands and
considerations.
that is, to weigh and consider deeply, for what cause he came thither? why he
was sent? to what end? what to attempt? what to prosecute? what to perform?
what shall be expected and required at his hands (upon his return,) by him
that sent him thither? For these cogitations (no doubt) shall stir him up
to attend to that, for which he came, and not to employ his time in
impertinent affairs. The like would I counsel a Christian to put in ure,
concerning the case proposed, and to demand of himself, between God and his
conscience, why, and wherefore, and to what end, he was created and sent
hither into this world? what to do? wherein to bestow his days? etc.

And then shall he find, that for no other cause, matter, or end, but only to
serve God in this life, and by that service to enjoy heaven, and salvation in
the life to come. This was the condition of our creation, Gene. 14.
as Moses well expresses: and this was the consideration of our redeeming,
foretold by Zachary, before we were yet redeemed: Luke, 1.
that we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, should serve God, in
holiness and righteousness, all the days of our lives.

Of this consideration do ensue two consequents to be observed. The first
consequence upon due consideration of our end.
Whereof the first is, that seeing our end and final cause of being in this
world, is to serve God, and so to work our own salvation with fear and
trembling: what soever thing we do, or bestow our time in, which either is
contrary or impertinent, or not profitable to this end, (though it were to
gain kingdoms, it is vanity and lost labor, that will turn us in time to
grief and repentance, (if we change not our course) for that it is not the
matter for which we came into this life, nor whereof we shall be demanded an
account, except it be to receive judgment and punishment for the same.

Secondly it follows of the same consideration, The second consequence.
that seeing our only business and affayre in this world, is to serve our
Maker, and save our own souls: and that all other earthly creatures are put
here to serve our uses to that end only: we should for our parts be
indifferent to all these creatures, as to riches or poverty: to health or
sickness: to honor or contempt: to little learning or much learning: and we
should desire only so much or little of either of them, as were best for us,
to the attainement of our said end and Butte pretended; that is, to the
service of GOD, and the weal of our souls. For who soever desires, seeks,
loves, or uses these creatures, more then for this, runs from his end for
which he came hither.

How each man may take a scantling of his own estate.
But this then may a careful Christian take some scantling of his own estate
with God, and make a conjecture whether he be in the right way, or no. For if
he attend only or principally to this end, for which he was sent hither;
if his cares, cogitations, studies, endeavors, labors, talk, conversation,
and other his actions, A right course.
do run upon this matter, and that he cares no more for other creatures,
as honors, riches, learning, and the like, then they are necessary unto him
for this end that he pretends: if his days and life be spent in this study
of the service of God, and procuring his own salvation, in carfulness,
fear, and trembling, as the Apostle advises him: Phillip. 2.
then is he (doubtless) a most happy man, and shall at length attain to the
kingdom which he expects.

A wrong and dangerous course.
But if he find himself in a contrary case and course: that is, not to attend
indeed to this matter for which only he was sent hither, nor to have in his
heart and study this service of God, and enjoying of heaven, but rather some
other vanity of the world, as promotion, wealth, pleasure, sumptuous
apparel, gorgious buildings, beauty, favor of Princes, or any other thing
else, that appertains not unto this end. If he spend his time about these
trifles, having his cares and cogitations, his talk and delight, more in these
things, then about the other great business of possessing Gods eternal
kingdom, for which he was made and placed in this world: then is he (I assure
him) in a perrillous way, leading directly to perdition, except he alter and
change his course. For, most certain it is, that whosoever shall not attend
unto the service he came for: shall never attain the reward assigned and
promised to that service.

And for that the most part of all this world, (not only of Infidels, but
also Christians) do run amiss in this point, The reason why so few are
saved.
and do not take care of that affayre and business, for which alone they were
created and placed here: hence is it, that Christ and his holy Saints, both
before and after his appearance in flesh, have spoken so hardly, and severely,
Math, 7, 20, and 22. Luke, 1^.
of the very small number that shall be saved, (even among Christians) and have
uttered certain speeches which seem very rigorous to flesh and blood, (and to
such as are most touched therein,) scarce credible, albeit they must be
fulfilled. As among other things, that a lover of this world cannot be saved;
James. 4, Math, 19, Mark, 10.
that rich men do enter as hardly into heaven, as a Camel through a needles
eye, and the like. The reason of which manner of speeches do stand in this,
that a rich man or worldling, attending with all his industry to heap up
riches (as the fashion is,) can not attend, (nor ever does) to that for which
he came into this world, and consequently, can never attain heaven, except
God work a miracle, and thereby do cause him to spend out his riches to the
benefit of his soul, (as sometimes he does, and so do lessen the Cammell in
such sort, as he may pass the needles eye. Luke, 19,
Whereof we have a very rare example in the Gospel, of Zacheus, who being a
very rich man, did presently upon the entering of Christ into his house, (but
much more as appears into his heart by faith) resolve himself to change his
former course touching riches, and at one blow to begin with-all, gave away
half of al he possessed to the poor; A perfect example of a good conversion.
and for the rest made proclamation that who soever had received any wrong at
his hands, (as commonly many do by them that are rich,) he should come and
receive four times so much amends. By which alms and restitution, he was
delivered from the Camels gibbe or bunche on his back, that let his passage
through the needles eye. And this extraordinary favor and grace he received,
by the fortunate presence, of his most blessed and bountiful guest, who had
signified before in another place, that himself was able, so to draw the
Camel, as he should pass the needles eye, Math, 19. Mark, 10.
for that the things which are impossible with man, are possible with God.

But to leave this, and to go forward in our former purpose; no marvel it
is, if in the world abroad, so few be saved; seeing that of thousands,
scarce one does account of that business, which of all other, is the chief
and principal. Consider you the multitude of all sorts of people upon earth,
and see what their traffic and negotiation is? see whether they treat this
affayre or no? see wherein their care, study, and cogitation consists? The
wrong course of the world.
How many thousands find you in Christendom, who spend not one hour of
four and twenty, nor one half day in forty, in the service of God, or
business of their soul? How infinite have you, that break their brains
about worldly commodities, and how few that are troubled with this other
cogitation? How many find time to eat, drink, sleep, disport, deck and trym
themselves to the view of others, and yet have no time to bestow in this
greatest business of all other business? How many pass over whole days,
weeks, months, and years, (and finally their whole lives) in hauking,
hunting, and other pastimes, without regard of this important affair? How
many miserable women have you in the world, that spend more days in one
year, in pricking up their apparel and adorning their carcass, then they
do hours in prayer for the space of all their life? And what (alas) shall
become of this people in the end? what will they do or say at the day of
account? what excuse will they allege? what way will they turn them?

A comparison expressing the vanity of our occupations.
If the Merchant-factor which I mentioned before, after many years spent in
foreign Countries upon his Masters expenses, should return at length and
give up his accounts, of so much time and money spent in singing; so much in
dancing; so much in fencing; so much in courting, and the like; who would not
laugh at so fond a reckoning? but being further demanded of his Master,
what time he had bestowed upon the Merchandise and affairs for which he was
sent; if the man should answer, that he had no leisure to think upon that
thing, for the great occupation which he had in the other: who would not
esteem him worthy of all punishment and confusion? And much more shame and
confusion (no doubt) shall they sustain at the last dreadful day, Math, 16.
in the face and presence of God and all his Angels, who being sent into this
world, to traffic so rich a Merchandise as is the kingdom of heaven: have
neglected the same, and have bestowed their studies, upon the most vain
tryfles and follies of this world, without cogitation, or care of the other.

O ye children of Adam (says the spirit of God) why love you so vanity,
Psalm, 4. Jeremy, 2.
and seek after lies? why leave you the fountain and seek after Cesternes?
If a golden game of inestimable value, should be proposed for such as would
run and could win the same; A comparison.
and when the course or race were begun, if some should step aside, and
follow flies or feathers that passed in the air, without any regard of the
prize and gole proposed: who would not marvel and take pity of their
folly? Even so is it with men of this world, if we believe Saint Paul, who
affirms, 1, Cor. 9.
that we are all placed together in a course or race, and that the kingdom of
heaven is propounded unto us for the Game or Prize; but every man (says he)
arriueth not thither: and why? for that most men do step aside, and leave the
mark. Most men do run awrie, and do follow feathers up and down in the air;
most men do pursue vanities, and do weary themselves out in the pursuit
thereof, until they can neither run nor go, nor move their lims any further:
and then, for the most part it is too-late to amend their folly. Will you
hear the lamentations of such unfortunate men? these are their own words
recorded by scripture. We are wearied out in the way of iniquity and
perdition, and the way of God have we not known. Wisdom, 5. The complaint of
worldlings in the end of their life.
What profit have we received of all our pomp and pride, and vaunting
riches? what good have they done us? They are now past away as a shadow, and
as a Messenger that rydeth in post, and we are consumed in our own iniquities.

This is the lamentable complaint of such men, as ran awrie, and followed a
wrong course in their actions of this life. These are they, who pursued riches,
honor, pomp, and such like vanities, and forgate the great and weighty
business for which they were sent. These are they, who were esteemed happy
men in this world, and thought to run a most fortunate course, in that they
heaped much riches together; advanced themselves and their families to great
dignities: becam gorgious, glorious, and dreadful to others: and finally,
obtained what soever their lust and concupiscence desired. This made them seem
blessed to worldly cogitations, The fond judgment of the world.
and the way wherein they ran, to be most prosperous and happy. And I make
no doubt, (by experience of these our times) but they had admirours and
enuiours in great abundance, who burned in desire to obtain the same course.
And yet when I hear their complaint in this place, and their own confession
wherein they say expressly, Wisdom, 5.
we senseless men did err from the way of truth: when I consider also the
addition of scripture, Talia dixerunt in inferno, they spoke these things when
they were in hell: I cannot but esteem their course for most miserable, and
condemn wholly the judgment of flesh in this affair.

Wherefore (my dear brother) if thou be wise, yield not to this deceit of
worldly lyppes and tongues, Psalm, 10.
that use to bless and sanctify such, as are in most danger and nearest to
perdition. Lean rather to the sincere counsel of S. Paul, who wills thee
to examine uprightly thine own works and ways, Gala, 6.
and so to judge of thy self without deceit. If thou walk the way of Babylon,
most certain it is, that thou shall never arrive at the gates of Jerusalem,
except thou change thy course. Oh (my brother) what a grief will it be unto
thee, when after long labor and much toil, thou shall find thy self to have
gone awrie? A comparison expressing our grief in the end, for running a wrong
course.
If a man had travailed but one whole day, and thereby made weary, should
understand at night, that all his labor were lost, and that his whole journey
was out of the way: it would be a marvelous affliction unto him (no doubt)
albeit no other inconvenience were therein, but only the loss of that days
travail, which might be recovered and reco^penced in the next. But if besides
this, his business were great, if it lay upon his life to be at the place
whether he goes; at a certain hour: if the loss of his way were
irrecouerable: if the punishment of his error, must be death and confusion: and
himself were so weary, that he could stir no one foot further: imagine
then what a grievous message this would be unto him, to hear one say: Sir,
you are amiss, your labor is lost, and you have ridden wholly besides your way?

The misery of a soul yt has gone a wrie, at the last day.
So then will it be unto thee, (my soul) at the day of death, and separation
from my body, if in this life, thou attend not to thy salvation for which
thou were created, but shall pass over thy days in following of vanities.
Thou shall find thy self astray at the end of thy journey: thou shall find
thy self weary, and enforced to say with those miserable damned spirits,
Wisdom. 5.
I have walked hard and craggie ways, for that indeed the way of wickedness is
full of thorns and stones, though in show it be covered with fair grass and
many flowers. Thou shall find at that day, that thou have lost thy labor,
lost thy time, lost all opportunity of thine own commodity. Thou shall then
find thy error to be unrecoverable, thy danger unavoidable, thy punishment
insupportable, thy repentance unprofitable, and thy grief, sorrow, and
calamity inconsolable.

Oh, he that could behold and feel the the inward cogitations of a worldly
man's heart at that instant, after all his honors and pleasures were past; no
doubt, but he should find him of another judgment and opinion in things, then
he was in the ruff and heat of his ioylitie. He does well perceive then, the
fondnes of those trifles which he followed in this life, albeit it were to make
himself a Monarch. If a man did know the cogitations that king Alexander the
great had, Alexanders death.
when of poison he came to die, after all his victories and incredible
prosperity; if we knew the thoughts of Julius Caesar, Julius Caesar's death.
at the day of his murder in the Senate house, after the conquest of all his
enemies, and subjection of the whole world, to his own only obedience: we
should well perceive, that they took little pleasure in the ways they
walked, notwithstanding they were esteemed most prosperous and happy, by men
of this world.

Two rare examples.
Josephus the Jew, recounteth two very rare examples of human felicity in
Herod the first, and Agryppa his Cosine, whereof the one by Anthony the
Triumuir, Josephus. lib. 14. 15. et 18. de antiq. Iudai. et de bello. Iud. lib.
2.
and the other by Caligula the Emperor, (both of them being otherwise but
private Gentlemen, and in great poverty and misery when they fled to Rome,)
were exalted upon the sudden, to unexpected great fortune, and made rich
Monarchs and glorious Potentates. They were endued (at several times) with
the Kingdom and crown of Jury) and that in such ample sort, as never any of
that Nation after them had the like. For which cause they are called in the
Hebrew story for distinction sake, Herod the great, and Agrippa the great.
They ruled and commanded all in their days, they wanted neither silver nor
Gold, neither pleasures nor pastimes, neither friends nor flatterers. And
besides al these gifts of fortune, they abounded also in ornaments and
excellency of body and wit. And all this was increased and made the more
admirable, by reason of their For envy only of Agrippa his fortune, Herodias
did ruin herself and her husband, as Josephus says, lib. 18. antiq. cap. 8.
9. 15. Her husband was Herod Antipas, that slew S. John Baptist, and was son
to Herod the first. Luke. 3. Math, 14.
base and low estate before, in respect whereof, their present fortune was
esteemed for a perfect pattern of most absolute felicity.

This they enjoyed for a certain space, and to assure themselves of the
continuance, they bent all their cares, cogitations, and studies, to please the
humors of the Roman Emperors, as their Gods, and Authors of all their
prosperity and felicity upon earth. In respect of whose favors (as Josephus
notes) they cared little to violate their own Religion of the Jews, or any
thing else that was most sacred. And this (forsooth) was esteemed of many, a
most wise, politic, prosperous, and happy course. But what was the end and
consumation of this their pleasant raze?

First, Herod's death.
Herod fell sick of an incurable and loathsome disease, Josephus. lib. 15.
antiq.
and was tormented in the same with so many terrors This Herod was called
Ascolonita, and slew the Infants in Bethlem. Math. 2.
and horrible accusations of his conscience; as he pronounced himself to be
the most miserable afflicted creature, that ever lived; and so calling one day
for a knyfe to pare an Apple, would needs have murdered himself with the
same, if his arm had not been stayed by the^ that stood by. And for Agrippa,
Josephus reports, The death of Agryppa.
how that upon a certain day which he kept festival in Caesaria, for the
honor of Claudius the Roman Emperor, when he was in his most extreme pomp
and iolitie, Josephus. lib. 19. capit. 7.
in the midst of all his Peers, Nobles, and Damsels, coming forth at an
hour appointed, (all glittering in Gold, and Silver) to make an Oration unto
the people: his voice, gesture, countenance, and apparel so pleased, as the
people began to cry, (being solicited thereunto by some flatterers,) that it
was the voice of GOD, and not of man: wherein Agrippa taking pleasure and
delectation, S. Luke says he was stricken by Gods Angel. Acts, 12. And consider
how Josephus agrees with this Narration.
was stricken presently from heaven, with a most horrible putrefaction of all
his body, whereof he died, repeating only to his friends these words in the
midst of his torments. Behold ye me, that do seem to you a God, how
miserably I am enforced to depart from you all. Eusebius lib. 2. histo. capit.
9.


Now then would I demand of these two fortunate men, who laying aside all
care of God and Religion, did follow the preferments of this world so freshly,
and obtained the same so luckily: how they liked of this their course and race
in the end? Truly I doubt not, but if they were here to answer for
themselves, they would assure us, that one hour bestowed in the service of
God, and of their salvation: would more have comforted them at the last
instant, then all their labors and travails which they took in their lives
for pleasing of Emperors, and gathering the grace and good lyking of mortal
men.

Sincere and profitable counsel.
Use then (o Christian,) use this experience to thy commodity: use it to thy
instruction, use it to thy forewarning. That which they are now, thou shall be
shortly, and of all follies it is the greatest, not to profit or flee from
dangers by the example of others. The difference between a wise man and a
fool, is, that the one provides for a myscheefe while time serves, and the
other would do when it is too-late. If thou might feel now, the state and
case wherein thy poor heart shall be at the last day, for neglecting the thing
that of all other it should have studied and thought upon most: thou would
take from thy meat, and sleep, and other necessaries, to repair that is
past; Hitherto have thou time to reform thy course of life if thou please,
which is no small benefit, if all were known. For in this sense (no doubt,)
it is most true, which the wise man says; that better it is to be a living
dog, then a dead Lion. Eccle, 4.
For that, while the day time of this life endures, all things amiss may
easily be amended. Ioh. 9.
But the dreadful night of death will ouer-take thee shortly, and then shall
there be no more space of reformation.

Oh that men would be wise, Deuteronomy, 32.
and foresee things to come, says one prophet. The greatest wisdom in the
world (dear brother) is to look and attend to our salvation: for as the
Scripture says most truly: Eccle, 37.
He is a wise man indeed; that is wise to his own soul. And of this
wisdom, it is written in the very same book, as spoken by herself. In me
is the grace of all life and truth, and in me is the hope of all life and
virtue. Ecclesi. 24.
In morral actions and human wisdom, we see that the first and cheifest
circumstaunce is, to regard well and consider the end. And how then do we
omit the same, Great folly and error.
in this great affair of the Kingdom of heaven? If our end be heaven, what
mean we so much to affect our selves to earth? If our end be God, why seek
we so greedily the worldly favor of men? If our end be the salvation and
eternity of our soul, why do we follow vanities and temporalities of this
life? Why spend ye your money, and not in bread? says God by the mouth of
Esaias, Esaias, 55, Ephe. 1. 1, These. 2. 2. Peter, 1.
why bestow ye your labor in things that will not yield you saturitie? If
our inheritance be, that we should reign as Kings, why put we our selves in
such slavery of creatures? Luke, 15,
If our birth allow us to feed of bread in our fathers house, why delight we
in husks provided for the swyne?

But (alas) we may say with the wise man in the Scripture. Wisdom, 4.
Fascinatio nugacitatis obscurat bona. The bewitching of worldly trifles, do
obscure and hide us from the things that are good and behoouefull for our
souls: o most dangerous enchauntment. Error in our course of life is not
pardoned.
But what? shall this excuse us? no truly: for the same spirit of God has
left recorded. Populus non intelligens vapulabit. Ose, 4.
The people that understands not shall be beaten for it. And another Prophet
to the same effect pronounces: Esaias, 28,
This people is not wise, and therefore he that made them shall not pardon
them, neither shall he that created the^, take mercy upon the^. It is written
of fools: Ventum seminabunt and turbinem metent. They shall sow and cast
their seed upon the winds, and shall receive for their harvest, nothing else
but a storm or tempest. Whereby is signified, that they shall not only cast
away and leese their labors, but also be punished and chastened for the same.

Consider then I beseech thee (my dear brother) attentively, A profitable
forewarning.
what thou will do or say, when thy Lord shall come at the last day and ask
thee an account of all thy labors, actions, and time spent in this life: Math,
25,
when he shall require a reckoning of his talents lent unto thee: when he shall
say, as he said to the Farmour or Steward in the Gospel: Luke, 16,
Read rationem villicationis tuae, give account of thy stewardship and charge
committed unto thee. What will thou say, when he shall examine, and weigh and
try thy doings, as gold is examined and tried in the furnace: that is, what
end they had? whereto they were applied? to what glory of God? to what profit
of thy soul? what measure, weight, and substance they bear? Baltasar King of
Babylon, sitting at his banquet merry upon a time, espied suddenly certain
fingers without a hand, A rare chance that happened to Baltasar K. of Babylon.
Daniell, 5.
that wrote on the wall right over against his Table, these three Hebrew words,
Mane, Thekel, Phares. Which words Daniel interpreted in three sentences unto
the King, in this manner. Mane, GOD has numbered thee (Baltasar) and thy
kingdom. Thekel, he has weighed thee in the Gold-smithes balance, and thou
art found too-light. Phares, for this cause has he divided thee from thy
kingdom, and has given the same to the Medes and Persians.

Oh, that these three most golden and most significant words, engraven by the
Angel upon Baltasars wall, were registered upon every door and post in
Christendom, or rather imprinted in the heart of each Christian, especially the
two first, that import the numbering and weighing of all our actions, and that
in the weights and balance of the Goldsmiths, where every grain is espied
that wants. If God examine straightly the actions of Infidels, much more of
Christians if they live careless.
And if Baltasars actions, that was a Gentile, were to be examined in so nise
and delicate a pair of balance for their trial; and if he had so severe a
sentence pronounced upon him, that he should be divided from life and
kingdom, (as he was the same night following:) Quia inuentus est minus habens,
Daniel, 5.
for that he was found to have less weight in him then he should have:
what shall we think of our selves that are Christians, of whom it is written
above al others; I will search the sins of Jerusalem with a candle. Sopho, 1.
What shall we expect, that have not only less weight then we should have,
but no weight at all, in the most of our actions? what may such men (I say)
expect, but only that most terrible threat of division made unto Baltasar, A
dreadful division.
(or rather worse, if worse may be) that is, to be divided from God and his
Angels: from participation of God and our Savior: from communion of Saints:
from hope of our inheritance: from our portion celestial and life
everlasting; according to the express declaration, made hereof by Christ
himself, in these words to the negligent servant. Math, 24,
The Lord of such a servant, shall com at a day when he hops not, and at an
hour that he knows not: and shall divide him out, and assign his part with
hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Wherefore (dear brother) to conclude this Chapter, The conclusion.
I can say nothing more in this dangerous case, wherein the world so runs a
wrie, but only exhort thee (as the Apostle does) not to conform thy self to
the common error that leads to perdition. Fall at length to some reckoning
and accounte with thy life, and see where thou stand, and whether thou
go. If hitherto thou have wandered and gone astraie: be sorry for the time
lost, but pass no further. If hitherto thou have not considered the weightines
of this affayre: serve thy self of this admonition, and remember that it is
written: Proverb, 9,
that a wise man profits by every occasion. Esteem thy resolution in this
one point, the cheifest menage that ever shall pass through thy hands in this
world, albeit thou were a Monarch and Ruler of ten worlds together. And
finally, I will end with the very same words, wherewith the wise man
concludes his whole book. Ecclesi. 11.
Fear God, and observe his commandments, for this is every man. That is, in
this does all and every man consist: his end, his beginning, his life and
cause of being: that he fear God, and direct his actions to the obseruaunce
of his commandments; for that without this, he is no man in effect, seeing
that he loses all benefit, both of his name, nature, redemption and creation.

THAT THE SERVICE WHICH GOD REQVIRETH OF MAN IN this present life, is Religion.
With the particular confirmations of Christian religion, above all other in
the world.
CHAP. IIII.
Having proved in the former chapters that there is a God, which created man:
and that man in respect thereof, and of other benefits received, is bound to
honor and serve the same God; the question may be made in this place, what
service this is that God requires, and wherein it does consist? Whereunto the
answer is brief and easy, that it is Religion; Of Religion.
which is a virtue that contains properly, the worship and service that we
owe unto GOD: even as Piety is a virtue, Piety.
containing the duty that children do owe unto their Parents; and Observance
another virtue, Obseruaunce.
that comprehends the regard, that scholars and servants bear unto their
Masters. In respect of which comparison and likeness between these virtues,
God says by a certain Prophet; Mala. 1.
The son honors his father, and the servant his Master, if then I be a
Father, where is my honor? if I be a master, where is my fear?

The acts of Religion are diverse and different; The acts and operations of
Religion.
some internal, as devotion and prayer: some other external, as adoration,
worship, sacrifice, oblations, and such like, that are declarations and
protes^ations of the internal. It extends it self also, to stir up and
put in vie, the acts and operations of other virtues for the service of God;
James, 1^
in which sense S^ James names it Pure and unspotted Religion, to visit
Orphans and Widows in their tribulation, and to keep our selves undefiled
from the wickedness of this world. Finally, how soever some Heathens did use
this word Religion, to some other significations: August. lib. 10 ^e ciuit.
cap. 1.
yet, (as S. Augustine well notes) the use thereof among the faithful, has
always been, to signify thereby, the worship, honor and service, that is due
unto God; How much it imports to be religious.
so that if in one word you will have it declared, what God requires of man in
this life: it may be rightly said, that al stands in this, that he be
Religious.

Hereof it proceeds, that whatsoever sort or sect of people in the world,
professed reverence, honor, or worship, to God, or to gods, or to any divine
power, essence, or nature what soever; (were they Jews, Heathens, Gentiles,
Christians, Turks, Moors, Heretics, or other:) they did always call their
said profession, by the name of their religion. In which sense also and
signification of the word, I am to treat at this time of Christian Religion;
that is, of the substance, form, manner and way, revealed by Christ and his
Apostles unto us, of performing our duty and true service toward God. Which
service is the first point necessary to be resolved upon, by him that seeks
his salvation, as in the Chapter that goes before has been declared. And for
obtaining this service and the true knowledge thereof, The necessity of
Christian Religion.
no mean upon earth is left unto man, but only the light and instruction of
Christian Religion, according to the protestation of S. Peter unto the
Governors of the Jews, when he said; Acts. 4.
There is no other name under heaven given unto men whereby to be saved, but
only this of Christ, and of his Religion.

If you object against me, that in former times before Christ's nativity, as
under the Law of Moses for two thousand years together, there were many
Saints, who without Christian Religion served God vprightlie, How me^ were
saved in old time, without Christian Religion.
as the Prophets and other holy people, and before them again in the law of
Nature, when neither Christian nor Jewish Religion was yet heard of, for more
then two thousand years: there wanted not diverse that pleased God, and served
him truly, as Enoch, Noe, Job, Abraham, Jacob, and others. I answer, that
albeit these men, (especially the former, that lived under the Law of nature,)
had not so particular and express knowledge of Christ and of his mysteries, as
we have now: Gal, 3, and 4, Ephesi, 3, Colos. 1.
for this was reserved to the time of grace, (as S. Paul in diverse places at
large declares:) that is, albeit they knew not expressly, how and in what
manner Christ should be borne: See S. August. lib. 19. cont. Faust capit. 14.
whether of a Virgin or no; or in what particular sort he should live and die;
what Sacraments he should leave; what way of publishing his Gospel he should
appoint, and the like; (whereof notwithstanding very many perticulers were
revealed to the Jews from time to time, and the nearer they drew to the time
of Christ's appearance, the more plain revelation was made of these
mysteries:) yet (I say) all and every one of these holy Saints, All old Saints
believed in Christ, and were saved by him.
that lived from Adam until the coming of Christ, had knowledge ingenerall of
Christian Religion, and did believe the same; that is, they believed expressly,
that there should come a Savior and Redeemer of mankind, to deliver them
from the bondage contracted by the sin of Adam.

This was revealed (straight after their fall) to our first Parents and
Progenitors in Paradise: Gene, 3, ver. 15
to wit, that by the woman's seed, our redemption should be made. In respect
whereof, it is said in the Revelations, Reuela. 13.
that Christ is the Lamb that has been slain from the beginning of the
world. Acts, 15. verse. 11,
And S. Peter in the first general Counsel holden by the Apostles,
affirms, that the old ancient Fathers before Christ's nativity, Roma, 5.
Ephe, 8.
were saved by the grace of Christ, as we are now, which S. Paul confirms in
diverse places. And finally, the matter is so clear in this behalf, that the
whole Read S. Augu. lib. 18. de ciuit. 1 47. et epist. 49. and 157. et tract.
45. in Ioh. Cle. Alex. lib. 6. Strom. et Ierom in cap. 3 ad Calat.
School of Divines accords, that faith and religion of the ancient Fathers,
before Christ's appearaunce: was the very same in substance that ours is
now, saving only, that it was more general, obscure, and confuse then ours
is, for that it was of things to come, as ours is now of things past and
present.

For example; they believed that a Redeemer should come: The difference between
our belief and the old Fathers.
and we believe that he is already come. They said, Uirgo concipiet, a Vyrgine
shall conceive: and we say, Uirgo concepit, a Virgin has conceived. They had
sacrifices and ceremonies that prefigured his coming for the time ensuing: we
have sacrifice and sacraments that represent his being for the time present.
They called their Redeemer, Esaias. 7. Genesis, 49.
The expectation of Nations: and we call him now, The salvation of Nations.
And finally, there was no other difference between the old faith of good men
from the beginning, and ours: but only in the circumstaunces of time,
cleerenes, perticularitie, and of the manner of protesting the same, by outward
signs and ceremonies. For that in substance they believed the same Redeemer
that we do, and were saved by the same belief in his merits as we are. For
which cause Eusebius Eusebius. handles this matter at large lib 1. demon.
euang. capit. 5.
well notes, that as we are called now Christians: so they were called then
Christi. Psalm. 104. that is, anointed, in prefiguration of the true Christ in
whom they believed, as the first and head of all other anointed, and who was
the cause and author of their anointing.

By this then it is most manifest, that not only now to us that be Christians,
but at all other times from the beginning of the world, and to all other
persons and people what soever, that desired to have their souls saved, it was
necessary to believe and love Christ, and to profess in heart his Religion. For
which consideration, I thought it not amiss in this place, after the former
grounds laid, that there is a God; and that man was created and placed here
for his service: The causes of this Chapter.
to demonstrate and prove also this other principle, that the only service of
this God, is by Christian Religion. Wherein, albeit I do not doubt, but that I
shall seem to many, to take upon me a superfluous labor, in proouing a
verity, which all men in Christendom do confess: yet, for the causes before
alleged in the second Chapter, which moved me in that place to prove, that
there is a God: that is to say, first, for the comfort, strength, and
confirmation of such, as either from the enemy may receive temptations, or of
themselves may desire to see a reason of their belief; and secondly, for
awaking, stirring, or stinging of others, who either of malice, carelesnes, or
sensuality, are fallen a sleep, and have lost the feeling and sense of their
belief, (for many such want not in these our miserable days,) it shall not
be (perhaps) but to very good purpose, to lay together in this place, with
the greatest brevity that possibly may be, the most sure grounds and
invincible evidences, which we have for declaration and confirmation of this
matter.

For albeit the Apostle S. Paul declares, Hebru. 11.
the things which we believe, be not such in themselves, as may be made
apparent by reason of human arguments: yet such is the goodness and most
sweet proceeding of our merciful God toward us, as he will not leave himself
without sufficient testimony, both inward and outward, Acts, 14.
as the same Apostle in another place does testify. For that inwardly, he
testifies the truth of such things as we believe, The diverse testimonies from
God. of the things that we believe.
by giving us light and understanding, with internal joy and consolation in
believing them. And outwardly, he gives testimony to the same, with so many
conueniences, probabilities, and arguments of credibilitie, (as Divines do
call them,) that albeit the very point of that which is believed, remain still
with some obscurity: yet are there so many circumstaunces of likelyhoods, to
induce a man to the belief thereof, as in all reason it may seem against
reason to deny or mistrust them.

This shall easily appear by the treatise following of Christ and
Christianity, and of the foundations of our Religion, which shall be confirmed
by so many pregnant reasons, and most manifest circumstaunces of evident
probability: as I doubt not, but the zealous Christian shall take exceeding
comfort therein, and esteem himself happy, to have a lotte in that faith and
Religion, where he shall see and feel so much reason, proof, and conueniencie
to concur and show it self, for his satis-faction.

And to this effect, it shall be of no mean moment, that I have proved before,
the certainty, divinity, and infallible truth of the Jews Scriptures, or
old Testament; which writings we have received from that Nation that does (as
it were) profess enmity against us, and the same being written so many ages
before the name of Christianity was known in the world: it cannot be but of
singular authority, what soever shall be alleged out of those records for our
purpose. And therefore as before, in proouing our first principle, That there
is a God, we used only the testimony of such witnesses, The undoubted
witnesses to be alleged in this Chapter.
as could not be partial: so much more in this confirmation of Christian
Religion, shall we stand only, either upon the confessions of such as are our
enemies, or upon the records of others, who must needs be indifferent in the
cause, for that they lived before either cause or controversy in
Christianity, was known or called in question.

My whole purpose shall be then, to make manifest in this Chapter, The dryft of
this Chapter.
that Jesus Christ was the Savior and Redeemer of mankind, fore-promised and
expected from the beginning of the world; that he was the only son of God,
and God himself, and consequently, that what soever he has left us in his
doctrine and Religion, is true and sincere, and the only way of salvation
upon earth. For cleerer proof and declaration whereof, I will reduce what
soever I have to say herein, unto three principal heads or branches, The
principal heads.
according to the order of three distinct times wherein they fell out; That is
to say, in the

In declaration of which three general points, I hope by the assistance of him
whose cause we handle, that so many clear demonstrations shall be dyscouered:
as shall greatly confirm thy faith (gentle Reader) and remove all occasions
of temptation to infidelity.

How Christ was fore-tolde to Jew and Gentile. SECT. I.
FIrst then, for such things as passed before Christ appeared in the flesh, and
do make for proof of our Christian Religion; it is to be noted, that they are
of two sorts, The Jew and Gentile.
or at least wise, they are to be taken from two kinds of people, that is,
partly from the Jews, and partly from the Gentiles. For seeing that Christ was
appointed from the beginning, yea, before the world was created, Ephe. 1. 1.
Tim, 2. Titus, 1. 1, Peter. 1.
(as Saint Paul affirms,) to work the redemption both of Jew and Gentile,
and to make them both one people in the service of his Father: heere-hence it
is, that he was foretold and prefigured to both these Nations, Esaias, 2. 11.
19 Iere, 9, 12, 16.
and diverse fore-warninges were left among them both, for styrring them up to
expect his coming, as by the considerations following shall most evidently
appear.

The first consideration.
AND to begin with the Jews, The Messiah promised.
no man can deny, but that throughout the whole body and course of their
Scriptures, that is, from the very beginning to the last end of their old
Testament, they had promised unto them a Messiah, which is the very same that
we call Christ, that is to say, a person anointed and sent from God to be a
Savior, a Redeemer, a Pacifier of Gods wrath, a Mediator between God and man,
a Satis-fier for the sins and offenses of the whole world, a Restorer of our
innocence lost in Paradise, a Master, an Instructor, a Lawgiver, a
Spiritual and eternal King, that should sit, and rule and reign in our
hearts, to conquer the power and tyranny of Satan, the enemy of mankind, who
ouer-came our first Parents, and never cease to assail us.

THE FIRST COVENAVNT TO ADAM.
THIS is evident by the first covenant of al, that ever God did make with man,
when he said to Adam our first Father in Paradise; Genesis. 2.
In what day soever thou shall eat of the tree that is forbidden, thou shall
die. Which covenant being after broken, on the part of our said Progenitor,
he received his judgment: but yet with a most benign promise of redemption for
the time to come: for thus God said to the devil or serpent that had deceived
him: Genesis. 3.
The seed of the woman shall crushe thy head, and thou shall lie in wait to
hurt his heel. That is, one shall proceed in time of the seed of the woman,
who shall conquer Death and Sin (that are thy weapons,) and shall not care for
thy temptations, but shall tread them under his feet, and this shall be Christ
the Messiah of the world.

Thus did not only the Rabbi Mose. Benmaimon, in hunc locum.
eldest Jews and Rabbines understand this place, (what soever the latter have
dreamed, that their Messiah should be only a temporal King:) but also the
old Chaldie Paraphrase, (named Thargum Hierosolymitanum) expounds it
plainly, in these words, applied unto the devil that had deceived Adam:
Tharg. Hieroso. in Gene. 3.
They have a certain and present remedy against thee (O devil,) for that the
time shall come, when they shall tread thee down with their heels, by the
help of Messiah which shall be their King.

TO ABRAHAM AND ISAAC.
THE same thing is confirmed by the very same promise seven times repeated
and established unto Abraham, that lived very near two thousand years after
Adam: and again to Isaac his son after him: Gene, 12. and 18, and 22.
In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes terrae. All Nations of the earth shall
be blessed in thy seed. Which had been indeed, but a very small benediction
to Abraham, or to the Jews after him, (that never saw their Messiah actually)
if he had been only to be a temporal King; And much less blessing had it
been to the Gentiles and all other Nations, if this Messiah of the Jews, must
have been a temporal and worldly Monarch, to destroy and subdue them to the
servitude of Jury, as fondly these latter teachers of that Nation do contend.

JACOBS PROPHECY OF CHRIST.
THIS yet makes the Patriarch Jacob more plain, who prophesying at his death
of the coming of Christ, has these words: Gene, 49.
The Scepter (or government) shall not be taken from the house of Judah, until
he come that is to be sent, and he shall be the expectation of Nations. Which
latter words, the forenamed Chaldie Paraphrase, Tharg. Hieroso. et Onkelos. in
hunc locum.
as also great Onkelos, (both of singular authority amongst the Jews,) do
interpret thus: Donec Christus seu Messiah veniat, etc. Until Christ or the
Messiah come, (which is the hope and expectation of all Nations, as well
Gentiles, as of us that are Jews,) the government shall not cease in the
house or Trybe of Judah. By which sentence of Scripture, and interpretation of
the Jews themselves, we come to learn, (besides the promise of the Messiah)
two consequences in this matter against the Jews of later times. First, The
Messiah must be a spyrituall and not a temporal King.
that if their Messiah must be the hope and expectation as well of Gentiles as
of Jews: then can he not be a temporal King to destroy the Gentiles, (as the
later Jews would have it,) but a spiritual King to reign over them, and to
bring in subjection their spiritual enemies for them, (I mean the flesh, the
world, and the devil,) as all true Christians do believe. Secondly, if the
temporal kingdom of the house of Judah, (whereof Christ must come) shall cease
and be destroyed at the coming of Messiah, (as this Scripture avouches:) how
then can the Jews expect yet a temporal King for their Messiah, as most
fondly they do?

But to leave this controversy with the later Rabines, and to go forward in
declaration of that which we took in hand, that is, to show how Christ was
fore-tolde and promised to the Jews. It is to be noted, that after the death
of Jacob last mentioned, there is a little recorded in scripture of the doings
of his people, during the space of four hundred years, being the time of
their bondage in Egypt; The tradition of the Jews in Misdrasch Thehilim.
but yet the tradition of that Nation teaches, that as soon as they were
delivered out of Egypt, and were in the desert toward the Land of promise: the
three sons of Chore, called Aser, Eleana, and Abiasaphe, (of whom mention is
made in the sixth Chapter of Exodus, and other places) made diverse songs and
Psalms, in the praise and expectation of the Messiah to come, and that the
holy men of that time, did solace themselves with singing the same: and that
King David afterward in the second part of his Psalms, See the tytles of these
psalms here specified.
beginning from the forty one, unto the eyghtie seven, gathered the most part
of these old songs together, as yet they are to be seen in his Psalter.

MOSES PROPHECY OF CHRIST.
BUT Moses, who lived with that people, and governed them in the wilderness,
had a clear revelation from God of this Messiah, in these words. Deute. 18.
I will raise up a Prophet to this people from amongst their brethren, even as
thy self: and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them
all things which I shall ordain unto him: and he that shall refuse to hear
the words which he shall speak unto them in my name: I will be revenged upon
that man. Which words, that they cannot be understood of any other Prophet
that ever lived after Moses among the Jews, but only of Christ, it appears
very plainly by this testimony of the holy Ghost, Deute. 34.
And there arose not any other Prophet in Israel like unto Moses. etc.

DAVID'S PROPHECY OF CHRIST.
AFter Moses about four hundred years, ensued David, who for that he was a
holy man, and the first King of the house of Judah, out of whose lineage the
Messiah was to come: the perticulers of this mystery, were more abundantly
and manifestly revealed unto him, then unto any other. And first, for
assurance that Christ should be borne of his stock and lineage, these are the
words of God unto him. Psalm, 88. 2, Reg, 7, 1, Chro. 22.
I have sworn to David my servant: I will prepare thy seed for eternity,
and will build up thy seat to all generations. Which words, albeit the later
Jews will apply it to King Solomon, that was David's son, (and in some sense
they may so be: for that King Solomon was a figure of Christ to come,) yet
properly these words, 3. Reg. 5. 1, Chron, 22.
and his kingdom shall stand for ever, and for all eternity, which are so
often repeated in this and other places of Scripture: cannot be verified in
Solomon, whose earthly Kingdom was rent and torn in pieces straight way after
his death, 3, Reg, 12.
by Jeroboam, and not long after, as it were extinguished^ but they must needs
be understood of an ^ternall king, which should come of David's seed: as must
also these other words of God in the Psalms. Psalm, 2, 45. 47, 67, 72.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, I will give unto thee the
Gentiles for thine inheritance. Which was never fulfilled in Solomon, nor in
any other temporal King in Jury after him. And much less these words which
follow; Psalm, 71.
He shall endure with the sun, and before the moon, from generation to
generation. There shall rise up in his days peace, until the moon be taken
away: he shall reign from Sea to Sea, unto the ends of the world: All Kings
shall adore him, and all Nations shall serve him: for that he shall deliver the
poor man that had no helper: he shall save their souls, and deliver them from
usury, and from iniquity: all trybes of the earth shall be bl^ssed in him, and
all Nations shall magnify him.

These words of Chris^es eternal kingdom: of his enduring to the worlds end:
of his universal reign over Jew and Gentile: of his adoration by all
Nations: of his delivery of souls from bondage of iniquity: and finally, of
his making blessed all Trybes of the earth: cannot possibly be applied to any
temporal King that ever was among the Jews, or ever shall be unto the worlds
end, but only Christ.

IEREMIES PROPHECY OF CHRIST.
THIS promise made unto David, for Christ to come of his seed, is repeated
(after his death,) by many Prophets, and confirmed by God, as in Jeremy,
where God uses these words. Jeremy, 23, and 33.
Behold, the days come on, and I will raise up to David a just seed, and
he shall reign a King, and shall be wise, and shall do judgment and justice
upon earth. And in his days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell
considently, and this is the name that men shall call him: OUR JUST GOD. All
this was spoken of David's seed, above four hundred years after David was
dead. Which proves manifestly, that the former promises and speeches, were not
made to King David for Solomon his son, or for any other temporal King of
David's line: but for Christ, who was called so perticulerlie The son and
seed of David, for that David was the first King of the Trybe of Judah, and not
only was Christ's Progenitour in the flesh, but also did bear his type and
figure in many other things.

EZECHIELS PROPHECY OF CHRIST.
FOR which cause likewise in the Prophet Ezechiell (who lived about the same
time that Jeremy did,) the Messiah is called by the name of David himself;
For thus God spoke at that time unto Ezechiell, Ezech. 34.
I will save my flock: nor shall they be any longer left to the spoil, etc. I
will raise over them, ONE PASTOR, which shall feed them: my servant DAVID,
Christ is called David.
he shall feed them: and he shall be their Sheepehearde, and Prince, and I
will be their God, and will make with them a covenant of peace, etc. In which
words, not only we that are called Christians, but the later Jews also
themselves, do confess in their Thalmud, Thalm. tract. Sanch. ca. helec
that their Messiah is called by the name of David, for that he shall descend
of the seed of David; as by reason also it must needs be so, for that King
David being dead four hundred years before these words were spoken, (as
has been noted) could not now come again, to feed Gods people or govern
them himself.

THE PROPHECIES OF ESAIAS, TOUCHING CHRIST.
Esaias the Prophet, who lived about a hundred years before Jeremy and
Ezechiel, had marvelous foreknowledge of the Messiah and his affairs, and
describes him very perticulerly, beginning in this manner. Esaias, 2.
In the latter days, the HILL of Gods house, shall be prepared upon the top
of mountains, and all Nations (or Gentiles) shall flow unto him: And many
people shall say: come and let us ascend unto the HILL of our Lord, and he
shall teach us his ways, and we shall walk in his paths: he shall judge
Nations. etc. Which very words are also repeated in Micheas the Prophet, Miche.
4.
and are applied there (as also here,) unto the Messiah, and can have no other
meaning, by the judgment of the Jews and Hebrews themselves. And Esaias does
prosecute the same matter afterward in diverse Chapters. As for example in the
fourth, talking of the same Messiah, which before he called the HILL of Gods
house, he adds these words. Esaias, 4. ver. 2.
In that day, shall the issue of the Lord, be in magnificence and glory: and
the fruit of the earth, in sublimitie and exultation, to all such as shall be
saved of Israel. In which words, he calls the Messiah, both the issue of
God, and the fruit of the earth: for that he should be both God and man. And
in the ninth Chapter, he calls him by these terms: Esaias, 9, ver. 6
Admirable: Couns^llour: God: Strong: Father of the future world: and, Prince
of Peace.

In the eleventh chapter, he describes him most wonderfully, in these words:
Esaias, 11. ver. 1.
There shall go forth a branch of the stock of Iesse, (which Iesse was
David's father; Psalm, 71. Eccle. 45.
) and out of the root of that branch, ther^ shall mount up a flower, and
the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: the spirit of wisdom and of
understanding: the spirit of council and fortitude: the spirit of knowledge
and piety: Wonderful properties of CHRIST.
he shall not judge according to the sight of (fleshly) eyes, nor yet condemn
according to the hearing of (fleshly) ears: but he shall judge poor men in
justice, and shall dispute in equity for the mylde men of the earth. He shall
strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the spirit of his lyps
shall he sley the wicked man. Justice shall be the girdle of his loins, and
faith shall be the band of his reins. etc. Hitherto are the words of the
Prophet: wherein truly nothing can be more plain and evident, Math, 1. Luke, 3.
then that by the rod or branche of I^sse, is meant the Virgin Marie, who
directly descended of the lineage of Iesse, Acts. 13. Romans. 15.
and by the flower ascending from this branch, must needs be understood
Christ, that was borne of her, and had all those excellencies and privileges
above other men, which Esaias in this place assigns unto him.

Whose further graces yet, and special divine properties, Other properties of
Christ.
the same Prophet expresses more particulerly in the Chapters following, where
he says; Esaias, 25, ver. 8
He shall for ever overthrow and destroy death: he shall open the eyes of the
blind, and the ears of the deaf: Esaias, 35, ver. 5. Esaias, 42, ver. 2^
he shall not cry nor cont^nde, nor shall he accept the person of any man: but
in truth shall he bring forth judgment. He shall not be sorrowful nor
turbulent, etc. And finally, in the forty nine Chapter, he alleges the words
of God the Father unto Christ, touching his commission, in this sort; Esaias, 49,
ver, 6 Acts, 13, 47.
It is too-little that thou be to me a servant, to raise up the Trybes of
Jacob, and to convert unto me the dr^gs of Israel. The commission of Christ.
Behold, I have appointed thee also ^or a light unto the Gentiles, that thou
be my salvation unto the uttermost parts of the earth.

DANIELS PROPHECY OF CHRIST.
AND to conclude this matter, without alleging more prophecies for the same,
(which in truth are infinite throughout the Bible) Daniell that lived in the
end of the captivity of Babylon, a little before Aggaeus, Zacharias, and
Malachias, (who were the last Prophets that ever flourished among the Jews,
almost five hundred years before the nativity of Christ:) this Daniell (I
say) reports of himself, that being in Babylon, and having fasted, worn
sacke-cloth, and prayed long unto God, there came the Angel Gabriell unto him
at the time of evening sacrifice, and foretold him, not only of the
deliverance of the people of Israel from the captivity of Babylon out of
hand, for that the seauentie years of their punishment foretold by Jeremy,
were now expired) but also he told him further, that the time of the
universal deliverance of mankind, from the bondage and captivity of sin:
was now shortened^ and that after seventy Hebdomades, (which, as shall be
showed after, make up just the time that passed from the rebuilding of the
Temple of Jerusalem after their deliverance from Babylon, unto the birth of
Christ:) there should be borne the Savior of the world, and be put to death
for the redemption of mankind.

Daniel. 9. verse. 23.
The Angels words are these. I am come to show unto thee, O Daniell, for that
thou art a man of good desires. And therefore do thou mark my speech, and
understand this vision. The seauentie hebdomades are shortened upon thy
people, and upon thy holy City: to the end preuarication may be consumed, and
sin receive an end: to the end iniquity may be blotted out, and eternal
justice brought in her place: and to the end visions and prophecies may be
fulfilled, and the SAINT OF SAINTS anointed. Know thou therefore and mark,
that from the end of the speech, for rebuilding of Jerusalem, unto Christ the
CAPTAIN, there shall be hebdomades seven, and hebdomades sixty two, and after
sixty two hebdomades, Christ shall be put to death, and the people which shall
deny him, shall not be his people.

I might pass on further to other Prophets, and make no end, if I would
allege what might be said in this behalf; for that the whole Scripture
runs all to this one point: The Butte of all Scripture.
to foretell and manifest Christ, by signs, figures, parables, and
prophecies: and for this cause was it principally written. But that which is
already spoken, shall be sufficient for our first consideration, whereby is
seen, that among the Jews from age to age, Christ was prophesied and
fore-tolde, together with the eternity of his kingdom, that should be
spiritual.

The second consideration.
Now follows there a second consideration of the quality of Christ's
person, That Christ should be God and man.
of no less importance then the former, and wherein the later Jews do more
dyscent from us: and that is, of the Godhead of the Messiah promised. I say
the later Jews or Rabines, are different herein from us, as also they are in
many other points and articles, wherein their ancestors (that were no
Christians,) did fully agree. Even as all Heretics are wont to do, The
custom of Heretics.
that first break in one point, and then in another, from the true Catholic
faith of Christ, to follow men's traditions; and so do run on, from one to
one, making themselves in all things as dislike as they can, for hatred of
that unity, whereunto their pride will not suffer them to return. So is it in
the generation of this reprobate people, who first agreed with us in all, or
most points, touching Christ to come, and denied only the fulfilling or
applycation thereof, in Jesus our Savior: but afterward, their ungracious
offspring, being not able to stand in that issue against us, devised a new
plea, and betook themselves to a far higher degree of impiety, affirming,
that we attribute many things unto Jesus, that were not fore-tolde of the
Messiah to come; and among other, that he should be God, and the son of God,
and the second person in Triniti^, etc.

But herein (no doubt) these obstinate and graceless men, do show
themselves both ignorant of their own Scriptures, and disagreeing from the
wrytings of their own forefathers. For as for scriptures, it is ^uident by
all, or most of the Prophets all^^ged before, that Christ (or the Messiah) must
be GOD, and the son of God, endued with man's nature; that is, both man and
God. That Christ must be both God and man. Gene, 3, ver, 5.
So in Genesis, where he is called the s^ede of the woman: it is apparent, that
he shall be man; and in the same place, The first proof.
when he is promised to crush the devil, and break his head: who can do
this but only God? Likewise, when he is called, Germen Iehouae, Esaias, 4. ver,
2.
the seed of our Lord God; his Godhead is signified: as is his man-heade
also, when in the same place he is named, the f^uite of the earth. Esaias, 9.
Psalm, 71.
Who can interpret these speeches; That his kingdom shall be everlasting:
That, he shall endure until the Moon be taken away, and after: Psalm, 109^
That, God begat him before Lucifer was created: That, no man can tell or
recounte his generation: Esaias, 53, Psalm, 96, Hebru, 1, Psalm, 110.
That, all Nations and Angels must adore him: That, he must sit at the right
hand of God, and many other such speeches pronounced directly and expressly of
the Messiah; who (I say) can understand or interpret them, but of God, seeing
that in man they cannot be verified?

And as for the last of these testimonies, concerning Christ's sitting at his
Fathers right hand: Math, 2. Mark, 12. Luke, 20.
three of our Evangelists do report, that Jesus did blanck diverse of the
learnedest Pharisees with alleging only these words of David; The Iehoua in
Hebrew. Psalm, 110.
Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right-hande, until I put thine enemies as
thy foote-stoole. For, (said Jesus,) if Christ be David's son; how did David
call him his Lord? signifying hereby, that albeit the Messiah was to be David's
Son, according to his man-head: yet was he to be David's Lord, according to
his God-heade. And so do both Rabbi Jonathan, Rab. Ionath. lib. collect. et
Misdr^s^h. T^hilli^^. in Psalm. 2. ver. 7.
and the public Commentaries of the Hebrews, interpret the place.

The second proof. Miche. 5.
Micheas is plain; And thou Bethleem: out of thee shall proceed a RVLER in
Israel, and his going soorth, is from the beginning, and from the days of
eternity. This cannot be understood of any mortal man, that ever was or
shall be. But yet Esaias goes further, when he says: Esaias, 9.
A little child is borne unto us, and a young son is given unto us, and his
principality is upon his own shoulder, and his name shall be GOD; the father
of the future World ( So is it in the Hebrew.
or of eternity:) the Prince of Peace, etc. In which words we see that
Christ is called God. But if the Jew do cauil hear, and say, that El or
Elohim the Hebrew words, An objection answered.
which we interpret God in this place, may sometime be applied to a creature,
as in Exodus once El signifies an Angel, Exodus, 10, ve. 11.
and Elohim at other times, is applied to Judges: the^ mark this dyscourse of
David touching the Messiah, to whom he says: Thou art beautiful in form
above the children of men: Psalm, 44.
grace is spread in thy lyps, and therefore has God blessed thee for ever, etc.
Thy seat O God, is for ever and ever: the rod (or Scepter) of thy kingdom,
is the rod of direction: thou have loved justice and hated iniquity:
therefore O God, thy God has anointed thee with oil of joy above thy
partners. Here the Messiah is called God twyce by the same word Elohim, as God
his father is: and therefore as the word signifies twice God in the one, so
must it also in the other.

But to remove all ground of this refuge touching El or Elohim, The third
proof.
that are names of GOD, which may be communicated sometimes, and upon some
occasions to creatures; most apparent it is, that the name IEHOVA, Christ is
called Iehoua.
which is called, Tetagrammaton, and which is so peculier to God alone, as
never it may be communicated to any other: this name (I say) which is of such
reverence among the Jews, as they dare not pronounce it, but in place thereof
do read Adonai, that signifies Lord: is every where almost in Scripture,
attributed to Christ, See Esaias, cap. 18, ver, 7, and cap, 28, ver. 5,
namely where the Latin interpreter has translated, Lord: as for example, in
two diverse places of Jeremy, after the long description of the Messiah, which
before I have recited: he concludes thus; Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt cum,
Iehoua iustus noster, Ier^. 23, ver. 7, and 33, ver, 16,
this is the name which they shall call him, OUR JUST IEHOVA, or as the Hebrew
has word for word, Iehoua our justice. And so do the ancient Hebrew
expositors confess upon this place of Jeremy, namely, Rabbi Abba, Rab. Abba
com^nt. in Thren. verse 16.
who asks the question what Messiah shall be called? and then he answers
out of this last place, he shall be called the eternal Iehoua. Misd. Thehilim.
in Psalm. 20. v. 1.
The like does Misdrasche gather upon the first verse of the twenty psalm.
And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, Rab. Mos. Hadars. in Gene. capit 41.
expounding a place of the Prophet Sophonie, chapter 3, verse 9. concludes
thus: in this place Iehoua signifies nothing else but the M^ssias.

Whereby appears, that as well in scripture, as also in the opinion of old
Hebrew expositors, the Messiah was to be true God and man. And I might allege
many other testimonies of ancient Rabbines, if it were not too-long:
especially, if I would enter among that kind of expositours, whom they call
Cabalists, (who are more ancient and less brutish then are the other sort,
which are termed Thalmudistes, Two sorts of Hebrew expositors, Cabalistes and
Thalmudistes.
) I should find many clear and manifest declarations against the Jews
doctrine and error of later times. And among other, (for example only of
Cabalisticall expositions,) I refer the Reader to the discourse of Rabbi
Hacadosch (which in Hebrew signifies the holy Rabine, and lived not long after
Christ,) upon the words of Jeremy before recited: Jeremy, 23. verse, 7.
in which, for that he finds the Messiah to be called Iehoua, which word in
the Hebrew is compounded of the three Letters, Iod, Vau, and He twice repeated:
this Doctor makes this discourse by art Cabalist, in this manner.

Even as (says he) the Letter He in Iehoua,is compounded of two other Letters,
named Daleth and Uau, (as appears by their form) so shall the Messiah, Rab.
Hacad^sch in Esaias. cap. 9.
(that is signified by this word Iehoua) be made of two natures, the one
divine, and the other human. And as in Iehoua, A Cabalisticall dyscourse.
there is twyse He, and consequently two Daleths and two Uaus contained
therein: so are there two byrthes, filiations, or chyld-hoods in Messiah, the
one, whereby he shall be the son of God, and the other, whereby he shall be
the son of a Virgin, which Esaias calls the Prophetise. Esaias, 8,
And as in Iehoua, the Letter He is twyse put, and yet both H^s do make in
effect but one Letter: so in Messiah there shall be two distinct natures, and
yet shall they make but one Christ.

Thus plays this Cabalist upon the Letters of Iehoua, (according to the
manner of their divinity) and draws great mysteries (as ye see) from Letters
ends. In which kind of reasoning, albeit we put no ground of strength at all:
yet is it sufficient to show, that among the elder Jews it was a known and
confessed doctrine, that Christ should be both God and man, and have two
natures conjoined d^stinctly in one person, which is the same that we
Christians do a^^i^me.

The fourth proo^e.
Nay, I will add further, (and this is greatly to be observed,) that the self
same ancient Jews, (as some also of the later) do hold, and prove by
scripture: that Christ shall be, (for always they speak of the Messiah to
come,) the very son of God. Christ called the son of God.
Et verbum Dei incarn^uum, and the word of God incarnate, or made flesh. And
for the first, that he shall be the son of God: they prove it out of diverse
places alleged by me before: as for example, out of Genesis, where the Latin
text has: Genesis, 49.
The scepter of Judah sh^^ not be taken away, until he come that is to sent.
The Hebrew has, until Silo come, which Silo, Rabbi Kimhi proves by a long
dyscourse, Rab. David. Kimhi, in lib. radicum.
to signify so much, as Filius eius, his son, that is, the son of God. The
same they prove by the place of Esaias, where the Messiah is called, germen
Iehouae, Esaias, 4, ver. 2.
the seed or son of Iehoua. Which the Chaldie Paraphrase terms, the
Messiah of Iehoua. Tharg. in hunc locum.
They prove the same also, out of diverse Psalms, where Christ is called
plainly the son of God, as where it is said: Psalm, 49.
He shall say unto me, thou art my father, etc. I will put him, mine eldest
son, more higher then all the Kings of the earth, etc. Iehoua said unto me,
thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, etc. Psalm, 2.
Kiss the This is according to the Hebrew text.
son ye Kings and Judges of the earth, and happy are al they that place their
hope in him. Which last words can no way be understood of the Son of any man,
for that it is written, Cursed is the man, that puts his trust in man.
Ierem. 17.
Wherefore Rabbi Jonathan, Rabbi Selomoth, Aben Ezar, and others, do conclude
by these and other places which they allege, that the Messiah must be the
very son of God.

And for the second point, The fifth proof.
they go yet further, affirming, this son to be Verbum Patris, the word of
God the Father. Which the fore-sayde Jonathan in his Chaldy Paraphrase, does
express in many translations: as for example; where Esaias says, Israel shall be
saved in Iehoua with eternal salvation, (which Iehoua signifies Christ, as
all men do confess,) In the Chaldie paraphrase.
Jonathan turns it thus: Israel shall be saved by Gods word. So again,
where God says by Ose, I will save the house of Judah by I^houa their God:
Hose, 1,
(which is by Christ,) Jonathan translateth it thus: I will save Judah by the
word of their God. In like manner where David writes, Iehoua said to my
Lord, sit at my right hand, etc. Psalm, 110.
Jonathan expresses it thus: Iehoua said unto his word, sit at my right
hand. So Rabbi Isaac Arama writing upon Genesis, Rab. Isaac. com. in cap. 47.
Gene.
expounds this verse of the Psalm: Psalm, 106. verse, 20.
he sent his word and healed them, etc. to be meant of Messiah that shall be
Gods word. And Rabbi Simeon the chief of all the Cabalists, Rab. Simeon. Ben
Iahai. com. in ca. 10. Gene.
upon those words of Job, I shall see God in my flesh, Job. 19. ver, 26
gathers, that the word of God shall take flesh in a woman's womb. So that
this doctrine was nothing strange among the ancient Rabbines.

For further confirmation whereof, (seeing the matter is of so great
importance) consider what is recorded in a Treatise called Zoar, of high
authority among the Jews, where Rabbi Simeon that was last before alleged,
Rab. Simeon in Zoar.
cites a place out of old Rabbi Ibba, upon these words in Deuteronomie, Ieho^^
our Lord, is one Iehoua: Deuter. 6. verse, 4.
which words the said ancient Rabbi Ibba, interprets thus: by the first
Iehoua in this sentence, The blessed Trinity proved by an ancient Rabbine.
(being the incommunicable name of God,) is signified (says he) GOD the
father, Prince of all things. By the next words ( our Lord) is signified God
the son, that is fountain of all Sciences. And by the second Iehoua in the
same sentence, is signified God the holy Ghost, proceeding of them both. To
all which is there added the word ( One,) to signify that these three are
indivisible. But this secret shall not be revealed until the coming of
Messiah. Hitherto are the words of Rabbi Ibba, reported in Zoar by Rabbi
Simeon, where also the said Rabbi Simeon interprets these words of Esaias,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath: in this manner. Esaias by repeating
three times holy (says he) does as much as if he had said. Holy Father, holy
Son, and holy Spirit: which three holies, do make but one only Lord God of
Sabbath.

Finally, The sixth proof.
I will conclude this controversy between the later Jews and us, with the
authority of learned Philo, who lived in the very same time with Christ, Phi.
lib. 2. legate Ruff. li. 1. hist. 1.6 Eusebius in Chron.
and was sent Ambassador twyse to Rome, in the behalf of his Nation in
Alexandria; that is, first in the fifteen year of Tyberius the Emperor,
which was three years before Christ's passion, and the very same year wherein
he was baptized by S. John: and the second time about eight years after, to
wit, in the first year of the reign of Caligula. This man that was the
learnedest that ever wrote among the Jews, (after the writers of holy
Scripture ceased) made a special Book of the banishment of his Countrymen,
where he has this discourse ensuing.

Philo. lib. de exulibus.
What time may be appointed (says he) for the return home of us banished
Jews, it is hard to determine. For by tradition we have, that we must
expect the death of an High Priest. But of those, some die quickly, and some
live longer. But I am of opinion, that this High Priest shall be, the very word
of God. Which shall be void of all sin, both voluntary, and inuoluntarie:
whose father shall be God, and this word shall be that fathers wisdom, by
which all things in this world were created. His head shall be anointed with
oil, and his kingdom shall flourish and shine for ever. This wrote Philo at
that time, when he little imagined, that the same High Priest, whom he so much
expected, and the same word of God, whose kingdom he describes, was now
already come into the world. And this shall suffice for our second
consideration, what manner of Messiah the Jews did expect.

The third consideration.
Now in the third place comes to be considered, Whether Christ should change
the Law of Moses.
what authority and power the Messiah should have at his appearaunce upon
earth, and whether he should change and abrogate the Law of Moses, or no? where
in there is no less controversy between us and the later Jews, then in the
former point of his divinity. For we hold with S. Paul, Gala, 3, and 4.
Hebru. 7.
that the Law of Moses was given unto the Jews but for a time, to entertain
that people withal, 1. Corin, 10.
and by the outward signs and ceremonies which it had, (whereof the most
part, or all, prefigured Christ to come:) to be their Schoole-maister and
leader to the times of faith, wherein it should be abrogated, and a far more
perfect Law set down by Christ in place thereof.

This we prove first, for that the Law of Moses was an imperfect Law, The
Law of Moses imperfect.
bringing nothing to perfection, as S. Paul well notes; Hebrews, 7. Acts, 15.
It was (as S. Peter says) a burden-som Law, which the Jews themselves were
not able to bear, for the multitude of ceremonies therein contained. It was a
carnal and servile Law, consisting most in the external. It was a Law of
terror and fear, Gala. 3.
more then of love and liberty of the spirit. It was a Law (as I said before)
of signs and figures for things to come, and consequently to cease, when those
things which it prefigured should come to be present. Deuteronomy, 15.
It was a Law peculiar and proper for the Jews alone, without respect of all
the rest of the world: Deuteronomy, 13, and 14 Leuit. 5, and 23, Exodus, 23. Deuteronomy, 27.
and the exercise thereof, was allowed only in the Country of Jury; and that
which is more, it was not permitted but in one place only of that Country,
that is, in Jerusalem, whether every man was bound to repair three times a
year, to wit, at the Pasqua, at the Pentecoste, and at the feast of
Tabernacles: and in that place alone to make their sacrifices, and in no other
Country or place besides.

Now then reasons the learned Divine, Good reasons.
if this Law of Moses were for the Jews and Jury only: how could it serve
for the time of the Messiah, who was to be King, as well of the Gentiles as of
the Jews: and to rule all people in the world, Psalm, 2,21,26. Esaias, 2,11, 19.
that should believe in him under one Law. If the exercise of this Law were
allowable only, and lawful in Jerusalem: how could it possibly be fulfilled
by Christians, that are dispersed over all the world? As for example, how
could they repair to Jerusalem thrice every year? how should every woman
that should dwell in England or India, repair to Jerusalem for her
purification after every childbirth, Leuit. 12. Exodus, 13. Numb. 8.
as by the Law of Moses she was commanded? Most evident is it then, which we
said before, that this Law was given but to endure for a time. And to use S.
Paul's own words, Hebrews, 7.
it was but introductio melioris spei, an introduction to a better hope. It was
but an entertainment to that people, (which by their being among the
Egiptians, were prone to idolatry,) until Christ should come and ordain a
perfect Law. The new law of Christ, and the perfections thereof.
That is, a Law of spirit and internal affection: a Law of love and
liberty: a Law that should be common to all men: serve for all Countries,
times, places and persons: a Law that should be written in the bowels of our
hearts, a Law that should be tolerable, easy, sweet, plain, light, brief,
and flexible as well to the poor as to the rich: a Law (to conclude) that
should consist in charity.

This signified Moses, when he said to his people, after he had delivered the
former Law unto them: Deuteronomy. 18.
The Lord shall raise unto you a Prophet of your own Nation, and from among
your own brethren, as my self: him shall you hear. As though he had said:
you shall hear me until he come, that must be a Lawgiver as my self: but yet
of a more perfect Law: and therefore more to be heard and obeyed. And then he
adds, who soever shall refuse to hear the words of this Prophet, I my self
will revenge it says the Lord GOD. Which words can not be verified in any
other Prophet after Moses until Christ: for that of those Prophets, the
Scripture says, Deuter, 34.
There arose no Prophet like unto Moses in Israel. Which is to be understood,
that they had no authority to be Lawmakers, as Moses had, but were all bound
to the observation of that Law only which Moses left, until Christ came,
whom Moses here calls a Prophet as himself: that is, a Lawmakers, and
exhorts all men to hear and obey him.

This yet is made more plain by the prophecy of Esaias, who says: Esaias, 2.
Out of Sion shall come a Law, and the word of God out of Jerusalem: which
cannot be understood of Moses Law that had been published eight hundred years
before this was spoken, A new Law prophesied.
and that from the Mount Sinai, and not from Sion; But Christ's Law began from
Sion and Jerusalem, and from thence was spread into all the world. Which the
same Esaias fore-sawe when talking of the coming of the Messiah he says: In
that day there shall be an Altar to God, in the midst of the Land of Egypt. And
the title of the Lord at the end thereof, etc. And God shall be known to the
Egiptians at that day, and they shall honor him with sacrifices and
oblations. Esaias, 19.
Which words could not be verified in the old Law of Moses, for that by that
Law the Egiptians could have neither Altar nor Sacrifice: but at Christ's
coming it was fulfilled, when the Egiptians were made Christians, and enjoyed
both the Aultars and sacrifices that Christians do use.

The same thing was foretold by God in Malachie, where he says to the Jews
and of the Jewish sacrifices. Malach. 1.
I have no pleasure in you, neither will I rec^iue oblations at your hands.
For that from the vprising of the sun, The reprobation of the old Law, with
a promise of a nevve.
unto the going down thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles, and they do
sacrifice unto me every where, and do offer unto my name a pure oblation,
says the Lord God of hosts. In which words we see first, a reprobation of
the Iewishe sacrifice, and consequently of the Law of Moses, which depends
principally of that sacrifice. Secondly we see, that among the Gentiles,
there should be a pure manner of sacrifice, more grateful unto GOD then the
other was, and such, as might be performed in every place of the world, and
not to be tied to one place only, as the Moisaicall Law and sacrifice was. And
finally I will conclude this whole matter, with the express words of God
himself, concerning the ceremonies and precepts of the old Law. Ezech. 20.
Dedi eis praecepta non bona, and iudicia in quibus non viuent. I gave unto
them precepts that were not good, and judgments wherein they shall not live.
That is, they were not good to continue perpetually, nor shall they live in
them for ever, but until the time by me appointed: of which time he
determines more perticulerly by Jeremy the Prophet in these words; Jeremy. 3.
Behold, the days shall come, and I will make a new Covenant or Testament with
the house of Israel and Judah: A new T^stament promised.
not according to that Covenant which I made with your Fath^rs, when I brought
them forth of the Land of Egypt. Where you see, that at the coming of Christ
into this world, (for of him and his birth, he talks at large in this
Chapter) there shall be a new Testament, containing a different Law from that
of the old Testament, which was given to the Jews at their going forth of
Egypt.

Thus much then hitherto has been showed, The sum of that which has been
said.
that Christ in all ages was foretold and promised: that he should be GOD;
and that his authority should be to change the Law of Moses, (that was given
but for a time,) and to establishe a new Law and Covenant, and a new
Testament of his own, that should endure and continue for ever.

The fourth consideration.
AND albeit these things be very wonderful, All particulers foretold of
Christ.
and sufficient to establish any man's belief in the world, when he shall see
them fulfilled, (which shall be the argument of my second Section:) yet
rests not the Scripture here, but passes further, and fore-telleth every
particular act, accident and circumstaunce, that shall fall out of importance
about the Messiah in his coming, incarnation, birth, life, death, and
resurrection. As for example; at what particular time and season he should
appear. Genesis, 49. verse, 10. That he should be borne of a Virgin. Math, 1.
Esaias 7. ver. 14. That the place of his birth should be the Town of Bethleem.
Luke, 2.
Mich. 5, verse 1. That at his birth, all the Infants round about Bethleem
should be slain for his sake. Math, 2,
Jeremy, 31, verse, 15. That the Kings of the East should come and adore
him, Math, 2,
and offer Gold and other gyfts unto him. Psalm, 71. verse, 10. That he
should be presented by his Mother in the Temple of Jerusalem. Luke, 2,
Malach, 3, verse, 1. That he should ^lee into Egypt, and be recalled thence
again. Ose, 11. verse, 2. Esaias, 19, verse, 1. That John Baptist should go
before him, and cry in the Desert. Esaias, 40, verse, 3. Malac. 3. ver. 1.

Math, 5.
After this, that he should begin his own preaching with all humility,
quietness, and clemency of spirit. Math, 4, and 8. Mark, 8.
Esaias, 42, verse, 2. That he should do strange miracles, and heal all
diseases. Esaias, 29, verse, 8. and 35, verse, 5, and 61, verse, 1. That he
should die for the sins of all the world. Math, 27,
Esaias, 53, Daniel, 26. That he should be betrayed by his own Disciple. Psalm,
40, verse, 10, and 54, verse, 14, and 108, verse, 8. That he should be sold
for thirty pieces of silver. Math, 16, and 27
Zachary, 11, verse, 12. That with those thirty pieces, there should be
bought afterward a Field of pot-shardes. Math, 21, 7.
Jeremy, 30. That he should ride into Jerusalem upon an Ass before his
passion. Zachary, 9, verse, 9. That the Jews should beat and buffet his
face, Math, 26,67.
and defile the same with spitting upon him. Esaias, 50, ver. 6. That they
should whyppe, rent and tear his body before they put him to death. Esaias,
53, verse, 2, Psalm, 37, verse, 18. That they should put him to death among
thieves and malefactors. Luke, 22.
Esaias, 53, verse, 12. That they should give him vinegar to drink, divide his
apparel, and cast lottes for his upper garment. Math, 27,
Psalm, 68, verse, 22, and 21, verse, 19. That he should rise again from
death the third day. Math, 28,
Psalm, 15, verse, 19. Ose, 6, ver, 3. That he should ascend to heaven, and
sit at the right hand of God his father for ever. Luke, 24, Acts, 7.
Psalm, 67, verse, 19, and 109, verse, 1.

All these particularities and a number more, were revealed in Scripture
touching the Messiah, some four thousand years, some two thousand, and some
one thousand, and the last of all, above four hundred years before Christ was
borne. Which if we lay together, and do consider withal, how exactlie they
were fulfilled afterward in the person of Christ, as in the next Section shall
be declared: if we add also to this, that we have received these prophecies
and predictions from a Nation that most of al other does hate us, and that the
same are to be seen and read in their Bibles, even word for word as they are
in ours; if you hold in memory also, what invincible proofs were alleged
before in the second chapter, for the infallible truth and certainty of those
Hebrew Scriptures: you shall find, that hardly any thing can be imagined for
manifestation of a truth, before it come to pass, which God has not observed
in fore-shewing the Messiah.

The fifth Consideration.
AND all these considerations are touching the Jews. There remains somewhat
to be said of the Gentiles; Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles.
who albeit they were to receive their principal knowledge in this affayre
from the Jewish Nation, to whom the Messiah was first and principally promised,
and from whom the Gentiles had to expect both their Savior and his Apostles,
as also the Scriptures for testimony and witness of them both, and finally,
all their certain knowledge and sound understanding in the mysteries of
Christ: yet had they also among themselves, some kind of notice and
fore-warning in this matter, which being joined with that which I have set
down before of the Jews, and examined at the light of Gods divine prophecies
before alleged: it will make very much for confirmation of our Christian
verity. And therefore this last consideration, shall be of the foreknowledge
of Gentiles in this behalf.

For better understanding whereof, it is to be noted, that besides al knowledge
of the Messiah, that diverse Gentiles might have by the Hebrew Scriptures, which
( Chap, 2.
as I have showed before,) were in the Greek language diverse ages before Christ
was borne, or by the instruction or conversation of the Jews, with whom many
Pagans did live familiarlie: there remained three ways peculier to the
Gentiles, whereby they received some understanding and fore-warning of this
great mystery. Three particular ways where by the Gentiles might hear of
christ.
The first was, by tradition and writings of their ancestors. The second, by
prophecies of their own. The third, by admonishment of their Idols and
Oracles, especially when the time of Christ's appearaunce drew near.

And for the first way, The first way.
it is evident, that as the Jews received diverse things by succession from
their forefathers, and they again from Moses; and Moses from the Patriarchs,
Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham, (who was the first man from who that whole Nation
proceeded, and in whom they were distinguished from all other people in the
world:) so had the Gentiles and other Nations their succession also of doctrine
and monuments, Tradition of learning among Jews and Gentiles.
even from the beginning; albeit the lower they went, the more corrupt they
were, and more obscured in divine knowledge, by their exercise in Idolatry. So
we know that the Romans had their learning from the Graecians: the Graecians
from the Egyptians: and the Egiptians from the Chaldeans, who were the first
people that received instruction in divine matters from Adam, Methusalem, Noe,
and others of those first and ancient Fathers.

Now then it is to be considered, Eusebius in Chron.
that by consent of Writers, there were three famous men that lived together in
those ancient times; to wit, Abraham, Abraham.
(who descending from HEBER, was the father and beginner of the Jews or
Hebrews:) and with him Job, and one Zoroastres, Job. Zoroastres.
that were not of that lineage of Heber, but as we call them for distinctions
sake, either Heathens or Gentiles, albeit that difference was not the^ in ure.
And of Job, we know by the testimony of his Book, that he was a most holy
and virtuous man. Of Zoroastres, we know only, that he was greatly learned, and
left testimonies there^^ unto his posterity.

This Zoroastres living in Abraham's time, might (by account of Scriptures) see
or speak with Noe. For Abraham was borne threescore years before Noe deceassed.
And Noe was borne above five hundred years before Methusalem died, which
Methusalem had lived two hundred and forty years with our first Father Adam,
that had enjoyed conversation both with GOD and Angels. And thereby (no doubt)
could tell many high and secret mysteries, especially touching Christ, in whom
all his hope for redemption of his posterity did consist. Which mysteries and
hidden knowledge, it is not unlike, but that Abraham, Job, Zoroastres and
others, who lived at that time with them, might receive at the third hand, by
Noe and his children, I mean The Jews have a tradition, that Abraham served
Sem fyfteene years in Chaldaea.
Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, who had lived before the fludde, and had seen
Methusalem, which Methusalem lived (as I said before) so many years with Adam.

Heerehence it is, that in the wrytings of Zoroastres which are yet extant, See
Clem. Alex.. lib. 1. strom. et Orig. lib. 6. contra. Celsum. et Procl. lib. 2.
et 3 in Parm. Plato.
or recorded by other Authors in his name, there be found very many plain
speeches of the Son of God, whom he calls, Secundam mentem, the second mind.
And much more is to be seen in the wrytings of Hermes Trismegistus, (who lived
after in Egypt, and received his learning from this Zoroastres: Trismegistus.
) that these first Heathen Philosophers had manifest understanding of this
second person in Trinity, whom Hermes calls: Mercurius. Herm. in Paema^d
cap. 1, et deincepi
The first begotten son of God: his only son: his dear, eternal,
immutable, and incorruptible son: whose sacred name is ineffable: those are
his words. And after him again among the Graecians, Graecians.
were Orpheus, Hesiodus, and others, that uttered the like speeches of the
son of God; as also the Platonists, whose words and sentences were too-long
to repeat in this place. But he that will see them gathered together at
large, let him read either Origin against Celsus the Heathen, or else S. Cyril
in his first book against Julian the Apostata. And this shall suffice for this
first way, whereby the Gentiles had understanding of Christ.

The prophecies touching Christ among the Gentiles.
For the second thing which I mentioned, is to be understood, that among the
Gentiles there were certain Prophetisses, or women Prophets, called Sibyllae,
which in the Greek tongue (as Lactantius gathers) may signify so much, as
either Counselors to God, or Reuealers of Gods council. Lactan. lib. 1. di^i.
instit. cap. 6
And these women, being endued (as it seems) with a certain spirit of
prophecy, did utter from time to time, (though in such terms as most Gentiles
understood them not,) most wonderful perticularities of Christ to come,
agreeing (as it were) wholly with the Prophets of Israel, or rather setting
down many things in more plain and evident speech then did the other, Of the
Sibyls.
the one of them beginning her Greek meeter in these very words. Know thy God,
which is the son of God, etc. An other of them makes a whole discourse of
Christ in Greek verses called Accrostichi: Lact. lib. 4. instit. cap. 6.
for that the beginning of every verse, is by some Letter appointed in order,
forth of some one sentence that runs through the whole. As for example: the
sentence that passed through the beginning of those verses which now we
talk of, was this S. Augu. translateth all the verses, lib. 18. de ciu. Dei.
cap. 23.
Jesus, Christ, Son of God, Savior, Cross. And there were so many verses in
the whole discourse, as there are Letters in this sentence. The total argument
being, of the incarnation, life, death, glory, and judgment of the Son of
God. And the last two verses of all the meeter, are thus. He that has been
here described by our Accrostike verses: is an immortal Savior, and a King,
that must suffer for our sins.

And for that these prophecies of the Sibylls are of marvelous importance to
confirm the verity of our Christian Religion, The Greek verses of the
Sibyls, of what importance and authority.
and are alleged often for that purpose, by the most grave and learned Fathers
of the primative Church: as for example, by Justinius the Martyr, in his
Apology for Christians; by Origin against Celsus; by Arnobius, and his
Scholar Lactantius, against Gentiles; by S. Cyril, against Julian the
Apostata; by S. Augustine in his City of God; by Eusebius, and Constantine
the Emperor, and other: I will say som-what in this place, for the authority
and credit of these verses, least any man perhaps might imagine (as some
Gentiles in old time would seem to do) that they were devised or invented by
Christians. And the most of my proofs shall be out of a learned See this
Oration in Eusebiu. lib. 4. cap. 32. de vita Constantini. a^ the end.
Oration, written in Latin by the aforesaid Emperor, to a Council of
Prelates in his days: wherein he endeavors to show, the undoubted
authority of these Sibyll prophecies, which he esteemed so much (after
dilligent search made for their credit and sincerity,) as they seem to have
been a great cause of his constant zeal and fervor in Christianity.

The first proof for credit of the Sibylls verses.
First then he shows, that these predictions of the Sibylls, could not be
devised or feigned by Christians, or made after the time of Christ's nativity;
for that Marcus Varro, Varro, lib. de rebus diui. ad C. Caesarem. pont. max.
a most learned Roman, who lived almost a hundred years before Christ,
makes mention at large of the Sibylls, (who in number he says were ten) and
of their wrytings, Countries, and ages: as also of the writers and Authors,
that before his time had left memory of them. And both he and Fenestella,
Fenest. cap. de 15. viris.
(an other Heathen) do affirm, that the wrytinges of these Sibylls, were
gathered by the Romans from all parts of the world, (where they might be
heard of,) and laid up with diligence and great reverence in the Capitole,
under the charge and custody of the High Priest and other Officers, in such
sort, as no man might see or read them, but only certain Magistrates,
called the Fiftine, and much less might any man come to falsify or corrupt
them.

The second proof.
SEcondly he shows, that Sibylla Erithraea, who made the former Acrostike
verses of Christ, testifies of her self, that she lived about six hundred
years after the flud of Noe, and her Countriman Apollidorus Erithraeus and
Varro do report, that she lived before the war of Troy, and prophesied to
the Grecians that went to that war, that Troy should be destroyed. Lactant.
lib, 1 insti^. cap. 6.
Which was more then a thousand years before Christ was borne. Cicero also,
that was slain more then forty years before Christ's nativity, Cicero.
translated into Latin, the former See Cicero of this Acrostike verses of
Sibylla, lib. 2. de diuinatione.
Acrostike verses, as Constantine says, which translation was to be seen in
his works, when Constantine wrote this Oration: so that by no means they
could be devised or brought in by Christians.

The third proof.
THyrdlie he shows, that the same Cicero, in diverse places of his works,
besides the mention of these Acrostike verses, insinuates also an other
prophecy of Sibylla, touching a King that should rise over all the world,
wherewith himself and the Romans were greatly troubled: and therefore in one
place, after a long inuectiue against his enemy Anthony, that would seem to
give credit to that Prophecy: or rather as Cicero does urge against him,
would have had the same fulfilled in Julius Caesar, he concludes thus: Cicero,
lib, 2, de divine, paulo post medium.
Let us deal with the Prelates of our religion, to allege any one thing
rather out of the Books of Sibylla, then a KING, whom neither the Gods nor yet
men, can suffer hereafter to be in Rome.

Cicero lib, 1, ep, fam, ep, 1,2,3 4,5,6,
The like prophecy of Sibylla touching a King, is insinuated by the same
Cicero, in his first book of Epistles to Lentulus: to wit, that See lib, 2,
Oraculorum Sibyl.
when the Romans should restore a King in Egypt by force, then should ensue
the universal King, that should be Lord over Romans and all other. Which
prophecy being much urged by Cato the Tribune, Epist. 5.
against the restoring of He was father to Cleopatra.
Ptolomaeus Auletes late King of Egypt, that for his evil government was
expulsed by his subjects, the matter was thought of such weight by all the Roman
Senate, The fear which the Romans had of the universal King, prophesied by
Sibylla.
(^ mean the sequel of this prophecy,) that whereas otherwise for many
respects, they were greatly inclined to have restored the said Ptolomie: yet
in regard of this Religion, (as they called it) they changed their minds. But
what? could they alter by this the determination of God? No truly; for soon
after, King Ptolomie perceiving the Senators minds to be altered, fled
secretly from Rome to one Gabinius that was Governor of Syria, Dion, libro 39
histor.
and for five Millions of Gold that he promised him, he was by the force of
Gabinius restored: and not long after was Christ borne, according to the
meaning of the Sibyll prophecy.

The fourth proof.
FOurthly, the said Emperor Constantine proves the authority of these
Sibylls verses, for that Augustus Caesar, before our Savior Christ was borne,
had such regard of them, that he laid them up in more straighter order
then before, (according as Suetonius a Heathen, in his life reports,) under
the Altar of Apollo, Sueto. tranq, cap 3, de vit. Augu.
in the hill Palatine: where no man might have the sight of them but by
special license; which license Constantine proves that Virgill the Poet had,
for that he was in high favor with Augustus. The prophecies of Sibylla
alleged by Virgil.
And therefore in a certain Eclogue or composition of verses, that he made in
praise of a young child named Saloninus, newely borne to Asinius Pollio,
Augustus great freende, (or as other take it,) of Marcellus a little boy, that
was Nephew to Augustus by his sister Octauia; or rather of the^ both, for
adulation of Augustus: he applies (I say) to one or both of these young
Infants, the whole prophecy, which he had read in the verses of Sibylla,
touching the birth of Christ, and of the peace, grace, and golden world that
should come with him. Upon which subject he begins thus.

Virgil. Eclog. 4,
Vltima Cumaei venit iam temporis aetas:
Magnus ab integro saeculorum nascitur ordo:
Christ's pre-ordination.
Iam redit and virgo: rediunt Saturnia regna.
That is, now is come the last age prophesied by Sibylla, called Cumaea: now
comes to be fulfilled the great ordinance and providence of God, appointed
from the beginning of the world, (these were Sibylles words:) now comes the
Virgin, and the first golden days of Saturnus shall return again.

Thus much translated Virgil out of Sibylla, touching the eternal
determination of God, for Christ's coming into this world: as also of his
Mother the Virgin: and of the infinite blessings that should appear with
him. Now ensues in the same Poet, what Sibylla had said for Christ's actual
nativity.

Iam noua progenies caelo dimittitur alto: Christ's birth.

Chara Deum soboles. etc.
Now a new progeny or offspring is sent down from Heaven: the dearly
beloved issue or child of the Gods. And note here, that Sibylla said plainly:
Chara Dei soboles, the dearly beloved son of God, and not of Gods; but that
Virgill would follow the style of his time. And thirdly, he sets down out
of Sibylla, the effect and cause of this son of Gods nativity, in these
words.

Te duce, si qua manent, sceleris vestigia nostri: Christ's cause of coming.

Irrita perpetua, soluent formidine terras.
That is, thou being our leader, or Captain: the remnant of our sins shall be
made void, or taken away, and shall deliver the world for ever from fear for
the same.

These are Virgils words translated (as I said) out of Sibylla. And now
consider you in reason, whether these prophecies might be applied (as Virgil
applied the^) to those poor children in Rome, or no, who dyed soon after this
flattery of Virgill, without doing good, either to themselves or to others?
Albeit (perhaps) in this point, the Poet be to be excused, in that he being
not able to imagine what the Sibyl should mean: made his advantage thereof in
applying the same to the best pleasing of Augustus.

These then are the proofs, which Constantine used for the credit and
authority of the Sibyll verses. And of Sibylla Erithraea in particular, that
made the Accrostike verses before mentioned, of Christ's death and passion: he
concludes in these words; Constantines opinion of the spirit of Sibylla.
Erythraea, orat, ad caetum, Sanct, cap. 18
These are the things which fell from heaven, into the mind of this Virgin to
foretell. For which cause, I am induced to account her for blessed, whom our
Savior did vouchsafe to choose for a Prophet, to denounce unto the world, his
holy providence toward us. And we may consider in this whole dyscourse of
Constantine, for Lactantius.
who were skillful, and would be diligent in the search of such an antiquity
of importance: especially Lactantius, that was Master to his son Crispus,
and who most of any other Author, recites and confirms the said Sibyls
verses: and Eusebius Caesariensis, that wrote the Ecclesiastical history and
See Eusebi. lib. 4. cap. 32, de vita Constant. how this Oration was first
written in latin and translated into Greek.
recorded this Oration of Constantine therein. And finally we may consider,
that Constantine was the first public Christian Emperor, and lived within
three hundred years after Christ, when the Records of the Romans were yet
whole to be seen. He was a religious, wise, and grave Emperor: and therefore
would never have bestowed so much labor, to confirm such a thing, at such a
time, to such an audience; had not the matter been of singular importance. And
thus much of the second point, touching Prophets among the Gentiles.

Of the confession of Oracles concerning Christ's coming.
THere remains only a word or two to be spoken of the third; which is, of
the confession of devils and Oracles, concerning Christ's coming; especially
when the time of his appearance drew near, and that they began to foretell
his power and virtue. Wherein as I might allege diverse examples, recorded by
the Gentiles themselves: so for that I have been some what long in the former
points, and shall have occasion to say more of this matter in another place
hereafter: I will touch only here two Oracles of Apollo concerning this
matter. The one whereof, was to a Priest of his own, that demanded him of true
Relgion, and of God; to whom he answered thus in Greek. The first Oracle.
O thou unhappy Priest, why do thou ask me of God, that is the father of
all things: and of this most renoumed Kings dear and only son, and of the
spirit that contains all etc. Alas, Suidas in Thulis. et Porphy. et Plutarch.
de oracul.
that spirit will enforce me shortly, to leave this habitation and place of
Oracles.

The other Oracle was to Augustus Caesar, The second Oracle.
even about the very time that Christ was ready to appear in flesh. For
whereas the said Emperor now drawing into age, Suidas in vita August. Niceph.
lib. 1. hist. cap. 17.
would needs go to Delphos, and there learn of Apollo, who should reign
after him, and what should become of things when he was dead; to which demand,
Apollo for a great space would make no answer, notwithstanding: Augustus had
been very liberal, in making the great sacrifice called Hecatombe. But in the
end, when the Emperor began to iterate his sacrifice again, and to be
instant for an answer: Apollo, (as it were) enforced, uttered these strange
words unto him. An Hebrew child, that rules over the blessed Gods,
commands me to leave this habitation, and out of hand to get me to hell.
But yet do you depart in silence from our Aultars. Thus much was Apollo
enforced to utter of his own misery, and of the coming of the Hebrew boy
that should put him to banishment. But yet the deceytfull spirit to hold still
his credit, would not have the matter revealed to many. Whereupon, Augustus
falling into a great musing with himself, what this answer might import:
returned to Rome, and builded there an Altar in the Capitole, Niceph. lib. 1.
hist cap. 17.
with this Latin inscription (as Nicephorus affirms) Ara primogeniti Dei:
The Altar of Gods first begotten Son.

Thus then have I declared, how that the coming of Gods son into the world,
The conclusion of this first Section.
was fore-tolde both to Jew and Gentile, by all means that possibly in reason
might be devised; that is, by prophecies, signs, figures, ceremonies,
tradition, and by the confession of the devils themselves. Not only that his
coming was fore-tolde, but also, why, and for what cause he was for to come,
that is, to be the only Savior of the world: to die for the sins of all
men: to ordain a new Law, and more perfect Commonwealth. How also he was to
come: to wit, in man's flesh: in likeness of sin: in poverty and humility.
The time likewise of his appearance was prefigured, together with the manner of
his birth, life, actions, death, resurrection, and ascension. And finally,
nothing can be more desired for the foreknowledge of any one thing to come:
then was delivered and uttered concerning the Messiah, before that ever Christ
or Christians were talked of in the world. Now then remains it to consider
and examine, The argument of the two sections following.
whether these particularities, foretold so long ago of the Messiah to come,
do agree in Christ, who^ we acknowledge for the true Messiah. And this shall
be the subject or argument of all the rest of our speech in this Chapter.

How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Savior Christ, at his being
upon earth. SECT. 2.
ALbeit in the points before recited, which are to be fulfilled in the Messiah
at his coming, we have some controversy and dysagreement with the Jew, as
has been showed; yet our principal contention in the^ all, Our controversy
with Gentiles.
is with the Gentiles and Heathen, that believe no Scriptures. For that in
diverse of the former Articles, the Jew stands with us, and for us; and
offers his life in defense thereof, as far forth as if he were a Christian.
In so much, that the Gentile oftentimes, is enforced to marvel, when he sees
a people, so extremely bent one against another, as the Jews are against
Christians: and yet do stand so peremptorily in defense of those very
principles, which are the proper causes of their disagreement.

But hereunto the Jew makes answer, Our controversy with the Jews.
that his dysagreement from us, is in the application of those principles. For
that in no wise he will allow, that they were, or may be verified in Jesus.
And herein he stands against us, much more obstinately then does the
Gentile. For that the Gentile, as soon as he comes once to understand and
believe the prophecies of Scripture, he makes no doubt or difficulty in the
application thereof: for that he sees the same most evidently fulfilled in our
Savior Christ. Which is the cause, that few or no Gentiles since Christ's
appearaunce, have come to be Jews, but that presently also they passed over to
be Christians.

But the Jew by no means will be moved to yield, The obstinacy of the
Jews.
albeit he have neither scripture, nor reason, or probability for his
defense. Which among other things, is a very great argument to prove, that
Jesus was the true Messiah indeed, seeing that among the marks of the true
Messiah set down by Gods Prophets, this was one: that he should be refused of
the Jewish Nation. Heerehence a^e those words of the holy Ghost so long before
uttered; Psalm, 118.
The stone which the The Jews are the builders, who take upon them to build
Gods house. Math, 21. Esaias, 6. Deute, 28,
builders refused, is made the head stone of the corner, this is done by God,
and is marvelous in our eyes. Heerehence is that great complaint of Esaias,
touching the incredulity and obstinacy of his people, against their Messiah
at his coming, which Moses also long before Esaias expressed most effectually.

It makes then, not a little for our cause (gentle Reader, The Jews
obstinacy against us, a great argument for us.
) that the Jewish Nation is so wilfully bent against us: and that they refused
Christ so peremptorily at his being among them. For whom soever that Nation
should receive and acknowledge: it were a great argument by scripture, that he
were not indeed the true Messiah. But yet to demonstrate to the world what
little show of reason they have, in standing thus against their own
salvation, and in refusing Christ as they do: I will in as great brevity as I
may, run over the chief points that passed at his being upon earth, and
thereby examine by the testimonies of his greatest enemies, whether the
fore-sayd prophecies and all other signs, which have been from the beginning,
to foretell unto us the true Messiah, were fulfilled in him and his actions,
or no.

And for that the matters are many and diverse, that will come herei^ to be
handle^^ I will for order sake, The division of this section into four
considerations.
reduce all to four considerations. Whereof the first shall be, touching the
time fore-prophecied of the coming of Messiah, and whether the same agreed
with Christ's nativity or no. The second shall be of diverse particulars that
passed in Christ's incarnation, birth, circumcision, and other accidents,
until the time that he began to preach. The third shall be of his life,
conversation, miracles, and doctrine. The fourth and last, shall be of his
passion, death, resurrection, and ascension. In all which (as I said before) I
will use no one Author or testimony of our own side, The testimonies heer^
used.
for approouing any thing that is in controversy between us: but all shall
pass by trial, either of their own scriptures, or of manifest force and
consequence of reason, or else, by express record of our professed enemies.

The first Consideration.
FOR the first then concerning the time, The time appointed.
which is the principal and head of all the rest: it is to be noted, that by
consent of all Writers, both Pagan, Jewish and Christian, JESUS, (whom we
believe and confess to be true CHRIST) was borne the twentie-fiue day of
December, in the end of the fortie-one year of the reign of the Emperor
Augustus Caesar, which was fifteen years before his reign ended. Also in the
beginning of the thirtie-three year of Herod's reign in Jury, which was four
years and more before his death. And from the beginning of the world, as See
Eusebius in Chron.
some account, four thousand, one hundred, and ninetie-nine. And as others do
account it, four thousand, foure-score, and nine, for that in this point
between the Hebrews and the Graecians, there is a difference of some little
more then a hundred years, concerning their reckoning.

The state of the world at Christ's nativity, was this. The general state of
the world at Christ's coming.
The three Monarchies of the Assyrians, Persians, and Graecians, were past
over, and ended: and the Romans were entered into the fourth, that was greater
then any of the rest, according to the prophecy of Daniell, Daniel, 2.
five hundred years before. Octauius Caesar, surnamed Augustus, Sueton, tranq.
et Aurel. victor. et ali^. in vita Augusti.
after five civil wars by himself waged, and after infinite broils and
bloodshed in the world, reigned peaceably alone for many years together: and
in token of an universal peace over all the earth, he caused the Temple gates
of Ianus to be shut, according to the custom of the Romans in such cases;
albeit this had happened but twice before, from the building of Rome unto that
time. And the very same day that Christ was borne in Jury, Augustus commanded
in Rome ( Oros. lib. 6. his.. cap. 22.
as afterward was observed) that no man should call him Lord, thereby to
signify the free liberty, rest, joy, and security wherein all men were after
so long miseries, which by continual wars the world had suffered.

By this we gather first, The first proof.
that this time of Christ's birth, agreed exactly with the prophecy so long
before set down in Daniell, The Roman Monarchy.
(who lived in the first Monarchy,) that after his time there should be three
Monarchies more, Daniel, 2.
and the last biggest of all: at whose appearing the Messiah should come, and
build up Gods kingdom throughout all the world.

Secondly, we see that fulfilled, The second proof.
which Esaias the Prophet, above a hundred years before Daniell, foretold that
at the coming of Christ, The peace of all the world. Esaias, 32, ver, 18. and 9.
ver, 6,7.
people should sit in the beauty in peace. And again; there should be no
end of peace. And yet further: he shall be Prince of peace. And King David
long before him again: In his days there shall rise justice, and abundance of
peace. Psalm, 71.
Which thing, though especially it be to be understood, of the internal peace
and tranquillity of our minds and souls: yet considering that external peace
also was necessary for a time, for the quiet planting and publishing of
Christ's Gospel: and seeing that the same was brought to pass most
miraculously upon the sudden, when in reason men might least expect the same,
for the infinite wars wherein the world a little before had been: and by
reason of the Roman Monarchy so freshlie established, (which in their
beginnings are wont to be troublesome:) this peace (I say) can not be but a
great argument, that this was the proper time of the Messiah his coming. And
thus much for the state of the world in general.

The third proof.
And now for the particular state of Jury at Jesus nativity, thus it was:
according as Josephus the Jew, The Scepter of Judah.
(who was borne within five years after Christ's passion) describes the same.
One Herod a stranger, whose Father called His Grandfather was a Sextane in
Apollos temple, and his father was brought up among thieves in Idumaea.

Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 6. ex Aphricano. Joseph. lib. 14. antiq. cap. 2.


Antipater, came out of Idumaea, was risen to acquaintance and favor with the
Romans, partly by his said fathers means, who was, (as Josephus words are) a
well monied man, industrious, and factious: and partly by his own diligence
and ambition, being of himself, both witty, beautiful, and of excellent
rare qualities. By which commendations, he came at length to marry the Daughter
of Hyrcanus King of Jury, that was descended linially of the house of David,
and Trybe of Judah. And by this marriage, obtained of his Father in Law to be
Governor of the Province of Galilie, under him. But Hyrcanus afterward
falling into the hands of the Parthyans, that carried him into ^^rthya: Herod
ran away to Rome, The first rising of Herod Ascolonita.
and there by the special help and favor of Anthony, that ruled in company
together with Octauius, he obtained to be created King of Jury, without any
title or interest in the world. For that not only his said Father in Law
Hyrcanus, was yet alive in Parthia: but also his younger brother Aristobulus,
and three of his sons named Antigonus, Alexander, and Aristobulus, and diverse
others of the blood royal in Jury.

Herod then, having procured by these means to be King of Jury: Josephus.
lib. 15. antiq. cap. 9.11.
procured first to have in his hands the foresaid King Hyrcanus, and so put
him to death: he also brought to the same end, his younger brother
Aristobulus, and his three sons likewise. The most horrible murders committed
by Herod.
He put to death also, his own Wife Mariamnes, that was King Hyrcanus
Daughter, as also Alexandra her Mother: and soon after two of his own sons,
which he had by the said Mariamnes, for that they were of the blood royal of
Judah. Libr^. 17. cap. 10.
And a little after that again, he put to death his third son named
Antipater. He caused also to be slain at one time, Libro. 15. cap. 1
forty of the cheifest noble men of the Trybe of Judah. And as Phylo the Jew
writes (that lived at the same time with him) he put to death all the
Sanhedrin, Philo lib. de tempore.
that is, the seauentie and two Senators of the tribe of Judah, that ruled the
peo^^^. He killed the chief of the sect of the Pharisees. He burned the
Genealogies of all the Kings and Princes of the house of Judah: Joseph. lib, 14.
cap. 2.
and caused one Nicholaus Damascenus an Historiographer that was his servant,
to draw out a petidegree for him and his line, as though he had descended from
the ancient Kings of Judah. He translated the High priesthood and sold it to
strangers. A pattern of an ambicious Tyrant.
And finally, he so rased, dyspersed, and mangled the house of Judah: as no one
jot of government, dignity, or principality remained therein. And when he had
done all this, the^ was JESUS of the same house and line of Judah, borne in
Bethleem, the proper City of David, which David was the founder and first
Author of Regalitie in Judah.

Now then, consider the prophecy of Jacob, The prophecy of Jacob touching
the scepter of Judah.
concerning the particular time of Christ's appearaunce, almost two thousand
years before these things fell out. Gene. 49,
Come hither my children, (said he) that I may tell you the things which are to
happen in the later days. etc. The Scepter shall not be taken from Judah,
until he come, who is to be sent: and he shall be the expectation of Nations.
Which prophecy, that it was fulfilled now at Christ's nativity, when Herod
had extinguished all government in Judah, no man can deny, that will
acknowledge the things set down before, which are recorded by Writers both
of that time, and of the Jewish Nation and Religion themselves. And that it
never was fulfilled from David's days, That the scepter never failed in Judah
until Herod came.
(who began the government of the house of Judah) until this time, appears
plainly by all Hystories and Records, both divine and profane. For that from
David, 1, Reg, 16.
(who was the first King) unto Zedechias that was the last, and died in the
captivity of Babylon: 4. Reg. 29. Ierem, 37.
the Scripture shows how all the Kings descended of the house of Judah. And
during the time of their captivity in Babylon, (which was seauenty years) the
Jews were always permitted to choose themselves a Governor of the house of
Judah, Thalm. in tract. Sanhed. ca. Dine^ Manmonoth. Rab. Moses Egip. in praesat.
whom they called RESCHGALVTA. And after their delyuerie from Babylon,
Maimonim. Esd. l. 1. ca. 1.2.3 Match. lib. 1. ca^ 2.3.
Zorobabel was their Captain of the same Trybe: and so others after him,
until you come to the Macchabees, who were both Captains and Priests: Rab.
Kimhi. com. in Agg. Joseph. lib. 13. ^^ 14, antiq,
for that they were by the mothers side, of the Tribe of Judah, and by the
fathers side, of the Trybe of Leui, as Rabbi Kimhi holds. And from these men
down to Hyrcanus and Aristobulus whom Herod slew: there continued still the
same line, as Josephus declares. So that by this prophecy it is evident, that
Jesus was borne at the proper time appointed for the Messiah, when there was
neither King nor Captain, nor High Priest, nor Counselor, nor any one
Governor of the house and tribe of Judah, left in Jury.

The fourth proof.
An other prophecy there is, no less evident then the former, wherein it is
affirmed, that the Messiah should come before the second Temple of Jerusalem,
The destruction of the second Temple.
(that was builded by Zorobabel after the Jews were returned from their
captivity in Babylon,) should be destroyed by the Romans. For better
understanding whereof, it is to be noted, that the Temple of Jerusalem was
builded twice; 3, Reg, 6. and 7. 2, Chron 3. Eusebius in Chron. Clem. lib. 1.
strom.
first by Solomon, which lasted about four hundred and fortie-two years; and
then it was burned and destroyed by Nabuchodonozor King of Babylon. Wherefore
about seauentie years after, it was builded again by Zorobabel, 4, Reg, 25. 1.
Esdras, 1, 3, 4.
who reduced the Jews from Babylon, and so it continued, until it was
destroyed the second time by Tytus, son to Vespasian the Roman Emperor,
about forty and six years after our Savior Christ his ascension. At what
time it had lasted from Zorobabel almost six hundred years: and from Solomon,
above a thousand.

And as in the time of the second building, the people of Israel were poor,
1. Esdras. 5. and 6.
and much afflicted in respect of their late banishment, (though much assisted
to this work by the liberality and munificencie of Darius King of Babylon:
The building of the second Temple, less gorgeous then the first.
) so was the building and workemanshyppe of this second Temple, nothing
comparable, for excellency to the first, which was builded by Solomon, 1.
Esdras. 5.
when the Jews were in the flower of their glory and riches. This testifies
Aggeus the Prophet, who was one of the builders, and he testified the same to
Zorobabel and to the rest of those that were with him, by Gods own
appointment, in these words, Agge. 2.
The word of God was made to Aggeus the Prophet. Tell Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel Captain of Judah, and Jesus the son of Iosedec high Priest, and the
rest of the people. Who is there left of you, that saw this Temple in his
first glory, (before our transmigration, and what say you to this, which now
we see? is it not in our eyes, as though it were not at all? That is, is it not
as though it were a thing of nothing, in comparison of the former Temple, which
Solomon builded?

Thus said Aggeus by Gods commission, of the material building of this
second Temple. And yet to comfort the Jews with all, he was commanded
presently in the same Chapter to say thus. Agge. 2.
Comfort thy self Zorobabel, and comfort thy self Jesus thou son of Iosedec
high Priest, and comfort your selves all ye people of the earth, says the
Lord God of hosts: do ye the things which I couenaunted with you, when ye
came forth of the Land of Egypt, and fear not, for that my spirit shall be
among you. Thus says the Lord God of hosts: This he said for that the three
Monarchies ensued, wherein there was continual war and bloodshed.
a little time yet remains, when I will move both heaven and earth, both sea
and land, with all Countries in the world. And then shall come the DESIRED OF
ALL NATIONS; and I will fill his house (or Temple) with glory, says the Lord
God of hosts. Silver is mine, and gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts:
great shall be the glory of this last house or temple, more then of the first,
says the Lord God of hosts. Hitherto are the words of God by Aggeus, and the
often repetition, of the Lord God of hosts, is to signify the certainty and
great weight of the matter promised.

Now consider then, that where as God had said immediately before, that this
second Temple was nothing in respect of the first, for pomp and riches of the
material building, (which the old men in the book of Esdras do testify by
their weeping, 1. Esdras. 3.
(when they saw this second and remembered the first) yet now God says, that
Gold and Silver is his own: (as though he made no account of the abundance
thereof in the former Temple, or of the want of the same in this,) and that
notwithstanding the poverty of the second building, yet, shall it be filled
and replenished with glory: and that in such sort, as it shall far pass in
glory the former: and that shall be, as both here is expressed, and other
where most plainly,) by the coming of our Savior This was fulfilled when
Christ was personally, and taught in the Temple. Luke, 1,2, 19. Math, 21, 26.
etc.
Christ into the second Temple, which shall be a greater dignity, then any
dignity whatsoever was found in the first building of Salomons Temple.

Concerning which point, Prerogatives of the first Temple.

Rab Samuel tract. Sanhed. in Thalm. Heirosol. Rab. Aba in lib. dierum.


it is to be considered, that the learned Jews, besides the material
difference of building before mentioned, do note five things of great
importance to have been wanting in the second Temple, which were in the
first. To wit, the fire sent from heaven to burn to Holocaustes; The glory of
God (or Angels) appearing Urim and Thumim. All which great wants thing,
Malachie that lived at the same time when the second Temple was in building
confirms more expressly, in these words: Malachie. 3.
Behold, I send my This Christ interpreted of S. John Baptist, Math, 11.
Angel, and he shall prepare the way before my face. And straight after, shall
come to this Temple, the Lord or Ruler whom ye seek, and the MESSENGER OF THE
TESTAMENT whom you desire. Behold, he comes says the Lord of hosts, and who
can imagine the day of his coming? or who can stand or abide to see him? for
he shall be as a purging fire, etc.

By all which is made evident, that Christ must come and appear in the second
Temple before it be destroyed, (as Jesus did,) and therefore he cannot be now
to come, seeing the said Temple was destroyed above one thousand and five
hundred years past, by the Romans, as has been said. Which destruction
and final desolation, was prophesied by Daniel, to ensue soon after the birth
and passion of Christ, in these words. D^niel. 9. The second Temple to be
destroyed presently after Christ's passion.
After sixty and two hebdomades, Christ shall be slain: and a people with
their Captain to com, shall destroy the City, and the Sanctuary, and the
end thereof shall be vastitie or spoil. And after the war ended, there
shall ensue the appointed desolation. Which prophecy to have fallen out
lytterally about forty years after Jesus was put to death, when Jerusalem was
destroyed, and the Temple overthrown by Titus; the story of Josephus the
learned Jew, Joseph. de bello Iudaico lib. 6.
who was Captain against Titus in that war, does manifestly and at large
declare.

And for that we have made mention here of Daniels prophecy, The fyft proof.
The 72. Hebdomades.
concerning the particular time of Christ's coming and of his death, which
confirms the purpose we treat of so perspicuously, as nothing can be said
more evident: it shall not be amiss, to examine the same before we pass any
further. For better conceiving whereof, it is to be understood, that this
Greek word Hebdomada, (signifieng seven) does some-time import a week or
seven days, according to our common use, Two kinds of weeks.
and then it is called in Scripture Hebdomada dierum, a week of days: as in
Daniel the tenth Chapter, and the second verse; where the Prophet says of
himself, that he did mourn three weeks of days. But at other times, it
signifies the space of seven years, and is called in scripture Hebdomada
annorum, a week of years. As in Leuiticus where it is said; Leui. 25. vide
etiam cap. 23. et alibi passim.
Thou shall number unto thee seven weeks of years, that is, seven times
seven, which make forty and nine years.

Now then it is certain, that Daniell in the prophecy before alleged, where
he assigns sixtie-two weeks to the time of Christ's death, could not mean
weeks of days: for that he appoints only seven weeks, to the
rebuilding of the City of Jerusalem, of the Temple, and of the walls about;
which were not ended but in forty and nine years after, as may be gathered by
the books of Esdras: which fortie-nine weeks, do make just seven weeks of
years. Libro. 1. et 2.
And therefore it is certain, that such Hebdomades of years, are meant here
by Daniell in all the prophecy.

First then, when the Angel came to comfort him, and to open unto him secrets
for the time to come: he said these words; Daniel, 9. verse, 23.
Mark my speech and understand the vision. The seauentie hebdomades, or
we^kes, are shortened, (or hastened) upon thy people, and upon thy holy
City: to the and all preuarication and sin may take an end, and iniquity
be blotted out, and everlasting justice be brought in place thereof: to the
end that visions and prophecies may be fulfilled, Jeremy, 25. and 29.
and the HOLY OF HOLIES, may be anointed. In which words, it seems that the
Angel did allude by naming seauentie, Why the Angel named 70, Hebdomades in
this place.
unto the seauentie years of captivity, prophesied by Jeremy: after which
ended, the people should be delivered from their temporal bondage in Babylon.
And therefore Daniell now being in that place, and perceiving the same time
to be expired; prayed to GOD with great instance, to fulfill his promise made
by Jeremy. Whereto the Angel answered, that it should be done. And as after
the expiration of seauentie years, God was now to deliver them from the
bodily captivity of Babylon: so was he also after seauentie Hebdomades more,
to deliver them from bondage of sin and preuarication, and that by the
anointed MESSIAH, which is indeed the Holy of all Holies.

This (I say) may be the reason of naming seauentie Hebdomades, thereby to
allude to the number of the seauentie years of that Babylonicall servitude. For
that immediately after, the Angel appoints the whole exact number, to be
threescore and nine Hebdomades, that is, seven to the building of the City
and Temple, and sixtie-two from that to the death of Christ, in these words.
Daniell, 9. verse, 25.
Know thou and mark, that from the end of this speech, to the time that
Jerusalem shall be builded, and unto Christ the Captain, there shall be
hebdomades seven, and hebdomades sixty two: The exact number of weeks from
the building of the second Temple, to the death of Christ, 62.
and the streets and walls (of Jerusalem) shall be builded again, though
with much difficulty of the times: and after sixty and two Hebdomades, Christ
shall be slain. And the people that shall deny him, shall not be his. etc. And
then unto consummation and end, shall persevere desolation.

Now then, if we put these years together; which are here mentioned by
Daniell: that is, first the seven Hebdomades^ which make forty and nine
years, and then the threescore and two, from the restoration of Jerusalem,
The account of Daniels weeks.
which make four hundred, thirty and four more: we shall find the whole
number to be four hundred, and eyghtie three years. Which being begun from
the first year of Cyrus^ as some will, (for that he first determined the Jews
reduction,) or from the second years of Darius, as others will, (for that he
confirmed and put the same in execution: (or from the twenty year of the
said Darius, for that then, he made a new Edict in the favor of Nehemias;
and sent him into Jury: every way they will end in the reign of Herod and
Augustus, under whom Christ was borne, or in the reign of Tyberius Caesar,
under whom he suffered. And by no interpretation in the world, can it be
avoided, but that this time appointed by Daniell, is now out, above a
thousand and five hundred years past, while yet the Temple stood, and was not
put to desolation. And therefore of necessity, Christ must be come about that
time, and never more hereafter to be looked for.

The sixth proof.
The traditions and observations of the old Jews themselves, do meruailouslie
confirm this belief of ours, The traditions of Rabines.
for that they all did run to this one point, that about the time of Augustus
his reign, (wherein Jesus was borne) the Messiah should appear. It is often
repeated in the Thalmud: Thalm. tract. Sandr. cap. helec. et alibi.
that one Elyas left this tradition, that the world should endure six
thousand years; that is, two thousand before the Law of Moses, two thousand
under the same Law, and two thousand after that, under the Messiah. Which
last two thousand years; by all computation, could not begin much from the
birth of Jesus. And the Rabines a great while agone, complained in their
Thalmud, that there seemed to them in those days, Thalm. in tract. Auodazara.
seven hundred and foure-teene years past, since Christ by the Scriptures,
should have appeared: and therefore they do marvel why God so long
deferreth the same.

An other observation they have upon the words of Esaias; Esaias, 9, ver, 6: An
observation of the Cabalistes.
Paruulus natus est nobis: a little child is borne unto us. In which words, for
that they find the Hebrew Letter Mem, to be shut in the midst of a word;
(which is strange in that tongue, for that Mem is wont to be open in the
midst of words, and shut only in the end:) they gather many secrets. And
among other, that seeing Mem signifies six hundred years: Thalm. in lib.
Sabbath. et in tract. Sanhedrin.
so long it should be after Esaias, until the time of Christ. Which account of
theyrs falls out so just: Esaias, 7.
that if you reckon the years from Achaz King of Judah, in whose time Esaias
spoke these words, until the time of King Herod, Math. 2.
under whom Christ was borne: you shall perceive the number to fail in little
or nothing.

A much like observation has Rabbi Moses, the son of Maimon, The observation
of Rabbi Moses.
(whom the Jews do hold in extreme great reverence, calling him, the Doctor
of justice,) in his Epistle to his Countrymen of Africa, Rab. Mos. Ben.
Maimon. ep. ad Iudaeos African.
concerning the time of Christ's appearaunce. Which he thinks to be past,
according to the Scriptures, above a thousand years in his days; (he lived
about the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred, and forty,) but that GOD
deferreth his manifestation for their sins. To which purpose also,
appertains the tradition of one Elias, (as Rabbi Iosue reports it in the
Thalmud, Rab. Ios^^. Ben. Leui. in Thal. tract. Sanhed. cap. haelaec.
) that the Messiah was to be borne indeed, (according to the Scripture,) before
the destruction of the second Temple; for that Esaias says of the Sinagogue;
Esaias, 66. verse, 7.
Before she was with child, she brought forth: and before the grief of
travail came, she was delivered of a man child. That is, (says he) before the
Sinagogue was afflicted and put to desolation by the Romans, she brought
forth the Messiah. But yet (says he) this Messiah for our sins, does hyde
himself for a time in the Sea and other desert places, Christ hydeth himself
in the Sea.
until we be worthy of his coming.

To the like effect is the observation of the Thalmud it self, The observation
of the Thalmud.

Thalm. tract. Sanhed. cap. hel^^ Rab. Iohanan. Rab. Iudae. Rab. Nehorai. etc.


and of diverse Rabbines therein, concerning the wicked manners of men that
should be at Christ's appearance upon earth, of whom they do pronounce these
words; The wise men in Israel, shall be extinguished: the learning of our
Scribes and Pharisees shall be putrified: the schools of Divinity shall be
stews at that time. Which thing, Josephus that lived in the same age with
Christ, affirms to be fulfilled in the time of Herod: Joseph. lib. 20. antiq.
cap, 6. et 8. et lib. 6. de bello. Iud. 15. et lib, 7. cap. 9.
in so much, that if the Romans had not destroyed the^, without doubt (says
he) either the earth would have opened and swallowed them down, or else fire
from heaven would have consumed them.

All then runs to this end, The seventh proof. Foreboding.
both by Scripture, tradition, observation, and instinct of God himself: that
about Herod's time the true Messiah should be borne. And hereof came that common
and public fame, that is recorded by Tacitus, Suetonius, and Josephus, Tacit,
lib. 21. Sueton. in vita Vesp.

Joseph de bello Iudai. lib. 7. cap. 12.


(which was also written in open sight, upon the cheifest Tower of the City
of Jerusalem;) that out of Jury should rise, A general Lord of the
universal world. Which prophecy, as the Romans either contemned, or turned
an other way, applying the same afterward to the Emperor Vespasian: so the
Jews understood it of their Messiah, and Herod feared the matter greatly;
and for that, was so watchful to extinguish the line of David as has been
already showed.

The eight proof.
Hereof also it did proceed, that the Magi, or wise men of the East, attended
so dilligently about that time, to expect the star that Balaam had promised
at the coming of this King. The general expectation of the people.
Heere-hence also it was, that the whole people of Jury, remained so attent at
this time, more then ever before or since, in expecting the Messiah. Whereupon,
as soon as ever they heard of I. Baptist in the Desert: John, 1.
they ran unto him, asking if he were Christ? As afterward also they flocked to
Jesus, demanding; Art thou he which is to come: or do we expect an other?
which words import the great expectation wherein that people remained in those
days. Neither wanted that expectation in the chief Governors themselves: as
may appear by that speech of theyrs to Jesus; John, 10.
How long will thou kill us (with this expectation?) if thou be Christ, tell us
plainly.

Of which fame, expectation, and greedy desire of the people, Diverse false
Christ's did rise in Jury.
diverse deceivers took occasion to call themselves the Messiah in those days:
and the people followed them presently: which thing had not happened in any age
before. And among other, there is named one Judas Gaulonites, Acts, 5. Joseph.
lib. 17. ca. 8. et lib. 18. cap. 1. et 2. et lib. 20. cap. 2. et 6.
or Galilaeus (as S. Luke calls him,) and an other Judas, the son of
Ezechias, both of them very wicked and licentious fellows. One also called
Atonges, a Sheepeheard: and two other, named Theudas and Egyptius, most notable
deceivers. And above all, there was one Barcozbam, Thalm. tract. Sanh. cap.
helec. Rab^ Mos. Ben. Maim. in Sententiis.
(who as the Thalmud affinneth) for thirty years together was received for
the Messiah, by the Rabines them selves, until at last they slew him, for that
he was not able to deliver them from the Romans. Which facility in the people
when Herod saw: Nicol. Damscenus. Joseph. lib. 14. antiq. cap. 2.
he caused Nicholaus Damascenus (as I noted before,) to devise a petidegree for
him, from the auncientest Kings of Judah; and so he, as well as other, took
upon him to be the Messiah, whom diverse carnal Jews, that expected the
Messiah to be a magnificent King, (as Herod was) would seem to believe, and
divulgate abroad, and thereof in the Gospel, they are thought to have been
called Herodians: that is, Math, 22. Mark, 3. and 12.
Herodians or followers of Herod, who came to tempt Christ, with the Scribes
and Pharisees.

Wherefore to conclude at length, The conclusion of this first consideration of
the time.
this weighty point of the time of Christ's appearing; seeing that about the
birth of Jesus under Herod's reign, there co^curred so many signs and
arguments together: as the general peace of the Roman Empire; the defection
of the line and regiment of Iuda^ the open decay of the second Temple; the
just calculatio^ of Daniels Hebdomades; the attestation of Oracles; the
observation of Rabbines; the public fame and expectation of all the Jews;
together with the palpable experience of more then fifteen hundred years
past, since Jesus appeared, wherein we see the Jewish people in vain do expect
an other Messiah, they being dispersed over all the world, without Temple,
Law, Sacrifice, Prophet, or promise for their redemption, (which never
happened unto them till after Jesus death, for that in all other their
banishments, captiuities and afflictions, they had some prophecy, consolation,
or promise for their delivery.) These things all (I say) considered and put
together: we may most undoubtedly and assuredly conclude, that Jesus was borne
at the just time appointed, and foretold by the spirit of GOD; and
consequently, that he only was the true Messiah and Savior of the world, which
yet shall better appear, by examination of other things that are to follow.

The second Consideration.
IN the second consideration, there come to be weighed these points
following; Christ his birth.
the line and stock of Jesus; his manner of conception; the place of his
birth; his circumcision and name; his adoration by the Magi; his presentation
in the Temple; and his flight to Egypt.

For his line and stock, Jesus Line.
there was never man denied or doubted, but that Jesus was directly of the
Trybe of Judah, and descended liniallie by his Mother of the peculiar house of
David, ( 3, Reg, 7. Psalm, 80. Esaias, 11. Math, 1. Luke, 3.
according as it was fore-tolde that the Messiah should do;) which is proved
most clearly by the two Genealogies and petidegrees, set down by S. Matthew
and S. Luke, of the blessed Virgins whole descent, from David to Joseph, that
was of the same Trybe and kindred with her. And it is confirmed by their
repayring to Bethleem; (when Proclamation was made by Cyrenius Of this matter
writes Josephus li. 18. cap. 1. antiq
in Augustus name, that every person should repair to the head City of their
Trybe and family, to be cessed for their tribute,) seeing that Bethleem was
the proper City only of them, that were of the house and line of David: 1,
Reg, 17. 2. Reg, 2.
for that King David was borne therein. And finally, it is evident by that the
Scribes and Pharisees, who objected matters of much less importance then this
against Jesus, (as that he was a Carpenters son, Math, 13. Luke, 6.
thereby to debase him for his poverty:) yet never objected they against him,
that he was not of the house of David, which they would never have omitted, if
they might have done it with any color: for that it would have weighed more
against him then all the rest, and would in one word have dispatched the whole
controversy. Nay, I add further, that it remains registered in the Jews
Thalmud it self, Thalm. tract. Sanh. cap. Nig^ar had.
that Jesus of Nazareth Crucified, was of the blood Royal from Zorobabel of
the house of David.

The manner of his conception. Luke, 1.
For the manner of his conception, and of the Message or annunciation made unto
his Mother by the Angel: albeit it depend principally, upon the relation and
credit of the Virgin her self, who only was privy thereunto: and upon the
testimony of Joseph, to whom it was revealed by the same Angel afterward;
yet, he that shall consider the circumstaunces of the thing it self: as first,
the simplicity of both the reporters. Then, how that it is not likely, that
Joseph being just, Math. 1.
(as he is described) would have concealed a thing so much against himself,
and against the Law, if he had not some way been assured of the truth.
Thyrdly, the innocent age of the blessed Virgin, (who was not past foure-teene
years old at that time, Augustine. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 5. e^ li. contra
Iudaeos. cap 5.
as S. Augustine and other ancient Fathers do prove by manifest arguments.)
All these things (I say) do make it improbable, that she would invent such a
matter of her self. Chrisost. in cap. 1. Luc.
And finally, the strange prophecy which she uttered in her Canticle of
Magnificat, and which we see now fulfilled, (albeit at that time very
unlikely,) to wit, That all generations should call her blessed. These
circumstaunces, he that shall consider them, can not but see that the matter
must needs be true.

And as for the kind and manner of his nativity: The manner of Jesus
Nativity. Esaias. 7.
most manifest it is be scripture, that the Messiah was appointed to by borne
of a Uirgine, for so says Esaias plainly: B^hold, a Uirgine shall conceive,
and bring forth a son. And Esaias appoints this to K. Achaz for a wonderful
and strange sign from God, which he could not have done in reason, if the
Hebrew word in that place, might have signified a young woman only (as some
later Rabbines will affirm,) for that it is no sign or strange thing, but
very common and ordinary for young women to conceive and bring forth
children. Wherefore the Septuagint do very well translate it in Greek,
Parthenos.
by the proper name of Uirgine, and so did also the elder Jews understand it,
Rab. Sime^n. Ben. Iohai. in cap. 2. Genesis
as Rabbi Simeon well notes. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, of singular credit
with the Jews, upon these words of the Psalms: Truth shall bud forth of the
earth, etc. says thus: Rab. Mos. Hadar in Psalm. 14. v. 12
here Rabbi Ioden notes, that it is not said, truth shall be ingendered of
the earth. But, truth shall bud forth: to signify thereby, that the Messiah,
(who is meant by the word Truth,) shall not be begotten (as other men are) in
carnal copulation. Thus far Rabbi Moses: who in another place, that is,
upon the twenty and five Chapter of Genesis, alleges Rabbi Berachias to be
of the same opinion, and to prove it out of the hundred and nine Psalm, and
fourth verse.

The same is proved also, in the plain words of the Prophet Jeremy; Jeremy,
31, verse, 22.
GOD has created a new thing upon earth: a woman shall inuiron (or enclose) a
man. That is, she shall enclose him in her womb, and bring him forth after a
new and strange manner, without generation of man. And finally, Rab. Hacad.
quest 3. in Ea. cap. 9.
Rabbi Hacadosch proves by Cabala out of many places of Scripture, not only
that the Mother of the Messiah shall be a Virgin, but also that her name shall
be Marie. All the ten Sibyls in like manner, Betulius in lib. de car. Sibyl.
(according as Betulius sets out their prophecies,) do make special
mention of the Mother of Messiah, that she shall be a most pure and holy
Virgin; so that this matter was revealed very clearly, both to Jew and
Gentile before it came to pass. And Clemens Alexandrinus writes, Clem. in
recognit.
that Simon Magus, to the end he might not seem inferior to Jesus in this
point, feigned, that he was also borne of a Virgin, as Jesus was.

That Bethleem where Christ was borne, was the peculier place preordained by
God for the birth of the Messiah: The place appointed for the birth of the
Messiah.
the Prophet Micheas foretold plainly, when he uttered diverse ages before
Christ was incarnate, these words; Miche. 5.
And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little one (in respect) of thousands in
Judah: (and yet) shall there come forth of thee, one that shall be the RVLER of
Israel: and his coming forth is from the beginning, and from THE DAYS OF
ETERNITY. By which words is plainly expressed, that albeit Bethleem were but
a little poor Town, (as in deed it was) in comparison of many other in Judah:
yet therein should be borne temporally that Governor of Israel, whose divine
birth was before the worlds foundation, and from all eternity. And so do
interpret this place, both Jonathan Ben vziel the great Author of the Chaldie
Paraphrase, (who died twentie-eyght years before our Savior Christ was
borne,) and also Rab. Selomoth and Hacadosch, in their Commentaries upon this
place of Micheas.

The same thing fore-tolde David of Ephrata, or Bethleem, (for both names do
signify one thing, as appears by the former place of Micheas and Gene, 35.
and 48.
others,) when talking of the Messiah, and being desirous to know where he
should be borne, says; 1. Chron, 2. Psalm, 131.
I will not go into the tabernacle of my house, nor into my bed: nor will I
give mine eyes sleep, or rest to the temples of my head: until I find out
the place, that is appointed for my Lord: the tabernacle (or house) for the GOD
of Jacob. And then, the mystery being revealed unto him: he says presently;
Behold, we have heard of it (now) in Ephrata (or Bethleem:) we have found it
out in the fields This he said. for that in David's time Bethlee^ stood nigh
unto woods.
of wood Math, 2.. And to show how he reverenced the place for that cause,
he adds immediately; We will adore in the place where his feet have stood.
Whereby he fore-prophecieth, not only the adoration used after in that place
unto Jesus by the Magi, or three Kings of the East, but also of all other
adoration used in the same place in the memory of Jesus, by other devout
Christians until this day; for which cause Origin says, that the place of
Bethleem, was most famous and renowned in his days. Orig. cont. Cells.


For the Angels appearing to the Sheepheardes, The Angels singing.
in the night of the Nativity: there can be no more said, but the credit,
honesty, and simplicity of them that reported it: and likely it is, they would
never faigne a thing, that might have been refuted by testimony of the
sheepheards themselves, if it had been false.

Of the name of JESUS, given to him in his circumcision: The name of Jesus.
it was to be seen set down in a Book, that how so ever it were not
scripture: yet was it extant in the world before Christ was borne. I mean the
second book of Esdras, which has these words in the person of God the Father.
2. Esdras. 7.
Behold, the time shall come, when the signs shall appear that I have told,
etc. And my son JESUS shall be revealed, with those who are with him. And
after those years my son CHRIST shall die, and the earth shall render those
that sleep therein.

Rabbi Hacadosch also proves by art Cabalist, out of many places and textes
of scripture, Rab. Hata. in Esaias. 9.
that the Messiah name at his coming, shall be JESUS. Gene, 49. and Psalm, 71.
and 95.
And among other, he adds this reason; that as the name of him who first
brought the Jews out of bondage into the Land of promise, was Jesus, or Iosue,
(which is all one,) so must his name be Jesus, Note this reason.
that shall the second time deliver them from the bondage wherein they are, and
restore them to their old and ancient possession of Jury: which is the
chief benefit they expect by the Messiah.

Finally, it is not probable, that the Virgin Marie should feign this name of
herself, for that among the Jews there were many other names of more honor
and estimation at that time; as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and David. And
therefore if she would have feigned any: it is like she would have taken one of
the^, as soon as this, which had not been the name of any great Patriarche.

The coming of the three Kings. Math, 2.
There follows the coming of the three Magi or wise men from the East: of
whom Cypr. ser. de Bapt. et idem Yert. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. in. hillaer. li.
4. de Trin. Joshua. 12.
Cyprians words are these: It is an old tradition of the Church, that the Magi
of the East, were Kings, or rather little Lords of particular places. Which is
to be understood, such little Kings as Iosue slew thirty in one battle. And
it is to be noted, that S. Matthewe makes mention of the coming of these
Kings to Jerusalem, as of a known and public matter, whereof all Jerusalem
and Jury were able to bear him witness. For he talks of their open
coming to Jerusalem: and of the inquiry for the newborn King: of their
speech and conference had with Herod: as also of Herod's consultation with the
Scribes and Pharisees about the place of the Messiah birth. And finally, he
shows the most pitiful murder that insued, of almost 14. Thousand, as says
the Lyturgie of the Aethiopians. and C^lend. Grecorum.
infinite infants, in all the circuit of Bethleem for this matter. Which could
not be a thing unknown to all Jury, and much less feygned by the holy
Evangelist Saint Matthew; for that he should have given his adversaries the
greatest advantage in the world; if he had begun his Gospel, with so
notorious and open an untruth, which might have been refuted by infinite
persons that were yet alive.

Epiphanius is of opinion, that the three Kings arrived in Jerusalem, Epiph.
haerit. 51.
two years after Christ's Nativity: for that Herod slew all infants of that
age. But other hold more probably, that the star appeared unto the^, Amon.
Alex. in Harm, Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 13.
two years before Christ's Nativity, so that they came to Bethleem the
thirteenth day after Christ's birth, according as the Church does celebrate the
Epiphanie. Saint Basile thinks that they were learned men, Basil. ser. in
nati. dom.
and might by their learning and Art Magic, (wherein those Countrymen at that
time were very skillful,) understand and feel, that the power of their Heathen
Gods, was greatly diminished and broken. They might also be styrred up with
that common brute, and general prophecy, spredde over all the East in those
days, as both Suetonius and Josephus do record, Sueto. in Vespos. cap 4.
Josephus. lib. 7. de bell. cap 12. Numb. 24.
That out of Jury should come an universal King over all the world. By these
means (I say) and by the prophecy of Balaam, left among the^ from Moses time,
(for he was a Gentile,) whereby was signified, that a star should rise, and
declare a great and mighty King in Israel; they might be induced at the sight
of this star, to take so long a journey as they did, toward Jury.

Prophecies of things that should fall out in Bethleem. Numb, 24. Psalm, 71.
This star (as I have said) was foretold by Balaam a Heathen Prophet, above
one thousand and five hundred years before it appeared. And after Balaam
again, it was prophesied by David, that Kings of Arabia, Saba, and other
Eastern Countries should come and adore Christ, and offer both gold and other
gyfts unto him. Jeremy, 31.
The murder also of those infants of Bethleem, was presignified by Jeremy, in
the weeping of Rachell for the slaughter of her children: Genesis. 35.
which Rachell was buried in Bethleem, and for that cause, those infants were
called her children, albeit she were dead above two thousand years before
they were slain, and above one thousand and five hundred years before Jeremy
wrote the prophecy. Amongst which infants, Herod also for more assurance,
slew an infant of his own. Philo. lib. de temp.
For that (as Philo notes) he was descended by his mothers side, of the line
of Judah. Which cruelty coming to Augustus ears, he said (as Macrobius
reports, Macrob. lib. 2. Saturnal. cap. 4.
) that he had rather be Herod's swyne then his son, for that he being a
Jew, Augustus speech of Herod.
was forbidden by his Religion to kill his swyne, though not ashamed to kill
his son.

The same star whereof we speak, is mentioned by diverse Heathen Writers:
Plin. li. 2. ca. 25,
as by Pliny, under the name of a Comete, (for so they termed all
extraordinary Stars, Heathen testimonies for the star which guided the
wise men.
) which appeared in the later end of Augustus days, and were far different
from all other that ever appeared. And therefore contrary to the nature of those
kind of Stars, it was adjudged by the whole College of South-sayers, to
portende universal good unto the earth; and for that cause, had an Image of
metal erected to it in Rome, and (as Plinies words are,) Is Cometa vnus, tota
orb colitur: that only Comete, is worshipped throughout the whole world.

Origin also, Orig. cont. Celsum
writes of one Chaeremon a Stoike, that was much moved with the consideration
of this Star, and for that after the appearaunce thereof, he perceived the
power of his Gods decayed: took a journey into Jury, (in company of other
Astronomers,) to inform himself further of the matter. Whereunto Chalcidius a
Platonicke does add, Chalcid. apud Marsil. Ficin. tract. de stella. Mag.
that the Chaldean Astronomers did gather by contemplation of this Star, that
some God descended from heaven to the benefit of mankind. And finally, the
Sibyls talking of the coming of Christ, affirmed plainly: Sybil. Saemia.
apud. Betul.
Rutilans eum sydus mon, strabit: a blazing star shall declare his coming.
Which prophecy Virgill the Poet having read in Augustus time, and soon after
having seen the same fulfilled: applied it (as I have showed before of all the
rest,) to the flattering of Caesar, and therefore he says in the place before
alleged.

Eglog. 4.
Ecce Dionaei, processit Caesaris astrum.
Behold the star of Caesar (descended of Venus, has now appeared. Which
star indeed, was the star of Caesar's Lord and Master.

Luke, 12.
After forty days past over, Saint Luke reports, how Jesus by his mother was
presented in the Temple of Jerusalem: The presentation of Jesus in Jerusalem.
and therwithall recounteth two strange things that happened at the same time;
to wit, that two grave and reverend persons, Simeon surnamed Just, and Anna the
Prophetess: (both of singular sanctity amongst the Jews,) coming into the
Temple at the very same time when Jesus was there in his Mothers arms: took
notice of him, and acknowledged him publicly for the Messiah and Savior of
the world. Foretelling also by the spyrite of prophecy, diverse particular
things that were to ensue, both to Christ and Christians, and especially to his
Mother the blessed virgin. Which things being published at that time, and
confirmed afterward by the event, do well declare, that this narration of S.
Luke could not be forged; as do also the number of particular circumstaunces
set down about the time, place, and persons, most notoriously known to all
Jerusalem. For, as for Anna, Anna the Prophetess.
she had lived from her youth until foure-score years of age in the Temple,
and thereby was known to the most part of Jury. And as for Symeon, Simeon.
he was the Scholar of the most famous Hillel, and condisciple to Jonathan
maker of the Chaldie Paraphrase, Thalm. tract. pitkei. A^^th.
of who^ I spoke before, and the Jews Thalmud confesses, that by the death of
these two men, Thal. tract. Ioma. cap. Tereph. Becalpi.
(especially of Simeon,) failed the spyrit of the great Sinagogue, called
Sanhedrin: which after the Captivity of Babylon until Herod's time, supplied
(in a sort) the spirit of prophecy, that was expressly in Israel before the
said captivity.

Of Christ's flight into Egypt for fear of Herod, Christ's flight into Egypt.
Luke, 2. Ose, 11.
S. Luke well notes, that it was prophesied by Ose long before: that God would
call his Son out of Egypt. And the Prophet Esaias describes the same very
particularly, when he says; Esaias, 19.
Behold, our Lord Iehoua shall ascend up, (or ride) upon a light cloud: (which
was his flesh or humanity,) and shall go down into Egypt: and all the Idols
of Egypt, shall shake at his presence. Which later point, Eusebius. lib. 6. them.
cap. 20. et lib. 9. cap. 2.3.4.
Eusebius shows that it was fulfilled most evidently in the sight of all the
world; for that no Nation came to Christian religion with so great celeritie or
fervor, as did the Egyptians, who threw down their Idols before any other
heathen Nations. And as they had been the first in idolatry to other Countries:
so were they the first (by Christ's coming unto them, The benefit that Egypt
received by Christ's flight unto it.
) that afterward gave example of true return to their Creator. It follows
in Esaias: And I will give up Egypt into the hands of cruel Lords: and a Potent
King shall take dominion over them. Which was fulfilled about the very time
wherein Christ was to come. For that then, after many spoils and cruelties
excercised upon Egypt by the Roman Lords and Princes, as Pompey, Caesar,
Anthony and others: in the end Cleopatra their Queen, (that was the last of
all the blood and line of the Ptolomi^s,) was enforced to sley her self: and
so Augustus the Emperor took possession of all Egypt, and subjected it as a
Province to the Romans Empire.

But consider you, how Esaias concludes the matter, after all these temporal
afflictions threatened against Egypt, and confess, that such adversity, is no
sign of Gods dys-fauour to them who receive it. For thus says God after all
his cominations; In that day, there shall be an Altar of Iehoua in the midst
of Egypt: they shall cry to God in their tribulation, and he shall send them a
Savior, etc. Blessing shall be in the midst of that Land, to whom the Lord
God of hosts has given his benediction, saying: Blessed is my people of
Egypt. And here we make an end of our second consideration.

The third consideration.
Now in the third place there comes to be considered, The life and actions
of Jesus.
(according to our former dyuision,) the life, conversation, doctrine, and
miracles of Jesus. And first, touching things done by him after his coming
out of Egypt which might be about the sixth or seventh year of his age,) until
his baptism by S. John, (which was the thyrtith,) there is little recorded,
Just. in Tripho. Chrysostom. in Johan. Aug. lib. 4. de Trinit. cap. 5.
either in Profane, or Ecclesiastical Writers. For that as Saint Iustine, S.
Chrysostom, S. Augustine and others do write, he bestowed that time in the
common exercise and labors of man's life: thereby to show himself true man,
and give demonstration how much he hated and detested idleness.

Of Saint John Baptist.
Of Saint John Baptist, all Hebrew writers of that time do make mention, with
exceeding praise and admiration of his holiness: especially Josephus that
lived immediately after Christ's days, Joseph. lib. 18. an^iq. cap. 7.
says; he was, Vir optimus: Iudaeos excitans ad virtutum studia. A most
excellent man, stirring up the Jews to the exercise of virtue. He adds
also, that partly for fear of the great concourse of people which flocked unto
him, and partly by the solicitation of Herodias, concubine and brothers wife
to Herod Antipas, the great Herod's son: (for whose cause he had turned off
his own Wife, daughter to Areta King of the Arabians:) he was apprehended and
imprisoned in the Castle of Acherun, and therein soon after put to death.
Which murder, Josephus esteemed to be the cause of all the misery which insued
afterward to Herod and his whole family.

Of this man it was written by Malachie the Prophet: Malachie. 3.
Behold, I send my messenger (or Angel) before me: and he shall prepare the way
before my face: and presently shall com to his temple, the RVLER whom ye seek,
and the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT, whom you desire. Which prophecy was
fulfilled most evidently, upon the preaching of S. John, S. John's behavior
toward Christ.
when Christ came unto him; and albeit S. John had never seen him before, yet
he acknowledged him for the Messiah in the presence of infinite people, and his
acknowledgment was confirmed by the visible descending of a Dove and voice from
heaven, Math, 3. Mark, 1. Luke, 3.
in the sight and hearing of all the people present, according as three of our
Evangelists do report. Which they would never have presumed to do: had not
the matter been most evident, and without al compass of denial or
contradiction.

And truly, no one thing in all this story of Jesus life, does more establish
the certainty of his being the true Messiah: then that S. John Baptist,
(whose wisdom, learning, virtue and rare sanctity, is confessed and recorded
by the writings of all our adversaries) should refuse the honor of the Messiah
offered unto himself, and lay it upon Jesus: as also, should direct those
Disciples that depended upon him, to the only following and embracing of Jesus
doctrine. Which is most evidently proved that he did: for that so many
folowers and disciples as himself had, not one appeared ever after, that was
not a Christian.

When Jesus was baptized, The preaching and doctrine of Jesus.
he began to preach, and his whole doctrine was directed to the manifestation
of his Fathers will, and amendment of man's life. It tends all to this one
ground and principle. Deuteronomy. 6. Math, 2.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul: and thy Neighbor as thy
self. It was plain, easy, perspicuous, and evident, though it treated of
most high mysteries. Heathen doctrine.
It had neither pomp nor pride of rethoricall words, nor flattering of man's
wickedness, as the doctrine of many Philosophers had. Jewish Ceremonies.
Neither consisted it of unprofitable external ceremonies, (as the later
observations of the Jewish Law did,) nor was it fraught with carnalitie and
spirit of this world; as the Turkish Alcoran, Turkish Alcoran.
and other sectaries doctrine is. But all was simplicity; all was spirit; all
was truth; al was honesty; all was humility; all was charity.

It took away or dysanulled no one perfect or spiritual point of Moses Law,
The comparison of Christ's Law with that of Moses. Math, 5.
but rather revived, interpreted, fulfilled, and made perfect the same. For
whereas^ that commanded external obseruaunce, this adds also internal
obedience. Whereas that said, love your friends: this adioyneth, love also
your enemies. Whereas that commanded we should not kill: this further
commands to speak no angry words. Whereas that prohibited to commit actual
adultery: this also forbids to covet in mind. Whereas that said, take no
interest or usury of a Jew that is thy Countriman: this faith, take it of no
man whatsoever. Whereas that accounted every Jew only to be thy neighbor:
this teaches every person living to be thy brother. Whereas that taught thee
to offer up a Calfe, a Sheep, or an Ox for thy sins: this instructs thee,
to offer up a contrite heart, by faith in the blood of him that died for all,
with a firm and resolute purpose of amendment of life. The effect of Christ's
doctrine.
And finally, this doctrine tends wholly to the true, sincere, and perfect
service of GOD thy Lord, that made and redeemed thee, to the exaltation of his
only name, power, goodness, and glory: to the depression of man's pride by
discovering his misery; to the contempt of this world and vain pomp thereof;
to the mortification and subduing of our sensual appetite: to the true love and
unfeigned charity of our neighbor; to the styrring up of our spyrite to
celestial cogitations; to peace of conscience; tranquillity of mind; purity
of body; consolation of our soul. And in one word, to reduce mankind again
to a certain estate of innocence, simplicity, and Angelical sanctity upon
earth, with his eye fixed onl^e in the eternal inheritance of Gods kingdom in
heaven.

This was the doctrine delivered by Jesus: which is the same that the Prophets
of God fore-tolde should be delivered by the Messiah. And as for his life and
conversation, The life and conversation of Jesus.
by the testimony of his greatest adversaries, it was more admirable then his
doctrine, his life being a most lively table, wherein the perfection of all
his doctrine was expressed. A man of such gravity, as never in his life he was
noted to laugh; of such humility, as being the son of God, he scarce used
in this world the dignity of a servant; of such sweet and mild behavior, as
all the injuries of his enemies, never wrested from him one angry word.
Finally, he was such a one, as he was described by Esaias so many ages before
he was borne, in these words; Esaias, 42.
He shall not cry nor contend, nor shall any man hear his voice in the
street: he shall not crush a broken reed, nor tread out a little flax that
lies smoking on the ground. etc. And another Prophet not long after him,
brake forth into this speech, upon consideration of the behavior that should
be in the Messiah, Zacha. ^.
Rejoice thou daughter of Sion: triumph thou daughter of Jerusalem: for behold
thy King shall come unto thee, thy just Savior: he is poor and humble, etc.
And as these Prophets did foretell the virtue and sanctity of the Messiah, so
the devils themselves could not but confess the same to have been fulfilled
in the person of Jesus; as is most evident by the testimony of Porphyrie, a
professed enemy of the Christian name. Who after consideration of diverse
Oracles uttered by his Idols, touching Jesus, he breaks forth into this
confession. Porphyr. lib. de laud. Phyl^s.
It is exceeding wonderful, what testimony the Gods do give of the singular
piety and sanctity of Jesus: for which they avouch him rewarded with
immortality: but yet these Christians are deceived in calling him God. Thus
much writes Porphyrie. And last of all Josephus the Jew, that was borne
immediately after Jesus, writes of him thus. Joseph. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 7.
There was at this time one Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a
man: a worker of most wonderful miracles, and a Master and Teacher of all
such men, as willingly were content to embrace the truth.

In which testimony of Josephus, we see mention also of Jesus miracles, Of
Jesus miracles.
which is the next thing whereof we are to consider. And as Josephus in this
place, (being a Jew) bears witness that Jesus performed many strange
miracles: so most apparently, and according to the interpretation of Josephus
in this place, were the same miracles foretold by the Prophets of God, that
they should be done by the true Messiah. Predictions of the Messiah miracles.
So Esaias in his thirtie-fiue Chapter describes at large, how the Messiah at
his coming, shall declare his commission, by giving sight to the blind,
hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, and agilitie of body to the lame
and cripple. And that which is more; God revealed this point very particulerly
to the Gentiles by the Sibyls, among whom, one of them wrote thus of Christ to
come, as Lactantius records; Lact. lib. 4. diuina. Instit. cap. 15.
He shall do all by his only word, he shall cure all infirmities: he shall
raise the dead: he shall make the lame to run and skip: the deaf shall
hear: the blind shall see: and the dumb shall speak. In five loaves and two
fishes, five thousand persons shall be satis-fied: and the fragments shall fill
twelve baskets, to the hope of many. He shall command the winds, and walk
upon the furious Sea, with his feet of peace.

And after diverse other Greek verses to this purpose, she concludes in these
words; Men shall say, that I am a mad and lying Prophetess: but when all
these things shall come to pass, then remember me: for then shall no man say
more, that I was a liar, but rather the Prophet of the great God.

To these predictions of Prophets in Jury and among the Gentiles, do agree
the Doctors of the Jews themselves, in many places of their Thalmud: Thal.
tract. Beraco^h. ea Mermathas. Colin.
to wit, that the Messiah shall be most wonderful in working miracles. And in
their public Commentary upon Ecclesiastes, they have these words.
Misdrach. coheleth. cap. 1.
All the former miracles of Prophets or Saints, shall be nothing to the
miracles of the Messiah, when he comes. And thus much of the foretelling of
Christ's miracles. But now for the fulfilling thereof in Jesus; that is, how
these predictions were performed in the stupendous works and actions of our
Savior Christ, there is no difficulty. For that besides the former testimony
of Josephus, The confession of Jesus miracles by his enemies.
(which were sufficient in this case,) the Jews themselves do grant and
record Jesus miracles, in diverse places of Treatises of their Thalmud; Thalm.
in tract. Auoda. Zara. Misdrasch. Coheleth Alcoran. Azoar. 1.4. 11.13.
yea, they make mention of many wonderful things which Jesus did, that are not
written by our Evangelists. The same does Mahomet in his Alcorane; affirming
Jesus the son of Marie, to have been a great Prophet, and to have wrought his
miracles, by the only power and spyrite of GOD; and that himself was sent to
confirm Jesus doctrine, saving only in the point of his Godhead; wherein he
says, that Jesus went too-farre, and had a check for the same at Gods hand
when he returned to Heaven.

Thus much do these enemies confess of Jesus miracles. Which, as it is much,
coming from such witnesses: so if they would either deny or dissemble the
same, they might be proved against them by most evident reasons: especially in
two points, wherein there can be no probability of any denial.

The first is, the calling and retayning of his Apostles and other followers,
The calling of the Apostles.
(whereof Josephus also in the place before alleged, makes mention, Joseph.
lib. 18. antiq. cap. 4.
as of a great miracle:) who were of diverse callings, states, conditions,
trades, and occupations in the world. And yet all, upon the sudden, left
both father, mother, wife, children, and other temporal respects, and followed
him, who had nothing to give or promise them in this world. A man, that never
spoke them fair, or uttered doctrine that was not repugnant to the sensuality
of this life, as may appear by their own wrytings and testimonies of him. A
man, that was contemned by the better sort, as then it might seem: that is, by
the wise and learned of that Country, and especially disliked by them that
were in government, as a dangerous and troublesome man to the state. One, that
had neither friends in the world to bear him out, nor a house to put his
head in. And yet, notwithstanding all this, A great miracle.
that worldly men and women, and some such also as were great sinners, and
loose lyuers before, should leave all their worldly hope, stay, and
condition, to follow such a man, with so great inconveniences, losses,
dangers, and dis-fauours as they did; and should continue with him in all his
afflictions, and be content to die and loose their lives rather then forsake
him, or abandon his service; this (I say) is such a miracle, as never in the
world fell out the like, and must needs be granted by the enemy, to be
supernatural.

The second point is, The miraculous facts of Jesus.
of external things and facts done by Jesus, above all power of human
ability, in the sight and knowledge of all the Jews; which facts were
published by our Evangelists, and especially by Saint Matthew, in the Hebrew
tongue, while yet the persons were alive upon who^ they were wrought, or
infinite other that might be witnesses thereof. As for example, the raising of
Lazarus in Bethania, that was a Vyllage John. 11.
at whose death and burial, (being a Gentleman) many Scribes and Pharisees
must needs be present, (according to the Jewish custom at that time, as is
reported by Josephus, Joseph. lib. 17. antiq. cap. 11.
) and they saw him both deceassed, interred, and the funeral feast observed
for him, as also raised again from death by Jesus, after four days of his
burial. With whom they did both eat and drink, and converse after his
return to life, and every day might behlode him walking up and down openly
in the streets of Jerusalem. This story (I say) how could it be feigned.

So in like manner, the raising of the Matthew. 9. Mark. 5.
whose name is affirmed to be Iairus, with diverse other circumstaunces that do
make the thing most Luke, 7.
in the presence of all the people that bare the said corpse, and stood about
it. The healing of the Cripple in Jerusalem, that had layne thirty Probatica:
John, 5.
which miracle was Math, 8. Mark, 5,
and so presently carried two thousand of them away into the Sea, and drowned
them. Whereupon the whole Country about of the people called Gerasines,
being stricken with extreme fear upon sight of the fact, besought Jesus most
humbly to depart from their borders. Math. 14. Luke. 9.
besides women and children, with five Barley loaves and two fishes only. The
Luke. 14.
and this at the table of a principal Pharisie, and in the sight of all that
sat at dynner with him.

These (I say) and diverse other such miracles, which were done in the presence
and sight of so infinite a number of people, and recorded by our Evangelists,
at such times when many desired to discredit the same, and might have done
easily by many witnesses and authority, if any one part thereof had been
subject to calumniation: cannot in reason or probability be doubted of. The
conclusion of this consideration.
And therefore I must conclude, that seeing these things are above all power of
human nature, and could not be done but by the finger and virtue of the
living GOD himself: considering also that it is impossible, that God should
assist or give testimony to any falsehoode, it must needs ensue, that al was
true and sincere which Jesus affirmed: and consequently, seeing he affirmed
himself to be the Son of God, and the true and only Messiah, it must
needs follow by these miracles, that he was so indeed; which is the ground
of that speech of his to the faithless Pharisees, John, 10.
If you will not believe my words, believe my deeds. And thus much of Jesus
life, doctrine, conversation, and miracles.

The fourth Consideration.
THere remains now only, the fourth and last consideration of this Section,
The Passion and Resurrection.
which is, the passion, resurrection and ascension of Jesus. And about his
passion, there is little or no controversy: for that all his enemies do agree
and grant, that he was betrayed by his own disciple; apprehended, afflicted,
and delivered up by the Jews, and finally put to death upon a Cross by the
Gentiles. The testimony of Josephus may serve for all herein, whose words
are these; Joseph. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 4.
That the principal Jews of his Country, having accused and delivered over
Jesus to Pilate, (that was Governor of Jury for the Roman Emperor) he
adjudged him to the Cross. The same do other Jews and Gentiles record: and
in this they take great offense and scandale, that we should attibute
divinity unto a man that had suffered death upon the Cross.

But if we show that this was the eternal preordination and appointment of
God, for saving of mankind: and that the same was fore-tolde both to Jew and
Gentile from the beginning: and so understood also by the Jewish Doctors
themselves of elder times: then every reasonable man (I trow) will remain
satis-fied, and prefer Gods divine wisdom before man's folly.

First then consider, Christ's ascending to Jerusalem to receive his passion.
that when Christ had ended his preaching, and wrought so many miracles as
seemed sufficient to his eternal wisdom; Math, 20. Mark, 8.
and when the time was come pre-ordained for his passion, (whereof he told
publicly his Disciples before:) he went up to Jerusalem of purpose to
receive his death; Math, 21.
and made a solemn entry into that City upon an Ass, which was prophesied
of him many years before; Zachary, 9.
Rejoice daughter of Sion. Behold thy JUST KING and SAVIOVR, shall come unto
thee upon an Ass.

And after his aboade some days in that place, Math, 10, and 16, Psalm, 40.
54, and 108.
he was betrayed and sold by his own Disciple, as David before hand in many
places had foretold should come to pass. Then followed his apprehension, and
most servile abusage by the Jews, whereof it was fore-prophecied in his person
by Esaias; Esaias, 50.
I gave my body to them that beat it: and my cheeks to them that buffeted
the same. I did not turn my self away from them that reproched me: nor yet
from them that did spitte in my face.

After this barbarous entreaty by the Jews, they delivered him over to Pilate
a Gentile, and never ceased to solicit and pursue their unquenchable hatred
against him, until they saw him on the Cross, The barbarous abusage of
Jesus, foretold by prophecy.
where also he was used in the highest degree of spightfull dealing. Whereof
likewise the Prophet David, made mention long before in the person of the
Messiah, when he said; Psalm. 21.
They pearsed my hands and feet: they divided among them my apparel: and
upon my (upper) garment they did cast lots. And again of another cruelty he
complains, saying; they gave me Gaul to eat, and in my thyrst they
refreshed me with Vinegar.

And finally, that Christ should die for the sins of mankind, Christ's
death most plainly fore-tolde. Gene, 21. 22. Numbers. 21.
is a common principle both prefigured and fore-tolde throughout all the old
Scripture. Prefigured, by the sacrifice of Isaac: by the raising up of the
brazen Serpent, and by all other sacrifices that were in the Law. Foretold,
not only by the Scriptures before alleged, but also most plainly by Daniel,
who was told by an Angel, Daniell, 9,
that after a certain time by him there appointed: Ungetur Sanctus Sanctorum,
the Saint of Saints shall be anointed, et occidetur Christus, and this
anointed Saint or Christ shall be put to death. Zachary also about the same
time, does not only foretell his death, but also the kind thereof, and from
what people he should receive the same: Zachary, 12.
for thus he says in the person of Christ himself. The inhabitants of
Jerusalem at that day shall look upon me, whom they have Crucified.

But if ye will read the whole story of Christ's passion, set down at
large six hundred years before it fell out, The wonderful prediction of
Christ his passion, set down by Esaias. Esaias. 57.
I refer you to a narration of Esaias, who to signify the strangenes of the
case, begins with this Praeface; Who will give credit to that we shall
report, etc. And then a little after he goes on in these words; He shall mount
up as a twig from a dry earth. He has no form or beauty upon him. We
beheld him, and there was no countenance in him: Christ's deformity upon the
Cross.
we saw him the most contemptible and despised man in the world. A man full of
pains, and experienced in infirmity. His countenance was obscure and
despicable, and we made no account of him. Truly he took upon himself our
greefes, and did bear our pains. We accounted him as a Leaper: and (...) man
stricken and punished by God. Christ appointed to die for our sins.
But he was wounded for our iniquities, and crushed in pieces for our
wickedness. The discipline (or correction) of our peace lies upon him: and by
his wounds, we are made whole. We have all erred, and gone astray like sheep,
every man after his ^wne ways: and God has laid upon him the iniquity of us
all. He was offered up for us, because he would so: he shall be led to his
slaughter as a Sheep: and as a Lamb he shall be silent before his Sh^arours.

For the sins of my people, have I stricken him, says God. He has done no
iniquity, neither was there deceit found in his mouth. Yet would the Lord
crush him in infirmity. But if he shall give his life for sin: then shall
he see a long seed (or generation,) and the will of the Lord shall be
directed in his hand. The increase of Christ's kingdom after his resurrection.
And for so much, as his soul has sustained labor: it shall see and be
filled. And this MY JUST SERVAVNT, That is, in making himself known, or
revealing the knowledge of himself to the world.
in his knowledge, shall justify many, and bear their iniquities. And I will
allotte unto him very many people, and he shall divide the spoils of the
stout, for that he has delivered his soul unto death, and was accounted
among the wicked, and prayed for hi^ transgressors.

Thus particularly (as ye see) was the death and passion of our Savior Christ
fore-tolde by the Prophets of Israel, to that Nation. Now hear ye the
prophecy of Sibylla^ (...) ye please, The particulers of Christ's passion
fore-tolde by Sibylla.
wherein she fore-shewed the same to the Gentiles; These are her own words,
set down by Lactantius. He shall appear miserable, ignominius and
deformed, to the end he may give hope unto the miserable. Lactant. lib. 4.
divine. instit. cap. 16. et 18.
Afterward he shall come into the hands of most wicked and faithl^sse men: they
shall buffette him with their sacriligious fistes, and shall spyt upon him with
their unclean mouths. He shall yield his innocent back to the whippe, and
shall say nothing while he receives the stripes, to the end he may speak to
those that are dead. He shall bear a Crown of thorns: and they shall give
him Gaul to eat, and Vinegar to drink. And this shall be the hospitality he
shall find among them. What thing can be more plainly described then this?

Neither do the ancient Rabines and Teachers among the Jews descent from
this. The consent of Rabbines.
For that in their Thalmud, Thal. tract. Sanhed. cap. helec. Misdraech. Ruth.
Rab. Joseph. in lib. Siph. Rab. Jacob. et R. Hanina. in cap. helec.
that was gathered above one thousand and two hundred years agone, the plain
sentences of diverse are set down: that their Messiah at his coming shall be
put to death. And as for Rabbi Jonathan the Author of the Chaldie Paraphrase,
who died a little before our Savior Christ was borne: he applies the whole
narration of the Prophet Esaias before recited, Esaias, 53.
(as needs he must,) to the murder of the Messiah by the Jews. Whereupon,
Rabbi Simeon that lived the next age after him, writes these words following.
Rab. Simeo^. Ben. Iohai. lib. de spe.
Woe be to the men of Israel, for that they shall sley the Messiah. God shall
send his son in man's flesh to wash them, and they shall murder him.

Whereto agrees Rabbi Hadarsan and others, and do prove further, out of the
fore-alleaged prophecy of Daniell, Rab. Hadars. in Dan.
Chapter 9. verse 27. that after Messiah shall have preached half seven
years, he shall be slain. For that Daniel says, Dani, 9. ver. 27
In half of seven years; the Host and Sacrifice shall cease. Upon which
words, they comment thus: Three years and a half, shall the presence of God
in flesh, cry and preach upon the Mount Oliuet; and then shall he be slain.
Which words the Jews ordinary Misdrasch. T^helim.
Commentary upon the Psalms, do interpret to be meant of Christ's preaching
three years and an half before his passion. Which disagreeth very little or
nothing from the account of us Christians, and of our Evangelists.

Of the miracles that fell out in Christ his death and passion.
And so we see by all that hitherto has been said, that the very particulers
of Christ's whole death and passion, were foretold most plainly both to Jew
and Gentile, and acknowledged also by the ancient Doctors of the Jewish
Nation, before the effectuation thereof came to pass. And Sibylla adds
further two particular miracles, that should fall out in the said passion of the
Messiah, to wit: Lact. lib. 4, divine. Inst. ca. 19
That the veil of the Jews Temple should break in two: and that at middaie;
there should be darkness for three hours over all the world. Which thing to
have been fulfilled at the death of Jesus, not only Saint Matthewe does assure
us in his Gospel: Math, 27.
but also Eusebius affirms, that he had read the same, word for word,
recorded in diverse heathen writers. And amongst other, he cites one Phlegon,
an exact Chronicler, that reports the same in the fourth year of the two
hundred and two Olympiad, Eusebius. in Chron. An Domin. 32. Phleg. Trallian.
11.14. Chron. An. 4. Olim 202.
which agrees just with the eyghteene year of Tyberius his reign, which was
the year wherein our Savior Christ suffered. And he goes so nigh, as to name
the very hours of the day, as our Evangelists do. See Orig. cont. Cells. lib.
6. e^ Suid. in verbo Jesus. et Tere. in Apolog.
AEsculus an old Astronomer does confirm the same, and proouoth more-ouer, by
the situation and constitution of the Sun and Moon at that time, that no
Eclipse could then be naturally. Which thing in like manner, Dyonisius
Areopagita did observe in the very day of Christ's passion, Dionys. Areop. in
ep.
being at that time but twenty and five years old, and yet well studied in
Astronomy, as himself testifies. And finally, Lucianus a Learned Priest of
Antioche, Lucian. praes. apud Eusebius.
was accustomed to provoke the Gentiles to their own Commentaries and Stories,
for record and testimony of those things.

There ensues now, for ending and confirmation of all that has been said and
proved before, to add a word or two of Jesus Resurrection. Of Jesus
Resurrection.
Which point, as of all other it is of most importance: so was it exactly
fore-tolde both to Jew and Gentile, and promised by Christ himself in all his
speeches while he was upon earth. And among the Jews, it was assured by all
the prophecies before recited, which do promise so great abundance of glory,
joy, and triumph to Christ's Church after his passion. Which never possibly
could be fulfilled, unless he had risen from death again. And therefore the
said resurrection was prefigured in Jonas, Jonas, 2.
together with the time of his abode in the Sepulcher. It was also expressly
fore-shewed by David, affirming: Psalm, 16.
That GOD would not suffer his holy one to see corruption. And after him
again, more plainly by the Prophet Ose; Ose, 6.
He shall quicken us again after two days, in the third day he shall raise
us, and we shall live in his sight. And to the Gentiles, Sibylla left written,
not far from the same time; Lactant. lib. 4. instit. Divine. cap. 19.
He shall end the necessity of death, by three days sleep: and then returning
from death to light again, he shall be the first that shall show the
beginning of Resurrection to his chosen: for that by conquering death, he
shall bring us life.

Thus much was promised by Prophets before Christ's appearaunce. Math, 12,
16,17 Mark, 8,9. 10 Luke, 11, 18. John, 2.
And Jesus to comfort his Disciples and followers, reiterated this promise
again of himself in many speeches, albeit oftentimes his meaning was not
perceived. Which promise of return from death, if it had been made for some
long time to come, (as Mahomet promised his Sarasins after eight hundred years
to reuisite them again, Mahom. in Alcor. Azoar. 17.
) albeit the performance were never meant: yet might the falsehood lurk in the
length of time. But Jesus, assuring all men that he would rise again within
three days, it cannot be imagined, but that he sincerely purposed to perform
his promise, for that otherwise the fraud must have been discovered. Now then
let us consider what manner of performaunce Jesus made hereof.

And first the persons most interessed in the matter, The appearings which
Jesus made after his resurrection.
as they whose total hope, stay, refuge and felicity depended hereof: I mean
his appaled, dismayed, and afflicted Disciples, do recount twelve sundry
apparisions which Jesus made unto them in flesh, after his Resurrection. The
first was to Mary Math, 16.
when she with Solome and other women, went and remained with ointments about
the Sepulcher. The second, Math. 28.
as they returned homewardes, who also were permitted to embrace his feet. The
third, was to 1. Corin. 15, Luke, 24.
The fourth, to the two Disciples in their journey to Emaus. The John. 20.
when the doors were shut. The sixth, was to the same company again, 1. Cor,
15. John, 20.
after eight days when Thomas was with them, at what time also he did both
eat and drink, and suffered his body also to be handled John. 21.
with five other disciples when they were in fishing; at what time also Math,
28.
upon the 1. Corin. 15:
The ninth was to more then five hundred brethren at one Ibidem.
as the same Apostle records. Acts, 1.
upon the Mount Oliuet by Jerusalem, when in their 1. Corin. 15.
unto Saint Paul, as himself bears witness.

All these apparitions are recorded in Scripture, as made by Jesus after his
Resurrection, to such as by his eternal wisdom, were preordained to be
witnesses of so glorious a spectacle. To whom (as S. Luke affirms, Acts, 1.
He showed himself alive by many arguments, for the space of forty days
together, and reasoned with them of the kingdom of his Father. And why any man
should mistrust the testimony of those men which saw him, co^uersed with him,
eat with him, drank with him, touched him, and heard him speak, and whose
entire estate and welfare depended wholly of the certainty hereof; I see no
reason. For what comfort had it been or consolation to these men, to have
devised of them selves these former apparitions? What encouragement might they
have taken, in those doleful times of desolation and affliction, Circumstances
that confirm the true resurrection of JESUS.
to have had among the^ the dead body of him, on whose only life, their
universal hope and confidence depended? The Scribes and Pharisees being
astonished with the sudden news of his rising again, confirmed unto them by
their own Soldiers that saw it, found no other way to resist the fame thereof,
but only by saying, (as all their posterity do unto this day) that his
Disciples came by night and stole away his body while the Soldiers were a
sleep. But what likelihood or possibility can there be in this? for first, it
is evident to all the world; that his Apostles themselves, (who were the
heads of all the rest,) were so dismayed, discomforted, and dejected at that
time, as they durst not once go out of the door, for which cause only those
seely women, who for their sex esteemed themselves more free from violence:
presumed alone to visit his Sepulcher, which no one man durst do for fear of
the Soldiers: until by those Women they were informed, that the foresaid
band of Soldiers, were terrified and put to flight by Christ's Resurrection.

Great improbabilities.
And then how was it likely, that men so much amazed and overcome with fear,
should adventure to steal away a dead body from a Guard of Soldiers that kept
it? or if their hearts had served them to adventure so great a danger: what
hope or probability had there been of success? especially, considering the
said body lay in a new Sepulcher of stone, shut up, locked, and fast
sealed by the Magistrate?

How was it possible (I say) that his dysciples should come thither? break up
the Monument? take out his body? and carry the same away, never after to be
seen or found, without espiall of some one amongst so many that attended
there? Or if this were possible, (as in reason it is not) yet what profit, what
pleasure, what comfort could they receive hereby? We see that these Apostles
and Disciples of his, who were so abandoned of life and heart in his passion:
after two days only they were so changed, as life and death can be no more
contrary.

For whereas before they kept home in all fear, The great change in Jesus
Disciples by his Resurrection.
and durst appear no where, except among their own private friends: now
they came forth into the streets and common places, and avouched with all
alacrity, and irresistible constancy: even in the faces and hearing of their
greatest enemies, that Jesus was risen from death to life; that they had seen
him; and enjoyed his presence. And that for testimony and confirmation hereof,
they were most ready to spend their lives. And could all this (trow you)
proceed only of a dead body, which they had gotten by stealth into their
possession? would not rather the presence and sight of such a body, so torn,
mangled, and deformed, as Jesus body was, both upon the Cross and before:
have rather dismayed them more, then have given them comfort? Yes truly. And
therefore Pilate the Governor, The examination of the matter by Pilate.
considering these circumstaunces; and that it was unlikely, that either the
body should be stolen away without priuitie of the Soldiers, or if it had
been, that it should yield such life, heart, consolation, and courage to the
stealers: began to give ear more diligently to the matter; and calling to
him the Soldiers that kept the watch, understood by the^ the whole truth of
the accident, to wit, that in their sight and presence, Jesus was risen out of
his Sepulcher to life, and that at his rising, there was so dreadful an
earthquake, with trembling and opening of Sepulchers round about; such
skriches, cries, and commotion of all elements: as they durst not abide longer,
but ran and told the Jewish Magistrates thereof, who being greatly
discontented (as it seemed) with the advertisement: gave the^ money to say,
that while they were sleeping, the body was stolen away from them by his
Disciples.

Pilats Letters to Tyberius, and his proceeding therevppon.
All this wrote Pilate presently to his Lord Tyberius, who was then Emperor of
Rome. And he sent withal, the particular examinations and co^fessions of
diverse others, that had seen and spoken with such as were risen from death at
that time, and had appeared to many of their acquaintance in Jerusalem,
assuring them also of the resurrection of Jesus. Which informations when
Tyberius the Emperor had considered, he was greatly moved therewith, and
proposed to the Senate, that Jesus might be admitted among the rest of the
Roman Gods: offering his own consent, with the privilege of his supreme
royal suffrage to that decree. But the Senate in no wise would agree
thereunto. Whereupon, Tyberius being offended, gave license to all men to
believe in Jesus that would: and forbid upon pain of death, that any Officer or
other, should molest or trouble such as bare good affection, zeal, or
reverence to that name. Thus much testifies Tertulian against the Gentiles,
Tertul. in apolo. pro Christian.
of his own knowledge; who living in Rome a learned man, and pleader of causes,
diverse years before he was a Christian: (which was about one hundred and
foure-score years after our Savior Christ's ascension,) had great ability by
reason of the honor of his family, learning, and place wherein he lived, to
see and know the Records of the Romans. And the same does affirm also
Egisippus; Egesip. lib. 1. hist. Eusebius libro 4. capit. 21. Ruffin lib. 1.
cap. 22.
an other ancient. Writer of no less authority then Tertulian, before whom
he lived.

Neither only diverse Gentiles had this opinion of Jesus Resurrection again
from death, but also sundry Jews of great credit and wisdom, The opinion of
the wiser sort of ^ewes, touching Jesus resurrection in that time.
at that time were enforced to believe it; notwithstanding, it pleased not God
to give them so much grace, as to become Christians. This appears plainly by
the learned Josephus, who writing his story not above forty years after
Christ's passion, took occasion to speak of Jesus and of his Disciples. And
after he had showed how he was Crucified by Pilate, at the instance of the
Jews: and that for all this, his disciples ceased not to love him still: he
adioyneth forthwith these words; I^sephus lib. 14. antiq. cap. 4.
Idcirco illis tertio die vita resumpta, denuo apparuit. That is, for this love
of his Disciples, he appeared unto the^ again the third day, when he had
resumed life unto him. Which express, plain, and resolute words, we may in
reason take, not as the confession only of Josephus, but as the common
judgment, opinion and sentence, of all the discreet and sober men of that
time; laid down and recorded by this Historiographer. In whose days there
were yet many Christians alive, that had seen and spoken with Jesus after his
Resurrection; and infinite Jews, that had heard the same protested by their
fathers, brethren, Kins-folke and friends, who had been themselves eye
witnesses thereof.

And thus having declared and proved the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus, Of
Jesus Ascension.
both how it was fore-shewed, as also fulfilled: there remains nothing more
of necessity to be said in this Section. For that, who soever sees and
acknowledges, that Jesus being dead, could raise himself again to life, will
easily believe also, that he was able likewise to ascend up to heaven.
Whereof notwithstanding, Saint Luke alleges one hundred and twenty witnesses
at the least, Acts, 1.
in whose presence he ascended from the top of the Mount Oliuet, after forty
days space which he had spent with them from the time of his Resurrection.
Likeli-hoodes of truth.
He alleges also the appearing of two Angels among all the people for
testimony thereof. He names the day and place, when, and where it happened.
He recounteth the very words that Jesus spoke at his ascension. He tells
the manner how he ascended, and how a Cloud came down, and received him into
it out of their ^ight. He declares what the multitude did, whether they went,
and in what place they remained afer their departure thence. And finally, he
sets down so many perticulers, as it had been the easiest matter in the
world, for his enemies to have refuted his narration, if all had not been
true. Neither was there any to receive more damage by the falsehood thereof,
then himself and those of his profession, if the matter had been feigned.

Wherefore to conclude at length this treatise of the Birth, Life, Doctrine,
Actions, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus: The conclusion of this
second Section.
seeing nothing has happened in the same, which was not for^-told by the
Prophets of God; nor any thing foreshewed by the same Prophets concerning the
Messiah, which was not fulfilled most exactly, within the compass and course
of Jesus abode upon earth: we may most certainly assure our selves, that as
God can neither foretell an untruth, nor yield testimony to the same: so can
it not be, but that these things which we have showed to have been so
manifestly foreprophecied, and so evidently accomplished, must needs assure
us, that Jesus was the true Messiah. Which thing shall yet more particularly
appear by that which ensued by his power and virtue, after his ascension:
which shall be the argument of the next Section which follows.

How Jesus proved his Deity, after his departure to heaven. SECT. 3.
AS by the deeds and actions of JESUS while he was upon the earth, compared
with the predictions of Gods Prophets from time to time: he has been declared
in the former Sections, to be the true Messiah and Savior of the world; The
contents of this third Section.
so in this that now we take in hand, shall the same be showed by such
things as ensued after his ascension and departure from this world. Wherein
his power and Deity appeared more manifestly, (if it may be so spoken,) then
in other his works which he wrought in his life. In which kind, albeit I
might treat of many and almost infinite branches, yet for order and breuities
sake, I mean only to take in consideration these few that ensue. Wherein, not
only the power of Jesus, but also his love, his care and providence, and most
perfect accomplishment of all his promises; and finally, the justification of
all his speeches, prophecies, and doctrines upon earth have been declared.

And to reduce what is to be said herein to some order and method, it is to
be noted, that in the first place shall be considered the sustentation, The
division of the particular considerations ensuing.
protection, increase, and continuation of Christ's little Church and kingdom,
that himself first planted and left upon earth. The second consideration, shall
be of his Apostles and their Actions. The third, of his Evangelists. The
fourth, of his witnesses and Martyrs throughout the world. The fyft, shall
treat of the kingdom of infernal powers beaten down by his virtue. The sixth,
of the punishment and just revenge that lighted upon his enemies, who most
impugned his divine person in the world. The seventh and last, shall declare
the fulfilling of all such prophecies and predictions, as proceeded from his
divine mouth, while he was conversant upon earth.

The first Consideration.
Now then for the first, it is to be considered, Christ's Church.
that at Jesus departure out of this world from the Mount Oliuet, S. Luke
reports, that all the multitude of his followers, which there had beheld his
ascension into heaven, returned back together into the City of Jerusalem,
and there remained in one house together, continuing in prayer and expectation,
what should become of them. The whole City was bent against them: themselves
were poor and simple people: and diverse of them women: Lands or revenues they
had none to maintain them: nor friends in Court to give them countenance
against their enemies. The name of Jesus was most odious: and whosoever did
favor him, was counted an enemy to the state. There wanted not (perhaps) among
them, who considering the great multitude, would imagine with themselves, what
should become of them: The state of Christ's first Church.
where they should find to maintain and sustain them: what should be the
end of that feeble congregation? For abroad they durst not go, for fear of
persecution: and continue long together they might not, for want of
necessaries. Besides that, every hour they expected to be molested and drawn
forth by Catch-poles and other Officers. And albeit in these dystresses, the
fresh memory of Jesus, and his sweet promises made unto them at his
departure: as also the delectable presence of his blessed Mother, and her often
exhortations and encouragements unto them, did comfort them generally, as may
be supposed: yet to him that by human reason, should ponder and weigh their
present state and condition, it could not choose but seem hard and no ways
durable.

But behold upon the sudden, The coming of the holy Ghost, and what
comforts he brought with him. Acts. 2.
when they had continued now ten days together, and might by all
probability find themselves in very high degree of temporal distresses:
Jesus performed his promise of sending them a COMFORTER, which was the holy
Ghost. By whose coming, besides the internal joy and incredible alacrity and
exultation of mind, they received also fortitude and audacitie, to go forth
into the world. They received the gift of tongues, enabling them to converse
and deal with all sorts of people. They received wisdom and learning, with
most wonderful illumination in highest mysteries, whereby to preach, to teach,
and convince their adversaries. They received the gift of prophecy to
foretell things to come, together with the power of working signs and
miracles, whereby the whole world remained astonished. And for a taste or earnest
penny of that which should ensue, concerning the infinite increase of that
little Congregation: they saw three thousand of their adversaries converted to
them in one day, by a Sermon of S. Peter.

Which increase went on so fast for the time that insued: that within forty
years after, the Gentiles themselves confess, that the branches of this
Congregation, were spread over all the world, Suetonius in vita Nero. Cor.
Tacit. lib. 5. hist.
and began to put in fear the very Roman Emperors themselves. Whereof not
long after, a man that was as learned as ever was any, converted from Paganism
to Christianity, bears record in his defense to an Emperor and his
Officers, who according to the nature of persecutors, accounted Christians for
Traitors and enemies to his state and dignity. Which vulgar objection, this
foresaid learned man refuteth in these words.

Tertulian in apol. ad gentes.
If we were enemies to your estate, you might well seek new Cities and
Counteries whereof to bear government; for that you should have in your Empire
more enemies the^ Citizens. We have filled your Towns, your Cities, your
Provinces, your Islands, your Castles, your Fortresses, your Tents, your
Camps, your Courts, your Palaces, your Senats, and your Market places. Only
we have left your idolatrous Temples unto your selves: all other places are
full of Christians. If we were enemies, what dangerous wars might we make
against you, (albeit our number were far less,) who esteem so little of our
lives, as to offer our selves daily to be slain at your hands? This then is
your safety in very deed, not your persecuting of us, but that we are
honest, patient, and obedient; and that it is more lawful in Christian
Religion, to be killed, then to kill.

By which words of Tertulian, The wonderful quick increase of Christ's Church.
in this first beginning and infancy (as it were) of Christian Religion (for
he lived in the second age after Christ,) we see how this ltitle flock and
kingdom of Jesus was increased, notwithstanding all the resistance and violence
of the world against it^ Which appears by the same Tertulian, to have been
such: In praefat. Apolog.
and was even at that time when he wrote those words (the fourth persecution
being then in most fury:) as all the malefactors of the world together, had
not so much rigor showed against them: as had the most innocent Christian that
lived, for confessing only that name and Religion.

This then declared most apparentlie, that it could not proceed but of some
divine power and supernatural assistance, that in so short a space, amidst the
contradiction and opposition of so many adversaries: among the whyppes, swords,
and tortures of so great, potent, and violent persecutors: this poor, simple,
and feeble congregation should pearse through, and augment it self so
strongly. Especially if we consider the outward means of this increase; The
increase of Christians against nature.
wherein there was nothing to allure or content man's nature: nothing gorgious,
nothing delectable, nothing to please or entertain sensuality.

Plutarch. in Apoth. Prisc. regu^.
We read of an Emperor, that taking in hand to conquer the world, made this
Proclamation for winning men unto his party. The Proclamation of Cyrus,
Monarche of Media.
Who soever will come and be my servant: if he be a foote-man, I will make
him a horseman. If he be a horseman, I will make him ride with Coches. If he
be a Farmour, I will make him a Gentleman. If he possess a cottage, I will
give him a Village. If he have a Village, I will give him a City. If he be
Lord of a City, I will make him Prince of a Region or Country. And as for
gold, I will pour it forth unto them by heaps and weight, and not by number.

This was the Proclamation and Edict of Cyrus to his followers: very glorious
(as we see) in pomp of words and oftentation of style. Jesus Proclamation.
Let us now compare the Proclamation of Jesus, whose entrance and Praeface
was; Math, 3,
Paenitentiam agite: Repent ye. And then it follows: John, 16.
In hoc mundo pressuram habebitis: in this world you shall receive affliction.
And then after again; Math, 10,
They shall whippe and murder you. And yet further: You shall be hateful in the
sight of all men, for my sake. Then is there adjoined: Luke, 9,
He that loves his life, shall loose his soul. After that ensues: he that
will follow me, must bear his Cross. And finally the conclusion is: Luke, 14.
He that comes to me, and does not hate his father, his mother, his wife, his
children, his brethren, his sisters, and also his own life for my sake, he is
not worthy to be my servant.

This was the entertainment proposed by Jesus, to such as would come and
serve under his Banner; with express protestation, that himself was sent into
the world, not to bring peace, Math, 5.
rest, and ease to flesh and blood, but rather to be the cause of sword,
fire, tribulation, combat, and enmity. And yet, with these cold offers,
presented to the world by poor, abject, and most contemptible Officers; and by
this doctrine, so cross and opposite to man's nature, inclination and sensual
appetite: he gained more hearts unto him, within the space of forty years, as
has been said: then ever did Monarche in the world possess loving Subjects,
by what soever temporal allurement they did or might propose. Which argues
most evidently, the omnipotent puissaunce of him, that contrary to man's reason,
could bring to pass so miraculous a conquest.


THere follows in order, the consideration of Christ's Apostles; Of Christ's
Apostles.
which in some respect, may be said more strange and wonderful then the former,
in that they being both rude, simple, and unlearned men, (and for the most
part of the baser sort,) should be chosen and assigned to so great a work, as
was the conversion of all Countries and Nations, and to stand in combat with
the power, learning and wisdom, of all the world. Neither only had they to
contend and fight against their enemies, but also to direct, govern, and
menage all those, who should be adjoined to their Masters kingdom. To which
charge they seemed so untoward and insufficient, in all that time wherein they
lived with him here upon earth: as by they questions and demaundes made unto
him a little before his passion, they might appear to have learned very
little, in three whole years conversation and instruction: and in very deed,
to be incapable of so high mysteries and functions.

Yet notwithstanding, these men, who of themselves were weak and impotent,
after strength and confirmation received by the descending of Gods holy Spirit
into them: became so perfect, able, and most excellent men, as they brought the
whole world in admiration of them. Not only by the most exquisite perfection
of their doctrine, (wherein on a sudden, without study they excelled, and
convinced the greatest Philosophers then living,) but also, and that
especially, by the rare and stupendous miracles, which they wrought in the
sight of all men. The contemplation whereof, as S. Luke reports, drove the
beholders not only into great marvel, Acts. 2^
but also into fear and exceeding terror.

And for example, The Apostles miracles.
he recounteth the restoring of a lame man at the Temple gate of Jerusalem,
which had been a Cripple for the space of forty years and more, and this
miracle was done and testified in the presence and knowledge of all the
City. He records also, Acts, 3.
the dreadful death of Annanias and Saphira, by the only speech and voice of
S. Peter: as in like manner, the healing of infinite sick people, Acts, 5.
by the presence and shadow of the same Apostle. He reports also the most
wonderful deliverance of the said S. Peter, out of the hands and prison of
Herod by the Angel of GOD. The variety of languages which all the Apostles
spoke. The visible descending of the holy Ghost upon all such, on whom the
said Apostles did but lay their hands. 1, Cor. 15. 2, Cor, 12. Act, 9, 22, 26
The miraculous conversion of Saint Paul, by Christ's appearing unto him in
the way, when he went to persecute. Of which miracle, Saint Paul himself
protests in every place afterward, and once especially, in an open audience
and judgment, before King Agrippa, and Festus Governor of Jury.

These miracles and many more are recorded by Saint Luke: whereof some part were
seen by himself, and the rest most evident to all the world, as done in
public before infinite witnesses. Neither is it possible they could be
feigned, for that (as in the like I have before noted,) it had been most easy
to have refelled them, and thereby to have discredited the whole proceedings of
Christian Religion in those first beginnings. The miracles reported of the
Apostles, could not be feigned.
As for example; if the miracle of Saint Peter, being delivered forth of the
hands and prison of Herod Agrippa, had any way been to be touched with
falsehood: how many would there have been of Herod's Officers Courtiers,
servant and friends, that for defense of their Princes honor, (so deeply
tainted by this narration of S. Luke, published not long after the thing was
done,) how many (I say) would have offered themselves to refute and disgrace
the Writer hereof, having so pregnant means by public record to do the
same; So again, whereas the same S. Luke reports of his own knowledge, that
in a City of Macedonie, named Philippi, S. Paul and Silas after many
miracles done, were whypped and put in prison, with a diligent guarde in the
lowest prison of all: their feet locked fast in stocks of Timber, Acts, 16.
and that at midnight when Paul and Silas began to pray, the whole prison
was shaken, and all the doors thrown open, as also the gyues, not only of
those two, but of all the other prisoners upon a sudden burst in sunder: and
that thereupon, not only the Iaylor cast himself at the feet of S. Paul,
but the Magistrates also, (who the day before had caused them to be whypt,)
came and asked them pardon, and humbly entreated them to depart out of their
City. This story (I say) if it had been false, there needed no more for
confutation thereof, but only to have examined the whole City of Philippi,
which could have testified the contrary.

And yet among so many adversaries, None ever durst impugn the miracles of our
Apostles, but by calumniation.
and eager impugners of Christian Religion, as Gods enemy styrred up in the
primative Church, of all sorts and sects of people: no one ever appeared, that
durst attempt to take in hand, the particular improuing of these or the like
miracles: but rather confessing the facts, sought always to discredit them by
other sinister calumniations: namely and commonly, that they were wrought by
the deceits and sleights of Arte-Magick. Math, 12.
Thus said the Jews of the miracles of Jesus, and so said Julian the Apostata,
Apud Cyril lib. 1. cont. Julian. August. lib. de vera Relig.
of the wonderful strange things done by S. Peter and Saint Paul; affirming
them to have been the most expert in Magic, of any that ever lived: and that
Christ wrote a special book of that profession, and dedicated the same to
Peter and Paul: whereas notwithstanding, it is most evident, that Paul was a
persecutor diverse years after Christ departed.

Eusebius lib. cont. Hiero.
One Hierocles also wrote a book, wherein he feigned Appolonius Tyanaeus to have
done the like miracles by Magic, which Christ and his Apostles did by divine
power. And finally, it is a general opinion, ^^a^ both Nero and Julian, gave
themselves so extremely to the study of that vain Science, as no men ever
did the like; upon emulation only of the miracles done in Rome by Peter and
Paul when Nero lived, and by other Saints and Disciples in the time of Julian.

Plin. lib. 30. Not. hist. cap. 1.
But what was the end? Pliny that was a Pagan, writes thus of Nero; that as no
man ever labored more then he in that Science, so no man ever left a more
certain testimony of the marvelous exceeding vanity thereof. Zosimus, in
vita Iulia.
The like in effect writes Zosimus of Julian, albeit himself a malicious
Heathen. And if it were not written, yet their several extraordinary
calamities, and most miserable deaths, which by all their Magic they could
not foresee: does sufficiently testify the same unto us; especially the last
words of Julian: Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 35. hist.
Uicisti Galilaee, vicisti. Thou have won (o Galilaean,) thou have gotten the
victory. Acknowledging thereby, as well the truth of Christ's miracles and of
his folowers, as also the vanity, folly and madness of his own endeavors.

Thus then went forward Christ's Apostles, The success of the Apostles.
and preached him every where throughout the world; Mark, 16.
Domino cooperante and sermonem confirmante, sequentibus signis: that is, (as
S. Mark affirms,) the Lord Jesus working with them, and confirming their
preaching by signs and miracles. In respect of which benign assistance of
Jesus in their actions: Saint Luke says further: Acts. 14.
they dealt most confidently in the Lord: his word of grace giving testimony
unto their doings, and shevving forth signs and most prodigious wonders by
their hands. No persecution, no terror, no threats of enemies, no
difficulty, or danger that might occur, could stay the^ from their course
of setting forth Christ's name and glory. The assurance of the Apostles.
And they were so assured of the truth, by the inward illuminations which
they had, and by this certain testimony of Gods favor and assistance in
doing miracles: ^s one of them writes thus; 1. John. 1.
That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
beheld, which our hands have handled of the word of life: that we do testify
and announce unto you. And another who had S. Paul.
been a grievous persecutor, and was converted without any conference with any
Christian in the world; said, of Jesus that was dead, and risen again: that,
neither tribulation, nor distress, nor famine, nor beggerie, nor danger, nor
persecution, nor dint of sword, Rom, 8.
could daunt him from the service of such a Master. And in another place, he
says, that he esteemed all things of this world, wherein a man might glory,
Phillip. 3.
to be as very dounge and detriments, in respect of the eminent knowledge,
(that is his word) of his Lord Jesus Christ. In which very name he took so
exceeding great delight: as in a few Epistles which he left written, he is
observed to have used this sentence, Dominus noster Jesus Christus, above two
hundred times.

The joyful ending of the Apostles.
Neither endured this in these Apostles for a time only, but all their lives,
which as they spent the same with alacrity in the service of Jesus: so in the
end they gave up the same most cheerfully, to what soever death presented it
self, for confirmation and sealing of their former doctrine; never so full of
confidence, courage, and consolation, as at that hour, 2. Tim. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
nor ever so boldly denouncing their Master, or talking so joyfully of
rewards, Crowns and kingdoms, as at the very last instant and vpshotte of
their worldly combat. This then declares most manifestly, that the actions of
these men, proceeded not of human spirit, nor could be performed by the power
of man; but by the divine force and supernatural assistance of their Lord and
God, whom they confessed.

The third Consideration.
AND thus much in brevity of Christ's Apostles. Of the Evangelists.
There ensue next his Evangelists: that is, such men as have left unto us
written, his birth, life, doctrine, and death. Wherein is to be noted, that
Jesus being God, took a different way from the custom of man, in delivering
unto us his Laws and precepts. For that men, who have been lawmakers unto the
world, knew no surer way of publishing their Law, and procuring authority to
the same, then to write them with their own hands, and in their life time to
establish their promulgation. So Lycurgus, Solon, and others among the
Graecians: Numa to the Romans: Mahomet to the Sarafins: and diverse other in
like manner. Jesus left nothing written by himself.
But Jesus to show his divine power in directing the pen and style of his
Evangelists, would not leave any thing written by himself, but passed from
this world in simplicity and silence, without any further show or ostentation
of his own doings: meaning notwithstanding by his eternal wisdom, that the
prophecy of Ezechiell should be fulfilled, Ezechi. 1.
which fore-signified the being of his four irrefragable witnesses, which day
and night without rest, should preach, extol, and magnify their Lord and
Master to the worlds end.

The different qualities and circumstaunces of the four Evangelists.
Four then were fore-prophecied, and four as we see by Gods providence, were
provided to fulfill the same prophecy. The first and last are two Apostles,
that wrote as they had seen. The two middle are two disciples, who registered
things as they had understood by conference with the Apostles. The first
Gospel was written by an Apostle, to give light and open the way to all the
rest. And the last in like manner was written by an Apostle, to give authority
and confirmation to all the former. The first was written in the Hebrew or
Jewish tongue, for that Jesus actions were done in that Country, to the end
that thereby, either the whole Nation might believe them, or the obstinate
impugn them. The other three were written in the public tongues of all other
Nations: that is, in the Greek and Roman languages, if it be true ( See
Armacan. lib. 9. de qu^est.
which diverse hold,) that S. Marks Gospel was first written in Latin.

They wrote their stories in diverse Countries, Circumstances of truth in our
Evangelists.
each one remaining far distant from another, and yet agreed they all (as we
see) most exactlie, in the very same narration. They wrote in diverse times, the
one after the other, and yet the latter did neither correct nor reprehend any
thing in the former. They published their stories, when infinite were alive
that knew the facts, and many more that desired to impugn them. They set
down in most of their particular narrations, the time, the day, the hour, the
place, the Village, the house, the persons, the men, the women, and other the
like. Which circumstaunces, the more they are in number, the more easy to be
refuted if they were not true. Neither did they in Jury, write of things done
in India, but in the same Country if self, in Towns and Cities that were
publicly known: in Bethania and Bethsaida, Villages hard by Jerusalem: in
the Suburbs and hyls about the City, in such a street, at such a gate, in
such a porch of the Temple, at such a fish-poole, which al people in Jerusalem
did every day behold.

The publishing of our Gospels.
They published their writing in their own life time: and preached in word, so
much as in writing they had recorded. They permitted the same to the judgment
and examination of all Christ's Church, especially of the Apostles, who were
able to discern every least thing therein contained. So Saint Mark set forth
his Gospel, Hieron. in catalog script. Eccles.
by the instruction and approbation of S. Peter, as also did S. Luke, by the
authority of S. Paul. They altered not their wrytings afterward, as other
Authors are wont in their latter editions, nor ever corrected they one jot of
that which they had first set down. And that which never happened in any
other wrytings in the world besides, nor ever Prince or Monarch was able to
bring to pass, for credit of his Edicts or sanctions: they gave their lives
for defense and justifying of that which they had written.

The manner of style in our Evangelists.
Their manner of writing, is sincere and simple, without all art,
amplification, or rethoricall exhortation. They flatter none, no not Jesus
himself, who^ they most adore: nor in confessing him to be their God and
Creator, do they conceal his infirmities of flesh, in that he was man: Math,
21. Mark. 2. John, 7. Luke, 19.
as his hunger and thyrst: his being weary: how he wept: his passions of
fear, and the like. So likewise in the Apostles that were the Governors,
superiors and heads of the rest: do these Evangelists dissemble, hyde, or
pass over no such things as were defects, and might seem to worldly eyes to
turn to their discredits. As for example, how Christ rebuked them for their
dulnes in understanding: Mark, 15^ John, 10. 11, and 20.
how after long instruction, they proposed notwithstanding, very rude and
impertinent questions unto him: how Thomas would not believe the attestation
of his fellows: how S. John and S. James the sons of Zebedee, ambitiously
solicited to have the pre-eminence of sitting nearest to Christ in his glory:
which latter clause, being set down cleerelie by Saint Mark, Mark, 10.
while yet S. John the Apostle was living, the same was never denied, nor taken
ill by the said Apostle, neither was saint Marks Gospel any thing the less
approved by him, albeit he lived longest, and wrote last of all the rest.

Nay, which is more, A special point to be observed in our Evangelists.
and greatly (no doubt) to be observed; these Evangelists were so sincere and
religious in their narrations, as they noted especially the imperfections of
themselves, and of such other as they principally respected. So Saint Matthew
names himself Matthew the Publicane. Math, 10. Mark, 14.
And so S. Mark being Peter's dysciple, records particulerly, how S. Peter
thrice denied his Lord and Master. Saint Luke that was scholar and dependent
of S. Paul, makes mention alone of the differences between Paul and
Barnabas: Acts. 15.
and in the Story of S. Stephens death, after all his narration ended, he
adds a clause that in humane judgment might have been left out, to wit,
Acts, 7.
Saulus erat consentiens neci eius: Saul was consenting and culpable of
Stephens death. Whereby we may perceive most perspicuously, that as these men
were plain, sincere and simple, and far from presuming to devise any thing
of themselves, so were they religious, and had scruple to pass over, or leave
out any thing of the truth, in favor of themselves, or of any other whosoever.

These men's wrytings then, were published and received for undoubted truth, by
all that lived in the very same age, and were privy to the perticulers
therein contained. They were copied and abroad into infinite men's hands, and so
conserved with all care and reverence, as holy and divine scripture. They were
read in Churches throughout al Countries and Nations: expounded, preached, and
taught by all Pastors, and commentaries made upon them by holy Fathers from
time to time. So that no doubt can be made, No doubt but that we have the true
wrytings of our Evangelists.
but that we have the very same wrytings incorrupt as the Authors left them:
for that it was impossible for any enemy to corrupt so many copies over the
world, without discovery and resistaunce. And the same very text, words, and
sentences, which from age to age the learned Fathers do allege out of these
Scriptures, we find them now, as they had them at that time. As for example,
S. John that lived longest of all the Apostles and Evangelists, had among other
Scholars and auditors, Papias, Ignatius, and Policarpus, all which agree of
the four Gospels and other writings left unto us in the new Testament
affirming S. John to have approved the same. These men were Masters again to
Justinius Martyr, Ireneus and other, whose writings remain unto us. And if they
did not, yet their sayings and judgments touching the Scriptures, are recorded
unto us by Eusebius and other Fathers of the next age after, Eusebius. lib. 5.
hist. cap 15.
and so from hand to hand until our days. So that of this, there can be no
more doubt, then whether Rome, Constantinople, Jerusalem, and other such
renouned Cities known to all the world at this day, be the very same whereof
Authors have treated so much in ancient times.


AND thus much of Christ's Evangelists, for whose more credit, and for
confirmation of things by them recorded: Of Martyrs.
his divine providence preordained, that infinite witnesses, (whom we call
Martyrs) should offer up their blood in the Primative Church and after.
Whereas for no other doctrine, profession, or Religion in the world, the like
was ever heard of; albeit among the Jews in the time of the Machabees, Macab.
lib. 1. et 2.
and at some other times also, when that Nation for their sins were afflicted
by Heathen Princes, some few were tyrannized and injuriously put to death; yet
commonly, and for the most part, this was rather of barbarous cruelty in the
Pagans for their resistaunce, then directly for hatred of Jewish Religion. And
for the number, there is no doubt, but that more Christians were put to death
with in two months for their belief throughout the world, then were of
Jews for two thousand years before Christ's coming. Which is undoubtedly a
matter very wonderful, considering, that the Jewish Religion impugned no less
the Pagan Idolatry, then does the doctrine of the Christians. But this came
to pass that Christ's words might be fulfilled, who said; Math, 5.
I come not to bring peace but the sword. And again, I send you forth as
sheep among wolves. Math, 10.
That is to say, to be torn and harried, and your blood to be devoured.

In which extreme and most incredible sufferings of Christians, Three points
to be considered in our Martyrs.
three points are worthy of great consideration. The first, what infinite
multitudes of all states, conditions, sex, qualities and age, did suffer
daily for testimony of this truth. The second, See the narration of
Philaeas, bishop in Africa touching this point, alleged by Eusebius, lib. 8.
hist. cap. 11. et 12.
what intolerable and unaccustomed torments, not heard of in the world
before, were devised by Tyrants for afflicting this kind of people. The
third, what invincible courage and unspeakable alacrity, the Christians
showed, in bearing out these afflictions, which the enemies themselves could
not attribute, but to some divine power and supernatural assistance.

And for this later point of comfort in their sufferings, The singular
alacrity of Christians in their sufferings.
I will allege only this testimony of Tertulian against the Gentiles, who
objected, that wicked men suffered also as well as Christians; whereto this
learned Doctor made answer in these words. Truth it is, that many men are
prone to ill, and do suffer for the same: but yet dare they not defend their
evil to be good, as Christians do their cause. For that every evil thing by
nature, does bring with it either fear or shame: Tertul. in. Apolog capit. 1.
and therefore we see, that malefactors, albeit they love evil, yet would
they not appear so to the world, but desire rather to lie in covert. They
tremble when they are taken, and when they are accused, they deny all, and do
scarce oftentimes confess their doings upon torments. And finally, when they
are condemned, they lament, moan, and do impute their hard fortune, to
destiny, or to the Planets. But the Christian, what does he like to this? is
there any man ashamed? or does any man repent him when he is taken, except it
be for that he was not taken rather? If he be noted by the enemy for a
Christian, he glories in the same: if he be accused, he defends not
himself: if he be asked the question, he confesses it willingly: if he be
condemned, he yields thanks. What evil is there then in the Christian
cause, which lacks the natural sequel of evil? I mean fear, shame,
tergiuersation, repentance, sorrow, and deploration? What evil (I say) can
this be deemed, whose guiltines is joy? whose accusation is desire? whose
punishment is happiness?

Hitherto are the words of learned Tertulian, Jesus assistance to his Martyrs.
who was an eye witness of that he wrote, and had no small part in the cause
of those that ^uffered, being himself in that place and state, as daily he
might expect to taste of the same affliction. To which combat, how ready he
was, may appear by diverse places of this his Apology, wherein he utters
(besides his zeal and fervor) a most confident security, and certain
assurance of Jesus assistaunce, by that which he had seen performed to
infinite other, in their greatest distresses, from the same Lord before. So
that nothing does more acertaine us of the divine power and omnipotency of
Jesus, then the fortitude inuinsible, which above all humane reason, force, and
nature, he imparted to his Martyrs.

The fifth Consideration.
AFter which consideration, The subjection of spyrits.
there comes to be weighed, the fifth point before mentioned, which is, of the
same power and omnipotency of Jesus, declared and exercised upon the spirits
infernal. Which thing, partly may appear by the Oracles alleged in the end
of the former Section, (wherein those spirits foretold; that an Hebrew child
should be borne; to the utter subversion and ruin of their tyrannical
dominion:) and much more at large the same might be declared, by other
aunswers and Oracles uttered after Christ's nativity, and registered in the
monuments even of the Heathens themselves. Whereof he that desires to see more
ample mention, (especially out of Porphyrie who then was living,) let him read
Eusebius sixth book, De preparatione Euangelica, where he shall find store: and
namely, that Apollo many times exclaimed, Hei mihi, congemiscite: Hei mihi: hei
mihi: Oraculorum defecit me claritas. Woe unto me, lament ye with me; woe unto
me, woe unto me: for that the honor of Oracles has now forsaken me. Which
complaints and lamentations, are nothing else but a plain confession, that
Jesus was he, of whom a Prophet said diverse ages before: Sopho, 2.
Attenuabit omnes Deos terrae: he shall wear out and bring to beggerie, all the Gods or Idols of the earth. This confessed also the wicked spirits
themselves, when a^ Christ's appearing in Jury, they came unto him diverse
times and besought him, not to afflict or torment them, nor command the^
presently to return to hell, but rather, to permit them some little time of
entertainment, in the Sea, or Mountains, or among herds of Swyne, or the
like. Which confession they made in the sight of all the world, and declared
the same afterward by their facts and deeds.

For presently upon Jesus death, and upon the preaching of his name and
Gospel throughout the world, Of the myraculous ceasing of Oracles at Christ's
appearing.
the Oracles which before were abundant in every Province and Country, were
put to silence. Whereof I might allege the testimonies of very many Gentiles
themselves, Iuuenal.
as that of Iuuenall. Cessant Oracula Delphis. Saty. 6.

All Oracles at Delphos do now cease, etc.

That also of another Poet: Excessere omnes adytis, arisque relictis
Dii, quibus imperium hoc steterat, etc. Lucan.



That is, the Gods by whom this Empire stood, are all departed from their
Temples, and have abandoned their Altars and place of habitation. Strabo has
also these express words. Strab. lib. Geograph.
The Oracle of Delphos at this day, is to be seen in extreme beggerie and
mendicitie.

And finally, Plutarch. de defectu oraculo.
Plutarch that lived within one hundred years after Christ, made a special
book to search out the causes, why the Oracles of the Gods were ceased in
his time. And after much turning and winding many ways, resolved upon two
principal points, Two insufficient causes.
as causes thereof. The first, for that in his time there was more store of
wise men then before, whose aunswers might stand in steed of Oracles: and the
other, that peradventure the spirits which were accustomed to yield Oracles,
were by length of time grown old and dead. Both which reasons in the very
common sense of all men, must needs be false; and by Plutarch himself, can not
stand with probability. For first, in his Books which he wrote of the lives
of ancient famous men, he confesses, that in such kind of wisdom, as he
most esteemed, they had not their equals among their posterity. Secondly, in
his Treatises of Philosophy, he passes it for a ground, that spyrits, nor
depending of material bodies, cannot dye, or wexe old; and therefore of
necessity he must conclude, that some other cause is to be yielded of the
ceassing of these Oracles, which cannot be but the presence and commandment
of some higher power, according to the saying of S. John, 1. John, 3.
To this end appeared the son of GOD, that he might dyssolue (or overthrow)
the works of the devil.

Neither did Jesus this alone in his own person, but gave also power and
authority to his dysciples and followers to do the like, according to their
commission in Saint Mathewes Gospel: Math, 10.
Super omnia Demonia et spiritus immundos etc. You shall have authority over
all devils and unclean spirits. Which commission, how they afterward put it
in execution, the whole world yields sufficient testimony. And for examples
sake only, I will allege in this place, an offer or challenge made for proof
thereof, Tertul. in Apolog. ad gentes.
by Tertulian to the Heathen Magistrates and persecutors of his time, his words
are these. Let there be brought here in presence before your tribunal
seats, some person, who is certainly known to be possessed with a wicked
spirit, and let that spirit be commanded by a Christian to speak, and he shall
as truly confess himself to be a devil, A most confide^t offer made by
Tertulian.
as at other times to you, he will falsely say he is a God. Again, at the same
time: let there be brought forth one of these (your Priests or Prophets) that
will seem to be possessed with a divine spirit, I mean of those that speak
gasping, etc. (in whom you imagine your Gods to talk, and except that spyrite
also, (commanded by us,) do confess himself to be a devil, (being affrayd
indeed to lie unto a Christian:) do you shed the blood of the Christians in
that very place. etc. None will lie to their own shame, but rather for honor
or advantage: yet those spirits will not say to us, that Christ was a Magitian,
as you do, nor that he was of the common condition of men. They will not say,
he was stolen out of the Sepulcher, but they will confess, that he was the
virtue, wisdom, and word of God; that he is in heaven, and that he shall come
again to be our Judge, etc. Neither will these devils in our presence, deny
themselves to be unclean spirits, and damned for their wickedness, and that
they expect his most horrible judgment, professing also, that they do fear
Christ in God, and God in Christ: and that they are made subject unto his
servant.

Hitherto are the words of Tertulian, containing (as I have said) a most
confident challenge, and that upon the lives and blood of all Christians, to
make trial of their power in controling those spirits, which the Romans and
other Gentiles adored as their Gods. Which offer, seeing it was made and
exhibited to the persecutors themselves, then living in Rome, well may we be
assured, that the enemy would never have omitted so notorious an advantage, if
by former experience he had not been persuaded, that the joining herein
would have turned and redounded to his own confusion.

The wonderful authority of Christians over spirits.
And this puissant authority of Jesus imparted to Christians, extended it self
so far forth: that not only their words and commandments, but even their
very presence did shut the mouths, and drive into fear the miserable
spirits. Lact. li. 2. divine. Instit. cap. 16.
So Lactantius shows that in his days, among many other examples of this
thing, a seely seruing-man that was a Christian, following his Master into a
certain Temple of Idols, the Gods cried out, that nothing could be well done,
as long as that Christian was in presence. The like records Eusebius of
Dioclesian the Emperor, who going to Apollo for an Oracle, received answer,
Eusebius. lib. 5. de prap. Euan.
That the just men were the cause that he could say nothing. Which just men,
Apollos Priests interpreted, to be meant ironically of Christians: and
theruppon Dioclesian began his most fearce and cruel persecution in Eusebius
days. Sozomenus also writes, Sozom. lib. 3. hist, cap. 18.
that Julian the Apostata, endeavoring with many sacrifices and coniurations,
to draw an answer from Apollo Daphnaeus, in a famous place called Daphne, in
the suburbs of Antioche: understood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of
Saint Babylas the Martyr, that lay near to the place, were the impediment why
that God could not speak. And thereuppon, Julian caused the same body
presently to be removed. And finally, hereof it proceeded, that in all
sacrifices, coniurations, and other mysteries of the Gentiles, there was
brought in that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian: Lucian. in Alex.
Extant Christiani, let Christians depart; for that while they were present,
nothing could be well accomplished.

To conclude, the Pagan Porphyrie, that of all other most earnestly endeavored
to impugn and dysgrace us Christians, Porph. li. 1. cont. Christ. apud. Euse.
lib. 5. cap. 1. de prae. Euang.
and to hold up the honor of his enfeebled Idols; yet discoursing of the
great plague that reigned most furiously in the City of Messina, in Cicilie
where he dwelt: yields this reason, why AEsculapius the God of Physic,
(much adored in that place,) was not able to help them. A marvelous
confession of Porphyrie.
It is no marvel (says he) if this City so many years be vexed with the
plague, seeing that both AEsculapius and all other Gods be now departed from
it, by the coming of Christians. For since that men have begun to worship
this Jesus, we could never obtain any profit by our Gods.

Thus much confessed this Patron of Paganism, concerning the maime that his
Gods had received by Jesus honor. Which albeit he spoke with a malicious
mind, to bring Christians in hatred and persecution thereby, yet is the
confession notable, and confirms that Story which Plutarch in his forenamed
book does report; A pretty story of Plutarch.
that in the later years of the reign of the Emperor Tyberius, Plutarch. de
defectu oraculo.
a strange voice, and exceeding horrible clamor, with hydeous cries, skriches,
and howlings, were heard by many in the Grecian sea, complaining that the
great God Pan was now departed. And this Plutarch (that was a Gentile)
affirms to have been alleged and approved, before the Emperor Tyberius,
who meruailed greatly thereat, and could not by all his Diuiners and
Southsayers, whom he called to that consultation, gather out any reasonable
meaning of this wonderful accident. But we Christians, comparing the time
wherein it happened, unto the time of Jesus death and passion, and finding the
same fully to agree, may more the^ probably persuade our selves, that by the
death of their great God Pan, (which signifies all,) was imported the ruin
and utter overthrow of all the wicked spirits and Idols upon earth.

The sixth Consideration.
AND thus has the Deity of Jesus been declared and proved by his omnipotent
power, The punishment of enemies.
in subduing infernal enemies. Now rests it for us to make manifest the
same, by his like power and divine justice, showed upon diverse of his enemies
here on earth; whose greatest punishment, albeit for the most part, he
reserueth for the life to com, yet som-times for manifestation of his
omnipotency, (as specially it was behouefull in those first days of his
appearaunce in the world) he chasteneth them also even here on earth in the eye
and sight of all men. So we read of the most infamous and miserable death of
Herod the first, surnamed Ascolonita, Herod Ascolonita.
who after his persecution of Christ in his infancy, and the slaughter of the
infants in Bethleem for his sake: Joseph. lib. 17. antiq. cap. 10. et lib. 1.
de bell. Iudai. cap. 21.
was wearied out by a loathsome life, in fear and horror of his own wife and
children: whom after he had most cruelly murdered, was enforced also by
desperation, through his inspeakable greefes, vexations, and torments, to offer
his own hand to his own destruction, if he had not been stayed by his
friends that stood about him.

After him, Archilaus.
Archelaus his eldest Son, that was a terror to Jesus at his return from
Egypt, fell also by Gods justice into marvelous calamities. Joseph. lib. 17.
antiq. cap. 15. lib. 2. de bell. Judah. cap. 6.
For first, being left as king by his father, Augustus would not allow or
ratify that succession; but of a king made him a Tetrarch, assigning unto him
only the fourth part of that dominion which his Father had before. And then
again after nine years space, took that away in like manner, with the greatest
dishonor he could devise, seazing upon all his treasure and riches by way of
confiscation, and condemning his person to perpetual banishment, wherein he
died most miserably in Vienna in France.

Herod Antipas.
Not long after this, the second son of Herod the first, named Herod Antipas,
Tetrarch of Galilie, who put S. John Baptist to death, and scorned Jesus before
his passion, (whereat both himself and Herodias his Concubine were present:
Joseph. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 9. lib. 2. de bell. cap. 8.
) was deposed also by Caius the Emperor, (being accused by Agrippa his
nearest kinseman) and most con^umeliously sent in exile; first, to Lions in
France, and after that, to the most deserte and inhabitable places in Spain,
where he with Herodias wandered up and down in extreme calamity so long as
they lived, and finally, ended their days abandoned of all men. In which
misery also it is recorded, that the dancing Daughter of Herodias, Herodias
daughter.
who had in her iolitie demanded John Baptists head, being on a certain
time enforced to pass over a frozen River, Niceph. lib. ^. cap. 20.
suddenly the Ise brake, and she in her fall, had her head cut off by the
same Ise, without hurting the rest of her body, to the great admiration of all
the lookers on.

The like event had another of Herod's family, named Herod Agrippa, Herod
Agryppa.
the accuser of the forenamed Herod the Tetrarch; who in his great glory and
triumph having put to death S. James, the brother of S. John Evangelist, and
imprisoned S. Peter, was soon after in a public assembly of Princes and
Nobles at Caesaria, stricken from heaven with a most horrible disease, whereby
his body putrified, and was eaten with vermin, Acts. 12. Joseph. lib. 19.
antiq. cap. 7.
as both S. Luke records, and Josephus affirms. And the same Josephus, with
no small marvel in himself, declares; that at the very same time when he
wrote his story, Lib. 18. cap. 7.
(which was about threescore and ten years after the death of Herod the
first,) the whole progeny and offspring, kindred and family of the said
Herod, The stock of Herod soon extinguished.
(which he says was exceeding great, by reason he had many wives together,
with many children, brothers and sisters, besides Nephews and kinse-folke:)
were al extinguished in most miserable sort, and gave a testimony (says
Josephus) to the world, of the most vain confidence, that men do put in
human felicity.

And as the punishments lighted openly upon Jesus professed enemies in Jury:
The punishments of the Romans.
so escaped not all the Romans their chastisement; I mean such, as
especially had their hands in persecution of him, or of his folowers after him.
For first, Pilate.
of Pontius Pilate that gave sentence of death against him, we read, that after
great disgrace received in Jury, Eutrop. lib. 7. hist. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7.
hist.
he was sent home into Italy, and there by manifest dis-fauours showed unto
him by the Emperor his Master, fell into such desperation, as he slew
himself with his own hands. And secondly of the very Emperors themselves,
who lived from Tyberius (under who^ Jesus su^fered) unto Constantine the great,
under whom Christian Religion took dominion over the world, (which contained
the space of three hundred years,) very few or none escaped the manifest
scourges of Gods dreadful justice, showed upon them at the knytting up of
their days. For examples sake; Tyberius, that permitted Christians to live
freely, Tertuli. in Apolog.
and made a Law against their molestation, (as before has been showed,) died
peaceably in his bed. Caligula.
But Caligula that followed him, for his contempt showed against all divine
power, in making himself a God: was soon after murdered by the consent of his
dearest friends. Nero also, Nero.
who first of all other began persecution against the Christians, within few
months after he had put S. Peter and S. Paul to death in Rome, (having
murdered in like manner, his own Mother, Brother, Wife, and Master,) was
upon the sudden, from his glorious estate and majesty, thrown down into
such horrible distress and confusion in the sight of all men: as being
condemned by the Senate, to have his head thrust into a Pyllerie, and there
most ignominiously to be whypped to death: was constrained, for avoiding the
execution of that terrible sentence, to massacre himself with his own hands,
by the assistance of such as were dearest unto him.

Many Emperors that died myserably.
The like may be showed in the tragical ends of Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
Domitian, Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Marcinus, Antoninus, Alexander, Decius,
Gallus, Volutianus, AEmilianus, Valerianus, Galienus, Caius, Carinus,
Maximianus, Maxentius, Lucinius and others. Whose miserable deaths, a Noble
man and Counselor, (well near one thousand years past) did gather against
Zosimus a Heathen writer, E^agrius Scolast. lib. 3. hist. cap. 41.
to show thereby the power-full hand of Jesus upon his enemies: adding
furthermore, that since the time of Constantine, (whiles Emperors have been
Christians) few or no such examples can be showed, except it be upon Julian
the Apostata, Valens the Arrian heretic, or some other of like detestable and
notorious wickedness. And thus much of particular men chastised by Jesus.

But if we desire to have a full example of his justice upon a whole Nation
together; The chastisement of Jerusalem, and of the Jewish people.
let us consider what befell Jerusalem and the people of Jury, for their
barbarous cruelty practiced upon him, in his death and passion. And truly, if
we believe Josephus and Philo the Jewish Historiographers, (who lived either
with Christ, or immediately after him,) it can hardly be expressed by the tongue
or pen of man, what insufferable calamities and miseries, were inflicted to
that people (presently upon the ascension of Jesus,) by Pilate their Governor;
Joseph. lib. 19. an^iq. li. 2. et. 3. de bell. Iudai. Philo. in Flacco et lib.
2. de leg. Cornel. Tac. lib. 12.
under Tyberius the Emperor; and then again by Petronius under Caligula, and
after that, by Cumanus, under Claudius; and lastly by Festus and Albinus,
under Nero. Through whose cruelties; that Nation was enforced finally to
rebel, and take Arms against the Roman Empire, which was the cause of their
utter ruin and extirpation by Tytus and Vespasian. At what time besides the
overthrow of their City, burning of their Temple, and other infinite
distresses, which Josephus an eye-witnes protests, that no speech or
discourse human can declare. The same Author likewise records, eleven
hundred thousand persons to have been slain, and foure-score and seauenteen
thousand taken alive, who were either put to death afterward in public
tryumphes, or sold openly for bond-slaues into all parts of the world.

And in this universal calamity of the Jewish Nation, being the most
notorious and grievous, How Christ's death was punished with like circumstances
upon the Jews.
that ever happened to people or nation before or after them, (for the Romans
never practiced the like upon others) it is singulerly to be observed, that in
the same time and place, in which they had put Jesus to death before: that is,
in the feast of the Paschal, when their whole Nation was assembled at
Jerusalem, from all parts, Provinces, and Countries of the earth: they received
this their most pitiful subversion, and that by the hands of the Roman
Caesar, to whom by public cry, they had appealed from Jesus but a little
before. Yea, further it is observed and noted, that as they apprehended Jesus,
and made the entrance to his passion upon the Mount Oliuet: so Titus, Joseph.
lib. 5. de bello cap. 8.
(as Josephus writes) upon the same Mount planted his first siege for their
final destruction. And as they led Jesus from Caiphas to Pilate, afflicting
him in their presence: so now were they themselves led up and down from
John to Simon, Capit. 27.
(two Tyrants that had usurped dominion within the City,) and were scourged
and tormented before the tribunal seats. Again, as they had caused Jesus to
be scoffed, beaten, and villainously entreated by the Soldiers in Pilats
Palace: so were now their own principal Rulers and Noble men, (as Josephus
writes,) most scornfully abused, beaten, and crucified by the same Soldiers.
Which latter point of crucifying, or villainous putting to death upon the
Cross, was begun to be practiced by the Romans upon the Jewish Gentry,
immediately after Christ's death and not before. And now at this time of the war
Josephus affirms, that in some one day, five hundred of his Nation were
taken and put to this opprobrius kind of punishment; in so much, that for the
great multitude, he says: Lib. 5. de bello^ cap^ 28.
Nec locus sufficeret Crucibus, nec Cruces corporibus: that is, neither the
place was sufficient to contain so many Crosses as the Romans set up,
nor the Crosses sufficient to sustain so many bodies as they murdered by that
torment.

This dreadful and unspeakable misery, fell upon the Jews about forty
years after Christ's ascension, A marvelous providence of God for delivering
the Christians that were in Jerusalem at the time of destruction.
when they had showed themselves most obstinate and obdurate against his
doctrine, delivered unto the^, not only by himself, but also by his
disciples; of which disciples they had now slain Saint Stephen and S. James,
and had driven into banishment both S. Peter and S. Paul, and other that had
preached unto them.

To which later two Apostles, (I mean Saint Peter and Saint Paul,) our
Savior Christ appeared a little before their martyrdomes in Rome, (as
Lactantius writes,) and showed, that within three or four years after their
deaths, he was to take revenge upon their Nation, by the utter destruction of
Jerusalem and of that generation. Lib. 4. divine. Instit. cap. 2^.
Which secret advise, the said Lactantius affirmeth^ that Peter and Paul
revealed to other Christians in Jury; whereby it came to pass, (as Eusebius
also and other Authors do mention, Eusebius lib, 3. hist. capit, 5. Niceph,
cap, 3.
) that all the Christians living in Jerusalem, departed thence, not long before
the siege began, to a certain Town named Pella, beyond Jordan, which was
assigned them for that purpose by Jesus himself, for that it being in the
dominion of Agryppa, (who stood with the Romans,) it remained in peace and
safety, while all Jury besides was brought to desolation.

The Jewish miseries after the destruction of Jerusalem.
This then was the providence of God for the punishment of the Jews at that
time. And ever after, their estate declined from worse to worse: and their
myseries daily multiplied throughout the world. Whereof he that will see a
very lamentable narration, let him read but the last Book only of Josephus
history De bello Iudaico, wherein is reported besides other things, that after
the war was ended, and all the public slaughter ceased, Tytus sent
threescore thousand Jews, as a present to his Father to Rome, there to be put
to death in diverse and sundry manners. Others he applied to be spectacles for
pastime to the Romans that were present with him; whereof Josephus says that
he saw with his own eyes, two thousand and five hundred murdered and
consumed in one day, by fight and combat among themselves, Joseph, lib, 7, de
bell, cap, 20, et 21.
and with wild beasts at the Emperors appointment. Others were assigned in
Antioche and other great Cities, to serve for fagottes in their famous
bondfires at times of triumph. Others were sold to be bond-slaues, others
condemned to dyg and hew stones for ever. And this was the end of that war
and desolation.

After this again under Traiane the Emperor, The final desolation of the
Jewish Nation.
there was so infinite a number of Jews slain, and made away by Marcus Turbo
in Africa, and Lucius Quintus in the East: (as all hystories agree) that it is
impossible to express the multitude. But yet more wonderful it is, which the
same Hystorians report: that in the eyghteene year of Adrian the Emperor,
Oros^ li, 7, ca, 13, Ariston pellaeus in hist. Eusebius, lib, 4, capit 8, Niceph,
libro, 3, cap, 24,
one Julius Seuerus being sent to extinguish all the remnant of the Jewish
generation: destroyed in small ^yme nine-tie and eight Towns and Villages
within that Country, and slew five hundred and four-score thousand of that
blood and Nation in one day: at which time also he beat down the City of
Jerusalem in such sort, as he left not one stone standing upon another of
their ancient buildings: but caused some part thereof to be reedified again,
and inhabited only by Gentiles. He changed the name of the City, and called
it The Emperors name was Aelius Adrianus.
AELIA, after the Emperors name. He drove all the progeny and offspring of
the Jews forth of all those Countries, with a perpetual Law confirmed by
the Emperor, that they should never return: no, nor so much as look back
from any high or eminent place to that Country again. And this was done to
the Jewish Nation by the Roman Emperors, for accomplishing that demand,
which their principal elders had made not long before to Pilate the Roman
Magistrate, concerning Jesus most injurious death, crying out with one consent
and voice, Math, 25.
to wit, Let his blood be upon us, and upon our posterity.


AND herein alfo, The fulfilling of Jesus prophecies.
(I mean in the most wonderful and notorious chastisement or rather
reprobation of the Jewish people, which of all the world was Gods peculier
before,) is set out unto us, as it were in a glass, the seventh and last
point, which we mentioned in the beginning of this Section: to wit, the
fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as Jesus uttered when he was upon
earth; as namely at one time, after a long and vehement commination made to the
Scribes and Pharisees, and principal men of that nation, (in which he
repeateth eight several times the dreadful threat woe:) he concludes
finally, that all the just blood, injuriously shed, Math, 23.
from the first Martyr Abel, should be revenged very shortly upon that
generation. And in the same place, he menaceth the populus City of Jerusalem,
that it should be made desert. And in another place he assures them, Luke,
21.
that one stone should not be left standing thereof upon another. And yet
further he pronounced upon the same City these words: Luke, 19.
The days shall come upon thee, and thine enemies shall enuiron thee with a
wall, and shall besiege thee: they shall straiten thee on every side, and shall
beat thee to the ground, and thy children in thee. And yet more particulerlie,
he fore-telleth the very signs, Jesus speeches of Jerusalem.
whereby his disciples should perceive when the time indeed was come, using
this speech unto them. Luke, 21.
When you shall see Jerusalem besieged with an Army: then know ye that her
desolation is at hand: for that these are the days of revenge, to the end all
may be fulfilled which is written. Great distress shall fall upon this earth,
and vengeance upon this people. They shall be slain by dint of the sword,
and shall be led as slaves into all Countries. And Jerusalem shall be trodden
under feet by the Gentiles, until the times of Nations be accomplished.

This fore-tolde Jesus of the misery that was to fall upon Jerusalem, The
circumstaunce of the time, when Jesus spoke his words, and when they were
written.
and upon that people (by the Romans and other Gentiles,) when the Jews
seemed to be in most security, and greatest amity with the Romans, (as also
they were when the same things were written,) and consequently at that time,
they might seem in all human reason, to have less cause then ever before to
misdoubt such calamities. And yet how certain and assured foreknowledge,
(and as it were most sensible feeling,) Jesus had of these miseries, he
declared, not only by these express words, and by their event: Luke. 19.
but also by those pitiful tears he shed upon sight and consideration of
Jerusalem, and by the lamentable speech he used to the women of that City,
who wept for him at his passion, persuading them to weep rather for themselves
and for their children, Luke, 23.
(in respect of the miseries to follow,) then for him.

Which words and predictions of Jesus, together with sundry other his
speeches, fore-shewing so particularly the imminent calamities of that Nation,
(and that, as I have said, at such time, when in human discourse there could
be no probability thereof;) when a certain Hethen Chronicler and Mathematique,
named Phlegon, Phleg. Thral. lib. annal.
about a hundred years after Christ's departure, had diligently considered,
having seen the same also in his days most exactlie fulfilled, (for he was
servant to Adrianus the Emperor, by whose commandment, as has been said
before, the final subversion of that Jewish Nation was brought to pass: The
testimony of a Heathen, for the fulfilling of Christ's prophecies.
) this Phlegon (I say) though a Pagan, yet upon consideration of these events,
and others that he saw, (as the extreme persecution of Christians foretold by
Christ and the like:) he pronounced, that never any man foretold things so
certainly to come, or that so precisely were accomplished, as were the
predictions and prophecies of Jesus. And this testimony of Phlegon, was
alleged and urged for Christians, against one Celsus a Heathen Philosopher and
Epicure, by the famous learned Origin, Orig. lib. 2. con^. Celsum, sub initium.
even the very next age after it was written by the Author: so that of the
truth of this allegation, there can be no doubt or question at all.

Other prophecies of Jesus, fulfilled to his Disciples.
AND now albeit these predictions and prophecies, concerning the punishment
and reprobation of the Jews, fulfilled so evidently in the sight of all the
world, might be a sufficient demonstration, of Jesus foreknowledge in
affairs to come: yet are there many other things besides fore-shewed by him,
which fell out as exactly as these did; notwithstanding that by no learning,
mathematical reason, human conjecture, they were or might be foreseen. As
for example: the foretelling of his own death, the manner, time, and place
thereof: as also the person that should betray him, together with his
irrepentant end. The flight, fear, and scandale of his Disciples, albeit,
they had promised and protested the contrary. The three several denials of
Peter. The particular time of his own resurrection, and ascension. The sending
of the holy Ghost, and many other the like predictions, prophecies and
promises, which to his Apostles, disciples, and followers that heard them
uttered, and left them written before they fell out, and saw them afterward
accomplished: and who by the falsehood thereof should have received greatest
damage of all other men, if they had not been true; to these men (I say) they
were most evident proofs of Jesus divine prescience in matters that should
ensue.

Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
BUT yet for that an Infidel, (with whom only I suppose my self to deal in
this place,) may in these and the like things, find (perhaps) some matter of
cauilation: and say, that these prophecies of Jesus were recorded by our
Evangelists, after the particularities therein prophesied were effectuated and
not before; and consequently, that they might be forged; I will allege certain
other events, both foretold and registered before they came to pass: and
divulged by public writings in the face of all the world, when there was
small semblance that ever the same should take effect. Such were the
particular fore-tellings afflictions, his faithful followers should not
shrink, but hold out, and daily increase in zeal, fortitude, and number, and
finally, should atchiue the victory and conquest of all the world: a thing
much more unlikely at that day, and so far passing all human probability,
as no capacity, reason, or conceit of man, might reach or attain the
foresight thereof. And with this will we conclude our third and last part of
the general division set down in the beginning, concerning the grounds and
proofs of Christian Religion.

The Conclusion. SECT. 4.
The sum of the former three Sections.
BY all that hitherto has been said, we have declared and made manifest unto
thee (gentle Reader) three things of great by the Prophets of God, most
evidently fore-shewed. Secondly, that the very same

By all which ways, means, arguments and proofs: and by ten thousand
more, which to the tongue or pen of man are inexplicable, the christian mind
remains settled, and most firmly grounded in the undoubted belief of his
Religion: having besides all other things, evidences, certainties, and
internal comforts and assurances which are infinite: these eight demonstratiue
reasons and persuasions which ensue, Eight reasons.
for his more ample and abundant satis-faction therein.

First, The prophecies.
that it was impossible that so many things should be fore-tolde so
preciselie, with so many particularities, in so many ages, by so different
persons of all sanctity, with so great concord, consent, and unity; and that
so long before hand, but by the spirit of God alone, that only has the
foreknowledge of future events.

The fulfilling.
Secondly, that it could not possibly be, that so many things so difficult and
strange, with all their particularities and circumstances, should be so exactly
and precisely fulfilled, but in him alone, of whom they were truly meant.

Gods assistaunce.
Thirdly, that it can no ways be imagined, that God would ever have concurred
with Jesus doings, or assisted him, above all course of nature, with so
abundant miracles, as the Gentiles do confess that he wrought, if he had
been a Seducer, or taken upon him to set forth a false doctrine.

Jesus doctrine.
Fourthly, if Jesus had intended to deceive and seduce the world: he would
never have proposed a doctrine so difficult and repugnaunt to all sensuality:
but rather would have taught things pleasant and grateful to man's voluptuous
delight, as Mahomet did after him. Neither could the nature of man, have ever
affectuously embraced such austeritie, without the assistance of some divine
and supernatural power.

Jesus manner of teaching.
Fiftlie, for that Jesus being poorly borne and unlettered, as by his
adversaries confession does appear, and that in such an age and time, when all
worldly learning was in most flourishing estate: he could never possibly but
by divine power, have attained to such exquisite knowledge in all kind of
learning, as to be able to decide all the doubts and controversies of
Philosophers before him, as he did, laying down more plainly, distinctly,
and perspicuously, the pythe of all human and divine learning, within the
compass of three years teaching, (and that to auditors of so great
simplicity,) then did all the Sages of the world unto that day: insomuch that
even then, the most unlearned Christian at that time, could say more in
certainty of truth, concerning the knowledge of God, the Creation of the
world, the end of man, the reward of virtue, the punishment of vice, the
immortality and rest of our soul after this life, and in other such high
points and mysteries of true Philosophy: then could the most famous and
learned of all the Gentiles, that had for so many ages before, beaten their
brains in contention about the same.

Sixtlie, Jesus life, and manner of proceeding.
if Jesus had not meant plainly and sincerely in all his doings, according
as he professed: he would never have taken so severe a course of life to
himself, neither would he have refused all temporal dignities and
aduauncements as he did: he would never have chosen to die so opprobriously in
the sight of all men, nor made election of Apostles and disciples so poor and
contemptible in the world: nor if he had, would ever worldly men have followed
him in so great multitudes, with so great fervor, zeal, constancy, and
perseueraunce unto death.

The beginners and first publishers of christian religion.
Seventhly, we see that the first begynners and founders of Christian Religion
left by Jesus, were a multitude of simple and unskillful persons, unapt to
deceive or devise any thing of themselves. They began against all
probability of man's reason: they went forward against the stream and strength
of the world: they continued and increased above human possibility: they
perseuered in torments and afflictions insufferable: they wrought miracles
above the reach and compass of man's ability: they overthrew Idolatry that
then possessed the world, and confounded all powers infernal, by the only
name and virtue of their Master. They saw the prophecies of Jesus fulfilled,
and all his divine speeches and predictions come to pass. They saw the
punishment of their enemies and chief impugners, to fall upon them in their
days. They saw every day whole Provinces, Countries, and kingdoms converted
to their faith. And finally, the whole Roman Empire and world besides, to
subject it self to the Law, obedience, and Gospel of their Master.

Lastly, The present state of Jews.
among all other reasons and arguments, this may be one most manifest unto us:
that whereas by many testimonies and express prophecies of the old Testament,
it is affirmed, that the people of Israel should abandon, persecute and put to
death, the true Messiah at his coming, as before has been showed; and for
that fact, should it self be abandoned of God, and brought to ruin and
dispersion over all the world: (wherein according to the words of Ose, Ose, 3.
They shall sit for a long time; without King, without Prince, without
sacrifice, without Altar, without Ephode, or Images: and after this again,
the children of Israel shall returne^ and seek their God, in the last days.)
We see in this age the same particularities fulfilled in that Nation, and so
have continued now for these ^ifteene hundred years: that is, we see the
Jewish people abandoned and afflicted above all Nations of the world: dyspersed
in seruilite throughout all corners of the earth: without dignity or
reputation: without King, Prince, or commonwealth of themselves; prohibited by
all Princes, both Christian and other, to make their sacrifice where they
inhabit; deprived of all means to attain to good knowledge in good
litterature, whereby daily they fall into more gross ignorance, and
absurdities against common reason, in their later doctrine: then did the most
barbarous Infidels that ever were, having lost all sense and feeling in
spiritual affairs; all knowledge and understanding in celestial things for
the life to come: having among them no Prophet: no grave teacher: no man
directed by Gods holy spirit; and finally: as men forlorn and filled with all
kind of misery, do both by their inward and external calamities, preach,
denounce, and testify to the world, that Jesus whom they crucified, was the
only true Messiah and Savior of mankind, and that his blood, (as they
themselves required,) lies heavily upon their generation for ever.

The conclusion of the Chapter, with an admonishment.
Wherefore to conclude this whole discourse and treatise of the proofs and
evidences of our Christian Religion: seeing that by so manifold and invincible
demonstrations, it has been declared and laid before our eyes, that Jesus is
the only true savior and redeemer of the world: and consequently, that his
service and religion, is the only way and mean to please Almighty GOD, and
to attain everlasting happiness: there remains now to be considered, that
the same Jesus, which by so many Prophets was promised to be a Savior, was
also foretold by the self same Prophets, that he should be a Judge, Jesus
shall be also a Judge.
and examiner of all our actions. Which latter point, no one Prophet that has
fore-shewed his coming, has omitted seriously to inculcate unto us. No not
the Sibyls themselves, who in every place where they describe the most gracious
coming of the Virgins son, do also annexe thereunto his dreadful
appearaunce at the day of judgment: especially, in those famous Acrostick
verses whereof there has been so much mention before; the whole dyscourse upon
the words Jesus Christ the Son of God, Apud Euse. lib. 4. in vit. Constable. in
^i.
Savior and Cross, contains nothing else, but a large and ample description
of his most terrible coming in fire and flame, and conflagration of the world
at that dreadful day, to take account of all men's words, actions, and
cogitations.

To which description of these Pagan Prophets^ is consonant the whole tenor and
context of the old Bible, 1. Reg, 2. Psalm, 95. Esa, 2. 13. 26, 27. 30.
Jeremy. 30. Daniel, 7. Sopho, 1. Malac. 4. Math, 12. 13. 16, 14. 25.
fore-shewing every where, the dreadful majesty, terror, and severity of
the Messiah at that day. The new Testament also, which tends to comfort and
solace mankind, and has the name of Euangile, in respect of the joyful news
which it brought to the world, omitteth not to put us continually in mind of
this point. And to that end both Christ himself, Mark, 13. Luke. 17. Rom, 2,
14. 1, Cor, 15. 2, Cor, 5. 1 Thessalonians, 4. 5. 2, These. 1. 1. Titus, 2. 2, Peter,
3. Hebr. 9. Jude. 4. Revel. 1.
amidst all his sweet and comfortable speeches with his Disciples, did
admonish them often of this last day, and his Apostles Evangelists, and
Disciples after him, repeated, itterated, and urged this important
consideration, in all their words and writings.

Wherefore, as by the name and cogitation of a Savior, we are greatly styrred
up to joy, alacrity, confidence and consolation, so by this admonishment of
Gods Saints, and by the testimony of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
himself, that he is to be our Judge, and severe examiner of all the minutes
and moments of our life: we are to conceive just fear and dread, of this his
second coming.

An illatio^ upon the premises with an exhortation.
And as by the whole former treatise, we have been instructed, that the only
way to salvation, is by the true profession of Christ's Religion: so by this
accounte that shall be demanded at our hands at the last day, by the Author
and first institutor of this Religion; we are taught that unless we be true
Christians indeed, and do perform such duties as this Law and Religion
prescribes unto us, so far off shall we be from receiving any benefit by the
name, as our judgment shall be more grievous, and our final calamity more
intolerable. For which cause I would in sincere charity, exhort every man
that by the former dyscourse has received any light, and is tho^owlie
confirmed in his judgment concerning the manifest and undoubted truth of this
Christian Religion: to employ his whole study and endeavors for the attainment
of the fruit and benefit thereof, which is by being a true and faithful
Christian; for that our Savior Christ himself fore-signified, that many
should take the name without benefit or commodity of their profession.

And to the end each man may the better know or conjecture of himself,
whether he be in the right way or no, and whether he perform indeed the true
duty belonging to a faithful Christian; I have thought convenient, to adioyne
this Chapter next following of that matter, and therein to declare the
particular points belonging to that profession. Which being known, and
thorowlie considered, it shall be easy for every one that is not over
partial, or wylfully bent to deceive himself, to discern cleerelie of his
own estate, and of the course and way that he holds. Which is a high point
of wisdom for all men to do while they have time; least at the last day, we
having passed over the whole course of our lives in the bare name only of
Christianity, without the substance and true knowledge thereof: do find our
selves in the number of those most miserable and unfortunate people, who shall
cry Lord, Lord, and receive no comfort by that confession.

HOW A MAN MAY IVDGE OR DISCERN OF HIMSELF, WHETHER HE BE a true Christian
or not.
With a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which are,
belief and life.
CHAP. V.
AS in humain learning and sciences of this world, after declaration made of
the utility, possibility, certainty, conueniencie, and other qualities,
co^mendations, and properties thereof: the next point is, to show the means and
ways whereby to attain the same: so much more, in this divine and heavenly
doctrine of Christian Religion, (which concerns our soul and everlasting
salvation;) for that we have showed before, not only the most undoubted
truth whereupon it stands, but also that the knowledge thereof is so
absolutely necessary, as there is no other name or profession under heaven,
whereby mankind may be saved, but only this of Jesus: Acts, 4.
it follows by order of consequence, that we should treat in this place, The
effect of this Chapter.
how a man may attain the fruit of this doctrine: that is to say, how he may
come to be a good Christian; or if he already profess that name, how he may
examine or make trial of himself whether he be so indeed or not. Which
examination (to speak in brief) consists wholly in consideration Two points.
First, whether he do not only, believe unfeignedly the total sum of
documents and mysteries, left by Jesus and his Disciples to the Catholic
Church, but also persuade and assure himself, of the forgiveness of all his
sins, and of the fatherly love and favor of GOD toward him in Christ Jesus,
whereby he is adopted to be the son of God, and an heir of everlasting

The first part, concerning belief.
AND for the first, how to examine the truth of our belief, it would be over
tedious to lay down every particular way that might be assigned for
discussion thereof: for that it would bring in the contention of all times, as
well ancient as present, about controversies in Christian Faith, which has
been impugned from age to age, by the seditious instruments of Christ's
infernal enemy. And therefore, as well in respect of the length, (whereof
this place is not capable,) as also for that of purpose I do avoid all
dealing with matters of controversy within the compass of this work, I mean
only at this time, (for the comfort of such as are already in the right
way, and for some light unto others, who perhaps of simplicity may walk
awrie,) to set down with as great brevity as possible may be, some few
general notes or observations, for their bethelpe in this behalf.

In which great affayre of our faith and belief, (wherein consists as well
the ground and foundation of our eternal welfare, as also the fuite and entire
utility of Christ's coming into this world;) it is to be considered, that GOD
could not of his infinite wisdom, (foreseeing all things and times to come)
nor ever would of his vnspeakeaable goodness, (desiring our salvation as he
does) leave us in this life, without most sure, certain, and clear evidence
of this matter; and consequently, we must imagine, that all our errors
committed herein (I mean in matters of faith and belief among Christians, The
matters of faith and belief easy among Christians.
) do proceed rather of sin, negligence, wilfulnes, or inconsideration of
our selves, then either of difficulty or doubtfulnes in the means left unto
us for discerning of the same, or of the want of Gods holy assistance to that
effect, if we would with humility accept thereof.

This Esaias made plain, when he prophesied of this perspicuitie; that is, of
this most excellent privilege in Christian Religion, so many hundred years
before Christ was borne. For after that in diverse Chapters he had declared the
glorious coming of Christ in signs and miracles, as also the multitude of
Gentiles that should embrace his doctrine, together with the joy and
exultation of their conversion: he fore-sheweth presently, the wonderful
providence of God also, in providing for Christians so manifest a way of
direction for their faith and religion, as the most simple and unlearned man in
the world, should not be able (but of wylfulnes) to go astray therein. His
words are these, directed to the Gentiles. Esaias, 35.
Take comfort and fear not. Behold, your God shall come and save you. Then
shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
restored. etc. And there shall be a pathe and a way: which shall be called,
The direct holy way of Christians under the Gospel.
The holy way: and it shall be unto you so direct a way, as fools shall not
be able to err therein. By which words we see, that among other rare
benefits that Christ's people were to receive by his coming, this should be
one, and not the least, that after his holy doctrine once published and
received, it should not be easy for the weakest in capacity or learning that
might be, (whom Esaias here notes by the name of fools,) to run awry in
matters of their belief, so plain, clear, and evident, should the way for
trial thereof be made.

God has opened himself unto us in the holy Scriptures, the wrytings and
doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, of Christ, and his Apostles: John, 20. 21.
2, Timo. 3. 14, 15, etc. Rom, 1. 20.
wherein is contained whatsoever is necessary for our salvation. For although
the invisible things of God, that is, his power and God-heade, may be seen by
the workmanship and creation of the world, wherein, as in a book written with
the hand of God, Psalm, 19, 1.
and laid open to the eyes of men, the glory of GOD and his mighty power
appears; Yet because, either we read not this Book at all, or if we do,
we read it carelessly, Abac, 2, 2.
therefore it was necessary that the Lord God should add another Book more
plain and easy to be read, so as he may run that reads it, August. in
exposit. Psalm. 96. et Sermon. 56. ad Fratrem in Eremo.
and this is, (as has been said) his holy will, revealed unto us in his
written word. Which Saint Augustine therefore very well, calls the Letters
or Epistle of God, sent unto us from our heavenly Country, Titus, 2. 12,
to teach us to live godly and righteouslie whilst we soiurne here in this
present world.

This is that Lantern whereby our feet may be directed, Psalm 119,105.
and that light whereby our paths may be guided unto Christ: it is that most
certain and infallible rule and level of all our actions, whereby both our
faith and life are to be squared and framed. Yea, it is that holy and undefiled
way, Psalm, 19, 7.
and with all, that plain and easy way denoted by Esaias, which even in the
very entrance thereof, gives light and understanding (as David speaks) unto
the simple. Psalm, 119.130
And although we must confess with S. Peter, that there are some things in
the Scripture hard to be understood, yet we may also say with the same
Peter, ^, Peter, 3, 16
that they are hard to those that are unlearned and unstable, which pervert
and wrest them to their own destruction. 2, Cor, 4, 3,4
So that if the Gospel of Christ be yet hid, it is hid in them that perrish,
whose senses satan has closed, that the light thereof should not shine unto
them. And heere-hence is it that the Apostle Saint Paul, pronounces so
peremptorily of a contentious and heretical man, Titus, 3,
that he is damned by the testimony of his own judgment or conscience, for
that he has abandoned this common, direct, and public way, which all men
might see, and has devised particular paths and turnings to him self. And
heere-hence is it, that the ancient Fathers of Christ's primative Church,
dysputing against the same kind of people, defended always, that their error
was of malice and wilful blindness, and not of ignorance; applying these
words of prophecy unto them: Psalm, 31.11,
They that saw me, ran out from me.

Thus then it appears, that the plain and direct way mentioned by Esaias,
wherein no simple or ignorant man can err, is the doctrine taught by the
mouth of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, which howsoever it seem to be
obscure and darksome to men of perverse minds, that are not exercised in it:
yet to the godly and studious readers and hearers, that have their eyes
opened, and their minds lightened to see the truth, 1. Peter, 1, 19
it is most plain and easy to be understood.

And this is the cause, that those holy and sage Apostles of Christ, for the
better preventing of all bye-waies, crooked paths, and blind lanes of errors
that afterward might arise, (as by revelation from Jesus they understood
there should do many,) so earnestly exhorted, 1, Cor. 16. Gala. 5. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 1. Tim, 6. 20 2, Tim, 1, Math, 7, Rom, 16, 2, Tim, 2. 3. Titus, 3.
and so vehemently called upon the people, to stand fast in the documents then
received, to hold firmly the faith and doctrine already delivered, as a
Depositum and treasure committed, to be safely kept until the last day. And
above all other things they most diligently forewarned them, to beware of
newe-fangled Teachers, whom they called Heretics, who should break from the
unity of that body whereof Christ is the head, and should devise new
glosses, expositions, and interpretations of Scripture, bring in new senses;
doctrines, opinions, and divisions, to the renting of Gods Church and City
now builded, and to the perdition of infinite souls.

The Apostle S. Paul, even whylst he lived, found some of his Scholars to
be removed by newfangled Teachers to another Gospel, Gala, 1. 11. 12.
and the better to make them see their error, he appealeth to the Gospel
which he had taught them. The Gospel he preached, was not after man, neither
received he it of man, but by revelation from Jesus Christ. He brought them no
fancies, visions, dreams, interpretations of scripture hatched in his own
brain, 1. Cor, 1^. 23.
but the pure and sincere doctrine, received by revelation from God himself,
and faithfully delivered unto them, without hacke or mayme as he received it.

Therefore Saint Jerome upon that place, Ierom. in epist. ad Gal.
considering how all Heretics have iugled with the Scriptures from time to
time, says. That Marcion and Basilides, and other Heretics, (the contagious
botches and plague sores of the Church,) have not the Gospel of God, because
they have not the spirit of God, without which, that which is taught, grows
to be man's Gospel. This makes that learned Father to resolve upon the matter,
that it is a dangerous thing peruersly to expound the holy Scriptures, for by
this means, that is, by wrong and perverse interpretation, that which is Gods
gospel, is made man's Gospel, et quod peius est, and that which is worse
(says this holy Father,) it is made the devils Gospel. For discerning
therefore of this kind of most pernicious people, and their deuilish dealing,
and least we should be carried away with every wind of doctrine by the
wiliness of men, Ephe. 4, 14.
God has ordained in his Church Apostles, 1, Cor, 12,
Doctors, Prophets, Pastors, and Interpreters, whom he has so guided and
governed from time to time with his holy spirit, that they have been able by
the Scriptures to repress and beat down whatsoever errors and heresies have
been raised up by the enemies of Gods truth, contrary to the analogy of
faith and rule of charity: that is to say, beside the true sense and meaning
of the Canonical scripture.

No heresy finally prevailed against the scriptures.
When there rose up certain sedious fellows among the Jews in the primative
Church, making some contention about their ceremonies, as did Simon Magus,
Nicholaus Cerinthus, Ebion, and Menander that were heretics; They were
refelled and convinced out of the scriptures by the Apostles and their
scholars, Martialis, Dyonisius Areopagita, Ignatius, Policarpus, and others,
who were no doubt directed and guided by the spirit of God. Afterward, when
Basilides, Cerdon, Marcion, Valentinus, Tatianus, Apelles, Montanus, and diverse
others, troubled the Church with monstrous heresy, they were confuted by
Iustinius Martyr, Dionisius bishop of Corinth, Irenaeus, Clemens, Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, and their equals, who in all their controversies had recourse unto
the scriptures, and being instructed and led by the spirit of truth,
prevailed mightily against their adversaries. And so downward from age to age
unto our days, whatsoever heresy or different opinion has sprung up contrary
to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, it has been checked and
controlled by the watchmen, spiritual Pastors, and Governors of the Church,
who alleged always the consent of the scriptures for deciding of all doubts,
and were most graciously guided by the spyrite of God in all their actions. And
hereof it is that the word of God is called the sword of the spirit: Ephe, 6,
17.
because, as it was given by inspiration at the first, so being expounded by
the direction of the same spirit, it is most lively and mighty in operation:
2, Tim. 3,16. Heb, 4, 12.
sharper the^ any two edged sword, and entering through, even to the dividing a
sunder of the soul and the spirit, of the joints and the marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

This is that spiritual sword wherewith our Savior Christ prevailed against
satan the head Lord and master of all Heretics, Math. 4.
who notwithstanding pretended scriptures for his deuillish purposes. And the
Apostle Paul, Acts, 9.
being furnished with this only weapon, disputed against the perverse and
overthwart Jews, which dwelt at Damascus, and confounded them, proouing by
conference of Scriptures, that this was very Christ.

Now as it was expedient that the Gospels should be written, that we learning
the truth forth of them, Theophilactus.
should not be deceived by the lies of heresies; so was it necessary that the
same Gospels should be preached for the confirmation of faith. Hieronimus.
And hereof it is, that the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 10. says, Rom, 10, 17,
that faith comes by hearing the word of God, 1. Peter, 1, 23 Ephe, 5, 26.
because the word preached, is the ordinary means to beget and increase faith
in us, for the which cause also, it is called the incorruptible seed whereby
we are borne a new, and whereby the Church is sanctified unto the Lord.

Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing that the holy scriptures are that
most infallible and secure way mentioned by Esaias, seeing they are the rule and
level both of our faith and life, containing in them sufficient matter to
confute error and confirm the truth, able to make a man wise unto salvation,
2, Tim, 3, 15. 16, 17.
and perfectly instructed unto every good work: Basil. moralium, Regula. 80.
ca. 21.
this ought to be the duty of the faithful, (that I may use the words of
Basil,) to be thoroughly persuaded in his mind, that those things are true and
effectual, which are uttered in the Scripture, and to reject nothing thereof.
For if whatsoever is not of faith be sin, (as says the Apostle) and if faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, without doubt when any
thing is without the holy scripture, (which cannot be of faith,) it must needs
be sin. And therefore (to speak as S. Augustine speaks, August. cont
literas. petil, lib. 3. cap. 6.
) if any, I will not say if we, but (which S. Paul adds) if an Angel from
heaven, Gala, 1, 8.
shall preach either of Christ or of his Church, or of any other thing which
pertains to faith, or to the leading of our life otherwise, then we have
received in the holy scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, let him be accursed.

Now if forsaking all bie-pathes of men's inventions and traditions, we will
search diligently in the scriptures wherein we think to have eternal life,
John, 5. 39.
we shall see that they testify of nothing so much, as of the promises of God
in Christ Jesus; who as he is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes, Rom, 10, 4, Gala, 3, 24.
so do they send us directly, and as it were lead us by the hand like a
careful Schoole-maister unto him, teaching us to apprehend and lay hold on him
with the hand of faith, and to apply him with his gifts and graces unto our
selves, and our own salvation. So that faith is made the means, and as it
were the Conduit to convey Christ himself, his death, burial, and
resurrection, and all the rest of his benefits unto us, which the Apostle
witnesses. Collos. 2. 12. Ye are buried (says he) with him through Baptism,
in whom ye are also raised up together, Coloss. 2,12.
through the faith of God effectually working, who raised him from the dead.
Whereof it ensues, that all the faithful, do not only obtain the benefit
of Christ's death and burial by their Baptism, whereby they die unto sin:
but also do receive and enjoy, the fruit and effect of his resurrection by a
lively faith, whereby they are quickened and raised up unto righteousness in this
life, and are assertained of resurrection to glory in the life to come,
Phillip, 3,21.
by his mighty working that is able to subdue all things unto himself.

Seeing therefore that the sum and substance of our whole Religion, and of
our eternal salvation or damnation, consists in the knowledge of this one
virtue, it shall be worth the labor, breefely (but yet plainly) to describe the
form, force, and nature of this faith whereof we speak. Wherein you shall not
look for the diverse significatio^s, which that word receives in the
Scripture, nor for any declaration of those unprofitable faythes whereof S.
James speaks, James, 2, 19.
which are common to the wicked, and to the devils themselves, whereby they
believe that Jesus is that Christ; Mark, 1, 24.
but here my purpose is to entreat, of that lively and saving faith, which is
peculier and propper to the elect and chosen children of God, whereby they
believe, that Christ is their Jesus, Math. 1, 21.
by whom they are saved from their sins, and from the punishment due unto
them for the same, and by whom only they are restored unto the favor of God,
Rom, 8, 17.
and made heirs with Christ of his heavenly kingdom.

In the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hebru, 11, 1.
there is a notable description of that lively faith, where it is said, to be
the ground of things that are hoped for, and the evidence of things that are
not seen. Of which description of the Apostle, we may make a plain definition
after this sort. Faith is an assured persuasion of our salvation by the means
of Christ, which is grounded on the promises of God, and sealed in our hearts by
the holy Ghost. This definition is drawn from the form and propriety of
true faith, but the other, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, seems rather to be
taken from the substance of faith, and speaks of the object matter thereof.
But both of them tend to one and the same thing, namely, to express the nature
of true faith, to consist in the certainty of that eternal life, which is
purchased unto us by Christ Jesus, which although we enjoy not presently, yet
by faith we are as fully assured of it, as if we had possession and fruition
thereof alreadi^. And hereof it is, that the Apostle calls it (...), Colos,
2, 2, Heb, 10,22,
fulness or assurance of faith, when we are persuaded that we are so highly
in Gods favor, that nothing is able to separate or remove us from the love
that GOD bears us in his Son and our Savior Christ Jesus. This fulness of
faith, contains in it these three things.

First, a notice or knowledge of the merciful promises of God in Christ Jesus.
Secondly, an undoubted persuasion of the truth of those promises. And thirdly,
the applying of the same to the comfort of our souls and consciences, for our
salvation. For as it is not enough for a man to have meat, unless he also
eat it and digest it, so it is not enough for us to know the promises of God,
unless we believe the same to be true, Hebru, 4,2.
and apply them to our own selves. And as it is not enough for a wounded man,
to have a sovereign salve or Medicine in his window, unless he apply it to
his wound, so is it not sufficient for us, to know that Christ is the Savior
of the world, unless also we acknowledge him to be a Savior unto us, and
lay hold on him by the hand of faith.

Wherefore, this is the property and effect of a saving faith, even to apply
Christ with his gifts unto every one of the faithful, and to make all
conclusions of Gods promises particular, that is, peculier to themselves and
their own salvation. And therefore it is that faith is called the life of the
soul, Habac, 2, Rom, 1, 17. Hebru, 10. 37.
because it is the instrument, wherewith Christ the true life and food of our
soul is to be eaten. Yea it is the mouth, the tongue, the teeth, the stomach,
and that heat of our hearts and souls, whereby Christ the word of God, is
spiritually taken, eaten, and digested of us; with which word, or rather with
which Christ, our souls do live: John, 6, 51.
namely, with the flesh and blood of Christ which we eat and drink, whilst we
embrace and receive Christ by a lively faith. Whereupon S. Cyprian has this
sweet saying, Cyprian. lib, de caena. domini.
Quod est esca carni, hoc animae est fides, etc. That which meat is to the
flesh, that is faith to the soul. That which food is to the body, that is
the word to the spirit. So that faith is that bond, which does so straightly
unite and knitte us unto Christ, no otherwise then the members are united to
the head, whereby we partake his spiritual graces, as the members of man's body
receive nutriment from the head; and in a word, what good things soever are
necessary for us to eternal life, do flow and are derived unto us from
Christ, as from a most plentiful and wholesome fountain, and are conveyed
unto us by the instrument of faith, as by a strong and substantial Conduit pype.

It were too long, and not so pertinent to the purpose, to recite all the
properties of this saving faith whereof we speak: it may suffice therefore to
have showed you these few notes, and effects thereof, by the due consideration
whereof, it shall be easy for any to examine and try themselves, 2, Cor, 13,
5.
as the Apostle speaks, whether they be in the faith or no, and consequently,
whether they be true Christians for the first part of that profession: namely,
for matters of belief, which consists (as has been showed) not only in
believing whatsoever is propounded unto us in the holy Scripture, (although
that also be a true faith,) but also in the assurance of Gods love and favor
toward us, wrought in our hearts by the preaching of the Gospel, and sealed by
the holy Ghost; whereby we do firmly persuade our selves, that our sins
are as utterly forgiven us for Christ's sake, as if we never had committed any,
and his righteousness as perfectly imputed unto us, as if we had performed the
same in our own persons.

Wherefore, to conclude this first part of our present speech, Dial. contra.
Lucifernanum.
he that not only protests with Saint Jerome, that he does abhor all
sects and names of particular men, as Marcionists, Montanists, Valentinians,
and the like, Gene, 11,
(which like the builders of Babell, have built up Churches, Sinagogues, and
Conuenticles to get themselves a name, that men might be called after them,
Marcionists, Montanists, and such others,) he I say that loatheth and
detesteth sects, and as he was not baptized in the name of Marcion, Montan, or
Valentine, but in the name of Jesus Christ, so refuses to be called a
Marcionist, Montanist, or Valentinian, or by any name of any man under heaven:
and therwithall rejoices in the name of Christ to be called a Christian, and
giving all doctrines and gospels the slyppe, pitcheth him upon the doctrine and
Gospel of Jesus, taught by his holy Apostles; he that can captiuate his
understanding to the obedience of Christ, to believe humbly such things as
Christ by his Apostles proposes to him, 2, Cor, 10.5.
albeit his reason or sense should stand against the same. And not only so,
but also persuades and assures his own heart and soul, that all the
merciful promises that God makes in his word, do belong unto him in
especial, and that he is one of that number which GOD has elected to
salvation, and for whose sins Christ Jesus the son of God was content to die,
and to rise again for his justification, Ephe, 3, 17.
he that finds himself to be in this faith, or rather this faith to be in
him, and feels the fruits and effects thereof, that is, (as they are reckoned
by the Apostle, Romans 5.) to be at peace with God; Romans 5, 12:
to have an entrance unto grace; to have spiritual joy, not only in
prosperity, but even in tribulation and affliction; to have hope that makes
not ashamed; and to have the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the
working of the holy Ghost, etc. This man, no doubt, is in a most sure case for
matters of his faith, and cannot possibly walk awry therein, but may think
himself a good Christian for this first point, which is for matters of belief.

The second part of this Chapter.
THere follows the second part of Christian profession, concerning life and
manners; which is a matter of so much more difficulty then the former, by how
many more ways a man may be led from virtuous life then from sincere faith,
wherein there can be no comparison at all, seeing the pathe of our belief is
so manifest, (as has been showed,) that no man can err therein but of
inexcusable wilfulnes. Which wilfulness of error, See S. August. de vtil. cre
cap. 1 Cyp. epist. 61.
the holy Fathers of Christ's primative Church, did always refer to two
principal and original causes, that is, The two causes of heresy.
to pride and ouerweening in our own conceits, and to malice against our
Superiors, for not giving our selves contentation in the things that we
desire. Of the first do proceed new opinions, new glosing, expounding, The
doings of Precismatiques.
and applying, of the Scriptures, preferring our own judgment before all other
past or present; the contempt and debasing of holy Fathers and Councels, and
whatsoever proof stands not with our own liking and approbation.

Of the second fountain are derived other qualities conformable to that humor,
as are the denying of jurisdiction and authority in our Superiors, the
contempt of Prelates, the exaggeration of the faults and defects of our
Governors, the impugnation of all Bishoplike dignities or Ecclesiastical
eminency, and especially of that rule whereunto appertains the correction of
such like offenders: and finally, for satis-fying this deuillish and pernicious
venime of malice, those wicked reprobates do incite and arm the people
against their spiritual Pastors, they kindle factions against Gods faithful
Ministers, they devise a new Church, a new form of Government, a new kingdom
and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy upon earth, whereby to bring me^ in doubt or
staggering what or whom to believe, or whereunto to have recourse in such
difficulties as do arise.

These two maladies I say of pride and malice, have been the cause of
obstinate error in all Heretics from the beginning, as full well noted that
holy and ancient Martyr Saint Cyprian, The observation of Saint Cyprian.
when he said so long a go. These are the beginnings and original causes of
Heretics and wicked Scismatiques, first to please and like well of
themselves, Cyp. epist. 65. ad Rogatian.
and then, being puffed up with the swelling of pride, to contemn their
Governors and Superiors. Thus do they abandon and forsake the Church, thus do
they erecte a profane Altar out of the Church against the Church. Thus do
they break the peace and unity of Christ, and do rebel against Gods holy
ordination.

Many causes of evil life.
Now then, as these are the causes either only or principally of erring in our
belief, most facile and easy (as we see) to be discerned, so of error in
life and manners, there are many more occasions, causes, ofsprings, and
fountains to be found. That is to say, so many in number as we have evil
passions, inordinate appetites, wicked desires, or unlawful inclinations
within our mind, every one whereof, is the cause oftentimes of dysordered
life, and breach of Gods commandments. For which respect there is much more
set down in Scripture for exhortation to good life, then to faith, for that
the error herein is more ordinary and easy, and more provoked by our own
frailty, as also by the multitude of infinite temptations. Wherefore we read
that our Savior Christ in the very beginning of his preaching, straight after
he was baptized, and had chosen unto him S. Peter, and S. Andrewe, James and
John, and some other few Dysciples, went up to the Mountain, and there made
his most excellent, famous, and copious Sermon, The effect of Christ his Sermon.
recited by S. Matthew in three whole Chapters, Math. chap, 5, 6, and 7.
wherein he talks of nothing else but of virtuous life, poverty, meekenes,
justice, purity, sorrow for sin, patience in suffering, contempt of riches,
forgiving of injuries, fasting, prayer, repentance, entering by the straight
gate: and finally, of perfection, holiness, and integrity of conversation, and
of the exact fulfilling of every jot of Gods Law and commandments. He
assured his Disciples with great asseueration, that he came not to break the
Law, but to fulfill the same: and consequently, whosoever should break the
least of his Commandments, and should teach men so to do, that is, should
persevere therein without repentance, and so by his example draw other men to
do the like, should have no place in the kingdom of heaven. Again, he
exhorted the^ most earnestly to be lights, and to shine by good works to all the
world, Math, 5,20
and that except their justice did exceed the justice of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Math, 6, 24,
(which was but ordinary and external) they could not be saved. He told them
plainly they might not serve two masters in this life, but either they must
forsake God, or abandon Mammon. Math. 7, 13.
He cried unto them Attendite, stand attent, and consider well your state and
condition, and then again, seek to enter by the straight gate. And lastly he
concludes, that the only trial of a good Tree, Math, 7. 20
is the good fruit which it yields: without the which fruit, let the tree
be never so fair, or pleasant to the eye, yet is it to be cut down and
burned. And that not every one that shall cry or say unto him Lord, Lord, at
the last day, shall be saved, Math, 7, 25.
or enter into the kingdom of heaven, but only such as did execute in deeds,
the will and commandments of his Father in this life. For want whereof, he
assures them, that many at that day, Math,7,22.
who had not only believed but also done miracles in his name, should be
denied, rejected, and abandoned by him.

Which long lesson of virtuous life, being the first that ever our Savior gave
in public to his Disciples then newly gathered together, (as Saint Matthewe
notes,) (having treated somewhat before of points of faith, and by some
miracles and preaching showed himself to be the true Messiah,) does
sufficiently teach us, that we must not only believe in his name and doctrine,
but conform our lives and actions also to the prescript rule of his
commandments.

For albeit in Christian Religion, A similitude touching faith and works.
faith be the first and principal foundation, wheruppon all the rest is to be
stayed and grounded. Yet as in other material buildings, after the foundation
is laid, there remains the greatest labor, time, cost, cunning, and
diligence to be bestowed upon the framing, and furnishing of other parts that
must ensue: even so in this celestial edifice or building of our soul, having
laid on the foundation and ground of true belief: the rest of all our life,
time, labor and studies, is to be employed in the perfecting of our life and
actions, and as it were in raising up the walls and other parts of our
spiritual building by the exercise of all virtues, and diligent observation of
Gods commandments, without the which, it will be to no more purpose for us to
brag of our knowledge in the Scriptures, or to say we have faith, and look
to be saved as well as other men: then it will be to purpose to have a
foundation without a building upon it, or a stock or tree that bears no
fruit. Which thing S. James (speaking of that historical and dead faith,
whereby the wicked and the very devils themselves believe that there is one
GOD,) expresses most excellently in this fit similitude: James,2. 26.
As a body without a spirit is dead, even so, (says he) is faith without
works.

This point of doctrine of virtuous life and observing of Gods commandments,
not our Savior Christ alone in his Sermon, most earnestly urged, (as has
been said) but his forerunner also Saint John the Baptist, and his followers
the holy Apostles, whereof the one continually called upon the people to bring
forth fruits meet for repentance; Math, 3, 8.
the other in all their writings, and no doubt in all their Sermons after
matter of doctrine and faith propounded, Roma. 12. 1. Ephe, 4, 1.
do proceed to exhortation, and precepts of Christian life. In so much as
Saint Augustine and other ancient Fathers, are of opinion, that the rest of
the Apostles, S. Peter, S. James, S. John, and S. Jude, perceiving the
looseness and security of the people in their times, directed their
writings, either only or principally to this end, even to persuade and
enforce the necessity of good life and conversation among Christians. Yea and
that Saint Paul himself, when he concludes that a man is justified by faith
without the works of the Law, Rom,3,28,
does not exclude the works of charity, as effects and fruits of faith, which
follow him that is already justified in the sight of God: but he excludes
the^ as causes of salvation, which go before him that is to be justified.
Whereby it appears, that S. Paul handling the causes of our justification in
the sight of God, is not repugnant or contrary to S. James, speaking of the
notes and signs whereby we are justified: that is, (as the word is taken
Math,12,37.
else where,) declared or known to be just or righteous before me^.

The sum is, that although good works are not the causes of our salvation,
Colos.1,10.
yet they are the way as it were, and the path that leads thereunto: because
by them, as by certain marks, we perceive our selves to have entered, and to
have proceeded in the way of eternal life. Yea, they are the fruits and
effects, James,2,18.
whereby we testify and declare both unto our selves and to others, the truth
of that faith which we profess. And therefore our Savior Christ wills us in
the Gospel, Math,5,16,
to let our light shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may take
occasion thereby to glorify our heavenly father.

And his holy Apostle Saint James, James,2,18.
bids those carnal and sensual Christians, that stood so much upon the
only name of faith, to show him their faith by their works, as he would show
them his faith by his works^ that is, they should declare and testify unto men
(as I have said) the faith which they professed, by the fruits thereof. To men
(I say) because men which judge but by the outward appearaunce only, cannot
know the goodness of a tree, Math, 7, 16,
b^t by the good fruit which it yields; they cannot discern the inward
faith but by the outward works. But as for God, that searches the secrets of
the hearts and reins, it needs not that we should show him our faith by
our works, nor may we look for justification at his hands by the best of
them: Rom, 4, 2.
for then might we have whereof to boast, but there is no boasting with God,
and therefore no justifying by works in his sight. Yet notwithstanding, the
Lord requires good works at our hands, to the end that himself might be 1,
Pet, 2. 12.
glorified, our needy brethren relieved and 1, Cor,9.2,13
comforted, others gained and won by our example, to the embracing of the
same faith and Religion which we profess: our own faith exercised and
strengthened, and our calling and election made sure and confirmed. 2,
Peter,1,10


And it is very requisite that the children of GOD, 1, Pet,1,18,19.
which are bought with so high a price, as with the blood of Jesus, should
glorify God both in soul and body, because they are redeemed both in soul
and body, and not live unto themselves, 1, Cor, 6,20, 2, Cor,5,15,
but unto him which died and rose again for them.

This is the end of our election before the foundations of the world were
laid, as the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 1.4. Ephe, 1,4,
even that we should be holy and blameles before him in love. This is the end
of our creation, as the same Apostle witnesses, Ephesians, 2. 10. Ephe, 2,10.
Where he says that we are Gods workmanshyp created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, wherein he has ordained that we should walk. This is the end of our
redemption, as old Zachary prophesied, Luke, 1. 74, 75. Luke. 1,74,75
that being redeemed and delivered from all our spiritual enemies, and from
eternal destruction whereunto we were subject, we should serve God without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
Finally, this is the end of our vocation. For God has not called us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness: 1, These, 4,7. 1, Pet, 1,15.
and as he that has called us is holy, so must we be holy in all manner of
conversation. And it can not be that they which are truly justified, that is
to say, made righteous by a lively faith in Christ, should not also in some
measure be sanctified, that is, made holy by a faithful life in him.

Let not men therefore deceive themselves with the only name and shadow of
faith, without the nature and substance thereof. Let them not promise unto
themselves everlasting life, because they know the true God, John, 17,3.
and whom he has sent Jesus Christ: but let them remember how Christ's
Apostle who^ he dearly loved expounds that saying, when he writes, By this
we know God ( truly) if we keep his commandments: 1, John, 2.3,4.
and whosoever says that he knows him, and yet keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. 1, Tim, 1,15,
For as it is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: so is it as true a saying,
and no less worthy to be affirmed, that they which have believed God, Titus,
3,8.
should be careful to show forth good works.

Saint Gregory upon the words of Christ to S. Thomas, Greg. in hom. 29. in
E^ang. John 20.
Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed: has a notable
discourse to this purpose. If any (says he) infer hereof, I believe and
therefore am blessed, and shall be saved, he says truly, if his life be
aunswerable to his belief: for that a true faith does not contradict in
manners, the things which he professes in words. For which cause, S. Paul
accuses certain false Christians, Titus, 1,16.
in whom he found not virtuous life aunswerable to their profession: that they
confessed God in words, but denied him in their deeds. And Saint John
avouches, that whosoever says, he knows GOD, 1, John, 2,4.
and keeps not his commandments, is a liar. Which being so, we must examine
the truth of our faith by consideration of our life: for then and not
otherwise are we true Christians, if we fulfill in works, that whereof we have
made promise in words. That is, in the day of our Baptism, we promised to
renounce the pomp of this world, What we promised in our Baptism.
together with all the works of iniquity; which promise, if we perform now
after Baptism, then are we true Christians, and may be joyful. But
contrariwise, if our life be wicked, and contrary to our profession, it is
said by the voice of truth it self. Not every one that shall say to me
Lord, Lord, Math, 7.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again, why do ye call me Lord,
Lord, and do not perform the things that I tell you.

Heer-hence is it, that God complained of his old people the Jews, saying:
Esaias, 29,17.
this people honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far off from
me. Psalm, 78,36,37
And the Prophet David of the same people. They loved him with their mouth, and
with their tongues they lied unto him. Wherefore let no man presume to say he
shall be saved, if faith and good life be divorced and put a sunder, which S.
Chrysostom notes, by the woeful and heavy chance and judgment that happened
unto him, who in the Gospel was admitted to the feast of Christian faith and
knowledge, but for lack of the ornament or garment of good life, was most
contumeliouslie deprived of his expectation. Of whom Saint Chrisostoms words
are these. Chrysostom. hom. 9. in John.
He was invited to the feast, and brought unto the Table, but for that by his
foul garment he dishonored our Lord that had invited him: he was not only
thrust from the Table and banquet, but also bound hand and foot, and cast
into utter darkness, where there is eternal weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Wherefore let us not (dear brethren) let us not I say deceive our selves,
and imagine that our dead and unfruitful faith will save us at the last day:
for except we join pure life to our belief, and in this heavenly vocation of
ours, do apparel our selves with the worthy garments of virtuous deeds,
whereby we may be admitted at the marriage day in heaven: nothing shall be able
to deliver us from the damnation of this miserable man, that wanted his wedding
weed.

Which thing S. Paul well notes, when having said, 2, Cor,5,1,8.
we have an everlasting house in heaven, not made with men's hands, he adds
presently this exception, Si tamen vestiti et non nudi inueniamur. That is, if
we be found at that day well apparrelled and not naked. Would God every
Christian desirous of his salvation, would ponder well this discourse of S.
Chrysostom.

And so with this alone to conclude our speech in this Chapter, The conclusion
of this Chapter.
without allegation of further matters or authorities, (which are infinite to
this effect,) it may appear by that which has already been set down,
wherein the true profession of a Christian consists: and thereby each man
that is not partial, or blinded in his own affection (as many are,) may take
a view of his state and condition, and frame unto himself a very probable
conjecture, how he is like to speed at the last accounting day. That is, what
profit or damage he may expect by his knowledge and profession of Christian
Religion. For as to him that believes soundly, and walks uprightly in his
vocation, performing effectually every way his professed duty, there remain
both infinite and inestimable rewards prepared: so to him that strayeth aside,
and swerueth from the right path of faith and life prescribed unto him, there
are no less pains and punishments reserved. For which cause, every Christian
that is careful of his own salvation, ought to six his eyes very seriously
upon them both; and as in belief to show himself constant, firm, humble,
and obedient: so in life and conversation, to be honest, just, pure, innocent
and holy.

And for this second point concerning life and manners, has been already
handled in my former book, (which as I understand is imprinted in England:) I
shall need to wade the less in further discourse hereof. But for I have
been admonished by the writings of diverse, how my former book has been
misliked in two special points; first, that I speak so much of good works,
and so little of faith: secondly, that I talk so largely of Gods justice, and
so breefelie of his mercy, whereby the consciences of many have been
offended: let the last Chapter going before of belief and life, answer the
first, and that which immediately follows, serve for the latter objection, and
so I doubt not but a Christian man may be thorowlie resolved.

OF THE ONLY IMPEDIMENT THAT IS WONT TO LET SINNERS FROM Resolution.
Which is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercy, through the multitude and
greeuousnesse of their offenses.
CHAP. VI.
AMong all other the most grievous and perrilous cogitations, which in this
world are accustomed to offer themselves to a mind entangled and laden with
great sins: this usually is the first, Despair, an ordinary temptation to
the greatest sinners.
(through the nature of sin it self, and crafty suggestion of our ghostly
enemy,) to fall into distrust and dyspaire of Gods mercy. Such was the
cogitation of most unhappy Caine, Caine.
one of the first inhabitants of the earth, who after the murder of his own
only brother, and other sins by him committed, brake into that horrible and
desperate speech, so greatly offensive unto his Lord and Maker, Gene, 4,
Mine iniquity is greater then that I may hope for pardon. Such was in like
manner the desperate conceit of wicked Judas, one of the first of the^ that
were chosen to the peculier service of our Redeemer; Judas.
who feeling his conscience oppressed with manifold iniquities, and most of
all with the prodition of his own Lord and Master: took no other way of
amendme^t or redress, but to destroy himself both in body and soul,
adjoining onoly these words, full of miserable distrust and desperation: Math,
27.
I have sinned in betraying the innocent and just blood. By which words and
most wretched end, he more greeuouslie offended and injured his most loving
and merciful Savior, then by all his former iniquities committed against him.

This then (most loving brother) is the first and greatest rock, The shipwreck
of souls ouerloden with sins.
whereat a sinful soul over burdened with the charge of her own iniquities,
and tossed in the waves of dreadful cogitations, by the blastes and storms of
Gods threats against sinners, does co^monlie make her shypwracke. That is,
that most horrible depth and dungion, whereof the holy scriptures says: Prou,
18.
The impious man, when he is come into the bottom and profunditie of his
sins, contemns all. This is that remediless sore, and incurable wound,
wherewith God himself charged Jerusalem, when he said: Insanabilis fractura
tua: Jeremy. 3^
thy rupture is irremediable. And the Prophet Michaeas considering the same
people, through the multitude of their wickedness, to incline now to despair of
Gods goodness toward them; brake forth into this most pitiful complaint. Mich,
3.
For this will I weep and lament extremely, I will strippe off my clothes
and wander naked: I will rore like unto Dragons, and sound out my sorrow as
Struthious in the desert, for that the wound and malady of my people is
desperate.

This is that great and maine impediment, The misery of desperation.
that stops the conduits of Gods holy grace, from flowing into the soul of
a sinful man. This the knyfe that cutteth in sunder all those heavenly and
blessed cords, wherewith our sweet Lord and Savior endeavors to draw unto
repentance the hearts of sinners, saying by his Prophet, Hose. 11.
I will pull them unto me with the chains of love and charity. For by this
means every sinful conscience comes to answer almighty God, as did
Jerusalem, when being admonished of her sins, and exhorted by his Prophet to
amendment of life, she said: Jeremy, 2.
Desperani, nequaquam faciam: I am become desperate, I will never think of any
such thing. To which lamentable estate when a sinful man is once arrived: the
next step he makes, is, (for avoiding all remorse and trouble of
conscience:) to engulfe himself into the depth of all detestable enormities,
and to abandon his soul to the very sinck of all filth and abominations:
according as S. Paul said of the Gentiles in like case, Ephe, 4.
That by despair they delivered themselves over to a dissolute life, thereby
to commit all manner of uncleanness.

Which wicked resolution of the impious, is the thing, (as I have noted before)
that most of all other offenses upon earth, does exasperate the ire of
almighty God, depriving his divine majesty of that most excellent property,
The thing wherein God most delights is mercy.
wherein he cheefely delights and glories; which is, his infinite and
unspeakable mercy. This might be declared by diverse and sundry examples of
holy writ, how be it two only shall suffice for this present.

The first is of the people of Israel, not long before their banishment into
Babylon, who being threatened from God by the prophet Jeremy, that manifold
punishments were imminent over their heads, for their grievous sins committed
against his majesty: began (in stedde of repentance) to fall to desperation:
and consequently, resolved to take that impious course of all desolute life,
alleged before out of Saint Paul; for thus they answered God exhorting the^
by his threats to reform their wicked lives. A desperate resolution.
We are now grown desperate: and therefore we will hereafter follow our own
cogitations, and every one fulfill the wickedness of his own conceit. Whereat
God stormed infinitlie, and brake forth into this vehement interrogation:
Ierem, 18.
Interrogate Gentes: quis audiuit talia horribilia? Ask and enquire of the
very Gentiles, whether ever among the^ were heard any such horrible
blasphemies.

And after this, for the more declaration of this intolerable injury herein
offered to his Majesty: he commanded the Prophet Jeremy to go forth out of
his own house, and to get him to a potters shop, which in the Village was
framing his vessels upon the wheel. Which Jeremy having done, he saw before
his face a pot crushed and broken by the Potter all in pieces upon the wheel,
and thinking thereby that the vessel had been utterly unprofitable and to be
cast away, he saw the same clay presently framed again by the Potter, into a
new vessel, more excellent then before. A marvelous example of Gods clemency.
Whereat he meruailing, God said unto him; Do not thou think (Jeremy) that I
can do with the house of Israel, as this Potter has done with his vessel?
or is not the house of Israel in my hands, as the clay in the hands of this
craftes-man? I will denounce upon a sudden against a Nation and Kingdom,
that I will root it up and destroy it, and if that Nation or Kingdom do
repent from their wickedness, I also will repent me of the punishment which I
intended to lay upon them. And then he proceeds forward, declaring unto
Jeremy the exceeding grief and indignation which he conceiueth, that any
sinner whatsoever, should despair of mercy and pardon at his hands.

The second example is, of the same people of Israel, during the time of
their banishment in Babylon; at what time being afflicted with many myseries
for their sins, Another example of Gods wonderful mercy.
and threatened with many more to come, for that they changed not the course of
their former wicked conversation: they began to despair of Gods mercy, and to
say to the Prophet Ezechiell that lived banished among them, and exhorted them
to amendment, upon assured hope of Gods favor toward them; Ezech. 33.
Our iniquities and sins do lie grievously upon us, and we languish in them:
and what hope of life then may we have? At which cogitation and speech, God
being greatly moved: appeared presently to Ezechiell and said unto him: Tell
this people, I do live says the Lord God of hosts, I wish not the death of
the impious, but rather that he should turn from his wicked ways and live.
Why will the house of Israel die in their sins, rather then turn unto me?
And then he makes a large and vehement protestation, that how grievously
soever any person should offend him, and how great punishments soever he shall
denounce against him: yea, if he had given express sentence of death and
damnation upon him: yet, Si egerit paenitentiam a peccato suo, feceritque:
iudicium and iustitiam: that is, if he repent himself of his sin, and
exercise Judgment and justice to be used in true repentance: that is, judgment
upon our selves, and justice toward others.
judgment and justice for the time to come, all his sins that he has
committed shall be forgiven him (says almighty God,) for that he has done
judgment and justice.

And this now might be sufficient, (al^ be it nothing else were spoken) for
remoouing this first obstacle and impediment of true resolution, which is the
despair of Gods infinite goodness and mercy. Nevertheless, for more evident
clearing and demonstration of this matter, and for the greater comfort of such
as feel themselves burdened with the heavy weight of their iniquities
committed against his divine majesty; I have thought expedient in this place,
to declare more at large, this abou^dant subject of endless mercy, toward
all such as will truly turn unto him: in what time, state, condition, or age
soever in this life; Four parts of this Chapter.
which shall be showed and set down by these four points and parts that do
ensue.

The first part: touching the love that God bears toward man.
FIrst of all, by the infinite and incomprehensible love that almighty God
bears unto man: which love is always the mother of favor, grace, and
mercy. If you demand of me in what sort I do prove that the love of God is so
exceeding great toward man, I answer as the Cosinographer is wont to do, who
by the greatness and multitude of the streams and Rivers, does frame a
conjecture of the fountain from which they flow. The proper Rivers which are
derived and do run forth of love, are good turns and benefits; which seeing
they are infinite, endless and inestimable, bestowed by God upon man, (as in
the place before has been declared, and the whole universal frame of this
world does abundantly bear witness,) it follows most evidently, that the
origin, fountain, and wel-spring of all these favors, graces, and good
turns, must needs be infinite, immeasurable, and far surpassing all
compass of man's understanding.

If you require of me the cause and reason, why Almighty God should so
wonderfully be affected toward man, I can directly yield you none at all,
but rather marvel thereat with holy Job, Job. 7.
why so sovereign a Majesty should set his heart upon so base a subject.
Notwithstanding, the holy scripture seems to allege one principal reason of
this love, when it says; Wisdom, 11
Nihil odisti eorum quae fecisti, and parcis omnibus, quia tua sunt, Domine,
qui diligis animas. That is, Thou (o Lord) which love souls, can not hate
those things which thou have made, but do use mercy toward all men, for
that they are thine. And the like manner of reasoning uses God himself, when
he says by his Prophet Ezechiell; The first cause why God loves us, for that
he is our Creator, and we are his own works. Ezechiel, 18.
Behold, all souls are mine, and heereuppon he infers a little after;
Numquid voluntatis meae est mors impii: Can I have the will to damn a wicked
man, seeing that his soul is mine, created and redeemed by me? as who would
say: this were a case against all order and equity. And the reason of this
manner of speech and argument is, for that every man naturally is inclined to
love the things that be of his own making. So we see, that if a man have an
Orcharde, wherein be great variety of trees and plants, yet if there be but
one of his own peculier grafting that florisheth and prospers well: he takes
more delight therein, then in any of the rest, for that it is his own
workmanship. So in like manner, if a man have a Vineyarde of his own planting
and trymming. Every man given to love his own.
For which respect the holy Prophet David, finding himself and the whole
kingdom of Jury in great affliction and calamity: thought no other means so
forcible to draw God to compassion and commiseration of their case, as to cry
out to him in this manner; Psalm, 79.
Thou which gouernest Israel, look toward us and be attent. Thou have
brought forth a vineyard out of Egypt, thou have purged the same from Gentiles,
and have planted it. Thou O God of all power turn toward us, look upon us
from heaven, and visit this thy vineyard which thine own right hand has
planted. The like manner of persuasion used the holy Prophet Esaias to move God,
when he said: Look upon us I beseech thee (O lord) which are the work of
thine own hands.

But above all other, the blessed man Job stands, Job, 1.
as it were, in argument and dysputation with God about this matter, saying:
The confidence of Job, in that God bad made him.
have not thy hands made me? have they not framed me of clay and earth? have
not thou compacted me as cheese is made of milk? have not thou knit my bones
and sinowes together, and covered my flesh with skyn? have not thou given me
life, and conserved my spirit with thy continual protection? how soever thou
seem to dissemble these matters and hide them in thy heart, yet I know that
thou remembrest them all, and art not unmindful of them. By which words this
holy man signified, that albeit God suffered him greatly to be tempted and
afflicted in this life, so far forth as he might seem to have forgotten him:
yet was he well assured that his divine majesty could not of his goodness
forsake or despise him, for that he was his creature and the proper
workemanshyp of his own hands. In which very name of workemanshippe, holy David
took such great comfort, considering that the workman cannot choose but be
loving and favorable toward his own work, (especially so excellent and
bountiful a worke-man as is almighty GOD, toward a work made as man is, to
his own shape and likeness,) that in all his necessities, yea even in his
greatest infirmities of flesh, and most grievous offenses committed against
his Majesty, he conceaueth most assured hope of mercy and pardon, upon this
consideration, that he was his workmanship, The assured hope David had, in that
he was Gods workmanshyp.
and consequently, well known to his divine wisdom, of how brickle and infirm a
metal he was made. For thus at one time among other, he reasons of this
matter. Look how far distant the East is from the West, Psalm, 102.
so far off has God removed our iniquities from us. Even as a father does
take compassion of his own children, so does the Lord take mercy upon us: for
that he well knows the moulde whereof we are made, and does remember that
we are nothing else but dust.

In which discourse, the holy Prophet makes mention of two things that did
assure him of Gods mercy; the one, that God was his Creator and maker, and
thereby privy to the frailty of his constitution and nature: the other, that he
was his father, whose property is to have compassion on his children; and this
is a second reason, The second reason of assurance of Gods love, for that he
is our Father.
more strong and forcible perhaps then the former, why every man may be most
assured of pardon that heartily turns unto almighty GOD; considering that it
has pleased his divine Majesty, not only to be unto man a Creator, (as he
is to all other things,) but also a father, which is the title of the greatest
love and conjunction, that nature has left to things in this world. Whereof a
certain Philosopher said well: that no man could conceive the love of a
Parents heart, but he only that had a child of his own. For which respect,
our Savior Christ to put us in mind of this most fervent love; and thereby as
it were, by one fire to enkindle another within our hearts: did use oftentimes
and ordinarily, to repeat this sweet name of Father in his speeches to his
followers, Math, 5,6,8. etc.
and theruppon founded diverse most excellent and comfortable discourses; as at
one time when he exhorted them from overmuch care and worldly solicitude: he
adds this reason: Your father in heaven knows, that you have need of these
things. Math, 6.
As who would say, he knowing your wants, and being your Father, you shall
not need to trouble your selves with too great anxietie in these matters: for
that a Fathers heart cannot but be provident and careful for his children. The
like deduction makes he in the same place, to the same effect, by comparison
of the birds of the air, and other irreasonable creatures: for which, if God
do make (says he) so abundant provision, as all the whole world may
witness that he does: much more careful will he be to provide for men that
are his own children, which are more dear unto him then any other terrestiall
thing created.

All which speeches and reasons of our Savior, are derived from the nature and
property of a Parent, which cannot but affecte and love his children;
especially such a Father whom Christ calls celestial who in this perfection
of true fatherly love, What a father God is.
so far exceeds al earthly Parents put together: as in power, clemency and
goodness, almighty GOD surpasses the infirmity of his feeble creatures. Such
a father, as has not only given life and being unto his children: Gala, 4.
but also (as S. Paul says,) has poured into their hearts the divine spyrite
of his only eternal Son, styrring them up to most assured confidence and
invincible hope, in his fatherly goodness and protection. And upon assurance
of this hope, have as well sinners as Saints from the beginning, fled unto
him confidently under this title of paternitie, and never were deceived. So the
Prophet Esaias, as well in his own name, as in the name of the sinful people of
Israel, doubted not to cry. Esaias, 63.
Thou art our father, Abraham has not known us, and Israel is ignorant of
us: Thou O Lord, art our father, thou art our redeemer. And to confirm this
assurance unto us, Christ sent that most sweet and comfortable embassage unto
his Disciples, Christ's comfortable embassage.
presently upon his resurrection: John, 20.
Go and tell my brethren, that I do ascend unto my father and unto your
father: unto my God, and unto your God. By which two words of Father and God,
the one of love, and the other of power: the one of will, the other of
ability, he took away all doubt of not speeding, from each man that should
make recourse to this merciful Lord and Father. God himself also, after many
threats used by the Prophet Jeremy against the people of Israel for their
sins, in the end, least they should dyspaire, turns about his talk, How
greatly the respect of a father moves God.
and changes his style, assuring them of many graces and favors, if they
would return unto him: telling the house of Israel, Jeremy, 31.
that he had loved her from the beginning, and had sought to draw her unto
him by threats, to the end he might take mercy upon her: and that now he
intended to build her up again, to adorn her with joy and exultation, to
gather her children from all corners of the earth, to refresh them with the
waters and rivers of life, and all this (says he) Quia factus sunt Israeli
Pater: for that I am become now a Father to Israel. And in the same place to
wicked Ephraim (the head City of the rebellious kingdom of Samaria,) he
says: Jeremy. 31.
Ephraim is become my honorable son, my delight and dearly beloved child:
therefore my bowels are moved with compassion upon him, and in abundance of
mercy will I take pity of him. So much attributed God to this respect of being
a father unto Israel and Ephraim, and of their being his children: that for
this cause only (notwithstanding their infinite enormous sins) his bowels of
endless mercy were moved with love and compassion toward them.

And these are those tender and merciful bowels, Luke, 1,
which holy Zachary father to Saint John Baptist, protests to be in
almighty God toward mankind that had offended him. These are those which
were in that good old father mentioned in the Gospel, Luke, 16.
who being not only offended but also abandoned by his younger son, yet
after he saw him return home again, notwithstanding he had wasted all his
thrift and substance, The fathers liberal heart to the prodigal son.
and had wearied out his body with wicked life: he was so far off from
dysdaining to receive him: as he came forth to meet with him, fell upon his
neck, and kyssed him for joy: adorned him with new apparel and rich jewels:
provided a solemn banquet for him: invited his friends to be merry with
him: and showed more exultation and triumph for his return, then if he had
never departed from him.

By which parable our Savior Christ endeavored to set forth unto us, the
incomprehensible mercy of his heavenly father toward sinners: in which respect
he is truly called by his Apostle Pater misericordiarum, 2, Cor, 1. Ber. ser.
5. de natal.
the father of mercies. For that (as Saint Bernard well notes) this sea and
Ocean of mercies, does flow peculiarly from the heart of a father, which cannot
be said so properly of the gulf and depth of his judgments. For which cause
he is called in Scripture the God of justice and revenge, Psalm, 35^
and not the Father. And finally, this blessed name of Father in God, does
import unto us by Gods own testimony, What the name of Father does import.
all sweetness, all love, all freendshippe, all comfort, all fatherly
providence, care, and protection; all certainty of favor, all assurance of
grace, all security of mercy, pardon, and remission of our sins, whenever
unfeignedly we turn unto him.

And in this point his divine Majesty is so forward and vehement, to give us
assurance, that being not content to set forth his love unto us by the love
of a fathers heart; he goes further and protests unto us, that his heart is
more tender toward us in this behalf, then the heart of any mother can be to
the only child and infant of her own womb. For thus he says to Sion, which
for her sins began to doubt least he had forsaken her: Esaias, 49.
Can the mother forget her own infant, or can she not be merciful to the
child of her own womb? if she could, yet can I not forget or reject thee:
behold, I have written thee in the flesh of mine own hands. And this, for so
much as God is called our father.

The third argument of Gods love, the giving his son for us.
There remains yet a third consideration, which more sets forth Gods
inestimable love, then any of the other demonstrations before handled. And that
is, that he gave the life and blood of his only begotten and eternal son,
for purchasing and redeeming us when we were lost; a price so infinite and
inexplicable, as (no doubt) his divine wysedom would never have given, but for a
thing which he had loved above all measure. Which our Savior himself that was
to make the payment, does plainly signify, and therefore also seems as it
were, to wonder at such a bargain, when he says in the Gospel: John. 3.
So dearly has God (my father) loved the world, that he has given for it his
only begotten son. In which words he ascribes this most wonderful dealing
of his Father, unto the vehemency and exceeding abundance of love: as does
also his dearest disciple and Apostle S. John, saying: 1, John, 4.
In this appears the great love and charity of God toward us, that he has
sent his only begotten son into the world, to purchase life for us. In this
(I say) is made evident his exceeding charity, that we not loving him, he
loved us first: and gave his own son to be a ransom for our sins.
Whereunto also the holy Apostle S. Paul agrees, Christ was given for love.
admiring in like manner the excessive love of God in these words; Romans 5.
God does meruailously commend and set forth his great love unto us, in that we
being yet sinners, he gave his son to the death for our redemption. And in
an other place, framing out; as it were, a measure of Gods mercy by the
abundance of his love: says thus; Ephe, 2.
God who is rich in mercy, through the exceeding love which he bore unto us,
we being dead in sin, he revived us in Christ, and raised us up even
unto heaven, making us to sit down there with him, to the end he might
declare to al ages and worlds ensuing, the most abundant riches of his grace
and goodness toward us.

This was the opinion of that noble Apostle S. Paul, and of all his coequals,
Apostles, Evangelists, Disciples and Saints: that this work of our redemption,
proceeded only from the inflamed furnace of Gods immeasurable love. And
therefore to make no other conclusion hereof, then that which S. Paul himself
does make: The conclusion of this point, made by S. Paul. Titus. 3.
if God have not spared his own propper and only begotten son, but has given
him up to death for gaining us unto him, how can it be, that with him he has
not given unto us al other things. If when we were his enemies and thought not
upon him, Rom, 5.
he sent to seek us so diligently, by such a messenger as he loved so dearly,
allowing him to lay down a price for us which he so infinitlie esteemed: what
shall we think that he will do unto us now, (we being made his own by our
redemption,) if we return willingly unto him: when our receiving shall cost him
nothing else, but only a merciful look upon us: which is not so much from the
infinite bowels of his bottomless mercy, as is one drop of water from the most
huge gulf of the maine Ocean sea. And this shall suffice for the first point of
Gods love, declared unto us by the three most sweet and comfortable names and
respects, of Creator, Father, and Redeemer.

The second part: how God expresses his love toward sinners.
NExt after which, we are to consider in what manner God is accustomed to
express and declare this love of his, in his dealings and proceedings toward
sinners. And first of all the wise man (having had long experience of this
matter,) begins to describe and set it forth in this sort, saying unto God
himself: Wisd, 11,
(Thou (O Lorde^) do dissemble the sins of men, to give unto them time of
repentance. And then, when they will not use this benefit of his forbearing,
but will needs enforce him to punish and correct them: he says further of
this correction: Wisdom, 12.
Such as wilfully do run astray (O Lord) and will not turn unto thee, thou
do correct them sweetly by little and little, admonishing and exhorting them
to leave their sins and to believe in thee. Two rare points of clemency in
GOD.
These two points then of exceeding clemency, by the testimony of the wise
man, are found in almighty God: first, to wincke at the wicked life of men,
and to expect their conversion with inspeakable patience and longanimitie,
according as also the Prophet Esaias bears witness, adjoining the cause
thereof in these words: Esaias, 30,
The Lord does attend your conversion, to the end he may take mercy on you,
and thereby be exalted. And secondly, for the same respect when he is enforced
by reason of his justice to chastise them: yet does he the same with such
moderation and mildness, as always in this life he reserueth place of pardon.

And to these two we may adioyne yet a third property of his mercy, more
admirable (perhaps) then the former: which is, (as Tertullian excellently
notes, Tertul. in Apolog. cap 2.
) that he being the party offended, yet first and principally desires
reconsiliation: he having received the wrong and injury, yet does he most
busily entreat for amity and atonement. And whereas in all right and
equity, he might deny us pardon, and for his power take revenge of us at his
pleasure: God that is offended, seeks atonement with us.
yet does he not only offer us peace of his own accord, but also sueth unto us
by all means possible to accept thereof^ humbling (in a certain manner) his
divine Majesty to our baseness and vilitie: and behauing himself in this
respect, as a Prince that were enamored of his bond-slaue and abject servant.

This might be declared by many of his own speeches and dooinges in holy
Scripture: but one place out of the Prophet Esaias shall serve for all: where
almighty GOD so earnestly wooeth the conversion of Jerusalem, as no lover in
the world could utter more signs and testimonies of a heart inflamed and
set on fire with love, then he does toward that City which so highly had
offended him. Gods wooing of Jerusalem.
For first, after many threats poured out against her, if she did not return,
least she might perhaps fall into despair, he makes this protestation in the
beginning of his speech, Esaias, 27,
Indignatio non est mihi, etc. Angry I am not (o Jerusalem,) but whatsoever I
have spoken, I have spoken of good will and love. His protestation.
Secondly, he enters into this dispute, and doubt with himself, about
punishing her for her sins; what shall I do? His cunctation.
Shall I tread her under my feet and put her to the fire? or else will she
stay my puissant hand and make peace with me, will she (I say) make atonement
with me? After which doubt and cunctation, he resolves himself to change his
manner of style, and to fall a little to chide with her, and then he says, His
chiding.
Harken O ye deaf inhabitants of Jerusalem: look about ye ye blind folk that
will not see: who is blind and deaf but my servant, that will not regard or
listen to the messengers which I send? O thou which have open ears, will thou
not hear? And then a little after he begins to smooth and speak fair
again, saying: His fair speech.
Ever since thou have been gracious and glorious in mine eyes, I have loved
thee, and for thy soul will I give whole nations. Fear not, for that I am
with thee. Wherewith she being little or nothing moved, he returns to a
sweet manner of complaint saying: His complaint.
Thou have enthralled me by thy sins, and with thine iniquities thou have
greatly afflicted me. Which being said, and she somewhat moved thereby to love
him as it seems, he turns unto her with this most comfort^ble and kind
speech: His kind speech.
I am he, I am he, which cancelleth thine iniquities for mine own sake, and
will never think any more upon thy sins.

All which being done, and they now reconciled, and made fast friends
together, his divine Majesty begins a very loving conference (as it were)
and sweet expostulation with her, saying in these words: His conference.
Call thou to memory the things that are past, and let us judge our selves
here together. Tell me if thou have any thing whereby thou may be justified.
Thy first parent was a sinner, etc. Whereat she being ashamed, and having
nothing in the world to answer for herself: almighty God comfort her,
and knitteth up the whole matter in this most kind and amiable sort. His
sweet conclusion.
Fear not, for I will pour out my spirit upon thee, and upon thy seed, and
my benediction shall be upon thine offspring; thy children shall bud up and
flourish as wylloes planted by the water side; Thus says the Lord and king of
Israel, the Lord of hosts that is thy redeemer: I am the first and the last,
and besides me there is no other GOD. Be mindful of this thou house of Jacob,
I have dissolved and dissipated thy sins, as a cloud is dissolved in the
air: be mindful of this and have an assured confidence. Thus far continues
the treaty between God and his City of Jerusalem.

And now tell me (dear Christian brother) whether it be possible for any heart
or tongue in the world, A consideration upon the former treaty of God with
Jerusalem.
to conceive or express more ways or significations of most vehement good
will and burning affection, then of Gods part in this treaty has been
declared? What lover or enamoured person upon earth, what passionate heart could
woo more earnestly, sue more diligently, solicit more artificially,
complain more pitifully, expostulate more amiably, confer more
intrinsically, remit offenses more readily, offer benefits more abundantly,
conclude more sweetly, and give more pregnant testimony of unfeigned love, or
more assured certainty of eternal league and amity, the^ does almighty GOD
unto this Nation that so grievously had offended him? who will not confess
now with the Prophet David, Psalm, 144.
that sweet and merciful is the Lord; and his miserations spread over all the
rest of his most wonderful works. Who will marvel if the same Prophet made
a vow, Psalm, 16.
that his everlasting song should be of the mercies of this his Lord and
maker?

But yet this thing is made much more apparent, Gods tender love to Jerusalem
when he was to destroy it.
by that which his divine Majesty did afterward to the same people in the
days of Jeremy the Prophet (above an hundredth years after this treaty in
the time of Esaias:) at what time God being resolved to destroy them and their
City, for their obduration in their sins: when the hour of execution drew
near, his bowels of mercy were so touched with commiseration toward them, as
he called to Jeremy, and commanded him once again to go up to the Temple
gate where all the people did pass in and out, and there with a loud voice to
cry as follows. Ierem, 7,
Hear ye the word of God, o all you of Judah, that do pass in and out by
these gates: thus faith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel: yet do you
amend your ways, and I will dwell in this place with you, etc. And when this
exhortation, and blessed endeavor of almighty God, could not move or profit
them any thing at all: then his unspeakable goodness began with sharp threats in
this manner; Ierem. 7.
My fury and indignation is gathered together upon this City: and upon the
inhabitants, and upon the very beasts and Cattle thereof, as also upon the
fruit and trees of this Region. The carkases of this people, shall be food to
the birds of the air, and to the beasts of the field, their enemies shall
come and cast forth of their sepulchers, Ierem, 8.
the bones of the Kings and Princes of Judah: the bones of their priests,
prophets and inhabitants; and shall dry them at the Sun, and cast them out
unto the dunghill. After all which long and dreadful commination, he alters
his speech presently again, and says with a very lamentable and pitiful
voice. A pitiful complaint.
And will not he that is fallen (notwithstanding all this) rise up again? Will
not he that is departed from me, return unto me again? O, why does my people
run from me so obstinatlie? By which loving complaint, The wonderful
proceeding of God with Jerusalem.
and infinite other means of mercy that God used to that people, when no
amendment at all could be procured: his divine Majesty was enforced to call
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon before the walls of Jerusalem, to destroy it. But
even now also consider the bowels of his unspeakable mercy. For hoping that
by this terror they might perchance be styrred up to conversion; he sent
Jeremy the Prophet to them again, with this embassage: Iere. 35^
Tell the inhabitants of Jerusalem: will ye not yet receive discipline and obey
my words? Whereat those graceless people were so little moved, as they took
Jeremy and cast him into prison for his message, and thereby exasperated most
grievously Gods further indignation against them. Notwithstanding all which,
his incomprehensible clemency would not thus abandon them: Iere, 3^^
but commanded holy Jeremy to write out all his threats and promises in a
book together, and to send the same unto them, forth of the prison where he
lay, by his servant Baruch, to be read in their hearing: and so he did.
Whereof when Ioacim the King had understanding: he commanded Baruch to be
brought into his presence, and there to read the Book by the fire side, (as
the Scripture notes.) And when he had heard but three or four pages thereof,
The obstinacy of the Jewish nation.
he cut them out with a penknife, and threw the whole book into the fire,
and so consumed it. At which obstinate and impious dealing, albeit almighty
God were exceedingly offended, yet commanded he the same book to be indicted
and written again, in much more ample manner then before, thereby (if it had
been possible) to have stirred up and gained that people unto him. But when
this by no means in the world could be brought to pass: then permitted his
divine Majesty, the whole City to be destroyed, according to his former
threats, and that rebellious people to be led away captive in bondage to
Babilo^. In which place and misery (notwythstanding their demerits) his
infinite mercy could not forsake them, but sent his Prophet Ezechiell, as also
Baruch unto them, with extreme complaint of their obduration: Ezechi. 23.
and yet offering unto them mercy and pardon even then, if they would repent.

And what more wonderful clemency then this, can possibly be imagined dear
Christian brother? Ezech, 2. Epitheto^s given by God to the people of Israel.
May in reason any man ever now enter into doubt or despair of Gods mercy,
how great and grievous soever the burden of his sins be, when he considers
this proceeding of his eternal Majesty with the people of Israel, for so
many years and ages together: whom himself calls notwithstanding, Gentem
Apostatricem dura facie and indomabili cord: an apostaticall Nation, of a
shameless countenance and incorrigible disposition? Can God devise any more
effectual and forcible means, to erect and animate a sinner confidently to
return unto him, then a^e these? And yet (gentle reader) for thy further
comfort and encouragement in this behalf, I will adioyne one thing more, which
does exceed and pass all reason and reach of human imagination: and this
is, A wonderful point.
that God promises to a sinner that faithfully will return unto him, not
only to forgette and utterly extinguish all memory of his former iniquities,
but also to make more joy and triumph at his conversion, and to love and
cherish him more tenderly at his return, then if he had never fallen or
departed from his service.

This God himself signifies by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias, 40.
when he says, Call unto Jerusalem, speak unto her heart, (that is,
comfortably,) for that her iniquity is forgiven, she has received double at
Gods hands for all her sins committed. What joy there is made at a sinners
conversion.
And more plainly in an other place by the same Prophet. Esaias, 30.
The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun: and the light of the
sun shall be as the light of seven days, seven times put together, when
God shall bind up the wounds of his people and heal their sores. And to
this purpose do appertain directly those most wonderful Parables of our
Savior in the Gospel, Luke, 15,
concerning the extraordinary joy and feasting that the careful woman made,
when she had found again her grote that was lost, and the good sheephearde,
when he brought back the sheep that was astray: and the merciful father when
he received home his son that before had abandoned him. And to the same
purpose does it also appertain, that in the Prophet David God glories
especially in the service of those people, Psalm, 57.
that before had not known him. And this shall suffice for this second point, to
show what wonderful means almighty God does use, in setting forth his
mercy, for allurement of sinners unto repentance.

The third part: what assurance God gives to them that repent.
AND so having declared what exceeding great love and mercy GOD bears
toward man, and how effectually he expresses the same by his suing unto
sinners for their conversion: it follows that we should in this third place,
examine some what more in particular, what certain assurance his divine
Majesty gives, of undoubted pardon and full remission of their sins, to all
such as unfeignedly shall resolve themselves to make their refuge unto him.
Which thing albeit every man by that which before has been treated, may
sufficiently conceive, yet for the importance of the matter, it shall not be
amiss in this place also, to add a word or two, for more plain and evident
demonstration thereof. And this shall be done by setting down both the
words and deeds, that is, both the promises and performance which almighty
God has used and exercised in this behalf, to all such as have offended him
whatsoever.

And for the first, which are his promises; The promises of God to sinners that
repent.
most apparent it is, as well by the things which before have been discussed,
as also by the whole course, body, and drift of holy scripture, that the
promises of mercy and pardon which his divine majesty has made to sinners,
and whereunto by his sacred word, he has (in a certain manner) obliged
himself; are both manifold, vehement, absolute, resolute and universal. Ezech,
18,33. 34, 37.
Whosoever shall depart from his wicked ways, and turn unto me, (says
almighty GOD) I will receive him. Behold the universality of all people and
persons, without excluding any. And then further; At what time soever an
impious man shall return unto me from his impiety, his wickedness shall not
hurt him, says the same Lord God of hosts: see the universality of all
times and seasons without exception. But yet harken what God adds besides.
Leave of to do peruerselie, (says he to the Jews etc.) and then do you come
and find fault with me, if you can. For if your sins were as red as
skarlet, they shall be made as white as snow. etc. Esaias, 1,
Consider the universality of all kind of sins, be they never so grievous,
so horrible, or heinous.

And finally, God talking to a soul that has often times fallen and most
infinitely offended him, he says thus; Ierem, 3,
It is a common received speech, that if a woman depart from her husband, and
do join herself to another man, she may not return to her first husband
again, for that she is defiled and made contaminate. And yet whereas thou
have departed from me, and have committed fornication with many other lovers:
do thou return unto me again, and I will receive thee, says almighty God.

By which words is expressed the fourth universality, containing all states,
qualities, and conditions of men; how many ways, or how oftentimes, or how
contemptuously soever, they have committed sins against his divine Majesty.
And what may be added now more unto this? was there ever Prince that made so
large an offer to his subjects? or was there ever father that gave so ample and
universal promise of pardon unto his children? Four universalities in Gods
promises to sinners.
Who can now mistrust himself to be excluded from this assurance of mercy,
wherein all sorts of people, al kind of sins, all times and seasons, all
states and qualities of sinners are comprehended? O most miserable and
unfortunate man that excludes himself, whom God excludes not. What is there
in this general and universal promises, whereof any man in the world should
have pretense, to make any least doubt or question? Of the meaning (perhaps)
and intent of him that promises? O dear brother, it is only love and
charity; and consequently, can not deciue us. Of the truth and surety of his
promises? It is infallible; and more certain then heaven and earth put
together. Of the power that he has to perform his promises? Three points of
great comfort.
It is infinite, and not restrained by any bounds or limitation: whereof then
may we doubt? or in which of these three points may we not conceive most
singular consolation? hear the comfortable meditation that blessed S. Bernard
made upon these three particulers which we have now mentioned. Tria considero
(says he) in quibus tota spes mea consistit: charitatem vocationis, veritatem
promissionis, potestaetem redditionis. etc. Bern. Ser. in ver. Psalm
misericordia. Domini in aeter. C^ntab.
That is, I do consider three things (faith this holy man) wherein all my hope
consists, and whereby it is made inuinsible. First the exceeding love and
charity of him, that calls me to him by repentance; secondly, the infallible
truth and certainty of his promise which he makes to me of pardon and mercy;
thirdly, the endless power and ability he has to perform whatsoever he
promises. This is that triple or threefold rope and chain, Eccl^^ 4.
which holy scripture says is hardly broken: for that by this rope, let
down unto us from heaven (which is our Country) into this world, that is our
prison; we may ascend and mount up (if we will) even unto the sight and
possession of Gods eternal kingdom and heavenly glory. Thus far that
blessed father.

How God has performed his promises to sinners that have repented.
But now to the second point, if we consider how faithfully almighty God has
put in execution those promises of his from time to time, and how no one man
upon earth, (so many ages as the world has continued) was ever yet frustrate
of his hope, in making his conversion unto his Majesty, if he made it from his
heart: we shall find further cause for us to confide. For so much as it is not
probable, or in reason to be imagined, that he which never failed in times
past, will break his promise for the time to com; especially seeing now in
Christianity, when we have this advantage above other former times (as Saint
John does also note) that he who was and is our judge, 1. Ioh, 2,
is become also our advocate to plead our cause.

Cast back thine eyes then my loving dear brother, and take a view of all
ages, times and seasons past and gone. Begin from the first creation of the
world, and come downward even unto this day: and examine indifferently
whether in all this wide compass of times, persons, places and most grievous
offenses committed against his divine Majesty, Never sinner repented that was
not pardoned.
there were ever yet any one sinner upon earth, that returned unfeignedly and
was not received. The sin of our first Parents, Adam and Eve.
was presently forgiven unto them, upon their first signification of grief and
sorrow for the same. And not only this, Gene, 3.
but our Savior also Jesus Christ was promised to be sent, for restoring them
and their posterity to the glory and felicity which by their fall they had
lost. After this, until the time of Abraham and of the people of Israel, as
some works of Gods justice are recorded in holy writ, that were exercised
upon irrepentant offenders: so are there many more celebrated of his mercy:
and only two persons in particular are mentioned, who notwithstanding some
sorrow which they seemed to have of their offenses, were yet rejected: the
first whereof was the murderer Caine, The reiection of Caine and Esau.
who at the beginning denied his wickedness unto God, and then being convicted,
despayred of remission. The second was Esau, whom S. Paul calls a profane
fornicator: Hebru, 12,
who found no place of repentance, albeit with tears he sought the same.
Whereof S. Chrysostom gives the reason in these words: Chrysostom. hom. 80. de
paenit. ad pop. Ami^.
For this cause Esau obtained not pardon, for that he did not repent as he
should have done: his tears proceeding rather of anger and temptation, then
of true sorrow.

When the people of Israel came to be a distinct Nation, and to be governed at
Gods appointment: how grievously (trow you) did they offend daily, and almost
hourelie his divine Majesty? And how graciously did his unspeakable
clemency remit and pardon their manifold and innumerable sins and
trespasses done against him? The whole Scripture (in truth) seems nothing
else, but a perpetual narration of Gods incredible patience and infinite mercies
toward them. The infinite ^ins of the Jewish people, and their infinite pardons
recei^ed from God.
And if I would speak of particular persons among them, which he received to
his favor after great and manifold offenses committed: there would be no end
of that recital.

Let Manasses that most impious and wicked king, be an example for all: The
example of Manasses.
of whose enormous life and most detestable acts, whole pages are replenished,
both in the books of kings and Chronicles; 4, Reg, 21. 2, Chro, 33,
and yet afterward notwithstanding, the same man falling into misery and
calamity among the Babilonians, (a fortunate school oftentimes for Princes,
who in their prosperity are wont to contemn God,) he began to be sorrowful
for his former life and actions, and became repentant (as the Scripture says)
in the sight of God, for the same. Whereat his divine and incomprehensible
mercy was so much moved presently, as he received him to favor, and brought
him back from his prison and fetters, to his kingdom and imperial throne of
Majesty.

The example also of the Ninevites is very notable and singular in this
behalf: The example of the Ninevites.
against whom almighty God having decreed a sentence of death, to be executed
within a certain time; Jonas, 1,2,3,4.
he commanded Jonas the Prophet to go and denounce that sentence unto them.
But Jonas well knowing the nature and disposition of God toward mercy:
fore-sawe (as afterward he signifies) that if he should go and bear
that embassage unto them, and they thereuppon make change of their lives: his
Majesty would presently pardon them, and so he should be taken for a false
and lying Prophet. For avoiding which inconvenience, he chose rather to flee
away by sea to the City of Tharsis, and there to hide himself. But almighty
God raised a tempest in that journey, and disposed in such sort, as Ion^s was
cast into the sea, and there received and devoured by a whale: from whose belly
he was commanded afterward to repair to Niniuie, and to do his former
message; which he performed. And the tenor of his message was, that within
f^rtie days that huge city of Niniuie should be destroyed. Which he having
denounced unto them: the sequel fell out, as Jonas before had suspected. For
the Ninevites believing the message, and betaking themselves to repentance, GOD
forgave them presently: whereat Jonas was exceedingly grieved and offended,
and complained sweetly to God of his strange dealing herein, demanding why he
had enforced him to come and preach destruction unto them, knowing before hand
that he would pardon them. But his merciful Lord answered him fully to this
point, by a certain accident that fell out, whereto Jonas was not able to reply
one word.

For so it chanced, that Jonas sitting without the walls of the City
Niniuie, under an Iuie bushe, that in one night by Gods appointment was sprung
up to cover him from the sun: the same Iuie by Gods ordinance perished upon
the sudden, and was consumed by a worm, leaving the poor Prophet destitute
of that consolation of shadow which he received by it. Consider this speech of
almighty God.
Wherewyth he being not a little disquieted and afflicted, God said unto him:
thou (Jonas) art sorrowful, Jonas. 4.
and much grieved for loss of thine Iuie tree, which notwithstanding thou
did not plant or make to grow, nor tookest any labor at all about it. But
the same grew up in one night, and in one night it perished again. And shall
not I then, be careful to pardon my great City of Niniuie, wherein there be
above an hundred and twenty thousand innocent people, which cannot distinguish
between their right hand and their left? This was the answer of almighty God
to Jonas, for defense of his singular inclination to mercy, in respect that the
Ninevites were his own creatures, his own workman^hip, and the labors of his
own hands, as all other people also are. Of which kind of reason and
consideration, there have been diverse things said and declared In the first
part of this book.
before, for manifestations of Gods infinite mercy. And all this that hitherto
has been spoken, is of things only done in time of the old Testament,
before the appearance of Christ our Savior in the flesh.

Examples of mercy in the new Testament.
But now if we look into the time of grace, when God incarnate came himself
in person, to show the riches of his endless mercy unto mortal men upon
earth: we shall see more examples without comparison, of his exceeding
clemency. For that now, our Creator and shepherd overcome (as it were) with
extreme compassion, came down into the vale of our misery, with resolution,
not only to offer pardon and forgiveness to all his sheep that were astray and
would return: Luke, 15,
but also to follow and seek them out: and being found, to lay them on his
own shoulders, and so to bear them back unto the fold again, and there to
give his life and blood for their defense against the Wolf.

John, 10,11,
O sweet Lord, what greater love can be imagined then this? what more pregnant
signification of inflamed charity, can man's cogitation conceive or apprehende?
is it marvel now if he which descended unto us with his heart, and with
these bowels of burning affection, did set open the gates of all his
treasures, favors, and graces unto us? Is it marvel if the holy Apostle
Saint Paul do say of this time Superabundauit gratia, Rom, 5,
that grace did over abound: and yet further in another place; that Christ
being very God, Phillp. 2,
did in a certain sort impoueri^h and empty himself, with the most
wonderful effusion of mercies and havoc of heaven, which at this time and
ever since he has made?

Heerehence it proceeded that all his delight and pleasure upon earth, The
wonderful clemency of Jesus our Savior.
was to converse with sinners, and to give them comfort, courage, and
confidence in him. Which he did so manifestly in the sight of all the world as
he became very scandalous and offensive thereby to the Scribes and Pharisees,
Math, 9, and 11. Mark^, 2, Luke, 5,
and other principal Rulers among the Jewish Nation. Heere-hence: also did
proceed those his most marvelous speeches and strange inuitations of wicked
men unto him; as for example at one time among other, when he cried out in
public, Math, 11.
Come unto me all ye that do labor and be heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. And at another time, going into the Temple of Jerusalem upon a high
festival day, when all the people were gathered together: he stood up in the
midst of them all, and brake forth into this vehement inuitation, with a loud
voice, as S. John Evangelist records: John, 7,
If any man among you be thirsty, let him come unto me and he shall drink.
John, 7.
Heerby it came to pass, that his divine majesty was termed commonly,
Publicanorum et p^ccatorum amicus: Math, 11.
the freende and familiar of wicked Publicans and sinners. And hereof finally
it did proceed, that he received all, embraced all, and forgave all that
repaired unto him: were they Scribes, Pharisees, Soldiers, Publicans,
Usurers, Harlots, Thieves, Persecutors, or whatsoever most grievous offenders
besides: (whereof particular examples in each kind might be alleged:)
assuring us furthermore, that after his resurrection and blessed a^cention to
the right hand of his father, he would be more bountiful yet in this manner
of proceeding, John, 12,
and dr^w all men unto him: being at one time both our Judge and Advocate, our
King and Mediator, our God and Redeemer, our Father and Brother, our Priest
and Sacrifice, and he that both pleads and determines our cause together.

What then should not we hope at this time (dear Christian brother) at the
hands of this our Lord and Master, Great and many ^^uses of assured hope in
Christ.
which has left unto us such words, such deeds, such assured evidences of
his infallible love and abundant mercies toward us? why should not his
dealings with other men before us, give us heart and courage to trust assuredly
in him, for the time present and to come? why should not his former most
infinite mercies, be unto us odoriferous alluring sauors and ointments, to make
us as the spouse did in the Canticles, Cant. 1.
follow and run after him?

Hear what devout S. Bernarde does meditate upon this passage of Christ's
fragrant ointments. Be^. Ser. 5. in Cantab.
O sweet Jesus (says he) the fresh and odoriferous smell of thy wonderful
clemency does allure us to run after thee, when we hear say, that thou
despisest not beggars, nor abhorrest sinners. We know right well (o Lord) that
thou did not reject the thief that confessed thee, nor the sinful woman
that wept unto thee, nor the Chananaean that humbled herself before thee, nor
the wicked adultresse brought unto thee, nor the touller or tribute gatherer
that followed thee, nor the publican that repaired unto thee, nor the disciple
that denied thee, nor Saul that did persecute thee, nor thy tormenters that
did nail thy sacred body to the Cross. O Lord, all these are fragrant smells
and savors of thy most sweet mercy: and at the sent of these thy ointments,
we do follow and run after thee. Thus far S. Bernard.

The fourth part: The application of all that has been said.
AND so with this to come to the fourth and last part of this Chapter, and to
apply all that has been said of Gods mercy to our present purpose: What man
is there living in the world, that reading and believing these things, can
doubt or mistrust to receive pardon for his sins? Rom, 8,
If God be he that justifies, who is able to condemn us, says the holy
Apostle S Paul? If God be minded to deliver us, who can take us out of his
hands? John, 10,
If God protest that he will pardon us, why should we make any doubt or
question thereof at all? Why should we not join rather with that confident
and faithful servant of his S. Paul, who says unto us, and to all other
sinners living, in his masters name: Hebr, 10.
Let us repair unto him with a true heart in fullness of faith, having purged
our hearts from an evil conscience: S. Paul's exhortation to confidence.
let us hold fast an immouable confession of our hope, seeing he is faithful
which has given unto us his promise, and let us consider how one of us may
provoke another to charity and good works. By which words, the holy Apostle
signifies, that what sinner soever shall resolve with himself to purge his
conscience from wickedness for the time to come, and to employ the rest of his
life in charity and good works: he may confidently and boldly repair unto
almighty God, with most certain assurance to receive pardon and remission.
And alas (dear brother) why then should any man despair? Wherefore should
any man cast away his own soul, that GOD so much desires to save? what a
pitiful and lamentable case is it, to behold so many Christians in the world
to go languishing in their sins, and to give themselves over to all kind of
careless and dissolute sensuality (which by God himself is called
desperation,) upon this conceit and wicked cogitation, that now they are gone
so far, and so deeply rooted and habituated in this kind of life, as either
it is impossible or in vain for them now, to think of change or amendment? O
dear brother, let these men harken to this excellent dyscourse of holy
Chrysostom, which ensues.

If thou be a wicked man, An excellent discourse and exhortation of Saint
Chrysostom. hom. 2 in Psalm. 50.
(says he) think upon the Publicane. If thou be unclean of life, consider
the harlot. If thou be a murderer, remember the thief. If thou be a swearer,
call to mind the blasphemer. Cast thine eyes upon Saul and Paul, first a
persecutour, and then a preacher; first a violent robber, afterward a good
steward and dyspenser. First chafe; afterward corn: first a woolfe, afterward
a shepherd: first lead, afterward gold: first a pirat, afterward a good
pilot: first a dispersor, afterward a gatherer together: first a breaker down
of Gods vine yard, afterward a planter: first a destroyer, afterward a
builder. Thou have seen manifold wickedness, but now behold unspeakable
mercy. Thou have heard the pride of the servant, consider now the love and
clemency of the Master. I will not thou say to me, I am a blasphemer, I have
been a persecutor, I have led an unclean and abominable life, and therefore
I doubt least I shall not be pardoned; Say not so unto me, for here thou have
examples to the contrary, in every of these and many other sins. Thou may
safely fly to what port thou list, and that either in the old or new
Testament. For in the old thou have David, in the new thou have Paul. I will
not have thee therefore allege excuses unto me, for covering thine own
cowardnes. Have thou sinned, repent: have thou sinned a thousand times, repent
a thousand times unfeignedly. This is the only ointment that may be poured into
an afflicted conscience, the torment whereof I do well know. The speech of
the devil to a soul laden with sin.
For the devil stands by, whetting his sword of desperation, and saying unto
thee; Thou have lived wickedly all thy youth, and thy former days thou have
misspent: thou have hanted plays and spectacles with thy companions, and
followed after loose and lascivious women; thou have taken other men's goods
from them wrongfully; thou have been covetous, dissolute, and effeminate: thou
have forsworn thy self: thou have blasphemed and committed many other heinous
and wicked crimes, and therefore what hope can thou have of salvation? Truly
none at all. Thou art a mere castaway, and can not now go back: and
therefore my counsel is, that now thou use the pleasures and commodities of
this world, and pass over thy time in mirth of heart, without cogitation of
other affairs.

These are the words of the devil (loving brother: S. Chrisostoms counsel
against the devils temptation.
these are the counsels and persuasions of our enemy. But mine are contrary.
If thou have fallen, thou may rise again. If thou have been a lost
companion, yet thou may be saved. If thou have committed fornication and
adultery in time past, thou may be continent for the time to come. If thou
have haunted plays and games, thou may draw back thy foot from henceforth.
If thou have delighted in lewd and evil company, thou may hereafter acquaint
thy self with good. This only is necessary, that thou begin thy conversion
out of hand, and that thou repent and take in hand to reform thy self,
though it be at the first but a little. Let thine eyes begin but to shed forth
one tear: enter into thy conscience: consider thy self but indifferently:
examine thine actions and what they deserve: lay before thy face the day of
judgment with the torments of hell on the one side, and the joys of heaven on
the other. Repent, confess, amend thy life, seek a medicine for thy wound
out of hand while thou art in this life, in what state or condition soever
thou be. No time too late to repent.
Yea if thou be upon thy deathbed, and ready to breath out thy soul and
spirit, fear not to repent, for that Gods mercy is not restrained by the
shortness of time. Which I speak unto you (my dear brethren) not to make you
hereby the more negligent, but only to stir you up to the confidence of Gods
mercy, and thereby to avoid the most dangerous gulf of desperation. Hitherto
are the words of this holy and learned Father.

In which long and large dyscourse of his, we are to note, that (together with
most excellent encouragement which he gives to all sinners, of what state and
condition soever they be, in all times and seasons to trust in Gods mercy, and
never to despair;) he gives also an wholesome admonishment, that we should
not by this confidence become more negligent in reforming our lives, but rather
do it out of hand, without all delay or procrastination. Whereunto in like
manner the holy father S. Augustine in like exhortation against despair, An
exhortation and admonishion of S. Augustine. Ser. 58. de temp.
does endeavor most vehemently to stir us up in these words: Let no man
after a hundred sins, nor after a thousand, despair of Gods mercy, but yet
so let him not despair, as he seek presently without all stay, to reconcile
himself to God by amendment of life: least perhaps after that by custom he
has gotten a habit of sin, he be not able to deliver him self from the
snares of the devil, albeit he would.

And in the very same sermon he discourses yet further of the same matter in
manner following. Not every man that has sinned, but he that perseuereth in
sin, is hateful and abominable in the sight of GOD. For that no man must
distrust of Gods mercy toward him that will amend and leave his sins. For
that God himself as a most sweet comforter, has said by his Prophet, Ezech,
11,33.
That the impiety of a wicked man shall not hurt him, at what time soever he
shall turn from the sam^ But yet this great mercy of the Lord, is then only
profitable unto us: if we delay not our conversion, nor do multiply sins
upon sins. Which I will declare unto you by the example of wounds and ruptures
of our body, by which, the infirmities also of our mind and soul may be
conceived.

Thus then we see, if a man's foot, leg, or arm be broken, A similitude of the
body, to express the misery of the soul, by multiplying sin.
with how great pain the fame is restored to his accustomed strength. But if
any member of our body should be broken twice, or three times, or more often
in one and the self same place: your charity can imagine, how hard a thing
it were for that part to recover her perfect health again. So fares it (dear
brethren) in the wounds and ruptures of our soul. If a man do commit sin once
or twice, and do unfeignedly with out dissimulatio^ make his refuge to the
medicine of repentance, he does out of hand obtain health again, and that
sometimes without any skar or blemish of the disease past. But if he begin to
add sins upon sins in such sort, that the wounds of his soul do rather
putrify within him by covering and defending them, then heal by repentance
and confession: it is to be feared, least that heuie speech of the Apostle be
fulfilled in him, to whom he says: Rom, 2.
Do thou not know, that the benignity of God is used to bring thee to
repentance? but thou by thy obdurate and irrepentant heart, do heap to thy
self wrath, in the day of vengeance and of the revelation of Gods just
judgment. Thus far S. Augustine.

But now (dear christian brother) what can be spoken more effectually, either
to erect us to hope and confidence in Gods mercy, or to terrify us from
presumption in delaying our amendment, then here has been uttered by these
noble pyllers and fathers of Christ's Church, and most excellent instruments
and temples of his holy spirit? The divine wisdom of almighty God in a
certain place, says: Godly men^ words ought to move us greatly.

Eccle, 12.


That the words of wise men ought to be spurs unto us, and as it were nails,
driven into the depth of our hearts: meaning thereby that we should be styrred
up, and most vehemently moved, when we hear such wise men as the holy
Ghost there means (which in deed are only they that have the knowledge and
true fear of GOD,) make such exhortations unto us, and give us such wholesome
admonishments, as these godly Fathers in this great affair have done. And how
is it then (dear brother) that we are nothing stirred up thereby, nothing
quickened, nothing awaked? Well, I will conclude this whole Chapter and treatise
with an other exhortation and admonishion of S. Augustine, for that besides the
grave authority of the man, (which ought to move us much,) I think nothing
can be spoken more excellently, or more agreeing to our peculier purpose. Thus
then he says.

A notable discourse of S. Augustine touching our conversion. Ser. 181. de temp.
Almighty God does never despise the repentance of any man, if it be offered
unto him sincerely and simply: nay, he accepts the same most willingly,
embraces the penitent, and endeavors to reduce him to his former state
wherein he was before hefell. And that which is yet more: if a man be not able
to fulfill the whole order of his satis-faction, yet does not God refuse the
least repentance that is, though it be done in never so short a space. Neither
does he suffer the reward to perrish of any little conversion. Esaias, 54.
And this does the Prophet Esaias seem to me to signify, when he says in Gods
person to the people of Israel: I have contristed thee a little for thy sins,
I have stricken thee and turned my face from thee, thou have been sad and have
walked in sorrow, and I have comforted thee again. These examples then of
repentance (dear brethren) we having before our eyes, let us not persevere in
our wickedness, nor despair of reconciliation, but rather let us say with a
confident heart: we will turn home to our father, and present our selves unto
our God: for truly (my Brethren) he will never turn away from the man that
turns unto him. Esaias, ^9.
Hymsefe has said that he is a God which draws near unto us, were it not
that our sins do make a separation betwixt him and us. Let us take away then
the separation and obstacle, and so nothing shall let our conjunction with him,
which he greatly desires. For to this end did he create us, that he might
bestow upon us eternal bliss in the kingdom of heaven. He did not make us
for hell, Hell not made for man.
but he made his kingdom for us, and hell for the devil. So he says in the
Gospel; Math, 25^
Come ye blessed of my father, enjoy the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. And to the damned: Depart from me ye accursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

If then hell fire was prepared for the devil, and the kingdom of heaven for
man, from the beginning of the world: it remains only that we provide, not
to loose our inheritance by persisting in sin. So long as we are in this
life, how many or great soever our sins may be, In this life repentance is
auailable, but not after.
it is possible to wash the^ away by true and unfeigned repentance, but when we
shall once depart from this world, albeit then we do repent, (as no doubt but
we shall from the bottom of our hearts,) yet shall it avail us nothing. And
albeit our teeth do gnash, our mouth cry out, our eyes gush forth in tears,
and our hearts lament with innumerable complaints and supplications: yet shall no
man hear us, no man assist us, nor so much as with the tippe of his finger,
give unto us a drop of water to cool our tongue amiddest her torments; but
we shall receive that lamentable answer which the rich glutton received at the
mouth of Abraham: There is between us and you a great distance, so that none
may pass from us to you, nor from you to us. Hitherto lasts S. Augustins
exhortation. And ther-withall think I it good to conclude this treatise.

FINIS.
The end of the second and last Book, tending to Resolution.

