A PLAIN EXPOSITION UPON the whole 8. 9. 10. 11. Chapters of the Epistle of
Saint PAVL to the ROMANS. Wherein the Text is diligently and Methodically
resolved, the sense given: and many Doctrines thence gathered, are by lively
uses Applied, for the benefit of GODS Children Performed with much variety, and
convenient brevity: being the substance of near four years Weekedayes
SERMONS.:

By ELNATHAN PARR, Bachelor in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods WORD.

ROMANS 2.10,11. 10. To every man that does good, shall be glory, and honor and
peace, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian.

11. For there is no respect of persons with God.

printer's device of George Purslowe NOLI ALTVM SAPERE

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe for SAMVEL MAN, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Swanne. 1618.

TO The very Noble and Religious Gentleman, Master Nathaniel Bacon, Esquire,
and TO The very Honorable and most worthy Lady, the Lady Jane Cornwalleys, his
wife, Grace and Peace be multiplied, from God the Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ.
SIR;
I PRESENT to your Nobleness these my poor labors; which shall be much
honored, if you will vouchsafe as gracious an eye to them written, as you did
a reverent ear to them uttered by voice.

As a picture attaines not the life; so neither can writing express that
lively Energie of the voice, which consists in Utterance and Action, the two
Ladies of Speech: yet as the picture of a friend is much esteemed for the
representation; so I cannot but hope of your favorable approuall of the Copy,
to whom the principal was so acceptable.

The style must needs lose something, because I have endeavored to abbreuiate
many things in vvriting; which I took more liberty in speaking to deliver. And
yet, I hope, that nor I, nor my labors, shall for this lose with the
Judicious: for Timantes, a famous Painter (as your self, if any, know) was the
more commended; because by his pictures, more was to be understood, then was
expressed.

As all that know your Noblenes, have experience of your Religious mind; so
have I also of your deep judgment, by whom no Author can lose; you being
able (and using) accurately to examine every word, wherein any excellent
thing may be couched. If I were able to write learnedly, I would vvish such a
Reader: as I am

MADAM;
I Humbly entreat you with favor to receive this fruit of yor own goodness. If
I have performed any good by my poor labors; those which receive it, owe the
acknowledgement (next unto God) to your Ladyship; who have so watered my
studies with your countenance and beneficence, that even my Barrennes has both
by preaching and writing yielded some fruit: which, as it may be profitable to
some, and is comfortable to my self to have brought forth; so I hope it shall
(somewhat) further your Ladyships reckoning at the day of Christ.

I know you take no pleasure to have your goodness published, because you
account Virtues fairest Theater to be a good Conscience: yet it becomes an
ingenuous mind to profess, by whom he profits: And I wish that all the world
understood of your Honorable disposition, and Christian carriage, both in
public and private, that many more might be provoked by your Noble example.

For as in all native and infused Graces, you immeasurably exceed the painted
Sepulchers of these days: so is your Ladyship in holy knowledge, discreet
zeal, and compassionate charity, a lively Image of those ancient Heroines
commended by Saint Hierom, and other Fathers, and also by unerring Writers.

As Ladies, delight not only to see fair Jewels, and curious Needleworks, but
to take them out and wear them; so I can truly testify, that your Ladyships
care is, not only to know, but to express and wear the good things you
know, in your conversation. I earnestly pray for the increase of Gods fatherly
blessing upon your soul, and

I crave your pardon, and the continuance of your favor to him, who
acknowledges himself bound unto you in all humble observance, ELNATHAN PARR:

To the Christian Reader, increase of faith and love.
GEntle Reader; thou have here the sum of diverse of my Lectures upon that
most comfortable Chapter the 8. to the Romans; and also upon those three
difficult Chapters next following, viz. the 9. 10. and 11. wherein I have
endeavored plainly to open the words; diligently to unfold the Argument;
briefly to comprise the doctrine; and (being evidently proved) liuelily to
apply the same. In which Application, I have had a principal respect of these
three things: namely, to comfort the distressed sinner; to humble the
obstinate; and to exhort and provoke the penitent to more obedience.

Also those mysterious points of Predestination, Reiection of the Jews,
Vocation of the Gentiles, and Revocation of the Jews, are here soberly and
diligently discussed and made plain. Beside, diverse dangerous Positions of the
Romanists, and of Arminius oppugned; and many other material doubts and
questions cleared by the way.

As I have labored to do thee good; so I desire thee, not to requite me with
evil. If in some things thou think otherwise; abound in thine own sense,
but censure not rashly; remembering that it is easier to pluck down a house,
then to build one. If thou blamest the style as too homely, be persuaded, that
wise men desire rather a careful, then an eloquent Physician.

If thou read therein, read to profit thy soul: which if thou do not; we
are both losers: but thou must give account for both our losses. For as for us,
we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, both in them which profit by our
pains, and in them which profit not. That thou may profit, I commend thee
to God; to whom also I desire thee to commend this labor, and

Thy true friend in our common Savior, Elnathan Parr.

A brief sum of the Doctrines handled in this BOOK.
CHAP. VIII.
Doct. 1. THose which are in Christ by Faith, shall not be condemned. Verse 1.
Doct. 2. Our union with Christ, the cause of our good life. Doct. Our union
with Christ, frees us from the power of sin and of death. Verse 2. Doct. 1.
The Law cannot justify us, because we cannot perfectly keep it. Verse 3.
Doct. 2. Christ came into the world, and was incarnate of the Virgin Mary, not
of his own will, and yet not unwilling, but by the will and Decree of his
Father. Doct. 3. God by the death of his Son on the Cross in our nature,
has so taken away and abolished sin, that it can not rule in us here, nor
condemn us hereafter. Doct. Whatsoever Christ did concerning the Law, is ours
by imputation, so fully as if our selves had done it. Verse 4. Doct. Carnal
men and spiritual, are contrary. Verse 5. Doct. Whatsoever the flesh or
corruption does mind or savor, brings death: so on the contrary for the
spirit that is the regenerate part. Verse 6. Doct. 1. All unregenerate men are
enemies to God, and God to them. Verse 7. Doct. 2. The Law of God, is the rule
of our subjection to God. Doct. A carnal man cannot please God, because he is
not subject to his Law. Verse 8. Doct. 1. Preachers are to apply their
Doctrines to their hearers. Verse 9. Doct. 2. Those which are regenerate, are
not carnal, but spiritual. Doct. 3. The holy Spirit dwells in the
regenerate. Doct. 4. Our union with Christ, is by the holy Spirit. Doct. 1.
Though Christ be in the regenerate, yet are they subject to death. Verse 10.
Doct. 2. Though the bodies of the regenerate be subject to mortality and
death, yet their souls are not. Doct. Those which have the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in them, shall have a joyful resurrection. Verse 11. Doct. All the
regenerate are to live to God in obedience, not to the flesh. Verse 12. Doct.
Salvation is promised on the condition we live not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit. Verse 13. Doct. They which follow and obey the Gospel, are the
sons of God. Verse 14. Doct. The Regenerate have the spirit of Adoption,
whereby they are enabled to cry, Abba Father. Verse 15. Doct. The holy Ghost
witnesses with them which are regenerate, that they are the Children of God.
Verse 16. Doct. 1. All that are the children of God, are heirs with Christ.
Verse 17. Doct. 2. The condition of our heavenly inheritance is the Cross
which glory follows. Doct. The glory to come does every way surmount the
present afflictions. Verse 18. Doct. The insensible creature expects the
Revelation of the sons of God. Verse 19. Doct. The creature fails and
labors under a great burden and bondage of mutabilitie, against the natural
inclination of it. Verse 20. Doct. The creature shall be freed from corruption
into Glory. Verse 21. Doct. The children of God, because they have received the
first fruits of the Spirit, do groan for the present corruption, expecting the
redemption of their bodies from the same. Verse 23. Doct. Hope is a certain
expectation of eternal life: with patience and expectation. Verse 24, 25.
Doct. 1. God helps his children in trouble by his Spirit. Verse 26. Doct. 2.
Ability to pray, is not of our selves, but the holy Spirit. Doct. 1. God
knows and approves the prayers of his Saints. Verse 27. Doct. 2. The way to
have our prayers heard, is to pray according to Gods will. Doct. All
afflictions further the good of Gods children. Verse 28. Doct. All such as are
elected, are predestined to be conformed unto Christ. Verse 29. Doct. The way
from Predestination to Glorification, is by Vocation and Justification. Verse
30. Doct. Nothing can hurt them, for, or with whom God is. Verse 31. Doct. To
whomsoever God gives Christ, he gives all good things. Verse 32. Doct. No
accusations can hurt or prevail against them whom God justifies. Verse 33.
Doct. Those whom Christ dyed for, can not be condemned. Verse 34. Doct. The
Devil with all his accomplices cannot separate us from Christ's love. Verse 35.
Doct. True Christians are always in danger, and ready to die for Christ's sake.
Verse 36. Doct. 1. In all Afflictions Gods children obtain a Noble victory.
Verse 37. Doct. 2. Christ is the Cause of our constancy and victory in time of
trouble. Doct. 1. Gods love can never fail to his Church. Verse 38, 39. Doct.
2. All other estates and things in this life are uncertain, only the estate
of Gods children is certain. CHAP IX.
Doct. 1. MInisters are to speak the truth though it displease, yet with
sobriety of wisdom. Verse 1. Doct. 2. It is lawful for Christians in due
time, cause and manner to swear. Doct. 3. They which swear, must swear by
God. Doct. 4. A man's conscience bears witness of all his words and thoughts,
either with him, or against him. Doct. The children of God grieve for the
hardness of heart, and condemnation of the wicked. Verse 2. Doct. We ought to
redeem the salvation of our very enemies, with the loss of heavenly joys to
our selves, rather then Christ should lose his glory. Verse 3. Doct. 1. The
Jews were a most honorable people. Verse 4, 5. Doct. 2. The Jews are not to
be hated, but to be loved. Doct. The promises of God are sure. Verse 6. Doct.
All believers are the children and seed to which belong the promises. Verse 7,
8, 9. Doct. Where nature is common and alike, there grace makes a difference.
Verse 10. Doct. 1. The Election or Reprobation of men is before they are borne,
or have done good or evil. Verse 11, 12, 13 Doct. 2. The purpose of Gods
Election and Reprobation is not of works, but of the will of God. Doct. 3. The
Predestination of God is sure. Doct. Though God save some, and condemn others,
yet he is just. Verse 14, 15, 16 Doct. 1. Hearers are to receive nothing, but
that which is signed, and sealed by the hand of God. Verse 17. Doct. 2. God is
not unjust in reprobating sinful men, to show his power. Doct. The will of God
is the cause of Election and Reprobation. Verse 18. Doct. The will of God is
distinguished to be his secret will, or his revealed will. Verse 19. Doct.
Corrupt man is not to dispute against God about his Judgments. Verse 20. Doct.
1. Both the Elect and Reprobate are Gods vessels. Verse 22. Doct. 2. God is
patient toward sinners and Reprobates. Doct. 3. The Scriptures describe God
angry with sinners. Doct. 4. God suffers Reprobates for the manifestation of
his wrath and power. Doct. The wrath of God showed on the Reprobates, does
amplify and commend his mercy to the elect. Verse 23. Doct. They which are
effectually called, are elect vessels of glory. Verse 24. Doct. The Calling of
the Gentiles to the state of grace and salvation, was long ago foretold by the
Prophets. Verse 25, 26. Doct. But a remnant of the multitude of the Jews shall
be saved. Verse 27, 28, 29 Doct. None can be justified in the sight of God, by
a righteousness of their own making. Verse 30, 31. Doct. Christ is a Rock of
offense to them which believe not, nor repent. Verse 32, 33. CHAP. X.
Doct. MInisters are not only to exhort their people to obedience, but also to
pray for them. Verse 1. Doct. Zeal, if it be not according to knowledge, is
not acceptable to God. Verse 2. Doct. Ignorance breeds Pride and Contempt.
Verse 3. Doct. God gave the Law in writing to bring men to Christ. Verse 4.
Doct. Faith, not the Law, makes us certain of our salvation before God. Verse
5, 6, 7, 8. Doct. Faith and Confession, are necessary to salvation. Verse 9,
10. Doct. He that believes, is sure to be saved. Verse 11. Doct. The favors
of God concerning* Justification and Salvation, are dispensed without any
respect of persons, to them which believe, and call upon him. Verse 12. Doct.
God will save all such which call upon him. Verse 13. Doct. Without the
preaching of the Gospel, there is (ordinarily) no salvation. Verse 14. Doct.
Nothing should be so welcome, as the preaching and preachers of the Gospel.
Verse 15. Doct. When the Gospel is preached, all are not converted by it.
Verse 16. Doct. The Gospel was preached to all the world, in the time of the
Apostles. Verse 18. Doct. The corruption of our hearts, leads us to the
practice of those things which we know to be sin. Verse 19. Doct. 2. God will
forsake them, which forsake him. Doct. Ministers are boldly to preach the
Truth. Verse 20. Doct. 2. Our Conversion and Calling is only from Gods mercy.
Doct. Disobedience and persecution of Gods messengers was the cause of the
reiection of the Jews. Verse 21. CHAP. XI.
Doct. 1. ALl the Jews are not cast away from the hope of salvation. Verse 1.
Doct. 2. The Elect of God are sure of their estate, and know it, and shall
never perish. Doct. 1. It is profitable to be acquainted with the Histories of
the Bible, and to make use of them. Verse 2. Doct. 2. We must be zealous for
the Lord. Doct. 1. God suffers sometimes the enemies of his Church to prevail
against it. Verse 3. Doct. 2. The Enemies of True Religion, are savage and
cruel. Doct. 1. All doubts in matters of Religion, are to be decided by the
Word of God. Verse 4. Doct. 2. The Church of God shall never be in such an
exigent: but that there shall be many thousands to worship God, in Spirit and
in Truth. Doct. 3. Those which in dangerous times are preserved in grace, it is
by the power and goodness of God. Doct. 4. Sincere worshippers of God, must not
in the least manner worship an Idol. Doct. The cause why some are reserved in
dangerous times, is their Election. Verse 5. Doct. Election and Salvation are
of Grace, not of Merit. Verse 6. Doct. No Elect cast away: No Reprobate but
cast away. Verse 7. Doct. God in his just judgment, gives over such as are
enemies to the Gospel, to the Devil to be blinded, that they cannot convert.
Verse 8. Doct. Persecutors of Christ and his Gospel, are justly accursed of
God. Verse 9, 10. Doct. 1. The Jews are rejected, that the Gentiles might be
called. Verse 11. Doct. 2. The Vocation of the Gentiles, is the provocation of
the Jews. Doct. The general Calling of the Jews, shall be the enriching of
the world. Verse 12. Doct. The way for a Minister to make his office glorious,
is to be diligent in preaching. Verse 13, 14. Doct. The Calling of the Jews
shall be a new life and happiness to the world. Verse 15. Doct. The Jews are
still a people. Verse 16. Doct. The Gentiles may not despise the Jews. Verse
17, 18. Doct. Our standing is by Faith, our breaking off by Infidelity. Verse
19. Doct. 1. Faith shuts out boasting. Verse 20. Doct. 2. He that believes,
fears God. Doct. All without respect, which continue not in Grace, shall be
broken off. Verse 21. Doct. 1. It is the duty of all, diligently to keep a
note-booke of the mercies of God to themselves, and of his Judgments to
others. Verse 22. Doct. 2. Perseverance is a necessary condition of true saving
Faith. Doct. Whatsoever sinner believes and repents, it is possible he
should be saved. Verse 23, 24, 25 Doct. 2. Before the end of the world, the
Jews in regard of their multitude shall be Called. Doct. Not only some now
and then, but the people of the Jews shall be Called. Verse 26, 27. Doct. The
Jews are beloved of God. Verse 28. Doct. God repents not of his gifts and
Calling. Verse 29. Doct. The Gentiles were Infidels. Verse 30. Doct. The Jews
are now in an estate of unbelief, but they shall be received to mercy. Verse
31. Doct. God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all.
Verse 32. Doct. It is neither lawful for man to search, nor possible to find
the hidden ways of God. Verse 33, 34, 35 Doct. God is of all his Creatures,
specially of his Church, to be praised and glorified. Verse 36.

THE SVMME OF THE Eleven first Chapters of the EPISTLE to the Romans.
SAint Paul in the eleven first Chapters of this Epistle, entreats of
Justification: his order is this: In the five first, he proves against all
objections of Jews and Gentiles, that all men are justified by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, apprehended by Faith. In the six next, he
overthrows the engines whereby Satan went about to oppugn this heavenly
Doctrine.

These Engines were 4. First, that this Doctrine brings in liberty and
licentious living. 2. That it makes God inconstant, and not so good as his word
to the Jews. 3. That it abolisheth the righteousness of the Law. 4. That from
thence it follows, that GOD has quite cast away the people of the Jews. The
first of these Paul remoues, Chapter 6. 7. 8. the second; Chapter 9. the third;
Chapter 10. the fourth; Chapter eleven.

Chap. 6.
The Doctrine of Grace, teaches men, not to live loosely, but to deny all
ungodliness, and to walk in newness of life. Therefore all believers are to
fight against sin, which they may do, with so much the more comfort, in as
much as they are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Chap. 7.
Indeed, before they were converted, they were subject to the curse of the Law,
and by it became more sinful; but having received Grace to believe, they are
freed by Jesus Christ, notwithstanding, the lusting of the flesh against the
Spirit, which is the condition of every regenerate man in this life.

Chap. 8.
Therefore, though sin remain in them, and for it they be chastised of God,
yet it reigns not in them, nor can condemn them, neither can any tribulations
separate them from the love of God in Christ.

AN EXPOSITION upon the eighth, ninth, tenth, and the eleventh Chapters of the
Epistle to the ROMANS.
CHAP. VIII.
THis Chapter has two parts, First, a sweet consolation to all that are
regenerate, to the 31. verse. Secondly, a conclusion, to the end.

The Consolation is double, against two special sore tentations, whereby it
might seem that a regenerate man were miserable, and destitute of inward
peace: the one arising from the remainder of sin; then which nothing is more
heavy: the other from the Cross, then which nothing is more bitter.

Against the first, he deals from the beginning of the Chapter to the 17.
verse. Against the second, from thence to the 31. verse.

The first has 4. parts. First, the Consolation it self propounded, verse 1.
Secondly, the Confirmation, to the 9 verse. Thirdly, an Application, from the
9. to the 11 verse. Fourthly, an Exhortation, from thence to the 17. verse.

VERSE. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


IN this verse are two things, 1. The Consolatory proposition, There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ. 2. A description of one of the
Terms, namely, Who are in Christ, such as walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit.

In the Proposition (as in all of this kind) there are 3. parts. 1. The subject
or Antecedent, To them which are in Christ, 2. the Predicat or Consequent,
Condemnation, 3. the Bond, negatiuely set down, There is no.

The whole Proposition in the natural order, is thus, To them which are in
Christ, there is no condemnation. This order is inuerted for more Elegancy and
force.

The Arguments disposed in this proposition, are the cause, and the contrary
effect. The contrary effect negatiuely delivered of the cause. The cause,
being in Christ. The contrary effect, Condemnation. The proper effect,
Justification, set down negatiuely for our greater comfort: because we are
more sensible of the evil things we are freed from, which we have deserved,
then of the good things we have by Grace.

There is therefore now. Anselmus.
Some make this particle (Now) an Aduerbe of Time, in a double relation. First,
to the time past, thus: before; when you were out of Christ, your estate was
damnable; but now it is otherwise. Secondly, to the time to come, viz. Of the
glorification of the body, thus, Now there is no condemnation; then there shall
be no concupiscence. But it is better taken for a note of inference from
somewhat going before, thus: Those which are justified, are not under the Law,
but under Grace. Now then it follows, that there is no condemnation to such.

There is no condemnation. Condemnation is a sentence or Doom given by a
competent Judge, concerning the punishment of an offender, the contrary
whereof, is Absolution, Acquitting, Justification. The Judge is GOD. The
delinquent to be arraigned, sinful Man, the Court double, Inferior: of
Conscience, Superior: of Christ.

To them which be in Christ. In Christ, and by Christ, differ: by the first,
effectual Vocation; by the second, Justification is usually set forth. To be
in Christ, is to be united unto him: which union is spiritual, not corporal.
He in us by his Spirit, we in him by our Faith.

The meaning arises from the conjunction of the Subject and Predicat by a
Negative Bond: for though they are joined in the Proposition, yet they are
really separated.

To them which are in Christ. That is, which believe, and so are effectually
called, there is no condemnation, (not before men, for such are most subject to
reproachful censures, but before) God; either at the Bar of their own
Conscience, or at the Bar of Christ, at the last day. The terror of damnation
is unspeakable, specially before the Judgment seat of CHRIST; for, if the
judgment of a guilty Conscience be so fearful, as we cannot be ignorant,
much more is the judgment of God, who is greater then our Conscience. Ioh.
3.20.


John 3.5.16,36. Mark 16.16. Ephesians. 5.23.

Use. 1.
He says not, There is no sin, or nothing worthy to be damned, but there is
no condemnation: for he that says he has no sin, deceiues himself: 1. Ioh.
1.8.
And the Apostle in the 7. Chapter, confessed the remainder of sin, which
manifests it self too often, in our words, deeds and desires contrary to the
Law: by which, if the most righteous man be examined, he must appear worthy to
be damned, and has need enough to use David's Prayer, Psalm 143.2.
Lord, enter not into judgment with thy servant.

Use 2.
There is no Condemnation to Them. Here appears the Prudence of the Apostle,
who, when he in the 7. Chapter spoke of the force of inhabiting Sin,
expressed it in his own person, that we might know there is no man so holy in
this life who is exempted. But when he speaks of Comfort to such; he speaks
in the person of others, lest we should imagine, that only some principal
and choice Christians did enjoy this benefit.

It is the fashion of Christians distressed in Conscience, to exempt themselves
from the communion of this comfort, as if it belonged to others, not to
themselves, Upon this Paul professedly changes the manner of his speech. Do
thou believe in Christ with a true (though weak) faith? Thou shall be saved.
Hold fast this faith: For even as a halfe-penny is current lawful money as
well as a shilling: so is the least true Faith of his weight and allowance
before God. Therefore Paul elsewhere says, There is laid up for Me a crown
of righteousness. Yea, for Thee an holy and famous Apostle. Nay (says Paul)
2. Tim. 4.8.
not for me only, but for them also who love the appearing of Christ.

Use 3.
Miserable are the unbelievers and impenitent. There is no Condemnation. If
Paul had stayed here, many would have applauded him. O how would the Drunkard
and Blasphemer, etc. have rejoiced, and all the rout of wicked ones! If Thou
be such: how do thou wish in thy heart that it were true? But hear and
tremble thou Profane. There is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ.
This is the Childrens bread, it is not for Dogs, that is, for Impenitent
sinners. What then shall become of them which repent not? Woe unto them: For
they shall perish, they shall be damned, for them is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever, even utter Darkness, where there is nothing but weeping,
and gnashing of teeth. Who can tell the Misery, the Flames, the Anger, the
Vengeance which shall fall down upon the heads of the wicked as a tempest of
Thunder? When thou art glossing and quaffing; think of this Damnation. When
thou art puffed up with Pride: think of the shame and Confusion following.
When thou art Coveting: think of the wrath thou treasurest up against the day
of Wrath. Of these things we daily speak and write, and yet thou wicked wretch
turnest not, as if it were a triflle to be damned; to be separated from the
Saints, from Christ, from God, a trifle: as if it were a light thing to have
eternal fellowship with the Devil and his Angels. Yet, yet convert: that if
it be possible, thou may escape Damnation: Yet leave thy Whoredoms etc.
While the door of grace is open. He which now stops his ear: O, how shall
he in That day call to the Mountains and Rocks to cover him! Prevent this
damnation by repentance; and though other fall into hell, labor thou to be in
the number of them to whom there is no Condemnation.

Use 4.
Great is the Blessedness and Security of the Godly: I say Security, not
Carnal, whereby the fear of God is shaken off, but spiritual, whereby the fear
of damnation is ouercom. There is no Condemnation to them: they have peace with
God, with themselves. Understand, you blessed of the Father, your happiness
and rejoice: My life for yours you shall not perish. That tormenting flame,
shall not touch one hair of your heads: As the garments of the three men smelt
not of the fire; so you shall be most free. Remember this golden, this most
divine Sentence, and in all distresses of Conscience conquer ye. But thou will
say: Alas, I am led captive unto sin, what hope therefore? Indeed in thy
self there is none; but in Christ there is plenty. When Satan shall trouble
thee, look unto Christ, in whom thou art by Faith, and Inuincibly rely
hereupon: There is no Condemnation to men in Christ. See thou have good
evidence of thy being in Christ, and then resolve that it is as possible for
Christ himself to be damned, as for thee. For thou art a part and a member of
him, which to perish is impossible. Examine thy Faith and Repentance, and
labor to feel in thy heart, thy union with thy Savior. It is not enough to
be near him; thou must be in him. If thou find so; Rejoice; be thankful;
and walk worthily.

Now follows the Description of them which are in Christ: (viz.) All those
which walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: and thus he describes
them from their proper effect; I say, proper; for it is as proper for Gods
Children to walk in holiness, as it is proper for the Sun to shine, and the
Fire to give heat.

These words contain a double Answer to each part of the proposition. ( viz.
Affirmative. Negative.


If you ask who are not in Christ. The Affirmative answer is: They which
walk after the Spirit.

If you ask who are not in Christ. The Negative answer is. They which walk
after the flesh.

If you ask who are Justified. The Affirmative answer: They which walk after
the Spirit.

If you ask who are Condemned. The Negative answer: They which walk after
the Flesh.

Here we have three things which be of great reckoning in the Scriptures. 1.
Vocation: They which are in Christ. 2. Justification: Shall not be condemned.
3. Sanctification: Which walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

The General meaning is: Those which live holily, mortifying the Flesh, and
obeying the Spirit, are in Christ.

The holy life of a Christian, is compared to walking and Traveling, which is
not done without a Guide. Two things may be noted in those words. 1. The manner
of the Metaphor. 2. The nature of the Argument. In the Metaphor are two things.
1. The Act. Walking. 2. The Direction or Guide; which is set down two ways.
1. Negatiuely, Not after the Flesh. 2. Affirmatively: But after the Spirit. The
false Guide the Flesh; The true Guide the Spirit.

Quest.
But why speaks the Apostle of the false Guide?

Answ.
Because most men are inclined to this Guide, being wedded to their own
opinions, and taking their own directions from the wisdom of the flesh to be
best: Therefore he gives them an Item of a false Guide.

The Scripture usually compares living to walking: as here. So Genesis 5.24. and
17.1, etc. the Reason: because of the suting of one to the other, for in diverse
things, here is great Correspondence.

1. Travelers, ignorant of the way, enquire after the right and nearest way.
So would thou travel to heaven? If thou inquire for the way of Merit, it
is Christ. If for the way of our Obedience, it is the Law. There are many
by-pathes. Search the Scriptures, the Rule of our Faith and Obedience. Ioh.
5.39.


2. Travelers, in dangerous and unknown ways, seek for a good Guide: so
must he which would safely travel to heaven: Act. 8 31.
For as the Eunuch understood not without an Interpreter, so cannot we walk
that way without a Guide. Two Guides will offer themselves: A false treacherous
deceiving guide, which is the Flesh, which will boast of her cunning and
ableness; and a true Guide, which is the Spirit. Both these are set down in
the Text. Take heed of the Flesh: Take the Spirit.

3. Travelers enquire for good Company: loath to go alone, and yet loath to go
with evil Company, as with a Thief or a Robber. So beware thou of ill
Company; as of Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, etc. These will draw thee
out of the right way, for they travel not to Heauen-ward. Let thy delight be
in the Saints, and in them that excel in virtue, that thou may the more
cheerfully walk, Psalm. 16.
being helped by their Prayers, and virtuous examples. As in a Teame, a good
sure Horse, being among a sort of Iades, is many times made shuttle and
untoward: so look for no furtherance in thy journey to heaven, by the society
of wicked men.

4. Travelers, especially in a long journey, clogge not themselves with things
superfluous, but only take necessaries: so ouerload not thy self with
unnecessary cares and delights of the world. As a heavy burden, or a long
garment to a Traveler, so is the world to us in our journey toward heaven, a
hinderance of our speed.

5. Travelers going a dangerous way, provide themselves of some weapon, as a
Sword, or a good Staff; for they may meet with Robbers, which would lighten
them of their money. So get thee a good weapon. The way is dangerous: Thou
shall be sure at one corner or Crosse-way or other, to meet with the Devil,
that old Thief, who would be glad to rob thee of Grace, and is as greedy of
it, as a Thief of a purse.

The best weapon is Faith: which serves for a Weapon to fight withal, and also
for a Staff to rest upon. For a weapon: Therefore Saint John says; that Faith
is the victory that overcomes. 1. Ioh. 5.4.
It is a weapon both Offensive and Defensive.

For an offensive Weapon, it is as good against the Devil, as a Pistol
against a Thief. 1. Pet. 15.9. Iam 4.7.
So says the Scripture: Resist the Devil steadfast in the Faith, and he will
flee from you. If a Thief see a case of Dags at a man's side, he will not
deal with him hastily; so if the Devil perceive us furnished with Faith, he
will have small list to meddle with us.

For a defensive Weapon also, there is none to this; It is a Target of proof,
or a Shield: So Saint Paul calls it, and exhorts, Ephesians. 6.16.
Above all, take the shield of Faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked.

Faith also serves for a staff to rest us upon. We stand and are stablished
by Faith. Romans 11.20.
Children learn to go by the finger, or by a stool; 2. Cor. 1.24.
such a thing is Faith to us. An old man will not go out of the doors without
his staff: so, if thou neglectest Faith, thou can never be able to hold on
thy journey, of which we have an example in Peter, who so long as he kept in
his hand, in his heart this staff, Mat. 14.30.
walked on the Sea, but when he let it fall, himself began to sink.

6 Travelers on foot prepare for their feet, that they be well shodde, lest
being wounded by the sharp stones and thorns, on which they must tread, they
be laid up by the way. If thou trauellest toward Heaven, thou must tread upon
thorns, the points of Needles, burning Coals; thou can not want shoes.
These are the preparation of the Gospel; And your feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, says Paul, Ephesians. 6.15.
that is, with a firm resolution, that come Fire, Sword, what will come, we
will hold our way. Thus was David prepared, Psalm 13.
Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill,
and Psalm. 119.106.
I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy Law. So Paul elsewhere
manifests his resolution and readiness, Acts 20.24. and 21.13.
to die for Christ.

7 Travelers carry with them some Cordial and comfortable waters, to cheer
their Spirits, when through weariness they begin to faint. So in the way to
Heaven, through weakness thou may faint and fall: the water of Repentance is
precious, a draught of it will recover and repair thy spirits, fill thee full
of godly care, and confirm thy assurance.

Thus much of the manner of the Metaphor: now follows the nature of the
Argument, which is (as was said) a description of such which are in Christ by
the effect: Such walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, that is, live
holily.

Our Union with Christ the cause of our good life. Ioh. 15.5. 1. Ioh. 1.6,7.

Use 1.
He says not, there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ, because
they walk; but which walk: for hereby we are not justified, nor called, but
they which are justified and called, so carry themselves. This walking is
necessary, not as a cause of salvation, but as a condition, without which there
is certain condemnation.

Use 2.
Here we have a touchstone to try whether we be in Christ, or no, and so
whether we shall be damned, or saved. When thou see the Impe which thou
have grafted, to budde and leave, and bring forth fruit, thou say it takes
well; so if thou bring forth Holiness, the fruit of the Spirit, thou take
well, and art surely grafted into Christ.

This then answers a Question, of which many desire to be resolved, viz.
Whether they shall be saved, or no? Examine thy walking; If in the way of
Envy, Blasphemy, Pride, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, this is the way of the
flesh unto assured condemnation: the spirit leads not this way, thou art yet
out of Christ, and therefore far from salvation. He that would be saved, must
walk after the Spirit, in righteousness and holiness. As the palpable profane
wretch is hereby excluded: so also, he that is a mere civil man, and no
more; for though he seem to be in a good way, as of just dealing, temperance,
liberality, courtesy, etc. yet he walks in these ways after a wrong guide,
which is the flesh, doing these things for the praise of men, and with the
opinion of Justification thereby: besides, he never descends into his own
heart, mourning for, and mortifying inbred corruption, unto which the Spirit
principally leads, but only glories in outward moralities.

If then thou would be saved, approve thy self to be in Christ, by walking
after the Spirit. But remember thou must walk: now and then will not serve the
turn, as he that sets now one step, then another, is not said to walk; so thy
walking, implies a continual motion in godliness, and yet not such a motion, as
of a Horse in a Mill; but as proceeding, and getting forward: As in walking,
there seems to be an Emulation between the feet, to be one before another; so
in our living, we must strive to be every day more forward in goodness, and to
be better to morrow, then we are to day.

Use 3.
There is nothing more irksome to the children of GOD, then the rebellion of
the flesh, (though wicked men be not sensible of it.) And many times, weak
Consciences are so distressed, by the sense of their corruptions, that they
doubt much of their estates. Let such wisely mark these words: He says not,
There is no condemnation to them, in whom there is no flesh; but which walk
not after it: nor, says he, there is no condemnation to them, which are not
tempted, or which sin not; but which walk not after sin: for the children of
God must be tempted, and we never receive such Grace in this life, as not at
all to fall, or sin; but not to walk after it, but to strive and resist it,
and, if down through weakness, not to lie and wallow our selves, as swine in
the mire, but by the power of the Spirit, to start up, to wash away our spots
in the Bath of Repentance, and ever after to be the more vehement and strong
against our corruption. It is not a willing service, which they perform unto
the flesh, when they are overtaken, as a man willingly walks in his Garden;
but a most unwilling, for the which, true Conuerts are often heard to sigh,
mourn and lament, and are often seen with tears in their eyes.

Concupiscence will be to thee so long as thou live here; but walk not after
it, and then all shall be well. When thou walk abroad, thou can not
hinder the Birds from flying over thy head; but thou may hinder them from
lighting upon thy head, and making nests: so thou can not be wholly void of
corruption, but if thou be in Christ, thou have received grace, not to obey
it. Thou art (it may be) much inclined to Anger? Do thou let it remain
with thee till being sowred, it turns to malice and rancour, and brings
forth revenge? Genesis 15.11.
Then have thou suffered it to nestle in thy heart, and if thou look not to
it, it will be thy destruction; so of Lust, Pride, Covetousness: but if thou
scarre away these Harpies, as Abraham the birds from his Sacrifice, and suffer
not an evil thought to lodge with thee all night; surely thou art in Christ,
and never shall be damned.

VERSE 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of Sin, and Death.


IN this Verse is an Argument, proving the Proposition before delivered; That
there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ.

The Argument is taken from an effect of our Being in Christ: Thus, They which
are freed from the Law of Sin and Death, shall not be condemned. But those
which are in Christ, are so freed: Therefore they shall not be condemned.


The Minor is thus proved. They which are quickened by the same Spirit which is
in Christ, are so freed: But all in Christ are so quickened. Therefore they are
so freed.


This Verse then intreates of the freedom and deliverance of the Regenerate
which are in Christ. Concerning which freedom or Manumission, four things may
be observed.

1. From what: namely, from Sin, and Death,

2. The extent of this Deliverance: not from sin and death simply in this
world: but from the Law of Sin and Death: that is, from the power and
authority of Sin: which power is called a Law by the Apostle, for two
reasons: 1. Because carnal men obey sin, as they should obey a Law. 2.
Because sin holds us bound by the Law unto eternal death.

3. The subject of this Deliverance: Me, says Paul, meaning himself for
instance; to be so also meant of every Regenerate man: and therefore the Syrian
Translator reads it Thee.

4. The Cause: The Spirit: The Law of Faith, say some, which may receive a good
Exposition. Others better interpret the holy Ghost: hereby proving the Deity
of the third Person. Ambrosius. Pareus. Chrysostom.
Beza understands it of the efficacy of the Spirit in us, which is, says he,
the Grace of Regeneration. I take rather to be meant here, the root of that
Grace, rather then the Grace it self: The root I call the Grace of Holiness
in the Humane Nature of Christ, which upon our union with him, is by the Holy
Ghost conveyed unto us. For, Ioh. 3.34. Ioh. 1.16.
he received not the Spirit by measure, but is full of grace, and of his
fullness we receive grace for grace. This I take to be the fittest Exposition.
This Spirit is two ways set forth. First, by the Subject in whom it is. It is
radically in Christ. Secondly, by the effect; it is the Spirit of life: for if
this flow not unto us, we are but dead men; with this being derived unto us,
both the worthiness of Christ's obedience, and also power for the weakening and
abolishing of sin, that it reigns not in us, nor can condemn us. And for
this, I guess, that our Savior is called a 1. Cor. 15.45.
Quickening Spirit. For as we have to live a natural life from Adam, so have
we to live a spiritual life from Christ, being united unto him.

The meaning then is this. The power of the Spirit which is in Christ, has
freed all them which are in Christ, from sin and death. So that as sin
could have no power over him to condemn him, neither can it have over us; we
receiving of the same Spirit, and living the same life which was in him: For we
live not a diverse life from that which is in Christ, but the very same, as the
water in the fountain, and rivers; and the life in the head and members is the
same.

Our union with Christ, frees us from the power of sin and death, Ephesians.
2.18,22.

Use 1.
The cause of all our happiness is this union. From hence is it that we serve
not sin: from hence is it that we yield not to every tentation of Satan:
that we have comfort, that we are stablished in Grace, is from hence. Labor
therefore to be united; the ordinary means is the Word preached: For as in
Graffing: so here; God is the Husbandman; Christ the Stock, Believers the Imps;
The Spirit the Sap, The Word the Knife or Saw; The Sacraments, The Ligatures.
As therefore without a Knife or Saw to open and riue the Stock, and to let in
the Imps, a man cannot Graffe; so Contemners of the Word and Sacraments cannot
possibly be in Christ.

Use 2.
Has freed Me: There is much Divinity in Pronounes (said Luther.) In the
first Verse Paul spoke in the third Person; Them. Here in the first, Me. Not
that he appropriates this freedom to himself by so speaking, but to teach
every one to apply it to themselves, and in themselves to feel it, for which
cause the Syrian Translator reads Thee. For as the power of sense and motion in
the head, is derived to every the least and farthest member and joint; Ephesians.
4.7.
so the meanest in the Church, as well as the chiefest, do receive according
to their place suitable grace. It may be some may think, O, if I were Abraham,
David, or Paul, I should be saved. Yea, if thou be in Christ, thou art freed
as well as they, and shall be saved as well as they.

Use 3.
We are now freed from sin and and death, not simply, (so we shall hereafter
be delivered) but from the Law of Sin. We be not so delivered, that we
cannot sin or dye; but Sin cannot domineere over us, nor damn us, nor Death
hurt us. Lay up this against the Day of tentation.

It is very grievous to feel the assaults of Sin, as of Uncleanness, Pride,
etc. But all are Beggars, we may not choose our Alms: we must remember our
measure; we have such things that we may be humbled, not that we should be
overcome. Thou must be content to have Sin trouble thee here, and to wring
from thee sighs and tears, but comfort thy Soul with this, it shall never
condemn thee.

A Snake may be so handled by taking out the sting or teeth, that it cannot
hurt us, though it touch us, yet we abhor it for the nature of it, and are
afraid to have it come nere us, and, it is but our fear. So sin is in such
sort handled by our Savior Christ, that though it touch us, and hiss at us,
yet it cannot hurt us: It may make us afraid, but blessed be God, the fear is
more then the hurt: For as sin and death could not hurt Christ, so neither
can they hurt us. It is not killed outright, but it is so maimed, Judges 1.
that as Adoni-bezek having his hands and feet mangled, and being in chains,
could not endammage Israel, so neither can sin us.

When therefore thou feel sin stir in thy heart (alas, who feels it not?)
cast not away thy confidence, but with a good courage resist it, and resort to
Christ by Prayer, that thou may more feel the power of his Spirit. Great is
the power of sin; but the power of the Spirit is greater. The Devil is
strong; but CHRIST is stronger.

Use 4.
Those which have not obtained this freedom, are most miserable. They are
slaves, and that to the basest master in the world, which is Sin, and shall
have the fearefullest wages, which is Death: As nothing is more base then sin,
so nothing is more bitter then death: How did sin Tyrannize over Ammon,
Achab, Judas, who could have no rest; 2. Sam. 13.2. 1. King. 21.4. John 13.30.
but are sick till they have performed most shameful services to their utter
ruin? Thou have heard of the Gally-slaues of the Turk: How sweet is it to be
delivered from such a bondage! But alas, What is the Turk to the Devil? What
is a Gally to Hell? What the labor of Oars, to the service of sin, and
torments of Hell? O the happiness of them which are in Christ, that are
delivered from sin and death! Have we any enemies to these?

Yea, his happiness is the more by the assurance of it: for once in Christ,
and ever in Christ, let Satan do his worst. The lest branch of the Vine, which
is Christ, is too high for Satan's reach. Such as are in him, can never want
saving Grace; so rich a Root is Christ, to maintain and nourish all such which
are grafted into him. So long as Christ has any Spirit, thou shall not want
it. As possible is it for Christ to want the Spirit, as for thee to want it, if
thou be in Christ.

Use 5.
Examine whether thou be set free. If sin rule in thee, it will also damn
thee: thou art not delivered. If a man sick in his bed, burning of an Ague,
fetching his breath with difficulty; looking ghastly, etc. should say he were
well; thou would not believe him. So, when thou see a man swell with
Pride, burn with Lust, etc. If he say he is in Christ, and hopes to be saved,
believe him not: All the world cannot save him.

VERSE 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh; GOD sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin;
Or, by a sacrifice for sin.
condemned sin in the Flesh:

4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.


IN these Verses is a declaration of the deliverance spoken of in the second
Verse. In which are two things. 1. The necessity of it. 2. The means whereby
it is wrought.


The Necessity, in these words: For what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh.

There is much diversity in the reading of these words: That of Camerarius is
very plain; but the best and plainest, is that of his Majesty's translation,
which I follow.

In these words of the Necessity are two things. 1. Something uttered of the
Law, viz. that it could not deliver us. 2. The reason: Because it is weak
through the Flesh. This is brought in by a Prolepsis, Thus. What needs
deliverance by Christ, seeing we have the Law which promises life to the
obseruers? If the Law be able to deliver, what need Christ? If not able, what
auailes the Law?

To this Paul answers by a Concession: That indeed the Law is not able, and
therefore GOD sent his Son, to do that which was impossible to the Law.

This then is affirmed by Paul, that the Law cannot justify and deliver, Acts
13.38,39. Heb. 7.18.

Q. What use then of the Law?

A. Very great. It teaches us Gods will concerning Obedience; it shows what is
right and wrong: It is a Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ, and the Gospel.
So that, though the Law cannot save us; yet, neither can the Gospel without the
Law, which Ambrose elegantly sets forth by a similitude of the upper and nether
Millstone: The Law (says he) Ambrosius Ser. 29. per. totum.
is as the nether-Milstone, which is slow and stirs not; the Gospel quick
as the vpper-Milstone; without which the nether-Milstone may seem
unprofitable. Yet, cannot the upper grind without the nether, but both together
make good Meal. So, Justification as fine Flower, is between the Law and the
Gospel, prepared for us.

Seek not Justification by the Law. This were to seek Life in Death, Heaven
in Hell, Salvation in Condemnation. There are two things necessary to
salvation: Justification and Sanctification. The Law can give neither of these.

Pardon sin it cannot, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
for it is the Office of the Law to curse transgressors.

Renew unto holiness it cannot; though it can command us to be holy. The Law
is holy in it self. But to be holy, and to make holy are two things: That,
the Law is: in This, the Law is impotent.

Vain therefore is the hope of many, who think to be saved only by their good
serving God, and their just dealing: and that their good deeds shall prevail
against their badde.

For first, our best deeds have so much defect, that though in some
consideration they might be worthy; yet in other, they stand in need of pardon.

Secondly, all our good deeds, though we had as many as Abraham, are of finite
perfection, and therefore cannot satisfy for the least sin, whereby an
Infinite Majesty is offended.

Thirdly, if we could do good perfectly, yet such doing is duty, and duty
discharges no debt.

In that it was weak through the flesh.

The Law cannot deliver. The reason, because it is too weak. How comes it to
be weak? It is weakened through the flesh. That is corrupted, sinful,
rebellious nature.

The Law is not weakened, either in Precept or in Doctrine; but only in
Justifying of Man: and this not in it self; but by accident, because we are
naught, and not conformable unto it: If we could perfectly keep the Law, it
were as able to justify us, as ever. There is no fault then in the Law, but in
us.

A blind man cannot see, though the Sun shine most clear: The fault is not
in the Sun, but in his blind eyes. So, that we are not benefited by the Law,
is our fault, not the Laws.

A cunning Caruer, can cut the similitude of any Creature; but not on a Rotten
stick; yet, no imputation to the Caruer. So the Law has skill to Justify;
but cannot do this feat in our Rotten Nature.

The Law cannot justify us, because we cannot perfectly keep it, 2. Chron.
6.56. Iam. 3.2.

Question. How can we be guilty of the breach of that Law which is impossible
for us to keep?

Ans. 1. It is impossible here, but in heaven it will be possible. 2. It is
possible to the Elect, in regard of Christ in whom they have fulfilled it. 3.
It is possible, in regard of perfect obedience, begun in this life, most
certain to be perfected after this life. Yet it is impossible for Justified
men in This life perfectly to keep the Law in themselves, (though the Council
of Trent have determined it possible) Council. Triden: Sess. 6. Can. 8.
and we also are bound to this impossible Law, and that Justly. The Reason is:
Because to Adam in whom we were, it was at first possible, and by his
transgression (in whom we sinned) it became impossible. So that God may justly
require it now of us; as a man may justly require a debt of him, who through
his Riot and Luxury has made himself unable to pay it.

A King loses not his authority to command, because some refuse to obey him:
nor God his right to command, though we by our naughtiness have made our
selves unable to perform his commands.

That seeming Contradiction, attributed to Hierome, is true on both parts.
Cursed is he which says God has commanded impossibilities; and Cursed is he
which says the Law is possible.

Use 1.
Thou failest in thy obedience, yet if thou beleeuest, and thy heart be
upright, be of good Comfort: Nor Abraham, nor David; nor any of the Saints did
perfectly keep the Law, or were saved by their Works, but by their Faith*
Do thou believe, and endeavor with an honest heart to obey (though in much
weakness?) Thou shall be saved as well as Abraham: For he has the perfection
of the Law, which believes in Christ. But thou will say, that thou art
unworthy. It Is true: So certainly was Abraham. Let thy faylings humble thee,
and seek for increase of Faith.

Use 2.
The Law is weak, to save so much as one: but it is strong enough to damn
thousands: Remember that. If thou be a Blasphemer, a Drunkard, etc. thou
shall find it a Giant; If thou have but one sin unrepented for, it will
condemn thee.

Use 3.
The Law was given to Adam as a Rule to Direct him to Heaven. It is weakened by
thy evil corruption: which weakens also the Gospel, making that a savor to
death, which is appointed for a savor of life. Bewail thy corrupt nature, and
seek Renouation.

God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
etc.

In these words to the end of the fourth Verse, is declared the means or way,
whereby we are delivered from the power of sin, and so from Condemnation.

This Declaration contains a double Effect of God. The first is the sending of
his own Son, etc. the second, The Condemning of sin, etc. Both these are
amplified from their End, verse 4. First, of the first Effect: In which we have
four things. 1. The Persons. 1. Sending. 2. Sent. 2. The Act Sending. 3. The
manner, In the likeness of sinful flesh. 4. The End, to take away sin.

1. The Person Sending: God the Father, so here to be taken, though it were
the work of the whole Trinity, because of the Relative, Son.

The Person Sent: The Son, noted by this possessiue (His Own) For God has
diverse Sons by a Superlatiue Grace; As Angels and Men. The one by Creation,
the other by Adoption. None of these are sent; Ioh. 1.14.
but his Own Son by Nature, his only begotten.

2. Sent: How can the Son be sent, without a Separation from the rest of the
Persons, or a Diminution of his own excellency? The Answer is, that Christ is
to be considered two ways: As God; and as the Mediator of God and Man: And
this sending to be meant; not of a local motion from Heaven to Earth, but of
his manifestation in the Flesh. Sent, says one, Aquinas.
not that he might be where he was not, but that he might be in the manner
that he was not: that is, visibly in regard of his assumed Flesh.

3. In the likeness of sinful Flesh. Flesh is not here to be taken for
Corruption; but for the substance of man's Nature: The word Likeness, is not to
be attributed to Flesh, but to Sinful. Not flesh in likeness; For that was
the Heresy of Marcion: but sin in Likeness. He had true Flesh: but No
Sin. In regard of the Substance of the Flesh, it was True. In regard of the
Evil Qualities, it was like. He was Counted a Sinner, and Condemned as a
Sinner, but he was no Sinner. He could be weary, sleep, be hungry, and dye, but
he could not Sin.

And for Sin: that is, for the taking away of Sin, to be a Sacrifice for
Sin.

The meaning. It was the will of God, that Christ should take our Nature upon
him, but without Sin, and therein make satisfaction for us, and so free us
from sin and death.

So that these words are (as we may say) a Commission from God the Father to
Christ. In which are three things. 1. The Author, God the Father. 2. The
Committee, Christ the Son. 3. The Sum and Contents of the Commission, in
two Clauses. The first, to take our nature upon him. The second, in that Nature
to take away sin. The first part shows his Nature. The second, his Office.
In the first is the Doctrine of his Incarnation. In the second, the Doctrine of
his Passion.

D. Of the first part, Jesus Christ came into the world, and was incarnate of
the Virgin Mary, not of his own will, and yet not unwilling, but by the will,
appointment, and decree of his Father, Gal. 4.4. Ioh. 8.42.

Quest. Was not the Virgin Mary a sinner?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. How could he then take flesh of her without sin?

A. By the operation of the Holy Ghost ouer-shadowing her.

Use 1.
Sending his own Son. Christ then had a Being before he was incarnate. The
Mission is not his Incarnation, but being sent, he was Incarnate.

Use 2.
There are two Natures in Christ. The Divine, for he is Gods own Son. The
Humane, because in the Likeness of sinful Flesh; and both these personally
united. For the same Son sent forth, is sent in the similitude of sinful
flesh.

Use 3.
Christ had no sin of his own, called therefore the Immaculate Lamb. He had
our sins by Imputation. Heb. 4.15. 1. Pet. 1.19.


Use 4.
God sent his Son out of his own bosom, without our Counsel; we inquired
not after it, we desired it not, much less deserved it. All our Salvation is
wholly of God.

Use 5.
Christ is God. How dare thou then despise his Word and Sacraments? How
dare thou by Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, etc. offend him? He is the Lord
thy God, Psalm. 45.11. Ioh. 15.20.
therefore believe thou in him, and worship him. Christ is man. This is
comfortable. Art thou poor, despised, afraid, tempted, weak? So was thy Lord
Christ, being Man. And the Servant is not above the Master.

Christ was Man. Not a man of Steel, but a weak man. Not senseless, but
sensible of miseries: Poverty could lay hold on him. Hunger bite him. Sleep
and weariness overtake him. Blows and Buffets light on him. The Devil could
tempt him. Death could fear him, yea, hold him for a time. The Grave could
swallow him. He knows what all these mean: What a vile Tongue: a false
Accusation: a smiting Hand; a cruel and partial Judge can do. How Poverty,
Temptation, Death, can terrify and amaze. In thy trouble therefore fly to
him; be not afraid. He cannot forget what it is to be troubled, and
remembering; he cannot but have compassion, and be touched with the feeling of
our Infirmities, who was so subject, that he might be merciful and succor
us that are tempted. O sweet! Heb. 2.17,18. and 4.15,16. read the places.
that he might have compassion, and that he might succor us.

When thou art sick, thou say, O if you knew what I feel you would pity
me: and seeing others pained as thou have been, thou art moved to pity them
from thine own experience. Remember: Christ knows thy misery, and has felt a
thousand times more. Go boldly to him for Comfort.

Use 6.
Christ was tempted and afflicted, but sinned not. Nothing could make him
sin. Do thou in like manner. Let not poverty, wrongs, any tentations make
thee offend God; that being like Christ thy Head in holiness, thou may be
like him also in glory.

Doct. of the second part. God sent his own Son to take our Nature upon him For
Sin. that is, to take away sin. Ioh. 1.29. The principal thing in this
Doctrine is, that This was committed to Christ, and enjoined him of his Father.
Esaias 61.1,2,3 Which Christ applies to himself. Luke 4.21. As Kings, Priests
and Prophets were of old, so was Christ hereto anointed and appointed. Yea, to
this Commission, as Gods own Act and Will, God has set his Seal. Ioh. 6.27.
And Christ himself undertakes his Office with an Oath. Heb. 7.20,21.

Use 1.
God has thus solemnly commanded his own Son this service To take away our
Sins, and to Save us. Art thou afraid of Damnation because of thy sins? Be
of good Comfort: Thou have Christ for thy Advocate. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
If we be to sue down a Commission, we desire to have the wisest and ablest
men to sit upon it. If we have a suit at Law, we covet to get the best and
learnedest Council, and in most favor with the Judge. Now we have a suit for
Salvation; we have strong Adversaries: The Flesh, the World, the Devil, the
Law. Who shall be our Man of Law to plead for us? Shall an Angel? No: we have
Christ himself the Lord of Angels; The wisest, for he is the Wisdom of his
Father, and most in favor with the Judge, for in him is God well pleased. And
indeed Christ has taken our Matter upon him. God has retained him for us. How
then should thou not have the Sentence pass on thy side? Committit se homo
viro disertae linguae, and non perit committis te Verbo and periturus es? Aug.
Thou committest thy other causes sometimes to a man and speedest; if thou
committest thy self to that Word, can thou perish? He knows the moment of
thy cause, and the reasons whereby he should persuade. It stands him upon that
thou prevail, because thou art of his bone and his flesh. Be sure to bring him
his Fee, that is, Faith, Repentance and Obedience, and thou can not lose the
day: If thou can believe, he can save thee; nay, he must, it is his Office,
God has enjoined him: and he is faithful as Moses; nay, more faithful;
Moses as a Servant, he as a Son. Let him that has an Office, Heb. 3.2,5,6.
Romans 12.7.
wait on his Office (says he to us:) and can he neglect his Office? Read
Ioh. 6.37,38,39,40. It is the will of his Father (which he always delighted
to obey) that he should cast away no poor Sinner which believes and repents.

Go therefore thou Penitent Soul to Christ, desire him to do his Office, to
take away thy sins and comfort thee. Have thou no feet? Have thou stumps?
Creep to him. It is as possible for him to reject thee, as it is possible for
him to be unfaithful.

Use 2.
Seek not to the Virgin Mary, to Angels or Saints for Salvation; it is not
their Office, but Christ's. He offers it thee in his Word: see thou refuse not
to receive it: This refusal brought woe upon Corazin and Bethsaida. Mat. 11.21.
Yea, the dust of the feet of our Preachers is to be shaken off as a witness
against such as contemn the grace offered in the Gospel: and it shall be
easier for Sodom and Gomorrah then for such. Mat. 10.14,15.
Let us not then harden our hearts any longer; but while he speaks let us
hear his voice; while he calls, let us make obedient answer; while he
stretches out his hands, let us run into the Bosom of his mercy, that we
may be saved. Amen.

Condemned in the flesh.

The former effect was a Commission from the Father to his own Son. In these
words is the second effect, containing the Return of the Commission. All
Commissions speed not. This sped according to the intent of the granting, for
sin was condemned and taken away.

In this effect are 4. things. First, the Efficient, God. Secondly, the Action,
Condemned. Thirdly, the Object, Sin. Fourthly, the Subject, in the Flesh.

God, the Father as before.

Condemned: To Condemn is an Action of a Judge giving sentence against a
guilty Person: So is it not here; for sin is not guilty, but makes guilty.
Condemnation is also many times taken for the punishment which the delinquent
condemned suffers; neither is it so here: but after a similitude, as condemned
Persons executed, cease to be, and are taken away, so Sin is taken away.
Tollu^tur emedio.
Beza.
Some expound it, He abolished it; Caluinus.
Some, He abrogateth the power and reign of it, as a man hanged loses his
Offices. Aquinas, He weakened. Ambrose, He took away the authority of sin.
So Martyr, He put out of authority and Office; as if the King should take away
his Commission from a Subject and disgrace him: So God by Christ put sin out of
Office with all the reproach that might be. As Soldiers and Captains are
sometimes cashierd and sent away disarmed, so Christ has cashierd this
Captain, Sin.

3 Sin, That is, All sin: whatsoever had any consideration of sin: Original,
with the fruit, which is Actual sin; and both these with the effect, which is
Condemnation. He condemned and abolished it in regard of dominion and
damnation, and so it answers unto the freedom spoken of in the second verse.

4 In the Flesh: Flesh here for the nature of Man which Christ assumed: The
Article would here be expressed in That flesh. The Syrian Translator, In His
flesh.

The sense. We are freed by the Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ;
for He abolished sin in his Flesh; so that we being Flesh of his Flesh, and
Bone of his Bone, must needs also be delivered.

God by the death of his Son, which He did suffer on the Gross in our
Nature, has so taken away and abolished sin, that it cannot rule in us
here, nor condemn us heereafier, Esaias 53. John 1.29. Heb. 2.10. to which add
Heb. 5.9.

Use 1.
Sin was condemned in the humane Nature of Christ; not in the Divine: for
that is impassible: but the Person must be Divine. For neither Men nor Angels
could have borne the punishment of sin, but themselves must have been for ever
condemned withal. To sin is Man's work: But to condemn sin is Gods work.

Q. Why did not GOD pardon sin at once, and spare his own Son?

A. The threatening, Genesis 2.17. required that Man must dye for his
transgression; which if he had done in this own person, he could not have
been saved. Neither indeed is it to be imagined, that God can forgive sin
without satisfaction to his Justice: not for any defect of power, but for the
perfection of his Nature, which cannot but hate and punish sin. Nothing is
impossible to God, 2. These. 1.6.
but that which he wills not, and he cannot will, that his Justice should
be unsatisfied.

Q. How can the Temporal punishment in the Flesh of Christ, satisfy for the
Eternal to be suffered by us?

A. Though he suffered not long, yet he suffered much. And though the Action, or
rather Passion was of short continuance; yet the virtue is everlasting and
infinite, suitable to his Person which suffered, who is Infinite.

Use 2.
Sin is fully destroyed: because it is Gods work: and justly; because
condemned. And Believers cannot justly be now condemned, because Christ has
paid the Debt.

Sin is condemned, our greatest enemy. What should let us greatly to rejoice?
If a man in authority, being our utter enemy, should be imprisoned, put from
his place, and made Jack out of Office, as we use to say; it would make us
exceeding glad: or, as if thou had a spiteful enemy, by whom thou were
afraid whenever he met thee to be stabd, thou would be much afraid: even
as Saul was (though otherwise a valiant man) at the sight of Goliath. But when
he saw David had killed him, he rejoiced and all Israel with him. So it is with
us: Sin alive and in authority, will make the stoutest of us afraid. But CHRIST
our David, has killed sin our Goliath: This comfort our hearts.

But thou will say, Alas, I feel sinnee struggling with me and molesting me,
and I many times smart full sorely for it. Yea, it may be so, and shall be so:
God will have it so, to humble thee, and to make thee cleave the faster unto
him. But, if thou beleeuest, it rules not, nor can condemn thee. Sin lives
indeed, but as a condemned person. A man receiving his deaths wound sprawleth
and moves a while: And Fire, though it be quenched, yet there arises a smoke
for some small time after, which may trouble thine eyes: So is it with finne.
And for the Cross, it is necessary, not as a punishment, or satisfaction; but
as an instruction: which is to be used, so long as we bear about us the
remainder of sin, for a help to Mortification; and that it may appear that
God no way approoueth of sin, when he corrects his Children for it, though
he has pardoned them.

Use 3.
Christ has done and suffered whatsoever his Father appointed him: he has
borne hard words, harder deeds. He never gave over till that comfortable
consummatum est was uttered. Imitate him. Whatsoever God commands thee, obey,
thought it be hard and tedious to flesh and blood: Repent thee of thy faylings,
who like a lazy servant have made Exceptions of thy service. And see that thou
hate for ever and abhor all sin, seeing Christ came to condemn and take it
away. Think seriously of it. God has in the flesh of his own Son,
condemned thy Anger, Pride, Covetousness, Blasphemy, etc. Will thou justify
them? Christ has killed sin: Will thou give it life? Christ came to demolish
and abolish it: will thou build it? God set a curse on him which should build
Jericho: Josh. 6.26. 1. Kin. 16.34.
which afterward took Effect. Sin is this Jericho, and cursed shall he be
that builds or maintains it. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil, which are Whoredom,
Drunkenness, etc. Will thou live in the practice of them? This is to take the
Devils part, against thy Savior Jesus Christ. Sin is Condemned in Christ's
Flesh; if it live and rule in thy flesh, thou have no part in him, thou art not
of his flesh and bone: for thou art contrary to him.

VERSE 4. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.


HItherto of the two Effects of God. God sent his Son, and gane him a
Commission. He executed it. So did God. So suffered Christ. But why? Cui bono?
Who have the benefit of all this? This Paul shows in this Verse. Where are
two things. First, what the Benefit is: (viz) The fulfilling of the
righteousness of the Law. 2. Who receive this Benefit. We that believe. In
us. Described by a proper Effect. Which walk, etc.

That. This notes not here the event only, as though it so fell out, but the
Counsel of God, purposing this to be the end of the sending of his Son, etc.

The Righteousness of the Law. So many. As though it were (...): some
Justification: as though it were (...): but it is (...), which Beza well
renders; Vt Ius Legis, that the Right of the Law might be fulfilled in us. What
Right? The Law has a double Right. One of Obedience, it does rightly challenge
obedience, and the Law has not the right if it be not obeyed. The other Right
is to Condemn us for Disobedience; for it is right and equal that those which
do evil, should suffer evil. Both these are here understood.

Of the Law. Law sometime is taken for the strength of a thing, as in Verse 2.
sometime largely for the whole Word of God: sometime more strictly for the
Moral Law in the Decalogue, and for the Doctrine, Precepts, Promises,
Prohibitions, Threatenings, which the Law speaks of: So here.

Fulfilled. Perfectly satisfied by Christ, in regard of both the Rights.

In us. Not by us. By Christ. In us. For Christ in our Nature has fulfilled
the Right of the Law: and therefore in us, because of our Communion with him.

The meaning. God has Condemned sin in the Flesh of his Son, that, All
that which the Law by any right could require of us, might be performed by him
for our Benefit so, as if we our selves had in our persons performed the same.

Whatsoever Christ did concerning the Law, is ours by Imputation so fully as if
our selues-had done it, Mat. 3.15. and 5.17,18. As if he should say, Every
Tittle of the Law shall be fulfilled. If it require Obedience, it shall have
it. If it threaten Curses, they shall be borne. The Precepts shall be kept, the
Promises received, the Punishments endured, 2. Cor. 5.21.

Use. 1.
If Adam had not sinned; by fulfilling the Law in the Precepts he should have
been saved: and the Damned fulfill it in hell in regard of the Curse, by
suffering it, and cannot be saved. If we would be saved, we (because sinners)
must fulfill it, in Praecepto, and poena, in the Precepts and Punishment. The
Precepts must be kept, that there may be place for the Promises. The Curse
also must be endured, which is the wages of our Sin. The Law must have our
Blood, and without blood there is no remission. Heb. 9.22.
We can do neither of these in our selves. We have done both these by our
Surety. Faith is here necessary, that Christ's doing and suffering may be
applied to us, that The Right of the Law may be fuifilled in us.

Use 2.
The Wonderful wisdom of God appears in our Redemption. Who Executes his
Justice upon Christ, Exercises his mercy toward us. Without Infinite
Satisfaction his mercy could not be appeased. Without Infinite mercy we could
not be saved. One Deep calls another. The Deep of his Justice, the Deep of
Christ's Satisfaction: The Deep of our Misery, the Deep of his Mercy. If he
had laid his Justice upon us, where had been his Mercy? If he had showed
Mercy without Satisfaction, where had been his Justice? Both these must meet,
that we may have Righteousness and everlasting peace. This the Angels admire;
do thou labor to understand.

Use 3.
Christ suffered for us, not only ( nostra Causa, but nostra vice,) for our
sake, but in our room and stead. We should have been Buffeted, Spit upon,
Crucified, Cursed. He represented our Persons, was in our room. O infinite
Love! Many desire to represent Great Personages, to partake of their Honor:
but none desire to represent the persons of base and condemned wretched, to
bear their Shame. No suing for this. David wished that he had dyed for Absalon.
But Christ our David dyed for us indeed.

Use 4.
Here is singular comfort; for this is our due from this place. The Law must
have its right, before a sinner can be saved. We cannot of our selves fulfill
the right of it. Art thou in Christ by Faith? Be of good comfort: Christ has
fulfilled it in thee, and thou have fulfilled it in Christ.

Thou may be threatened by the Law, in regard of thy daily failings: But here
is a non obstante, by the goodness of thy surety. As a man having broken a
penal Statute, if he once have undergone the Law, he fears not any more,
either Judge, Officer, or Law, for that fault. So, because Christ has
undergone the Law for us, we need not fear. And as the Debtor by the payment
of the surety is delivered, so we by the sufferings of Christ.

But thou will say, that thou still sinnest, and can not fulfill the
Obedience of the Law. I answer, that this right also of the Law is fulfilled
in thee by Christ, if thou beleeuest. For he that has Christ, though he has
not kept the Law, has the whole righteousness of the Law. Christ's
righteousness is a large Garment covering himself, and us too. Iustitia
Christi non pallium breue. Bernh.
This Garment is not of our buying or working, but it is better, because
wrought by Christ; and we shall also have a righteousness of our own in the
kingdom of Heaven.

Use 5.
Christ has stood in thy stead, and endured the sharpest of Gods Judgments,
which he deserved not, that thou might taste the sweetest of Gods Mercies,
which thou deseruedst not. How should this bind thee unto Him in all
obedienced* The Borrower is a servant to the Lender, as Solomon says, Prou.
22.7.
and the Receiver to the Giver. Christ has done and suffered so much for thee:
shall thou deny him any thing? Even thy life if He require it? Now, what would
Christ have thee to do? He has borne the punishment of thy sins; He would
then have thee cease from sin. He endured baseness and poverty for thee:
Repent then of thy Pride: His blessed Mouth was buffeted and spit upon for
thee: He would now have thee to leave thy Swearing, Lying, filthy and ungodly
talk, and to use a holy and gracious speech. His heart was pierced for thy
sins; thrust not the spear of thy sins into his side again; but regent,
and please thy Savior in the amendment of thy life.

VERSE 5. For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh,
but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.

6. For to Or, the minding of the flesh.
be carnally minded is death, but to or, the minding of the spirit.
be spiritually minded is life and peace.

7. Because or, the minding of the flesh.
the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of
GOD, neither indeed can be.


IN the premises, Saint Paul has delivered that there is no Condemnation to
them which be in Christ; because they are delivered from the condemning power
of sin, God having condemned their sin in the flesh of his Son. And lest
any should here take liberty to sin, he has there admonished that such
comfort and privilege belongs unto them only, which walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit.

This last point is farther enforced in these three verses, by an Argument
taken from an Opposition of Contraries: The dispositions of Carnal and
Spiritual men are contrary. Therefore their end must be contrary.


Of the contrariety of their dispositions speaks the fist verse, of their
contrary ends the sixth verse, one part whereof is proved in the 7. verse, the
other part is easily understood. First of the fifth verse.

They which are after the Flesh, that is, which are in a mere unregenerate
estate.

To be in or after the flesh, and the flesh to be in us, differ: This is
incident to the Regenerate, that proper to the unregenerate.

But understand, to be after the Spirit, not to be merely spiritual, but to
be Regenerate.

The things of the Flesh. Earthly things, which are either good, as Moralities.
Indifferent, as Riches: or evil, as Whoredom. The things of the Flesh here
principally meant, set down, Gal. 5.19,20,21. The things of the Spirit also
set down, Gal. 5.22,23.

To mind, must be taken largely, comprehending Thoughts, Meditation, Desire,
Delight, Study. To Savor:

The sense: Caruall men savor Carnal things, Spiritual men contrary.

Carnal men and Spiritual are contrary, Gal. 5.17. 2. Cor. 6.14. James
3.15,17. And Salomons fool and wiseman so often opposed, show the same.

Use 1.
Why cannot Carnal and Spiritual, Godly, and Godless men agree together?
Prou. 29.27.
Why is a wicked man an abomination to the Just and contrary? Here Is the reason.
They are contrary, of contrary nature and disposition: Fire and Water are not
more contrary. Clay and Iron will not weld together, so friendship is where
there is likeness: Birds of a feather will fly together. Gods Children wonder,
that wicked men can be so ill: and wicked men wonder that the children of God
will not run with them into all excess, and Riot.

From this contrariety is it, that Adulterers, Drunkards, vain persons find
favor there, where a good man is hunched at. That an Idle person who will let
his work to run to the Alehouse, and to vanity, shall be borne with; but
if a poor man let an hour to go to a Sermon; he is an Hypocrite, it is pity
to do any thing for him. A Philosopher being asked, why men sought more to rich
men, then to wise men, answered, because it was possible they might be rich,
but not wise: So, if any ask me why wicked men are of some more favored, then
good men: the Answer is ready: Because they which favor wicked men, either
are, or mean to be, Whoore-masters, Harlots, Thieves, Drunkards, etc. but to
be godly they purpose not.

Do thou hate good men and rail on them? Well, go too: show thy self what
thou art: No body hates an Israelite, but an Egyptian, or a Canaanite; no body
mocks Isaac but Ismael: betraies CHRIST but Judas, is an enemy to a godly man,
but he which is contrary.

Put Fire to Fire, or Water to Water, and there is no commotion: but put Fire
to Water, or contrary, and then, what a noise and Thundering! So, if a wicked
man meet with a wicked man, there is shaking of hands and much gladness: but if
a good man come in their way, he is sure not to pass without a mock or taunt.
If thou fear God, let not this discourage thee. It Is a sign there is some
goodness in thee, otherwise the Devil would not in his Instruments so rage
against thee.

Use. 2.
As it is easy to discern between Musk and a Muck-hill by the sent, and
between Gall and Honey by the taste: so it is easy to discern a spiritual man
from a carnal, by their savor: Do thou most mind, affect, savor earthly,
and carnal things? This shows thy dunghill disposition; for Spiritual men
seek and mind things above.

Every thing lives according to his kind: the Horse in the Pasture: the Fish in
the Water: A Fish cannot live out of the Water: so talk of good things to a
carnal man; he presently falls asleep, or railes; for he is out of his
Element; but to a Spiritual man, such things are a delight. As in diet, that
which is one man's meat, is another man's bane, because of the difference of
their temperature and constitution: So is it here.

Examine thy self in particular: The hearing of the Word, Prayer, etc. are
Spiritual. Is the Word as sweet to thee as the Honey and the Honie-combe, as it
was to David? And is thy Soul never at rest, till thou can find opportunity
to power out thy heart to GOD in Prayer? Thou art spiritual; these things are
most tedious to a carnal man. Drunkenness, Idleness, Vanity, etc. are things
carnal: Do thou account that day as lost, wherein thou meetest not with thy
Consorts, to have fellowship in such things? Flatter not thy self; thou art
surely carnal: For a spiritual man hates these things, and all his delight is
in the Saints, and in them which excel in Virtue.

Use 3.
He that would savor spiritual things, must be renewed by the Spirit of God.
As he that is Aguish, thinks sweet things bitter; but being in health, tastes
every thing aright: So, if thou would savor good things, purge out that
same choler, and rankness of corruption, which has infected thee.

Many think that the privileges of Regenerate men belong to them, because now
and then they go to a Sermon, though they find no more savor in it, then in a
dry Chippe: No, no, Thou may hear many Sermons, and yet have a carnal heart
of thine own, which if occasion serve will show it self. As Water-fowles
hatched under a Land-fowle, a while remain with their damme; but anon run into
the Water, according to their kind. So, if the nature and disposition of the
heart be not changed, we cannot savor and take pleasure in good things.

As a Hare when she is hotly pursued and hunted, plies her to some beaten-path,
not for any love she has to it, but that there, by the feet of passengers she
may lose her sent; so many will be in the Church paths, not for any Devotion;
but that the filthy sent of their carnality might not be discovered.

Plutarke laughed at such who would be accounted as wise as Plato, and yet in
the company of Alexander would be drunken. Desire thou the reputation of one
godly and religious Professor? Though thou come to Church, and ioynest in
Prayer, etc. thou shall never attain it, so long as thou will swear, lie, be
drunken, or any thing for company. Its another manner of thing to be
spiritual. We cannot be a Lion in the Forest, and a little Dog in a
Ladies lap. There must be a change of nature; seek this.

VERSE. 6. For to be Carnally minded is Death: but to be Spiritually minded is
life and peace.


AS Adam having sinned, the Angel kept the way of the Tree of Life, so our
Apostle keeps unrepentant sinners from the Consolation before propounded.
Such consolations belong not to wicked men. The Argument to prove it was: Those
which are contrary obtain not like condition: But the wicked and godly are
contrary. This Minor was partly showed Verse 5. from their contrary
dispositions, and is more declared in this Verse from their contrary Ends.
Death and life are immediately contrary. But these are the Ends of the Wicked
and Godly. Therefore, the Ends of Wicked and Godly men are contrary.


To be Carnally minded. (...) Figmentum cordis.
The word signifies the act of a Carnal mind, comprehending thoughts, desire,
discourse. Moses calls it that which the heart fashioneth. Genesis 6.5. 8.21.


Is death, By a figure, Meton. Effecti.
brings, causes, or ends in death: For death is the end of sin, though
not the end of a Sinner: A wicked man sins not purposely that he might be
damned, but damnation follows his wicked doings.

As a man many times, seeking for one thing finds another: so wicked men in
their sinning seek another thing: The Adulterer, his pleasure; the Covetous,
Riches, etc. but they find another thing: that is, Death.

To be spiritually minded. That is, the Cogitations, devices, desires actions,
proceeding from the spiritual part.

Is life and Peace: that is, brings happiness, and peace with God and our
own Consciences.

The sense and Doctrine. Whatsoever, the flesh or corruption does mind, savor,
desire, endeavor, seek, act, brings death; and so on the contrary for the
Spirit, that is, the Regenerate part: Gal. 5.21,23. The fruits of the flesh
exclude us out of Heaven: the fruits of the Spirit exclude the Curse of the
Law. The more flesh, the nearer Hell, the more Spirit, the surer and nearer
Heaven, Gal. 6.7,8. As he that sows Wheat, reapeth Wheat, not Barley: so if
we sow to the flesh, we reap Corruption; if to the Spirit, life everlasting.

Use. 1.
True wisdom is that which has the favor of God, and life following it: We
say many times of a wild graceless young man: He has a good wit: a Naughty wit
we should say; because being unsanctified it brings death: We say also of a
Covetous man: O, a very wise fellow, we should say a very fool: For what
wisdom can it be for a man to damn his soul by his courses?

If a man would judge of wise men without the Word, he might imagine, that our
witty Politics and Carnal men had all the wit, and that Spiritual minded
men, who neglect the present good things, were little better then Fools.
Indeed Carnal men think Spiritual men to be Fools, but Spiritual men
know Carnal men to be so. For true wisdom is to fear God, which while
Carnal men want, they cannot be truly wise.

The Word sometime calls wicked men wise, but with a restriction, in their
generation to doe-euill? according to the flesh, etc. Luke. 16.8. Ier. 4.22. 2.
Sam. 17.23.
Thus was Achitophel a deep Politician, but dyed like a Fool, in a pettish
humor hanging himself. Therefore Solomon almost always calls a wicked man,
The Fool.

Some think it a point of wisdom to believe nothing which they cannot fathom
with their own Reason, as the Corinthians doubted of the Resurrection: but
Paul says to such a one. Thou Fool, or, O Fool. 1. Cor. 15.36.
Some think it a glory to differ from other in opinion and to contrary them,
as the Galathians in the point of Justification: Gal. 3.1.
but Paul calls them fools for their labor.

Pharao seeing the children of Israel to increase, Exodus 1.10.
said he would deal wisely, but indeed he played the fool, as appeared in
his fearful end. Gehezi thought himself wifer then his Master, 2. King. 5.27.
when he would save something by the Leprous Assyrian; but this wisdom got
him the Leprosy of Naaman. Mat. 16.22.23.
Peter would be counted a wise fellow, and takes upon him to advise our Savior
to avoid his Passion: but this was carnal wisdom, as our Savior told him,
calling him Satan.

There is wisdom in a Carnal man, as life in one that has the Falling
Sickness, or sense in a mad man; but no more to be compared to the wisdom of
the Spiritual, then such life and sense is to be compared to the life and
sense of sound men.

Use 2.
Great is the misery of a man unregenerate: for he cannot think a thought, or
speak a word but it is his death; nay the very wisdom of the flesh is so:
how much more the foolishness? we pity natural fools, and it is a misery to
be so; but it is more to be a fool in spiritual things: So on the contrary,
the happiness of them which are spiritually wise is great: For whatsoever they
devise, desire, speak, or do, according to the teaching of the Spirit, is for
their great good. Every Sob, Tear, every good deed hitcheth them nearer to
Heaven. Every Prayer they make, every Sermon they hear, increases their peace
and their assurance of life. Surely they are blessed. Labor thou to be such a
One.

Use 3.
In nothing follow the Counsel of the Flesh: For it is a Traitor and seeks thy
destruction: will a King counsel with a Traitor? This were to ruinate himself
and his Kingdom: Many when any thing is to be done, Counsel not with the
Spirit, but with their own fleshly heart; as Rhehoboam with the young men, and
so they miserably perish.

Will any man choose him for a guide, which will lead into a ditch? But such a
blind Guide is the Flesh: will any man commit his body or Goods to that
bottom, which is steered by such a Pylot, which drownes every vessel he
gouernes? There was never any man followed the wisdom of the Flesh, without
deadly danger.

Seek therefore another Directer which is the Spirit: There is no Condemnation
to them which walk after this Guide. Gal. 1.16.
When Paul should take upon him the Calling of an Apostle, he counseled not
with Flesh and blood. For his Flesh would have said, Why Paul: this Calling will
bring Persecution: pity thy self, thou art in place, a learned Pharise, etc.

So: is there a falling out between thy neighbor and thee? The Flesh will
say, Sue him, throw him into Prison, be revenged, etc. but the Spirit will
counsel to meekness and forgiveness, which is pleasing to God. Take heed in
these and the like thou follow not the wisdom of the Flesh: for that is the
way to destruction: And indeed, who shall at any time, pray hear the Word,
do any good, or especially suffer for the Gospel, if he counsel with the
Flesh? As Abraham therefore, when he went to offer up Isaak, told not Sarah,
lest she might dissuade him: So in all things to be done or avoided, be
jealous of thy corrupt heart: take no counsel of it, but of the Spirit by the
Word: for the wisdom of the Spirit is life and Peace.

VERSE 7. Because the Carnal mind is Enmity against God: for it is not
subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be.


IN this Verse is proved, that to be Carnally minded is death or deadly: The
Argument is from the Efficient Cause, Thus: That which is Enmity, brings
Death. But the Carnal mindedness is Enmity, Therefore, etc.


The Proposition is manifest; for as Friendship with God, and Reconciliation is
the cause of life, Deuteronomy. 4.4.
so on the contrary.

The Minor is the first part of the Verse, and it is proved from the property
or Effect of such Enmity; Thus: That which neither is nor can be subject to
the Law of God, is Enmity: But the Carnal man, neither is nor can be, etc.
Therefore:


So that in this Verse are two things. 1. A Proposition, in the former
distinction of it; 2. a Reason in the latter.

First of the Proposition: The Carnal mind is Enmity against God.

The Carnal Mind. That which we read Mind, or Wisdom, some expound
Sensuality: (...).
but the word will not bear it, which notes the best part of Corrupt man; even
his wisdom not simply, but in respect of Corruption. Even Lady-Reason: and
therefore Paul has in another place (...), Coloss. 2.18.
The Mind of the Flesh.

Is Enmity: Not as the Vulgar is an Enemy in the Adjective or Concrete, for
that will agree, neither with the Gender of the Substantive, nor with the
Accenting of it: but in the Abstract noting an excess, as if we see a proud
man, we say, There goes Pride: so here; Is Enmity; nothing can be said more:
For an Enemy may be reconciled, but Enmity cannot: a vicious man may become
virtuous, but vice cannot. Enmity is a mutual maleuolence, between men: with
a mutual desire to hurt each other. So God hates the Flesh, and it hates God:
and yet man by this hatred, hurts not God, but himself: for he is Gods Enemy
not by hurting his will, but by resisting it. Non nocendo, sed resistendo.
Anselm.


All unregenerate men are Enemies to God, and God to them, Iam. 4.4 Romans 5.10.
Gal. 1.27.

Use 1.
From whence is it that we are Enemies to God, and God to us? Not from God; but
from our Sin. The Cause is in us: Adam was created in Gods Image; The friend
of God; and God the friend of Adam: He transgressed Gods Commandment, and
hence came this Enmity: which we have cause to bewail with tears of blood.
But few think of it as is meet.

Use 2.
Here is the Reason why wicked men hate the godly: Marvel not, says John,
though the world hate you. One would think it should be marvelous. But if
they hate God: 1. Ioh. 3.13. Ioh. 15.18.20.
surely they will hate us, as our Savior shows. He that loves me, loves my
Children and friends for my sake: And a malicious man will mischief, even the
Cattle of him whom he hates. Do thou hate any godly man? Ah wretch! Thy
ill will is not originally and properly to them, but to God himself.

Use 3.
A wicked man is Gods Enemy. What warrant have thou to keep their company? to
entertain familiarly their Acquaintance? to countenance them? Remember that
there must be always Enmity between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of
the Serpent. Psalm. 139.21. 2. Chron. 19.2.
Remember David's protestation: remember how Iehoshaphat was rebuked, Would
thou help the wicked, and love them which hate the Lord? The Judgment of the
Heathen is, That friendship is then dissolved, when one of the friends becomes
notoriously wicked.

Use 4.
Carnal men are enemies to God, and God to them: therefore are they miserable:
There can be nothing more monstrous then the Creature, to hate the Creator,
nor more grievous then the Creator, to hate the Creature.

If Absalon rise against his Father David, and like a viper seek to devour his
Fathers bowels; Every one will condemn him for an unnatural sauadge Varlet.
If thou rebellest against God, thou art more guilty ten thousand times: How
kind is David to his wicked son! 2. Sam. 18.5. 2. Sam. 18.33.
How does he lament the wretch! How kindly has God dealt with thee in thy
Creation, Preservation, etc! He has done more for thee then ever David did or
could do for Absalon. Therefore if thou hate Him, thou art a very Monster.
Alas for thy fearful Estate. God also is thine Enemy, Psalm. 11.5.
and his soul hates thee. Thou grieuest and tremblest for the Enmity of some
Great Man: Howl then and Lament for the Enmity of the Great God.

But rejoice thou that art Regenerate, for God is thy friend: So was he
Abraham's, Iam. 2.23. Ioh. 15.14. 1. Ioh. 4.19. Ioh. 13.1.
for his Faith, and so Christ calls his Apostles for their obedience. What if
the world hate you, seeing God loves you, and you love God? Yea he loved you
first; and will love you to the end. Jonathan will deny David nothing, nor God
them whom he loves.

If the Conscience apprehend the hatred of God! Did you ever feel the torment?
So on the contrary is the happiness of them which are assured of the love of
God: which assurance happy art thou if thou feel.

For it is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be.

This is the Reason of the Proposition, from the effect and property of Enmity.
It is usual for Enemies to cross one another, and not be subject to them in
any thing: Such are the conditions of wicked men; they endeavor to cross God
in his government; they will not be subject to his Law.

It is not subject to the Law of God. The Law, i. The will of God, of which the
Law is a Copy.

Be subject. That is according to an ordinate and godly subjection as the word
signifies: (...).
wicked men cannot pluck their necks out of the yoke of subjection to God by
their perverseness; but God will have his will upon them, and they are, and
shall be subject to the curse of the Law: He says not, are not subject to God,
as one well observes Caietanus.
, but to his Law.

Nor can be. Black may be made white, but blacknes cannot: so a carnal man
may be Regenerate, but carnality cannot.

It is not: There is Contumacy: It cannot: There is Impotency: It cannot,
because it will not; for it is the nature of flesh to resist the Law.

Use. 1.
The Law is the Rule of our subjection to God. Not Traditions, or our good
meanings, etc.

Use. 2.
The flesh must be utterly abolished, it cannot be brought into order:
Regeneration is necessary.

Use. 3.
The Papists speak much of the goodness of our Free Will, if it be but helped
by Grace: Is It not likely think you? When the best part in us vnrenued, is not,
nor can be subject to the Law?

Use. 4.
Q. Can God be hated? It seems no. For God is the chief Good; Goodness it
self: and Goodness is the very proper object of Love. If we hate any thing:
either it is not good, or we apprehend it to be evil.

A. Carnal men hate not God as he is Goodness: but as they apprehend
something evil in him, and this is, that he is a Judge, gives a Law, and
punishes for the breach of it. The Adulterer, Drunkard, Blasphemer, etc. When
they find the Law curbing them by the threats and maledictions of it: so that
they cannot run on in their sin as they desire, and if they do, that then they
shall be damned: then they hate the Lawmakers. Which hatred springs from
Infidelity; for could carnal men believe that God would save them, they would
love him. Beware therefore that there be not in thee an evil heart of
unbelief, to cause thee to hate God.

Use 5.
Vile is the disposition of a Carnal man. When God calls for Obedience; the
unregenerate man contraries God, and says as the wicked Jews sometimes, We
will not obey. Monstrous Rebellion! Ier. 18.19.
If the Sun created to give light, should cast abroad darkness; If the Fire
created to give heat, should cool; would not thou marvel? Consider: Thy
Creation was to serve and obey thy God: If thou refusest, thou art a Monster of
Nature. And indeed all Creatures observe the Law of their Creation, the Devil
and Man only excepted.

Yet take this with thee; that though thou will not be subject in an orderly
and holy subjection: yet shall thou be subject to the wrath of God will thou
nill thou. 1. Reg. 2.28.34.
Though David cannot rule Ioab, yet Solomon will, taking him even from the
horns of the Altar.

Use 6.
Observe a secret in our profession. The more Wisdom and wit, if it be
fleshly, the more enmity against God, his Word, and Church. Gods people have
ever received most hurt by such. Who were Christ's greatest enemies? The learned
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees. Acts. 8.
Who resisted Paul at Athens? The learned Epicures, Stoics. Who was his
greatest enemy before Festus? Learned and Eloquent Tertullus. Who are at these
days the greatest enemies to Religion, but our deepest Machiuellian Politics?
Pray therefore for a sanctified understanding. Better it is to be without
understanding, then with it to dishonor God.

Use 7.
Would thou obey GOD? Deny then thy carnal Reason. Call upon the young man
to Repent: his carnal Reason says, Time enough yet; and so hinders him. The
Angry man is not moody without Reason. The greatness of his wrongs; every one
will count him a fool, etc. The Covetous man has some Reason: yea, every sin
has his shifts and fig leaves. So long as thou give thy fleshly reason the
hearing, thou will never obey. He that is once beaten from the hold of his
carnal Reason, will soon be won to Obedience.

Use. 8.
Who is Gods enemy? Even he that will not obey the Law, whether he do things
contrary, as commit Adultery, Blasphemy, etc. or leave things commanded undone,
Ioh. 14.15.23,24.
and in the number of these, comes our Civil men. Is It not pity that such
courteous and harmless creatures should go to Hell? Would any think that
such were Gods enemies? While they neglect the duties of the first Table, and
inward Sanctification, GOD accounts even these his enemies. And such have
nothing to expect but damnation, if they Repent not. Math. 5.20. Luke 19.27.
If thou be Gods servant, show it by thy life.

VERSE 8. So then they that are in the Flesh, cannot please GOD.


THis Verse is a Confectary, following out of the seventh verse; and contains
a conclusion of all that goes before in this Chapter.

So then: For, they therefore. The Aduersatiue being put for an Illatiue.

Which are in the Flesh: Not which are married, as one fondly expounded;
Syriemus Papa.
for the beginning of the next verse confutes it. But which are Carnal and
unregenerate. The phrase is significant, noting a man drowned in corruption. We
say of a man overcome of Anger; He is heat. Of a Drunkard; He is in Beer, or
Wine. Acts 8.23.
So Simon Magus is said to be in the Gall of Bitterness.

Cannot please God: Nor their persons, nor their thoughts, words, or Actions,
till they be renewed. As Snow can never be made hot while it is Snow: for Fire,
or heat will dissolve it into Water; but then it may be made hot. So the
Carnal man in that estate cannot please God, but change him into a sanctified
estate, and then he can.

The meaning, which is the Doctrine. A Carnal man cannot please God, because
he is not subiest to his Law, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.18. Gal. 6.16.

Q. Why should we be punished for that we cannot do?

A. Yes great reason. For we cannot, because we will not, and we will not,
from our own corruption, which we have not from GOD, but from our selves.

Use 1.
A Man may be Prudent, Learned, Liberal, do many beautiful things in Nature,
and yet not please God: An evil Tree (such is every unregenerate) cannot bring
forth good Fruit. The substance or matter of the work may be good: but the
work cannot be so called, unless it be done modo, and forma. Velvet is good
matter to make a Garment, yet it may be so mard in the cutting, that it shall
never obtain the name of a good Garment. Pieces of Timber are good matter for
a House: but they must be Artificially framed. An unregenerate man gives Alms,
and in giving sins; not because he gives, but because he gives not in the
manner he should.

Some may then say, it is good not to give at all. Nay, not so: they are good
vsu, though not cultu, there is good use of their Alms, though they be no
pleasing service to God. He sins that gives not as he should, but he sins more
that gives not at all. Rest not then in this, because the matter of thy works
is good, but add also, the right manner: In Faith. And the right end: The
glory of GOD. The matter of Cains Sacrifice for ought we know, was a good as
Abels: But Abel offered in a better manner, and to the right end. The Devil
can be content thou should do good for matter: but if thou will please
GOD, the matter and manner also must be according to his will.

Use 2.
An unregenerate man is most miserable, because he cannot please God: Prou.
20.2.
For, if the displeasure of a King be the death of his Subject: how fearful
is the displeasure of God?

It Is a most sweet thing to please God: This is the happiness of the Regenerate:
though they deserve it not, yet their Persons and Actions please in CHRIST
through Faith. Dear is the affection of Parents to their Children; so is the
favor of GOD a precious thing, and to be desired. David preferres the loving
Countenance of GOD before all earthly things. Psalm. 4.6.7.
And good reason: for it brings peace of Conscience, breeds confidence in
Prayer, and is the fountain of all good things unto us.

Thousands of Rams and Rivers of Oil will not please God; Micah. 6.7,8.
but subjection to his Law will: If thou beleeuest. Unregenerate regenerate men
please the Devil: Pray thou for Renouation, that thou may please thy GOD.

Use 3.
Let this spur thee on to Obedience, because therein thou please GOD. If thou
be a servant, displease thy Master, and see what thou shall get by it: for
they which please are preferred. If thou have a contrite heart, thou please.
Be more contrite. If thou give Alms, thou please. Give more. If thou
Prayest, hear the Word, be Obedient, thou please: exercise thy self in
these things the more; so serve GOD, that thou may please him in reverence
and fear. Heb. 12.28.


VERSE 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the
spirit of God dwells in you, etc.

And so to the end of the 11. verse.


HItherto of the comfort with the Confirmation. Now of the third part, which is
the Application to the Romans, in the 9.10. and 11. verses, wherein we have
two things. 1 The Application. 2. The Amplification.


The Application is set down in the first words of the 9. v.

The Amplification in the rest of the words of the 9. verse, and in the 10. and
11. verses.

In the Application are two things. 1 The Application it self. 2. A
Confirmation of it in these words; if so be that the spirit of God dwells in
you.

There is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ. These are such which
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Now (says PAVL) you Romans
which believe, are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit.

So then the Application is two ways set down. 1 Negatiuely, ye are not in
the Flesh. 2 Affirmatively, but in the Spirit.


Now. or But.

Ye; Not all the Romans, but believers which are in CHRIST. He speaks to
the Wheat, not to the Chafe: to the Corn that is hidden, not to the stubble
which is appearing. Tritico dixit non paleae: massae latenti, non stipulae
apparenti. Ansel.


Are not in the Flesh. Fleshly life, says Chrysostom. Understand (as often)
Corruption of Nature. He denies not the Nature of the flesh, but the euilnes,
not that no flesh is in them, but that they are not in it, or subdued by it.

But in the Spirit; by the opposition. Spiritual, Regenerate.

The consideration of these words, is twofold. 1. Relative, or 2. Simple.


The Relative respects that which goes before. Where is to be noted that the
Apostle applies the things delivered to the Romans. From whence arises this
Doctine.

The General Doctrine. Preachers are to apply their doctrines to their
hearers. So did Nathan, 2. Sam. 12.7. So did Peter, Acts 2.36. whereby diverse
Jews were converted. So did our Savior Christ, Luke 13.3,5.

Application is a part of Spiritual wisdom, whereby things are so transferred
to use, as that we grow not only in knowledge, but also in Godliness. And it
is, either of the Minister, or of the People.

Of the Minister; when he not only gives the sense, and divides his Text; but
also divides and distributeth, Consolations, 2. Tim. 2.15.
Threatenings, etc. to whom they do belong.

Of the People; when they also lay to their hearts things delivered, bringing
all to their Conscience, Accusing or Excusing.

Use 1.
Ministers must apply in their preaching. 1. Cor. 4.1.2
They are Stewards, and such must be faithful. This Faithfulness appears
three ways. 1. To provide wholesome viands for the Family. 2. To distribute
the Provision. 3. To do this wisely.

1. For the provision; 1. Good must be laid in, that is, truths grounded upon
Gods Word. No singular fancies of our own brain must be obtruded; for these
fill full of wind, not of sound nourishment. 2. It must be for the Season. All
things are not at all times so seasonable. The present occasions of public
sins, Mercies, Judgments, are to be observed.

2. For Distribution; They are not to sing to themselves: and to account it
enough, to have store in their own heads, and books; but they must dispense
it to the Family: not only to make purueyance, but to give every one his
portion, and this not in the gross of Doctrine only; but in the Re-tayle of
particular Exhortation; as the Surgeon makes the plaster, and lays it on too.
As a whole loase among little Children, so is a General Doctrine among the
Auditors, not divided by Application. As a rich man only discoursing of bread
to a hungry Beggar, or a Physicion describing his Patients disease, and leaving
him to himself; so is a Preacher not applying. As Nurses chewe and prepare the
meat for the Child; so must Preachers. Generalities profit little; every man
being ready to put off from him self, that which is generally spoken to all.
If Nathan had not come home to David's Conscience, he would never have thought
himself to be meant: But Then, he is stricken, and repents: So then, if ever,
our Profane wretches will leave their sins when they are told they are the
Men, and the secrets of their hearts are made manifest. 1. Cor. 14.24,25


3. Wisely. For all things suit not all persons. All persons are not in the
same Estate: some repent, some are Impenitent. All, both Repentant and
Impenitent, are not in the same degree. All distresses are not alike, etc.
There is therefore requisite much faithfulness, and wisdom to give every man
his due.

Some preach Comfort to all: Some to All Judgment, not making difference. Some
in preaching Judgment, let sinners go, and strike the upright in the Land.
There Is neither Wisdom, nor Faithfulness in this; as it is no wifedome in
that Steward; that either serves all alike, or sends that to his Masters
Board which was provided for the Men; and contrarily. There is the childrens
bread, Mat. 15.26.
which is not to be given to Dogs, and there is Fire and Brimstone for the
wicked, which is their portion to drink. Psalm. 11.6.
The Bread of Consolation is for the Child: The Staff and whip of Reprehension
is for the Dog, that is, the Profane.

Use 2.
The People mist remember two things. 1. To receive with meekness that which
is their Appointment. Blasphemers, unclean Persons, Liars, Sabbath Breakers,
etc. are to be threatened with Damnation: Art thou such a one? Thy portion then
is the Curse and eternal Wrath: when thou amendest thy life and repentest,
then these things are not spoken to thee. If thou be angry with thy Minister
for reproouing thee; Remember the fault is in thee, for being so ill. 2. To
apply things delivered to themselves. If any virtue be commended; to practice
it: if any vice condemned; to shun it: If any Consolation; to feel it; If
any good example, to follow it. Whatsoever thou hear, take as spoken to thy
self. Is it Comfort? Repent, and it is thine: Is it Judgment? If thou repentst
not; it is to thee. We usually hear Sermons, as we entertain news out of the
Indies, not pertaining to our selves, and so we profit not. Amend thou this.

Thus much of the Relative Consideration: now of the Simple. From whence, as
these words are to be considered in themselves, arises

Those which are Regenerate are not Carnal, but Spiritual, 1. Cor. 2.14,15.
Gal. 5.25. and 6.1. 1. Pet. 2.5.

Use 1.
To be in a spiritual estate is comfortable, for such please God, and are in
the way of life: Examine therefore thy estate. Thou were Carnal; see if there
be a Change in thee: if there be no Change, but thou art the same man that
ever thou were; thy state is naught. Some say they always loved God, and
believed: but Believe it; that state which was always good, in very deed was
never good.

Thou will say then: How shall I know whether I be changed or no? It is as
easy to know as to discern darkness from light, Ephesians. 5.
foul from clean. You were Darkness, but now are light. You were unclean,
ryotous, etc. but now ye are washed. So if thou can say as the blind man, I
was blind, but now I see; if thou can say this in truth, 1. Cor. 6. John 9.
doing thereafter, thou art Spiritual: But if thou walk after the Flesh,
thou art not Spiritual, whatsoever thou say. The Flesh remaining will tempt
thee. Is the Action as ready as the temptation: 2. Sam. 20.8.
That Ioabs sword does not more usually fall out of the sheath, then thou go
after thy Concupiscence? Surely, Thou have not a dram of the Spirit; For
where it is, it so amates the Corruption that it cannot prevail. If thou be
Spiritual, let it appear by thy new conversation: What have thou to do with
Whoredom? etc. These are the Agags which may not be spared by the Saul of thy
Flesh, but hewed in pieces by the Samuel of the Spirit. Thou must exercise thy
strength, not in doing, but in subduing of these.

Domitian perceiving many of his Predecessors in the Empire to be hated; asked
one, how he might so rule as not to be hated? The party answered; Tufac contra:
Do thou Contrary to that they have done. So the Spiritual man must be in his
affections and actions contrary to the Carnal. If thy mind be changed, so
must thy behavior.

A Certain Young man (as the story goes) Ambrosius, lib. 2. de poenitentia.
cap. 10.
having long lived in Lust and whorish company, traveled, and was converted.
When he returned home, he met with one of his old lewd acquaintance; but did
not salute her: at which the Strumpet wondering, thinking he had not known her,
crosses, and meets him again, with this onset; What, have you forgotten
me? It is I. Yea, says he, But it is not I. So if thou art become Spiritual,
it becomes thee to manifest this change, in resisting such temptations, and
showing the power of the Spirit; He that is furnished with weapons, and
suffers a feeble unarmed Enemy to overcome him, has no courage in him; so if
thou suffer the Flesh, having received its deaths wound, (as it bath in all
the Regenerate) to foil thee at every bout; thou have not the Spirit within
thee.

If so be that the Spirit of God dwells in you.

In these words is the Reason to prove that the believing Romans are
Spiritual, from the efficient cause which is the In-dwelling of the Spirit.

If so be that: The word is Causall, not Conditional: (...).
If: not that he doubts, but that he is plaincly confident, says one,
Chrysostom.
as 2. These. 1.6.

The Spirit of God: that is, the Holy Ghost, who in the words following is
called the Spirit of Christ, as proceeding from the Father and the Son.

Dwells in you. You, that is the Regenerate Romans, and so all others.
Dwells, not formally, or Essentially, but in regard of the Gifts it
produces: not by the immensitie of his Essence whereby he is in all; but by
the presence of his Grace, whereby he dwells in the Regenerate, as in his
own Temple, noting thereby a favorable residence.

The holy Spirit dwells in the Regenerate. 1. Cor 3.16.

Use 1.
The Apostle judges the Holy Ghost to be in the Romans; from their holy
obedience: Take heed that thou pronounce not the Spirit to be wanting, where
thou see a spiritual walking, nor affirmest a presence of it, where thou
feast a fleshly.

Use 2.
As Jerusalem was the Glory of the world, because of the Temple of God: So are
the Regenerate, of all men most Glorious, because they are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost. In matters of the world, an unregenerate man may be before us; but
in this he cannot. He may have gold in his purse; but we have God in our
hearts, the right owner of them, which is the top of our happiness.

Tenants make hauock and suffer all things to fall to Ruin, but owners are
always repayring: when the Devil held our hearts, all was out of frame:
Ignorance ruled in the Mind, Rebellion in the Will, Disorder in the Affections;
But the coming of the Holy Spirit, Enlightens, leads into all truth,
certifies of the favor of God, fashioneth to every good work, and enricheth
with all spiritual grace, all those in whom he dwells. Even as Fire makes
Iron fiery, so the Spirit makes us Spiritual. This is that Spirit which is
the Comforter, which cheereth and sustaineth the desolate, and despairing
Conscience, and feeds it with heavenly Manna. Surely the Conscience of a
Regenerate man is a very Paradise, in which Gods good Spirit dwells not for a
short time, but for ever.

Use. 3
Despise not, neither wrong them which have the Spirit, by odious nicknames,
accounting it as their disgrace (which is their Glory,) to be Spiritual, or
full of the Spirit.

Use 4.
The Spirit dwells in thee: Look well to thy heart, because thou
entertainest such a guest: Thou art careful so to receive thy friend, by whom
thou art benefited, that he may delight to stay and abide with thee. So use
thy self, that the Holy Spirit forsake thee not. Grieve not (says Paul)
Ephesians. 4.30.
the Holy Spirit. If he depart from thee, his Grace also departs with him.
And though being once Regenerate, thou can not fall from Election, and
Regeneration, yet thou may lose the gracious feeling of thy Assurance, and in
thine own sense the Spirit be utterly departed: as David no doubt felt, as
appears by the 51. Psalm. Which state is more bitter then death.

If therefore thou have this treasure, take heed thou lose it not; if thou
would have it remain with thee, to comfort thee night and day, and in the
hour of Death, purge thy heart, and sweep all evil out of it. As Kings
Courts have Porters, so Ward thy heart, that the Enemy of the Spirit, the
Devil, Enter not. It Is a Clean Spirit, it delights to dwell in such. The
Temple of Solomon had a golden inside, and there was the Incense and the
Lamps, etc. Thy heart is the Temple of a Greater then Solomon, even of the
Holy Ghost: Let all be Gold, and Light, and Sweet. Let there be no dross, nor
Darinesse, nor stinking savors, but Knowledge, Righteousness, Repentance,
Peace, etc.

Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Hitherto the Application with the Reason: now follows the Amplification,
which has two parts: 1. A Caution, in these words: 2. A Consolation, Verse 10,
11.

In this Caution is a Commination from the Contrary, showing the danger that
follows the not-dwelling of the Spirit in us. We are none of Christ's.

If any, In general, Have not the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, as before.

He is none of his: Whose? Christ's. He is his Creature, but not his Disciple,
his member. For this Spirit unites us to Christ, as a member is united to the
Head; by which union we are partakers of the benefits of Christ. This union is
not Corporal, by touching, or by a real entrance of his body and soul into
our bodies and souls. Neither is it only an union of minds in love: But a
Mystical coalition and growing up together of the faithful with Christ, into
one body by one Spirit, which Spirit is in that whole body, and in every part,
as our souls are in our whole bodies and in every part.

Our union with CHRIST is by the Holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13. 1. Ioh. 3.24.

Use 1.
Great is the Glory of the Regenerate: As David says, What am I to be the
son in law of the King! so it is no small matter to be the member of Christ.

Use 2.
They which have not the spirit, are none of Christ's. Whose are they then? The
Devils: and that as sure as he is not Christ's: Alas, thou will say, How
shall I know whether I have the spirit or no? As a woman knows her self to
be with child by the stirring of it: So by the working of the spirit thou
shall know it: for it is always operative.

When Solomon builds the Temple, all the Country shall know it, and every
workman shall be called unto it: So if the Spirit be in thee, there is such
pulling down of the old man, and building up of the new: that thou can not
be ignorant of it. Math. 2.3.
When Christ is borne, Herad and all Jerusalem is troubled: so when thou art
borne again, it is with so much trouble, and resistance of the flesh, that
thou must needs be privy to it.

Mark the works of the spirit, both inward, and outward. When thou buiest a
piece of cloth, or a vessel, thou viewest the inside and outside: so examine
the work of the spirit in thy inside, which is thy heart, and in thy outside,
which is thy Life.

1. The inward work of the Spirit is to Renew thy mind and Affections
according to the Image of God; and this is in knowledge, holiness, and
Righteousness: Now then hear a parable; I passed by the field of the
slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man destitute of understanding, and lo,
it was all ouergrowen with thorns; and Nettles covered the face thereof, and
the stone wall thereof was broken down. Prou. 24.30,31.
Thy heart is this field. What grows in it? Ignorance? Hardness of heart?
Pride? Covetousness, etc. Surely an Ill Husband owes it: Here is not the Holy
spirit, but the unholy. That heart where the spirit of Christ dwells, is as a
Garden well fenced, and enclosed; where knowledge, faith, hope, love, patience,
and the Flowers of all heavenly graces abundantly spring forth and grow; yea,
there will be the same mind that was in Christ Jesus. Phil. 2.


2. The outward work, is to fashion the outward man unto all conformity with
the Law of GOD in word and deed.

1. For words: As Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, John 2.
so his spirit drives away all swearing, unclean talk, lying, slandering, etc.
out of the mouth of a regenerate man. No man that has the spirit of Christ,
can call Christ execrable. 1. Cor. 12,3.
Do thou delight to speak of Christ and his Gospel, with reverence and
holy affections? A sign it is of the good spirit. But disgraceful speeches of
the Word, and them which profess it, and lavish in oaths, and filthy and
Lawless communication, with ieasting which is not comely, agrees not with
this spirit.

2. And for Deeds: As a Hare may be traced in a Snow to her form; so is it
easy by your deeds to find out what Spirit is in you. What spirit think you is
in Idolaters, Hypocrites, swearers, Sabboth-breakers? in the malicious,
unclean, proud, drunken, covetous wretches? In Liars, Slanderers? etc. The
spirit of Christ? It were blasphemy so to say: Nay that unclean spirit the
Devil, who delights in such, and effectually works in them.

Use 3.
The state of the Children of God is certain, whatsoever the Papists say to
the contrary. If I am Christ's, I shall be saved: But if I have the Spirit, I am
Christ's. Therefore, etc. True, If:

Q. How shall you know you have the Spirit?

A. How shall I know that I have a Soul? but by the effects of it,
understanding memory, etc. So by the work of Grace in my heart, by my sincere
love of goodness, and hatred of evil, etc. which I cannot be ignorant of
being in me, I know that I have the Spirit. 2. Cor. 13.5.
Know you not (faith the Scripture) that Christ is in you (by his Spirit)
except you be reprobates? And again, We have received the Spirit of God, 1.
Cor. 2.12.
that we might know the things which are given to us of God. What things? All
Spiritual grace present, with perseverance, and all the good things of glory
to come. Lyra.
That we might firmly and without doubt know; for look what a demonstration
by causes, is in humane things; that in Divine, is the Revelation of the spirit
through Faith. The end then why God gives us his spirit, is to make us know
that we are in his favor, and shall be partakers of the glory to come: and by
consequence that we shall persevere in grace, without which the future glory
cannot be obtained.

But thou will say, I feel Infidelity in me which grieves me. It Is well thou
feel it with Grief: this argues not the absence, but rather the presence of
the spirit: For the spirit does not make us omnisciens and impeccable, does not
beat down sin in us at a blow; does not kill corruption outright. No.
Corruption will be an Inmate with the spirit in this life, do what we can. Yet
such a man for all this has the spirit, and is spiritual.

If thou go by a Noble-mans house, thou know that there are horsekeepers,
skullions, and such like; yet, if thou be asked who dwells there; Thou say
such a Noble man, naming the Lord of the house, and not these baser people. So
Corruption dwells where the spirit; but gouernes not, but is an underling;
and therefore we are in account spiritual.

VERSE 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the
spirit is life for righteousness sake.


NOw follows the other part of the Amplification, which is Consolation, which
is double: The 1. verse 10. that we are certain of eternal life. The 2. verse
11. that we are certain of the Resurrection of our bodies. He brings in both,
by an Occupation, against two grievous Tentations, the first in the 10. verse,
Thus: You say that the spirit is in us. Alas! what are we the better? We are
subject to poverty, sickness, death it self as well as others. Unto this Paul
answers, first, by a Concession, The body is dead because of sin: Secondly,
by a Correction: But the Spirit is life for Righteousness sake.

First of the Concession.

And if Christ be in you: Before he said, the spirit of God, and of Christ;
now Christ; because Christ is in us by the Spirit and Faith: Not Corporally,
but Spiritually, which manner of his presence is the best. Ioh. 6.63.
We need not pluck him down out of heaven by any Enchantment; as the Papists
into their sacrament of the Altar, that we might partake of his virtue; as not
the Sun to partake of his light.

The body. Corruption, or the unregenerate part, say some. Chrysoft. Piscator.
But not so; for when Paul calls corruption a Body, it is with an Addition, of
Sin, or Sinful, or Death. Romans 6.6. Col. 2.11. Romans 7.24.
Here it is for the Mass of Flesh and Blood, the Natural body. Aug. lib. 1.
Ret. cap. 26.


Is dead: not is mortified, but dead: addicted to the Necessity of death, which
necessity it had not before sin Tho. Aqui. et ante eum Aug. loco modo citato.
. But dead is more, we dying even from our birth; death having made his seizure
already because of sin remaining.

Though Christ be in the Regenerate, yet are they subject to death, Heb. 9 27.
Romans 5.12. Where sin (that is original) takes hold, there death enters, by
sickness and other mortalities, the forerunners, and Parts Mortes partiales.
Pererius in Genesis lib. 4. de Creat. hom. number. 166.
of Death, though the Curse and sting be taken away: For as the lines from the
Circumference determine in the Center: so all pains and sicknesses tend unto
Death.

As God sent to Hezekiah to put his house in order, Esaias 38.
because he must die: So the Remembrance that the body is dead, should
persuade us to think of death, and prepare for it. Thy living body is called a
very Carcass. Use.


If we see an old man stooping and sickly, we say he carries his Beer on his
back: It Is the case of us all, old and young. Death the King of fear and
Terrors, Job 18.14.
plants even from the first hour of our life, his Ordnance of Sin, to batter
the walls of our bodies. Thou see Death is entered into the City of thy Body.
Take heed it Vanquish not the Castle of thy Soul; if it do, then both body
and soul must to the Devil.

It Is lamentable to observe, how many that have the walls of their house shaken,
and undermined, ready to drop down, yet provide not for their soul; abate not
of their pride, Covetousness, etc. practicing such things, whereby they dye
more: Obrepit non intellecta senect. Iuuenal. saty, 6.
Even dying, before ever they began to live, and departing this world, with
as little understanding and sense of God and goldlinesse, as they came into the
world. Old age will steal upon thee! Before it comes, learn to live well:
when it is come, learn to dye well; nay, always meditate thou of death, it
will cut the comb of thy pride, and make thee neither to glut thy self with
pleasure, nor to be greedy of the world: For thou must Dye. And I counsel thee
to dye quickly unto Sin, that thou may live ever in righteousness and
everlasting glory.

But the Spirit is life for righteousness sake.

Now of the Correction. Where we have 1. The Thing: Life: 2. The Illustration.
1. By the Subject: The Spirit. 2. By the Sign: For Righteousness sake.

But the Spirit: The Regenerate Spirit, say some Chrysostom.
: The Regenerating Spirit, say Martyr. Aretius.
others, but, in my opinion it is better taken for the Beza.
Soul, because so it holds best correspondence with the words of the
Concession, and yet if we so take it; both the other must be supposed: For he
means such a soul, as is Regenerate by the Spirit.

Is life: If Spirit be taken for the Regenerate part: Then, is made to live. If
for the Holy Ghost, then, quickneth and makes to live; if of the soul, then,
Is life, signifies, lives for ever. For Righteousness sake, of Christ;
Imputed to us: Inchoated in us. That the Cause, this the Sign of this life.

Though the bodies of the Regenerate be subject to mortality and death, yet
their souls are not, but they do now live, and shall for ever, for
Righteousness sake, Gal. 2.20. Stephen dying, says, Lord Jesus, receive my
Spirit, Act. 5.59. This is confirmed also by the desire of all the faithful:
Abraham is said to be gathered to his Fathers, Genesis 25.8. not his body; (for
they were buried in Chaldea, he in Canaan;) but his soul.

Use 1.
This Confutes beastly Epicures and Atheists, who hold a death of the Soul: Of
which number was (I think) that Lymb of the Pope, or of the Devil, (which you
will) the Cardinal of Burbon, who said he would not give his part in Paris,
for his part in Paradise.

Use 2.
Thou art pressed with the weight of Sin: Be of good Comfort. Though Sin
cling about thee as Iuy, yet by the Spirit of God thy Soul shall live; yea
then more, when thy Body dies. John 3.36.
We are not called forth by that Spirit to destruction, but to victory. Thou
have even here, everlasting life. And truly he that has it not here in the
inchoation of it, shall never have it in Heaven, in the perfection of it. This
is that which enables us to overcome the fear of death.

Wicked men are afraid to dye, yea, they would live here for ever, because they
have no assurance that when they dye, their souls shall ascend into Heaven:
But Gods Children, though they fear death, yet they overcome that Fear, and
desire to dye, being well assured, that by death, their soul as a Captive
shall be delivered out of Prison: and as a Bird, escape out of the Cage of the
Body, into the celestial Paradise, as the Soul of Lazarus: not so the soul
of Dives, which went into everlasting tormenting flames.

Use. 3
There are Living Souls; and there are Dead souls. That Soul which has the
Spirit of Christ, is a Living soul: that which has it not, is a Dead soul.
For as the Soul is necessary to the life of the Body, so the holy Spirit to
the life of the Soul. As the body without the Soul is dead from natural
Actions; so the Soul, without Christ's Spirit, from spiritual. The Body dies,
when the Soul leaves it; The Soul dies, when God leaves It: Bernard.
There are two Mansions or Rooms of the Soul: The lower which it gouernes,
which is the Body: the upper wherein it rests, which is God. She quickneth
the Body, God quickneth her: She is better then the body; God is better then
she. Therefore Paul says, that widows living in pleasure are dead while they
live. 1. Tim. 5.6.
Dead; not concerning the substance of living, but the Quality: not that they
should not be: but not be blessed.

Look now to thy Soul: is it dead or alive? Life of the body is discerned by
sense and motion; so in Proportion that of the Soul.

What knowledge have thou of Spiritual things? What taste and delight have thou
in the things of God? Do thou hear and feel that which is spoken out of the
Word? If not, thou art Dead. He that is only asleep, by great noise and
blows may be wakened. Thou art not by the trumpet of the Word, nor by the
scourge or diverse crosses. Certainly thou art dead. Art thou stark and stiff,
not stirring hand or foot in any good duty? Alas, thou art dead; yea, he is
not more dead that is put into his grave then thou art. Thou feel it not:
The more miserable art thou. Thou shall feel it; and when thou dyest, before
thy Executors can carry thy body to the Grave; thy soul shall be carried to
hell by the Devil. Hence is it that the Death of the wicked is called a very
ill death.

We lament the bodily death of our Friends: here is cause of lamentation when
their souls dye also. If a house be burnt with the goods, all have compassion:
but if the Owner also, his Wife and Children be consumed with the fire, we cry
out Alas. So when the soul and all perishes, here is matter of grief. For
this, (as many think) was David's mourning for Absalon, 2. Sam. 18.33.
because as his body hung fearfully on the tree, so his soul might hang in
hell for ought he knew. O, what a sweet Comfort is it over our Friends
departed, if they have dyed well, with tokens of Grace! Labor thou for such a
death, and be careful for thy soul. A dead body is a ghastly thing to behold;
a thousand times more ugly, if it could be discerned with bodily eyes, is a
dead soul; such is even like the Devil.

VERSE 11. But if the Spirit of him, which raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell
in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies Or, because of his Spirit.
by his Spirit that dwells in you.


THe second Consolation in this Verse. As the former showed the happiness of
the Godly in regard of their souls: so this in regard of their bodies: and it
is inferred by an Occupation, from the words of the 10. Verse, thus: I
confess, Paul (might some say) that the soul lives: but the Body is turned to
dust and perishes. Nay, says Paul, Even the body shall be raised up and
quickened, that the Regenerate may be happy in body and soul.

These words have two parts. 1. A supposition: If the Spirit, etc. dwell in
you. 2. A Conclusion: He that raised up Christ, etc.

If: This Conditional, is not to be taken as if the Apostle, doubtingly did
suspend his Judgment; or call into question their having the Spirit: but as
taking it granted, both that Christ is risen, and that they have the Spirit: so
our Savior: Ioh. 14.15.
If you love me, keep my commandments: not doubting of their love, but from
thence urging their obedience.

Two things are supposed: 1. That the Spirit of God is in them. 2. That Christ
is risen by the power of the holy Holy Ghost. Verse 9.
Of the former of these before. The later is a part of the Creed, which I
purpose not to run into at this time.

The Conclusion declares the Argument: Thus: If the Spirit of God be in you;
then the Spirit will quicken your mortal bodies. But the Spirit of God is in
you: as has been declared. Therefore, etc.


The Consequence is proved from the like. The Spirit has raised up Christ,
therefore will it you, being his members.

Here two things 1. The Action. Quickening. 2. The Amplification.


1. From the Efficient, God, described by an Effect. The Raising up of Christ.
2. The Subject. Quickened. Your mortal bodies. 3. The Condition of them whose
mortal bodies shall be quickened. Theirs in whom the Spirit dwells.

He that raised: that is the Father: so the Soune: so the Holy Ghost raised
Christ, it was the work of the whole Trinity, who in works without, are
undivided.

Shall quicken. Not raise: for the wicked shall be raised, but they shall not
be quickened as the Godly; namely, with a Spiritual life. And yet Paul says;
1. Cor. 15.22.
As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made aline, using the same word
which here. But the Answer is, that All may be taken distributiuely, thus.
As many as are in Adam, dye; and as many as are in Christ, shall be made
alive. He says, All and All, to show that none dye but in Adam, and none are
made alive but in Christ.

Your mortal bodies: Aug. Epist. 57. Dard.
that is, souls dead in sin, say some Piscator.
: but that's too hard. Your mortified bodies, say others Sarcerius.
; but better, your mortal, that is, your base, vile bodies, subject to dying:
They shall be quickened. That is their natural body shall rise a Spiritual 1.
Cor. 15.44.
, and their mortal shall put on immortality 1. Cor. 15.54.
, so that they shall have no death nor mortality. Vt non solum non sint
mortua, sed ne mortalia, Anselm.


Your, even your, as it is in the Greek.

By that his Spirit which dwells in you: That is, by reason of their union
with Christ, through the Spirit.

All that are Regenerate shall in the power of Christ's Resurrection, be raised
by his Spirit that dwells in them, Luke 20.35,36. Ioh. 6.40. 1. Cor.
15.20,21,22,23.

Here have we an Argument against the seeming impossibility of the
Resurrection. The Sadduces account it unreasonable Mark. 12.18.
. The Philosophers Ridiculous, Act. 17.18.
Hymeneus and Phyletus said it was past

2. Tim. 2.18.
; and many yet doubt of it. To all which I say, Consider the Author, and cease
to Doubt: Paul illustrates it by natural things: As Wheat dies and rises 1.
Cor. 15.36.37,38.
: so the day Dies moritur. in noctem, etc.
: Trees also wither and re-flourish. Why not our bodies: we having a Promise?

Do thou believe Christ's Resurrection? Else were thou nor a Christian? The
Jews believe he dyed, the Christians that he rose again. Beleeuest thou this?
Then believe thine own: as the body drownes not so long as the head is above
water: so if thou be a member of Christ thy Head, thou shall not be left
behind; but even thy body shall be received into Heaven, Whither he has
carried the pledge Tert. ib. c. 37.
of it in his own humanity. Be secure, O flesh and blood, you usurp Heaven
in your Head Christ.

Adam had a possibility to dye if he sinned: and a necessity of dying because
he sinned: Our mortal bodies shall receive an impossibility of dying by the
Quickening of that Spirit: That as Christ dies no more Romans 6.9.18.
, so death has no dominion over us. This comforted Job in the day of his sore
trouble Job 10.25.
: and this was the Comfort of the poor Jews under Antiochus Epiphanes, they
looked for a Heb. 11.35.
better Resurrection, to be as Sugar to relish the bitterness of the Cross.

Note a secret. Your mortal bodies: The same which they carried about with
them, shall be raised up, and a reunion of the body and soul at the last day.
No accidental thing can utterly destroy an Essential. But death is
accidental, and the union of body and soul essential. Therefore that union
cannot in reason perpetually fail. Some of the Heathen Plato.
acknowledged that the separation of body and soul, could not be final.

Ruffinus says, that his people, in repeating the Creed would say, I believe
the resurrection of this Flesh Carnis huius, Ruff. in exposit. simbol. inter
opera Cypr.
: as though they had clapped their hands on their breasts. So Paul says, This
Corruptible 1. Cor. 15.54.
. But some will say: Some men are lame, some deformed; shall those bodies rise
so? I answer: The same in substance shall rise, not in infirmity. Lazarus
without his sores, Mephibosheth without his lamenesse: Such things shall be
taken away in the elect: for defect and deformity cannot stand with that
glory. And for the Reprobate, it is thought by some Divines to be probable,
that their defects shall not be supplied, but suffered, for the increase of
their shame and punishment Tilen. syntag. disput. Theolog. part altera loc de
Resurrect. These. 37.
.

The Justice of God requires that the same, not another body should rise, to
punishment or bliss. That hand, those feet, those proud adulterous eyes, that
blaspheming tongue shall rise again to receive condign punishment. And on the
contrary, those hands that have been lifted up in prayer, and stretched out to
relieve the Saints, those that have wept for sin, that tongue which has
glorified God; That body that has suffered for Christ, shall also rise to be
partaker of his glory.

Use 5.
Those which have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, shall have a joyful
Resurrection, others not: As the sleep of sound and sick men differ: So the
Resurrection of good and bad. Sound men are refreshed, sick men have sick
sleeps, and are the worse when they awake: so shall the Resurrection be. Then
shall be a general gaole-Deliuerie: but some shall be acquitted, some
delivered to the Executioner to be tormented: and these are said to perish,
not Physically but Theologically, being deprived of bliss.

We must all rise. How would thou rise (which read these things?) would
thou rise with fear and terror, or with joy and confidence? If thus: then
repent and forsake thy sins, and thou shall. For the hope of such
resurrection depends upon an holy Conversation. Alas! what shall become of
thee, thou Drunkard? etc. When thou dyest, thou have done: but God has not
done with thee. Thou shall no sooner peep out of thy Grave, but thou shall see
him come to judge thee, whom thou have pierced, despised, disobeyed. What
Confusion shall it be unto thee! Think of it and repent: lest at that day thou
wish thou had been a dog or a toad, for that shame and condemnation thou
shall then undergo.

VERSE. 12. Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the Flesh, to live
after the Flesh.

Verse 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.


HEre begins the Exhortation, the Effect whereof is this; seeing we expect
such things, and the state of them which live after the flesh is so miserable,
we ought to live after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh.

There are diverse Arguments whereby this Exhortation is urged; The first is in
the 12. verse, which is taken from Equity and Justice. Suum cuique To give
every man his own is the voice of Justice. But we are debtors to the Spirit:
therefore our life must be spiritual.

Therefore: an Illation sending us to the things before delivered: wherein (me
thinks) the Apostle deals like a brave General, who having spoken of the
glory of them which conquer, and the shame of them which are conquered, does
animate his soldiers to fight it out manfully, and to subdue the Flesh.

Brethren: This is an Insinuation, the better to persuade them.

We: Not including others, and excluding himself, but concluding all.

Are Debtors: Debtors are of two sorts: Civil, which owe money, etc. to men:
Secondly, Theological: And this is also double. 1. Sin. 2. or Obedience.
Sin is a debt, so called in the Lords Prayer, not that we owe sin, or that
our sins are owing to be done: but because we owe the punishment to be
undergone; having by our sins forfeited body and soul to be damned. And
therefore sins are so called by a double figure: Metaphora. Metonim. effecti.
but this debt is not here meant.

The other Theological debt, is the debt of obedience; which we owe to God,
for our Election, Vocation, Justification, etc. So it is taken here; not so in
the Lords Prayer, for we do not pray, neither may we, to have the debt of
obedience forgiven.

Not to the Flesh: Flesh here, not for the body, but for corruption: for we are
debtors to the body; to cloth it, to feed it, etc. that it may be a fit
instrument for the soul to serve God: but we are not debtors to the corruption
to live thereafter.

Here the Antithesis is omitted, but necessarily to be understood. But to the
spirit, to live after the spirit, that is, holily.

This verse has two parts: First, an Affirmation. Secondly, an Amplification.
The Affirmation, We are debtors. This is amplified; first, by an Illation,
Therefore. Secondly, by a Friendly compellation, Brethren. Thirdly, by a
generality, We. Fourthly, by the Creditor, who is here set down Negatiuely,
Not to the Flesh. The Affirmative to be supplied, But to the Spirit. Fifthly,
by the debt which we must pay, Life, or living; that is, thoughts, words,
deeds. And this is also negatiuely set down, and to be marked, Not to live
after the Flesh. For we owe something to corruption, but death, not life.

All the Regenerate are to live to God in obedience, not to the Flesh. This is
proved out of the Preface of the law, Where, before God requires any thing, he
shows that we are in his debt. I am the Lord thy God, etc. So Joshua 24.15,16.
2. Corinthians. 7.1. Gal. 5.25.

Use 1.
Here is a double note for Ministers: first, to use loving and friendly words
to win their Auditors to suffer the words of Exhortation. Secondly, not to
exempt themselves: but as they would have part in the promises they offer; so
to acknowledge the duties which they urge. As Nepthali, they must give goodly
words Genesis 49.21.
, and also be examples to their flock 1. Pet. 5.3.
, putting their own shoulders to the burden which they lay upon other Mat. 13.4.
.

Use 2.
Our Obedience is debt, therefore not merit. What we receive of GOD, is of
Grace, what we render, is due debt: and when we have paid all we can, we
are unprofitable servants.

Use 3.
The Grace we receive, frees us not from Obedience, but binds us the more. If
thou make another use of Gods favor, thou art a Libertine. The mercies of God,
make us debtors to offer up our bodies and souls to his service. Romans 1. ver.
1.


Use 4.
Thou owe Obedience to God. Pay, pay. The borrower is a servant to the
Lender, Pro. 22.7.
and he that receives, to him that gives. Thou have received all of GOD:
therefore thou owe for all. Think of payment. So did David: O says he, Psalm
116.
I am greatly indebted to God: What shall I pay? As men, that having gotten
other men's goods into their hands, will not pay, but break, or run away, are
infamous: So thou, if having received Body and Soul, and all from God,
should deny thy service.

He that lets a Farm, looks for his Rent; and he that hires a servant,
expects his work; yea, Baalam is offended, if his Ass serve him not. Should
not God much more exact thy service; who has Created, Preserved, and Redeemed
thee, even by the blood of his Son? If a Prince commit to his subject a Piece
of Importance, and he render it up to the Enemy, will not all men hold such a
subject for a rank traitor? What art thou better then a Traitor; if, having
received many Castles of thy Lords to keep, as thy Tongue, thy Eyes, thy
Hands, thy Body, thy Soul, thou yield and sell them to the Devil by
Blasphemy, Drunkenness, Pride, Uncleanness? etc. Ah wretch, thou receiuest
with one hand from God, and give to the Devil with the other.

If thy neighbor be offended with thee, thou usually say, I care not for
him, I owe him nothing. Remember thou owe the Devil nothing, why should
thou serve him? When Satan tempts thee to sin, answer him thus: I owe thee
nothing, Satan, why requirest thou my service, which is due only to GOD, from
whom I have received all things?

Policarpus being urged to remember Christ, and to swear by Caesar's fortune:
answered, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. a. cap. 15.
This 86. years have I served my Lord Christ, and he has been always my good
Master; I will not now deny him. Remember this holy man, and pay thy Vows and
Debts to God.

Use 5.
Men that are run far in debt, and pay, and pay, and see no end of their
debt; many times grow desperate. Thou owe much to God, and art unable to pay,
be not thou therefore negligent and careless. The Prodigal Child spent all:
but he recovered all and more by humble repentance, begging pardon. Do thou
so. Pay as far as thou can: Crave pardon and remission for the rest, by the
Obedience of Christ. God accepts of a willing mind for the deed. There is
great difference between debts owing to men, and owing to God. The more we
pay of our debts to men, the less we have; but the more we pay to God, the
more we have, and are the better able to pay. The more thou prayest, the better
able thou shall be to pray, etc.

VERSE 13. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.


IN the 12. Verse the Apostle had an Argument, ab aequo and honesto, which were
enough to persuade; but in this Verse he more strongly urges it. Adhibet
calcaria. sortiora. Martyr.


The Argument is drawn from the contrary Ends of obedience and disobedience,
and so contains two Arguments: the one, a Co^mination in the first part of
the Verse: the other, a Promise in the latter: both Conditional, as all
Promises and Threatenings are.

If ye live after the Flesh: Following the lusts of your corrupt heart.

Ye shall dye: Not only the death of the body in the separation of the soul
from it but of the soul in the separation of it from God.

Q. But why says he, Ye shall dye, and not Ye shall be damned; in as much as
that is chiefly meant?

A. Because the Spirit of God would drive men from Sin, by that which is most
fearful, which is Death. The remembrance of Death does more forcibly move the
mind, then the remembrance of Hell; though hell be a thousand times more
grievous then Death. For our Affection is moved according to our knowledge of
the thing: That which most ways is known, affects most: we know hell only
by Faith: but we know death to be fearful, by Faith, by Reason, and by
Sense. By Faith, because the Scripture declares it: By Reason; because it is a
separation of things, so nearly and naturally joined and consenting. By sense;
because we feel it growing upon us every day.

But if ye mortify: that is, beat down, cut off, cast away, cause to dye: a
Metaphor taken from Surgeons, who before they cut off a Limb, mortify the
place.

The deeds of the body: That is, Actions and Affections: but actions are named,
because by actions, affections are manifested. The body is either taken for
Corruption: or rather evil deeds are called the deeds of the body, because the
body is the instrument of working them.

By the Spirit: Sarcenus.
That is, the help of the Holy Ghost: or by the Regenerate part.

Ye shall live. Eternally in happiness: Of the which Sanctity is the way:
This life scarce a shadow. In the latter part, there is the Promise. Ye shall
live. The Condition, If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit. Where
1. The action, mortify. 2. The Object; The deeds of the body. 3. The means,
By the Spirit.

Salvation is promised on the Condition, that we live not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit, Romans 6.22. Gal. 6.8.

Use 1.
A hard thing it is to forsake sin; it is mortification. It is hard for old
friends to part: we lay together in the same womb; and it has been our
unhappy play-fellow and companion, ever since we were borne: Yea, sin
sticks as fast in our nature, as a tooth in our heads, or our soul to our
body: as we cannot part from these without pain; so neither from Sin.

It is the nature of Sin not to be driven away, without force and violence:
A few angry looks, and sharp words will not do it. You may rate away your
dog, but sin will not stir for words, as appears in many, who will
speak bitterly against their sins, and themselves, with Beast, Wretch, etc.
and yet anon to the practice of them.

When thou have to deal with Sin, have no compassion, but fight against it
with a bloody and cruel mind: So much as thou sparest it, so much thou hurtest
thy self. 1. Sa. 15.20,23. 1. Kin. 20.42.
Saul spared Agag, and Ahab spared Benhadad, but it was their ruin: so if thou
sparest sin, it will cost thee even the Kingdom of Heaven. Kill therefore
thy sins, or they will kill thee. It is a case of life and death. Be
careful; Old wounds must have strong medicines. O, what ado have we with
Pride, Hypocrisy, Covetousness, Lust! He that favors these, let him want
favor.

Use 2.
The deeds of the body are mortified by the Spirit: We do the work, but by
the power of the Spirit. The strength unto mortification is put into us from
Heaven. We are as able with our little finger to shake the foundation of the
earth, as to shake out sin by our own strength.

He that goes among Lions, must needs be torn in pieces: Sins are Lions. He
that stands upon the shore when the tide comes, thinking to beat back the
water with his hand, is soon eaten in, and drowned. Sins come upon us as
waves, we must drown, if God help us not. By Gods help, the walls of Jericho
fell down, Samson killed a Lion, and Daniel is safe in their very den, and Moses
diuides the Sea. So mortification of Sin is possible by the help of the
Spirit, otherwise impossible. When therefore thou feel Pride, Covetousness,
Lust, growing upon thee, beg the help of the Spirit, or else thou art undone.
Pray with the words of Iehoshaphat. 2. Chron. 20.12
O Lord God, there is no strength in me to stand against these sins, neither do
I know what to do, but mine eyes are toward thee.

Use 3.
If you mortify: he speaks to them, which had mortified sin before, they
must continue so doing. In this life thou shall never want something to be
mortified. Have thou begun to repent? Never give over so long as thou have a
heart to sigh for thy sins.

We weed our Gardens, and are ever weeding. Sins are ill weeds, and grow
apace; our hearts are a Stepmother to Goodness, and a natural mother to
Vice; therefore be always dealing with it. The Captain that batters the
Enemies Fort a day or two, and then gives over; gives the more courage to the
enemy, and loses his labor. So is it if we continue not our course of
mortification. Elisha was angry with Ioash for smiting the ground but thrice
with the arrows. 2 King. 13.19.
O, says be, thou should have smitten five or six times, and then thou
should have smitten the Aramites till thou had consumed them. So, leave
not thy sins till thou have consumed them, lest they consume thee.

Use 4.
There is a necessity of mortification; the want whereof brings a Necessity of
damnation. Those things which God has joined, no man can part: He has joined
unmortified sins and death together, they cannot be parted.

When thou go to buy a commodity, if the price be great, thou forbearest:
and shall thou fly upon sin, knowing what it will cost thee? If Judas had
known as much before he betrayed his Master, as he now feels, it is likely
he would never have committed that villainy. Mortification is tedious, but
heaven is sweet. Men are content to go all day after their hounds and hawks,
to endure hunger, thirst, etc. for their pleasure; and what get they in the
end? some silly creature that is scarce worth the having. But Heaven is worth
the having, refuse not a short labor for the obtaining so infinite a reward.

VERSE 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God.


THe latter part of the verse going before is here proved: namely, that such
as mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, shall live. The argument is
taken from the proper subject of the life before spoken of; that is, the sons
of God. Thus, The Sons of God shall live. But they which mortify, etc. are
the sons of God. Therefore they shall live.
The Minor is proved thus, They which are led by the Spirit, are the sons of
God. But they which mortify, etc. are led by the Spirit. Therefore.


As many as are led by the Spirit: that is by the holy Ghost.

Led. Those things are said to be led, which are moved by a superior instinct
Aquin. in locu^.
, which is either Common or Proper: of the common, all men, the Reprobate, yea,
beasts are partakers. The beasts come to Adam Genesis 2.19.
, to Noah Genesis 7.8,9.
: the Bear slaies the Children 2. Reg. 2.24.
, the Lion the old Prophet 1. Reg. 13.24.
by this common instinct. The proper is that, whereby the elect children of God
are moved to believe, repent, etc. This is here meant.

Are led; Not furiously, but mildely and familiarly: not as brute beasts, but
as reasonable creatures; Not as though we do nothing, but lest we should do
no good thing: we are actuated by the good spirit that we may do.

Neither are we led violently and against our will, but willingly: and yet were
we not willing before we were led: but in the leading made willing to be led:
so willing, that when God has once breathed his grace unto us, we cannot
resist, but earnestly desire to be led. And yet is not the nature of the will
overthrown, nor naturally so determined to one side, that as heavy things
move downward by an inward beginning, so the will absolutely can only affect
this one thing. But as Orators by their Eloquence do rule in the mind of
their Auditors; so God much more effectually draws us to desire Christ, and
affect the Gospel.

If a covetous man were offered to take what he would of a heap of Gold; no
man doubts but he would gladly embrace such occasion, though simply and
absolutely it were in his power to refuse it. So our heavenly Father does so
commodiously show us the Riches of his Grace, so lovingly does he inuit us to
receive it; and so aptly does he exhort us, that he does persuade us, without
any impairing of our wills: so a Beast with prouender, Children with Nuts, and
every one is led or drawn by his pleasure. We are then led being willing, not
before, but after grace received.

Are the Sons of God: not making us such, but declaring us to be such.

The Sons, that is, Children, as verse 16. for sons and daughters are in
the Covenant.

They which follow and obey the counsel, prescriptions, and precepts of the
Spirit, are the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12. Ioh. 6.45. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Now it is the
Spirit which works faith, teaches and begets us.

Use 1.
Take knowledge of thy Impotency to good things without the spirit. As a guide
to a blind man, or as a Nurses finger to a little Child, so is the Spirit to
us; without the which we can neither discern or walk in the good way. Without
the Spirit we catch many a knock by stumbling and falling at every sin. As
therefore the little child when it would first go, reaches for the Nurses
hand; so, crave thou the Spirit, to be led into the knowledge and practice of
the Truth.

The Israelites that would presently go toward Canaan without Moses, were all
slain; Number. 14.45.
so is it not safe to attempt any thing without the Spirit, which is to be our
Counselor, and to us as the pillar of the Cloud was to the Israelites; the
Rule of their marching and pitching their tents.

Use 2.
If thou yeeldest thy self, and thy reason and affections to he led by the
Spirit, thou art the Child of God, and so co^trarily: which that thou may the
better discern, observe 2. things; first, the way wherein. Secondly, the mind
wherewith thou walk.

First, Are drunkenness, whoredom, etc. thy ways? who led thee into these
ways? The Spirit? no: the Devil leads thee, for these are his ways. Are
Faith, Repentance, Humility, etc. thy ways? How came thou into these ways?
The devil would never bring thee into them, nor thy self never have chosen
them. Surely, if these be thy ways, thou art led by the holy Spirit, whose
ways these are.

Secondly, what is thy mind? Do thou walk in the way of Prayer, hearing
the Word, Repentance, etc. willingly, and cheerfully? Thou art then led by the
Spirit: for though we may be found in these ways: yet if we walk in them as a
Bear is drawn to the stake, we are not led in them by the Spirit; for the
Spirit makes us delight in such things.

Every thing lives according to the breeding, water-fowles are ever paddling in
the water, and Land-fowles are feeding on the dry ground. So, if thou have a
spiritual breeding, all thy delight will be in spiritual things; if a carnal
only, then in carnal.

VERSE 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but
ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father.


IN this verse the Apostle proves, that those which are led by the Spirit, are
the children of God; by an effect of the Spirit in them, which is to call God,
Father. Which is amplified by an opposition of their former estate, which was
an estate of servile fear. As if he should say by an Occupation: It may be,
you fear in regard of sin inhabiting. But the profiting you have made, is
not in the addition of such slavish fear, wherewith formerly you were
possessed: but that which you have now received is a more excellent effect of
the same Spirit, which is the Grace of Adoption.

Here two effects of the Holy Ghost are opposed: for in some the Spirit works
fear, in other, love and assurance; and first, fear; then, assurance, that we
may, stirred up to seek assurance: Fear; the sign of the spirit of bondage:
Confidence and assurance in God as a Father, the proper effect of the Spirit of
Adoption.

You have not received the spirit of bondage; Paraeus.
Not the Devil, nor the Law, as some have interpreted, but the Holy Ghost.

To fear: Seruilely; Again, that is, yet, still, or more, as if he should
say; the Holy Ghost does not still lead you as servants to fear, by the
preaching of the Law, for not obeying it. For the preaching of the Law, is the
true cause of servile, not filial fear. And here the Apostle alludes (I take
it) to the time of the Law and the giving of the same.

But you have received the Spirit of Adoption: He should have said, of Liberty;
but he says more, of Adoption: for Children are free. Children are either
Natural or Adopted: Natural; so the holy Child Jesus is the only Son of
God. Adopted; so are we the sons of God.

Adoption is a lawful Act, imitating nature, found out for the comfort of them
which have no children: Adoption and Arrogation (which are Terms of the Civil
Law) differ. Adoption is of those which are under the rule of others:
Arrogation is of them which are sui iuris. The Holy Ghost is called the Spirit
of Adoption, because it works both it, and the sense of it in us.

In whom: That is, by whom, whereby. We cry: not say; for so may a Reprobate:
but Crying notes affection. Abba Father. Abba, is an Hebrew or Syrian word,
which signifies, Father. Father, is added in Greek, either to note the
Sanctification of all Languages Chrysostom.
: or of all people, Jews and Gentiles Anselm.
, or a double paternity, of all by Creation: of the Elect, by Grace Lyra.
: or earnestness in calling upon God Martyr.
, or an Exposition; as Abba, that is to say, Father Beza.
.

The sense. The Regenerate might object: We feel the Spirit working fear in
us: But, says the Apostle, you have also the Assurance of Adoption, They which
have only the Spirit of bondage, are driven by fear: you by the Spirit of
Adoption, are led by love.

The Regenerate have the Spirit of Adoption, whereby their fear is moderated,
and they enabled, to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.

Use 1.
In all the Elect, which are of years of discretion, the spirit does work the
Slavish Fear, before the filial assurance, as appears in that example of the
Jews, in the Acts, Act, 2.37.
who first are terrified, and after comforted, in assurance of forgiveness.
All are brought to this exigent, more or less, that they may acknowledge they
stand in need of Christ, and be stirred up to seek him. Such as were never
afraid, were never assured. Did thou never feel the sting of an accusing
Conscience terrifying thee, though thou have been a lewd wretch? Surely Judas
was nearer Heaven then thou; and to this thou must come, before thou can have
the Comfort of a Son. For as the needle makes way for the thread; so fear
for comfort, the spirit of bondage, for the Spirit of Adoption.

Use 2.
The preaching of the Law without the Spirit, has no power to strike fear
into us: when thou art terrified; it is the Spirit that so applies the Law,
either to bring thee to Christ, or to despair and everlasting Confusion.

Use 3.
As none have the Spirit of Adoption, which have not had the spirit of bondage:
So many have the spirit of bondage, which have not the Spirit of Adoption. Note
this.
Many do diligently resort to the hearing of the Word; and are afraid to do
otherways; they deal Justly, live temperately, etc. and dare not deal
falsely, or riotously, etc. and yet are not Regenerate. Why? What is it makes
them do thus? Only Fear. They have the spirit of bondage; they are afraid of
Hell; and hence comes this obedience, which is only slavish. But if they do
not these things, for the love of Justice also, they cannot be saved, neither
their obedience accepted.

The Children of GOD fear hell: but their obedience comes more from Love, then
from Fear: Yea though there were no Devil, Hell, Judge to be feared, yet
would they obey the commandments of their God: and their fear is also
moderated by Faith: whereby they believe the pardon of their sins, and
obtain this privilege to be the Sons of God.

The estate of a Son is discerned by Confidence in Prayer. Such a one is able
(notwithstanding fear) to cry Abba Father. He that can (I say not, speak the
words with a loud voice, for so may a Parrat, or Hypocrite, Mat. 7.21.
but) cry with intention of heart, as well as contention of voice; and can come
into the presence of God, as a child into the presence of the Father, has the
Spirit of Adoption.

This is wonderful hard to do: As for Instance. Thou feel Corruption
rebelling, thou remembrest, how thou have actually transgressed above number:
thou hear the threatenings of the Law: thou know that God is of pure eyes,
and most just: hence thou fear, and art almost confounded. Can thou in
this Conflict, turn thy self to God, as to thy gracious Father, and that with
confidence of his mercy? Thou have a certain sign of thy Adoption: For in
such estate, our Nature is to fly from God, as Adam: but to embrace God even
then when we are so terrified, is the work of the Spirit, by Faith.

Can thou with a childs affection cry Abba Father? I dare undertake, that
God cannot but show himself as a Father, in having compassion. What earthly
Father could despise the voice of his Child fallen into danger? Much more will
our Heavenly Father regard the cry of his children. In a fearful estate then
are they which never pray, or as Hypocrites only with the mouth, and not with
the heart.

Thou call upon God with Abba Father: Remember that wicked children are a
dishonor to their Parents: Degenerate not thou from the Nobility of thy
Father, whose honor it is to have godly children. If thou call God Father;
1. Pet. 1.17.
then pass thy time with fear and care to obey him.

Use 5.
This overthrows the Popish manner of Praying: as, Blessed Virgin, Holy Mother
of God help us. Saint Peter help us, etc. From what Spirit should we think
these prayers come? Luke 15.18.
Not from Gods; for that teaches to cry Abba Father. The Prodigal Son
says, I Will go to my Father, and say to my Father: and his Father meets him.
He had an Elder brother, and knew many servants; but he seeks only to his
Father.

VERSE 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are
the Children of God.


THe Sons of God cry Abba Father: here is the Ground of such praying: which
is the witness of the Spirit with our spirits, that we are the Children of
God. This is the very root, from whence springs confidence in Prayer to God:
and the more or less we hear and feel this witness, the more or less
assurance have we and boldness in Prayer.

Here are two things. 1. The witnesses: which are two: 1. Gods Spirit, which
performs two Offices. 1. It seals up our hearts in assurance that we are
Children: then it opens our mouths to pray. 2. Our Spirit, which is our
Regenerate part. These witnesses are two, that we might be the more confirmed.

2. The Thing witnessed: That we are the Children of God.

The Spirit it self: that is, the Holy Ghost.

So witnesses: Not by an outward voice, as God of Christ: nor by an Angel,
Mat. 3. Luke 1.
as to the Virgin Mary: but by an inward and secret inspiration, raising in our
hearts a Confidence and persuasion that God is our Father, and we his Children.

With our spirit: Not to our ears: but to our spirit: 1. These. 5.23.
nor this only, but with our spirit: Our Spirit is a witness, whose
testimony is then good when confirmed by the Holy Ghost. Our Spirit: not our
Soul, but our Regenerate part so called.

The witness of the Holy Ghost is the work of Faith: Reu. 2.17.
the witness of our spirits the sense of Faith wrought. This is better felt by
experience, then expressed by words: known altogether, and only to them which
have it: for me to speak of this to them which have it not, were as if I
should speak a strange language.

That we are the Children of God. Not that we shall be, or may be: but are;
in the present Tense.

The Holy Ghost witnesses with them which are Regenerate, that they are the
Children of God, 2. Cor. 1.21. 1. Ioh. 3.21. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.

Use 1.
The state of Gods Children is full of sweet certainty and assurance. He that
having a cause to be tried, has two sufficient witnesses, doubts not of the
day. Now Gods Children have two witnesses, omni exceptione maiores: 1. Their
own Spirit, which is not to be contemned: (for if Conscience a natural thing
be a thousand witnesses: much more the Spirit, which is a supernatural power
given of God.) 2. The Holy Ghost, which cannot deceive, or be deceived,
witnesses with our spirits.

It is marvelous then that the Church of Rome denies assurance to Gods
Children: What though some have bragged of assurance, that have been deceived?
Does it follow therefore that none are sure? There be some poor and base; are
there therefore none rich? And what though my very name be not written in the
Scripture: Thou Thomas, Thou John shall be saved? It is not convenient: What a
huge Volume should the Bible be, if every Saints name were there written? It is
not necessary: because all particulars are included in their Generals: As he
that says, All my Children are here: means every one in particular, though he
name them not: So God, that says All Believers shall be saved: Means every
one, as though they were named.

And yet the Scripture does speak in particular. If thou Confessest, etc. Thou
shall be saved. When the Law says; Romans 10.9.
Thou shall not Kill, Steal, etc. Every one is to take it spoken to himself,
as if he were named: Why should not such particulars in the Gospel be also so
taken? True, say the Papists: If you believe; you shall be saved: but where
does the Scripture say that you do believe? Ridiculous! The Act of Faith is
not set down in the Scriptures, but the Object. The Faith which I believe is
in the Bible. The Faith whereby I believe, is not in the Bible, but in my
heart: and is not believed (for that were absurd) but known by feeling. We do
not believe that we believe, but we feel it: as Paul says; 2. Tim. 1.
I know in whom I have believed: he knew by feeling, and this witness of the
Holy Ghost in his heart with his Spirit. Of all things of which the Holy Ghost
witnesses with our spirits we may be certain. But the holy Ghost witnesses
with our Spirits, both of our Present, and also of our Future estate.
Therefore, etc.


The Minor is proved by Paul, who avouches that the things which are prepared
for Gods Children, are revealed to us by the Spirit, and: By the Spirit of God
we know the things which are given to us of God. 1. Cor. 2.9,10.
What things? Faith and Perseverance: Grace and Glory.

If Man should witness, or an Angel, there might be doubt: but when there is
such a witness as is the Spirit: we ought not to doubt. The Flesh will doubt.
The Spirit doubts not, but ouercomes doubting: and this is the state of Gods
Children. They doubt from the Flesh: but from the Spirit they are assured
through Faith.

If a man of a weak brain, were on the top of some high Tower; and should
look down, it would make him wonderfully afraid: but when he considers the
Battlements or Rayles that keep him from falling, his fear abates: So fares
it with the Regenerate: when we look on our sins, and so down and down to
Hell: Alas! whose heart quails not? But when we consider the brazen wall, of
the love, truth, and promise of God in Christ, we may be assured without
fear. Look upon thy defects, but forget not the truth and power of God.

Pretend not the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, without thine own spirit: nor
contrarily, for they go together. Faith, Repentance, etc. are the Testimony of
Gods Spirit: if from these thy Spirit witnesses, then it is current. But if
thou be a Drunkard, a Sabbath-breaker, unclean, etc. and say the Spirit
witnesses thy Salvation: it is not Gods spirit: but a lying spirit: for such
works are of the Devil: Gods Spirit indeed witnesses; but the witness is,
that they which do such things, shall be damned.

VERSE 17. And if Children, then Heirs: Heirs of God, and Ioynt-heyres with
Christ. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.


THis Verse is a Confectary of that which is delivered in the 16. Verse. The
Confectary is inferred from the proper adiunct of Sons: We are Sons,
Therefore Heirs.

Here are two things. 1. That we are heirs, in the first part of the Verse. 2.
The Condition of the Inheritance: in the latter part.

The first part is amplified by the Person whose heirs we are. The Heirs of
God: This is amplified by an Occupation. But God has an Heir, even Christ.
True: and we are Co-heires.

If Children, then Heirs. Servants look for wages. Sons for the Inheritance.
The Law of Nature gives the Inheritance to the Children. Municipall Laws, it
may be, to the Eldest: but by nature every Son is an Heir: the eldest to
have a double portion.

Heirs of God. An heritage, is a succession into the whole right of the dead:
we are Heirs therefore of all the good things of God.

Q. But how heirs, seeing God dies not?

A. We may say, that there is not the same Reason, of temporal and spiritual
things: Temporal things cannot be wholly enjoyed without the death of the
possessor: Spiritual things may Tho. Aquin.
. For here such a one makes thee an heir (says one Aug. Ser. 13. de verb.
Apost.
) not whom thou should succeed being dead, but with whom thou should live
for ever. And Ambrose amplifies it, Ambros. in locum.
by the Parable in the Gospel, Luke 15.11.
where the Father gives his Child his portion, while himself lives. In
earthly inheritances, the Father dies, giving place to the Son. In heavenly,
Sons must dye, that they may live with their Father.

Joint heirs with Christ: Christ alone is the natural heir: we co-heires by
the Adoption. He the Head, we his members. He the elder Brother, having a
portion suitable to his eldership: we younger Brothers, having a proportion fit
for us.

All that are the Children of God, are heirs with Christ, Gal. 4.7. Ephesians.
1.14. Tit. 3.7. 1. Pet. 1.3. Iam. 2.5. Act. 20.32.

Use 1.
Heaven is an Inheritance, therefore not merited by us.

Use 2.
Men part with that, which they cannot carry with them. If they could carry
their inheritance with them when they die, they would leave but little for
their Children. God gives that which we deserve not, which he can keep from
us. If men expect thanks: much more may God exact it, that he gives us such an
Inheritance, making every one an heir, ex ass, to the whole. For the Heavenly
Inheritance is not divided.

The excellency of this Inheritance is in four things.

1. The universality of it: All the children are heirs: Jews, Gentiles,
Male, Female: If a Child, an heir.

2. The extent of it: For every child is an heir to all, and has right to
all: In earthly Inheritance, if there be many Children, every one cannot
possess the same without diminution of it. The more divide, the less is every
ones part. Here not so. This is not Diminished, by the multitude of possessors;
nor impaired by the number of Co-heires; it is so much to all, as it is to a
few; so great to singulars, as it is to all.

3. It is certain: If a Child, an heir without doubt; neither can Satan
Coozen us of it: neither can we lose it: Many are heirs on earth, but their
inheritance is kept from them: we cannot be kept from this.

4. It is sufficient. Riches enough, such as the eye has not seen, etc. Aug.
Sermon. de Tempor.
And if it will suffice us to be like Christ in glory, and to be where he is
then must it needs be sufficient: for thus it shall be. 1. Pet. 1. 1. Cor. 2.9.
Ioh. 17.


Here we are admonished of diverse duties.

Use 3.
1. We are here, as in our none-age, under discipline: let us be patient if
poor: The hope of Future reuersions, must make us content with shorter
maintenance for the present.

2. We have an heavenly inheritance: let us not build our nests here on earth,
being covetous and greedy of the world, as though we looked for no more then
any wicked man. Carnal men seek this world: for it is their portion. Heaven
is ours, let us seek that.

3. Be sure thou be a child, and thou shall have a childs part: the
Inheritance will follow, as the Prodigal child persuades himself, that if he
can obtain his fathers favor, he shall have bread enough.

4. Walk worthy of such an Inheritance: present benefits bind us. The future
should much more, because they are much better. Thou art my portion (says
David) Psalm. 119.57.
I will keep thy Law. The Amplitude of this inheritance should move us, and
yet many Esaus contemn it, and sell it for a Mess of pottage, as if it were a
contemptible thing: but Esau is branded for a Profane wretch for it, Heb. 12.16.
and so are all they that prefer sinful pleasures before the Kingdom of
Heaven. As heaven is the proper place of the Children of God, who walk in
obedience: So the portion of the wicked, Mat. 25.41.
is with the Devil and his Angels, and Hell their own or proper place, as it
is said of Judas. Act. 1.25.


As Naboth refused to sell his Inheritance: so resolve thou not to lose thine,
by thy ungodliness and sin.

If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.

In these words are the Condition of the Inheritance: where Saint Paul closely
and sweetly falls into the second part of the Consolation.

Hitherto he has comforted against the Remainder of sin: Now to the 31.
Verse, he remoueth the other impediment of our Comfort, which is the Cross.

The Sum is, that the Heirs of Glory are not to be dismayed, or to faint
under the Cross. This is urged by many excellent Reasons: The first is in
these words, which is brought in by an Occupation: Some afflicted might say
thus: I an heir? Thus Poor? Thus Miserable? Yea (says Paul) this is the
Condition of our inheritance, by the dispensation of GOD, that we should first
suffer, and so enter into Glory.

If we suffer with him: Luke 23.27.
Not by compassion, condoling with him as the Daughters of Jerusalem: but by
imitation, as Simons, bearing his Cross.

That we may be glorified together; Not with equal glory, but according to our
proportion; as his sufferings did exceed, so his glory must excel.

There may be a double consideration of these words: 1. Relative; and 2. In
themselves. The Relative, we are heirs, if we suffer. In themselves: Though
we suffer, yet we shall be glorified. The Children of God may not ouer-grieue
themselves: For their sufferings betokens they are heirs.

The Condition of our Heavenly Inheritance is the Cross, which glory follows,
Mat. 16.24. Prou. 3.11.12, Heb. 12.6. etc.

Use 1.
Here are three Arguments of Comfort under the Cross.

1. It is an assurance that we are heirs. The Cross is painful; and Ease is
sweet: but as he who loves his money, yet willingly parts with it, for
assurance of his Title to an earthly inheritance: so, though we love our quiet,
our blood, our lives, yet if the expense of them will confirm our Title to
Heaven, we are not to discomfort our selves.

2. We suffer not alone, but with Christ. We are of his Order: Knights of the
Cross. It is comfortable to have companions in trouble; we can have no more
comfortable companion I am sure then Christ, with whom I had rather be under
the greatest Cross, then without him in the greatest prosperity: even as
where Man and Wife love, they had rather live together in a mean estate, then
separated in the greatest abundance. God had but one own Son, that came into
the world without sin, and yet he could not get out of it without the
Cross: therefore be thou comforted.

3. The Cross is the way to Heaven. If we taste not of the Cross, we may
doubt justly, that we are not in the right way. If a traveler, inquiring of
the way, be told, that he shall at such a place come to a great water; a little
farther to a high hill, a little farther to a place of great danger: If he
pass on and find neither water, hill, nor danger, but all plain, pleasant
and safe, he doubts: but if he find these marks, he travails cheerfully,
because, though the way be tedious, yet he is in the right path. So the Cross
is foretold; if we meet with it, it confirms us; if not, it weakens us.

But it may be some will say: Alas! I suffer nothing, I have had small or no
troubles; no losses, sickness, etc. For answer, know there is Abels cross,
and Isaaks cross: both these are persecution: The Tongue of the wicked is
persecution (as Paul calls it,) Gal. 4.
as well as the Sword. Though thou have not Abels, thou must quit thee well,
not to have Isaaks Cross: And if thou be ready and prepared to bear even
cruel death, for Christ's sake, it shall be accounted as though thou had
borne it. He shall not lose the reward of a Martyr, who has a ready mind to
be Martyred for Christ.

If a company of resolute Soldiers set upon the enemy, here one is laid along,
there another, one loses a leg, another an arm, and some escape without
hurt through the providence of GOD. Shall we say that those which escape are
Cowards No, their valor was no less then the others; their readiness as much
to venture their lives, and their danger as great; and therefore their glory is
no less: So be thou a Martyr in affection, and thou shall have the Crown of a
Martyr.

Jobs friends judged him an Hypocrite because of the Cross. But blessed is the
man that judges wisely of the afflicted. Psalm.
The Devil would have persuaded our Savior that he had not been Gods Son,
because afflicted. Use 2.
Would God suffer his Son (saih he) to be here in the wilderness, and to
starve? But we know that the precious stone of the Ring, Gemma Annularis
where with all are married to Christ, is the Cross: and the Token that we are
not Bastards, but Sons.

There is great reason God should discipline us. We should be mard without
correction. O, what pride, what Hypocrisy, Covetousness, Anger, Lust, etc. is
in us! These must be purged out: Our Physic, is the Cross. If a Father see
his child by a Pond side, he takes it up and makes as though he would cast it
into the water, thereby to scarre it from the water. So God seeing his Children
walking near unto hell by these vices, takes them as though he would hurl
them in: throwing them at least into Purgatory, that is the Cross, to make
them afraid of sin and hell. Alas! alas! how cold and dull are we in Prayer
and the service of God! The Cross is a means to cure us of this laziness,
and to quicken us to all holy duties.

Use 3.
A man that is to go a journey, though it be fair at his setting forth, yet
he takes his cloak with him, for fear of a storm; so prepare for the Cross,
if thou be in the number of Children, for the cross will come. Joseph in the
years of plenty, provided for the years of famine: so do thou.

But let none suffer as an evil doer. 1. Pet. 4.
Woe be to them that bear the Cross, but follow not Christ. Thy Cross is
Christ's, when thou suffer for the same cause, in the same manner, and for
the same end.

1. Christ suffered, to bear witness to the Truth. This must be the cause of
thy sufferings. It is not the likeness of the punishment, but the cause, that
makes a Martyr. Christ was there where the Thieves were, like in punishment,
unlike in the cause. Similis in patria, dissimilis in causa. Aug.


2. Christ suffered patiently and thankefully. Thou must kiss the Rod.

3. Christ suffered, to put away sin: so make thy sufferings a furtherance to
mortification, that thou may be stirred to repent for thy sins, and to
leave them. Many in the cross cry out; (but of their pain, as in a burning
ague the sick man of his heat;) not of their sins. As Esau, who missing of
the blessing, cried and blubbered, not that he cared for the blessing, but for
his cursed heart.

Labor so to be under the cross, that thou may say another day, It is good
for me that I have been afflicted. Psalm. 119.
And labor so to avoid sin, that thou may be fit to bear the Cross.

Use 4.
If Gods sons and heirs must suffer, what shall become of the Reprobate? If
he spare not Moses one slip, nor David, his own Children, how shall his
enemies fare? If such as pray against sin, and watch, be taken; shall
drunkards, blasphemers, etc. which never take any thought to please God,
escape? No certainly. If Jerusalem be searched with Lanthornes, and razed;
then Babylon and Rome must down to the Ground, yea to Hell.

VERSE 18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy
of the glory to be revealed in us.


IN this Verse is another Argument of Comfort, from the excellency of the glory
spoken of in the verse before, and it is brought in by an Occupation, thus. You
say we shall be glorified, but in the mean time, who is able to bear the
troubles that do befall? Paul answers, that The troubles of this present time
are not worthy of that glory to be revealed.

For I reckon. This word is not to be referred to opinion, which is uncertain
and doubtful; but to assuredness and certainty: And is a metaphor taken from
such, as casting account, find the true total sum. As if he should say, I
have cast up the Cross, with all the encumbrances of it.

That the afflictions of this present time: Not excluding time past, and to
come, but spoken, as Time is referred to Eternity.

Are not worthy. The word properly signifies that part of the balance which
goes down, the things therein drawing the beam: As if he should say, If the
troubles of this life be weyed with the glory to come, they will be but light
in comparison.

Of the glory. That is, Eternal happiness, so called, because glory is most
of all coueted of all mortal men.

To be revealed. It is revealed, and it is to be revealed. That is the first
fruit of this.

In us. That is, our bodies and souls.

The excellency of this glory is declared by a comparison of unequals, where
from the less, this glory is advanced.

In the Comparison there are three things. First, the things compared.
Secondly, the Issue. Thirdly, the Proof.

The things are two, first, Passions; and secondly, Eternal life. Sufferings
amplified, from their short continuance of this present time. Eternal life
amplified; first, from the name, Glory. Secondly, from the manner, To be
revealed. Thirdly, from the subjects, in Us.

Secondly, the Issue. These are so compared, that the preeminence is given to
Eternal life. These passions are base, that life is glorious. These are short:
That is Eternal.

Thirdly, the Proof: from his Experience, I count, reckon, determine.

The glory to come does every way surmount the present afflictions, 2. Cor.
4.17.

Use 1.
Popish merit of condignitie is here confuted. There must be a proportion
between the merit and the Reward: because the Recompense of Merit is an action
of Justice: and Justice is a certain equality. If therefore there be no
equality, then sufferings merit not: and if not Martyrdom, then no other virtue.

Glory follows the Cross, but not for the merit of it: but for the free
promise of God.

The Papists answer, that sufferings in themselves are not worthy, but as they
proceed from Grace and Charity: Christ having merited this honor for them,
that they should be meritorious.

We deny sufferings to merit, (as they proceed from Charity) from this Text;
for Paul speaks of such sufferings, unless we would say that the Regenerate
are without Grace and Charity, or that he goes about to comfort such. Their
distinction takes away Paul's argument: who comforts the Regenerate against the
bitterness of the Cross, which is as well when it proceeds from Charity, as
when not. We deny also that Christ purchased this Grace to our sufferings, that
they should merit.

No marvel, if the Papists differ in this from us: when they differ from
themselves. Ornelius Cornelij a lapide, in locum.
For they affirm such a power to be in sufferings to bring forth glory, as in
seed to bring forth fruit: and yet they say that the condignity of sufferings is
not Natural, but Moral: when as seed not Morally, but Naturally brings forth.
Besides, they agree not whether this Merit be only for the dignity of the
Work, or only for the promise of GOD, or partly for the Work, partly for the
Promise, or whether according to distributive or commutatiue Justice.

Use 2.
The Cross is a sign thou art a Co-heyre with Christ: it is a suffering with
Him. It is a way to Glory. Yea, it is not worthy of the glory following. Though
the Cross be bitter, yet it is but short. A little draught, and the Sugar is
ready. A little storm as one Nubecula cito transitura. Atha^.
said of Iulians persecution: and an eternal Calm follows. And because
short, therefore to be accounted tolerable, though great. Omnia breuia
tolerabilia esse debent, etiamsi magna sint. Cicero.
Besides the shortness, infinite glory follows. So much glory; that if a man
could fulfill all Obedience, and suffer Hell torments, yet he could not
deserve it.

The diseased man endures cutting, searing, for a short use of a miserable
life. Shall we refuse to suffer any thing for that glory? Many Heathens have
suffered great things for a little vain approbation of the vulgar. What would
they have done for this glory, if they had known it? If they so much for a
shadow, what ought we for the substance? Do thou whine and lament? All that
thou suffrest, is not worthy to be named on that day that this glory is spoken
of. Remember this glory and be comforted. So Moses and Christ did: Heb.
11.25,26. Heb. 12.2.
and for this cause he showed Stephen his glory at his stoning. Acts 7.55.


What therefore if the world speak ill of thee, and persecute thee? What is a
word or two to that glory? Nay, what is a few drops of blood to the Kingdom
of Heaven? O happy change.

Would thou have this Glory without suffering? He is too nice that would
here rejoice with the world, and after reign with Christ. Few there are, who,
if God should bring his fan, would be ready to suffer. My reason is, because
there are so many which will not be persuaded to leave their sins. I will
never believe that he will leave his life for Christ, that will not leave his
sins at his commandment.

Use 3.
The godly man has his sufferings here, his glory afterward. If in this life
only we had hope, we were of all men most miserable. 1. Cor. 15.
The Motto of the Children of God, is Spero meliora. We are not destitute of
comfort even here, blessed be God: but this is nothing to that which is to be
revealed.

Mark the end, and thou shall see what difference is between the wicked and
the Godly. Psalm. 37.37.
The end of the just is peace. So on the contrary, the end of the wicked is
fearful. Lazarus ended his miseries in Abraham's bosom; and Dives his
pleasures in hell torments. Consider wisely the difference between a moment of
sorrow here, and eternal happiness in Heaven; and a moment of pleasure heene,
and eternal torments in hell.

VERSE 19. For the earnest expectation of the Creature, waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God.

20. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason
of him who has subjected the same in hope.

21. Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
Corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Children of God.

22. For we know that Or every Creature.
the whole Creation groneth, and trauelleth in pain together, until now.

23. And not only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of
the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Body.


IN these verses the Apostle brings an excellent example, both to show the
greatness of the glory to be revealed, and to move us to the patient
expectation of it. For all delay is long and troublesome to them which expect
great matters. We expect great glory. Therefore we must be patient.

The sum is this. The whole Creation, or every Creature, is patient, and
expects; therefore also ought we.

In this example we have two things. First, the example, verse. 19. 20, 21, 22.
Secondly, the Application, verse 23.

In the Example are two things. 1. The thing Affirmed, verse 19. 22. 2. The
Reason, verse 20, 21.

The thing affirmed is, that the Creatures expect the revelation of the Sons
of God: wherein we have first the Action. Expects. Secondly, the
Amplification. 1. From the party expecting, The whole Creation. 2. The thing
expected, The manifestation of the Sons of God. 3. The manner, delivered in
diverse borrowed terms, With fervent desire, Groaning, Travailing in pain.

All the Creatures, or the whole Creation, or the frame of the world: for here
are not to be understood, Angels or Men, Good or Bad. Bad Angels and Men long
not for that time. Good Angels desire it not with groaning. And good men are
the other term in opposition. Whether every particular Creature be here meant
is doubted. I take it not every particular: for those only are here meant,
which shall be delivered into the liberty of the Sons of God. Which cannot in
my opinion be said of the Horse, Dog, etc. For then there should be a
resurrection of them, which is only to be believed of men. Also there is no
promise of their restoring, as there is of Heaven and Earth. Thus, I take it,
we may distinguish the unreasonable Creatures: Esaias. 66.22. 2. Pet. 3.13.
All of them groan and travail in pain, but wayt not for the manifestation
of the Sons of God. All of them shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption: not all into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; but only
such as shall at the day of Judgment be restored.

Expects with fervent desire: the word signifies anxious, frequent, earnest
expectation, as a man stretches out his neck with desire to behold.

Groaneth: As one pressed with a burden, desiring to be eased.

Trauaileth in pain: As a woman in travail to be delivered.

Q. But, how can these things be said of the unreasonable, nay, insensible
Creatures?

A. Not as if there were sense in the frame of the world, but by a figure,
Prosopopoeia.
as in diverse other places of holy Scripture. Psalm. 114.3,4,7. and 148.2,5.


Q. But what is it? It is not nothing sure, which the Apostle sets down in
such significant words.

A. Such words are used, by similitude, to express that hidden instinct put
into the Creature by God, Esaias 1.1, etc.
whereby it naturally bends it self to the preservation of its own welfare.
As in a Mariners Compass, the Needle being touched with the Lodestone,
always turns to the North: though it know not North or South. So the Bough
of a Tree, if you bend it downward: Yet so soon as you let it go, it
aduanceth to his natural situation.

The insensible creature expects the Revelation of the Sons of God.

Use 1.
The Devil persuades the Atheist to believe that the world is eternal; that
he may cast off the care of heaven, and the desire of Eternal life. Indeed
if it were so, it were the better for the Atheist. But the Justice of God
requires there should be a Reckoning day, and the Appetite of the Creature put
into it by God, cannot be in vain.

Use 2.
The creature condoleth, and groneth with us: The Sun by his darkness shows
his Sympathy, at the Passion of our Savior. A shame it may be for us not to
be moved at the remembrance of that Passion, and to have a fellow-feeling of
the calamities of our Brethren.

Use 3.
Desire then, and expect heavenly things: We to have our affections upon the
Earth, when the Earth affects (as I may say) Heaven? Those things which were
created for us, and are in the lowest degree of Creatures to be sensible, and
we to be insensible of such things which principally concern us?

If a man by his fault, cast himself and his into danger; should servants be
more sensible then the Master? The very Earth has expected thousands of
years, and yet is fruitful in patience: much more should we pass a few days
with patience, and obedience to God. The shortness of our Trouble, the
Greatness of the Glory, the Example of the Creature, should teach us patience,
and perseverance in goodness, till the day of our Revelation.

Use 4.
We are the Sons of God: but it appears not what we shall be. When Christ
shall appear, 1. Ioh. 3.1,2. Col 3.4.
then shall we also be manifested with him in Glory; and there shall the
wicked be confounded: In the mean time, they neither see nor acknowledge our
happiness, rather judging us the offscouring.

Do thou mock and scorn the Children of GOD, thinking them miserable? Thou
see their outside. Thou Fool: Look what is within: Not within their Chest,
but their heart: if thou could see their Peace and Joy, etc. thou would
say there were none happy but such.

Thou see the outward riches and pleasures of a worldling, and iudgest him
happy. Thou Fool: Look what is within in his heart. If thou could see the
wounds and terrors of his Conscience, thou would tell me a new tale, that
this were the miserable wretch.

Art thou reviled and contemned in the world? Be patient in the sense of thine
own present estate, and in the assurance of thy Future. The world would not
be like thee: Thou would not be like it: we are as earthen pots full of
treasure: The pots are seen, and therefore contemned: the treasure is not
seen, and therefore not desired.

A Noble man is respected in his own Country, unregarded abroad. As such a
one knowing his own Nobility, regards not the mean opinion of Strangers,
but comfort himself that he is a Noble man at home: So howsoever we are
here contemned, we are Noble Men in our own Country, and there will come a
Day wherein our Noble Glory shall be revealed.

20. For the Creature is made subject to vanity, etc.

21. Because the Creature it self also, etc.

In these words is the Reason of the Expectation of the Creature: taken from
its present condition, which is an unwilling subjection to vanity, under hope
of a better estate.

Here are two parts. 1. A Position: The Creature is subject to vanity. 2. An
Exposition: in which are three things showed. 1. How? Not willingly. 2. The
Author. God. 3. The Adiunct. Hope. All these are in the 20. Verse. This Hope is
farther expounded, Verse 21. but first of the 20. verse.

The Creature: as before.

Is subject to vanity. Vanity is in-vtility. Nomen sine Re. As catching at ones
shadow. When as a thing neither fills that which contains it; nor stays up
that which leanes on it; nor yields fruit to him that labors in it, it is
vain, says one. Vanity, is a Lie, as notes Gellius Gell. nect. Attic. lib.
18. cap. 4.
, in the discussing of a saying of Salust Erasmus.
. Vanity, is a failing of the End Luke 5.5.
: as Peter fishes all night, and takes nothing Tho. Aquin.
: Vanity is Defect: for he that wants nothing, has no need to expect any
thing. Some interpret it Corruption and Fragility Ambrosius.
. Some that which has end and Preuarication Coment. Hieron. adscript.
. Some dissolution by Fire Beza.
. Some Abuse Sarauius.
. And indeed Vanity is all these; and therefore Oleuian expounds it
Malediction: and Calvin, that which is contrary to the Integrity of Nature:
and Parcus, Bondage of Corruption: as Verse 21.

Not willingly. It unwillingly serves wicked men Gryneus vt Com. Arion adscript.
. Against the particular natural propensitie which every thing has to
preserve it self.

By reason of him who has subjected the same. That is, for the ordinance of
God.

In hope. Of a better estate, set down, Verse 21.

The Creature fails, and labors under a great burden and bondage of
mutabilitie, vility, Corruption, abuse, against the Natural inclination of it,
for the power and will of God under hope. The Creature is vain, Eccl. 1.2. Not
willingly, for all punishment is involuntary. For God; Who cursed the Creature,
Genesis 3. Under Hope: as follows in the next Verse.

Use 1.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world, for all is Vanity. The best
things of the world, are as the Apples of Sodom, fair to the eye, vain in the
use.

Extol not thy self for thy Riches, Honor, and Birth, for all is Vanity.
This did Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. in Eutropium.
tell Eutropius, Chamberlain to Arcadius the Emperor, when he fled for
safety to the Altar, from which before, he went about to take the privilege of
Sanctuary. When Fulgentius Apud Suriu^. 1. Ianuar.
saw Theodorick King of Italy, going in pomp in Rome; O says he, How
Beautiful is the Heavenly Jerusalem, when Earthly Rome so glittereth? If in
this world so much dignity be given to them which love Vanity: How much shall
they have which follow verity? When thou look upon thy Gold, Apparel, etc.
remember they are vanity: but Righteousness, a good Conscience, and Heaven,
are not vain.

Use 2.
The vanity of the Creatures is not natural, but accidental by sin, which
though it be expiate by the blood of Christ; yet the Creature shall not be
freed, till sin be taken out of the Nature of things. Sin has inuolued
the Creature under the Curse, and makes it to groan: Not the sin of it, but
of us.

Where are our wits and Senses? The very Earth groans which has not sinned,
and we groan not. Art thou a Drunkard, Blasphemer, Proud, Profane, etc? Verily
the Earth groans to bear thee, though thou art not sensible. O Desperate times
which bring forth some men as beasts, some worse then Devils! The Earth
groneth, The very Devils believe and tremble: and we many of us, neither feel
nor see, nor believe nor tremble.

Use 3.
When the Air infects us, the heat and cold annoy us, the earth yields us no
fruit: From whence is this Vanity? Even from us, for our sin. Balaam
believed his Ass, himself being in the fault. So we complain of the
Elements, and Creature; but if the Lord would open their mouths: They would
say, O sinful Man which complainest of us: Thy sin has made us unable to
satisfy thy Needs. Complain not of us, but of thy sin, which excruciateth
both thy self and us.

Use 4.
The Creature serves us by the Commandment of God, of whom otherwise they
would be revenged, for defacing Gods Image. Let us obey against the
inclination of corrupt Nature, even by the example of the Creature.

VERSE 21. Because the Creature it self also, etc.


The Hope spoken of in the Verse going before, is declared here what it is: or
why the Creature is in Hope; namely, because GOD has purposed the deliverance
of it.

The sum is; that, the Creature shall not always be subject to vanity, but
shall have a manumission from bondage. Of the which deliverance three things
are declared. First, Who. The Creature; that is, This world. Secondly, from
what: from Corruption; which is, a bondage. Thirdly, into what estate; into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Some here note the time of the
deliverance of the Creature; namely, when the children of God shall be wholly
set free: For though they have here a freedom unto righteousness from the
bondage of sin; yet they have not the freedom of glory, which is from the
bondage of misery. But it is better taken for the state it self, which shall
be glorious: not the same with the children of God, but proportioned according
to it is kind with them:

For it befits the liberty of the faithful, that as they are renewed, so also
should their habitation. And as when a Nobleman mourns, his servants also are
clad in black: so it is for the more glory of man, that the creature, his
servant, should in its kind partake of his glory.

The Creature shall be freed from Corruption into Glory. Acts 3.21.

Use 1.
The World is not Eternal: it is a Creature, and being of a bodily matter, as
it had a beginning, so shall it have an end.

Use 2.
The manner how the Creature shall be restored, is difficult to determine: and
some have judged this to be one of the difficulties at which Peter aims at. 2.
Pet. 3.
There are three opinions.

1. The first opinion holds, that this Earth and visible Heaven, even the
whole Nature of these things, shall perish. This Heaven and Earth being
appointed by God to be the habitation of man, while he is Viator, and
therfeore that there shall be no need of it when he shall be Comprehensor. For
this opinion are alleged diverse Scriptures. Job 14.12.


2. The second opinion is, that some of the Creatures shall be abolished: and
some restored. The Heavens and the Elements to remain, the rest to perish.
Psalm. 102.26. Esaias 51.6. Mat. 24.33. 2. Pet. 3.10,12.


3. The third opinion, that all Creatures shall be restored. Esaias 65.17. 1.
Cor. 7.31, etc.
(Remembered, that we speak not of reasonable Creatures, nor of the Heaven of
Heavens in this question.) This opinion has also some Scriptures, but
principally this now in hand.

The second opinion I think to be unlikely: for as it is uncomely to build a
fair house, not to be inhabited: So to have these Heavens and Earths to
remain without any Inhabitants. Besides, this Earth to be without her
ornaments, and to be naked and bare, were rather a defrauding then a restoring.
Farther, I should imagine, that Restoring should have reference to the state it
had before the fall: not when it was naked and void, but when it was in all
it is beauty.

The first opinion to me also seems as unlikely as the second: For the
Scriptures, they may conveniently be expounded to speak of the end of the
World, by similitude, etc. and it is not probable that the Lord would
Annihilate such a monument of his power. It is true, that the bodies of Christ
and men will be monuments of his power: but why not other also, seeing it
pleased God to create variety of things for this end? Also, if these things
should be resolved into nothing, where should the Devils be, and the
Reprobate? In Heaven they shall not be; neither shall they be no where,
unless they hold also that they shall be annihilated, which is not by any
means to be affirmed. Further, that place is against this opinion, 1. Cor.
7.31. Vtraque hoc Coelu^ and Terra, per ca^ qua^ nunc habent imagine^
transcunt. sed tamen per essentiam sine fine subsistunt. Greg. 17. Mor. cap. 5.
The figure of this world passes. Which is not to be understood of the
substance, but of the qualitatiue respect (as I may so term it) unto this
present estate of it: As a stone doole being plucked up, ceases to be a doole,
but not a stone. Now, whereas some may say, that from that place may be
concluded as well, that the Sphericall figure shall be changed: it is but a
cavil, and Figure need not so to be stretched. Also this place makes directly
against it. And whereas they say that it is deliverance enough for the
Creature, if it cease to serve Man, and have an end of vanity by Annihilation:
I affirm it not to be enough, because this verse notifies, not only such
deliverance, but also a farther estate which it shall have after such
deliverance, namely, to communicate in some degree with the Children of GOD in
Glory.

Therefore I take the third opinion to be most probable; if the restoring be
only to some singulars of all kinds. And whereas it may be objected why these
of the kinds, rather then other? I would ask them also, why at the Deluge,
these of the kinds rather then other, were preserved in the Arc?

But it is not safe walking in the dark without a light. We know not how it
shall be, but this I am sure of, that all things shall be most wisely and
excellently brought to pass.

Use 3.
Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we
to be in all holy conversation and godliness? 2. Pet. 3.11.
If our servants shall be changed, why are we yet entangled in old things? Let
us become new Creatures, that we may be worthy Inhabitants of the new Heavens
and new Earth which shall be.

Use 4.
Glorious liberty is proper to the Children of God: what shall become of the
wicked? Alas! they shall be holden in the bondage of everlasting torments.
They shall be worse then many bruit Creatures: for many of them shall cease to
be: and therefore to be miserable. They shall never cease to be, that they may
never cease to be miserable. As they now follow the liberty of the flesh: so
then they shall be in the bondage of everlasting punishment.

VERSE 23. And not only they, but our selves also which have the first fruits
of the Spirit. Even we our selves, groan within our selves, waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Luc. 21.28.
Redemption of our body.


IN this Verse is the Application of the former Example. The words have no
difficulty, if we understand to whom the Application is referred.

We: Some expound, Caietanus.
We Apostles, which (Apostles) had the first fruits: that is, the Riches of the
Spirit. As the first fruits are most precious; so they received Grace, both
before others, and in greater measure, and then the Argument is from the
greater to the less. Aretius.
If we Apostles, which are sydera, as stars, if we sigh and groan, then much
more inferior Christians.

But it is rather to be taken of Christians in general: the Apostle neither in
the precedent or subsequent verses speaking of himself as of an Apostle, but
as of a Christian: as in the next verse we are saved by Hope: which is not the
prerogative of Apostles, but of all Christians. We then; that is, we
Christians, both of that, and all times. So here is an Argument from the less
to the greater, thus. If the Creature which has not such sense of the glory to
come as we have, do abide the Lords leisure, expecting a day of deliverance,
then much more ought we to wait, etc.

In this verse are two things: First, a practice of Christians. Secondly, a
reason of the practice. The practice is set down in two words; 1. Groan. 2.
Wait.

1. We groan. Among our selves, say some, Beza.
but better in our selves. And so it is an Amplification from the manner or
measure of Groaning. That is, our Groans come from our very heart root, (as we
say.) There is a rejoicing which is but in the face and appearance; so there is
a groaning, but in appearance, therefore he says, in our selves, 2. Cor. 5.12.
to note the Greatness and the Truth of it, that it is not fained, but without
hypocrisy; or to show that there is matter within the best of us to make us
mourn. Pareus. Ansel.


The second practice, We wait: amplified by the thing we wait for, The
Adoption; which is expounded, The Redemption of our bodies; these words being
added by apposition.

But we are the sons of God: why then should we wayt for that which we have
already? The answer is, we have the Right, but not the Complement. We have
the right of the Inheritance, Habemus Ius haereditatis non possessione^ Iuris.
but we shall not have the full possession of our Right, till the Resurrection
of our bodies. But why of the body? because all miseries are conveyed to the
whole man by the body: or rather, because the body is subject to death;
corrupting and rotting in the grave, when the soul is in Heaven; it is the
last is redeemed, and all wayt even for that. Luke 21.28.


The reason is, because we have the first fruits of the Spirit, which breeds
sighs and groans in them which have it.

The first fruits: that is, the Prelibation: A say, or taste, which we receive
here in righteousness, peace, and joy, being but a sip, in comparison of the
full draught we shall have hereafter. Saint Paul here alludes to the law of the
first fruits, which were a pawn to the offerer of Inning his whole crop:
Leuit. 23.
so the first fruits of the Spirit which we receive here in remission of
sins, is as a pawn to us of receiving the whole mass of Glory promised.

The Children of God, because they have received the first fruits of the
Spirit, do groan for the present corruption, expecting the Redemption even of
their bodies from the same, Ephesians. 4.30. 2. Cor. 5.2,3,4,5. Phil. 3.20,21.

Use 1.
The power of Sin brings death of body, goes with it to the Grave, remains
with it, turns it into dust, and never leaves it till the day of the General
resurrection.

Use 2.
Gods children now mourn, yet they are called to Joy, and Joy they shall have,
going from the vale of tears to the Mountain of Joy. Heaviness may endure
for a night, (the time of this life) but joy comes in the morning; Psalm.
30.5. Illo Mane. Psalm. 49.14.
in That morning which shall have no night to succeed it. And this with as
undoubted assurance, as the first fruits, assured of the whole crop, and as
the earnest assures of the bargain. Now the first fruits of the Spirit are
the earnest of future glory. Ephesians. 1.13.


Use 3.
We have no perfection in this life, for we have but the first fruits: and
hence the devil would deceive us, persuading us that we have no faith, no
sanctification, not the Spirit at al, because we have not al faith, perfect
sanctification, and the fulness of the Spirit. Well Remember that God requires
according to that he gives: he knows thou can have no grace but from him, and
therefore he expects obedience no farther then he gives. Have thou much grace?
He expects from thee much obedience. And a man is accepted according to that he
has, not according to that he has not. Be humbled for thy wants, but despair
not.

Use 4.
He that has the first fruits of the Spirit, groans to be delivered from the
power of sin, not only to condemn him, but also to rule and reign in him.
Where are thy sighs and Tears for thy sins, and manifold faylings? The
godly are every where brought in in their mourning apparel. David waters his
couch with his tears. Psalm. 6.6.
Jobs mourning came before his meat; Job. 3.24.
and Paul cries out lamenting. Romans 7.24.


If then thou live in drunkenness, whoredom, etc. and never lamentest, how
art thou like any of the Saints? Paul had no such sins in regard of the
outward act to answer for, yet he laments; How then can thou which art
notoriously guilty of these and the like sins, restrain thy eyes from tears,
yea, thy heart from breaking? Thou could not if thou had the first fruits
of the Spirit: Can thou be thus guilty and laugh? Remember what was the end
of Dives his mirth. Mourn, mourn, for Luke 6.21,25.
woe be to them which laugh, and blessed are they which weep.

Use 5.
Our Grief for sin, and desire of deliverance must be hearty and earnest.
Wicked men grieve because of that day, which shall render into their bosoms the
fruit of their ways: The Saints grieve for the delay of it: never receiving
satisfaction till that day arise upon them.

When Paul had been rapt into the third Heaven, 2. Cor. 12.
his note was ever after: Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And therefore the Church in
the Revelation from the sense of Gods love, in the first fruits of it here
received, cries, Revel. 22.20.
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, praying not for the delay of the end, as some
of old, Tertul. Apol. aduers. Gent.
but for the hasting of the same.

Even as he that has tasted a little honey, longs for more, so the desire
of the Saints having once tasted the sweetness of Christ, remains unsatisfied
till they bathe themselves body and soul in those rivers of righteousness and
pleasure, which are at the right hand of God.

The children of God pray for the accomplishing the number of the Elect, the
coming of Christ, etc. Psalm. 16.11.
No marvel. For here they are strangers, then shall they go to their own
Country. As home is sweet and desired of him that is in a strange and
barbarous Country, so is that day to the Saints.

No woman with child does more exactly count her time; No Jew more earnestly
looks for the Iubilee; No servant more desiredly wishes for the end of the
year, then the Saints the coming of the Lord Jesus to Judgment. The wicked
desire it not, but tremble at the remembrance of it: neither do they desire
things spiritual, because they never tasted of their sweetness; as a Horse
having Hay and Prouender desires no better, because he knows no better. Have
thou tasted of the Spirit? Show it in thy rejoicing in it, in thy mourning for
thy wants, and corruption, and in thy desiring increase of grace; and longing
for the Day of the second coming of thy Lord Jesus.

VERSE 24. For we are saved by Hope: but Hope that is seen is not Hope: for
what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?

25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with Patience wait for
it.


FRom the occasion of the waiting spoken of in the Verse before, he brings
another Argument, to persuade to Patience, taken from the nature of Hope which
breeds Patience: for if we hope for life hereafter, we must be patient till we
possess it.

In these Verses are two things; first, a declaration of our Tenure concerning
eternal life. 2. An Inference, wherein is couched an exhortation to patient
waiting.

The Declaration has two branches. In the first is our state to eternal life.
We are saved by Hope: In the second is the state of Eternal life to us. Hope
that is seen, is not hope.

Hope is a Grace of God, whereby we expect good to come, patiently abiding
till it come: I call this Hope whereby we are saved, A grace of God: because
God is the Giver of it: who is therefore called, the God of Hope. Romans 15.13
Not only obiectiuely, that which we hope for: but effectiuely, which works
it in us. It is no natural affection in men, nor moral virtue, but
Theological, not attained by custom and frequent actions, but by the gift of
God, whereby we expect good to come patiently: I say, Good: for Evil is not
hoped for, but feared. To come: because we have it not. With Patience: in
regard of the Interim between Hope and Possession.

We are saved by Hope: So are we saved by Faith; yet these are not all one.
Among many differences, this one is for our present purpose: Faith looks to
the Promise, Hope to the thing promised. Faith considers the thing promised
with a Spiritual eye, as present: Hope looks for it indeed for to come.
Augustine likens Hope to an Egg, which says he is somewhat, but not a Bird:
So Hope is somewhat, yea, a great matter, but not the enjoying of the thing it
self. We are as an Heir traveling to take possession of his inheritance. We
have it not in possession, but we shall have it so soon as we get home.

Hope that is seen is not hope. Hope is not here taken for the Affection or
Virtue, but for the Object, for the thing hoped for. So is Faith taken in that
place of Paul. Gal. 3.25.
After that Faith is come, etc. that is, Christ the thing believed. The meaning
then is: that, Spes impertat motum animae in aliquod non habitum tendentem;
Aquin. in loc.
The thing hoped for, when it is seen, that is, possessed, ceases to be hoped
for. For how can a man hope for that which he sees? We hold Salvation by
Hope, therefore it is not present, but to come. For hope imparteth a motion of
the mind, unto a thing which we have not.

From these is the Inference; containing an Exhortation Verse 25. If we hope,
etc. then do we, that is, we ought with patience to wait for it. We Hope for
Salvation: It is absent: It is therefore patiently to be expected, and all
things to be borne, which in the mean time shall fall out by the appointment
of God.

Here then we have four things of Hope. 1. The Object of it: Things not seen.
2. The Effect of it: Salvation. 3. The Assurance of it: We are saved. 4. The
Adiunct of it: Patience, which is the gift of God, whereby, with a holy,
contented, and pleased mind we bear affliction, that we may not lose the
thing hoped for.

The Doctrine. Containing a description of Christian Hope. Hope is a certain
expectation of Eternal life, with Patience. Expectation, because it is of that
which is to come. Certain; because it makes not ashamed, Romans 5.5. with
patience, Psalm. 37.7. Heb. 6.11,12.

Use 1.
The Philosophers excluded hope out of their Catalogue of Virtues, numbering it
among the Perturbations: but that which their blind conceit made no account
of, we are taught by God highly to prize; for we are saved by Hope.

Use 2.
As thou prayest for Salvation, so labor for Hope: which is a special part of
the worship Spiritual required in the first Commandment. Yea, this Scripture
has the nature of a Precept: and therefore desperation to be avoided, not only
as a thing terrible to us, being the Murderer of the Soul: but as a most
heinous sin against God. Hope therefore. But thou will say; Alas! my Euilnesse
bids me despair. Yea, but if thou beleeuest, and repentest, God bids thee
Hope: Be of good Comfort therefore, and having Gods Commandment to Hope, and
his promise, not to be confounded, though thou see nothing in thy self to
make thee hope, yet hope above hope.

Use 3.
The Papists say, we cannot be certain of Salvation, because we hope for it:
but God says, because we hope we are certain. For we are saved by Hope.

Use 4.
The complete and perfect state of Gods Children here, is not in re, but in
spe: As Christ's Kingdom is not of this world: Ioh. 18.36.
so is not our Hope. The worldlings motto is, A Bird in the hand. Give me to
day, say they, and take to morrow whosoever will. But the word of Believers is,
Spero meliora. My hopes are better then my present possessions: Therefore we
despise the present things of the world, in the hope of things to come, using
the world, as though we used it not: as a Merchant hoping to fraught himself
with Gold, neglects baser commodities.

Worldly men laugh at Believers, for contemning earthly things, and Believers
which hope, laugh at worldly men for contemning heavenly things.

We are not without joy in this world; but it is such as the world knows not.
The Joys of the world are nothing to that we have: as that we have, is
nothing to that we shall have.

What joy and happiness is in enjoying, when the very hope is so happy and
glorious? If God be so sweet to them which hope for him, what is he to them
which have him? The Children of God are accounted fools for letting slip a
good bargain; for going to a Sermon, when others go to profit and pleasure;
but herein they are most wise; as he is, which contemns dross for Gold,
shells for Kernels.

Use 5.
Hope breeds Patience. Understand it thus. Between Hope and Having there is a
want of the thing desired. This delay is troublesome; for the hope that is
deferred, Pro. 13.12.
is the fainting of the heart, but when it comes, it is as a Tree of Life: and
the greater is the fainting, as the thing hoped for is greater. Now for this
want, delay, and fainting, Patience is necessary, that we should not think the
time long, nor faint under the troubles, which in the mean time do occur.

David was promised a Kingdom, and in the end had it; but in the mean time he
waited, devouring many troubles through patience. So, we have a Kingdom
promised, but we must enter into it, through many tribulations, and wait the
Lords leisure; Therefore Patience is needful, that after we have done (and
suffered) the will of God, Heb. 10.35. Ephesians. 6.17.
we may inherit the Promise. Needful indeed, as a Helmet, for so is hope
called; because by Patience it bears off many a knock, with the which
otherwise we should be soon stricken down into despair. Pray for hope, that
thou may with patience bear the many troubles must be endured. The Patience
of the Martyrs to endure the fire, was bred by hope, as their hope was bred by
Faith.

True is the Proverb, If it were not for hope, heart would burst; and
therefore to be out of hope, is to be most miserable. As the Philosopher said,
Take away the heavens, and I shall be no body: Toll Coelum, nullus ero. Empedo.
so take away the hope of heaven, and we are the most miserable which believe.

As is the Cork to the Net, so is hope to us: the Lead at the bottom would
sink the Net, if it were not vpholden by the Cork: so would troubles us, if
hope by patience did not sustain us. Perer. comment. in Genesin. to. 1. lib.
1. number. 159.
One compares hope to the Moon, which God has appointed by her light, which
is patience, to govern the Night of our afflictions. Paul excellently compares
it to an Anchor; for as the Anchor holds the Ship in a tempest, so does hope
through Patience, keep us in troubles from the shipwreck of our souls. As
the Husbandman waits patiently for the precious fruit, so must we: for those
which sow in hope, shall reap in saluatihn.

Use 6.
Many say they have this hope, when they have it not: Thou shall know by three
things whether thou have it, or no: 1. By the mother of it, which is Faith: 2.
By the Daughter of it, which is Patience: 3. By the Companion of it, which is
Love.

1. He which hops, believes: and so much Faith, so much Hope: for Faith is
the ground of things hoped for: and the strength of hope is confidence. Heb.
12. Robur fidei confidentia: Ambr.
Therefore the Ignorant, as they have no Faith for want of Knowledge, so no
Hope for want of Faith.

2. Hope has Patience. The Merchant, in hope of gain, endures the water: The
Martyrs in hope of the Recompense endure the fire. Do thou in trouble seek
to Wizards, Devils? Then no Patience, and so no hope.

3. Love is hopes Companion inseparable: Gal. 5.5.
and therefore hope is called the hope of righteousness, and he that has
this hope, 1. Ioh. 3.3.
purges himself. If thy life be holy, then have thou hope, because the
promise is made to such as lead a holy life. God threatens damnation to them
which live vnholily, in blasphemy, breaking of the Sabbath, disobedience to
Parents, Malice, Pride, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. If Thou live in
these sins, how dare thou say thou hopest to be saved, when thou have no
promise? No, no, Thy hope is presumption; and the hope of the wicked shall
perish, and his hope shall be as a Spiders web, of which if a man lay hold,
it stays him not. Job. 8.13. Job. 11.20.
Thy hope shall be sorrow of mind. This is thy hope, thou profane wretch.
David hoped in the Lord and was comforted, and the Fathers trusted in God, and
were not confounded: but if David or the Fathers had lived, as thou do which
art profane, they had missed of their hope. If then thou would have the true
and lively hope of salvation, remember to increase in Faith, Patience, and
Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law.

VERE 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities: for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with gronings which cannot be uttered.


IN this Verse and the next, is another argument unto patience from the most
present help of the Spirit; as if he should say, Though you be afflicted, yet
despair not; for even the Holy Spirit from Heaven helps you.

Here are two things, First, the help of the Spirit: Secondly, the means
whereby he helps us: by teaching us to pray.

Of the first. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities.

Likewise, referred either to the work of the Spirit before noted, Verse 11.
he quickneth, and likewise helps, or rather to hope: not only hope helps,
but also the Spirit.

The Spirit: not good Angel Lyra.
nor spiritual man, as the Minister Iam. 5.14. sic Chrysostom. tract. 6. in
Iohannem.
: nor spiritual grace Ambros.
, nor Charity August.
, but the Holy Ghost.

Helps: As the Nurse helps the little child, upholding it by the sleeue, or
as an old man is vpholden by his Staff Pareus.
, or rather helps together (...). Vna subleuet: Beza well translated, also
helps.
, being a Metaphor taken from one that is to lift a great weight, and being
too weak, another claspeth hands with him and helps him; so the Spirit is
ready to relieve us under the great burden of the Cross.

Our Infirmities: Not of praying, though the Spirit does help that infirmity;
nor of practice to do good, but infirmity to suffer evil: not perturbations
only, which arise from infirmity, but the infirmity it self to undergo
those things which are by God laid upon us: our Infirmities, that is, us which
are weak.

The Cross is a heavy burden: we are weak: the Spirit helps us to carry it,
as Simon helped Christ.

God helps his children in trouble by his Spirit. So promised, Ioh. 14.16.
made good by Paul's experience, 2. Cor. 4.8. which was by the Spirit, Verse 13.

Use 1.
We are too weak of our selves to stand under the burden of the Cross, it is
so heavy: as in poverty not to murmr, complain, or to seek unlawful
shifts to help our selves.

There are two special Reasons why we are too weak to bear the Cross.

1. The Cross is a part of the Curse, which is intolerable: though it be
sanctified and lightened to Gods children.

2. Our sinfulness makes us weak. An ill Conscience enfeebles us, makes very
cowards of us. Iustine Martyr, when he was a Heathen, judged by the fortitude
and magnanimity of Christians in suffering, that they could not be subject to
vile affections. Where a good Conscience is, there wants no courage in
suffering. If the Devil can make us wound our Consciences by committing sin,
then he will easily drive us, either to murmr or blaspheme, or despair
under the Cross.

Q. But do not many wicked men patiently bear pains and death it self?

A. No; stoutly they do, but patiently they do not. It is not laudable
patience, but miserable hardness and stupiditie; As Nabal dyed, 1. Sam. 25.37.
his heart being as a stone, insensible of good or ill. So also dyed the wretch
that murdered Henry 4. the French King.

Use 2.
Let none be confident in their own strength: we are weak: and Peter is an
example: He bragged that he would not deny Christ; nay, though all other
forsook him, yet he would stick to him, and dye at his foot. And yet a silly
Damsel with one word, put him by his resolution. Mat. 26.
This appeared also in the example of Doctor Pendleton, as may be read in the
Book of Martyrs. Fox Acts and Monuments. 1362.


Censure not thy Brother for some weakness under the Cross, nor say, If I had
been in his case, I would not have done so or so. Thou also art weak, and of
thy self art nothing without the Spirit.

Use 3.
Beware of Security: Fore-thinke of the Cross, and provide for it. Sudden
troubles, and vnpremeditate are the more grievous; ouerwhelming, as the breach
of a high wall oppresses unawares. In the day of peace, prepare for battle. A
fair day makes us to be taken in a storm many times without our Cloakes.
Think therefore of losses aforehand: of burning of houses, burying of Children,
Husband, Wife, etc. Thus did Job* for want of this, Job 3 25.
we hear many in the day of trouble complaining, O, I never looked to have
seen this day, etc. Did thou not? It was thy fault. If a man go to Sea,
should he not look for tempests?

Use 4.
The Spirit helps our infirmities: The Unregenerate shall be sure of trouble
without comfort: The Regenerate of comfort in Trouble. God will either mitigate
their pains; or strengthen them to bear, or quite take them away. No man will
lay so much weight upon his Horse, as shall break his back. Much more will
God be careful of his children; yea, as he will not suffer them to be
tempted above their strength, so he will give an issue and deliverance in due
time. 1. Cor. 10.10.
We shall not have one blow or fit more then we are able to bear. He that can
endure but three fits, shall not have the fourth. Non quarto die pati
permittetur, qui scitur vltra non posse quam triduo tolerare: Ambrosius.


Use 5.
If thou have deliverance out of trouble, ascribe it not to thy self, saying;
I rubbed out; I plucked up a good heart, and got out. Acknowledge the praise to
God which helped thee.

Use 6.
Grieve not the Spirit by which thou art helped; If thou shall provoke him by
thy sins, how can thou expect his help? Make him so familiar now by thy
careful obedience, that he be not a stranger to thee in the day of thy trouble.

Verse 26. For we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with gronings which cannot be
uttered.


THe Spirit is a principal help in the Cross; and one of the principallest
means whereby the Spirit helps us is, by teaching us to pray, which is showed
in these words: Where we have three things: First, our Ignorance and impotency
to pray. Secondly, from whence we be made able. Thirdly, the success and
fruit of such prayers; they are acceptable.

The two first are in these words, which we will handle together. The third is
in the 27. verse. It is a great cheering of the heart in the Cross, if we can
pray; but alas, we know not what to pray: we ought to know, but we do not,
either in regard of matter or manner.

But the Spirit, August.
that is, the Holy Ghost makes intercession for us: not is our Intercessor,
but makes us to pray. So the Spirit cries Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.
not that the Holy Ghost cries, but teaches us to cry.

Christ and the Spirit, are as the Master of Requests, but in different manner:
Christ by the power of his merit; the Holy Ghost by the efficacy of operation
in us. As a Schoolmaster with his Scholars, so deals the Holy Ghost with
us: stirring us up to pray, and prompting us with sighs, groans, and words
fitting.

For us: For our profit. Aquinas. Beza.


With sighs, that cannot be expressed: For their greatness; for as there is a
joy unspeakable: 1. Pet. 1.
So also, a sorrow and earnest desire in the Saints, not to be uttered. Rather
for their littleness, both because we scarce feel them, and know not what our
hearts mean, and this is the fittest because of that which follows; Toletus.
He which searches the heart knows: GOD knows every little striving and
groaning. Every sigh in Repentance though never so weak, is observed by the
Searcher of hearts.

The Doctrine. Ability to pray, is not of our selves, but the Holy Spirit,
James 1.17. Psalm. 20.17. Zach. 12.10.

As the Eunuch understood not what he read, without an Interpreter. Acts 8.
Luke 11.1.
So neither we how to pray, without a Teacher. Therefore the Disciples desire
Christ to teach them how to pray. Mat. 20.22.
And Christ tells the Mother of Zebedeus children, they knew not what they asked.

Use 1.
If there be any power in man unto any goodness, then to Prayer; but not to
Prayer. Therefore of himself to none.

Use 2.
Prayer is a great refuge in affliction; Is any afflicted? Let him pray. Iam.
5.13.
So have the Saints done, and have been delivered. Moses at the Red Sea, Exodus
14.
and fighting with Amalek, prevailed by Prayer. Exodus 17.
So Asa, 2. Chron. 14.11.
so Iehosaphat, 2. Chro. 20.12.
so Hezekias, 2. Chro. 22.20.
so our blessed Savior. Heb. 8.7.
Therefore did the Heathen Mariners in a great stresse of weather reprove the
drowsines of Jonas, and raise him up to call upon his God. Ionab. 1.


As in storms, the Birds and Beasts flock to the rows, and the Mariner to
the Haven; so the Saints in trouble unto God by Prayer. Not to pray is a sign
of a wretch, Psalm. 14.
so is it, by play and merry company, to seek ease in trouble, as Saul by
music, and not from God by prayer. Let us pray: we have a Commandment, and a
gracious promise to be heard. The Martyrs in their godly letters to their
friends, write, Pray, pray, pray. The want of comfort is from the want of Prayer.

Use 3.
Prayer is a great travail of the heart: our Nature will not away with it, but
upon every little occasion neglect it: seek to the Spirit for help, and force
nature.

Use 4.
Sighs are prayers: and the voice not absolutely necessary, being but an
accident: the substance of prayer is the desire of the heart. This the soul of
prayer, words but the body, which without the soul is but a dead carcass. If
thy heart groan not; words are but babbling, and the hypocrites drawing near.
Many have fervently prayed that have spoken never a word. Moses at the Red Sea
Exodus 14.
, Hezekiah when he chattered Esaias 38,14.
. Anna, Samuels mother, 1. Sam. 1.13.
her lips went, but no word was heard: she prayed seeretly in regard of words,
openly in regard of her faith Prece occulta, sed manifesta fide.
.

If a man had the voice of a Lion, the eloquence of Apollo, the learning of
Moses: it were nothing without the desire of the heart. Neither is prayer to be
measured by either the multitude or sinenesse of words, but by the earnest
groans of the heart: as in money, we esteem the value of the piece, not the
quantity. A little piece of gold is in value to a great piece of silver. So,
that prayer is to be preferred, which in few words has a great deal of spirit.

When thou go to pray, enter into thy chamber, that is, of the heart, says
Ambrose: no matter though the door of thy mouth be shut, so the closet of thy
heart be open. So this business is dispatched more by sighs then speeches; more
by tears then words. Neither does the noise of the lips please God better then
the ringing of the bells, without the inward meditation of the hear^.

A Father has compassion upon his sick child when he complains; but when it
cannot speak, but only weeps and groans, and looks upon the father; this
doubleth the fathers bowels. So the Lord hears us when we speak, but when we
cannot speak, but only are able to groan, his compassions are doubled toward
us.

Use 5.
Tyrants may cut out our tongues, but cannot hinder and bar us from prayer. For
the sighs and groans of the heart are prayer.

VERSE 27. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is in the mind of the
Spirit, Or, that.
because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God.


HEre is declared the success of the prayers and groans of the Saints: they
are known and accepted. This is showed by two reasons: The first, from the
property of God, He searches the heart. The second, from the matter of their
prayers, in the end of the Verse they pray and ask things according to his
will.

He that searches the hearts. God searches; he need not search to know; but
because he knows, he is said to search, after the manner of men, who search
when they would exactly know.

Knows; There is a double knowledge attributed to God: of knowledge only and
of allowance, both are here meant. From this Reason:

God knows and approoueth the prayers of the Saints, Psa. 38.9. and 51.17.

Use 1.
God is only to be prayed to because he only knows the heart: It is vain to
pray to Saints and Angels, who when we cannot speak, know not the meaning of
our groans.

Use 2.
Beware of hypocrisy, we may deceive men, but God is not mocked. The Hypocrite
may make as fair a show as the true Professor, as counterfeit gold may glister
as bright as the true. Nay, the hypocrite may make a fairer: as a painted face
may show more beautiful then a natural; but God searches the heart.

Use 3.
Sin not in hope of secrecy, for Gods eye sees all things. even the secrets
of the heart. Thou may hide God from thy self, thou can not thy self
from God. The eye of man restrains thee from evil: much more let the eye of
God.

Use 4.
Judge no man, for thou know not the heart. Be justly cautelous, not
unjustly suspicious.

Use 5.
Thou art condemned for an Hypocrite: God knows thy heart. If thou can say
with Peter, John. 21.17.
Lord, thou know, etc. all is well. Thou art in grievous distress, and
can not pray. Can thou sigh? This is prayer. And though nor thou, nor
standers by can make any thing of it, yet God can and does make much of it.

The least evil in the heart cannot escape his knowledge: so not the least
good thought or desire. God knows more evil by us then we know by our selves,
so also more good: for God is greater then our heart. 1. Ioh. 3.


When we go about to pray, we think to ask this and that: but many times
something is forgotten. Shall this prejudice us? No. Though we have forgotten
it: God who searches the heart, will find it well enough and reward it.

Because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God.

In these words is the 2. reason of the Application of the Groans of the
Saints: because they groan for things according to the will of God.

He that is the Spirit, makes Intercession for us: that is, teaches us to
make Intercession.

According to his will: as it is revealed in his Word.

The way to have our Prayers heard, is to pray according to Gods will, 1. Ioh.
5.14. Iam. 4.3.

Use 1.
Wicked men shall not be heard to their benefit. Prou. 28.9.
The Prayer of a wicked man is abominable He heard the Jews when they cursed
themselves, saying, His blood be upon us: but he only approues the prayers of
his children.

A wicked man can have no hope to be heard: for whosoever remembers that free
will not do that which he has heard, must needs distrust to receive that
which he asks. When our good life agrees with our good words, then is there
confidence and loud crying in the ears of God.

Use 2.
Would thou be heard? Ask then those things which are according to Gods
will, not thine own. In Prayer it is a great grace to renounce our own wills.
And he doubtless is the best servant, that desires not to hear that which he
will: but which wills that which he hears, Submit thy will to Gods: for
better knows the Physicion what is fit for the sick man, then himself.

If thou ask any thing; either thou shall have it: or if thou have it not,
it is not expedient for thee to have it: and then GOD does not thy will, that
he may do his own for thy good.

VERSE 28. And we know that all things work together for good to them that
love God, to them who are called according to his purpose.


HEre is a new argument to comfort and encourage us under the Cross, taken
from the profit the Cross brings. The Cross tends to our Good, to further us
to godliness and the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore we may not be discouraged.

In this Verse are two things: 1. A Proposition. All things work together, for
them which love God. 2. The proof which is double. 1. From the experience of
all Saints. We know. 2. From a description of them which love God: they are the
Called according to Gods purpose.

We know. The wicked know not this secret: As the Philistims understood not
Samsons Riddle: but we know the Cross is a help.

All things: Aquinas and ante ^um. Aug. l^b. de cor. and gra. c. 1.
Even sins, because from their falls Gods Children arise more wary and
careful. The best things of the wicked, even their prayers, turn to their
hurt: the worst of the godly, even their sins, turn to their Good. Satan
then gets nothing in the end by tempting us to sin, but the greater overthrow
of his own Kingdom.

I dare not say that this is the meaning of these words. For sins indeed
turn to the good, but work not the good of Gods children, as afflictions do.
For sin is not appointed to be done, as the Cross is appointed to be
suffered: neither can it be said that sin is sanctified to this purpose, as
are afflictions. Here properly by All things, is meant all Adverse things.

Work together, not inuicem, between themselves: but together, with God. Not
of their own nature, for so they do not cooperate, but contra-operate, but
being sanctified by God: Ansel.
and therefore one takes the Verb passiuely, are wrought: for indeed, take
away God, and afflictions work to our hurt.

For Good: That is the chief good; Eternal life.

To them which love God. So are Gods children described: for it is proper to
children to love and obey their Father.

To them which are called according to his purpose. That is, God has purposed
the salvation of his children: has chosen and called them unto it: therefore
it must needs be that afflictions coming from God, must further them to
eternal life. Otherwise he should do that which should hinder and cross his
own purpose: which is not done by wise men; much less by our most wise God.

All Afflictions further the good of Gods children, Psalm. 119.71. 1. Pet.
1.6,7. and 3.17. and 4.19. 2. Cor. 4.17. Joseph's afflictions furthered Gods
purpose of honoring him, Genesis 50.20. and Paul's afflictions furthered the cause
of the Gospel, Phil. 1.12.

Use 1.
The admirable power and goodness of God, is here noted, that he can and does
ouerrule the nature of evil things so, as to make them serve for much good;
yea, to bring good out of them, as he brought light out of darkness. He can
sweeten these bitter waters. As the Apothecary of poison makes Triacle to drive
out poison: So can God make the poison of afflictions, (which in themselves are
the curse of the Law) to drive out the poison of sin. God makes afflictions
work to our good in two respects. 1. Of Sin. 2. Of Grace.

1. Of Sin two ways. First, to prevent it. Secondly, to cure it.

1. A Physicion opens a vein not only to cure, but many times to prevent a
disease: God knows our disposition. He sees that many times we are inclined
to Pride, Uncleanness, Covetousness, Revenge: Now that we should not fall
into these, he sends us losses in our goods, sickness in our bodies, etc.
whereby we are kept and bridled from that which otherwise we would commit.

2. Sin also is cured by afflictions. The blood of Christ indeed has only
this virtue: but afflictions are said so to do, because they drive us to seek
the cure, being therefore called the medicine of the soul. They are of the
best nature which are won by love: but ten to one are brought to goodness by
afflictions. Meliores sunt quos ducit amor, sed plures sunt quos corrigit
timor: Aug. Luke 15.17.
In prosperity we grow rusty: The Cross is Gods file to make us bright. The
Prodigal in prosperity forgets himself: but having gone to school to the
Hogs-trough, he comes to himself. So did fellowship with the beasts teach
Nabuchadnezzar humility, and the Dungeon Manasses true Religion, who in their
prosperity were proud and irreligious.

The Cross is also a preservative of Grace; In prosperity we are dull and
drowsy, as a man coming from a Feast is heavy and sleepy. A Roman Captain
said, that his army never stood in worse terms, then when he had peace. So in
prospetie is our greatest danger, then have we least mind of God: then do we
least fear: pray seldomest and coldest: are soonest overtaken with pride,
covetousness, uncleanness, hypocrisy. Adversity is a quickner; stirs up
to Prayer, Repentance, and all holy duties. It is noted of Solomon, that of all
the Kings of Judah, he fell foulest; because he had most prosperity. That God
might not loose us, and we lose his grace, he sends us adversity. As the
Stars shine brightest in the night: so the graces of Gods Spirit in
affliction.

Use 2.
The Affliction which is to the godly a help to heaven, is to a wicked man the
forerunner of hellish torments: as in the deluge, the water that bore up the
Arc, drowned the wicked of those times. Under the Cross the godly pray, the
wicked blaspheme. In the fire the Chafe is consumed, the gold is purified; so
much mattereth it; not what is suffered, but what manner of men they be which
suffer.

Use 3.
This privilege is to them which love God. Do thou love God? Otherwise thou
were not worthy to live: and then will thou worship him, keep his
Commandments, be zealous for his glory. Which if thou do not, thou art
profane, and love not God, neither art beloved, and so have no part in this
privilege.

VERSE 29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be conformed
to the Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many
Brethren.


THe Apostle in the 28. Verse affirmed; that Afflictions work to the best good
of Gods Children, because God has purposed to save them: so that all things
which are appointed them by God, are subordinat means to bring this purpose to
pass. As a man purposing to build a house, goes to the Forest, chooses
Trees, fels them, hewes them, sawes them, to make them fit for his building: So
God purposing to save us, hewes off our knobs by affflictions, and prepares us
for glory.

That Reason, from the purpose of God, is here and in the next Verse enlarged,
from the inviolable connection of the Effects of it, which are the causes of our
Salvation.

This Verse expounds the former, the next Verse expounds this.

In this is a definition of the purpose of God: namely, that it is a
foreknowing of the Called.

The Principal proposition in this Verse, is this: Those which are foreknowne,
are predestined to be conformable to Christ.

In this proposition we have two things. 1. The Subject: Those which he knew
before. This Praecognition is not general, or foreknowing of merit; but
special, joined with his love; and indeed so it signifies here. Even the love
of God, whereby from all Eternity he has chosen us in Christ unto Salvation.
This is called the good Pleasure of Gods will! Ephesians. 1.5.
Will is Purpose: Good pleasure is this praecognition, or praeagnition.

The second thing in the Proposition is the Praedicate: he predestined to be
conformed to the image of his Son.

Here are two things. 1. The Act, he predestined. 2. The Determination of the
Act: to be conformed, etc. and this is amplified with a limitation in the last
Clause of the Verse. Of the which in the due place.

He predestined. To destinate is to appoint a thing to a certain end. To
predestinate, is to appoint a thing to such end beforehand. Predestination is
by Divines usually taken and used in their writings, for the whole counsel of
God concerning the Elect and Reprobate: and this they do for plainness sake.
Here it is used only for Election: neither do I observe it otherways used in
the Scripture.

In Election we may conceive two Acts. 1. A separation of the chosen out of the
Mass fallen. 2. An ordination of them to life, and the means of life. So is
it taken here, as also in other places. Acts 13.48.


The second thing in the Predicate, is the determination of the Act: To be
conformed to the Image of his Son, that we may bear the Image of the
heavenly Adam, as Paul elsewhere speaks. 1. Cor. 15.49.
The meaning, to be like or conformable to Christ: that is, a Son, as he is
a Son: holy, as he is holy: The which likeness is either in this life,
begun: or in the life to come perfected. In this life it is a conformity in
holy Actions, and Passions. In the life to come a conformity in Glory.

There are three Doctrines here concerning Predestination.

Doct. 1.
The 1. There is a Predestination. Proved, Ephesians. 1.5. but largely in the next
Chapter: Of which we are not to be ignorant, because it is revealed: Deuteronomy.
29.29.
and they which deny it, or would not have it taught, bereave men of a
principal stay under the Cross.

Doct. 2.
The 2. The cause of Predestination is Gods fore-knowing and free love, Ephesians.
1.5. Not foreseen merits, or Faith. God knows what he will work in us: but
that is not the cause of Predestination; Ephesians. 1.4.
but being predestined unto life, he will have us holy.

Doct. 3.
The third, all such as are elected, are predestined to be conformed to
Christ, Ioh. 15.20. 1. Pet. 2.21. Phil. 3.21. Ioh. 14.43. and 17.22.

Use 1.
We should be comforted under the Cross, because it is a Conformity with
Christ. God has many sons: but one only Son without sin, yet not
without the Cross: He came into the world without sin, but he could not get
out of the world, without the Cross. Should we which are sinful, then look
to be free from Crosses? We use to be most tender over our first child; Christ
was the first begotten: yet God never abased any of his second sons, as he
used him. If we be used no otherwise then was Christ, we have no cause to
complain.

Art thou poor? So was Christ. Have thou enemies? So had He. Art thou
disdained? Remember, how he was reviled, mocked, buffeted, spit upon. Art thou
perplexed in Conscience? O, his soul was heavy to death. Consider the great
things he suffered, and for thee, and thou shall have no cause to complain of
thy enduring. Luke 14. Act. 14.12.
The Cross was his way to Glory, and so it must be thine. Neither is
godliness abolished, but built up by the Cross.

Use 2.
Christ is our Absolute Example to follow. Others to be followed, only as
they follow Christ. 1. Cor. 11.1.


The Papists tell us of the conformities of Saint Francis, etc. whose orders
must be followed without making question: but we are predestined, not to
conform to Francis or Dominick, but to Jesus Christ. He is our Pattern, our
Copy.

Many Scholars attain to the perfection of their Copy, but we can never:
and indeed it was necessary we should have so excellent a pattern, that we
might never want matter to imitate.

If we must be conformable to him, we must know how he lived, and dyed: and
this must be always before our eyes, as the Copy is before the Scholars.

The Gospel propounds three sorts of works of Christ. 1. The work of
Redemption. 2. Miraculous works. 3. The works of obedience. The two first are
for our Instruction, but the last only for our Imitation. He bids us not to
redeem the world, or to walk upon the sea. But in the works of godliness he
says to us, as Gedeon to his Soldiers: Judges 7.17.
As you see me do, so do ye; Be ye holy, as I am holy.

Use 3.
As thou would be like Christ in glory, so endeavor to be like him in
holiness. Examine thy self. Christ was humble. It may be thou art proud,
disdainful: witness thy vain apparel, and arrogant behavior. Christ spent
whole nights in Prayer: Thou spendest them in riotousnesse and luxury. Christ
was often in the Temple: thou had rather be any where then at Religious
exercises. It was meat and drink to him to do his Fathers will: to thee to do
thine own vile will. What likeness is here? this is not to be conformable,
but contrary unto him. Do thou think to be like him in glory, which live
thus? That that body of thine which thou have made an Instrument of Whoredom,
Drunkenness, etc. shall be endued with his glory? No, no. It is as possible
for thee to be saved, living thus, as it is possible for Christ to be like
thee.

That he might be the first borne among many brethren.

This is the limitation of the conformity. We shall have glory: not equal; but
like: not by Arithmeticall, but Geometrical proportion: not inch for inch, but
suitable to our estates: He is the first borne, and therefore must have the
double portion.

That: This is not to be taken finally; but causally: for this was not the end,
but the reason why we should be patient, because so was our Elder brother, unto
whom we must be conformable.

That he might be the first borne. He is so called by allusion to the
privileges of the first borne. They were the Princes of their Families Genesis
4.7.
, and Priests, till the Tribe of Leui was separated to that Office, in their
stead. Number. 3.12.
And they had a double portion, Deuteronomy. 21.2. Chro. 21.3.
dividing the inheritance among the rest of the brethren. So Christ is our
King, Prophet, Priest, and is anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows. Psalm. 45. Heb. 1.


Among many brethren. That is, the Elect, which by Adoption are the sons of
God, and so the brethren of Christ. Christ took our Nature upon him; but we
are not his brethren hereby: but when we partake of his Nature, being Bone of
his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, by a supernatural birth, as he is Bone of
our Bone by a natural, then are we his brethren. These brethren are called
many, in regard of themselves, not in regard of the Reprobate.

Here are three things. 1. Christ is the first borne, Colos. 1.18. Revel. 1.5.
We are his brethren, John 20.17. Heb. 2.11. We shall be like him, 1. John 3.2.

Use 1.
It is much to be Gods servants, but to be his Sons, even the brethren of
Christ, is an excess of Love. We give God just cause to be ashamed of such
children as we are, and our blessed Savior to be ashamed of such brethren.
Christ is not ashamed of thee, though thou be poor, though full of
infirmities: be not thou ashamed of him, and his service: the world casts
shameful and opprobrious things upon them which follow Christ: which keeps
many, from professing the Gospel; this being such a rub which they cannot get
over. Remember, Christ is not ashamed to acknowledge and call thee brother: put
on thou therefore David's Spirit, I will (says he) Psalm. 119.
confess thy name before Princes, and will not be ashamed.

Use 2.
A friend in the Court is worth much. We have in the Court of Heaven, a
special friend, even a brother, to speed our suits. Let it comfort us in
Prayer, and make us confident to go to him, and not to the Virgin Mary, etc.

Use 3.
Natural brethren, howsoever they may descent among themselves, yet they will
take one another part against enemies: so that wrong one, wrong all. Let then
the World and profane men take heed how they wrong us: for Christ is our
brother, and has promised protection, and to take our parts.

Use 4.
Christ is our Elder Brother, therefore our Prince, unto whom we owe subjection
and obedience. If we be sanctified and perform this: He is not ashamed of us.
Thou art ashamed of thy brother; if he be a Drunkard, a Thief, a Whoremaster:
if thou be such, assuredly Christ is ashamed of thee.

VERSE 30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom
he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.


THe Elect are Predestinate to be conformable to the Image of Christ: this
Conformity is, when they are called, Justified, and glorified, of which speaks
this verse. And so is absolved the whole order of our salvation. God purposes
to save some of mankind fallen. These he fore-knoweth, these fore-known he
predestinateth, these he calls, justifies and glorifieth.

In the two verses going next before, Paul carried us up into the third Heaven.
Here he brings us down again to the Earth, to behold the patefaction of
Predestination, by Vocation, Justification, Glorification.

Those whom he predestinateth; that is, to salvation from everlasting.

He also called: In time, and out of their sinful estate, from the number of
the wicked, outwardly by the Law, the Gospel; which calling, is common to the
Elect and Reprobate. Inwardly by the operation of the Spirit in their hearts,
whereby they are enabled to fulfill the condition of the Gospel, which is to
believe: and this is proper to the children of God.

Them he also Justified: That is, he accounts and pronounces them
righteous, by the offered righteousness of the Gospel, which in their vocation
by Faith they apprehended.

Them he also glorified. Not makes them renowned and famous; but did
gloriously save. Glorification, is a putting away of baseness and dishonor,
and a putting on of honor, even the honor of immortality and salvation.

Q. But where is Sanctification?

A. Some say, it is included in Vocation, and Justification, but rather in
Glorification. Sanctification is Glorification inchoate, and Glorification is
Sanctification consummate.

These are so inuiolably connected, that he who is predestined, is as
certain to be saved, as if he were in heaven already. The way unto this
Glorification is the Cross: therefore we are to be patient in sufferings.

The fore-acknowledging or love of God, is the fountain of the Predestination
of Saints, of which love we may say, that it is from everlasting to
everlasting; from the Eternity of Predestination, without beginning, to the
eternity of glorification without end: the Necessary means between both;
Vocation, Justification.

I purpose not to common place of the Nature of these graces, but only to
speak of their Connection and Relation, one with and toward another: which are
so linked together, that they follow and convert Affirmatively, and Negatiuely,
from the first to the last, and from the last to the first, as in a chain of
diverse linkes, if ye draw any one, the rest follow.

The way from Predestination to Glorification is by Vocation and Justification,
so that whosoever is called and justified, was predestined, and shall be
glorified. This appears by comparing together these places, 1. Cor. 1.9. Romans
1.7. 1. Pet. 1.9. Jude 1. Act. 13.48.

Use 1.
These graces proceed not from merit but from Gods foreknowledge and love.

Use 2.
The opinion of universal Election, is here exploded. All are not called;
therefore all are not elected. So long as God continues his Gospel, press to
the door of his House to obtain this Calling: and in as much as few obtain
it, we should the more labor to be of that number. Honors and Jewels are
highly esteemed, because given to a few. The Grace of Salvation, as it is much
more precious, so should it much the more draw our affections.

Use 3.
The sottish and blasphemous opinion of many among us, is hence reproved: If I
be predestined (say they) to be saved, then I may live as I list: (...).
for howsoever I live, I must be saved: If I be predestined to be damned, all
my care cannot alter the counsel of God, and therefore the best way is to take
our pleasure while we may.

But whence have thou this Collection? Not from God and his Word; but from the
Devil, and thine own Ignorance: For put the case, thou were on the top of an
high Tower: God has predestined, that thou shall come safely down, or
break thy neck in coming down: Will thou now leap down upon this reason,
neglecting the ordinary way? I trow thou will not trust thy body upon these
terms; then art thou mad so to trust thy soul. God has predestined that
thou shall live to the end of this present day, or that thou shall dye before
night; Will thou upon this drink poison, etc. saying, Why, If GOD have
predestined that I shall live, I shall live though I eat poison. If I do
dye; then I shall dye though I be never so careful. If thou be in thy right
mind, thou will not do thus.

Hezekiah had assurance of the prolonging of his life for fifteen years, Esa.
38.5.
yet neglected not the means of preserving his life. So the predestination of
God ought not to make us careless of using the means of salvation.

Origin makes mention of one who being sick, and desiring to send to the
Physicion, was persuaded by his friend not to send; for, says he, if it be
appointed you shall dye, the Physicion cannot help you: if to live, you shall
not need him. The sick man of a sounder brain then his friend, excellently
answered: Nay, says he, if it be appointed I shall live; I will send for the
Physicion, that such appointment may take effect.

God has predestined me to be saved, so has he predestined me, to be
called and Justified, before I be saved. Though Glorification necessarily
follow Predestination, yet not immediately, but here are means from one to
another, which God has predestined to be used. As thou art predestined to
glory, so also by the same Act to holiness, without which he has
predestined to save none.

This opinion then is most absurd in reason: and also most blasphemous; for
wicked wretches think they have God on the vantage, and that they may be saved
whether he will or no. I am sure of this, that whosoever thinks, reasons,
and lives thus: in that time he can have no assurance that he shall be
saved: And if he continue thus to the end, there can be no greater sign of a
man's Reprobation, and Damnation.

Use 4.
Vocation and Justification, are antecedents to Glorification, Consequents to
predestination. Here is a Chain of four linkes: the two extreme,
Predestination and Glorification, are in the hands of God, the two middle are
let down to us, by which we may equally be drawn to both the ends, as a man
may by a River either go down to the Sea, or up to the Spring head. Art thou
called and Justified? Then thou may be sure of thy Predestination past, and
Glorification to come.

Examine therefore the Calling, 1. These. 1.4.
which of all arguments manifests Election. Art thou called? I say not
outwardly only, but inwardly? Is thy heart opened? Are thy ears board? When
God has called thee in the preaching of the Word, has thy heart answered, as
Samuel: 1. Sam. 3.9.
Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears? When Christ asks thee if thou do
believe: Do thou say with that man, Mar. 9.24.
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief? Does thy heart as an Echo answer the
loving call of God? And do thou live accordingly? Where is thy love of the
Word? Thy Obedience? Thy Faith? etc. Alas, alas: The absence of these declare
thou art not called. How often has the Lord called thee from Drunkenness,
Swearing, etc? and yet thou drinkest, and swearest, etc. Art thou predestined
to life? Nay, if thou so continuest, thou art a Reprobate. God has called upon
thee to leave the company of ungodly men, and thou notwithstanding drawest with
them the yoke of Impiety. How art thou of the number of the Elect, which
familiarly conuersest with Reprobates and damned wretches?

Rejoice you, rejoice which feel that your hearts are moved to believe and
obey the calling of God; you have a most sweet testimony of the love of God,
and that you shall be conformable to Christ in glory. Your salvation is built
upon a stronger and nobler foundation then the very Heavens; even upon the
Counsel of God. But the signs are in your selves: be careful to preserve
them clear, and as you are to be separated from the damnation of wicked men,
so, separate your selves from their conversation.

VERSE 31. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us? Who can be
against us?

32. He that spared not, etc. to the end of the Chapter.


MAny are the troubles of the righteous. Therefore we have had many arguments
of Consolation; all which the Apostle here magnificently concludes as with a
song of triumph, celebrating the plerophory and confidence of the faithful,
founded upon the immutable love and counsel of God, showing that no tentation
is to be feared.

This conclusion Paul vtters after the manner of brave soldiers, who when they
see their enemies approach, shake their spears, and wave their swords above
their heads, as daring their foes: For having mustered an army of comforts and
encouragements, both against inbred corruption, and outward affliction; he
takes the field; daring hell it self to the encounter with words of great
defiance. As, What shall we say? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? and such like.

Here then Paul renounceth all tentations and assaults, which might disquiet
the children of God: and this he does two ways. 1. Generally, Verse 31.2.
Particularly: in the rest.

In this 31. Verse, are two things. 1. A question. 2. An answer.

The Question: What shall we say to these things? To what things? some say,
that we are predestined, called, etc. or that all things work to the best
for the children of God, as others say* but I think they say best, which
refer this question to all that is said before: viz. That there is no
Condemnation to us that are in Christ. That we have the Spirit, are the
Children of God, are predestined, etc. For that which he has said before of
sin and affliction; he does in this conclusion briefly recapitulate.

What shall we say? Aquinas gives three expositions: 1. how thankful should
we be, seeing God has done such things for us? It is true that this ought to
follow; but this is not so proper. 2. That these should be the words of one
amazed and overcome, with the consideration of Gods goodness, not knowing how
to express himself. This comes nearer. 3. As if he should say, Who can say
any thing against these things which I have delivered? let all the world say
and do what they can. These two last joined together gine the full sense.

Use 1.
Paul teaches us here by meditation to receive that which we hear and read,
chewing it down again* as clean beasts: for that which before he delivered,
he recalleth to mind, staying his thoughts upon it, by meditation and
application.

Many will be moved while they are in the Church, hearing: But if we will
soundly profit, we must reason of things heard when we are gone, and say to our
selves and others: What shall we say to these things? and so enter Application
upon the Conscience: otherwise as a flash of lightning leaves us in more
darkness; so such flight hearing increases hardness of heart.

The Answer: If God be on our side, who can be against us?

What shall we say? why, says Paul, this I will say, if God be for us, who
etc. If. This is not spoken doubtfully, but affirmatively: being a supposition,
taking a thing for granted, upon which some other thing is inferred, as in that
old verse, Cato.
Si Deus est Animus, etc. If God be a Spirit: that is, seeing he is a Spirit,
he must be worshipped in spirit and truth, as Christ speaks. Ioh. 4.


Who can be against us? That is, none: But this is a more forcible denying: Who
can? Do thou Paul, ask who can? I Will tell thee: The Devil can, Tyrants; the
whole world, our own corruption, etc. True: these may set themselves against
us; but it shall not prevail, it shall be to no purpose, but even as throwing
stones against the wind. They may hasten, but cannot take away our Crowns.

Me thinks these are words of great resolution, as if he should say: We
have many enemies: let the proudest show their face; I fear them not. Who can?
who dare be against us? Quis contra nos scilicet esse poterit Efficaciter?
Aquinas.


Here is an Enthymeme from contraries. God is for us: Therefore none can
Efficaciter be against us: or it is an Hypotheticall Syllogism; where there is
a hiding of the Minor, and of the Conclusion. If God be for us; then etc. But
God is; Therefore.

Nothing can hurt them for or with whom God is, Psalm. 23.4. and 56.4. Josh.
1.5. Heb. 13.6. No flesh nor death shall hurt David; no enemies shall hurt
Joshua, nor poverty Gods children, because God is with them.

Great is the security of the faithful; they shall have many enemies, that the
love of God may be the more conspicuous in their protection, for they shall
overcome them all: He that is with them, is stronger then all, who is
omnipotent, doing what he will, and suffering no resistance in that he will
not. Only he which can overcome God, can hurt us. Nemo nos laedit nisi qui
deu^ vincit.


Pharaoh followed the Israelites; but he and his mighty men were drowned, and
Israel escaped, for God fought for Israel; Ansel. Exodus 14.
Saul hunteth David as a Partritch in the mountains, 1. Sam. 26.20.
but Saul perishes, and David is King: for God is with David. 1. Sam. 31. and
2. Sam. 2.
Haman hates Mordecai, but Haman is hanged, and Mordecai is advanced, for God
is for Mordecai. Hester. 6. and 7.
In Queen Mary's days the Papists sought the destruction of the Lady
Elizabeth, but they are confounded, and Elizabeth is made Queen, for God was
with Elizabeth. In 88. fierce enemies intended the Invasion of England, but
they were foiled, and England triumphed: for God is for England. Many
Enterprises have been undertaken against our most learned, most wise, most
religious, most mighty King James, especially that Hellish attempt of Popish
monsters in the Powder Treason: but they are executed as Traitors, and King
James still reigns (O long long may he reign:) for God is with King James.
The Lord be with him, and with his posterity for the good of his Church to the
end of the world. Amen.

Use 2.
Let Turks, Jews, Papists, profane persons, and all the Enemies of the
Gospel desist from their devilish enterprises against Protestants: for God is
for the Protestants, against whom when they arise, they arise against God
himself, and therefore must needs fall. Acts 9.5.
It is hard to kick against the pricks, it is madness to run our naked
bodies against a swords point. Cease therefore, Papist, to plot against the
Gospel, it is impossible to prevail. If any policy, counsel, lying, cursing,
strength, cruelty, could have prevailed, it had been rooted out long ago: A
prophet like thy self will teach thee, even Balaam, Numb. 23.8.
that it is in vain to curse whom God blesses.

Use 3.
The wicked are most miserable: for God is against them. What if thou have
riches, honors, friends, if God hate thee and deny thee, if in every corner
thou meet with the Angel of God with a sword in his hand against thee. God
sits upon the Circle of the Earth, and all the Inhabitants are as
Grasshoppers, yea, all the Nations as a drop of a Bucket, and less then the
dust of the Balance. Esaias 40.22,15.
How easily can he be revenged by fire, by water, by drought, by sickness, by
sea and by land? Seek therefore Reconcliation.

Use 4.
Examine whether God be with thee. It appears here that God is only with
them which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; who are
predestined, called, justified; if thou be such, God is with thee, and will
take thy part: otherwise he is against thee.

When the Angel of the Lord said to Gedeon, Judges 6.12,13.
The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man; Gedeon answered: Ah my Lord, if the
Lord be with us, why then is all this come unto us? The Earth parcheth, the
Clouds are restrained, the fire rages, etc. What shall we say to these things?
Is God with us? Is he not rather against us? Would thou have comfortable
seasons? If God be against thee, how will thou have them. Thou blasphemest, art
drunken, unclean, profane: Is this the way to obtain God and good things? Let
us repent and humble our selves, that we be not all swallowed up in the heavy
Judgments of God.

VERSE 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us: how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?


PAVL here begins to remove the tentations of the godly in special. Which are
of two sorts. Either concerning the defect of good, or the presence of ill. In
this Verse he deals about the first sort; in the rest of the Verses, about
the second. Pareus. Chrysostom. Martyr. Grynaeus. Pareus. Rolloaus.


About the coherence most Interpreters judge thus; that here is a proof that
God is with us, because he has given up his own Son for us: and then the
argument is taken from the sign, not probable, but necessary and infallible.
This is very true. Yet is may be very fitly conceived thus. (viz.) That the
Apostle does answer an Objection, which might be made from the Verse going
before.

If God be for us, says the Flesh. What mean then the want and poverty
whereby we are pressed? Piety is hotly praised, but coldly rewarded. To this
Paul answers, as if he should say: Let not such diffidence distract you: God
will freely give you all things you need: and this he proves by an argument
from the greater to the less: He which gives his own Son, will deny
nothing: and therefore the Syrian Translator reads it, And if God has not
spared, etc. which Beza most approues, and his Majesty's Translation: He has
not spared. Not as before: Who has not: implying that it should be still
addressed to answer to the question, Verse 31.

We are poor, says the weak Christian. I but if God has given us his own
Son, he will deny us nothing which is good for us.

This Argument is amplified two ways, 1. From a description of Christ, who is
here called Gods own Son, that is, Ioh. 5.18.
his natural, only begotten. We are sons, but adopted: and thus Christ also
calls God his own Father. Which term notes equality, as the Jews there
understood. Ibid.


2. From an opposition of actions. He spared not, but delivered or gave up: It
is more then if he had said, he gave, though freely. For a man may give of his
abundance, but God has not spared his own and only Son.

But has delivered him up, that is, to death. Judas delivered him. So did God.
Judas as the Isntrumental, God as the Principal cause, governing the
Tradition of Judas: and yet neither is God to be brought into the fellowship
of the fault with Judas; nor yet Judas to be excused for the cooperation of
God. Because neither did God command or compel Judas to do it; neither did
Judas in the doing of it, aim at the pleasing of God.

This action of GOD is amplified; from the Persons for whom. For us all: that
is, not for all Men: but Believers.

In these words then we may consider two things. 1. A Supposition, that GOD
has not spared his own Son. 2. The Collection deduced and inferred. He
will not deny us any thing.

The Doctrine. Out of the Supposition. God has given to death his own Son
for us, Romans 5.8.

Use 1.
O, the greatness of Gods love toward us! So God loved the world (says our
Savior Ioh. 3.16.
) that he gave his only begotten Son. 1. Ioh. 4.9,20.
When Abraham was ready to offer his Son Isaak, Genesis 22.12.
The Lord saeid, Now I know that thou fear and love me, because for my
sake thou have not spared thine only Son. If Abraham love God, because he
spares not Isaak, much more does God love us, because he spared not Christ. For
it is more for God to offer up His Son: then for Abraham to offer up his. For
first, God loved Christ better then Abraham could love Isaak. Secondly, God was
not bound by the commandment of a Superior to do it, as was Abraham.
Thirdly, God voluntarily did it, which Abraham would never have done without a
commandment. Fourthly, Isaak was to be offered after the manner of holy
sacrifices: Christ suffered an Ignominious death, after the manner of Thieves.
Fifthly, Isaak was in the hands of a tender Father; Christ in the hands of
barbarous Enemies. Sixthly, Isaac was offered but in show, Christ in deed. This
is an Excess, yea, a Miracle of love. Hyperbole amoris Chrysostom. Portentu^
amoris. Pareus.
Paul calls it a love, passing knowledge. (...). Ephesians. 3.19.
There is no Argument to this, to draw a man to God. This Paul often
celebrates. And he is a very block that is not moved herewith, to show
himself sensible of it in his godly walking.

God has not spared his own Son for us, as if he loved us more dearly
then Christ: For we use not to expend things dear, but for such as are more
dear. Who then which understands this, can find in his heart to offend such a
God? He spared not his own Son for thy sake. Spare thou thy drunkenness,
uncleanness, etc. but not thy blood for his sake, who was so prodigal (as I
may say) of his own and only Sons to do thee good:

Now to the Argument. He that spared not his own Son for us, will spare no
other thing for us. But God spared not Christ for us. Therefore.


For it is less to give us all things with him, then to give Him to death for
us.

To whomsoever God gives Christ, he gives all good things: For all things are
in Christ, 1. Cor. 3.21,22,23. Col. 1.17,19.

Use 1.
Above all things seek for Christ, who is the Fountain of all good. In ipso
filio Dei omnia existunt tanquam in primordiali praeparatiua causa. Aquinas.
If thou have him, thou have all; for as the shadow follows the body: so all
good things temporal and eternal follow him. He never comes empty or alone,
but his reward is with him. Revel. 22.12.
The world sings the old Poets note: First for money, then for Christ. And if
they have any spare time, that is for Christ and eternal life.

Ungrateful wretch, which have bestowed many hours and days on thy pleasures
and vanities, scarce a day or hour on the knowledge of God and Christ. He
that has Christ, has all things: yet who seeks Christ so earnestly as he
seeks all other things?

This was preached in the time of the great drought Anno 1615.
Examine your selves on this present occasion. Who amongst you ever so longed
for Christ, as now for rain? Who has so bewailed his sins, as this present
want? Seek ye Christ; and with him you shall find comfortable seasons, yea
all good things. First seek the Kingdom of God, and his Christ, then all such
things shall be given us into the bargain. Mat. 6.33. (...) hoc est (...),
velut additamentum. Metaphora ab ijs qui emunt fructus, vt pyra, poma, etc.
Piscat. in. loc. Mat.
These shall be as an etc. in the end of a sentence. Consider how most men
hastily go to work: one seeks rain in the new Moon, another in the change
of the wind: a third in this or that figure. None almost seek him in Christ,
and therefore God has confounded all our Signs and Observations.

Seek therefore such things in Christ: for without Christ either we shall not
have them: or we shall have no comfort in having them, they turning from being
benefits, to be very snares unto us. We may have temporal good things without
Christ, but as the Thief has the True man's purse. Alas, what shall it profit
him, when he shall come to hold up his hand for his robbery? So if thou have
not Christ, thou art an usurper even of that which thou possessest by a lawful
civil right, and shall be called to account for the same.

Thou may have gold and silver without Christ, but no comfort without him:
Whom if thou have, thou may eat with peace, and drink with peace, and with
peace and comfort possess gold, silver, house, lands, rich apparel; for they
are thine own in Christ.

If thou beleeuest, thou can want nothing which is good for thee: for all
temporal blessings and spiritual, are annexed to the person of Christ, whom
they possess by Faith. Walk therefore cheerfully in thy calling, and be not
anxious, nor disquiet thy self with carking care. Quid haesitas super
possessionibus horum and Dominum omnium habeas? Chrysostom.
What do thou doubt about possessions, when thou possessest the Lord of all?
He that has given that which is greater to his enemies, how should it be
that he should deny lesser things to his friends? The Prodigal Child doubts
not of bread enough, if he can obtain his Father. So we can be in no want, if
we want not Christ.

VERSE 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
Justifies.


IN this Verse Paul begins to arm Gods children, against the second sort of
special tentations, which arise from the presence of evil.

This evil is either in our selves, in the Creatures, or supposed to be in
God. In our selves; our sins. In the Creatures, violence and death. In God,
mutabilitie of his love.

The first of these is removed in this Verse, and the next: namely, that which
arises from our faultiness. For our sins, there are two that hurt us. 1. The
Accuser. 2. The Judge. In this Verse Paul shows that no Accusation can hurt
us in regard of our sins. In the 34. verse, that No Judge.

In this Verse is a Position, set down by way of Interrogation: and a Reason.

The Position: None can accuse the Elect. The Reason: because God Justifies
them.

Some read all in both these Verses, 33, 34. with Interrogation: thus: Who
shall accuse? Shall GOD which Justifies? etc.

But our reading is best and most approved.

Who? In general, Who? What Devil or Man? Sarauius.


Shall lay to the charge: Shall accuse, shall sue, shall call into the Law,
shall endite, shall arrest, that he may accuse? This is very Emphaticall: There
is no place for accusation, much less for finding guilty and condemning. (...).
Of what should Gods children be accused? Of old sins; not of false things,
but of such whereby Satan and our Consciences (the Accusers) may bring us to
desperation.

The Elect of God: The Election, says Chrysostom, not well. Ambrose gives the
sense thus: None can or dare retract the Judgment of God: for he confidently
provoke all Adversaries, if they dare come forth to accuse, not that there is
no cause, but because God has justified us. Therefore it is here subioyned as
a Reason.

It is God that justifies. They are justified: therefore it is vain to accuse
them, and it is God that Justifies them. If God do it, none can reuerse it,
for none is equal with God.

No Accusations can hurt or prevail against them whom God justifies, Esaias
51.8,9.

Use
It is ordinary for wicked men to traduce and accuse the Children of God, of
hypocrisy, pride covetousness, etc. But whom do thou accuse? Even those
whom God iustifies. It is false that thou chargest them with all, or it is
True. If false, then thou art a Slanderer. If True; then thou show thy self
malicious, to impute, and to object that which God has pardoned, and of the
which he has acquitted them. Take heed, thou playest not the Devils part, who
is styled the Accuser of the Brethren. As it was said to Peter, That which God
has cleansed, account not thou unclean: So them whom God justifies, take
heed thou accuse not.

No accusation can hurt believers. Who shall accuse them? Who? Inow I warrant
you. The Devil and wicked men: who will sift us, as a man sifts his corn, and
search into us, as Laban searched Jacobs stuff; and when they can find
nothing worthy of Accusation, they will invent false things. But thou will say,
Alas, that which the Devil and the world accuse me of, is too true, mine own
conscience also accuses me. Be it so: but do thou believe and repent? Then
God Iustifyeth thee, not only from false, but against true accusations. Be
they true or false, they shall never hurt us, for he from whom there is no
appeal, has acquitted it.

Thou must neither deny nor forget thy guiltiness, that the more thou do
understand thy disease, the more thou may praise thy Physician: But if thou
have Faith, which is the cause, and Repentance, which is the fruit of
Justification, no Accusation can endan-ger thy peace.

Use 3.
Miserable art thou, profane wretch: for as God will admit no Accusation
against the Elect, thus justified and sanctified, so he will refuse no just and
legal accusation against the profane and obdurate, which censure of the just
and terrible Judge must needs fill the conscience of irreligious and reprobate
men full of horror and confusion.

What must needs be the torment of thy soul, when thine own Conscience, the
Law, the devil himself shall most eagerly accuse thee before the Judge of the
quick and dead? Mala. 3.5.
Nay, God himself will be a swift witness against thee! Yea the very
insensible creatures shall accuse the wicked: The dust of the Preachers feet
shall accuse the contemners of the Gospel: Mat. 10.
The covetous man's rusty gold and silver, Iam. 5.3.
the Usurers unjustly gotten goods shall accuse him. Habac. 2.11,12.
The drink, O drunkard, which thou have swilled in, shall rise up in judgment
and accuse thee. If it be possible, Repent, that thy conscience may be freed
from hellish Desperation.

VERSE 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us.


AS in the 33. verse, Paul took away the danger of Accusation, so in this he
takes away the fear of Condemnation.

Here are 2. parts. 1. a Position; None can condemn the Elect: to condemn, is
to adiudge to death or other punishment: This position is set down by
Interrogation for the more force.

2 A Reason. Which is, because Christ is dead: The Interpreters for the most
part do place the force of the Reason in the Intercession of Christ, which they
oppose to Condemnation: as if the Apostle did use a Traiection for the more
strong consolation of Believers? Beza.
But under correction, I think the reason principally to be in the death of
Christ, by which we escape death: and the Resurrection, Session and
Intercession to be ended by way of Amplification, for the cause alleged. The
words are parts of the Catechism. The sense is thus to be conceived: Alas,
says the weak Christian, mine own conscience, the Law, the Devil accuses
me, Yea but God iustifies thee, says Paul. What, a sinner? How can that be,
saving his Justice? for sinners are to be condemned by the Law. True, says
Paul; but Christ is dead for us, and so has made satisfaction: for as it is
well observed by Caietane, that these words For us, are to be referred to every
part of the Answer, he dyed for us, rose for us, etc.

The Death of Christ is farther declared by the consequences of it: which are
3. 1. Resurrection. 2. Session at Gods right hand. 3. Intercession for us,
which Gradation is added to take away all scruple. He is dead: Nay, he is
risen, which seals the merit of his death: Nay, he sits at the right hand
of God, having received all power for the safety of Believers, and confusion of
unbelievers, and that nothing be wanting to our comfort, he continually makes
intercession for us, Heb. 9.24. Heb. 10.10.
by appearing in heaven for us, and by willing that his merits should be
effectual unto us.

Those whom Christ dyed for, cannot be condemned, Romans 4.25. and 5.9. Heb.
2.14,15.

Use 1.
The Death, Resurrection, Power and Intercession of Christ, are the wells of
salvation, from whence all comforts are to be drawn. Art thou cast down for
fear of thy sins and the punishment due to them? Christ has suffered thy
punishment, he was condemned in thy room and stead, and therefore in the
Justice of God, thou must not be condemned. Believe and repent, and then it is
as possible for thee to be damned, as for God to be unjust.

Thou may securely rest in his death, because he not only dyed, but rose
again, which though it did add nothing to the price which was paid in his
death, yet it is a demonstration of the sufficiency of it, and thereby a
confirmation of thy comfort: for if he had not rose again, his death had done
us no good. If death had overcome him, how should we sinners have escaped.

He, as our Samson, carried away the gates of death. The foundation of our
comfort is laid in Christ's death: we receive it in his resurrection. His death
is compared to the sowing of Corn, which comforts most when it comes up.
Ioh. 12.24.
So our peace and joy is sown in his death: we reap it and begin to possess
it in his Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.17,18,19.
He is not only dead and risen, but has received all power, having it in his
hand to save and destroy: by this power he sent the Holy Ghost. Act. 2.
He has always governed and preserved his Church, and confounded his foes. We
have many foes indeed, but we need not fear; for if he so bridled them being
on earth in our weakness, that he overthrew them backward with a word; Ioh.
18.6.
how can and will he hamper them being in Heaven, in the power and glory of his
Father?

He was courteous on earth: and he forgets us not now he is in Heaven: he is
not like Pharaohs Butler, who forgot Joseph? Genesis 40.23.
He is not in Heaven, only to live happily himself, but to procure our
happiness also. He prays yet for thee, and his Father hears him always.
John 11. Heb. 7.25.
Therefore thou may be confident that thou art perfectly saved. A man
retaining an eloquent, learned, gracious Counselor, is of good hope; much
more may thou, which have the Kings Son, yea, the power and wisdom of
God to be thy Advocate. He is innocent, against him lies no exception; he has
satisfied for thee of his own; not by the force of reason, but really by the
price of his blood: He knows the weightinesse of thy cause; is in especial
favor with the Judge; knows best the reason whereby he may persuade; and it
concerns him that the day should be on our side because we are his flesh:
therefore we may be comforted.

Use 2.
From this sitting and Intercession, Ambrose notes the distinction of the
persons in the Trinity, and that the Father is the fountain of all good.

Use 3.
Saints are not our Intercessours, but Christ: therefore go to Christ alone:
Can they more love and care for us, then Christ? They not hear, nor understand
us, neither have we in the Scripture precept or example to require their
intercession; and if any help or comfort were to be had this way, Paul
doubtless in a place so fit would first or last have mentioned it. If any man
sin, says John, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
we have Christ an Advocate. He does not say, You have me, or the Virgin Marie,
an Advocate, but Christ. Maluit se ponere in numero peccatoru^, vt haberet
Aduocatu^ Christum, quam ponere se pro Christo Aduocato, and inueniri inter
damnandos superbos. August.
The Apostle had rather put himself among sinners, that he might have Christ
his Advocate, then put himself for an Advocate, and so be found among them who
are to be damned for their pride

Use 4.
These comforts require great obedience; for Christ has not purchased for us a
carnal security, whereby the fear of God should be abandoned, but a
spiritual, whereby the fear of condemnation should be overcome.

If thou would partake of Christ's death, dye thou to sin. If of his
Resurrection, rise thou to newness of life. If of his glorious Session, obey
his power and authority. If of his Intercession, then avoid thou all sin.
For nothing can be more contrary, then Christ to pray for thee that thou
may be pardoned, and thou not cease from thy blasphemy, drunkenness, etc.
Christ prays not for such beasts. We have an Advocate, says John, 1. Ioh.
2.7.
Jesus the just. A just Advocate will not plead unjust causes. Thy cause is
unjust, because thou beleeuest not, nor carest how thou live: For, it is most
just (even supposing Evangelical grace and mercy) that such should be damned,
and should want the benefit of that pardon, which they by their vnrepenting
heart renounce. Repent therefore, that thou may have thy part in these
comforts.

VERSE 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?


IN this verse and the two next, the Apostle remooueth the second Tentation
arising from the presence of evil, namely, of the evil without us, from the
Creatures. The coherence Pareus makes to be thus: A weak Christian thus
objects: Though God love us, and Christ pray for us, yet we are subject to
famine, nakedness, poverty, a thousand troubles. Paul answers, What then? This
is the condition of the Church; we are nevertheless beloved for this; yea, we
are more then Conquerors.

The words wherein Paul delivers this are admirable; and so indeed is this
whole conclusion. That we could feel that which Paul writes! Though all which
he writes, be from the Spirit of God, yet here he was more specially
inspired. And some observe that Paul's style is so beautified with wonderful
Eloquence and Rhetoric, that nor Tully nor Demosthenes could ever have so
spoken. For power, some have been affected with the reading of Paul, as they
are with thunder. And S. Augustine, as is reported of him, Augus^nus. Erasmus.
Paulum quotiescunque lego, videor mihi non verba sed audire toni trua. Hier.
epist. 61. ad Pammach.
wished for 3. things: to see Christ in the flesh; Rome in the pride of it; and
to have heard Paul preach.

In this verse is a position, that no orosses or creatures can deprive us of
the love of our God. Which is set down in a double Interrogation, and that not
in plain manner, but with great force, that he might add life to it, and
ravish the Readers. This position has a double probation following; the one
from example, Verse 36. the other from the issues of our troubles, ver. 37.

Who shall separate us? That is, none can. But he speaks with contempt, Who
shall? Shall tribulation? as if he should say, I scorn it. As Goliath defied
David, saying, 1. Sam. 17.43.
Do Thou come to Me with a staff? So Paul with a bettor spirit, defies all
crosses, as to be able to deprive us of Christ's love.

Separate; Such a word is here used, as signifies separation of soul and
body, to note that as it is grievous for the soul to be separated from the
body; so much more to be separated from God.

From the love of Christ. Many of the ancient, and of the late Writers
(especially Popish,) expound it of our love to Christ; which if it be the
Genuine meaning (as Martyr says) it is neither unfit nor impious) then I
wonder they should say it is presumption, to affirm that we are certain of
perseverance; in as much as Paul speaks in the person of all Believers. But I
take it to be meant principally and most properly of Christ's love to us, or of
the sense of it in affliction, as some interpret Piscator. Rollocus.
. If it were meant of our love, the comfort were not so great Grynaeus.
. Also the like phrase elsewhere Verse. 37. and cap. 5.5.
approues this Exposition. Farther, the word separate cannot properly be
spoken of our love. For we are separated from another, not from our selves
Oleuianus.
.

Us: That is, Believers: Elect: The Syrian Translator reads Me: better Us:
Yet thence we may be put in mind, every one to labor particularly to apply
it, and feel it in himself.

Shall tribulation? etc. He said Who? Speaking of persons: here he speaks of
things; because by these things, Devils and wicked men seek to hurt the Elect.
Chrysostom observes Paul's wisdom in three things: 1. That he says not,
Shall the love of Riches, Pleasures, etc. which have great force to bewitch us:
but shall Tribulation, Distress? etc. which violence, Nature. 2. That he
begins with the lighter, and so rises to greater troubles, placing them in
this order, not casually, but by singular Art. 3. That though these which he
here rehearses, consist of a certain number; yet every one as a General
has special Tropes under it; As when he says Tribulation, he says,
Imprisonments, Bonds, Slander, Banishment, etc.

Tribulation: The word fignifieth any thing that presses or pincheth us.

Distress: The word is translated from the straightness of the place, to the
estate of the mind, when we know not which way to turn us, as David was in a
strait. 2. Sam. 24.14.


Persecution: When we are pursued from one place to another, and banished.

Famine and Nakedness. Which follow such as are banished, and are grievous
weapons.

Peril of life. The Sword: Death it self, noted by the instrument of it.

The Devil with all his Accomplices, cannot with all their Threatenings and
Persecutions, separate us from Christ's love. This is grounded upon the
Immutabilitie of Gods love, Ioh. 13.1, Reu. 2.10. Esaias 43.1.

Use 1.
The disposition of godly and godless men are different. Where the godly are
most bold, there wicked men are cowards; and where the godly are most afraid,
there the wicked are most bold. In sin the child of God quakes and fears:
there the wicked man is bold. In Aduerfitie the child of God is bold; there
the wicked man's heart is in his hose (as we say.) When Moses comes to Pharaoh
that he should let Israel go. He knows not, nor cares for God, nor will let
them go. But when the plagues come: Then, Pray for me, Moses; Go your ways:
Take what you will, even the wealth of Egypt.

In sin, let me always be a Coward: but (upon grounded assurance of Gods
love) bold and resolute in Affliction.

Use 2.
The Believer is Assured. All bitter things cannot quite extinguish the
sweetness of Gods love to them. Tribulation cannot, nor Distress, etc. For as
the Whale deuoures the lesser Fishes, so the love of God ouercomes these.

Shall Tribulation, Distress, Persecution? No. They are blessed which endure
these things. Shall Famine? He which feeds on Christ, cannot perish for
hunger. Shall Nakedness? Christ's Righteousness is my clothing: I shall
willingly follow him even Naked, who when he was clothed with infinite Glory as
with a Garment, was content to be borne Naked, and to be stripped on the Cross
for my sake. Shall Peril? I know the hardest. Shall the Sword? Christ is to
me in life and death advantage. When the Tyrant shall take off my head, my
soul shall fly out unto Christ.

The sense of the love of Christ, made the Martyrs esteem Tyrants, as Gnats or
Fleas, and torments as the flea-bitings. 1. Tyrannos, ipsumque adeo Neron,
velut quosdam Culices aestimabat. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. de laud. Pauli.
Tertullian of his times says, Accusatio votum est, and poena felicitas, Tert.
aduersus Gentes, non procul ab initio. Apolog.
that to be accused, was the wish of Christians; and punishment for Christ,
they accounted felicity. A certain woman running in all haste, with her child
in her arms, being asked the cause, O, says she, I hear a great sort of
Christians are appointed to be martyred, and I am afraid, lest I and my little
one come too late. When the Emperor Valens banished Basil, and the Tribune
threatened death, I would, said Basil, I had any thing of worth, I would bestow
it on him which should cut Basils windpipe: And when he had that Night given
him to deliberate, answered that he should be the same man to morrow, and
wished that the Tribune would not be changed. Chrysostom being in banishment,
by the means of Eudoxia the Empress, wrote to a Bishop called Cyriacus: and
upon occasion, tells of his resolution, before he was banished: I thought with
my self, says he, that if she will banish me, The earth is the Lords: If she
will saw me asunder, I remembered Esaias; If drown me, Jonas came to my mind: If
stone me, I thought of Stephen: If behead me, of John Baptist; If take away my
goods; Naked came I out of my Mothers womb. Thus did this holy Bishop
fore-arme himself. So ought we to do, that if God appoint such times for us,
we may not think it strange.

Thou it may be art Now rich, in health, in peace, etc. Thou know not what
hangs over thy head: but thou know what thou have deserved. Think daily of
Famine, Nakedness, Banishment, Imprisonment, Hanging, Burning, etc. Fear the
worst, and provide for it: For what art thou better then thy Fathers? Then
Eliah, Esaias, Peter; Paul, etc? Forethinke these things: less shall thou be
moved with such things when they come. if thou meditatest of them before they
come. The weapon that is fore seen, hurts the less.

Use 3.
That which Satan aims at in all his tentations, is to separate us from God
and Christ. He vexes our bodies, spoyleth our goods, as we see in Job; not so
much to hurt our bodies, or make us poor; as to make us blaspheme or deny God.
He can be content we should be rich and healthful, so we be hated of God. Is
this Satan's drift? Let us ouershoote him in his own bow: the more he tempts
and raises trouble, the more often and earnestly do thou pray* and the more
conscionably do thou walk before God, that thou may defeat the Devil, and
preserve the sense of Gods love in thy breast.

VERSE 36. As it is written, Psalm 44.22.
For thy sake, are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for
the slaughter.


THat No Tribulation can separate us from the love of Christ, is here proved,
by the example of the ancient Church, recorded in the Scriptures; which comes
in good season: for least such grievous things should seem signs of
desertion; he brings a prophecy, which not only shows that the Saints have
in former times suffered these things and been in favor; but also that this
should be the state of the Church in this life.

This Prophecy or holy Testimony is taken out of the 44. Psalm, Verse 22.
This Psalm is entitled, A Psalm of instruction to the sons of Corah, which
some interpret to the sons of Martyrdom. It is questioned, when, and upon
what occasion this Psalm was written. Some think upon occasion of the 70.
years captivity at Babylon. But this is uncertain, Because That Captivity
was a punishment for their sins: It was not For thy sake all the day long. It
is more likely, to my seeming, to be upon the occasion of the horrible
persecution of the Church under Antiochus Epiphanes, unto which in all
likelihood Paul has reference, Heb. 11. toward the latter end.

The sum is this; The Saints of old have endured Tribulation unto death: and
yet were not separated from the love of God: Therefore such tribulation cannot
separate us Now. That they have endured, the Records of all times testify: and
that their sufferings extinguished not the sense of Gods love, appears,
because they endured for Gods sake; which they could not have done without an
exceeding sense of his love. Neither can such things separate, because of the
constant decree, true from Abel. They which will live godly, must suffer
persecution: And through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

In this report of the sufferings of the ancient Church, we have three things.
1. The greatness of their sufferings. They were killed: amplified by a
similitude, As sheep to the slaughter. 2. The cause; Not for Their Sin, but
for Thy sake. 3. The continuance, how long? Even all the day long.

We are killed: Not mortified, as the Vulgar, which Sarcerius follows,
expounding of the killing of sin: namely, that all our Afflictions must tend
to mortification, that there may be an end of sinning, before there be an end
of living: but it is to be understood of bodily death, which is the extremity
of troubles.

All the day long: A day is a measure of time, which is either taken for the
whole time of the world, from Abel to the last Martyr; or for the time of every
Christians life, beginning at his conversion; This is the best.

Q. But how can one be killed all the day long? A man can be killed but once,
and it requires not a day, nor an hour for it: our life is taken away in a
moment.

A. It is to be understood either of every affliction, which is mors partialis,
a kind of death, and a passing unto it; or in regard of our continual danger
and readiness to die, with the terror of it: being never secure, but always
expecting to be taken and killed, which is more terrible then Death it self.
When we must die, it is a favor suddenly to be dispatched; by nature all die
but once, but by our willingness we may suffer it every day, as Paul said, 1.
Cor. 15.31
he died daily.

And are counted as sheep to the slaughter: Not innocent, humble, ready to
hear and follow Christ's voice, as elsewhere the term sheep is taken. The
enemies of the Gospel do not so reckon of us; but here it is meant as in that
saying of our Savior, Math. 10.
I send you as sheep among wolves. Therefore called sheep of the slaughter:
That is, Tyrants make no more reckoning of the taking away of our lives, then a
Butcher does of cutting the throat of a sheep. Some sheep are good for store,
some for slaughter: we are not counted for store: Happy were it if here were
always store of believers, their lives would much profit the world. Gene. 18.
If there had been found in Sodom ten such store-Christians, it might have
stood to this day: but the world uses not to spare such; but as a Butcher
kills a sheep, without making conscience of the effusion of the blood of it:
nay, he thinks well of his work, and is glad when he has done it: So Christ
says, that Tyrants shall kill Christians, and think that thereby they have
done good service to God.

True Christians are always in danger, and ready to die for Christ's sake, John
15.21. and 16.2. Luke 9.23. As the Sun every day goes down, so must Christ's
disciple every day make account of crosses, and death in the following his
Master.

Use 1.
Paul, to comfort us under the cross, brings Scripture; for there are the
promises, which were David's comfort in trouble. There are the stories of the
Saints, what they suffered, how they behaved themselves, how they were assisted
by God, of the which whosoever is ignorant, is as a soldier without armor or
weapons. Christ in his temptations used Scripture, so do all the Saints.

When thou art tempted to covetousness, remember that of Paul, We brought
nothing into the world. When to revenge, then call to mind that God says,
Vengeance is mine. And so in other cases defend thy self with this Target. Out
of the book of the Scriptures choose thee arguments, as stones: put them into
the scrip of thy memory, and with thy tongue, as with a sling, throw them at
thy Adversary the Devil, who has no more power to withstand Scripture, then
Goliath to stand, being smitten in the forehead by David.

Use 2.
So savage is the cruelty, that is used toward true Christians by wicked men,
that he is accounted to have done a great exploit, who can invent new, or add
any thing to old torments. The story of the Heathen Emperors, of the Turks, of
the Pope, where he and his whelps set foore, show this to be true. The fires
in England in Queen Mary's days; The massacre at Paris in the days of
Charles the ninth, prove that the death of a Professor of the Gospel, is of no
more account with them, then the death of a sheep, nay of a dog. But O
Papists, Psalm. 116.15.
Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. You can
suffer Jews, Turks, enemies to Christ, to live among you; yea, you pity
Thieves, Traitors, and abet them; but the Protestant, Christ's true servant, is
hated to the death.

Use 3.
Martyrdom and Persecution is, when not for our own sake, but for Christ's sake
we suffer patiently. There are two principal things required in a Martyr; 1.
That his doctrine be true. 2. That his life be holy.

The truth of our doctrine must be confirmed by the Scriptures: when we suffer
for our own opinions and fancies, for Toys and Quiddities, it is not to be
called Persecution, but rather the Judgment of God. The old saying is good
which Cyprian and Augustine have; Not the punishment, but the cause makes a
Martyr. And therefore Augustine observes, that David says not, Judge my
punishment, but, Judge my cause, O Lord. And again; Blessed are they who
suffer persecution, not for wicked division, but for righteousness sake. Psalm.
41. Non dixit, Discern poenam, sed causam meam. Aug Epist. 50.
Non propter iniquitate^ et Christianae vnitatis impiam diuisionem, sed propter
iustitiam. August. ibid.


Many are censured in the Church of England for their singularity, separation,
and division, and then they say they are persecuted. Shall Agar say she is
persecuted, because Sara deals with her according to her deserts? No, let her
carry her self more humbly to her Dame. Remember then that it must be the
weighty Truth for the which thou suffrest; and that thou live holily: both
these joined together, make a Martyr.

Use 4.
Three things comfort in persecution. 1. Our Afflictions are but for a day,
that is, a short time. All short troubles though great, are tolerable.

2. We have the Saints of all times our companions, we are not alone.
Therefore Christ from hence comfort: Mat. 5.12.
For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

3. We suffer for Christ, who will reward us a hundred fold in this life, and
in the world to come everlasting life, who also has suffered for us. It is no
marvel if we servants suffer for so good a Master; but this is maruailous,
that so good a Master has suffered for such naughty servants. We suffer
nothing, but our sins deserve more, and yet our good Master imputes not our
punishments as suffered for our sins, but for his own sake.

Use 5.
All that bear the face of the first Adam, are subject to sufferings: but when
we bear theface of the second Adam, then are we much more subject. If thou be
a Christian, account of sufferings, and that thou have not suffered enough till
thou suffer death. The Wheat endures more then the chafe, but the Wheat is
for the Lords board, and the chafe is for mucke, or to be burnt with
unquenchable fire.

If God will have his own, which fear and worship him, to suffer grievous
things; what remains for drunkards, and profane beasts? So Jeremy argues
against Edom: Ier. 44.12.
Behold, they whose Judgment it was not to drink of the cup, have assuredly
drunken: and art thou he that shall escape free? Thou shall not escape. So
Peter, 1. Pet 4.17.
If judgments begin at Gods house, how shall the wicked escape?

VERSE 37. Nay, in all these things we are more then Conquerors, through him
that loved us.


HEre is the other Argument, to prove that nothing can separate us, which
believe and are regenerate, from the love of Christ. It is thus formed: Those
which in all Tribulation overcome, those no Tribulation can separate from the
love of Christ. But belieuers in all tribulations overcome. Therefore.


All the doubts are in the Minor, which is the words of this verse. In which
are two things. First, the Victory. Secondly, the Cause of it.

The victory: In all these things we are more then Conquerors.

These things: that is, Tribulation, etc. as before.

We are more then Conquerours: How can that be? Can a man get more then the
victory? The meaning is, We are famous and renowned Conquerours; both in
regard of the facility to conquer, and the greatness of the Conquest: we
easily conquer, only preparing the mind to be constant. We have a great
Conquest, because we conquer by those things which are used to conquer us; we
bear our enemies with their own swords: as Julian sometime said, Egregie
vincimus.
being confuted by heathen learning. Therefore Martyr and Piscator expound, We
do more then overcome: that is, we obtain a noble, a famous victory.

The meaning is: Satan in all the sufferings of Gods children drives at this, to
bring them from Christ; to make them murmr, blaspheme, despair, and so to
make a breach between God and them. Ab ipso ducunt opes animumque ferro. Hor.
But Satan is defeated, and God inspires his children with such a generous and
noble spirit, that troubles abate not their fortitude and patience, but rather
increase it. As one Glouer, Fox, Acts and Mon. p. 1555.
being to suffer at the stake, was wonderfully afraid, and the remembrance of
the fire was so terrible, that he was exceedingly perplexed: but when he came
within the view of the stake, at the very sight of it, a heavenly courage was
put into him, with much boldness, holy assurance and joy, in which he most
constantly suffered.

In all afflictions, Gods children obtain a noble victory, 1. Cor. 10.13.
James 1.12. and 5.11. 2. Tim. 2.11. 1. Ioh. 5.4.

Use 1.
Gods children suffer great things, and die in their sufferings. Do they then
overcome, who bear away the blows, and are killed by their enemies? Indeed
this is a Paradox to flesh and blood to conceive: but the truth is, they
famously conquer and that five ways.

1. In regard of their torments. For neither the big and stern looks of
their Tormentors do affright them, nor the sharpnes of their pains make them
lament and complain: but in the midst of their bitter sufferings, they rejoice
and glorify God; as appears in the examples of the Apostles in the Acts. Acts
5.41. Acts 16.
Now the voice of Joy belongs to conquest; this is notorious in some of our
own Nation, as Farrar, Hawks. This last was desired by some godly friends for
their confirmation, to give some token when he was in the flames (a strange
time one would think to attend upon signs or friends) whether the pain were
tolerable or no. He was bound to the stake, fire put to the vvood, it burns,
it flames, it consumes the flesh of this Saint; his eyes start out of his head,
his fingers are consumed with the fire; and when every one thought him dead,
expecting the fall of his body: Lo, suddenly he lifts up his stumps, and
thrice as a famous Conqueror, he claps them over his head. Fox, Acts and Mon.
p. 1447.
In this he was more then a Conqueror.

2. In regard of their Tormentors. Victoria abhinc pro quo certas. Tertull.
Apol.
Victory is to obtain that which we strive for. Now what is the strife between
the Christian and the Tormentor? The Tormentor seeks to drive the Christian to
deny Christ. The Christian, for all his torments, the more confesses him. The
Tormentor fumes and chafes, signs that he has not his will, and therefore is
overcome. The Christian rejoices and is constant, and therefore goes away with
the victory. Julian the Apostata, that savage, obtained not his purpose by his
cruelty. Nay one of his nobles at the tormenting of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa,
said unto him, Greg. Nazianz. orat. 1. in Julian. Imp.
We are ashamed, O Emperor; the Christians laugh at your cruelty, and grow the
more resolute: for these things are more fearful to the tormentors, then to
the sufferers. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
Also the Tormentors in the execution of a woman, Blandina by name, confess
themselves overcome.

3. In regard of them which are not converted; for their patience and
constancy have converted many. The occasion of Iustine Martyr his conversion
was, the constancy and joy he saw in the Martyrs who suffered for Christ. This
made him search into their Religion, and searching he found it to be the
right, and dyed in and for the same. So also an Eunuch under Sapores Souldane
of Persia, reuolting after profession made of Christian Religion, was
reconuerted by the constancy and patience of a Bishop at his execution, and
after became a Martyr.

4. In regard of the converted, who by their patience are confirmed in courage:
so Paul says His bonds were famous; Phil. 1.14.
so that many of their brethren were boldned thereby, and dare more frankely
speak the Word.

5. In regard of their friends: For they leave a sweet memory between them,
wherein all their kindred boast and rejoice. If any man suffer as an evil
doer, his friends are ashamed of him. But it is accounted (and justly) a credit
to have a Martyr of our own Name and Stock: And we read of Parents, who have
encouraged their children to suffer, thinking themselves much honored, to
bring forth children, to suffer for Christ. Thus are the Saints in their
sufferings conquerors above all others.

Use 2.
Christians are not to look to be exempt from troubles, but they are sure to
overcome: Formido sublata est, non pugna. Leo Ser. 7. de Ieiun. 10. mensis.
Their Fear shall be taken away, not the fight. And it is more to be wished to
suffer, then to avoid trouble. It is as much for Gods glory, to give us victory
by suffering, as to deliver us by miracle. And therefore one says, that God
did more gloriously triumph in Saint Lawrence his patience and constancy,
Rupertus.
when he was broiled on the Gridiron, then if he had saved his body from
burning by a miracle.

Here must be remembered the resolution of three men. Dan. 3.
God is able to deliver us: but if he will not, yet know, we will not forsake
him. Our eye must be on the prize to overcome, and otherwise not to be freed.

Use 3.
That we may overcome in our sufferings, two things are requisite. 1. Faith.
2. A good Conscience, as Saint Paul notes. 2. Tim. 2.19.


Faith is that whereby we overcome the world. 1. Ioh. 5.4.
This made the Martyrs such Conquerors. And Cyprian reports of diverse, Cypr.
Sermon. de lapsis.
who forsaking the Faith, were given over to evil spirits and dyed fearfully.

As Faith is requisite, so a good Conscience. An evil Conscience makes us
dastards, and cowards, loath to suffer any death, much less a death for Christ.
A good Conscience makes us bold as a Lion. As all Samsons strength lay in his
hair, so all our courage in both these.

Alas, how would we grieve, and cry shame of him which should renounce Christ,
and become a Jew or Turk! Surely if thou have an evil Conscience, walking
wickedly, thou art in this danger if trouble should come. Nay, thou do even
Now more deny Christ. A more grievous sin it is in these days of peace, to
be overcome with Pride, Whoredom, Drunkenness, and so to deny Christ, then
to deny him in the days of persecution, being overcome with torments.

The Tyrant says, Deny Christ, or I will burn thee, hang thee, etc. Satan
says, Follow thy Lust, swear, lie, be unclean, etc. and thou shall have a
little pleasure. In this case, my opinion is, that he who obeyes the Tyrant,
sins less then he that obeyes the Devil.

The Tyrant threats such things as force Nature. The Devil shows such things
as please it, and he can but solicit and tempt; overcome he cannot, except we
consent. He that suffers, is compelled by fear; he that is tempted, yields of
his own accord, and that, to him from whom he is redeemed by Christ's death.
Greater pardon is for him who denies Christ in torment, then for him which
assenteth to the Devil, to whom to give credit is the vilest denial. In one
of our Temples to hear Mass, thou accountest (as it is) an abominable thing.
Mayor venia debetur Christum in tormentis neganti, quam sponte assentienti:
Zabulo. Cyp.
And yet in the Temple of God which is thy self, thou worshippest Venus and
Bacchus, by Whoredom and Drunkenness, etc. When will thou suffer for Christ?
Thou which wilt lie and forswear for a Groat, will thou stick to deny Christ
himself, if thy whole estate should be in danger by it? Thou which in an Ague
wilt send out to the Devil for help and ease, will thou rather burn at a
stake then renounce Christ? Thou which by no Exhortation or Admonition, wilt be
persuaded to leave thy pride, will thou account thy self base for Christ's
sake? No, No. If such a time should come: Thou would turn Turk, Jew, or any
thing, rather then suffer death.

Therefore that we may be Martyrs if the fiery Trial should come; let us now
Martyr our sins. Non potest habere Martyrum mortem, qui non habet
Christianoru^ vitam. Aug. Epistola. 61.
There is a Martyrdom even in peace. For though our heads are not stricken off
with the Temporal sword, yet with the spiritual we mortify our Carnal
lusts and desires.

The cause of the Victory is, By him which loved us. Which is a pithy
description of Christ: As if he should say, It may be you marvel at the
patience of the Saints: this is not by their own strength, but by Christ's who
loves them.

Christ is the cause of our constancy and victory in trouble. 1. Ioh. 4.4. 1.
Cor. 15.

Use
If we be left to our selves, the world will overcome us as it did Demas: Nay,
we are not able to bear an Ague, the Toothache, much less the torment of
Fire: Many in the presumption of their own strength have grieously fallen:
Peter vowed to dye at his Masters feet, but he foully failed afterward.
Doctor Pembletons Story proves this also, of whom we read in the Book of
Martyrs. Fear God, depend upon him, pray to be confirmed, then will he do
above all thou can ask or think.

VERSE 38. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


IN these Verses the third tentation is removed, which is from the evil
supposed to be in God; which is mutabilitie of his love, and it is brought in
as answering a doubt.

Some might say: Nothing can so press us, but that we shall be sure to
conquer, if God continue to love us, and to stand on our side.

Paul confidently answers, that not only no tribulation as before; but no
creature or thing that is or may be present or to come; no Wit, Power, or
Policy; no Men, Devils, Angels, if they were all mustered in one army, could
separate Gods children, from his love unto them in Christ Jesus. If any thing
could, then these all, or some which are reckoned; but not these, therefore
nothing.

In these words are two parts. 1. A Proposition, That Nothing can separate us
from Gods love. 2. The Amplification which is double. 1. Paul's persuasion upon
great experience. 2. The ground of his persuasion, which is, that Gods love is
not grounded upon us, but upon Christ; whose merit is infinite, and efficacy
omnipotent; and therefore Gods love never to fail.

I am persuaded; That is, I am infallibly certified: it is my Faith, no Moral
conjecture: some note that under this word is employed, that Paul was brought
unto this assurance by the preaching of the Word.

That neither Death, nor Life: Death cannot, which is of all terrible things
the most terrible: and life cannot, though it be sweet, as we say; which the
Devil knew well enough when he said, Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life! Death
cannot, for it is our Advantage: which a wicked man spied out, when he wished
Numb. 23.10.
that he might dye the death of the Righteous, and that his latter end might
be like theirs. Life cannot: for Gods children, are ready to offer up their
lives as a sacrifice to God. In trouble, many have borne much, who have been
overcome of pleasure; but no Adversity, which is meant by death, the chief of
things feared, nor any pleasure, which is meant by life, the chief of the
things desired, can set GOD off from his children.

Nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers. Some write here of the distinction
conceived to be among ministering Angels; I meddle not with that, neither think
I that Paul aimed at it here. Some mean good Angels: some evil, for these
titles are given to both: To good: Ephesians. 1.21. To evil: Col. 2.15. I
subscribe to them who think both meant. The evil cannot, though they
enterprise it what they can; The good will not, who rather rejoice at the
Conversion and constancy of the Saints.

Q. But why should Paul speak of good Angels?

A. For our greater Consolation. And it is to be understood conditionally;
that if they should attempt it (which they never will do) yet neither their
cunning, nor strength is able to do it, so sure is our salvation founded upon
the blood and merit of Jesus Christ. The like confident speech Paul uses in
another place. Gal. 1.8.
Though an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed.
It is impossible that the Angels should; but if they should: So here in this
place.

Nor things present, nor things to come. Things which we now endure, or to be
endured hereafter. Things present work either grief, or delight: things to
come, either fear or desire: whatsoever they work, they cannot work our
separation from God.

Nor height, nor depth: 2. Cor. 10.5.
Some understand prosperity, and adversity: some honor and baseness: some
the sublimitie of man's reason, called a high thing some-where, and humility of
mind: some the height of authority and depth of wisdom, as we call a wise
man, a profound man: some the elements above and below us: some heaven and
earth: some heaven and hell; and so Chrysostom, whose exposition I take to be
least constrained. Quocunque modo profundum and sublimitas intelligatur, non
poterit nos ab amore Christi separare. Ansel.
But howsoever it be taken, whether all, or one of these ways, or any other
way, it cannot separate us from the love of God in Christ.

Nor any other creature; Not extant: as if he should dare all creatures that
are or may be; which is set to the rest as an etc. in the end of a sentence.

Gods love can never fail, to his Church, and children, Iam. 1.17. Esaias
54.9,10. Mat. 16 18. Ioh. 10.28. and 13.

Use 1.
Nothing can separate us from the sense of Gods love; but have sense we cannot
without Faith: Therefore Faith cannot fail.

Use 2.
The ground of Gods love to us is Christ: in our selves we are odious, in him
beloved.

Use 3.
All other estates and things in this life are uncertain: only the state of
Gods children is certain.

The favor of a King is a great matter: but the Kings Favorite may either by
envy, or just desert, as Haman, be cast off: Yea Kings themselves have no
certainty, as appears in Nebuchadnezzar: But neither envy, nor our own
deseruings, if once the children of God, can separate us from him. We may
sin, but we cannot finally and totally fall away. God will correct us because
we sin, but never forsake us, because we are his. For our estate stands upon
four brazen pillars, which are all founded upon, and vpholden by Christ.

1. The Unchangeableness of Gods love. 2. The Immutabilitie of Predestination:
3. the Infallibility of his Promises: 4. The continual Intercession of Christ.
All these are in Christ. In Christ he loves us: In Christ we are predestined;
All the promises are yea and Amen in Christ; and it is Christ that makes
intercession for us. So that upon these grounds whosoever stands, must needs be
certain. Yea, with reverence be it spoken: Christ must cease to be himself,
if we be not saved; neither can he be saved without us, as the head lives not
without the body.

Use 4.
The state of Gods children is sure in it self, and in God: and they know it
to be so, and that it shall so continue.

Object. But they doubt.

Ans. True: but they overcome doubting by their Faith. So that though by their
flesh they doubt: yet by their Faith they are certain: as Paul says here, He
is persuaded.

Ob. Paul was indeed sure, but by Revelation.

A. It is no where so written, nor can be proved: Apostolus non loquitur
singulariter de se, sed in persona omnium Praedestinatoru^. Aquin. in loc.
and Paul speaks here not singularly of himself, but in the person of all
the predestinate, as in the whole current of the rest of this Chapter and
Epistle appears. Otherwise by this objection of exemption by privilege, it
may as well be avouched that Saint Paul intends to prove or auerre no more,
then that only Paul accounted the afflictions of this present to be invaluable
to the future glory; 8.18.
that only Saint Paul had the first fruits of the Spirit; 8.23.
that Christ made intercession only for S. Paul. And so his comfortable
arguments here delivered, should serve rather for a glorious displaying of the
special privilege of the Writer, then for the personal application, and
sound comfort of the children of God, his fellow-beleeuers, to whom, and for
whom he wrote this and other Epistles. Therefore, this comfortable and firm
persuasion certainly is a thing common to all believers.

Ob. But the word sometimes signifies a coniecturall persuasion, which may
fail.

A. But so it cannot here by the judgment of our Adversaries themselves, who
say that he was certain by Revelation. When this word is used of others,
singulars: it is the persuasion of Charity which may fail. But when of the
holy Catholic Church, or of our selves according to the word, then it is the
persuasion of Faith, which is most certain.

Ob. But we may be sure now, but not of the time to come.

A. Yes, well enough: because Paul says, no future thing can separate us from
Gods love. 1. Cor. 13.8.
And if our Charity shall never fall away, much more shall Gods love continue.

Doubt not therefore, but be believing. And yet this is not our praise not to
doubt, but to overcome doubting by our Faith. Let this encourage thee against
all tentations. Martial men descend with great resolution to the battle,
uncertain of the event. Thou art certain of victory, be therefore courageous.

Use 5.
If we esteem not Christ's love above all other things, he may have just cause
to account his blood and love ill bestowed on us. If a wife should love her
husbands estate, more then himself, she were unworthy: so were we, if we
should prefer any thing before God, who loves us Thus. Phil. 3.8.
Paul accounts all other things as dung in comparison hereof. Nay, our Savior
says, Luke 14.26.
that he that hates not all dear things in comparison of Him, is not worthy
of him.

Heaven is not so much to be desired as Gods love, nor hell so much to be
feared, as the want of it. It is better to be in hell with Gods love, then in
Heaven without it, if that were possible. Love Christ then more then Heaven,
more then thine own soul, who left heaven to redeem thy soul.

Whom do thou love best? Christ? or other things? If thou bestowest more
pains to get riches, and more cost to compass thy pleasures, then thou do
to obtain Christ: sure thou love these above Christ. If thou will neglect
Christ and his Word, rather then renounce thy vile affections; thou love thy
self more then Christ. He that tastes honey, rellisheth not other things; so
where the love of Christ is, other things will be of small account. As the
Stars, though they be as well in the day as in the night, yet shine clearly
in the absence of the Sun, and are obscured in his presence: so till men
taste of Christ, worldly things are pleasant and admired: but when Christ
comes, they be nothing delightful as before.

THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.
CHAP. IX.
WHile we were conversant in the former Chapter, we dwelt amongst many
comforts: Now we are to deal in a subject of another nature: Then we camped
as it were in Elim, in a place of Palm trees and water: now we are to pass
into a wilderness of much difficulty and trouble. There we lodged in a sweet
Harbor of consolation; here we must put into the Ocean, and almost bottomless
depth of abstruse and hidden mysteries.

If it be as a wilderness, we hope for the holy Spirit as that pillar, to
guide our way, and to lead us into the Truth, which is more nourishable then
the honey and milk of Canaan. If it be as an Ocean, we hope by the benefit of
our Card, which is the Word, and the Pylot, which is the Spirit, with the wind
of Prayer, and Oars of diligence, to arrive safely unto the Land; yea, with
Moses to walk through the Bottom unto the desired shore of Truth: he that gave
us assistance to speak of comfort, will also enable us to speak of these
secrets.

Qui dedit quod locuti simus, dabit, sicut eredimus quod loquemur. Leo sermon. 1.
de pass. Dom.
This and the two next Chapters following pertain to one Argument, about the
coherence whereof Interpreters speak diversely, yet almost all agree in this,
that Paul here remooues a great objection of the Jews, against the doctrine of
Justification before delivered, which was made after this manner: If none be
justified but by faith in Christ, then the Jews are not justified, but in the
state of condemnation: for they hate Christ, have crucified him, and persecute
such as believe in him. But it is absurd to affirm that the Jews should not
be justified. Therefore men may be justified, though they believe not in
Christ.


The Minor assumed has three fortifications as the Jews think impregnable.

First, the promises are made to them and theirs: But if Paul's doctrine of
Justification be true, then the promise fails, and God is made less then
his word: which is blasphemy to avouch.

Secondly, No people under the Sun are so zealous of righteousness; which
their righteousness and zeal that it should be of no reckoning, and the
Gentiles that never intended the Law, to be received for their faith in Christ;
seems contrary to Reason and Justice.

Thirdly, then has God cast off his people whom he has chosen? which is not
to be thought: and therefore they conclude that Justification by faith, is a
doctrine of Paul's devising, and not the Truth of God.

For answer to the Argument, the Minor is to be denied. For it is not absurd
to affirm but the truth; that the Jews, because they believe not in Christ,
are not Justified. The fortifications raised for defense, are easily razed: The
first in this 9. Chapter; the second in the tenth; and the last in the eleventh.

VERSE 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost.

2. That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart.


IN this nynth Chapter Paul shows, that though the Jews be rejected, yet the
promise fails not; which was originally never meant to any unbelieving, either
Jew or Gentile. And therefore he expounds the promise made to the Jews: upon
that occasion falling into the doctrine of Predestination, and of the reiection
of the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles: which before he enters into, he
premiseth a Preface to prepare the minds of the Jews to the patient reading of
the same.

So that in this Chapter are two parts. 1. A Preface in the five first verses.
2. The Treatise it self, concerning the stability of the promise of God,
notwithstanding the casting off of the Jews.

Because it was odious to the Jews to hear of their reiection, and that the
Gentiles should be admitted to favor: Therefore Paul in the Preface
protests solemnly both of his love to his Nation, and exceeding hearts
grief for their Reprobation, that it might appear these things to be spoken
not of malice and spleen, as they were ready to interpret, but of conscience
toward God and his Truth, which was his office to deliver.

In the General, from this Preface a note may be observed for Ministers.

Use 1.
Ministers are to speak the Truth though it displease: yet with sobriety of
wisdom after the example of Paul, so as we may, if it be possible, with
gentle and loving means, win the affections of the Auditors both to us, and
our doctrine.

In this, two sorts of Ministers much fail: First, those which are so tender
and studious to please, that they are loath to speak any but sweet words,
though men rot in their sins.

Secondly, those which are as far on the other extreme, accounting all
prefacing and loving speaking to be dawbing, and no sentence to be zealously
delivered, unless Damnation and Damned be at the end of it: whereby many
times, they drive them farther from Christ, whom they would have converted unto
him. Let such imitate Paul's discretion here, who might have been rough with
these stubborn and obstinate Jews, and have spoken hardly to them, being
haters and Persecutors of Christ and his members: but he chooses rather to
speak mildly, as being likely to do more good. So he advised Timothy: 2.
Tim. 2.24.25
The servant of Christ (says he) must be gentle toward all men, even evil
men, instructing them with meeknes. So he practiced himself, with his kind
words, so insinuating into King Agrippa his affections, that he had almost
persuaded him to be a Christian: Acts 26.28.
when rough words might have much exasperated his mind.

Use 2.
Hearers would be also admonished, not to prescribe their Teachers what they
shall preach. For some ignorantly, either desire never to hear of their
sins, because of their great profanenes. Or out of a pride and presumption of
their own righteousness above others, All preaching which is not declamatory,
and inuectiue against sin, is cold preaching with them.

Pray for thy Teacher, and be content to hear thy sin reproved; and above
all, desire to hear of Christ Jesus, and the mercy of God in him, the next and
immediate cause of converting a sinner.

The sum of the Preface in the five first verses, is a protestation of his
love, manifested by his exceeding grief for their Reiection. Or a protestation
of his grief, issuing from his love.

In it there are two parts. 1. A Complaint. 2. A Justification of it. The
Complaint is in the second verse, first to be handled. The Justification, ver.
1. 3. 4. 5.

VERSE 2. That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart.


IN this Complaint, principally is to be considered that which he complains
of: which is his great grief: which must needs argue great love. Conceruing
which grief are two things: 1. The greatness of it. 2. The Cause.

The greatness is set forth three ways. 1. By a Comparison expressed in a
word, signifying the pains and sorrow of a woman in travel (...).
. 2. By the Continuance of it: It was without intermission. 3. From the feat of
this sorrow. It was not outward, or in the face, in a few Crocodiles tears,
but in the heart, and therefore a sharp and dangerous sorrow.

The Cause is not expressed for the horror of the thing: his mind trembled to
name it: and it would have been full of Envy. But it is easily gathered out of
the matter following; namely, for the Reiection and Reprobation of the Jews.

The children of God grieve for the hardness of heart, and condemnation of the
wicked. So they are described, Ezec. 9.4. So did Jeremy, Jeremy 9.1. So did
David, Psalm 119.53. So did Christ, Ioh. 11.33.

Q. Is it lawful so to mourn, their destruction being the execution of Gods
just Decree, which we are cheerfully to reprove, and rejoice in?

A. In the punishment of sinners, when we look upon the glory of Gods
Justice, we joyfully approve it: When on the destruction of the Creature, we
lament it. As the Cameleon is colored according to that which is next it: so
the mind puts on affections, after the nature of the thing it does
contemplate. As a Judge, when malefactors are arraigned before him, is moved
with indignation as they are malefactors, and with compassion as they are
miserable men; so is it in this case.

Use 1.
Because Paul loves the Jews, he grieves for their downfall: for grief
arises from the hurt of the thing we love. If we love not, we are not moved
and according to the degree of our love, is the measure of our grief. David
exceedingly grieved for Absolon; for he loved him exceedingly.

Examine thine affection in spiritual things; thy love by thy joy and grief.
Do thou love the Word of God? then thou will rejoice to hear it, and that
it should have free passage; and wilt grieve, if it be hindered or ill reported
of. If thou do not thus, thou love it not. Thou say thou love Gods
glory; then is it meat and music to thee, to see men to fear God, to keep
his Sabbaths, etc. and, as a dagger at thy heart, to hear men blaspheme, and
to see men follow after ungodliness; otherwise, thou love not God not his
glory.

Use 2.
The Jews resist Paul's doctrine through the hardness of their hearts: This
caused both his grief, and also their Reiection.

If the Husbandman plow every year, and sow, but his seed rots under the
clots, and never comes up, he cannot but grieve: so Paul, when his doctrine
has no success. The thriuing of the flock, is the glory of the Shepherd,
and the wound of the sheep, is more to the Shepherd then to the sheep. Plus
Pastor in gregis sui vulnere vulneratur. Cypr sermon. de lapsis.


Though we be not afraid; yet if our people be, it touches us nearly; What if
we save our own souls, yet if our people perish, we cannot but sorrow, as a
careful Father, for the destruction of a wretched son.

Ease thou thy Teachers heart, and joy him by thy repenting. It will be good
for thee, if thy Teacher can praise God for thy conversion: and on the contrary
fearful, and unprofitable, if in his prayers, he have cause to complain of
thy stubbornness. Heb. 13.17.


Use.
Let us mourn for the sins of the Times, and weep in secret for the
Iniquity of the people; so let us rejoice when God is glorified by the
conversion of men. Christ's gain, and Satan's loss should cause our joy. We
can grieve when our children prove unthrifts, and when our friends decay in
their worldly estate, and on the contrary rejoice; but such joy and grief are
carnal. The conversion of thy friend, howsoever he go backward or forward in
the world, ought to be matter of thy Joy, and if he be profane, how rich so
ever, matter of thy mourning. Luke 15.23.
The Father of the Prodigal rejoiced when his son came home a Convert,
though he had spent all, and had not a ragge to hang on his back.

What Monsters are they which make the sins and destruction of men, matters
of their greatest mirth? which ought to wring even tears of blood from them.
When thou hear a blasphemer, see a drunkard, etc. can thou laugh? If
thou should see a man grievously wounded, fetching deadly groans, and drawing
his last breath, would thou account it sport or pastime? How much less
should thou rejoice, when thou see thy brother wounding and stabbing
himself even to the heart by his abominable sins? We lament over the bodies
of our friends, which we believe shall be raised to glory at the last day;
much more over the souls of men which go down under the power of everlasting
death.

It is the Devils delight (if those hellish spirits can have any delight.) It
is their delight to see men sin and offend their God: Luke 15.10.
Even as the holy Angels rejoice at the conversion of sinners. Let us not be
like the Devil; but contrary to him, and grieve at that which he takes
pleasure in, which if we would do, it might so come to pass, that our grief
might work also a grief in them that offend: as many times the seeing others
fall heartily to their meat, brings on our stomach.

When thou see sinners in words or behavior to be out of the way; If thou
could in stead of a smile, afford a tear: thy tear might make them relent,
whom thy smile confirms in their wretchedness.

VERSE 1. I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost.


PAVL proves his grief (proceeding from his love) for the Reiection of his
Nation, by diverse Arguments. The first is a Testimonio, in the form of an
Oath, where he calls Christ himself to witness of that he delivers. The
validity of a Testimony, is according to the value of the Testis: Therefore
he appeals to Christ, as his witness.

I speak the Truth in Christ: Not in the name and authority of Christ: nor as
I am a Christian, or as it becomes a Christian, or I being in Christ, or being
baptized: but By Christ: As Beth sometime in the Hebrew, so En in the Greek,
is the token of an Oath in this place; Piscator. 2. Cor. 12.2.
and so also some expound that of Paul. I know a man in Christ: that is, By
Christ: yet not by Christ as only a man, but as God.

I lie not: This duplication of contraries, is here, as elsewhere, used for the
more force, and to show his syncerity. For a man may lie, and yet speak the
truth; as when he adds a lie unto the truth: And therefore it is well
provided by our godly Laws, that men to give in evidence, are sworn to speak
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. Paul in this Affirmation and
Negation, frees himself from this.

Again, a man may lie in speaking the Truth: For our speech has Relation
either to the mind, or to the thing. If it agree with the thing, and not with
the mind, it is a lie, for that properly makes a lie. If it agree with the
mind, and not with the thing, it is false, but no lie: and therefore because
we discern not men's minds, we must be wary how we give any the lie. Paul
therefore for the more credit of his oath, and that all exceptions of
ambiguitie, mental reservation, or equivocation might be taken away, he put
his oath Affirmatively, and Negatiuely.

My conscience bearing me witness: Paul here neither swears by his
Conscience, nor by the holy Spirit, though this might be justified: but he
iustifies his oath by the witness of his Conscience. For Conscience is a
thousand witnesses, being for this purpose placed in man by God.

In the holy Ghost: That is, renewed by the Holy Ghost: so that Paul could speak
in no words with more weight, against all exceptions then he uses here.

First he avouches it the truth which he delivers: I speak the truth; and
because no Jew should cavil that part may be truth, and part a lie; He adds,
I lie not: and because his word it may be would bear no pawn, He adds an
Oath: And because the Oath of an unconscionable man is little worth, he brings
in his Conscience; and because unless the Conscience be enlightened and
directed, it may err; therefore he signifies that his Conscience is renewed by
the holy Ghost.

So we have here two things. 1. Paul's Oath. I speak the truth in Christ, I lie
not: 2. The auouchment of his Oath: My Conscience bearing me witness in the
Holy Ghost. I might here enter into the common place of Truth, Lying, Oath,
Conscience; but I write a brief Commentary, not a volume, of Common places.

First, in Paul's Oath we have three things. First, the Person that makes Oath:
Paul. Secondly, the Person by whom the Oath is made: Christ. Thirdly, the
Cause, which is a matter of weight and great consequence; namely; that Paul
writes not in malice, but in love, and that he grieves for the Reiection of
his Nation.

The Doctrine out of the first. It is lawful for Christians in due time,
cause, and manner to swear: We have Jacobs oath, Genesis 31.35.
David's oath, 1. Sam. 20.3.
Paul's oath, Christ's oath, Gods oath: it is a part of Gods service commanded,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. and without it a Commonwealth cannot stand.

Use
The Anabaptists are here confuted, who deny the use of all oaths.

Ob. But Christ says and his Apostle Saint James, Mat. 5.34. Iam. 5.12.
Swear not at all.

A. That is, unlawfully.

Ob. But what is more then Yea, and Nay, comes of evil.

A. True: Yet it is not evil. As good Laws come from evil manners, yet the
Laws are good.

The Doctrine out of the second. They which swear, must swear by God, Deuteronomy.
6.13.

Use.
Abuse not this sacred thing.

1. Either by Impious oaths, as naming any part of Christ's humanity, his
Blood, Life, Wounds, etc. which is most fearful.

2. Or by civil oaths; as by This Bread, This Drink, This Light, These ten
Bones, This good Day, This money, etc. These I call Civil, because they are as
common amongst careless Christians, as any Civil talk.

3. Or by Superstitious Oaths: as Saint Anne; Saint Mary: Faith, Troth,
Holy-dome, the four Evangelists.

4. Or by any thing that is not: for in so doing, thou placest these in Gods
room, attributing both infinite Knowledge, Power and Justice unto them.

5. Or by Swearing falsely: A Christian may not be found tardy in any:
especially bound with an oath: His very calling must keep him from Lying,
Cogging, Glozing and all tricks, and make him to love the Truth.

The Doctrine out of the third. In matters weighty we may swear: Ier. 4.2.
Such is Paul's oath here: and such are all the holy oaths of the Saints. This
is lawful not only in public, but in private, as David and Jonathan so
swear. So a man may require an Oath of his Executor for his just dealing, as
Joseph did of his Brethren for his bones. Genesis 50.25.


Use.
Beware of common and customable swearing, and the horrible and blasphemous
practice of these times. The Turks swear not, but upon great necessity: and
an idle swearer is not admitted among them to places of government. Be ashamed,
thou Christian; the Turks shall rise in Judgment against thee. It has the
Devil for the beginning, and hell for the end of it.

We should use Oaths as our Holy day apparel; but seldom. A man will not
wear his Holyday clothes every day and in every work: so we should not
ordinarily and upon every trifle use the Name of God. Thus to do, is a sign
of an irreligious person, of a very wretch.

And if thou have sworn to a Truth, keep thy Oath for the reverence of the
Name of thy God. If thou have pawned some precious thing for performance, thou will be careful to redeem it; much more careful ought thou to be, having
as it were pawned the Name of thy God.

Out of the Auouchment, the Doctrine. A man's Conscience bears witness of all
his words and thoughts, either with him or against him, Romans 2.15.

Use 1.
Take his Oath that has a good Conscience. As a profane man makes no more
account of his oaths, then of straw: so also do thou account of them. And
urge not such to swear; for they will swear to any thing.

Use 2.
The testimony of Paul's conscience comforts him, though the Jews credit him
not: The world holds thee for a good man or woman. But what says thy
conscience? if that know thee not so, the testimony of the world is nothing:
and though the World knows it not, yet inow know it, if thy Conscience know
it. Virtue requires no better witness then the conscience Nullum theatru^
virtuti maius quam conscientia. Cicero.


The world accuses thee for whoredom, theft: but what says thy conscience? If
thy conscience excuse thee, thou may be comforted. There is more force in
the testimony of a man's conscience, then in the testimony of all the world.
Augustine Aug. contra Secund. cap. 1.
being accused by Secundinus, to have come from the Manichees for fear of
loss, or desire of preferment, comforted himself in the integrity of his
conscience. I esteem not, says he, what Secundinus thinks of me, so long as
my conscience accuses me not before God.

Use 3.
Be watchful over thy thoughts, words and deeds, because conscience will bear
witness, and always for God. It is Gods Officer for the purpose, put into us
to keep us in awe. Take heed of Hypocrisy: for thy conscience will discover
thee. Take heed of secret sin: for though thou could hide it from men,
yea, from the devil, yet not from thy conscience. Thou see no witness.
See not thy self? The darkness may encourage to sin, but it cannot cover
sin Si arbitru^ non vides, teipsum non vides? Tuae conscientiae testimonium
non vereris? Nescis caliginem noctis no^ operterium esse, sed incentiuum
peccati? Ambr. Sermon. 7. in. Psalm. 119. prope finem.
; for as God sees in the dark, so does conscience also.

Let this make thee fear to sin: for as sighing follows grief, and
belching unwholesome meat, so the stinging witness of conscience after the
committing of sin. The witness and accusation of conscience is the first
revenge upon a sinner Prima est haec vltio, quodse Iudice, nemo nocens
absoluitur.
.

It is wisdom to make conscience our friend against the day of Judgment. It
is the best friend, and the worst enemy. Better have all the world against a
man then his conscience. Judas had the Scribes and Pharisees on his side, and
his purse full of money: but his conscience was against him, and he hanged
himself.

Many feel not the witness of their conscience, it sleeping, or being
benumbed or seared, through a continuance in the custom of sinning. Much
sinning stupifies the conscience for a time: but there is a day a coming
either of affliction, or death; and then all the world for a good conscience.
Or if a man dye as a beast, or as a stone, as Nabal, yet in the day of
Judgment conscience will speak, and not hold her peace.

Thou shall dye, but thy conscience cannot: It shall appear with thee at the
Judgment seat of Christ, when thou shall say, Have thou found me, mine
enemy? For as a seal makes impression into the Wax; so the memory of every
sin is engraven as with the point of a Diamond on the conscience, not to be
blotted out, but by the blood of Jesus Christ.

Thou may lose thy self, but thou can not lose thy conscience. The light
of it may be shadowed because it is not God, but not quite put out because it
is of God Obumbrari potest, quia non est Deus, extingui non potest, quia est a
Deo. Ter.
.

VERSE 3. For I could wish that may self were Or separated.
accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the Flesh.


IN this Verse is a second Argument, to prove Paul's grief for the reiection of
the Jews.

I could wish my self: By the duplication of the Pronoune, Paul most
significantly expresses himself.

To be accursed, or separated from Christ: There are diverse impertinent
expositions, which I leave. The word here used, signifies that which is put
apart from the use of man, and dedicated unto God, not after an ordinary
manner, as such things which might be redeemed; but with the accursing of them
who should convert it to their own use; and so by a translated sense it
signifies a perpetual separation from Christ. As therefore such things were
separated from men for honor sake: so applied to men, it signifies to be
separate from Christ for horror sake. This is Chrysostomes exposition, approved
of the best Interpreters. And as the Greek word is thus used; so, Sacer
properly signifying Holy, is used amongst the Latins by good Authors Auri
sacra fames. Virg. Sacer intestabilis esto. Hor.
, in a contrary sense.

For my brethren (not spiritual) but kinsmen according to the flesh, that is,
the Jews, as if he had said, I would be damned in their stead, that they
might be won to Christ and saved in mine. As David wished he might have dyed
for Absolon: and Christ dyed for us.

The Argument to justify Paul's grief, is from an effect of his love, which is
a contestation that for their sakes he would with all his heart be accursed
from Christ. Therefore he must needs be grieved for their separation.

This love of Paul is here amplified by three circumstances. 1. The Person
wishing, Paul. 2. The matter of his wish, to be accursed from Christ. 3. For
whose sake; for the Jews. Who? Paul? who was so zealous for Christ? To be
accursed from Christ, his only Joy and Desire? and for the Jews his enemies?
who laid continual wayt for him? about a forty of them vowing neither to eat
nor drink till they had his blood? Even thus it was; Even Paul wishes to be
accursed from Christ, for these. Chrysostom calls it a flame, a sea of love.
No sea so deep, no flame so bright as Paul's love.

Q. But is it lawful for Paul thus to wish? For it is to be holden as a truth
in Divinity, that every man is first to have a care of his own soul: yea,
the Papists affirm, that though the soul of the Virgin Marie (whom they too
much adore) were in peril, yet for her salvation we ought not to hazard our
own.

A. There are many farre-fetcht answers: For Interpreters have exceedingly
labored herein. We hardly understand how this should be, because we are far
from the measure of Paul's love.

Among all the Answers: there are 3. principal. The first is, that Paul uses
an Hyperbolicall speech, or that he spoke hastily, not well considering the
matter: but he spoke upon his oath, as we have heard: and therefore no
Hyperbole or oversight to be admitted.

The second, that he did not indeed so wish, but was ready so to do, if it
were lawful: but the words, and his oath take away this also: he did actually
so wish, and without supposition.

The third is Chrysostomes, which also Aquinas has: who make a double
separation from Christ. 1. To be separated from his love; which Paul by no
means wishes: neither is it lawful to desire either not to love Christ, or
not to be beloved of him. 2. To be separated from him only by punishment, in
regard of the fruition of heavenly joys; and so Paul wishes here, not so much
having an eye to the destruction of the Jews, as to the glory of Christ. The
unbelieving Jews did daily by vile speeches blaspheme Christ; the hearing
hereof was so grievous to Paul, that out of a great zeal he wished verily to
have been accursed from Christ, rather then that he should be so reviled: yet
so accursed, as that he would still love Christ, and be beloved of him. He will
for no cause be deprived of Christ's love; but he is content to lose his part in
Heaven for Christ's glory.

We ought to redeem the salvation of our very enemies, with the loss of
heavenly Joys to our selves, rather then Christ should lose his glory. So
Moses wishes, Exodus 32.12.32. For Gods glory ought to be more dear to us,
then any joy or good of our own.

Use 1.
If we consider Paul as a kinseman: we are taught what great love we owe to
our kindred. We are to love our Nature in all; but where there are most bands,
there should our love be most: Nature teaches this: and Grace perfiteth Nature.

Christ beginning to preach, first preached at Nazareth; to recompense the
place of his education. Luke 4.16.
And Paul says, 1. Tim. 5.8.
That he that provides not for his own, is worse then an Infidel. Husbands
ought specially to take care for the salvation of wife and children; brethren
for brethren, etc.

Use 2.
Consider Paul as an Apostle, 2. Pet. 5.2.
and then it teaches Ministers specially, to feed their own flocks; to pray
for them: to be affected with their stubbornenesse: So Samnel, Jeremy, etc.

Must Ministers take pains grieve, and burn out the Candles of their lives to
do their people good? Then is it not fit that their people should despise and
despite their Teachers, vexing them with their ungodly stomachs and profane
carriage: This is to increase their sorrow, which is so great, that it is
compared to the sorrow of a woman in travail. Gal. 4 19.


Use 3.
Consider Paul as a Christian: He feeketh the salvation of his enemies; so do
thou. Remember it was Cains speech, Am I my Brothers keeper? Thou must have
care of thy brothers, yea, of thine enemies: It will not serve the turn to
say, Every Fat shall stand on his own bottom. This is harsh to nature, but
Grace must ouereome corruption.

Use 4.
Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy, whether it be by the immediate hand
of GOD, or by the hand of the Magistrate: say not, It is no matter: If thou
feel thy heart to hammer such thoughts, strive and pray against it. Consider
Paul's example here, and David's in the Psalms: Psalm. 35.13.
To rejoice at other men's harms, is the way to have such things cast upon our
selves. Prou. 24.17.


Use 5.
The cause of Paul's wish is the glory of Christ, which ought to be more dear
unto us then our own salvation. Though we cannot attain to the measure of
Paul's zeal, yet we must aim at it, and endeavor our uttermost. Though Parents
are loath to part with their Children; yet for their good, they are content to
put them to school, and to bind them to Trades far off: So we can be
contented to enjoy life, liberty, etc. yet if the parting from these be to Gods
glory, we must be ready so to do. How few then be there which love Christ as
they ought? how few which would be content to part with Heaven for his honor?
for many will not for the glory of God, and the obtaining of Heaven, leave
their pride, whoredom, drunkenness, etc.

VERSE 4. Who are Israelites: to whom pertains the Adoption, and the Glory,
and the Or Testaments.
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises.

5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the Flesh, Christ came,
who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen.


HEre is the third Argument to prove Paul's grief, and to manifest his love
toward the Jews, and it is a confession of diverse singular privileges, as
their due. These he reckons, not that it cannot be that God should abdicate
such a people; but that he might show his love. For he does not extenuate
their worth, which is the effect of hatred; but largely confesses it, which is
a token of his love: And therefore his grief must needs be so much the more,
that a people so endowed (the attractiue of his love) should for their hardness
and stubbornenesse be rejected.

Who are the Israelites? that is, because they are the Israelites: the Relative
being here put for the Conjunction causal, which is ordinary in the Scripture.
So Psalm. 7.10. God is my defense, who keeps the true in heart: that is,
because he keeps. So I expound that controuerted place, 1. Tim. 5.17. The
Elders, etc. especially they who labor; that is, because they labor.

Israelites: Genesis 32.
That Nation had this name from Jacob, who was so called upon a special
occasion mentioned in his story? Israel signifies a Prince, or Preuailer with
God, or (as we may say, Gods Favorite. The Name Jews, was first not so
general, signifying only them, who, in Rehoboams time, at the division of the
kingdom, cleaued to the house of Judah; but after the Captivity, it grew to be
a general Name: for all of that Nation of what Tribe soever. He says not,
which are the Jews, which was a name of great excellency; but, which are the
Israelites: a more ancient Name, and more honorable: beside, the name Jew was
then in much contempt, as it is at this day.

To whom pertaines the Adoption: not Eternal in Christ, proper to the Elect,
of which Ephe. 1 5. but temporal: God passing by other Nations, and choosing
them to be his Church and people. Thus are they called his firstborn, his
white son and darling. Exodus 4.22. Iere. 31.20.


The glory: Psalm. 26.8. 1. Sam, 4.21.
that is, the Temple and the Arc, which are so called elsewhere, because
tokens of Gods presence among them.

And the Covenants: not the two Tables of the moral law, as Beza: but rather,
the covenant made with Abraham, and often renewed.

The giving of the law: which is to be referred both to the law it self,
which was a great privilege, to have a rule to teach them the true worship of
God, all other Nations wandering in the vanity of their own inventions: And to
the circumstances also with the which the law was given.

And the service of God: The ceremonial worship, which was most beautiful.
Other Nations knew there was a God to be served; but how, they knew not; and
therefore they fell into most horrible Idolatry.

The promises: Act. 2.39.
scattered through the Bible, entailed to the Jews and their children; so that
whosoever would come to God, must come by the means of the Jews.

Whose (not of whom) are the Fathers. This also is a great privilege, to
descend of honorable Ancesters: as of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of the which
the Jews often boasted: and indeed they are in regard of their births, the
honorablest Nation under the Sun.

Of whom came Christ: He took his humane nature of their stock. It is a great
honor to all mankind that he took not the Nature of Angels, but of Man. But
much more to that Nation, that he took the seed of Abraham.

And making mention of Christ, he does 2. things, 1. Describes him. 2.
Praises him.

His description is, that he is God over all: where we have great mysteries.
He came of the Jews, therefore he is very Man. He is God also, which the
Jews deny, etc. He also that came of the Fathers is God. Where we have his
two Natures; God, and Man, and their Personal union.

Blessed for ever. Amen. This addition of praise shows, that so often as we
have occasion to think on, or mention our blessed Savior, we should confess
his praise. All these privileges are great, yet not so much the praises of the
Jews, as the gifts of God.

The Jews were a most honorable people, Romans 30.1. Psa. 19.20.

Use 1.
Be equal toward all men, either Friends or Enemies: If friends, flatter them
not: Though Paul loves the Jews, yet he tells them of their faults: If
Enemies: Envy them not their privileges. The Jews are Paul's mortal enemies,
and wicked men; yet he makes them not worse then they are; he conceales not
their honor, but freely acknowledges it.

So if Magistrates be wicked, yet they are Magistrates, and so to be honored:
If Ministers be negligent and profane; Guali. hom. in locum.
yet till the authority of God and the Magistrate displace them, they are to
be reverenced as Ministers, and to have their Titles and Duties, that thereby
they may be put in mind of their duty.

Use 2.
The Jews are not to be hated, but to be beloved upon these Reasons, by Paul's
example.

Use 3.
Paul grieves that so worthy a people should be rejected; so it cannot but be a
grief to a godly mind; to see men and women of excellent beauty, comeliness,
wit, learning, place, etc. to live to the dishonor of GOD, and to go to hell.

Use 4.
Notwithstanding all these privileges, the Jews are cast off: It was much to
have such privileges, but they profited them not, because they adorned them
not, with believing hearts, and a godly life.

Let England think of this, who are no less privileged, though many less
godly.

They are Israelites, we are more, for we are Christians, a more honorable
Title. Art thou a Christian? For shame dishonor not that Title by living like
a Heathen.

They were the people of God, so are we: Let us obey him which they did not:
and then we shall never suffer as they do.

They had the Glory, the Covenants, the service, the Promises: So have we, let
us be warned by their harms to amendment of our lives, lest these things be
taken from us, as they were from them.

The Fathers are theirs: so are they ours by a better right: Theirs by the
right of the flesh, ours by the right of Faith.

Have thou Honorable, and religious Parents? Imitate their virtues: If they
have made thee honorable, so live thou, that thy children also may account it
their houour, not their shame to name thee, when thou art raked up in the dust.

Christ came of them: so came be of us also in the General, and for us, which
is a greater glory, else to come of us is not available. It is probable, that
many of Christ's kindred may be in hell. Had not Mary her self carried him in
her heart by Faith; her conceiving and carrying him in her womb, had little
auailed her soul. Beatior Maria peripe^endo fide Christum, quam concipiendo
car^. Aug.


No outward privileges can stop the Anger of God, if we be wicked: they do
rather make way for the same: as a man is more offended with the ill behavior
of a servant advanced by him. Remember at the day of Judgment thou shall be
stripped of all thy privileges, of Birth, Honor, etc. and shall stand naked
before God.

Use 5.
As it helped not the Jews, because they were Idolaters, to have Abraham to
their Father: so neither the Bishops of Rome, because they are vile Idolaters,
to have Peter for their Predecessor.

VERSE 6. Not as though the Word of God has taken none effect, etc.


NOw Paul enters the lists with the Jew, who objected against Justification by
Faith on this manner: If Justification be by Faith, then the Jews not
belceuing in Christ, cannot be justified. But the Jews must be justified,
though not believing. Therefore.


The Minor is denied; which they prove thus: If they be not Justified, but
Reprobated, then the Word of God takes no effect but fails: Therefore.


In this part of the sixth verse which we have in hand, Paul denies the Mayor,
affirming the plain contrary, that though they be reprobated, yet the Word of
God is not of no effect.

This conclusion Paul proves in the verses next following, taking away the
ground on the which the Jews built their Consequence, as we shall see by and
by.

The sum of that which in these words is propounded is, That though the
multitude of the Jewish Nation be rejected, yet the word (of promise) fails
not.

The promises of God are sure, Romans 4.16. 2. Cor. 1.20. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.17.

Use 1.
God is full of compassion, and has made many merciful promises: this is
comfortable: yet this were nothing, if God were changeable as we are, to day a
friend, to morrow a foe; making a promise to day, and repealing and reuersing
it to morrow. Laban changes often with Jacob, but God never changes with us,
but keeps his promise for ever, and his truth endures from generation to
generation.

We promise, and many times fail either by the mutability of our will, or the
Imbecilitie of our power, or the scantnesse of our knowledge, not being able to
foresee impediments. But God is not mutable, nor weak, nor ignorant: When he
promises, he foresees what can be against it; he is the same; he never
repents; and he is able to bring it to pass. Therefore if we be sure of the
promise, we are as sure of the performance.

This stabilitie and truth of God, vpholds us in trouble. Which if it could
fail, Satan had a thousand times ere this overthrown us. God promised David
he should be a King: But Saul was alive, and his enemy, and went about by open
force, and secret practices to kill David: so that in the eye of flesh and
blood, it is a thousand to one but David shall dye before Saul. For all this
David looks to be King. Why? Because God had promised, which promise comforted
him in all his troubles. Psalm. 119.41,42,49,50.
If thou would not be swallowed up in the surges of tentation, Cast anchor on
the truth and promises of God.

Use 2.
As are the promises, so are the threatenings: It cannot be proved from Adam to
this day, that God did ever in any tittle fail of his promise to the godly.
Neither can it, or ever shall be found that God ever has or will fail of one
jot of his threatenings, but that he will make them good upon the hayry scalpe
of such as go on in their wickedness without repentance.

Art thou a blasphemer or a drunkard, etc. and repentest not? If thou beleeuest
God to be true, and his Word, thou may read thine own sentence and doom:
Remember that God can as soon deny himself, as not perform his word, to
penitent, and impenitent. For he is true and constant, and requires such
Worshippers.

For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel.

VERSE 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children:
Genesis 21.12.
but in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

8. That is, they which are the Children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God: but the children of the Promise are counted for the seed.

9. Genesis 18.10.
For this is the word of Promise; At this time will I come, and Sara shall have
a son.


THe Jews did thus argue (as we have seen) that if they be Reprobated; then
the word of Promise takes no effect. The contrary whereof Paul avouched in the
first part of the sixth verse.

Here Paul proves that which he avouched; In which proof he takes away the
ground on which the Jews did insist.

Their ground was this: that the Promise was made to Abraham and his seed, and
to Isaac and his seed: which seed they affirmed themselves to be, and from
hence argued thus.

To Abraham's seed is the Promise made.

But we are Abraham's seed: therefore the promise of Remission of sin, and
Eternal life, must be performed to us, and if it be not, then does God fail
of his promise.

Paul answers to this Argument, by a distinction of the subject to whom the
promise was made; which subject is the seed of Abraham.

The seed of Abraham is of two sorts. Carnal, to which the promise is not
made: and Spiritual, to which it was made. The error of the Jews was, that
they made the Promise too general; counting all that descended of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob by a carnal generation, to be that seed to which the promises
should belong. But Paul shows, that the promise was never meant to all that
come of Abraham by the flesh, but to the spiritual seed, which were the
children of the promise.

So that there are two parts of Paul's answer. In the first part he shows,
that the promise is not meant to all them which are Israelites according to
the flesh. In these verses, and so to the 24. The second, that it is meant to
the elect of all Nations, from the 24. verse to the end of the chapter.

In this first part of Paul's answer, he shows, that though many of the Jews
be cast away, yet the promise is not made void; because the promise was never
meant to all the Jews, thus: If all were the Israelites to whom the promise is
made, then if all that descend of Israel, were not saved, the promise failed:
But all that descend of Israel, are not that Israel, to whom the promises were
made, verse 6. therefore.


The Minor is proved by a double instance: the first, of Abraham's children; the
second, of Isaac and Rebeccaes children.

The first instance is in the 7.8.9. verses. The second, in the 10.11.12.13.
verses. In the first instance are two things: the Proposition, verse. 7. the
sum whereof is, that though the tenor of the promise be to Abraham, and his
seed, yet that seed is determined in Isaac: so that all that are the carnal
seed of Abraham, are not children: that is, of God, or of the promises. For
Ismael and his posterity were excluded.

2. The exposition, v. 8. confirmed, by a testimony, ver. 9. They which are the
children of the flesh: that is, of the flesh of Abraham only, according to the
course of nature, are not thereby the children of God, but those which are the
children of the promise, according to the word of promise, are accounted for
the seed to whom the promises are made. Plainly, it is thus to be conceived.
Abraham has diverse sons, Ismael, Isaac, Zimram, Iocktan, Medan, etc. The
promise is made to Abraham and his seed: As if you should say, to Abraham and
his heirs; not meaning every son, but the heirs being nominated by God,
namely Isaac, and all such which are after the manner of Isaac: the seed being
to be expounded and restrained to the children of promise, and extended no
farther.

Q. What is meant by the children of promise, and who are they?

A. Isaac was a child of promise, in this regard, because he was begotten not
by the force of Nature, but by the force of the promise, Abraham and Sara being
then so old, that it was as possible for Abraham to have a child by Sara, in
nature, as for a stone to fly. So that all those which are after the manner of
Isaac, are children of promise, as is plain, Gal. 4.18.

Abraham is the Father of the faithful, not only because he is an ensample to
the faithful, but by believing the promise of the birth of Isaac. For by that
faith, he not only begat the promised Isaac, but all other Believers, which
were comprehended in the promise which Abraham believed: Isaac being a type of
all Believers both Jews and Gentiles.

The sum then is, that all they which are after the manner of Isaac, are the
seed or children of Abraham, that shall be blessed with him.

All Believers are the children and seed to which belong the promises, John
1.12. Romans 4.11. Gal. 3.7.9. and 4.28.

Use 1.
All are not true Israelites, which are of Israel, nor all true Christians, who
are named of Christ. As there were many in Abraham's house, who were not his
seed: so there are many in Gods house, which is the Church, which are not the
children of God.

See how thou can prove thy descent from Abraham; it requires more then to
make an outward profession. It requires Faith which is the Correlatiue of the
Promise. As Abraham by believing becam the Father of the faithful, so thou by
believing beco^mest the son or daughter of faithful Abraham.

Children for the most part bear the face and countenance of their Parents,
and look like them. Examine thy self. Abraham believed in God; was religious.
If he came where there was no Altar, he built one. If he came where was an
Altar, he worshipped God. He was also obedient, even to the offering up of
his son at Gods commandment. Do thou believe, and religiously worshippest
God publicly, privately, doing cheerfully what God commands thee? Surely
thou have Abraham's face; thou art his child.

Zaccheus, by his faith and obedience became the child of Abraham. He was no
Jew, as Chrysostom and others hold, though some say he was. If he were none,
be becomes an Israelite. If he were, yet not a child of Abraham by his
flesh, but by his faith. In like manner Peter tells women, (whether Jews or
Gentiles, it matters not) that by well-dooing, they are the daughters of Sara.

Art thou an unclean person, a drunkard, a Sabbath-breaker, proud, etc? All
the wit in the world cannot prove thee a child of Abraham. Was Abraham such a
one? No, no, thou have another manner of Father, as our Savior tells thee.
Ioh. 8.44.
Thou swearest, lie, stealest, etc. This did not Abraham. Thou, art of thy
father the Devil; for in this are the children of God, and the children of the
Devil known asunder: Ioh. 3.10.
They that are of God, will do righteousness; and they which are of the Devil,
delight in the contrary. Therefore I advise thee to walk in the steps of
Abraham, if thou would be his child.

VERSE 10. And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even
by our Father Isaac,

11. (For the children being not yet borne, neither having done any good or
evil, that the purpose of God, according to Election, might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls)

12. It was said unto her, Genesis 25.23.
Or Greater.
The Elder shall serve the Or Younger.
Younger;

13. As it is written, Mal. 1.2.
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.


HEre is another Instance, to prove, that the promises belong not to all them
who come of Parents to who^ and to their seed the promises are made.

This Instance is of the children of Isaac and Rebecca, which does more
strongly prove it then the former of Abraham and Sara. For against that diverse
objections might be framed, which have no place here. As, that Isaac was borne
of the free-vvoman, and when Abraham was circumcised; but Ismael of the
bondwoman, and in Abraham's uncircumcision: and therefore no marvel if Ismael
be excluded.

Here is no difference. One Isaac, one Rebecca, one Copulation, one Conception,
one Birth. No difference of Circumcision and Uncircumcision, and nothing in
Jacob which Esau had not. The Argument from hence is thus framed. If the
promise be made good to all Isaaks seed, then to Esau: But not to Esau.
Therefore it is not meant by God to all, but only to the Elect that come of
Isaac.


Here are two parts. First, the Instance, verse 10, 12, 13. Secondly, the
Amplification, verse 11. included in a Parenthesis, which I will handle by it
self.

In the Instance are two things; First, the Affirmation of the matter, verse
10. Secondly, the Confirmation, verse 12. Expounded, verse 13.

And not only this: The reading of this verse is diverse; some Neither he
only, referring it to Abraham; some, Neither she only, referring it to Sara;
and then they supply, felt this, or received the promise: but as the words are
now translated, are fewest supplies; and that which is supplied, referring us
to the whole matter precedent, makes better for the sense, which is, that it
plainly appears in Rebeccaes children, which were Twins, in nature every
way alike, that the promise belongs not to all of Isaac or Abraham.

This is proved, verse 12. (which is to be read with the 10. verse) by the
Oracle of God to Rebecca, when she resorted to the Lord for counsel about the
striving of the Children in her womb, before they were borne. Of which, Genesis
25.23. the sum whereof was, that the elder should serve the younger, that is,
should be deprived of the birthright, and so of the blessing, and of the
Inheritance of Canaan, a type of the heavenly inheritance. For these words are
not Historically to be understood of earthly honor and bondage, but mystically
of spiritual. For, as concerning earthly, it was contrary, Jacob calling Esau
Lord, and so behauing himself toward him.

This Oracle is expounded verse 13. by another out of Malachie. Jacob have I
loved, that is, elected, proceeding from Gods love; Esau have I hated,
proceeding from Gods hatred: which is not a passion in God, as in us; but his
Justice, so called, because it seems hatred to them which suffer it.

God hated not Esau as a man, but as a sinner.

Ob. But Jacob was a sinner also: How came he then to love him?

A. Aug. ad Simpl. lib. 1. q. ^.
He loved in Jacob, not the fault which he took away, but the grace which he
bestowed.

Where Nature is common and alike, there grace makes a difference: we are all
by nature the Children of wrath. Ephesians. 2.3. yet some are elected, some
reprobated, John 13.8. and 15.19. and 17.9. 1. These. 5.9. 2. Tim. 2.20.

Use 1.
As in Rebeccaes womb, there was a striving between Esau and Jacob; so in
every true Christian, there is a combating between corruption and grace: and
as Esau is the elder, so is corruption.

Use 2.
As in Isaaks family there was a profane Esau, as well as a godly Jacob; so is
the visible Church a mixed company, as our Savior teaches by diverse parables.
Mat. 13.
Examine how thou stand in the Church, whether as an Esau, or as a Jacob.

Use 3.
Esau is Isaaks eldest Son, yet rejected: Birth, degrees, and blood, are to
be regarded, and are especial favors of God, yet they further not Election.
As it was rather a disgrace for Esau to come of virtuous Parents, because he
was no better: so do thou account of thy self: then is the blood of thy
famous Ancestors thy credit, when thou art like them in virtue. Better the
honor of our Families should begin, then end in us.

Use 4.
Esau is disherited, and yet God gave a law that the first borne should not be
deprived of his birthright, namely, without just and weighty cause. Hence Peter
Martyr makes a question whether God can dispense with his own Laws. With the
Judicial and Ceremonial no doubt he may. Concerning the Moral: It is by some
answered that he may, and that the Commandments are to be understood with this
prouiso, unless God command otherwise, for the Law is for us, not for God. But
this answer seems to be defective: because the Law being the copy of Gods
Will, must needs be an unchangeable, and vnvarying rule of righteousness. God
is a law to himself by the perfection of his nature, which he has expressed
in his Law: and therefore to command any thing contrary to his law, or to
dispense with it, so that the things here forbidden, as theft, whoredom, etc.
should be no sins, in the sense they are forbidden, seems to be as though God
should depart from his own nature, which is impossible.

Pareus a very learned man answers otherwise, namely, In orat. paraen. de legum
dignitate, vsu, and obedientia, ex 1. Tim. 1.8,9.
that the Law indeed is an immovable rule even in regard of God, not simply in
regard of the whole Decalogue, but only according to some part of it. And
therefore he distinguishes of the Commandments: holding some absolutely to
proceed from the Nature of God, which he does freely and necessarily will, as
Command. 1, 2, 3, 7, 9. The rest as 4, 5, 6, 8, 10. to proceed from the will of
God, but not necessarily. The things in these last to be just or unjust,
because commanded or forbidden, and that in these lies that Prouiso, Till God
command otherwise.

But with reverence of that Worthy man, I cannot understand, how at any time,
it should be no sin to steal or to murder, in the sense it is forbidden in
the law. My opinion is, that the Justice in these Laws proceeds from the pure
nature of God, and are necessarily therefore willed by him, as well as the
Justice in the other precepts. My reason is, because the equity of these laws
is imprinted in our nature: and that which is imprinted thus in our nature, is
a remnant of the Image of God, which was according to the natural and
necessary Justice of God.

The Schoolmen therefore (as I take it) more safely resolve this doubt, who
hold that God (saving his Justice) cannot command that which is contrary to his
law, as that a man should steal, etc. and yet not sin. And therefore
wheresoever it seems that God has commanded the contrary, we are to know,
that the matter of the precept is varied. As the Israelites rob the Egyptians,
yet not guilty of theft, because when the Israelites took those goods, they
were not the Egyptians, but their own, given to them by God, who has right
and authority to bestow those things where and to whom he pleases. All
things forbidden in the moral law, are sins, not only because they are
there forbidden, but principally, because they are contrary to the most just
nature and will of God, of which the law is a copy.

Use 5.
The Elect are beloved, the Reprobates are hated. The love of God includes all
favors, his hatred, all plagues and curses: The Elect are happy, the
Reprobate miserable; miserable indeed, for it were better to be in hell, then
to be hated of God.

VERSE 11. (For the children being not yet borne, neither having done any good
or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls.)


IN this Verse is the Amplification of the second Instance. The sum of the
Instance was, that though Esau and Jacob were Twins, and Esau the first
borne, yet the promise made to Isaac and his seed, was not to be understood of
Esau, but of Jacob, being so determined by God. So that there is a great
difference between these two Twins.

Of which difference here are two things declared: First, the Time. Secondly,
the Cause. The Time, in these words, The Children being not yet borne, neither
having done any good or ill.

Here the time has a double relation: first, to their birth. Secondly, to
their actions, or conversation. When they had done neither good nor euiill,
that is, actually, for when the Oracle came to Rebecca, they were originally
guilty before God.

The Election or Reprobation of men is before they are borne, or have done good
or evil, Ephesians. 1.4. 2. Tim. 1.9. Jude 4. As it was with Esau and Jacob, so is
it with us all.

Use 1.
There is a predestination of men, and because revealed, it is lawful, yea,
necessary to be taught (but soberly and discreetly) rather soundly to be
explained in the Schools, then daily to be inculcated in every Pulpit. It is
hard (I confess) to corrupt reason and sense: but let the light of the
Scripture be the rule, and not thy blind reason, and it will be in some degree
intelligible.

Use 2.
Here the monstrous opinion of Arminius is confuted plainly, who affirms that
man dying in the faith, is the object of particular Election. Against which we
reason from hence; Jacob is elected before he was borne, says Paul here. But
Jacob is a type of the all Elect, says Arminius. In Anal. cap. 9. ad Rom
script. ad Gel. Succanum.
Therefore (say I) whosoever are elected, are elected before they were borne.


Use 3.
Hence also is notably confuted the vanity of Astrologers, who upon the
calculation of men's Natiuities, foretell of their dispositions, fortune (as
they call it) and ends, by the Constellation of the heavens at their Birth.
Some of them have said, that there is a constellation for obtaining our
prayers, another also for salvation. Albu^azar and Maternus sicut refert
Pererius lib. 2. in Genesis cap. 1. number. 59.


But these are toys and Impostures, and confuted by this example. For a man is
appointed of GOD before he is borne: Therefore his estate depends not on his
Nativity. There could be no greater diversity in any then between Jacob and
Esau; and yet Twins, and borne at the same time and in the same place, and
therefore why not under the same Constellation? For Jacob held Esau by the
heel, and both were but as a long child. If they say that the Motion of the
heavens is so swift, that notwithstanding they might be born under diverse
Ascendents: I would ask, If so swift? How can they discern it? And (with
Gregory) then every one is borne under diverse Constellations, as his head under
one, his shoulders under another, his belly under a third, his legs under a
fourth. Again (as Gellius asks) Noct. At. l. 14. c. 1.
if the same constellation portend the same things, Why then were there many
Alexanders, many Aristotle's, and as we may say, many David's, many Salomons,
etc? Was there no one borne at the same time with these, or before, or since,
under the like Constellation.

Now follows the Cause of such difference between Esau and Jacob; that one
should be loved, and the other hated.

The Cause is the stabilitie of the purpose of Gods Election, That the purpose
of God according to Election, etc.

In the words is a Traiection of the Verb, which if it be right placed,
makes the sense plain, which otherwise is obscure. For the sense they would
be thus placed: That the purpose of God concerning Election, which is not of
works, but of him that calls, might stand, that is, might be firm. This
purpose here mentioned, to be understood about Reprobation, as well as about
Election, as included in the contrary.

The meaning then is, that God manifested to Rebecca before her children were
borne, their different estates, caused by the stable Decree of God, which
depends not upon the works of man, but upon the Will of God.

Here we have three things. First, the cause of the different estates of Jacob
and Esau: (viz.) The purpose of God according to, that is, about, or concerning
Election. Secondly, the cause of this Election two ways set down. First,
Negatiuely, Not of works. Secondly, Affirmatively, but of him that calls.
Thirdly, the property of this Purpose of God: That it is Firm.

The Doctrine out of the 1. part. The purpose of Gods election, specifieth and
detenmineth the indefinite promises of the Word. The promise is made to Isaac
and his seed: This promise is made good, not to Esau, but to Jacob, because it
was purposed to Jacob, not to Esau. Which appears also by the examination of
Romans 11.7. Tit. 1.1. Act. 13.48.

Use 1.
Here parents are taught the meaning of the Promise; I am thy God, and the God
of thy seed. What? That all thy children shall be saved? No: It stands if any,
if but One. God promises to David and his seed the Kingdom. Shall all his
sons be Kings? No. But he, to whom God purposes it. So among our many
children, those only shall have grace to believe the promises, to whom they
are purposed.

Parents are bound to give good Education to their children; but Parents cannot
change their hearts which are corrupt from the beginning. That which decays in
Nature, is to be restored only by the Author of Nature. Let Parents arise in
these things, to acknowledge the counsel and purpose of God: which is secret
many times, but never unjust, and let them comfort themselves in those who have
the signs and marks of election shining in them.

Use 2.
Here also we are taught the Reason why all profit not by the preaching of the
Gospel. The promises are the same propounded total; but they are in the
counsel of Gods good pleasure and purpose made effectual only to the Elect.
Thus our Savior teaches, saying, Into what house soever you enter, say, Peace
be to this house. Luke 10.5,6.
If the son of peace be there, it shall remain upon him, but if not, it
shall return.

Saint Augustine observes, that Christ says not, upon whom your peace shall
rest, he shall be the son of Peace. But where there shall be a son of
peace, your peace shall rest upon him. The like reason is for Corrections, and
Education, and other means of goodness. They are profitable only to the Elect.

Ob. If God offer me the promise, and mean not that I shall receive it, he
mockes me: and why am I punished for not receiving it?

A. Some think to ensnare God with their subtilties: but it is to be
understood, that preaching was ordained by God, not for every man's salvation,
but only for the gathering and salvation of the Saints which are mingled here
together with the Reprobates. It is of use also concerning the Reprobates, to
convince them and to make them inexcusable. Whereby the Elect are stirred up
the more to humility and thankfulness, when they see their own Nature
condemned in the Reprobates.

The Doctrine out of the second. The purpose of Gods Election, and Reprobation,
is not of works, but of the will of God, Ephesians. 1.4.11. Tit. 3.5.

Use 1.
The Rule of Gods choice is not the goodness which he sees in the thing to
be chosen, though we choose things for their goodness: The cause of Gods
choosing is his will. It is the gift of the Divine will, not the desert of
humane fragilitie. Diuinae voluntatis donum, non humanae fragilitatis meritum.
Aug. Hyp. 6 Greg. de Valentia Disp. tom. 1. Disp. 1. q. 23. de Praed. p. 4.


This confuteth the Jesuits, among whom this is the most received opinion,
that the praescience of the cooperation of our Free Will with Grace, and of
our final perseverance, is the cause of Election. This cooperation, they say,
is respected, not by the way of simple understanding, as possible, but by the
way of vision, as absolutely and actually to be. Which vision or foresight of
our actual cooperation with grace, is the cause of Election, and in order of
reason (as they affirm) goes before it; which is nothing else, but that the
goodness of our own wills, is the cause why God elects us. This opinion comes
near to Pelagius, but is far from Paul, who affirms the purpose of God
concerning Election, to be of him that calls.

This also confuteth those, who hold that Faith foreseen is a condition
prae-requisite, or a motive cause to Election: most contrary to this of the
Apostle here, who affirms that Jacob was elected, before he had done any
works; that Election might be not of Works, but of him that calls. Arminius
expounds these words (of him that calls) thus: Armin. in analis. ca 9. ad
prim. script ad Gellium Succanum.
that the purpose of Gods election might be not of works, but of Faith,
whereby it is obeyed to him that calls. This Gloss corrupts the Text; and
is like an old piece, sown to a new garment: For first, this quite crosses
the meaning of the words, and in effect it should be thus, not of works, but
of him that is called; for they also absurdly hold that Faith is of our selves.
Secondly, when there is an opposition between Faith and Works, it is in the
point of Justification: and Faith not opposed in regard of it self, but of the
righteousness of Christ by it apprehended: as it is a virtue, it comes under
the account of works, which in as much as they hold, there must needs follow a
confusion in the sense.

Gods election is without Faith, as the cause of it: not without it, as the
means appointed to Justification and salvation. So also Reprobation is without
sin, as the cause discretiue impelling: not without it, as a condition,
without the which God reprobateth not: as for instance: God considers Esau and
Jacob fallen in Adam. His authority and power is this. He may save both: and
he may damn both, and that justly if he will. Or he may elect Esau if he
will and reprobate Jacob. But what has he done? He has chosen Jacob. Why?
Because he would. He has passed by Esau, and reprobated him. Why? Because he
would. And this will is just, because Esau has deserved it. But so has Jacob
also. True: but it pleased God to forgive Jacob in Christ, and not Esau; as a
man having two debtors, may forgive the one, and require the debt of the other,
without any injustice.

Use 2.
This Doctrine affords comfort in tentation: Thy unworthiness may dismay thee:
but remember that thy Election depends not upon thy worthiness, but upon the
will of God. Let this Doctrine also provoke thee to thankfulness and due
praises. Which two uses Saint Augustine makes of his preaching this Doctrine.

There is great cause thou should praise God if thou be elect; for it is of
his mercy, not of thy deserving. In regard of thy self there was no difference
between thee and a Reprobate. If now there be, God found it not in thee, but
put it into thee. Consider Esau and Judas: in what art thou better then they?
Thou art of the same Nature; hewne out of the same Rock: of the same wool (as
I may say) and making; Nothing has parted thee, but the knife of Gods
Election. Nothing in thee more then in Judas, to make him Elect thee. Thou
see many commit lewd things; some, whoredom; some, drunkenness; some,
murder; Thou hate these sins: what is the cause? The grace of Gods
Election. If God should have left thee to thy self, thou would have proved a
Judas, or a Iezabel. Give glory to God which has discerned thee: and seeing he
has put a difference between thee and the Reprobate, manifest thou this
difference by thy godly life.

The Doctrine out of the third part. The Predestination of God is sure, Ioh.
13.1. 2. Tim. 2.19. as this is affirmed of election; so holds it also of
Reprobation.

Use 1.
Great comfort follows the Elect: Their state is as sure as God is sure. As
none can be saved, but they which are predestined to it, so they most
certainly: for God neither can deceive, nor be deceived. So certain (says
one) Nullo detriment^ minui potest summa praecognita l. de voc. Gent. 1. c.
vlt. inler opera Amb. In sensu diuiso, non in sensu composito. The. Sum. 1. p.
q. 23. art. 23.
is the number of them which are predestined, that it can neither be
increased, nor by any detriment be diminished! In deed if we consider an Elect
by himself without the Decree of God, he may dye in sin: but if we
consider him with the Decree of God, he cannot.

If our Salvation did not for the certainty of it depend on God, but on our
selves it were hazardable, and we must needs despair and run mad in
trouble, because we are mutable.

The foundation is in God: The marks in us. God has not revealed to men
whether they be Elect or Reprobate. It Is not written in every ones forehead:
but this is written in the Word, 2. Pet. 1.10.
that we must make our election sure, not in it self, but in our assured
knowledge of it: which may be done a posteriori, as they say, that is, by
certain effects of election, which are infallible marks of the same.

There are two special marks of election noted by Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 2.19.
Faith: and Repentance. If thou have Faith, thou art Elect: for only such
believe which are ordained to life. Repentance also approues thy election. For
we are elected that we should be holy, and God has ordained us to walk in
good works, and to be clothed with righteousness, and the obedience of a new
life.

If thou say, Alas, what shall I do? I find not these marks in me: but
the contrary: as Ignorance, Contempt of the Word, Profaneness, Whoredom,
Pride, Drunkenness, etc. I answer thee, Yet despair not: but use the means,
and submit thy self to them: and if thou be elect, they shall become
effectual to work in thee all such graces unto life. Some as Spiders gather
poison out of this honey. Either of malice, or (as I would rather judge) of
Ignorance, blaspheming this Doctrine and saying: If there be Predestination,
and so certain; then let us never trouble our selves about Faith and
Repentance: For if I be predestined to be saved, my sins cannot damn me,
if to be damned, my care cannot save me.

To affirm this, is horrible blasphemy, for it is in effect to say, that God,
who has given us his word, to teach us to live well, has therein opened to us
a Doctrine of carelessenesse, and dissoluteness. Which is to deny the wisdom
and purity of God.

Also they consider not, that by the same act, God both predestinates a man to
life, and to the means of obtaining it, which are Faith and Repentance,
without which he has predestined to save none.

A man has a grievous wound: will he say, if God has appointed it shall
heal, It will heal, though I use no plaster? Will a man neglect to eat,
because God has appointed how long he shall live? Did Hezekiah so for the
term of those fifteen years, because of Gods appointment? Will a man on the
top of an house refuse the ordinary means of safety, and leap down upon these
terms? Will we not on these terms trust our bodies, and shall we our souls?
In bodily things will we join the means and end together, whatsoever Gods
predestination be, and shall we not in spiritual, which are of much more
weight?

A child is sure of the inheritance, by virtue of some entayle, neither can his
father put him by it. Will he therefore contemn his father, and spit in his
face? Surely the children of God will not, because of their assurance, be
desperate and dissolute, but so much the more careful to please God.

Abraham, David, Samuel, etc. never argued thus: never any godly man reasoned
after this manner: this is the Logike of irreligious and profane wretches. It
must needs be an evil way wherein none but lewd beasts walk.

Whereas some think that this doctrine also annihilates preaching: I answer
that the end of preaching is not to make of Reprobates Elect; but that the
Elect thereby should attain the fore-purposed, and promised salvation.

VERSE 14. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid.

15. For he says to Moses Exodus 33.19.
: I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion, on
whom I will have compassion.

16. So then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy.


IN these Verses, and so to the end of the 18. Paul answers an objection,
which flesh and blood make against the dealing of God with Jacob and Esau, and
with the Elect and Reprobates, which has before been avouched.

Here are two parts. First, the objection, verse 14. Secondly, the answer, in
the end of the 14. verse, and in the 15. and 16.

The objection challenges God of injustice; after this manner. If it be so,
that men are elected or reprobated before they are borne, and when they have
done neither good or evil, only according to the will of God: Then God is
unjust. But God is not unjust: Ergo.

The full meaning of this objection will the better appear, if we hit aright,
against what the objection is laid. Master Beza thinks that God is by flesh
and blood challenged of injustice, if he proceed to election or reprobation,
before men live in the world, and manifest their deserts: Conceiving that GOD
in Justice should stay his decreeing of men, till they be borne, and by their
life have manifested their goodness or illness.

Others, and the most are of mind, that the objection arises from Gods
unequal dealing with equals: Jacob and Esau are equal in birth, in
corruption, etc. neither having deserved better or worse then other, yet God
loves the one, and hates the other. At this flesh and blood stumbleth,
complaining of injustice, and acception of persons. For a just Judge deals
justly, when he deals alike, with like Malefactors: either then let them be
both elected, or both reprobated, both saved, or both damned.

The first opinion raises the objection from the time of the Decree. This from
the Persons about whom the Decree is. I approve this to be the best, upon a
reason taken out of Paul's answer, verse 15. the which is applied to the
Persons, not to the Time. For if the objection lay from the time, Paul would
and should have answered, I will have mercy, when I will have mercy, and not,
upon whom.

The answer unto this Objection is twofold: 1. General. 2. Special. (...).
The General in the latter end of the 14. verse. GOD forbid: strongly denying
the Proposition: as if he should say: This is to be holden of all, that GOD
is just in his ways, and the contrary not to be so much as thought. For even
to think that God is unjust, is blasphemy deserving execration rather then
answer. The Syriake Translator reads it, God forgive, noting thereby the
hainousnes of such thoughts.

The special answer is verse 15.16,17,18. and has two parts. The first,
proving God is not unjust in electing, verse 15, 16. The second, that he is not
unjust in reprobating, verse 17, 18.

In the first, are two parts. The first, an Authority proving that GOD is not
unjust in electing, verse 15. The second, a Determination of the point, verse
16. according to the truth of verse 11. The Authority which Paul voucheth, is
taken out of Exodus 33.19. and is the speech of God to Moses, either of the
people rendering the reason why all that were guilty of the Calfe were not
handled alike, but some punished, other spared: or of Moses self, when he
showed him his glory, declaring it to be not for Moses his merit, but of his
own mercy: which way soever you take it, the Question is, wherein the force of
the reason should be, to prove that God is not unjust in. Election and
Reprobation.

Interpreters say generally thus: It is mercy to be elected, not Justice:
therefore God is not unjust, because mercy violates no Justice, but injustice,
as contrary unto it. The force of the argument is put in Mercy: but I take it,
that it is better, and more plainly to be understood, if it be put in Justice,
or rather the authority of God.

For the understanding whereof, observe, that Justice is taken two ways.
Either generally for the whole company of virtues, and so it is the Rectitude
and Perfection of the Divine Nature, or specially for that which gives Suum
Cuique, every man that which is his: and this is either Commutatiue or
Distributive: in both is equality. In the first; Arithmeticall, of Quantity.
In the second; Geometrical; of Proportion.

Commutatiue Justice is not in God, in as much as it confists in equality of
giving and taking. But none give to God equal things, according to that they
take; as a penny for a penyworth.

Neither is Distributive Justice properly in God, but according to similitude.
For he gives to his creatures what he thinks good, not according to their
merit, but according to his own pleasure.

Now this giving, according to this justice, is to be considered in God, either
as he is God, or a Judge, or a Lord.

As God; Psalm. 51.1.
and so it is his goodness, making and preserving all things: so communicating
his goodness, that those things should be which are not; and those things be
well which are. This is that goodness and justice which the Saints implore,
being pressed with their sins, or with the cross.

As a Judge of all; and so he punishes the wicked, and delivers the godly.

As a Lord; and so he will have this to live, and that to die: among men
corrupt alike; this man to be chosen, that man to be reprobated; and in this
last acception it is to be taken here. And so the force of the Argument lies
in these words: On whom he will. As if he should say, I will have mercy upon
Jacob, and not upon Esau, because it so pleases me. I have a mere authority
over all, and it is in my power, to give to one, and to deny to another,
without injury of either, which am bound to neither. I may do with mine own
what I will.

The Objection conceiues God to proceed in this business as a Judge; but Paul
shows that he proceeds as a Lord, who manumits of his bond-seruants whom he
pleases.

Saint Augustine compares God to a Creditor, and us to Debtors. Aug. ad
Simplicianum. lib. 1. q. 2.
We are all indebted to God: If thou payest not thy debt, thou have whereof to
rejoice; if thou do pay it, yet have thou not whereof to complain.

I will have mercy and compassion. This mercy and compassion, which in man is
with a passion of the mind, grieuing for the harm of another, is in God a will
without grief or perturbation to help the miserable. The first word signifies
freely to love, the other to put on motherly bowels, as the true mother did
toward her child before Solomon.

So then, etc. v. 16. This is the conclusion; the sum whereof is as if he
should say, That which God ascribes to himself, is not to be ascribed to the
will or power of any Creature: but God ascribes wholly to himself our
Election and salvation: therefore, It is not in him that wills or runs,
but in God that shows mercy.

It is not in him that wills or runs. Some apply this to Esaus running,
but it serves not his turn, for Jacob by the mercy of God obtained the
blessing. Some apply it to Jacobs: but it was not that, but Gods mercy which
holp him. But the best is to understand it of Election: That Election is not of
Jacobs, or of any man's willing, that is, free will, or good desires: or
running, that is, good works; but of Gods will and mercy, which was auerred
before, ver. 11. The cause of Gods mercy, is his mercy.

The Doctrine out of these three verses. Though God save some, and condemn
others, yet is he just. Gene. 18.25. Romans 3.5,6. Math. 20.

Use. 1.
Imitate Paul's zeal when God is challenged by unjust persons: God forbid,
says he, having indignation. Alas our coldness! If it be a matter touching our
own Reputation, we are red-hot: but though God be a thousand ways
dishonored, we are key-cold.

Use 2.
In all things acknowledge God to be just, though thou understand not the
reason of things done by him. Search not into the reason of his will, but
submit thy self. For he will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy. He
justifies the These upon the Cross, and condemns some Infant. Here chamber
thy tongue, remembering that GOD is the chief Lord. Stat pro ratione voluntas
is good in God: he wills it so to be, therefore it is just. For a thing is
not Just, and then God wills it: but God wills it, and then it is Just: his
will being the cause of things, and the rule of all right.

Say not, Why will he elect this? and reprobate this? The thing is manifest, but
not the reason. The manner of Gods dealing may sometimes be hidden, but it can
never be unjust. If he reprobate sinners, it is just, because it agrees with
their deseruings. If he elect the sinful, it is just, because it agrees with
his goodness.

A Carpenter having diverse trees before him of like bigness, marks one to be
sawne into board, another into sparrs, etc. If we ask him, why he lines out
one tree thus, and another thus, he will answer, that he means to employ
one of them for timber for the roof, another for other uses in the building:
But if you ask why he chose this tree for such use, rather then another, all
being of like goodness; he will judge the question unreasonable, and allege his
will: so beyond the will of God, no inquiry must be made of the cause of the
Election and Reprobation of men.

To this we may apply that of Augustine, Si non vis errare noli velle
Iudicare. Aug. tract. 26. in John.
in a matter not much unlike. God chooses this man, refuses that, both being a
like guilty before him. If thou would not err, inquire not the reason. Let
whosoever will search this deep, but let him take heed he break not his neck.

Thou see some are rich, some are poor: some Englishmen, some Spaniards:
some Noble, some base. Thou see this, and accusest it not: why then accusest
thou God to be more unjust in willing this man to be an elect, that man to be a
reprobate? Let us praise that which is done, because it is safe to be ignorant
why it is done, God having hidden the reason from us.

Use 3.
Mercy presupposes misery: therefore, when we were elected, we were considered
as miserable.

Use 4.
The state of the Elect is certain, noted in this phrase; I will have mercy,
upon whom I will have mercy. Even as Pilate by the like manner of speaking,
denied to change that which he had written: John 9.22.
That which I have written, I have written. Which manner of speech we use, both
when we will not have the reasons of our doings inquired after, nor that which
we have done to be altered.

Use 5.
Arminius, who holds that it is in man's power to be saved if he will, and
that grace is effectual, by the event: is here confuted plainly; when all is
attributed to the will and mercy of God, and nothing to the will of man. Grace
is not effectual because free will wills: but free will wills because
grace is effectual.

VERSE 17. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh: Exodus 9.16.
Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up: that I might show my power
in thee, and that my Name might be declared throughout all the earth.


THat God is not unjust in electing, appeared verse 15.16. That he is not
unjust in reprobating others of equal condition with the Elect, is showed in
this Verse; and in the next verse both are concluded.

This verse is to be referred to these words, ver. 14. God forbid. For the
Scripture says, etc.

The proof is from a testimony of Scripture; where we have first, The Quality
of the testimony: and secondly, The Substance.

The Quality is, that it is written. Hence is to be observed, that Paul
plainly proves these dark points by the Word of God.

Use 1.
Paul's practice is for the imitation of Ministers.

Use 2.
Hearers are to receive nothing, but that which is signed with the hand and
seal of God, as we receive no money, but that which has the arms and seal
of the King.

Use 3.
The Scripture is a competent Judge of controversies of faith, because it says
to Pharaoh; it speaks to us: it is no mute letter, as the Papists affirm. For
indeed it speaks not only of things contained in it, but to us: As the
statutes of the Land, not only contain the will of the King, but call to us
for obedience.

The substa^e of this testimony, is taken out of Exo. 9.16. where is declared
how God deals with Pharaoh: For this purpose I have stirred thee up, etc.

I have stirred thee up. That is, I have raised thee up Beza.
, or I have created thee Culu. super Exodus
, or I have raised thee up to be King Rupertus.
, or I have reserved thee alive, that thou should not die of those plagues
Chald. para. et Septuag.
, or I have made thee remain Iun. et Trem.
, or I have stirred up the euilnesse of thy heart, not made thee evil Ansel.
, or I have stirred up thy sin, that thou should be worse, not giving thee
repentance Aquinas.
, or I have stirred up thy mind to resist Piscator.
, or rebel Martyr.
, or I have continued thee alive, to make thee an example of my justice Ambrose.
, or as Pareus, (referring it to the whole story of Pharaoh, I have created
thee, left thee to thy self, made thee King, stirred up thy rebellious mind,
etc. for this purpose, that all the earth might ring of my glory and power.

In this we consider two things. 1. The Action of God (implying his purpose
Martyr.
,) I have stirred thee up, etc. 2. The End of it: the glory of God.

The Argument to prove that God is not unjust in reprobating equals, is this;
No man ever challenged God to be unjust in his dealing with Pharaoh: but as he
dealt with Pharaoh, so is his dealing with reprobates. Therefore the very force
of the reason is contained in the end of Gods dealing with Pharaoh; which also
is the end of reprobation. Which end is not the destruction of the creature,
but the glory of the Creator, and is thus concluded.

That which properly tends to the glory of God, is not unjust, but good, by the
nature of contraries; for that is evil which dishonoreth God, that good, which
glorifieth him. But to reprobate equals, properly tends to the glory of God.
For hereby his power is declared. Therefore it is not unjust. For all creatures
were made to set forth Gods glory, according to his, not their will.

The Turk commands his Vassals to destroy themselves, to show his power. Is
this just? No. Yet is God just, in reprobating for this end: Because those
which he reprobateth, deserve it by their guiltiness.

God is not unjust in reprobating sinful men, to show his power. For there are
three things here to be considered. 2. Sam. 16.10 Job 34.17,18,19. Prou. 16.4.
Habac. 1.12.
1. The right of GOD: to whom no man may say, Why do thou so? 2. The end:
not the damnation of men, but his own glory. 3. The euilnes of the reprobate:
in who^ God always finds just cause, not only to damn them, but also to
destinate them thereunto.

Use 1.
Pharaoh and Tyrants do nothing in persecuting the Church, but what God
appoints: therefore be patient.

Use 2.
Look to thy end. As Pharaohs wickedness brought him to the bottom of the Sea;
so will thine bring thee to the bottom of hell, if thou repentest not.

Use 3.
Say not, nor think, that the doctrine of Predestination is hard or unjust. Is
it hard that the excellent properties of God should be made known? We complain
not that the creatures should manifest their nature by their actions: why
should we complain of this in the Creator? The chiefest knowledge we have of
the creatures, is by their effects: and though it be not the chief way whereby
we know God, yet is it an excellent way: we have a more excellent way, which is
the Word.

It is good therefore, that among them which are equally guilty, as some are
elected, so some should be reprobated; for so is Gods power known, and that is
good. His authority also; and that is good: His vindicatiue justice, and that
is good: His mercy and truth, and that is good: So the Elect are stirred up to
praise him, and that is good: and to make sure their election by a holy care,
and that is good: and all are made to tremble and stand in awe, and that is
good.

As of old (and so is it now also lawful) Physicions begged the body of a
condemned person, to anatomize it, that the punishment of the dead might
further the good of the living; and as Apothecaries of dead men's flesh make an
expedient Triacle: so God makes Triacle of the Reprobate, to do the Elect
good, by stirring them up to praise him for their mercy, and to repentance, to
the purging out of the venimousnes of their corrupt nature.

God will glorify himself upon Reprobates, though it be nothing to their
ease: they will not glorify God in the manner he will, but they shall glorify
him in the manner they would not.

Thou dishonourest God in thy life, saying with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? and
trampling under thy feet his holy Commandments; shall God lose his glory? No,
he will have it spite on thy heart: he will get himself glory in condemning
thee: He will make thy sins bring forth glory to his Name, as some times he
brought light out of darkness, and as the Physicion draws preservatives out
of rank poisons.

But for all this, let none sin, because God shall thereby be glorified: as
no man who has his wits, will wound himself, that the Surgeon may be
condemned for his skill in healing him. For sin turns to Gods glory, not of
its own nature, but by accident through the power of God. No thank to the
sinner for it; the praise of it is Gods.

O that our grievous sinners, old Adulterers, horrible Blasphemers, grinding
Usurers, monsterous proud persons, etc. would repent; what glory would come to
God thereby and praise! what reioicing and thanksgiving would there be in the
Church! what melody in our Fathers house, at the coming home of these lewd
Prodigals! How should themselves feel the sweet of it! But if thou repentest
not, thou shall have everlasting smart, and God everlasting glory, in thy
condemnation.

VERSE 18. Therefore he has mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardens.


THis Verse is not a new objection, as some have thought: but a Conclusion of
the two branches of the reason from Scripture, brought to prove that God is not
unjust in electing and reprobating according to his will. Wherein is a short
repetition of the Argument: and may thus Syllogistically be concluded. All the
effects of the Divine will are good. But Election and Reprobation are effects
of the Divine will. Therefore.


Or thus. He that by an absolute right does what he will, deals not
unjustly. But God by an absolute right electeth some, and ouerpasseth others.
Therefore.


Here are two Emulations. The first of the Elect: He has mercy on whom he
will. The second of the Reprobate. Whom he will he hardens. The sum of
these is before delivered, we will now consider of them so, as we shall note
some things not before spoken of.

He has mercy, on whom he will have mercy. See of this before, verse 15.

Whom he will he hardens. This is very difficult, and to be made plain.
All consent, that here the Apostle treats of Election and Reprobation, and
that this Verse compriseth that which is before spoken, verse 15, 16, 17.
Therefore as that before is to be understood, so is this. And as large a sense
as Having mercy has: so large must hardening have. Then not only of Actual
having, but of the purpose it must be understood.

He should have said, He stirs up to destruction whom he will: but he says,
he hardneth, that he may show how he stirs up, namely by hardening.

Hardness is an estate of a corrupt heart, whereby it is disposed to all
evil, yielding no obedience to God: and it is threefold. First, Natural,
which is the estate of all men. Secondly, that which is contracted by a custom
of sinning, as a path is hardened by continual trampling of passengers.
Thirdly, Iudiciarie, which GOD inflicteth upon men as a Judgment. This is here
meant: for finding all in their natural hardness, he hardens, that is,
reprobates whom he pleases.

Q. But all hardness is finne. How then can God be said to harden?

A. There is a difference between hardness and hardening. Hardness is sin, but
to harden is not always so: and this is from God not as sin, but as his just
Judgment. For it is not possible that by him we should sin, by whom we
repent, and rise from sin: even as bitter water and sweet issue not from the
same fountain. It is from God that we stand, from our selves that we fall.

God is said to harden properly (not by making soft hearts to become hard, for
Pharaohs heart was never but hard; nor by putting hardness into the heart, as
the Papists unjustly charge us to affirm; nor by only suffering us to be
hardened, which is the opinion of the Papists, dreaming idly of an idle
permission in God: making him like the Poets Iupitor, who was feasting in
Aethiopia, while things went out of order; but) three ways.

1. By forsaking: not making it hard: but not taking the hardness away. He
hardneth, that is, he softneth not. He hardneth, not by putting in hardness, but
by not putting in the softning oil of his mercy, as the Sun causes darkness,
by withdrawing his light.

2. By punishing: for finding the heart hard (if he please not to pardon it,
and to soften the heart) he inflicteth a new hardness, as a punishment of the
former. And this he instilleth not, but effects three ways. 1. Either by
Satan, to whose power he delivers such a heart for him to work upon. 2. Or
by themselves, giving them over to their own hearts ^usts. 3. Or by the
preaching of the Word. For as the middle region of the Air, is more cold by
the Anteperistasis, so the heart of a Reprobate more hard by the Word; not
properly, but accidentally, as a resty horse, the more he is spurred forward,
the more goes backward:

By actuating and exciting the present evil inclination of the Creatures, by
propounding an occasion to manifest it: as the Sun, being in it self most
clean, by the force of his beams, draws out of a dunghill stinking and
unpleasant vapors.

Hardness then is caused by the Commandment, Occasionally, by our own malice
Meritoriously. By Satan, Efficiently. By God, Iudicially. So Satan is the
Tormentor, a sinful man, the guilty person. God the Judge, and that a Just
one, who knows how to use evil means well; being no ways the cause of
sin, as sin; but always ordering it for his glory, and the good of his
Elect. For sin is like a Ship. Man the Mariner. Satan the spirit or wind.
God the Pilot at the stern, directing all things to his glory.

The will of God is the cause of Election and Reprobation, as has been showed
before.

Use. 1.
Our goodness or illness is not the cause of Predestination.

In election, is excluded the merit of man, and the debt of God: and yet it is
to be confessed, that some way the goodness of man is the cause of election:
Praedestinatio quantum ad principium sine nobis, non sine nobis quantum ad
finem. Paulus de Pala. Gran. in ca. 25. Math. Aliud est principium Actionis,
abud Cognitionis.
that is, not of the Action of God, Electing: but of our Cognition and
knowledge, that we are elected. Consider election Compositiuely: there is no
cause, but Gods will, Consider it resolutely: and our Vocation is the cause,
whereby we know it.

In Reprobation our illness is excluded, as a special personal discretiue
cause: but not as a necessary condition, or general meritorious cause, without
the which God will not reprobate any.

Use 2.
Here also appears, that man fallen, is the subject of Predestination. Of
election it is, because it is called mercy, which presupposes misery, and
faultiness.

It is of Reprobation, because it is called hardening. Now this is a Rule, that
God hardens none, but such as are hard before. Neither can it be avoided, by an
interpretation of Actual Hardness: For here is to be remembered, that Paul
speaks of Gods purpose, as has been observed before out of Martyr. And, if
he actually harden none, but them which are hard, neither did he ever purpose
to harden but such.

Also if it be not here to be understood of the Decree of Reprobation, there
is more in the Antecedent, then in the Consequent. This verse being the
determination of the point, according to the meaning of that which is before
delivered: and thus do most Interpreters understand this secret. Augustine
often calls the subject of Gods Decree, The Damned Mass. Lege doctissimam
Aug. Epist. quae est ad Sixth. presb. number. 105.
That Mass (says Anselme) Ibi gratuita est indulgentia, vbi iusta poterit
esse vindicta. Ansel.
to which death is due. Hereby is perspicuous both the Mercy and Justice of
God. Because there is a free Indulgence, where there might have been a just
revenge. He loved Jacob by a free Mercy; he hated Esau, by a due and deserved
Judgment.

They that against this pretend the absolute right of God, observe not, how
this way that Absolute right is more excellently manifested, when Authority is
attributed to him, among all mankind being guilty, to save or to damn all, or
none, or some at his own pleasure.

An absolute Monarch, who has power of life and death; if his subjects should
rebel, has by his absolute power, just right to pardon them all if he will,
or some, and not others; whereof he needs give no other reason then his
pleasure: But sure he could not be counted a just Lord and Governor, if out of
a plea of absolute command, he should deuoid from his protection, and cast off
any his subjects without relation to any Rebellion, or other crime.

If you ask whether God can annihilate all things? I answer, Yes. If whether
he can reprobate good Angels, or Men (for Angels and men to be neither good
nor bad, is an idle fiction) I say he cannot, by the perfection of his nature,
which can not but love goodness: as Augustine excellently: He renders good
for good, because he is good. Evil for evil, because he is just. God for
evil, because he is good and just. Only he renders not evil for good,
because he cannot be unjust.

He that is elected, cannot boast of his merits, and he that is reprobated,
cannot complain but of his merits.

Use 3.
A hardened heart is a most heavy Judgment, which the more it is upon a man,
the less he feels it: and the further he is from the possibility of
Repentance and Salvation. When God gave the Devil leave over Job, he made
havoc: so when the heart is given over to the Devil, he rages in it. He
must needs run headlong into all evil, whom the Devil drives, as those
Swine of the Gergesens into the Sea. Of all Judgments, God deliver me from
this: Hell only is worse then it. But thou will say, that this is spoken of
Pharaoh, and that thou art an Elect. Show then thy Election by thy works.

Use 4.
The property of hardness is not to yield either to the stroke of a hammer, or
to the dint of a sword: That which neither can be bruised or broken with any
strokes, nor pierced with any sharpenes, nor softened with any moistning, is
hard. Hereby know thy heart. If no Threatenings and Monitions of the Word,
(which is a hammer) breaking the rocks, and a sword piercing through can
prevail with thee; Ier. 23.29. Heb. 4.12. Esa. 55.10,11.
nor any exhortations or entreaties of the Word (which is as rain) can
persuade or soften thee; nor any Afflictions move thee: but all these things
are as an Arrow shot against a brazen wall, thy heart being as the scales of
Leuiathan, who laughs at the shaking of the spear: Surely thou have a heart
hardened, which if it continue to the end, is a most certain sign of
Reprobation.

Seek therefore a soft heart, which is a most singular blessing of God. The
way to have it, is 1. with reverence to hear the Word. 2. to meditate of Gods
mercy. The remembrance of his fathers house, made the heart of the Prodigal to
relent. 3. To pray for a soft heart, for it is the gift of God.

VERSE 19. Thou shall say unto me, Why does he yet find fault? for who has
resisted his will? and so to the end of the 23. verse.


THe Apostle in the 18. verse said, that GOD hardens whom he will: against
this, wicked men cavil, and Paul answers, verse 19.20,21,22,23.

There are two parts. 1. The Cauillers objection, verse 19. 2. The Apostles
answer, verse 20, 21, 22, 23.

Why does he yet find fault? That is, so as he punishes.

Who has resisted his will? The will of God is distinguished to be his secret
or revealed will.

His secret will, is the will of his good pleasure, whereby he determines of
things which himself will do. His revealed, is that which is manifested in
his Word, commanding things to be done by us. His revealed will is refused of
the wicked; his secret cannot be resisted of any.

The Interrogations imply Negatiues: as thus: If his Will be the Cause of
Reprobation, then he has no reason to complain, Because his Will cannot be
resisted.

Here are two parts. First, the objection. Secondly, the proof.

The objection in these words: Why does he yet find fault? It is formed thus;
If Gods will be the cause of our Hardening: he has no cause to find fault.
But the last is denied. Therefore the first.


The Proposition is proved, thus. Whose will brings a necessity of sinning,
he has no cause to find fault with those sinners. But Gods will brings a
necessity, and cannot be resisted. Therefore.


Concerning this Objection, before we come to Paul's answer, we will propound
two Questions: in the answering of which, the force and infirmity of this
cavil will appear.

Quest. 1. Whether a Reprobate be in such an estate, that he cannot but sin?

Quest. 2. If he be in such an estate. Whether it does excuse him?

Answ. 1. To the first, I answer affirmatively, proved, Genesis 6.5. Ier. 12.23.
Iam. 2.12. Mat. 18. So that a Necessity of sinning lies upon Reprobates: which
is double. 1. Of Nature. 2. Of the Decree.

The first is Inward, coming from an inward beginning, which being corrupt, of
necessity that which proceeds from it, must be corrupt also. As fire, heat,
the sun, light: so corruption brings forth evil necessarily. Ioh. 3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. So that, though the act it self
of volition be always most free, yet now, through corruption of nature, all
men's wills are necessarily, both weak to attain the good, and peruersly
inclined to that which is evil.

The other necessity is that which follows the decree. For things are
necessarily upon supposition that God had decreed them. Principiatu^ sequitur
natura principij.
Yet the decree is not the cause of sin, nor compels thereunto: but God
finding the nature corrupt, decrees of it as he finds it.

Use. 1.
The Philosophers erred, who thought none were evil by nature, but by
imitation; and that vice is not borne with us, but comes afterward. Erras, si
existimes nobiscu^ nasci vitia, superuenerunt, ingesta sunt. Seen. ep. 9.6.


Use 2.
Also the opinion of the Papists, and Arminius, is hereby confuted; who hold a
power in the vvil, of it self not to sin. For the understanding of the truth
herein, we will first note what Free Will is. Secondly, what necessity is to be
meant in this question. Thirdly, the difference of actions. Free Will is a
faculty in an intelligent nature, freely choosing or refusing the object, as it
appears under the show of good or evil. The form of this freedom is, that
by an inward beginning, it freely, without any violence, affects or reiects the
object.

This freedom is distinguished, to be a liberty of co^trariety or
contradiction. The first is, when we choose one of two opposites, as good or
evil. The latter is, when one thing being propounded, we freely choose it, or
refuse it. The first was in Adam, and (being of moralls) is not in us. In the
second, the object is to be distinguished: for it may either generally be
considered, or particularly. If generally as evil, then we have not this
liberty: If particularly as this evil, then we may have such liberty.

Necessity is twofold; of coaction, of immutabilitie. The first is contrary
to the nature of the will; the second is not.

Actions are either natural, as to eat, drink, speak, etc. or civil, as to
buy and sell, etc. or moral, as with or against the Law: or supernatural, as
to believe and repent.

In some natural actions there is a liberty of contrariety and contradiction.
So also in civil. In moral, there is no liberty of contradiction in the
general, but in particular.

In good actions, as they are rightly performed, there is no liberty at all in
a reprobate, or unregenerate man, qua talis.

The Question between the Adversaries and us, is about the liberty of
Contrariety in good and evil in the general. The liberty of the will is not
taken away: the liberty of the person is. For Adams liberty is taken away, but
the liberty of the will is not, neither can be, but that whatsoever it chooses,
or refuses, it chooses or refuses freely.

The liberty of contrariety, is rather a liberty of the state of a person,
then of the will: and so a necessity of sinning and free will may stand
together. A necessity, I say, not of coaction, but of immutabilitie, both by an
inward beginning, and also by the decree, and a freedom I say of
contradiction, but not of contrariety.

Arminius thinks, that if the will be determined to one part, it loses the
freedom, which is manifestly false. For God is the most free Agent, yet is his
will, by a most absolute necessity, tied unto that which is good: he being both
most freely and most necessarily good.

The Devil is now by a double necessity evil, and yet freely evil: so our
wills are free, though determined, because they are not compelled. And whereas
the Arminius avouch, Vide Aug. tractat. 26. in Ioh.
that God cannot determine the will to one part, without destroying it, it is
near unto blasphemy. If Orators can persuade by their eloquence, cannot God,
by the sweet power of his Spirit so persuade the heart, and determine it that
it cannot actually resist, whatsoever the possibility be in regard of nature
uncorrected? If they say that such possibility still remains in the will to
come into act; I would feign know what good they will say the Spirit has done
in us, when the nature of our wills is as evil disposed as before grace
received? If God cannot determine our wills infallibly to one part, then it
shall be possible for the holy Angels and glorified Saints to fall from their
happiness, which is horrible to affirm. For they hold that the will of man
lost nothing of its inward virtue by Adams sin: not receives any virtue or
strength from grace in the way to conversion.

But to return, we thus conclude; that the unregenerate sin freely, and yet
necessarily: yea, by how much the more necessarily, by so much the more freely,
because their will has brought upon them this necessity. Our will is always
free, though it be not always good.

Ob. If there be no other freedom, why are we exhorted to choose the good,
and to refuse the evil?

An. The reason is set down by Leo; Ideo datur praeceptu^, and praecipientis
quaeratur auxiliu^. Leo ser. 11. de Quadra.
Therefore (says he) is the precept given, that perceiving our weakness, we
might seek for help from him that gave it. And indeed hence we should be
admonished, to seek the setting free of our wills from evil unto good; which
is only by the power of God: that as in the state of corruption we have a
free necessity unto evil; so in the state of regeneration (perfect) we may
have a free necessity unto that which is good. Voluntas quae libera est in
malis, quia delectatur malis, ideo non est libera in bonis quia non est
liberata. Aug. contra 2. Epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2.


To the second Question, the answer is negative: though a man that is borne
lame, is to be excused before men for his halting, because he was so borne: yet
wicked men and reprobates are not excusable before God for their sinning,
either by the necessity of nature or of the Decree.

Not by necessity of nature. For its the nature of the devil to do evil, yet
none excuse him: Its the nature of an Adder to sting deadly, yet we spare them
not: so we are born in sin, yet the Saints excuse not themselves by it, but
rather condemn themselves for it, as David and Paul. Psalm. 51. Romans 7.
Besides, not God but our selves has laid this necessity upon us. Adam
willingly obeyed the voice of his wife, and brought upon us this condition
which I call necessity. Indeed, if God had created us under such a necessity,
or now did compel us, we desiring to do good, there might be some excuse: but
it is not so; nor so.

Neither does the necessity of the Decree excuse. For God does not by his
decree force us to evil, but finding us evil, and prone only unto it of our
selves, he decrees we shall be so: and knows that so we would be, though he
should never decree. And thus he leaves us to our selves, who have no more
power to leave sinning, then a stone has, not to go downward if it have no
impediment.

God forces not the drunkard, or swearer, but they voluntarily, and with
desire commit these sins, as their own consciences testify. Judas did
nothing but by the Decree of God, yet he was not forced, but did that which he
did, of his own accord most freely, his heart being set upon covetousness.

God gouernes the wills of the wicked, but he takes not away either the will
from man, or freedom from the will, but he moves their wills according to their
own Natures, as he moves the heavens with a circular motion, fit for the
nature of it. And when God moves, then the will freely deliberates, and
willingly of it self consents. So that we may conclude this, with that of
Bernard: Bernard ser. 8. super cant.
The will brings a Necessity upon it self, so that neither the Necessity
can excuse the Will, nor the Will exclude the Necessity.

When Adam finned, he blamed his Wife: and she blamed God himself, and we have
sucked the same milk. But remember thou, that God is not the cause of thy
sin, but thy self. If thou smartest for thy faults, thank thy abominable
and wicked life, of which thou art the Cause: GOD the Auenger.

VERSE 20. Nay, but O man, who art thou that Or answerest again, or disputest
with God.
replyest against God? Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it Esaias
45.9.
, Why have thou made me thus?

21. Has not the Potter Ier. 8.6. Wisd. 15.7.
power over the Clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and
another unto dishonor.


NOw follows the Answer to the Cavil, which is either personal to the
Cauiller in these two Verses, or real to the Cavil, in the two next Verses
following.

In these two verses, the sauciness of Cauillers is reproved, which appeared
in that they submit not themselves as they ought to have done, but out of their
pride petulantly word it with their Creator, going about to bring the Decree of
Gods Predestination, under the Rule of their blind and Carnal Reason, which is
as possible as to gather up all the Sea into a Nut-shell.

Here are two things. First, a Reprehension. Secondly, an Amplification.

The Reprehension is in these words: But, O man, what art thou that replyest
against God? Where we have 1. The fault. 2. The person reprehended. The fault
is disputing with, or replying against God. The person noted, in these words:
Thou, O Man. Where is also couched a reason of the Reprehension, from the
Nothingnes, and base condition of man, in respect of God. As if he should say;
Thou, O Man, Thou piece of Clay; Thou Dirt of the street: What art thou, base
vile wretch? Do thou reply against God? Paul seems to speak in some heat,
his affections and holy zeal being stirred, at the malapertnesse of the
Cauiller, as the words and Interrogations show.

What art thou, O Man? These words have great weight, as Anselme observes, and
call man to the consideration of himself. A greater Abasing could not be
(says Chrysostom) this making him of less account, then if Paul had said in
plain terms, that man had been nothing, as David says, What is man? Compare
a worm to us, and us to God, and there is more difference between us and God,
then between the basest worm and us.

This Reprehens^on is amplified by a similitude; where we have the similitude,
and the confirmation of it.

The Similitude is in the rest of the 20. verse. The Confirmation in the 21.

Shall the thing formed, say to him that formedit, Why have thou made me thus?

Shall the wood quarrel with the Carpenter? The Iron with the Smith? The Clay
with the Potter? This last is Paul's Similitude, taken out of Esaias 45.9. and by
proportion teaches, that Man is not to quarrel with God about his
Predestination. Shall the Pot say to the Potter, Why have thou made me of this
fashion? It is the worst fashion; A man without hands might have made as good a
one. Much less may man which is but a pot-sheard, argue the case with God,
complaining of his Decree. For there is more difference between us and God,
then between the Pot and the Potter, though an Emperor were the Potter, and
the Pot never so base.

The force of this similitude is confirmed, verse 21. from the Right and
Authority of the Potter over his Clay. (...).
Has not the Potter power, that is, authority over his Clay, etc?

The reason is from the less. The Clay may not expostulate with the Potter,
having power of the same lump, to make one vessel to Honor, and another to
dishonor. Much more has God authority of the same damned and Apostaticall
lump, to harden some, and to have mercy on other some.

As therefore the Potter is not to be reprehended in his doing, so neither GOD
in his: who has more authority and power over man, then the Potter over his
Clay. The Potter made not his Clay, but both Clay and Potter are made by God.
But God made man, and therefore his right is more.

In this Confirmation God is the Potter, Corrupt man the Clay. The vessels of
Honor the Elect, the vessels to dishonor, the Reprobate.

Here are two things soundly taught. First, that as the Potter has power over
his Clay, so God has more over Man. Secondly, that as the Potter makes vessels
of honor and dishonor out of the same lump at his pleasure, and is not bound
to render a reason of his so doing to his Pots: So God is not unjust, though
from among men of equal Corruption, he choose some, and reprobate others. In
those he chooses, he is exceeding good; and in those he refuses, no way
culpable, neither taking away any goodness, nor adding any evil to the
Reprobate; but of base stuff (such is man corrupted) he makes base vessels,
such are the Reprobate.

Ob. Though the Pot may not plead against the Potter, yet the Potter has no
reason to be angry with his Pot, if it remain no otherwise then he has made
it.

A. The Potter is not angry with his Pot for the fashion in which he made it,
but for the soil which it has gathered since he made it. So if we had
remained as we were at first created, God would not have been angry with us:
but we are corrupted, and therefore he may justly be offended.

Corrupt man, is not to dispute against God, about his Judgments, Job 9.1,2,3.
So Job acknowledges while he was himself; but being tired with affliction, he
forgate himself, Chap. 23.3,4. For which God sharply reproues him, though
otherwise a just man, Chap. 39.35. Is this to learn to strive with the
Almighty? He that reproues God, let him answer to it. Then Job cries peccaui,
acknowledges his vileness, craves pardon, and promises amendment, verse 37,
38.

Use. 1.
If thou be a Preacher, put on Paul's spirit: be godly-bold, to reprove
gainsayers, and eat not the Word thou have spoken from God, for the
Calumniations of Cauillers, or to please any mortal wight.

Use 2.
Reverence the secrets of God. Inquire not a reason of his doings, which thou
can not understand; if thou could understand it, thou should much more
understand that thou have no reason to complain. Acknowledge that to be just
which God does.

There are many things which he has not revealed, search them not, much less
censure them: Shall base subjects censure the doings of their Prince? or call
Princes wicked and unjust? If we dare not do thus to mortal men, much less
ought we to the Immortal God.

God suffered the Gentiles about 2000. years to walk in darkness, and then
he reueales to them the Gospel. What is the reason? Is there more merit in
us, then was in our Elders? No: Our Impiety is alike. Who is able to
comprehend the reason? We see the thing, we understand not the Cause.

Again, among the multitude of Infants which dye, some are elected, some
reprobated. Vide de hisce c. 5. l. 1. de voc. Gent. inter opera Amb. tom. 2.
What is the Reason? If you say, Original sin: The whole number is guilty.
If you consider personal Innocence: the whole Sum is without fault. Humane
wisdom and righteousness finds not what to say, but divine Grace finds
whom to elect. The reason is hid, but the gift is manifest.

Some man lives ciuilly, yet for want of Christ's righteousness is damned: some
live wickedly, even almost to their very end, and then through Faith and short
Repentance are saved. This is not unequal, because a secret, but therefore
equal, because it is certain that it is Gods Judgment. That which is by him
decreed, we know not till it come to pass, and when it is come to pass, we
may not complain of the Issue, because it is certain that God ought not to
have done, otherwise then he has done. The householder in the Gospel opposes
his power and authority to the complaint of the Cauiller: so the Power and
Authority of God freeth him from all attaint of injustice, specially in
reprobating and electing corrupt men.

In these therefore, and the like secrets, say with David; Psalm. 39.9.
I should have been dumb, and not opened my mouth, because thou did it.
Thou may be reproved for curious searching into things not revealed, but for
a sober study of things revealed thou shall never be reproved: Things secret
are for GOD, things revealed for us and our children for ever. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Though thou attain not the reason of many things: yet labor to know whatsoever
God has revealed, and give not over such study, as a man which is graffing,
gives not over, because he understands not the reason why the fruit
follows the Nature of the Imp, not of the Stock.

Use 3.
God is compared to a Potter, we to Clay. God commanded Jeremy to go to the
house of the Potter, Ier. 18.2.
there must he study a Sermon. The Potters clay and wheel must be his
books. If we will with Jeremy go down to the Potters house, we may learn
many excellent things.

1. Contentation. Some are poor, some deformed, some base, etc. These when
they look upon others which are, with Noble, comely, beautiful: They usually
say with discontent, God might have made me as they are. But go then to the
Potters house, who makes Pots of all fashions, and for all uses, and they
complain not. Has not the Potter power over the Clay? and has not God much
more over us? Labor for Faith and Repentance; these graces will make amends
for all other defects. In unseasonable weather, in violence of fire, and other
calamities, many say, O what a hard case is this! But thou, O man, go to the
Potters house, and learn to let God alone with governing the earth: and
howsoever things fall cross, with Ely, say 1. Sam. 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And with Mauritius, remember
that of David: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy Judgments.

2. Consolation. God is as the Potter, and we are the clay in fashioning upon
the wheel: as the Potter does not roughly handle his clay: so God has a
tender care over us: as the Potter knows his Pot can endure but a little
knock, and handles it thereafter; so God knows whereof we be made, he
remembers we are but dust, Psalm. 103.14.
and pities us.

3. Humility. Dust and Ashes, and Clay, why art thou proud? Why spendest thou
so much time in painting, powdring, pranking thy body? Thou deckest but a piece
of Dyrt. But it may be thou excellest other in fashion or use. Yet thou art of
the same metal, thou art clay. Remember that a pot-sheard ouerlaid with
silver, is a potsheard; and gilded clay is clay, be not proud. If any
extraordinary thing be in thee above others, it is not of thee which art but
clay, but of the Grace of the Potter.

4. The fear of God. Psalm. 2.
For he can make or mar us at his pleasure. He has a Rod of Iron, wherewith
he breaks the wicked, as a Potters vessel. O that our profane wretches, who
wallow in whoredoms, drunkenness, vomiting, blasphemies, and poisoning the
very earth with their abominations! O that they would consider, that they are
in the hands of God, as the pot in the hand of the Potter! How easily can he
break them in pieces, and stamp them to powder? Be wise now therefore, ye
wicked. Can the earthen Pot abide the stroke of an Iron Rod? or a mortal
sinful man, the vengeance of an Angry God? The Potter dasheth against the wall
the Clay that will not be fashioned: So what should God do with thee, if thou will not be fashioned by the ministry of the Word, but throw thee into the
bottom of hell?

As therefore thou see the Clay to follow the Potters hand, and to receive a
fashion, according to the guiding of his hand: so be thou flexible and pliant
under the means appointed for thy fashioning, that thou may be a vessel of
honor.

VERSE 22. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, endured with long suffering the vessels of wrath Or made up.
fitted to destruction,

23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of
glory, which he had before prepared unto glory?


IN these Verses is a real answer to the objection, which was this. If Gods
will be the cause of hardening, then (says the Cauiller) I would see, how God
can justly punish me, if in process of time I obey him not.

Paul's answer is from the manner of Gods dealing, namely, that he may justly
punish, because he suffers them with long patience, not only giving them
space to repent, if they can or will, but also affording them many outward
helps which he is not bound to do.

And because they might object, that if GOD would give them grace, they also
would obey; and why did not GOD destroy man, having sinned, and create him anew
without sin?

Paul tells them that God could give them grace, or have created man anew, but
it is his pleasure to suffer wicked men with much patience, that he may make
known his power and wrath upon the wicked, and so declare the riches of his
mercy on the Elect. And what has any to do with it, if God would have it so,
who does all things justly?

Here is a Reticentia, whereby something is to be supplied. If God will, what
is that to thee? or what can thou say against it?

For the meaning, this is to be remembered, that principally these two verses
speak of Reprobates, and what is spoken of the Elect, is spoken by occasion.

Here are two things. 1. A description of the Reprobates and the Elect. 2. That
which is spoken of Reprobates.

Reprobates are Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. The Elect are vessels
of mercy, which God has prepared to Glory.

In these descriptions are two things. 1. The Parts. 2. The Amplification. The
Parts are two. 1. The Genus. 2. The Difference.

The Genus in both: They are Vessels. The form on the part of the Reprobates,
they are Vessels of wrath: On the part of the Elect. They are vessels of Mercy.

The Amplification on the part of the Reprobates: They are vessels prepared to
destruction. Of the other: They are vessels which God has prepared to Glory.

Vessels: The word in the Original, signifies not only a Vessel by the
hollownesse capable to receive and contain things, but an Instrument or any
Vtensil, as all the ministering vessels in the Tabernacle, as Fire-pans, Tongs.
Besomes, etc. are called in the Hebrew, by the word here used: Heb. 9.21. (...).
so also are called the furniture of a horse and warlike munitions: and the
tackling of a ship is called by a word like unto it. Act. 27.10.
Now it may be translated an Instrument; but more fitly and fully a vessel,
such as we use to contain things liquid or dry. So that the Reprobates and
Elect, are vessels upon whom God powers Wrath and Mercy, as we power Water
into a Vessel.

A Vessel in Scripture is applied two ways. 1. These. 4.4. 1. Pet. 3.7. Act.
9.15.
To the body alone; or to the whole Man: and so in three respects. 1. Of Sex,
of Office, of Estate, and so in this place.

There are two things in which the Elect and Reprobate are alike. First, they
are both Vessels of the same lump. Secondly, they serve both for one general
use, that is, for Gods glory.

Their main difference is, that the Reprobates are Vessels of Wrath unto
Damnation: The Elect, vessels of Mercy unto Salvation; and both for the glory
of God.

A vessel of Wrath is such a one upon whom GOD will will show no mercy, but
will be angry with him for his sin, leave him in it, and at last take
vengeance on him for it. A vessel of Mercy, such a one upon whom God purposes
to show mercy, in forgiving his sin, bringing him out of it, and unto
salvation.

Here care is to be had of distinguishing some like phrases, as a Vessel of
Wrath, and a child of Wrath. These differ. A child of wrath may be a vessel
of Mercy, but a vessel of Wrath cannot. As Paul and the Elect Ephesians are by
Nature the children of Wrath, as well as others. Ephesians. 2.3.
A child of wrath notes our corrupt estate. A vessel of wrath the Destination
of such a one to damnation. But a child of Disobedience and a vessel of Wrath,
are all one.

Prepare to destruction: and which God has prepared to glory.

In both these are two things. First, the Action. Secondly, the End. The End
both of the Reprobate and Elect, not the end of election, and reprobation. For
the end of Gods Decree in both, is Gods glory, but the end of the vessels
decreed, is their honor or dishonor.

The Reprobate are prepared: but God has prepared the Elect. This diversity
of speaking is not without great weight. The Reprobate are prepared or fitted.
By whom? Doubtless by God: but yet the Participle Passive, here used, and not
of the Elect, notes that all the preparation of the Elect unto glory, is of
God: of the Reprobate to destruction, is both of God and of themselves. Of
themselves, being apta, fit, of God, being aptata, fitted to destruction, for
that prauity in them, whereby they are fit to be destroyed.

To destruction: Not as it is the misery of the Creature, but the way to
glorify the Creator.

Both the Elect and Reprobate are Gods Vessels. The Elect prepared to glory,
the Reprobate to destruction: That they are vessels is proved, 2. Tim. 2.20.
that they are prepared as aforesaid, 1. These. 5.9.

Use 1.
There is great difference between the Elect and Reprobate; both in their use,
and end; and hereby appears the happiness of the Elect, and the misery of the
Reprobate.

1. For use: The Elect are for Mercy, the Reprobate for Wrath. When God
pleases to show mercy, the Elect are brought forth. When Wrath, then the
Reprobate, who are the proper subject of Wrath, as the Elect are of Mercy.

As the householder has diverse vessels, some for base uses, and some for the
use of his Table, and he uses not the base vessels at his Table: so God will
for nothing but for vengeance of the Reprobate. And as the Apothecarie has
diverse boxes and pots, in some of which he puts nothing but Cordials, in
other nothing but poisons, and things of the like dangerous nature, and
carefully distinguishes them: So does God with the Elect and Reprobate. Also
as a Carpenter has some course tools which he uses about stones and gravel,
about which he uses not his choice tools: so if God has a base work to
effect, he has a Reprobate, if a more honorable, he usually has one of his
Elect at hand. If Christ be to be crucified, he will not use the Virgin Mary
or such choice pieces; but a Judas, a Pilate, a Caiphas, and such like.

We preach Mercy: if thou be a Reprobate, it is not meant to thee. We preach
Wrath: if thou be an Elect, this is not meant to thee, but to the Reprobate. It
may be, that when mercy is preaching and pouring down, the Reprobate looks
after it, and thinks to have it; but be deceiues himself. When a Father is
cutting bread among his Children, their little eyes are upon every piece that
is cut: It may be also the dog stands by (Reprobates may not grudge the
comparison, whose state is worse then the dogs.) The dog it may be stands by,
and gapes for the bread: but the Father gives the bread to the children: he
gives to the dog also, but it is a cudgel or whip, and spurns him from him.
So Mercy is the childrens bread, it hangs not for the Reprobates tooth.

2. There is great difference also between the Elect and Reprobate, in regard
of their end. The Elect shall be saved, the Reprobate, assuredly damned.
Sometimes he uses the Reprobates as a rod, to chastise his children, but
when he has served his pleasure by them, he deals with them as he did with
the King of Assure, Esaias 10.5,12.
he throws them into the fire.

God uses them, who cannot but use them well, and they do no more but what he
has appointed; and when they have done according to his secret appointment,
they shall be damned, for not obeying his revealed appointment. Yea, he will
make that which they do against his will, to serve his own will, and our good.

Judas is sick of Covetousness, so that he will do any thing for lucre: God
will make the covetousness of Judas serve for his glory, and the eternal
safety of his Elect.

Use 2.
The Reprobates are prepared and fitted for destruction: not simply only for
Gods pleasure, but also for their own desert; for if they deserved it not, it
would be his pleasure to save them.

Use 3.
God prepares the Elect for glory. He saues none, but he prepares them by
sanctification, and so makes them fit to be saved. The Elect do not by and by
from a corrupt estate go to a glorified: but a fitting and holy preparation
comes between. If a man have a garment, he will have it fit before he wear
it, so God will have us cast into new mould, that we may be fit for heaven
before we come there. If thou live in drunkenness, whoredom, pride, etc.
These things make thee fit for hell, but as for heaven, being such, thou art
sure never to come there.

Use 4.
An Elect and Reprobate are discerned, not by their matter; for they are both
vessels of the same lump; but by their use. Look therefore what is within:
what does God put into thee? Is there any of the heavenly liquor in thee, as
Faith, Repentance, love to the Word? Is Christ there with his merits? Those
which have these rich graces in them, are vessels of honor. But if there be
nothing in thee but Infidelity, Pride, Hypocrisy, Covetousness, etc. and
they continue, without questioning, thou art a vessel of dishonor.

It may easily be known what we have within: for as a Pomander if you chafe
it, yields a comfortable smell; and Assafaetida or the like strong thing if it
be rubbed offends; so deal with one truly godly, and thou shall hear nothing
but sauoury and gracious speeches; the opening of his mouth will be as the
opening of a Box of sweet ointment: thou shall also have none but conscionable
dealing at his hands. But deal with a wicked man, uncalled, and he will some
way or other, by evil words, or deeds, discover the carrion-like corruption of
his heart.

Now follows the second part of these two verses, which is the consideration
of that which is spoken of the Reprobates; which is, that he suffers them
with long patience, etc. Where we have the Act: He suffers them. He does not
make an end of them at once, but suffers them. Secondly, the end: Which is to
be conceived in a double respect. First, of the Reprobates, to show his power
and wrath upon them. Secondly, of the Elect: that so the riches of his mercy
and glory toward the Elect, might more famously appear.

VERSE 22. Endured with long-suffering the vessels of Wrath.


IN these words is contained the Act we spoke of: which is enduring: amplified
two ways. First, by the manner, with long-suffering. Secondly, by the object,
The vessels of Wrath.

Long-suffering is a dilation of revenge, though we be provoked. Though the
Greek word be here translated long-suffering, yet properly God cannot suffer:
for all things are active in God: and whatsoever suffers, or is patient, fayles
either in the essence, faculty, or Energie. The word here used, is hard to be
translated into our Tongue, we borrow from the Latins to express it in one
word, by Longanimitie. Between which Longanimitie, and patience, Chrysostom
observes this difference: Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Epist. ad Colos.
Longanimity is toward them of whom we can, Patience toward them of whom we
cannot be revenged. So also Augustine: Aug. l. de. Pati.
Patience is said of God, not that he suffers any evil, but because he
expects sinners to conversion.

God is patient toward sinners, even Reprobates, Joel 2.13. Romans 2.4. 2.
Pet. 3.9. He endured Cain a long time, suffered him to live, to build Cities,
to beget Children. So he suffered Saul, Judas, etc.

Use 1.
Be thou patient after the example of thy heavenly Father; whose child how art
thou, if thou suffer not, but repayest injuries? Socrates, a Heathen
Philosopher, would willingly neither suffer, nor do no wrong: but if he must
choose one, he would rather choose to suffer, then to do. But what speak we of
Heathen, when we have God himself patient toward Reprobates?

Say nor, I will recompense evil. God himself yet bears with a number of
hell hounds Reprobates. Christ is not yet revenged, nor the blood of the
Saints. Will thou be moved at a crosse-word, and thirst after Revenge? It may
be sweet to the flesh, but it is hateful to God. If thou have put up wrong
once or twice, thou think thy self worthy to be chronicled, as a rare
example of Patience. How many thousand times have thou provoked God, and yet
he forbeares thee? Do thou likewise toward thy neighbor. Remember the
Parable of the merciless Debtor. Mat. 18.
Give the Pardon thou ask: Forgive, that thou may be forgiven. When thou
can so bridle thy affections, that being provoked, and in thy power to
revenge; and yet for conscience toward God thou forbearest, think thou have
profited. That argues true Nobleness. Posse and nolle, Nobile.


Use 2.
For God to bear with his children which provoke him, is much: but to suffer
his enemies, who seek not his favor, and are the worse because they are
forborne; to suffer a drunkard, whoremonger, etc. to live and long, and to have
great means, and to hold his hands must argue an Infinite perfection.

Alas, what had become of the best of us, if there were not such Longanimitie
in GOD? We had not lived to read these things. God might have taken us away in
our sins; if he had called us out of the world, some ten or twenty years
ago, before we had repented, how should we have done? If he had used
Martial law to Manasses, Paul, Mary Magdalen, they had not shined now to the
comfort of sinners: He suffered the ill manners (the word is significant)
(...). Act. 13.18.
of the Israelites forty years in the wilderness. Consider thou which
read, how long he has suffered thee: let it move thee to repentance, and
to praise his patience.

Use 3.
Here is comfort for poor sinners: God is patient toward Reprobates, much more
will he be toward the Elect. He which long forbeares Tyrants, drunkards,
Enemies: will he be hasty and inexorable toward his children? If he spare them
which never grieve for their sins, never regard his Word, will he not much
more spare them which repent that they have offended him, which tremble at his
Word, and seek his favor? If the Reprobate fare so well, much more will he
abound to us, in all riches of Grace and Consolation.

VERSE 22. To show his wrath, and to make his power known.


THe end of Gods longanimitie in regard of the Reprobates, is (according to
these words) to declare his powerful wrath in their condemnation.

In these words we will first consider certain things here attributed to God,
and then the matter it self in them contained.

There are two things attributed to God here, 1. Anger or Wrath: and 2. Power.
For the first, Anger or Wrath is defined by Philosophers, to be a desire of
revenge with grief and perturbation, through the boiling of the blood about
the heart. It is called of the Hebrews, Aph, because it discouers it self in
the dilating and contracting of the nose thrills. Thus is it in us. Such a
thing is in God, but not with perturbation; for God is not subject to passion.
As God does not repent as man does, yet repentance is attributed unto him: so
also may it be said of Anger. As repentance is in GOD without grief or error:
so wrath, without passion or perturbation.

God is said to repent, when he changes that which is done, and to be angry,
when he punishes that which is ill done; not being indeed angry, but seeming
so to them which suffer. For as a man in his angry mood, wounds and kills;
so when God punishes, he is said to be angry: Anger noting in God, not an
affection, but an effect of some divine perfection: namely, his vindicatiue
justice.

Anger is attributed to God after the manner of men (...).
, but it must be conceived after the manner of God (...).
. For God does that in his holy and quiet judgment, which we do in fury and
rage. As there is difference between an Enemies cutting off a limb, and a
Surgeons: so God, as a Surgeon, without any passion, cuts off, that is,
punishes evil men. As when we speak to children, we lisp as children Quotiens
barbaros alloquimur ill^ru^ lingua vtimur, et cum pueris aliquid dicere volumus
eoru^ more balbutimus, etc. Euthy. in Psalm. 6.
, so the Spirit speaks to us of God, in terms suitable to our capacity:
calling his justice, wrath, to make us afraid to sin.

The Scriptures describe God angry with sinners, Exodus 32.12. Numb. 11.1. Psalm.
7.6.

Use.
Fear to offend God, for he can be angry; and when angry, who knows the
power of his wrath Psalm. 90.1.
? As his grace is incomprehensible toward his children: so is his anger toward
his enemies. We desire his Grace, let us eschew his Anger. Lord rebuke me not
in thy wrath, says David Psalm. 5.1.
: praying more against that, the^ against bodily sickness. Gods frown is worse
then any punishment, yea, then hell torments. If his wrath be kindled, yea but
a very little, blessed are all they that trust in him Psalm. 2. vlt.
. Do they provoke me to anger, and not themselves to their own confusion,
says the Lord Iere. 7.19.
? For if the frown of a Prince be the death of the subject Prou. 20.2.
, much more the frown of God: who in very deed cannot frown as man: but if any
thing could make him frown, sin would do it, it is so hateful to him.

As Anger, so Power is attributed to God: but anger improperly, this properly.
It is always active in God. In him is principium agendi, not patiendi, to do,
but not to suffer: for this argues defect, as was said before.

This power is Almightinesse; and it is absolute or ordinate. By the first, he
is able to do all he will, and more then he actually does will: for as there
is in God a knowledge of things which never were or shall be, so is there
Ability to do that, which he never will shall be done. He can raise up of
stones children to Abraham, and give Christ more then 12. legions of Angels:
but we never read he did so.

By the second, he can do all he will, notwithstanding all opposition, and
that in an instant.

Q. Can God do all things?

A. It is a shameful question for the Creature to move of the Creator. Some
things are in possible to God, because he is God: of which a pious obseruer of
Gods majesty would have us not to say, God cannot do them, but, they cannot
be done.

Those things are impossible, which any ways imply a contradiction: Aquin.
as a thing to be, and not to be at the same time: for this is to make those
things which are true, in the same respect that they are true, to be false
Aude^ter loquar Cu^ omnia possit Deus, suscitare virgine^ non potest, post
ruinam. Hieron. in ep. ad Eusta. de virg. Quisquis dicit, Si omnipotens est
Deus, faciat vt quae facta sunt, facta no^ fuerint: non videt hoc se dicere,
saciat vt quae vera sunt, eo ipso quo vera sunt, falsa sint. Aug. lib. 26.
cont. Faust. ca. 5.
. So God cannot ly, or die, not for want of strength, but because he wants no
strength; for these are works of weakness, not of power. In these, the
affirmation has the force of a Negation, according to the thing.

Doct. There is in God an infinite power to do what he will. Luke 1,31. Math.
19.28. He is called Almighty, 2. Corin. 6.18.

Use. This doctrine is like the cloud, which was light to Israel, but darkness
to Pharaoh and his host.

If thou belongest to the Israel of God, remember God is Almighty. Many promise
more then they can perform: GOD can give being to all his promises. Pray
with boldness, trust on him with boldness, whatsoever thy own reason, or
the world object. He is able to give, and to maintain his gifts, that thou
may persevere.

I know in whom I have believed, says Paul; 2. Tim. 1.12.
In whom Paul? In him who is able to keep my soul, says he. With this
Christ comforts his sheep: John 10.29.
My Father is stronger then all, and none can take them out of my Fathers hand.
If thou be profane, remember that God is able to make good all his
Threatenings. Does it not affright thee to consider? Does it not make thy heart
to shake? Vana sine viribus ira.
Anger without power is in vain; but God has anger and power. O humble thy
self to this Almighty Judge of the world, who infinitely hates and is offended
with sin, and has infinite power to execute his vengeance and displeasure
upon sinners. Let all the ends of the earth fear him; so does our blessed
Savior admonish; Math. 10.28.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

The matter it self in this end, is, that God lets wicked men alone, and
suffers them to have a being here, which are not worthy to tread upon the
earth, that all the world may take knowledge of his anger against sin, and of
his power to execute the same.

God suffers Reprobates for the manifestation of his wrath and power: for this
he suffered the Amorites many hundred years, Genesis 15.13,16. To this purpose
also is there a speech uttered by our Savior to the Scribes and Pharisees, and
the rest of the Jews, me thinks it is a fearful one, Mat. 23.32. Fulfilye
the measure of your fathers iniquity. They were monstrously wicked, yet he
bids them go on to fulfill their measure. Why? That they may be made examples,
and that the world may ring of his judgments which he will bring upon them,
for all the blood which was shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel, to the
blood of Zachary, verse 35.

Use. 1.
There is no Injustice in the reprobation of men; because they deserve it, and
it serves to the setting forth of Gods glory, and for the getting himself a
name. It is most necessary that the Justice and Power of God should be known:
but without the Decree of Reprobation, and Execution thereof we could not so
well know them. A man may know the sweetness of honey by reading, and by
report: but a fuller knowledge is attained by taste. So we may know the
Justice and power of GOD by his Word: but when we see examples of these, this
experimental knowledge is far more excellent.

Use 2.
Many times we see a wicked notorious wretch to be advanced, to live long, to
prosper, and to enjoy an ouerflowing cup of outward blessings: while Gods
children (a great deal better men,) are poor, despised, and crossed on every
hand. This is a sore tentation. This is the Atheists Argument: If there be a
God, or a providence: Why do his enemies prosper? Why does he not bless his
own? This posed David, Psul. 73.
and troubled Jeremy. Ier. 12.
But they and we are taught that God heaps good things on wicked men, not
that he likes their courses, or had given over the governing of the world, but
to make them the more pregnant examples of his wrath and power: and that his
children are afflicted here, that they may be prepared for the glory to come.

Grieve not then, nor grudge at bad men's thrift: it is convenient: nay, it must
be so. These things are but preparatiues to their greater judgment. But alas,
wicked men think not so: they say, Let the Preacher say his mind: I am sure,
whatsoever I am, I thrive, I prosper, I have good crops, etc. O, they know not,
that they are as Oxen fatted for the slaughter. If thou be rich, thou
think thy self happy, though a wicken man: but thou shall pay dear for all
one Day, when Dives will wish he had been Lazarus: Nay, for the hope of that
Day, the poorest man that fears God, will not even Now change states with the
richest upon earth: For Mary has chosen the better part. Luke 10.42.


Further, if thou maruellest at the great power and pomp of the Turk, who
wastes Gods inheritance, filling the places of the Apostles chiefest labors
with detestable doctrines; or at the pride of the Pope, who plays the Devil,
in burning and raging against the Saints: Remember there is a Day coming,
wherein they shall be made examples; and that God will get himself a name,
glorious and magnificent in their destruction, fore-prophesied in the
Revelation. Reu. 17.


Use 3.
Sin not in hope of Impunity, which if it be long, is a strong inticement to
offend: For GOD is patient, not that thou shall quite escape, but that thou
may be made an example. Because sentence is not speedily executed, ungodly
men take courage to offend: Eccles. 8.11,12,13.
But though a sinner do evil, and live long, yet it shall not be well with
him in the end. The Drunkard, or unclean person, etc. offend once, and feel
no Judgment, yea, a second and a third time, and God takes them not in hand:
Now they think God sees not, has forgotten, and will never mark. Ah, Fools,
which consider not that the more they sin, and are not punished, the more
their reckoning increases.

They deal with God, as the Birds with a Scar-crow, at first it makes them
afraid, but seeing it not to stir, at length they come near it, and light
and sit upon it. So at first, the wickedest man is afraid to offend, but
through impunitie he hardens himself to commit iniquity. But though God has
woollen feet, yet he has Iron hands. He spares them, to have the greater
stroke at them. All this while, he is whetting his sword, and every sin
makes it the sharper: he is preparing deadly Arrows, and is long in drawing
his Bow, because he means to have a speeding shoot.

The old World is an example, so is Sodom, yea Jerusalem, famous Jerusalem is
an example of this. There was never any place so abounded with blessings as
Jerusalem, (our unthankful England excepted.) How long did God spare* How
often did he fore warn? And when nothing would serve, how was his patience
turned to fury! and her mercy into Judgment! Not a stone upon a stone! Her
rivers flowing with milk and honey, turned into blood! The suruiuing
Inhabitants and their posterity, vagabonds, dispersed this 1600. year, over
the face of the earth. Let England, so long spared, so greatly blessed, look
to it; yea, let every one look to it. This is a time of patience, without
wrath. There is a day coming of wrath, without patience: Let the patience of
God move thee to Repentance.

VERSE 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory, on the
vessels of mercy.


HEre is the end of Gods showing his wrath and power on the Reprobates, after
his long enduring them; namely, that he might show the riches of his glory on
the Elect. Contraries illustrate each other, being laid together: Contraria
iuxta se posita magis illucescunt.
So these things by comparing: not that Gods Justice and Mercy are contrary one
to the other: but that their effects in contrary subjects, are after a
contrary manner.

There is no difference between the divine attributes, but only rational, in
regard of our conceit; which difference also cease, when the operation of our
understanding cease. For as it is the same Sun which hardneth the Clay and
softneth the Wax: So it is the same will in GOD, which shows mercy on the
Elect, and Justice on the Reprobate.

God makes the Reprobate drink off the very dregs of his wrath, that the
relish of his immeasurable goodness might by comparison be the sweeter to the
Elect.

And that: this Particle (And) is not in some Copies, and the Ancient read it
not, and indeed without it, the sense appears the more plainly: but being in
very approved Copies, it would be here taken (as often it is) for, Even.

The Riches of his glory. Glory is that whereby God appears to be glorious,
and is to be glorified.

Now he appears glorious by the effects of his goodness and power, whereby he
is willing and able to save. The Interpreters for the most part, here interpret
it, of his mercy: but I think, Gods power also to be understood: and so the
opposition is notable. His mercy to his wrath, and his power in showing mercy,
to his power in executing wrath. As Glory is sometimes put for Mercy: so
sometimes for power. Romans 3.23. Romans 6.4.


The riches of his glory. This is an Hebraisme, where Glory is not the
addition, but riches, noting (as usually) abundance. So we say a man rich in
plate, land, etc. which has store of these things. That he might show his
most rich and abundant glory.

The wrath showed on the Reprobates, does amplify and commend the mercy to the
Elect. Gods saving Noah, and drowning the world, made his mercy to Noah the
more conspicuous. The plaguing of Egypt, and sparing the Israelites, by
comparison, the more sets forth the goodness of God to the Israelites. So
also the drowning of Pharaoh and his host: and their deliverance noted: Exodus
14.30,31.

Use 1.
Here are two comforts.

First, the riches of glory laid up for the Elect, comfort against our
present baseness, and disgrace put upon us by the world.

Secondly, we have friends here: but many times we fail of their help: either
for want of love in them, or for want of power: But God wants neither: nay, he
is infinite in both. He has riches of glory. Whatsoever thou want, as
Faith, Repentance, etc. Ask and thou shall have. That fountain can never be
drawn dry.

Learn Humility. For thou did never earne or purchase the happiness thou
have and shall have: and that there should be such difference between thee and
a Reprobate, it comes from the riches of Gods glory.

It is not a little thing or ordinary, which God gives his Elect, but riches of
Glory: the pledge of it here in Faith and Sanctification, the perfection of it
hereafter. To bring us to this estate, and to make us capable of such glory,
cost the treasure even of heaven: the richest Jewel there, even Christ Jesus
was pawned for it. Forget not to be thankful: And that thou may so much
the more do it: Compare thy estate with the estate of a Reprobate, thou were
in the same condemnation. Consider the torments to which the Reprobate, and the
riches of Glory to which thou art reserved.

How does God deal with us, as though we were Princes children, who indeed are
beggars brats! He takes a Reprobate, and scourges him with Scorpions, to fray
thee from sin, and to show thee his love. When thou feel thy self dull to
praise God; consider how God has discerned thee from the Reprobates, then
whom, in thy self thou art not better so much as a hair.

If God had saved all, it had been an Infinite mercy, and an Infinite cause to
praise him: but Now seeing many are damned, to them which are saved, it is the
more cause of thanksgiving. The Sun is glorious and beautiful: but if the
Moon and every Star had as much brightness, it would not be so admired. So
this makes the mercy of GOD to the Elect so much the more admirable, by
comparison of his wrath on the Reprobate. On the contrary, it is augmentation
of torment to the Reprobate; to see how God uses his Elect, to hear how
graciously Christ speaks to them: Come ye blessed: to behold Them go
triumphing to heaven, and themselves thrust down with the Devil to hell. To
see what they lose shall more torment them, then that which they feel. This
shall even cut them to the heart, as may by proportion be gathered out of the
Gospel. Luke 13.28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth (says Christ to the Reprobate
Jews) when ye shall see the Elect in the Kingdom of heaven, and your selves
thrust out.

Apply this to all occasions of mercy to thy self, which thou obseruest others
to want. Would thou be stirred up to praise God for our long peace? Compare
England with France, and the Low Countries; this will do it. Would thou for
the Gospel be provoked to thankefulnes? Consider their misery that live in
Turkey, or under the darkness of Popery.

Thou have riches, understanding, health, the use of thy limbs, etc. When thou
see a man Lunati que, or a poor lame cripple begging a penny of thee;
Remember that God offers him to thee, not only that thou should be
compassionate to relieve him: but also to make him thy glass to behold the
mercy of God to thy self; who could have put him into thy estate, and thee
into his. Be from hence thankful, lest God cast thee into such an estate (for
he can do it) that so by a hard comparison thou may learn to be more
sensible of his goodness, which thou have received. Thus did God declare i^
Jerusalem by his Prophet, that they should serve Shishak, that they might see
the difference of his service, and of the kingdoms of the earth. 2. Chron.
12.8.
Consider wisely, and be thankful.

VERSE 24. Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the
Gentiles.


HItherto has been showed, that the promise was never made nor meant to the
only carnal seed of Abraham: Now follows the other part of Paul's Answer,
that it is made to the Elect of all Nations. And he falls into it from the
occasion of that which is verse. 23. delivered of the vessels of mercy and
glory. For in this verse he shows who they be, and by consequence who are
Abraham's seed, to whom belong the promises; and that by an effect of election,
which is Calling. This calling is enlarged by a distribution of the Subject,
viz. Jews and Gentiles.

The Argument or sum of the words is: That the seed to whom the promises
pertain, are the Elect, which are not the Jews only; but the Gentiles also:
nor all the Jews, but only the Elect. The first is approved, verse 25, 26. The
last, verse 27, 28, 29. Then follows a collection from these things, verse 30.
to the end of the Chapter. Even us whom he has called: Calling is an action of
Gods love whereby he calls men to salvation. It is twofold.

1. Outward, when we hear the Word preached with the ear of the body.

2. Inward, when God bends the heart to believe the promise offered, and
swayeth the whole man to obedience. Pareus.
This is here meant; not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles: Not all
the Jews, nor all the Gentiles; but of the Jews and Gentiles: the Proposition
being partitiue: some singulars of both.

They which are effectually called, are elect vessels of glory: for the
execution of the decree of election begins in Calling, Romans 8.30. Tit. 1.1.
Ioh. 10.16. Act. 13.48.

Use 1.
In time past they sang: God is known in Iewry, his name is great in Israel;
at Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling at Sion. Psalm. 76.1.2. Psalm. 79.6.
Ierem. 10.25. Luke 2.32. Acts 10.
Then were the Prophets bold to say: Powere out thy wrath upon the Gentiles:
Yea, we were as dogs: But now he that is the glory of Israel, is the light
also of the Gentiles. Peter could not understand this without a vision. The
Jew, the elder brother, could not endure his younger brethren to be
entertained: but they had no reason for it; for neither did we grutch their
glory, neither does our admittance, but their own infidelity exclude them from
God. Truth it is, that in all times of the Jews excellency, some few of the
Gentiles were received into the fellowship of the promises, as Job, Iethro,
Ruth, etc. for the salvation of some, and for a witness unto all: but now, the
multitude of the Gentiles receive the Gospel. Vt quibusdam esset in remediu^,
omnibus in testimoniu^. Amb. de voc. Genesis


Whether Jew or Gentile, such as are called are the elect of God. It is not the
having, or wanting of the prerogative of Nation, Sex, Condition, etc. that
makes or marrs. In Christ, says Paul, Galat. 3.28.
(not in a Christian Commonwealth) is neither Jew nor Gentile, etc. But all,
rich, poor, masters, servants, Jews, Gentiles, have an equal right in
Christ: which I think was shadowed, Exodus 30.15. Where the rich shall not
pass, nor the poor diminish.

Art thou rich? if thou be not effectually called, thou shall be damned:
Art thou poor? If thou be effectually called, thou art rich. A poor man
wanting grace, is twice miserable: and a rich man believing, has a double
portion. Nemo dicat ideo vocauit me deus, quia colui eum. Quomodo, coals, si
non voceris. Augu.


There is nothing in us which is the cause of effectual calling: He calls
us. Good desires and thoughts, etc. follovv calling, as calling follows
Election, and Election the mercy of God.

We are the subject of Calling; but power to obey the Calling of God we have
not, till God has created it in us. As water, being by nature cold, may be
made hot, and yet it has no natural inclination to heat: so the Flesh has no
ears to hear, nor eyes to see, but as GOD creates them. Neither does God
give us a power, and we educe it into act, but both power and act as from God.

The preaching of the Word is Gods ordinary voice to call. First, be thankful
that this voice sounds among us, for it sounds not in all places of the
world. Secondly, that thou have ears to hear: without hearing, a voice
profits not. Hearing is the sense of learning. Faith comes by hearing, how
miserable then were thou, if thou were deaf! for deaf men must needs be
miserable, being deprived of the ordinary means of faith: howsoever, such
deaf which are elected shall be saved. For God is not tied to eyes and ears,
he can save without these; yet great is the comfort of hearing. He that has
ears to hear, let him praise God, and hear. Thirdly, that thou have a mind
to understand that which is taught, for every one cannot: as fools, and
frantikes, and such a one might God have made thee. Fourthly, that thou have a
heart to obey: for many have the Word, and hear it, and understand it, being
witty and apprehensiue, and can discourse of it, yet are most profane in their
lives; they know evil, but have no power to avoid it: when thou see such,
take occasion to acknowledge the mercy thou have received.

Use 4.
We may know our Election by that which follows it; The foundation of our
Election is in God; The tokens of it are in us. That is immovable; These are
infallible. A principal token is Effectual vocation. By this (not by
extraordinary revelation, Paul knew he was a vessel of honor, as he says,
Even us whom he has called, etc.

Examine thy Election by thy inward calling: God has often outwardly called
thee by his Word, but thy heart knows that thou have not obeyed: but if thy
heart answer as an Echo in obedience, then art thou elected. Show thy
election by thy reformation, and by thy good fruits.

Many are like that son, Math. 21.30.
who said to his father he would go, but went not. They have some fleeting
motions and purposes of Repentance while they are at the Sermon; but afterward
return to their vomit. Even as a melancholik man is cheered with Music while
the Instrument sounds, as in the example of Saul, but after are vexed with
the evil spirit. So many are moved, it may be, to tears for the present, who
afterward rejoice in evil. While Felix heard Paul, Acts. 24.26.
he trembled: so a man may have some sudden motions and glances of sorrow,
while Paul preaches; but the continuance of these things, being powerful to a
daily increase of godliness, is a comfortable mark of our election.

The Word is the instrument of Calling: vvait upon it, and remember, the time
of calling is called a Day. Some days are very short, and the longest have an
end. It may be thou have spent thy day, even to the last hour, in vanity and
rebellion: look to it, the time is short; if thou dyest uncalled, thou die
damned.

VERSE 25. As he says also in Osee, Ose. 2.23
I will call them My people, which were not my people, 1. Pet. 2.10.
and her Beloved, which was not beloved.

26. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them,
Ose. 1.10
Ye are not my people, there they shall be called the children of the living
GOD.


IN these two verses, the Apostle proves, that to the Gentiles belong the
promises as well as to the Jews: and that they have an interest also in
Christ, by Calling and Election. And because the Jews could not endure this,
he brings two Testimonies out of Osee, as if he should say; This that I write,
and this that daily is fulfilled, concerning the calling of the Gentiles to
Grace, is nothing else but that which God long ago caused the Prophets to
preach unto our Fathers: for the Prophet Osee, brings in GOD himself calling
the Gentiles, his beloved, his people and children.

The first of these Testimonies is out of Osee 2.23. The second, Osee 1.10.

These words are not spoken of the Israelites, and applied to the Gentiles by
similitude, as some have thought. For these terms, A Nation not beloved, Not
the people of God, are constantly in the Prophets taken for the Gentiles.

The matter then is thus to be conceived. God commands Osee to rebuke the
Israelites by a Parable, Consule Pareum super Oseam.
wherein he is commanded to take to wife Gomer, and to beget children, which
he does. He takes Gomer, that is, he preaches Gomer, which signifies
Consumption, Desolation, and utter Vastation to the Israelites. The effect of
this Sermon, is said to be a son, begotten by the Prophet: at whose Sermon,
the Israelites grew worse and worse, for the which they are called by God,
Iidsreel: that is, Dispersion. He preaches Gomer again, and begets a
daughter, whose name is, Lo-Ruchama, No mercy: that is, the people persist in
their sins, and therefore God threatens to show them no mercy. He preaches
Gomer the third time, and Lo-Ammi is borne; that is, Not my people. By which
name, for their incurable perverseness, the Lord threatens them with extreme
abiection. And, that they should not complain, that if they be cast off, then
the promise to Abraham, that his seed should be as the sand, should fail: God
in the 10. verse of the first Chapter, tells them, that That promise should be
made good, though they all perish. Yea, that when he has destroyed them, that
promise should chiefly be fulfilled: a greater company of all Nations becoming
the children of Abraham, then ever the Israelites were. For as all the sand is
not on the shore of Canaan; so not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles in
all the world, is a posterity to be borne unto Abraham.

In these verses is a double description of the Gentiles; The 1. of their
estate before their calling, expressed by Negatiues: Not beloved; Not receiving
mercy; Not my people. The 2. of their estate after their calling, expressed by
Affirmatiues: My people, and Beloved, The children of the living God.

This second estate is amplyfied three ways; First, from the place: In the
place, not in the stead, but in the place; as in England, France, Denmark, in
any place. Not only the Rivers of Canaan, but All Rivers shall flow with
Milk and Honey. Yea, the Honey and Milk of Canaan shall flow into all
Countries: As a River being stopped, ouerflowes the banks, and drownes all; even
so the stream of Gods mercies being stopped in Canaan by their sins, flows
over into al parts of the world.

2. From the means or Instrument of conueying this grace to all Nations, which
is the preaching of the Word, notified in this word, They shall be Called.

3. From the excellency of their state unto which they are called. The Jews
were called the people of God. The Gentiles shall be called his children. It
is more to be the son of a King then his Subject.

This is amplified by a Title given to God, whose children they are: (...), vel
(...), quia (...). Tacit. in Zen.
The Children of the living God, so called in opposition to their Idols which
they served: or because of his bounty a^ goodness, giving life and all
happiness to such as worship him: as the Heathens called their chief god by a
Title so signifying, as the Cause of life.

The Calling of the Gentiles to the state of Grace and Salvation, was long ago
foretold by the Prophets, Osee 1.10. and 2.23. So also, Genesis 9.27. Psalm. 2.8.
Esaias 49.6. Haggai 2.8. Micah. 4.1. Mal. 1.11, etc.

Use 1.
In all scruples have recourse to the Scriptures for satisfaction, by the
example of Paul. The Jews were offended that the Gentiles were preached unto.
Paul tells them that it was so foretold by the Prophets. It should not therefore
have bred in them scandal, but rather confirmation of their Faith, seeing the
event to hold correspondence with the Word.

Let us apply it thus. Many are troubled and puzzeled, because of heresies, and
erroneous opinions, and because such as fear God, are mocked and hated. This
should rather confirm us in the Faith, because such things are foretold. These
things (says our Savior) Ioh. 16.4.
I have said unto you, that when they come to pass, you should not be
troubled. Many also stagger, because some after long profession fall away. But
this is no other but that which was by our Savior foretold; Mat. 19.30.
Many which are first shall be last, and the last shall be first. As therefore
in the dark thou look not about, but to the Lantern, that thou might
not stumble: so in these evil days attend to the Word, and thou shall be
satisfied.

Use 2.
We are Gentiles; we ought to consider what we were, that we may be stirred up
to thankfulness, for the grace we are come unto. Ephesians. 2.11,12.
We were without Christ, aliants from the commonwealth of Israel, Strangers
from the Covenants of Promise, without hope, yea, without God in the world, and
walked abominably. But now we are beloved, and the sons of the living God.

To be the people of God, was not always the estate of England: but time was,
when we were like the Indians and Armenians. O, the darkness that was over the
face of our land, about 80. or 90. years ago! What grace and light have we
above our Forefathers! Be thankful, England, and show forth his virtues, who
has called thee both out of the darkness of Heathenisme, and Papisme, into
his marvelous light. Yea, let every one in particular apply it. What were thou
before thy effectual Calling? It may be, a drunkard, an unclean person,
profane, unconscionable, etc. but now a Son or Daughter of the living GOD.
Praise thy God, who has loved thee, and delivered thee out of the power of
darkness, translating thee into the Kingdom of his dear Son. I was (says
Paul) 1. Tim. 1.13. etc.
a blasphemer, etc. but God has showed grace. Therefore to the King
everlasting, etc. be praise and honor for ever.

Use 3.
Highly esteem of the Word, by which so much grace is conveyed unto thee. Many
are like proud Seruing-men, which are ashamed to be seen in their Masters
livery. If thou be not ashamed of thy Master Christ, be not ashamed daily
to wait upon him in thy livery, which is the hearing of his Word, and the
receiving of the Sacraments.

Use 4.
Examine whether thou be beloved, and the son of God indeed, or Titular
only. The Jews gloried, that they were the people of God, when he would not
acknowledge them. And the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of
light, and seem to be one. Will thou for his fair show say he is a good
Angel, perceiving the black drifts of his Tentations? So many seem to be
the children of God, who in their conversation express the affection not of
children, but of enemies.

Thy Conscience tells thee, thou drunkard, thou Strumpet, thou painted
Sepulcher, that thou art a Pagan, though thou have the outward badge of a son,
of one beloved. Nay, thou art so much the less beloved, because bearing the
badge of God, thou seruest the Devil. If thou be Gods Spouse, keep thy
self chaste to him: if his son or Daughter, honor him. If of his people;
learn his Statutes, and obey them. It is a grievous thing, to be cast out, to
be divorced from God, to be dis-herited of heaven. He is the everliving God,
to save his children, and to confound them which are his enemies.

VERSE 27. Esaias 10.22.23
Esaias also cries concerning Israel, Though the Number of the children of
Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a Remnant shall be saved.

28. For he will finish the Or account.
work, and cut it short in righteousness, because a short work will the Lord
make upon the earth.

29. And as Esaias said before, Esaias 1.9.
Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and
been made like unto Gomorrah.


IN these verses Paul proves that not all the Jews, yea, not many, but a very
few shall be saved: by two Testimonies out of Esaias, both which are to the same
effect.

The first, is verse 27, 28. out of Esaias 10.21,22.

The second, verse 29. out of Esaias 1.9.

In the first Testimony are two things. First, the thing witnessed. Secondly,
the Amplification.

The Thing witnessed, is, that but a Remnant of the children of Israel shall be
saved. A Remnant notes a small Number in comparison of the whole.

Saved: The Prophet Esaias says, shall return: not only from the captivity of
Babylon, but from sin, as appears, verse 21. They shall return unto God.
Hence one observes, Gualter.
that none can be saved, but they which return, that is, which repent.

The Amplification is fourfold. First, from the Person bearing witness,
which is Esaias. Paul delivers not this in his own Name, which he knew was odious
to them, but in Esayes, a Prophet of chief account. Paul was not inferior to
Esaias, nor his Testimony of lesser Authority: for they wrote by the same
Spirit: but he knew they would except against him: therefore he takes one,
against whom lay no Exception.

Observation. It was a great corruption in the Jews, to examine truth by the
person: and a foul fault in many among us, who have the Word in respect of
persons. If the Preacher be of their Cut, they will hear him, and admire him,
how sillily so ever he speaks; but if he be not, they esteem not the Word,
though never so soundly delivered.

2. From the Manner of the Testimony: He cried: wherein, some note the
Prophets zeal, which also should be in all Ministers, but others understand it
of plainness and boldness also: as if Paul should say to a Jew, What? Art
thou angry, because I speak so plainly and boldly of thy reiection? Is not
Esaias as plain and bold?

3. By a Concession Indeed their number is as the sand of the sea, and
therefore much to be pitied, that of so many, so few should be saved. Anselme
notes the Jews to be as the sand, in regard of their barrenness of Faith,
which is true; but here it signifies their great multitude and Number.

4. The fourth Amplification, is verse. 28. which the Ancients have expounded of
the manner, how the Remnant should be saved; Amb. Hieron. Anselm. Aqum.
namely; by a short word: that is, say they, by the Gospel which teaches
Faith: wherein the Law also is by Christ abbreuiated into the love of God, and
of our Neighbor. And this word is abbreuiated in Righteousness; because the
Righteousness which the Law could not give, is given by the Gospel. Chrysostom.
Ambros. Phot. Cyprian. l. 2. cont. Iad. c. 3.
Or, because the Word of Faith brings a Consumption of sin. Or because
another Gospel succeedes not this, as this did the Law. Or this Word is Christ,
The Word Incarnate, so abbreuiated to the Nature of man, that He whom the
heavens cannot contain, should be contained in a Manger. Hier. ad Alg. q. 10


The later Writers expound it as a reason why but a Remnant should be saved:
namely, because God has purposed to make a short word, that is, business or
work, as it is well translated in his Majesty's Bible. The Hebrew term
signifying both. And thus it notes, either the greatness of the Destruction of
the Jews by Titus, and then the Remnant should teach and publish
Righteousness in all the world. Corneli. Corn^a Lapide.
Or the speediness: as if the Prophet should say, As I have soon said it, so
shall the Lord in a trice bring it to pass. Comment. Hieron. ascripti.
Or the certainty from the Decree of God, which he shall fully execute, so
that no strength shall resist: even as the course of a River cannot be stopped.
Tremellius in Esaias 11.


In the other Testimony, verse 29. we have also two parts. First the Position.
Secondly, the Amplification.

The Position: A seed shall be saved. By seed is not meant The Gospel, or
the Apostles, or Christ: but the same that is meant by Remnant: that is, a few:
That as but a few were preserved at the Captivity of Babylon: So but a few
shall obtain the Promises. Beza.
This Remnant is called a Seed, not only because the life of things is
preserved in the Seed, but also because that, of a man's whole crop, the most
is sold and eaten, and the least part reserved to seed the land for another
harvest. Piscator.


This is amplified two ways.

First, from the Author of this Reservation, God, here called the Lord of
Hosts. All creatures are his Hosts, in regard of their multitude, as an Army
consists of many troops. Secondly, in regard of their order, which is
admirable, as order makes an Armie-beautifull. Thirdly, in regard of obedience:
for no Soldier is so ready and pressed, at the command of his Centurion, as all
creatures are ready to fulfill the will of God. Even Flies, and Lice, if God
muster them together. God can arm all the creatures against sinful man, the
least whereof, even a Fly, is able to make an end of us, if God give
Commission.

Secondly, it is amplified from the grieuousnesse and totalitie (as I may say)
of the Deletion of the Jews, if God had not been merciful. Expressed by a
Similitude of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorah, where all perished save Lot
and his two Daughters.

The sum is, that as many thousands of the Jews perished by the sword of
Hazael, Ioash, Sennacherib, Nebuchadnezzar, etc. and had all, if God had not
preserved some few: so but a few only of them shall be saved from everlasting
destruction, of which those destructions before named were types.

But a Remnant of the multitude of the Jews shall be saved, Esaias 8.18. and
24.13. Amos 3.12.

Use 1.
Dignity and multitude move not GOD to have mercy, but he delights in them
that fear him though but a few. 2 Esd. 8.2.
Though the wicked be ten times so many as are the good, yet they shall be
damned, these shall be saved.

Use 2.
As there is much Pot-earth to a little gold Ore; so the Reprobates are many
more then the Elect. These are a little flock Luke 12.32.
in comparison, though in themselves an innumerable company. Yea, in the
Church, Many are called, but few are chosen Mat. 20.16.
: And of four sorts of grounds, there is one only good Luke 8.
. Many have stony hearts, many have thorny, but they which have good hearts,
are the lesser Number.

If we should survey Town-ships, alas, how many Ignorant should we find, to
one that has sound knowledge! How many Swearers, to one who fears an Oath!
How many Drunkards, Unclean Persons, Covetous, Proud, Hypocrites, to one godly
and true-hearted Professor!

Be not offended then at the poverty of Believers and godly persons, neither
follow the multitude. For the greatest part is commonly the worst part. There
were many that cried Crucify, to one Nichodemus or Joseph of Arimathea, that
spoke in the defense of CHRIST. It is a common Argument: Does not every body
thus, or thus? Shall I follow a few singular persons? Better it is to follow a
few to Heaven, then a multitude to Hell, and to be damned for company.

Why are the multitude of the Jews rejected? Had they not the Law? Offered they
not sacrifice? They offered, but to Idols. They had the Law, but obeyed it not.
They acknowledged not God Esaias 1.2,3.
. Were the worse for corrections Ibid verse 5.
. Despised the Prophets, till there was no remedy 2. Chr. 36.15,16.
. Profaned the Sabbath Neh. 13.17,18
. Transgressed and turned back Dan. 9.6.20.
, etc. These were the causes.

O let England lay it to heart, and repent: for what corner of it is free from
all these grievous abominations? As Jerusalem justified Sodom, so we may well
justify Jerusalem; abounding in all damnable transgressions, and contempt of
the Word. Let us be wise by the example of the Jews, lest others become wise
by our example.

See thou any to fear God, and take a good course in these perilous times,
wherein sin so abounds, and so many occasions, and prouocations to evil
offer themselves? Surely, it is the great mercy of God. We say its strange to
see men so vile: but indeed it is not strange, that our corrupt nature should
bring forth abominable fruits: but this is strange, that any, having such a
corrupt nature as we have all, and living in such sinful days, should fear
God, and make conscience of his ways. Let every one say, If the Lord had not
been merciful, and sown in my heart the seed of Grace, I had been as a
Sodomite; yea, as the vilest that can be named.

VERSE 30. What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after
Righteousness, have attained to Righteousness, even the Righteousness which is
of faith.

31. But Israel which followed after the law of Righteousness, has not
attained to the law of Righteousness.

32. Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the
works of the law.


IN these verses is a collection, wherein Paul answers an objection which might
be made against that, which he delivered out of Osee and Esaias; and so prepares
way for the matter of the tenth Chapter.

The sum of the Objection is this: If the Gentiles be accepted, and the Jews
rejected, then is the righteousness of the Law condemned. To this Paul answers
in part here, more fully in the next Chapter.

Here are two parts; 1. A Question, What shall we say then? 2. The Answer, in
all the rest of the words.

Q. If the Gentiles be received, and the Jews cast out, what shall we say then?

A. This will we say, quoth Paul, That the Gentiles which followed not the
Righteousness of the Law, have attained Righteousness: and the Jews which
followed the Righteousness of the Law, have not attained to it.

The first part of this Answer is in the 30. verse, with a Reason annexed;
Because they sought the Righteousness of the Law by faith.

The second part of the Answer is in the 31. verse, with a reason also thereof
in the first part of verse 32, Because they sought it not by faith, but by
their own works.

That these may the better be understood, let us see what a Gentile is, and
what a Jew. A Gentile is described, Ephe. 2.11,12. and 4,17,18,19. A Jew, is
one lineally descended of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who is circumcised, and
strict in keeping the Ceremonial Law, and also of the letter of the moral
Law, as appears by the young man in the Gospel. Luke 18.21.


Now this makes the matter the more strange; that such devout people, so
eagerly pursuing the righteousness of the Law, should not be justified, when
we can have no agreement with God, without such a righteousness performed which
the Law requires: and that the Gentile should obtain Righteousness, having
no care of the Law.

The reason shows how this came to pass. The Gentiles sought Righteousness,
not in themselves, but in Christ, which they apprehending by faith, were by it
justified in the light of God: And the Jews seeking it in themselves, and
thinking by the goodness of their own works, to attain to the righteousness of
the Law, missed of it, it being in no man's power perfectly to fulfill the
same: only Christ has fulfilled it. Hence was it, that our Savior so sharply
reprehended the Scribes and Pharisees, zealous followers of the Law, keeping
company with Publicans and sinners, at which those Jews were greatly offended.

As Peter fished all night and caught nothing; so they lost all their labor,
because they cast not out their net on the right side, where Christ was to be
found.

None can be justified in the sight of God by a righteousness of their own
making: but whosoever will be justified, must be justified by the righteousness
of Christ through faith, Romans 3.20,28. Romans 10.3. Gala. 2.16. Tit. 3.5.

Use 1.
The Gentiles by faith attain the righteousness of the Law; Therefore the
righteousness of the Law, and of faith, are all one; viz. in respect of matter
and form: The difference is only in the worker. The Law requires it to be
done by our selves; The Gospel mitigates the rigor of the Law, and offers such
righteousness done by an other, even by Christ; who performed the Law even to
a hairs breadth. How we can be justified by the righteousness of another,
see largely opened elsewhere. See grounds of Divinity, page 213. Et seq.


Use 2.
They which seek justification by their own righteousness, find it not: for
such practice and doctrine, the Jews are called Thieves and Robbers. John 10.1.
If they are so called, seeking it in things commanded of God, much more the
Papists, who seek it in things forbidden of God; as prayers to Saints,
worshipping of Images, and Monkish life, etc.

Nor Jews, nor Papists, are to be blamed for seeking, but for seeking amiss;
neither do they miss it for want of seeking, but for not seeking it as they
should do. He that runs in a wrong way, the more have he makes, the farther
he is from his iourneyes end. The right way to Righteousness for Justification,
is by Christ; who is the way and the door.

Seek in Christ, and thou shall find, so shall thou if thou seek in thy
self, not life, but death; for how should ought else be found there, where sin
cannot be wanting Quomodo ibi pura esset iustitia, vbi non potest culpa deesse?
Bern. sorm. 5. de verb. Esaias.
? Because we want a righteousness of our own, God has affigned Assignata est
ei aliena qui carni sua. Bern. Epist. 190.
us the righteousness of Christ, which is better then our own; yea, better then
our lives, being the very root of our lives (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in Epist.
ad Romans 3.27.
.

This doctrine is to be holden, 1. That we may have peace in our Consciences,
which by our own righteousness cannot be attained, by reason of the defect of
it; which must needs bring the curse: but being justified by faith, we have
peace with God Romans 5.1.
. 2. That we may give God his due glory; which they do not, who seek
righteousness by their own endeavors; for all boasting is excluded by the law
of faith Romans 3.27
, but established by our works.

Q. May not a Believer boast, because he belieueth?

A. No more then a beggar, because he has a hand to receive a reward: nay, a
beggar may more boast then we; for he that gives, gives only the reward,
but God gives both the righteousness whereby we are justified, and the hand to
receive the same, which is our faith.

Civil righteousness, which consists in a quiet, courteous, sociable life, in
good housekeeping, etc. is a vain thing to Justification. I find no fault
with any for living ciuilly, neither do I speak against it, but against the
dangerous deceivable conceit of it, which has so possessed the minds of many,
that they think it sufficient to bring them to heaven.

A good Christian is not without it, but without the opinion of it. If it be
joined to faith, it is a Sea-marke, but without faith it is a dangerous Rock.

The example of the Jews confound he confidence of all our Civil men: They
gave alms, they fasted, they paid tithes of their garden-herbes, etc. yet
Christ says, Math. 5.20.
Except your righteousness, exceed the righteousness of the Pharisees, (the
precisest Jews) ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Paul accounted it all doung and dogs meat, in regard of confidence in it.
Phil. 3.8.
A true Believers life cannot justify, much less a Civil man's life, for
there is great difference.

1. A Civil life consists in outward obseruances of the Law, but a Christian
life goes farther, and has grief for inward corruptions.

2. A Civil man makes some conscience of public and greater offenses, as
murder, treason, etc. but secret sins, and those of lesser account, as
idleness, continual gaming, etc. he swallows without check, so also common
swearing by Faith and Troth; and by your leave, your civil man can swear in
the most odious manner if he be angered. But a true believer makes conscience to
be idle, and in the least manner to offend God.

3. A civil man regards only to have reputation in the world: The true
Christian to have it with God.

4. A civil man regards something the duties of the second Table: but nothing
of the first. Indeed he will come to Church: but for a fashion and civility,
if he have no other business; to meet and speak with a friend; if no
bargain, or merry meeting be in his way: but a true Christian makes regard of
both Tables, specially of the first.

Now alas! this righteousness cannot avail: nay, indeed the opinion of it is
one of the greatest impediments to a man's salvation that can be; because it is
hard to be vnpossest of that which attributes so much to our selves. As a
horse ill paced at first, is harder to be brought to a good pace, then one
which was never handled: so a notorious wicked man is sooner brought to
repentance, then one righteous enough in his own conceit. As there is more
hope of a fool, then of one wise in his own conceit: Pro. 26.12.
So our Civil man might have attained that righteousness, if he were not
persuaded he had attained it already. Mat. 21.31.
Publicanes and Harlots shall go before such into the Kingdom of Heaven. As
therefore when blind Bartimeus came to Christ, Mar. 10.50.
he threw away his Cloak: so must we throw off our own righteousness, as a
Beggars Cloak, if we would be justified in the sight of God.

Use 4.
Here is the Necessity and commendation of Faith: we dispraise not good
works, but we affirm they are not the cause for which we are justified in
the sight of God. From hence the Papists take occasion to slander us, as if we
were enemies to good works. Am I an enemy to a Noble man, because I will not
attribute that to him, which is only due to the King? We acknowledge good
works to be necessary in every one that will be saved; but we ascribe our
Justification, not to our good works, but to the good works of Christ,
apprehended by Faith: Not that we would dishonor good works, but that we
would not dishonor our Savior Christ.

Ob. But this brings in slothfulnes and liberty, and makes men careless to
live holily.

An. If I say to a common Soldier in an Army, You cannot lead this Army
against the enemy. Will the Soldier say: Then I may be gone; There is no need
of Me? Or if I see a poor man at his day-labour, and say to him, that he
shall never purchase 10000. pound land a year, by working for a groat a day;
Will he therefore give over his work, and say he is discouraged? So neither
does our denying Justification to good works set men off from a care to live
well.

If any are enemies to good Works, they are the Papists who dispense with
Lying, with Whoredom, Murder, etc.

This we teach: That Faith is necessary to justify a man's person: Good works
necessary to justify a man's Faith: Yea, that without them we cannot be saved.
He that attributes his Justification to good works, is a Papist; he that
quite denies good works, is an Atheist. Believe, and thou shall be saved: but
if thou be a profane wretch, thou neither beleeuest, nor shall be saved, if
thou repentest not.

Do thou believe in Christ? Do the works which Christ commanded thee, that
thy Faith may live, and then live by thy Faith. As the Wax in the Candle makes
not the light, but maintains and cherishes it. So good works justify not,
but yet they maintain and cherish Faith which does justify: and according as
is the degree of our Sanctification and Obedience; so more or less do we
feel the sweetness of Faith, in our Justification before God.

VERSE 32. For they stumbled at the stumbling stone,

33. As it is written, Esaias 8.14. and 18.16. 1 Pet. 2.6.
Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and Rock of offense, and whosoever
believes on him, shall not be Or, confounded.
ashamed.


THe Jews miss of Righteousness to Justification, because they believe not
in Christ. Here is showed the reason, why they believe not in Christ, who came
of their flesh, and preached amongst them.

The Reason is set down in the end of verse 32. under a Metaphor continued by
Paul.

The Jews pursue and follow after righteousness: but as he that runs in a
race, if he stumble and fall, loses the prize, for another gets before him:
So they stumbled at the means of Christ, in whom only righteousness was to
be had. Is not this the Carpenter, Mary's Son say they? Mar. 6.3.
Can he give us a righteousness better then our own? So when Christ told the
woman of Samaria of Water of Life. Art thou (says she in contempt) Ioh. 4.12.
greater then our Father Jacob that gave us this Well? Can thou give better
water then this? Thou art a like man.

In this reason, Christ, in regard of his outward poverty, is compared to a
stumbling stone. And the Jews refusing to believe in him, because of his
poverty, are said to stumble, and not to attain the righteousness for
Justification, which they pursued.

We stumble many times at a stone, which for the littleness is not marked: so
the littleness of Christ was the occasion of their stumbling: they thinking
that the neglect of so mean a person (as he outwardly seemed) could not
prejudice them.

Now because some might ask, who this stone is, and who laid it in their way?
Paul shows these things, with other, verse 33. by the Testimony of Esaias 8.14.
and 28.16. where we have five things.

1. Who this Stone is: namely, Christ: who is often called by David his Rock:
Psalm. 118.22.
not for offense, but defense: Ephesians. 2.20.
and by him and Paul, a chief Corner Stone: because as the walls of a
building are joined and holden together by the Corner Stone, so the Church is
vpholden by Christ. But here he is a stumbling stone. Not in himself,
properly, in the first place: but by accident, when he is rejected of the
builders. He is so Passiuely, not Actiuely: for he is given to save men, not
to destroy them: to keep them up, not to make them fall: In his own Nature he
is a Jesus: but when he is not received, he is a Rock of offense, and becomes
a severe Judge.

A Stone to stumble at, and a Rock of offense, are diversely by Interpreters
applied: The first, to the Gentiles: the second, to the Jews: and contrarily
also by some; a Stone, to the Ignorant: a Rock, to unbelievers; by some a
Stone to his Incarnation, a Rock to his Passion, etc. but these are too
curious, the best is to take them as signifying one and the same thing.

Three things made the Jews to stumble. First, the meandness of his Person,
they expected that the Messiah should have come as another Alexander. Ioh.
7.48,49.
Secondly, the meandness of his followers, his Disciples, Fishermen: his
Hearers, the meanest of the people. Thirdly, the quality of his Doctrine, full
of reproof of their Hypocrisy and vile dealing: They sought to be praised of
all men: but he uncased their Hypocrisy, and laid them open, denouncing woe,
woe, woe, against them.

2. Where this stone is laid: in Sion, in Iewry, in the Church.

3. Who put it there. God himself: in the first and chief end, to build men
up to salvation: but if they refuse and disobey: then to be a Rock of offense.

4. To whom. To unbelievers, noted by the contrary.

5. The effect: They that stumble, shall be ashamed, noted also by the
contrary. They that believe; shall not be ashamed.

Christ is a Rock of offense to them which believe not, nor repent, Luke 2.34.
1. Cor. 1.23. 1. Pet. 2.6.

Use 1.
Many speak evil of the Gospel, and of hearing Sermons. 2. Cor. 6.14.
Be not offended at it: you see it is no new thing. If any wonder that the
Gospel has such enemies as the Devil and the Pope are, and that it is such a
moat in their eyes: Let them remember that light and darkness are contrary;
and they which do evil, hate the light: Ioh. 3.20.
and Christ himself is stumbled at.

Use 2.
The Reason why so much preaching brings forth so little Faith, is because men
think not reverently of it, but account the preaching and professing of the
Gospel a mean thing.

The mean conceit the Jews had of Christ, bred their Infidelity. The mean
conceit Nathaniel had of Nazaret, Ioh. 1.46.
at first hindered his Faith. When the Woman of Samaria began to conceive more
highly of Christ, she left scoffing, and believed. And when Nicodemus is
persuaded that Christ is a Teacher sent from God, Ioh. 4.19. Ioh. 3.2.
he resorteth unto him for instruction.

So when we hear the Word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the
Word of the living God, it will be powerful, and work Faith in our hearts.

Use 3.
Nothing more Sovereign then Christ, yet an offense to wicked men. No savor
more sweet then of the Gospel; yet a savor of death to the wicked. As
wholesome meat, to a healthful man, has a good relish: but to one that is
agueish, even honey is bitter: and as the light is cheerful and comfortable
to sound eyes, but an offense to sore: so to good men there is nothing more
delightful then the Word: then the which there is nothing more tedious to the
wicked.

There are diverse kinds of them which stumble at Christ, and his Word.

1. The Jews, as appears in this place.

2. The Turks, who cannot be brought to seek for salvation in him, who has
hanged on a Tree.

3. The Papists: Tell them that their Masses do no Good: that works justify
not; that the Virgin Mary cannot help us; that Christ is our only Mediator:
They cry out, Sedition, Heresy, etc. We are made blocks, good works are spoken
against.

4. The Worldling: Who affecting pleasure and gain, and perceiving the Cross
to follow the Gospel, is by and by offended.

5. Ignorant people; who are offended with the paucitie of Professors: If this
be the true Religion, why is it so much spoken against? Shall none be saved
(say they) but they which follow Sermons, etc?

6. A sort of people among us called Separatists, or Pharisees, whom I much
pity, because I am persuaded there are some amongst them, that are
conscionable. These stumble at our mixed assemblies; they will not know that the
best field has Tares, the best Wheat chafe, the best men faults, and the
purest Christians defects. Yea, they will not see the beams in their own
company, but in our Church every moate troubles them.

7. Our ordinary profane people, who cannot afford a good word either to a
Preacher, or conscionable Professor. These say; It was never merry world since
there was so much Preaching: so much following of Sermons, is to make men
Beggars, Fools, to run out of their wits. What is the matter with these men?
What is that which troubles them? The Truth is: These men which say after this
manner, are either Drunkards, Whore-masters, common Swearers, or given to some
notorious lewdnes, and because the Word finds them out, and diseases them in
their evil courses, therefore they are offended at it: If they be not
controuled for their faults, they are quiet enough. Herod was a wonderful
Gospeller for a while, till John told him of his Incest: So the Preacher is a
good man, till he tell them of their faults.

Use 4.
Christ and his Word are good to them which walk uprightly! Mic. 2.7.
Believe in CHRIST and obey his Word: then will Christ be thy defense, and his
Word thy Comfort. But if thou be profane, and thereby an enemy to thy self,
then is the Word thy enemy, which if thou did love and obey, would be thy
faithful friend, even in the hour of Death.

When Moses threw his Rod out of his hand, it became a Serpent, and he was
afraid of it: but when he laid hold of it, and took it to him, it became That
Rod whereby he wrought many Miracles. So, cast the Word from thee, and it is
a Serpent; but lay hold of it by Faith, and obey it, and thou shall have the
great Work of thy Salvation wrought thereby.

Blessed is the man which is not offended at Christ and his Word: It is hard to
kick against the pricks. If a man strike his hand upon the point of a spear,
he hurts not the spear, but his hand. If he spurn at a stone, he hurts not
the stone, but his own feet: so whosoever malign and speak evil of the
Word: Alas, they hurt not that, but themselves, even to their utter
condemnation, if they repent not. If thou have been a despiser, repent: love
and obey the Word, that thou may be saved.

THE TENTH CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.
VERSE 1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they
might be saved.


IN the ninth Chapter appeared, that the Reiection of many Jews does not
prejudice the promise of God: and therefore the doctrine of Justification by
faith, remains firm.

In this Chapter, the Apostle answers another Argument, in which the Jews
put wonderful trust: viz. in their holiness and zeal, thus; If none be saved
but those which believe in Christ, then what shall become of our strict and
zealous observation of the Law moral and Ceremonial? Paul tells them, that
all this auailes not before God, but faith, which attaines that righteousness
which justifies in his sight. Now this must needs be wonderful harsh to them
which had such confidence in their own righteousness; as appears by that
Pharisee, and the Ruler spoken of in the Gospel. Luke 18.11,12 ibid. v. 21.
To be both bereaved of the promises, and also to be stripped of their holiness,
and to be left naked before the Judgment seat of Christ, must needs be
grievous.

This Paul knowing, and that they would be not a little incensed against him;
and having experience that such preaching caused him great trouble, before he
comes to the matter, he makes a Preface, whereby he endeavors to assuage their
minds, and to approve his love to them, that he might take away all preiudicate
opinions of him.

So in this Chapter we have two parts; 1. A Preface, ver. 1. 2. The matter it
self in the rest.

The Preface, verse 1. is by insinuation, or protestation of his love, in which
are two things; 1. The Thing protested. 2. The Amplification of it.

The thing protested, is his Love. The Amplification is twofold; 1. From the
persons to whom he protests love: that is, to the Israelites. 2. From the
Arguments of his love, which are three. 1. A friendly co^pellation, he calls
them Brethren, in regard of the same Country and Nation. 2. From a desire of
their salvation. The word translated, hearts desire, signifies two things.
First, to have a good opinion. Secondly, to wish well unto. Paul thought well of
them, and wished them well, whatsoever they thought of him. This desire is
amplified from the subject of it, his heart. It was not a fained glozing love,
as is the friendship of the world, from the teeth outward, but even from his
very heart. Thirdly, from his prayers for their salvation. A singular token of
love. This is amplified, first, from the object to whom he prayed, To God.
Secondly, from the end, or sum of his prayer, That they might be saved.

Q. Why does Paul pray for the^ who have crucified Christ, are enemies to the
Gospel, and hated and rejected of God?

A. He intends the general calling of the Jews; of which, chap. 11. Or with
condition of Gods will; or only of the Elect; or to show his willingness to
wish well even to his enemies.

The observations from this verse, are from the consideration of Paul, as an
Apostle, or as a Christian.

Ob. If we consider him as an Apostle, we observe; 1. That Ministers are not
only to preach against wicked persons, and to exhort their people to obedience,
but also to pray for them, as Samuel and Jeremy did. 1. Sam. 12.23. Ierem.
13.17.


2. When Ministers are to speak of a matter that may distaste; they must wisely
prevent all offense and grudge, by preparing the minds of the hearers, and
showing that they speak not out of malice, but out of love, and a desire of
their salvation. So Paul mitigates his reproves, with protestations of his
love and gentleness, which is no dawbing with untempered mortar. Paul dawbed
not, but had Gods Spirit when he spoke to Festus and Agrippa; and having
reproved the Galathians, Chap. 3. He affectionatly declares his love, Chap. 4.
As Physicians prepare, and Nurses sometimes still their little ones with
singing: So also must Ministers attempt every way, which may profit their
people.

3. Paul loves the Jews, but tells them plainly of their faults: So must
Ministers do. Indeed the way to get peace among men, is, not to reprove; but
this is the way to lose the peace of God, and to bring the blood of our hearers
upon our own souls.

4. The condition of Ministers is miserable. The labor is great: the care to
save the souls of our hearers (yea our own) that we may give up a good
account, is infinite; the discontents not to be expressed: as, to spend many
sleeplesse nights, many tears, and sighs for their salvation, who rail and
revile us, accounting us unworthy to live:

But indeed our joy is in the conscionable discharge of our duty, 2. Cor. 2.15.
and that we are a secret succor to God both in them which are saved, and in
them which perish. And for such as receive the Word with reverence, obeying it;
we acknowledge that we are never able sufficiently to praise God for the joy
wherewith we rejoice on their behalf; 1. These. 3.9.
who if they continue, then do we live.

If we consider Paul a Christian: we observe,

Obs. 1.
Though the Jews seek PAVLS life in their rage, and nothing would have given
them more content then his blood: yet he carries himself loving toward them,
his very speeches no way sauouring of Revenge.

Love thine enemies. We are Pharisees by nature, loving our friends, and hating
our foes: but we are Christians by Grace, and therefore must love our very
enemies, and pray for them, as our Savior both taught and practiced. Amicos
diligere, omnium est: inimicos vero solorum Christianorum. Tertul. ad Scap.
cap. 1. Chrysostom. hom. 15. operis impersecti.
Every man can love his friend, but only a godly man can love his enemy: and
in this doing we do our selves more good then our Enemies: For Christ gave us
this commandment not for our enemies sake, but for our own: not that they are
worthy to be beloved; but that malice is too unworthy and base a thing for us.
This is hard, but we must beat down our stomakes, that we may be the
children of our heavenly Father.

If then in cold blood, and upon deliberation (though not at the instant of thy
passion) thou can so rule thine affection, as to love thine enemy, and pray
for him, doing him good in stead of evil, it will be a sweet comfort to thy
breast; for with our heavenly Father, he is not in the communion of sons,
that is not in the Charity of Brethren. Apud summum Patrem, qui non fuerit in
charitate fratrum, non habebitur in numero filiorum. Leo. mag. sermon. 11. de
Quadrag.


2. Paul's love was hearty; so let thine be, be it friend or foe. Some, after a
controversy is taken up and ended, will promise friendship, but with a
Reservation of revenge, though it be seven year after. Judas kissed Christ,
and betrayed him: and Ioab saluted Amasa courteously and slew him. Remember
thou to mean the truth thou make show of.

3. Let thy love appear in kind words and salutations, as Paul calls the
Jews Brethren; yea, Lot the Sodomites: Genesis 19.7.
which condemns the practice of some, who if they be offended, show that they
are possessed either with a dumb devil; they will not speak: or with a
railing Devil: if they speak, it shall be in bitterness with taunts and
reproaches.

4. Pray for them thou love. Thou shall never have any comfort of his
friendship, for whom thou do not pray.

VERSE 2. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.


THis verse has not a reason of Paul's love from the procreant cause of it: for
the zeal of the Jews did not make Paul love them: for in this zeal they
crucified Christ, persecuted the Gospel: and Saint Paul calls this zeal in
himself, blasphemy, and therefore Paul would never commend it. Indeed if I
see a Papist zealous in his way, I pity him, and wish his zeal were well
directed, but I commend not his zeal. When I read the Story of Alexander,
Cicero, etc. I love their remembrance for some moralities in them, as Christ
loved that Y^ng man in the Gospel: but this zeal of the Jews was no
morality, being considered in the manner in which they were zealous. And
therefore though Paul grant it, yet as Chrysostom observes, he reproues it
vehemently and takes away all Apology from them.

Here then (I take it) the Apostle comes directly to point, to show that
Justification by Faith abolisheth not the Law, though their zeal be cast
away; because it was not according to knowledge: Paul here notably in the first
place, beating down (as was fit) the admiration and opinion they had of their
zealous observations.

In this verse there are two things. First, a Concession. Paul grants that they
have the zeal of God. Secondly, an Accusation or Reproof of their zeal: But
not according to knowledge.

The zeal of God. The earnest study of the Jews about the worship of the true
God, and standing for Moses Law, Paul calls zeal, Heb. 10.27.
which is a vehement affection, as a very hot fire is called the zeal of
fire, and may thus be described: that it is an exceeding vehement affection or
love to a thing, with an indignation against whatsoever does hurt the thing
beloved, and an endeavor to redeem it from all injuries and wrongs.

Zeal of God. Not as approved of God; but so called, because God was the end
or object of it, though they failed in the right way: so as this is to be
understood comparatively, in respect of the Heathen who are zealous for false
gods. So if we compare the Turks, and Papists; The Turks are zealous for
Mahomet. The Papists in comparison for Christ.

Not according to knowledge. It was according to their own conceived
knowledge; but not according to the knowledge they should have had by the
Gospel: and for this does Paul reprove it. The more of such zeal, the worse.

Zeal, if it be not according to knowledge, is not acceptable to God: The
Jews are a plain example hereof. See also Eccles. 7.18.

Q. Can a man have too much zeal?

A. Not of true, but of selfe-conceited: A little of this is too much. For
whatsoever is without Faith, is sin: Faith presupposes knowledge: Error in
knowledge, breeds error in zeal.

Use 1.
A good meaning will not justify our actions, (if otherwise evil) as appears
in the Jews, who many of them meant well in persecuting the Gospel; but they
are to this day plagued for such zealous meanings. Let us mean never so well;
if that which we do, be not according to Gods meaning, he regards it not, who
has given his Law, not our meanings to be a rule of our obedience.

If a Wife play the Harlot, and say she meant no harm, will this satisfy her
Husband? And shall we think, to worship Images, pray to Saints, stay at home
on the Sabbath day, when we may conveniently resort to the Church, under the
shadow of a good meaning? No. God will not accept of such bald excuses.

And if good meaning will not excuse ill doing; What shall we say to them which
do ill, and mean ill too? What shall become of Drunkards, Blasphemers,
Unclean persons, etc. What good meaning can be in them?

Use 2.
Here we have a rule for the ordering of our zeal, that it may be acceptable
to God. For it is such a thing, which if it be well ordered, is most beautiful
in a Christian; but if not, a thing of exceeding danger: as Fire in moderation
is most comfortable, in extremity most fearful.

This Rule is sound knowledge out of Gods Word.

This knowledge must be threefold. First, of the thing of the which we are
zealous, that it be in the Right. For if we be in the wrong, the more zeal,
the worse; as in a wrong way, the more haste the worse speed. Exodus 40.36,37.
Therefore Saint Paul tells the Galathians, that it is good to be zealous
always in a good thing.

2. Of the wrong which is done to the thing we are zealous of: that in deed,
there be a wrong done, not going upon hearesay and adventure, but upon
certainty, being able out of the Word, soundly to convince the same. For here
is the indignation; and if there be not sound knowledge, we may become
slanderers of our brethren; and (as they say) beat them with the sword, who
deserve not to be touched with the scabberd.

3. That we have some competent knowledge and ability, thereby to judge of
the proportion of the wrong, for the which we have indignation in our zeal,
that so our zeal may have a good temper. For all sins, offenses, and wrongs
are not of the same quantity, and quality. As there is a difference in
offenses, so must there be in our zeal; in greater things to be more zealous,
in lesser things, less zealous: we must remember it is of the Nature of fire:
There is not the like fire, for the roasting of an Egg, and for the roasting
of an Ox: but it is moderated, according to the necessities of the household.

By this threefold knowledge must our zeal be directed, where the Word
begins, there must our zeal begin, and where the Word ends, there must our
zeal end, whatsoever our opinion be. For as he that trauelleth over the
Washes, or in some dangerous passage, without a guide, many times perishes: So
is the man that is zealous, not according to knowledge. As therefore in the
wilderness when the cloud ascended, the children of Israel set forward in
their iourneyes: and when that stood still, so did they: And if the cloud
ascended not, then they iourneyed not till it ascended. Exodus 40.36,37
So is our zeal always to follow our knowledge, and to be directed thereby.

There are two forts of men, hereby to be apprehended. 1. They which have a
desect not of zeal, but of knowledge, for the ground of their zeal. 2. They
which have a defect not of knowledge, but of zeal answerable to their
knowledge. Of the 1. of these may be verified the Proverb. They set the Cart
before the Horse. The second may be likened to Pharaohs Chariots, when the
wheels were off: so slowly do they express their knowledge in their lives.
The first are like a little ship without ballast and fraught, but with a great
many sails; which is soon either dashed against the Rocks, or toppled over;
The second, are like a goodly great Ship well ballasted, and richly fraughted,
but without any sails, which quickly falls into the hands of Pirates, because
it can make no speed; sooner making a prey for them, then a good Voyage for the
Merchant.

Separate zeal and knowledge, and they become both unprofitable: but wisely
join them, and they perfect a Christian, being like a precious Diamond in a
ring of Gold. Let not zeal outrunne knowledge or lagge behind it; but let it
ad aequale agree, going hand in hand with the same. For even as in an
Instrument of Music there is a proportion of sound, wherein is the harmony,
beyond which, if any string be strained, it makes a squeaking noise; and if it
be not strained enough, it yields a clagging, dull and unpleasant sound. So is
it in our zeal, if it be either more or less then our knowledge.

Among the first sort of these men which have zeal, not according to
knowledge, are to be placed the Jews, and we may justly put the Papists,
whose zeal for their many groundless devices, has made them bloody
persecutors of the Gospel: Likewise the Brownists, whose immoderate zeal
without warrant, has made them most uncharitable Censurers of all the famous
Churches in Christendom.

Among the other sort which have knowledge without zeal, are our Dullerds in
Religion, who are like a resty horse, that has metal and strength, but will
not go forward. Be zealous and amend; the example of Laodicea were enough to
provoke us. Apoc. 3.19.
It is the end of thy Redemption: and a very pitiful thing, to be a man in
knowledge, and a beast in life. Zeal without knowledge, profits not; so
knowledge without zeal condemns. How far art thou from the zeal of
Phinees, David, Elias, etc? Thou can be zealous and hot in thine own
causes: thou can follow thy pleasures with Esau, till thou faint. Thou will
spend twenty pound, but thou will have thy will of thy neighbor. Alas, what
will thou answer to God? When notwithstanding all thy knowledge, thou neither
have indignation against sin: Nor art any way careful to honor God,
according to his Word.

VERSE 2. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God.


THat the zeal of the Jews is not according to knowledge, is showed in this
verse. The reason whereby it is showed, is brought in by an Occupation. Some
might say, Did not the Jews abound in knowledge, who counted the very Letters
of the Bible?

For answer, Paul affirms that they were ignorant of that which they should
specially have known; namely, the righteousness of God, of which they ought to
have been zealous.

In this verse then we have two things, 1. A Justification, That the Jews are
zealous, but not according to knowledge: They are ignorant of the righteousness
of God. 2. A declaration of the effects of such ignorance, which are two, 1.
Pride, They went about to stablish their own. 2. Contempt of Gods
righteousness: They have not submitted themselves unto it.

Here is a distinction of righteousness, it is twofold; First, Gods. Secondly,
Our own. Gods righteousness is not abolished, but established by faith. Our
own righteousness, that is, which we have wrought, as I may say, home-made
righteousness, of our own vvebbing; this is abolished by faith: this was the
righteousness which the Jews boasted of, unable to abide the trial of the Law.

For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness; not whereby God is righteous
in himself, but which he gives to man, that he may be righteous by God. This
is the righteousness of our Mediator. They are zealous of righteousness, but
they are ignorant of that righteousness which God approues; which is a
righteousness every way answerable to the Law. This we sinful men cannot
perform, but Christ has performed, and we cannot apprehend when God gives
faith.

Going about to stablish their own righteousness. Their own: that is, which
they in their own persons perform. To stablish, or to set up. A Metaphor from
the staying up of an old rotten house, which can be shored up no longer Aretius.
. Or from the setting up of a dead man upon his feet, to make him stand Pareus.
. Such is the labor of him that goes about to be justified by his own
righteousness.

Going about. The Nimrodians went about to build a tower whose top might reach
to Heaven; they went about it, but brought it not to pass, but built a Babel:
so the Jews went about to be justified by their own righteousness, but in
vain; working their own confusion in the sight of God.

They did not submit themselves. This is the issue of pride; They will not be
beholding to God for a righteousness of his appointing: They have not
submitted; as Rebels, which will not be subject to their lawful Prince.

Ignorance breeds pride and contempt. Thus Christ imputes to the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 15.14. So Paul thought he had no Peer while he was a Pharise;
and therefore he was mad against the faith: and this was through Ignorance, 1.
Tim. 1.12.

Use 1.
Zeal without knowledge, is dangerous, as appeared in the Jews; as appears
in the Papists, and Brownists. It makes them proud; and having drunk in an
opinion, they cannot be removed with reason. As a man cannot write in a paper
already written, or plow in a ground overrun with bushes; so is it hard to
fasten any reason upon a mind prepossest with fancy.

2. It makes the^ uncharitable, in abhorring all them which consent not to
their devices; so far, that they Judge their Contraries to be men not worthy
to live; persecuting with more eagerness, them which renounce their opinions,
then them which deny God.

This appeared in the Jews, who crucified Christ, for reproving their
Traditions. And in the Arrians, who were more cruel in their time, to the
Orthodoxall Christians, in maintaining their opinions, then were the heathen
Emperors.

The Papists do not exercise so much cruelty against any, as against those who
consent not with them in the doctrines of their own devising. A fantastical
zeal.
Also the Separatists exclaim of the Church of England, and can endure any
thing, save the government of this Church, because it confuteth their fancies.

I find by my little reading, and small observation, that too much zeal is more
dangerous to the Church, then the contrary degree of coldness.

3. It makes men impatient of admonition; It will not endure the hearing of any
thing that contradicts it: as the Jews would not hear Paul. Zeal is
erroneous, if it want charity, humility, and patience.

Use 2.
Ignorance is the mother of Error, and excuses not, because we are bound to
know; as a subject is bound to know the Laws of his Prince: Ignorantia Iuris
non excusat. Regula.
and if he offend, it will not serve his turn, to say he knew not the Law.

If a man be ignorant of that which concerns him not, it excuses him: as if a
Minister be ignorant of the Art of Physike, or to plow an acre of ground; or a
Physician, ignorant of the Art of Navigations. But if a Minister be ignorant of
the Scriptures, or a Physician of the difference and cause of diseases, the
complexion of his simples, etc. it excuses not. So for a Christian to be
ignorant of Gods righteousness, and the way of Justification before him, is most
dangerous.

So is it for a man to imagine he knows, when he is most ignorant; which is,
as if a drunken man should think himself sober, or a sick man well. Stop the
fountain of these inconveniences, by sound knowledge; as a blind man, so an
ignorant man must needs err out of the way. As a man expects not a voice from
fishes, so nor from ignorant men virtue.

If the woman of Samaria had known who it was that offered her water, John
4.10.
she would not have mocked him. If the Jews had known many of them the Lord
of life, 1. Cor. 2.8.
they would not have crucified him. If the Papists many of them knew better,
they would accordingly profess. Our profane persons, if they knew the rigor
of Gods justice, the heat of his anger, the burning of hell, they would not (I
think) so shamelesly carry themselves.

Use 3.
Trust not in thine own righteousness, in they civil and harmless
carriage, there is no more goodness in it, then life in a dead carcass. It is
like a childs baby made of clouts: there is not more difference between such a
puppet and a strong man, then between our righteousness, and that which may
justify us before God.

Use 4.
They which receive not Christ's righteousness, are Rebels: then are the Papists
Rebels, so are all they which seek not after faith. Whatsoever gifts of nature
thou have, thou art a rebel if thou belieuest not the Word, and receiuest not
the righteousness of God offered thee therein. A more open rebel is a
drunkard, blasphemes, etc. Alas! what shall become of these? A Jew is better
then such a one, so is a Papist; they can say something for themselves, and
many of them are free from such notorious crimes. Surely, such shall be dealt
withal as rebels, and because they will not repent, and be subject to the
righteousness of God in faith, they must be subject to the revenging justice of
God in torments.

VERSE 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes.


THe Jews are zealous of the righteousness of the Law, yet are ignorant of
Gods righteousness, and submit not unto it: for God gave the Law, not to make us
righteous, but to make us seek Christ, the end of the Law, that we might be
righteous in him.

Here Paul brings an Argument, to show that Justification by faith,
establishes the righteousness of the Law. That which aims at, and attaineth
the end of the Law, destroys it not: But faith attaineth the end of it, which
is Christ. Therefore. And as he which runs not to the end of the race,
misseth the prize; so the Jews miss of Justification, because they have not
Christ, the end of the Law.

In this verse are two things; 1. A Proposition. 2. The amplification.

The Proposition. Christ is the end of the Law, both Ceremonial and Moral.
The Jews sought to be righteous by the observation of both these.

The end, The end of a thing is either Mathematical or Moral. The
Mathematical end, is the utmost part of a thing in which the length or
continuance is determined; as a point is the end of a line, Death the end of
life, the day of Judgment, the end of this world.

The Moral end of a thing, is the scope and perfection of it.

Now Christ is the end of the Law both ways. The Mathematical end, both of
the Ceremonial and Moral, but diversely. Of the Ceremonial, by a direct
signification of the Moral, by an accidental direction. The Ceremonies
signified Christ, and ended at him. The Moral Law also, after a sort, leads
to Christ. Properly, the Moral Law leads sinners to the Curse, but by account
to Christ, as the disease leads to the medicine or Physician.

He is also the moral end of both. For he is the body of those Ceremonies and
shadows, and he perfectly fulfilled the Decalogue for us, and that three
ways; 1. In his pure conception. 2. In his godly life. 3. In his holy and
obedient sufferings, and all for us: for whatsoever the Law required that we
should Be, Do, or Suffer, he has performed in our behalf. Therefore one
wittily says, Aretius.
that Christ is Telos, the end, or Tribute; and we by his payment, Ateleis,
tribute-free; we are discharged by him before God. Christ is both these ends;
but principally the last is here understood.

The Amplification is by a double determination: 1. For what. 2. For whom. 1.
For righteousness to be done, or imputed. This first, and more principally also,
for the other. 2. For whom; Described 1. by quality, for Believers. 2. By
generality, Every Believer.

Q. Is Faith and Christ's righteousness of the Law?

A. In substance the righteousness of the Law and the Gospel are all one. For
none can be justified by any other righteousness, then that which the Law
requires. They differ only in the manner of performance, the Law exacting it
to be done by our selves, the Gospel offering it done by Christ, to be
apprehended by faith. Justifying faith is not directly of the Law; for the Law
knows no Grace, but indirectly it is as the Law commands, obedience to God.

God has given the Law in writing, to bring men to Christ, that believing in
him, they might be justified by his righteousness, Gal. 3.24.

Use 1.
Humane laws are branches of the Moral law: therefore not abolished by
Christ: and that is an unjust law, whose end is not Christ.

Use 2.
For righteousness to the believer, not to the worker: we are not justified by
doing, but by believing.

Use 3.
All believers admitted to Justification, none excluded: for faith is a
supernatural grace, of which all are equally capable, if God bestow it.

Use 4.
A believer is happy, for he has Christ, and so, the righteousness which the
Law exacts: He has the perfection of the Law which believes in Christ.
Talis est ille, qui in Christum credidit, die qua credidit, qualis ille qui
vniuersam legem impleuit. Com. Hieron. ad Script.
Yea, such a one is every believer in the day that he believes, as he should be
if he could as perfectly keep the Law, as the very Angels. Satan would
discourage poor sinners from the scant measure of their sanctification: But if
thou beleeuest, be comforted; for thou have livery and seysin of all the
promises of the Law in the first moment of thy faith: It cannot hurt thee, it
curses only unbelievers, and bad livers, having a full blow at them to their
condemnation.

Seek faith and the increase of it more then gold, for it is much more
precious, enriching the conscience with peace, comfort and confidence, even in
the hour of death: Many lament outward wants, but few the want of faith.

Use 5.
The Law is a heavenly thing, and many wonders are contained in it, of which
we shall comfortably understand, if we study it aright. Study it not as the
Jews or Papists do, to be justified by it; but to bring thee to Christ, and
then to walk in all obedience with thankfulness: If thou do thus, thou
hittest the nail on the head. If the Law drive us not to Christ, as the
storm the birds to the Row, and the ship to the haven, all other intents and
studies are of no value.

Every precept must teach us our weakness, every promise must set our teeth on
edge, and every curse as the lash of a whip, make us cry peccaui, and bring us
down upon our knees, with, Jesus thou son of David, have mercy, as the blind
man cried in the Gospel.

And when thou art come to Christ, thou must not cast away the Law, but use it
still, to make thee more to cling unto Christ, and as a rule of righteous
living: Christ is the end of the Law, not the killing, but fulfilling end;
Finis non interficiens, sed persiciens. Aug.
not to end, but to urge thy obedience. When the Merchant is come aboard his
ship by boat, he drownes not his boat, but hoyses it up into his ship; he may
have use of it another time: or as a Nobleman neglects not his Schoolmaster
when he is come to his lands, but preferres him: So certainly, if the Law
(though sharp) has brought thee to Christ, thou can not but love it for
this office; if thou do not, thou have not Christ. Yea, it will be the
delight of a man to be then doing, when Christ is with him, as Peter then
willingly and with success cast out his net. Without Christ the Law is an
uncomfortable study: but with him, nothing more delightful.

VERSE 5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that
Leuit. 18.5. Ezech. 20.11. Gal. 3.12.
the man which does those things shall live by them.

6. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise; Deuteronomy.
30.12.
Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? That is, to bring Christ
down from above.

7. Or, Who shall descend into the Deep? that is to bring up Christ again
from the dead.

8. But what says it? Deuteronomy. 30.14.
The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the Word
of faith which we preach.


HEre Paul brings an Argument to euince, that faith abolisheth not, but
stablisheth true righteousness, thus: The righteousness of faith is that
which Moses teaches unto Justification: Therefore Justification by faith,
abolisheth not righteousness, but establishes it.

Paul compares in these verses the righteousness of the Law, and of faith
together; showing that the righteousness of the Law, (to be performed by us)
is uncertain and impossible: and that the righteousness of faith is certain
and possible; and both these by the testimony of Moses.

The Jews thought that faith had been contrary to Moses: but Paul shows that
Moses taught faith, as Christ himself witnesses. Ioh. 5.46.


The impossibility of the righteousness of the Law (unto Justification) Paul
shows in the 5. verse out of Leuiticus: The man that does these things, shall
live thereby; that is, shall be just; for life flows from Justice.

The Gospel teaches not a diverse righteousness from that of the Law, but a
diverse way unto it: namely, Faith in Christ, who fulfilled the Law.

The Argument from hence against Justification by the Law, is drawn from the
Cause. To perform the Law is impossible. But righteousness of the Law, is to
perform it. Therefore.


This impossibility of our performing the Law, is not from the Law, but from
our selves, who are corrupt.

That the righteousness of Faith is certain and possible, Paul shows, verse
6, 7, 8. that it is certain, verse 6, 7. that it is possible, verse 8.

The Righteousness of Faith, that is, which the Gospel offers, and Faith
receives, is certain. This Paul declares, by a Negation of contrary
doubtfulnesse, elegantly compounded by a figure out of Deuteronomie.

The doubting which presses sinners, is twofold; 1. how they may enter into
Heaven: and 2. how they may avoid Hell. These two Moses shows to be taken away
by Faith. The first, because we believe the Ascension of Christ (for us.) The
second, because we believe his Resurrection, whereby he demonstrated his
victory over Hell and Death; as if Moses had said, He that seeks Justification
by the Law, must needs be in continual fear of Hell, and despair of Heaven;
but he that believes that Christ is risen and ascended, is freed from both.
Christ rose for us, and ascended for us, and before (which must be implied)
lived and dyed for us: he which believes not, and seeks for Justification
from himself, in effect denies the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ.

That the righteousness of Faith is possible, Paul shows by the facility of
it, out of Moses, verse. 8. Faith is easy, because it is given, otherwise the
hardest thing in the world for a sinner to believe the Gospel.

In the 8. verse we have two things. 1. Moses Testimony. The Word is nigh
thee, etc. 2. Paul's exposition, That is, the Word of Faith which we preach.

The Word is nigh thee. The Word of Promise; so was the Word of the Law: but
nigh thee in thy mouth and heart: not in Tables of Stone as the Law: As if he
should have said by a Prouerbiall manner of speaking: This is righteousness
before God, to believe with the heart, and with the mouth to confess the
Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior Christ for us.

The General sum: That Righteousness is the safest and sufficientest to
salvation, which makes us assured before GOD, and succoureth us in tentation;
but so does not the righteousness of the Law, but that of the Gospel.
Therefore.

In this passage many things might be spoken of: as of the Law: our
insufficiency, and impossibility to perform it. Of the Ascension and
Resurrection of Christ. But I will only consider of

The Doctrine: Faith, not the Law makes us certain of our salvation before
God, Luke 8.12. Romans 9.33. Ephesians. 2.8. 1. Pet. 1.9.

Use 1.
The Law is too weak to justify us, but strong enough to condemn us, which
thou shall find, which repentest not of thy sins. Seek not that which the
Law cannot do, but fear that which the Law can do.

Use 2.
Faith takes away, but the Law breeds doubting: both because we do but little
of that which the Law commands, and in that little there is much defect,
deserving the curse.

As then the doctrine of the Jews, so of the Papists, who teach men to be
justified by inherent righteousness, must needs leave men in suspense and
doubt; which doubts Faith ouercomes. If our bodies were as hard as an Adamant,
we should not feel the sting of Serpents: so if the soul be armed with
Faith, not all the poisoned darts of the Devil can hurt it.

But alas, will some say; How shall I avoid hell, being most worthy to be
damned for my whoredom, pride, drunkenness, blasphemy, etc? How shall I ever
come to heaven, who never have kept the Law? These thoughts especially trouble
in the hour of tentation and death: but as Paul and his company, Act. 27.43,44.
though in great danger, yet swamme to the shore and escaped; so though the
floods of tentation swell, and there be no bottom, yet by Faith we swim to
land and are safe.

My Brother; Consider that thou shall not go to heaven for thy worthiness,
but for Christ's: When thou have done all thou can, thou art unworthy to be
saved. Do thou believe that Christ dyed and rose again for thee? Then is it
as possible for Christ to dye again, as for thee to go to hell. He that has
satisfied the Law, is freed; but thou have so done in Christ. Therefore as when
Jonas was cast into the Sea, it calmed, so thy Conscience may now be calmed by
the death and Resurrection of Christ, of whom Jonas was the Type. Also, if
Christ be ascended, and thou beleeuest, it is as possible to pluck him out of
heaven, as to hinder thee from thence: for all believers do sit together with
him in heavenly places. Ephesians. 2.6.
He that denies that we do even now possess heaven in Christ, denies Christ
to be in heaven.

Use 3.
Faith is most necessary and useful: If ever thou have felt the sting of sin
in thy soul, thou know the power of Faith. If thou have not felt it, thou
shall: and then what a hell without Faith? The fiery darts of Satan are
quenched by Faith. Ephesians. 6.16.


Thou remembrest what a wretch thou have been, how thou have blasphemed his
Name, broken his Sabbaths, despised his Word, etc. Can thy stomach digest these
things? Can thou practice such things, and thy Conscience not check thee?
Though by the custom of sin thou have stupefied thy Conscience, yet it will
be made sensible, and then it will affright thee. Yea, then, what thoughts of
hell, of Di^ls, of everlasting torments arising from the guiltiness of sin?

Would thou overcome these? Believe; This is our Shield, our Victory, even
our Faith: 1. Ioh. 5.4.
and to approve thy Faith, repent unfeignedly. Which is as sure a demonstration
of Faith, as Faith is a cause of the peace of Conscience.

Keep Faith and a good Conscience. As Conscience cannot be good without Faith:
so, nor Faith lively without good Conscience. As a Lamp yields no light
without Oil: so nor Faith comfort without good Conscience.

Many believers neglecting the care of a good Conscience, have lost (not their
Faith) but the power of it to pacify Conscience: though Faith cannot be cast
away, yet it may suffer shipwreck, and the peace which is by Faith may be
lost, as David and other of Gods children have done, for their liberty, in
following their own lusts: and it may be questioned whether ever David (after
his Adultery) obtained the glorious feelings he had before by his Faith.

Beleeuest thou? Beware of sin, lest GOD chastise thee, not by taking away
thy Faith, but the comfort of it, without which life is tedious. As in Cordials
often distemper weakens the receipt; so Faith loses the power to comfort, when
we make a pack-horse of it by our often sinning.

Thy peace is from Faith, thy misery from sin. Even as worms breed of
putrified meat: so distress arises from a polluted mind. Sin weakens
Faith, and gives the Devil advantage, who without it is as able to hurt us, as
the Law to justify a sinner. If thou think of Heaven, think of Faith and a
good Conscience; if thou sinnest, think of hell, and everlasting torments. If
thou be godly, fear not hell; if profane, hope not for heaven. For the
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget God; but believers and
righteous people shall be saved. Psalm. 9.17. Ioh. 3.15.


VERSE 9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved.

10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.


Our own righteousness and the righteousness of Faith have been compared.
The righteousness we attain by doing, is uncertain and impossible: the
righteousness we attain by believing, is certain and possible. Certain,
because it expels doubts: possible, because the Word of Faith is near us in
our mouth and heart.

This of Faith, he explaines in these two verses, showing that in the
righteousness of Faith, it is only required that we should heartily believe
and confess the Resurrection of Christ, verse 9. which is amplified by an
Apostolical determination, verse 10.

If thou shall confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart. There are
two things required of him that would be saved: The confession of the mouth,
and the believing of the heart: and we have in these verses two things to be
considered: 1. The duty required. 2. The end.

The duty is twofold: Of the mouth, which is called Confession; of the heart,
which is named Believing. In the duty of the mouth, we have three things.
First, the Action, Confession. Secondly, the Subject, the Mouth. Thirdly, the
Object, the Lord Jesus. Auricular Confession is not here meant. Tho. Aquin. in
locum.
Confession is threefold. Of sins, of Benefits, of the Truth: this last is
here understood; namely, that main Truth, Salvation only by Christ. To
confess Christ has a large sense: to acknowledge him to be our Lord, and so
to use him: that is, to submit our affection to him, as to our chief Lord, by
right of Creation, Providence, Redemption, to call upon him, to obey him, and
if need be, to restifie our acknowledgement with our best blood.

And shall believe, etc. Here are also three things: 1. The Action, Believing.
2. The Subject, the Heart. 3. The Object, That God raised up Christ, etc. This
is not only to assent to the truth hereof, which the Jews do not, the
devils do not deny; but to embrace the benefits, and to rely upon it.
Resurrection; not exclusiuely, but by a figure, comprehending things
Antecedent, and Consequent: but this principally is named, not as adding to the
price, but as sealing to the conscience the sufficiency of his death. The
confidence of a good Conscience being grounded upon the Resurrection of
Christ. 1. Peter 3.21.
That Christ died, the Jews and Heathens do believe; Christians only believe
that he rose again.

Thou shall be saved. That is, thou shall be justified, as before; Thou shall
live: for both the righteousness of the Law, and of faith, have eternal life,
as the end propounded and promised unto them, but with a different success. By
that, none attain the end, because it has a condition possible to none. By
this, all the Elect do attain, because it is possible for all whom GOD
purposes to save, to confess and believe. Neither is salvation without
justice, nor righteousness without salvation. So far just, so far saved.

For with the heart, etc. Faith brings righteousness. Confession is an
infallible sign of faith. Righteousness, Confession, Salvation, are the effects
of faith; but faith and all, are the gifts of God.

In the 9. verse, Confession is set before: in this verse, Faith. In Nature,
and in the order of Composition, faith of the heart goes before confession of
the mouth; 2. Cor. 4.13.
I believed, therefore I spoke. But in order of Resolution, Confession of the
mouth precedes: for we know not the faith of the Brethren before they make
confession.

Faith and Confession are necessary to salvation. Faith, by the necessity of
the means, and of the precept: Confession by the necessity of the precept. Of
the necessity of faith, Math. 16.16. John 3.18. Ephesians. 2.8. Of Confession. Math.
10.32,33. 1. John 4.15. Therefore is Christ called the Apostle of our
Confession. Heb. 3.1.

Use 1.
If Thou. Ministers have here a pattern of Application in teaching.

Use 2.
If Thou. The Papists say that none can be certain of Salvation by the
certainty of a special faith: which is clean contrary to this of Paul, and
wholly takes away his Argument, which he brings from the assurance of faith.
One of their chief reasons is, Because it is no where written, Peter, John,
etc. shall be saved; and that which is not written, is not to be believed.

To this I answer: First, It is not necessary that every particular Believers
name should be written. It is enough if the promises be universally delivered,
because vniuersalls include all particulars. All Belieuers shall be saved,
therefore I also believing, shall be saved.

Secondly, here is a particular promise. If thou: speaking to every one as by
name, as is the tenor of the Law, and every one takes himself to be meant.

Thirdly, whereas they say, that our faith is not written in the Bible: I
answer, that faith is taken two ways; for that which I do believe, or for
that with which I do believe: for the object, or for the virtue of faith. The
first is necessary to be written; The second is not, nor can be written: for
the grace of faith is not believed, but felt. By the power of my Conscience I
know that I believe, as I know what I think.

Use 3.
This Scripture speaks to thee face to face, to comfort thee if thou
belieuest, and to terrify thee if thou belieuest not: for as it is true that
if thou belieuest, and confessest, thou shall be saved; so if thou do not,
thou shall be damned.

Use 4.
As Faith, so Confession is necessary. There are many who understand not the
doctrine of Christ, which they should confess; let such learn to make
confession, if they would be saved. Every one is bound to believe the
Principles and Articles of faith, explicit, that is, plainly, understanding
what he belieues, as says the School.

Use 5.
Testify thy faith by thy Confession; which is either Verbal or Real. Verbal
is of the mouth, when we ingenuously profess him in whom we believe, and are
not ashamed. As Christ lives in thy heart, so let him dwell in thy mouth. Who
will endure such a servant who is ashamed to acknowledge his Master?

Real Confession, is either of Action, or Passion. Of Action, in our whole
conversation, that our manners may speak and confess Christ, that we be not
in the number of them, who profess they know God, but deny him in their lives.
Of Passion, that we be ready to seal that without blood, which we profess in
word and action, from whence, such are called Martyrs in excellence, that is,
excellent vvitnesses. For the most excellent, is that, which is confirmed
without death, as Paul speaks to Timothy of our Savior. 1. Tim. 6.16.


Here are diverse to be reprehended, 1. Our Ignorants, as in the 4. Use. 2.
Nicodemites, who account it sufficient to believe with their heart, taking
liberty to confess what they list. 3. Hypocrites, who confess fair, but
believe nothing. But it is no Confession if it be not of Faith: for to
confess, is to utter that which is in the heart. It thou have one thing in thy
heart, and vtterest another with thy mouth, thou speak, but co^fessest not
Si aliud in cord habes, et aliud dicis, loqueris, no^ confiter is. Ansel.
. 4. Our profane persons, who deny Christ with their works, which is the worst
denial: for stronger is the testimony of the life, then of the lips, and
works have their eloquence in the life, then of the lips, and works have
their eloquence in the silence of the tongue. Our Saviors works did more
testify of him then the witness of John John 5.36.
. Its a great madness not to believe the Gospel to be true; but a greater, when
thou belieuest it to be true, so to live as though thou did believe it to be
false Magna est insania, non credere Euangelio, etc. sed long major insania,
si de Euangelij veritate non dubitas, viuere tamen quasi de cius falsitate non
dubitares. Picus Miran.
.

We would readily say, that he which denies Christ, is a wretch: take heed thou
find not the wretch in thine own bosom, if thou live profanely, thou art
he. Thou must both believe, and confess; in word, in action, by passion.

As that creature is not a man, which though it has some similitude of a man,
yet has not a reasonable soul; so that man is not a true Christian, which
has not both the faith and confession of Christ.

VERSE 11. For the Scripture says, Esaias 28.16.
Whosoever belieueth on him, shall not be ashamed.


THe saving effect of Faith and Confession, spoken of in the two last precedent
verses, is here proved by Scripture: Either, Esaias 28.16. or as one, Psalm. 25.3.
Beza.
It is not material whether of the two you take. I think the first fittest,
because of the Messiah there and here spoken of: and if in particular he aimed
at neither of the two, yet it is enough that this is the general doctrine of
the Scripture.

The Argument is thus: Whatsoever the Scripture faith, must needs be so: for
the Scripture cannot be loosed. 1. Ioh. 10.35.
But the Scripture testifies that Believers shall be saved. Therefore.


Q. This proves the point of Beleeurs; but how of Confessors?

A. If it prove it of Faith, it proves it also of Confession. For as the Sun
is not without light; so Faith is not without Confession. Beside, it is proved
also of Confession, ver. 13. The Argument is taken from the proper effect of
Faith, Salvation, which Peter calls the end of Faith. 1. Pet. 1.9.


In this verse are 4. things. 1. The generality, Whosoever. Esaias says, He that
believes: but its all one; for an Indefinite Proposition, is equivalent to an
Universal.

2. The Restruction of the general, Whosoever belieueth. Whosoever, concludes
all Belieuers; Belieuers, excludes all unbelievers.

3. The object of Faith, In him. To believe on Christ, is not only to believe
that Christ is, and that what he says is true, but to rest upon his
Righteousness for Justification, and to trust him with our Salvation, as Paul,
2. Tim. 1.12.
I know whom I have believed. On him, notes Faith and Confidence.

4. The effect of Faith, Not ashamed; The contrary denied for the direct
effect. As if he had said, Shall be saved. For the denying of one contrary, is
the affirming of the other. They shall not be frustrate of their end; therefore
not ashamed.

Ob. But we account it a good thing to be ashamed, and the contrary a fault.
Diogenes thus encouraged a young man blushing, Fear not, it is Virtues color.
Yet the Philosophers wisely distinguish of it, counting it a grace in young
folks; but old folks should commit nothing which might make them blush.

A. Here is a Figure. The word is not used in the ordinary signification: he
means not that believers shall not be ashamed of their faults, for none are
more, and the wicked are noted to be shameless: Ier. 3.3.
but the sense is, they shall not miss the end of their faith, and so be
ashamed. A man boasts of a matter, and in the end up starts just nothing; then
is he ashamed, as profane people brag of their hope to be saved; but when
their Crakes fail, they shall be confounded with shame. Esaias says, Shall
not make haste; that is, shall not betake themselves to shameful courses, to
bring their desires to pass, but shall wait upon God, and in the end have
assured deliverance: but as such who run hastily, often stumble and fall, and
so are ashamed: so they which will not stay Gods leisure, fall into many
inconveniences which cause their shame.

He that believes, is sure to be saved, Ioh. 3.18. Psalm. 22.4. Romans 5.5. 1.
Pet. 1.6. The promises are called sure: Romans 4.16. The counsel of God, stable,
and the consolation thereby, strong. Heb. 6.17,18.

Use 1.
Whosoever trust in any thing but in Christ, shall be ashamed: The Jews of
their confidence in the Law. The Papists, though they now brag and face out
the matter, that they be the only men, and the true Church, shall one day be
ashamed of their religion; because they build their salvation on a rotten
foundation, as masses, pardons, indulgences, pilgrimages, prayer to Saints,
their own merits, etc. They are like him in the Gospel, who began to build a
Tower, but not being able to finish it, was ashamed.

Those which trust in horses and armed men in the day of battle, shall be
ashamed: They also which with King Asa trust in the Physicians, and not in God
in the day of sickness; so they which trust in their riches contrary to the
commandment of the Spirit, whom Christ calls fools: 1. Tim. 6.17. Luke 12.20.
These also who seek in losses to Wizards, and not to God. Many trust in
outward things without God; but there are few who trust in God without outward
things.

Use 2.
There is much fear and doubting where faith is; but in the end believers
shall not be ashamed. This makes them confident against the obloquy and
reproach cast upon them by the world: The children of God are laughed to
scorn, as the Philistims mocked Sampson. What then? Though Saul love not
David, nor his Religion, yet he will speak of Gods testimonies before Kings,
and will not be ashamed; Psalm. 119.46.
and though the Gospel be spoken against in every place, yet Paul will not be
ashamed of it. Romans 1.16.


This also comforts against the guiltiness of sin, which is the true cause
of shame, following it as the shadow does the body. How profane we were before
our conversion, and how weakly we have walked since, our conscience knows and
is ashamed. Here is our help, faith obtaines pardon of sin, and therefore we
shall never be put to shame for our faults: we are sinners; but as when the
light comes, the darkness departs, and the more light, the less darkness: so
faith drives away shame, and the more we believe, the less do we fear
confusion and shame. Peter walked upon the water and shamed himself, for he
began to sink. What was the cause? Not the wind or waves, but the defect of
Faith. Abraham believed, and left his country, and offered up Isaac, and yet
was not ashamed.

Ob. Abraham had a great Faith, but my faith is little.

Ans. If thou have true Faith, though never so little, thou shall not be
ashamed. A child cannot take up his meat so strongly, nor eat so much as
does a man, yet that little which he takes weakly and eats, nourishes him,
as well as more meat does a man. So though thou be but a child in Faith, thy
Faith shall save thee, as well as Abraham's Faith saved him. For a man is not
saved by the quantity of his Faith, but by the preciousnesse of that which
Faith receives, which is the righteousness of Christ, which a weak and little
Faith will as sauingly apprehend as a strong Faith; as a Beggar that has a
shaking weak hand, can make shift to take an alms, as well as he that has
not such infirmity.

Ob. But I am pestered with much doubting, and cannot be rid of doubts.

A. Like enough: But do thou believe? Believe still. It is not the
commendation of Faith, to be without doubtings but to overcome them: Thou
shall overcome in the end and shall not be ashamed. He that kills his enemy at
the first blow, shows himself valiant: so does he also show a great deal of
valor, who being often knocked down, and wounded, yet stands to it. So though
the field seem doubtful between thy Faith and doubting, yet in the end, thou
shall overcome, and thy victory shall be famous.

Make precious account therefore of thy Faith, and labor to increase it. A
certain Captain Epaminondas.
, being in a hot skirmish, was stricken down, sore wounded, and taken up for
dead: as soon as he came to himself, he first asked if his Target were safe,
being loath his enemies should get that: so look to thy Faith, (for the Devil
thy enemy will look to it) and thou shall not be ashamed.

Use 3.
Wicked men and unbelievers are miserable, because of the shame which follows
them. There can be almost no stronger Argument against sin, then to say it
will make ashamed: then which there is nothing more grievous to a generous
mind, therefore diverse have rid themselves of their lives, that they may be
rid of their shame, as Samson. For to dye is natural, but to live in shame, is
more then nature can endure, and yet the wicked must eternally endure it.

Some like shameless beasts, glory in their shame, seeking no corners, nor
muffling themselves as Thamar; but as Absolon, barefaced, and in the open
Sun, practicing abominable things, and discovering their filthiness; making
a pastime of that with Salomons fool, Prou. 10.23.
which they should bewail with tears of blood, and of which the very Heathen
would be ashamed. It is a face of brass, and a Whores forehead, that is not
ashamed of blasphemy, drunkenness, adultery, pride in paintings, powderings
(the Devils inventions) and other lewdness. Though many, of these things be
not now ashamed, yet at the day of death or Judgment they shall be put to
shame, and then there shall be no covering for their shame, but they shall be
clothed, and covered with shame.

If thou which read these things, be one of these wretches, and could
blush, there were hope of thee. When a Thief is taken in the manner, how does
he hang down his head before men. Alas, if thou beleeuest not, nor repentest,
how shall thou be able to look Christ in the face, when he comes to
Judgment? Let us therefore so live, that when he shall appear, we may be
bold, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. Ioh. 2.28.


VERSE 12. For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the
same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.


THe universal note in the 11. verse, Whosoever, is her confirmed: and Paul is
put to this; because the Jews made a Monopoly of the grace of God as only
belonging to them: but Paul shows that the Patent is as well to the Grecian,
as to the Jew, for there is no difference. If there be no difference, then
whosoever believes, shall be saved. But there is no difference between Jew and
Grecian. Therefore.


The Minor is affirmed in the first part of this verse, and confirmed in the
rest of it from the suffering of God.

There is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian: The Jews were the
posterity of Sem, by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, inhabiting in the land of
Canaan, a part of Syria in Asia. The Grecians the posterity of Iaphet, by
Iauan, inhabiting a part of Europe called Greece, at first Ionia of Iauan: but
here they are taken by a figure, for all the inhabitants of the world, beside
the Jews. So called, because they were the most famous for their learning and
bringing up, in respect of which, they called all other Barbarians.

It appears then that there is a great difference between a Jew and a
Grecian, in regard of Ancestors, Country, Language, Manners, etc. But Paul
means none of these: but is to be understood only of Justification; in regard
of which, there is no difference between them, that a man should ever the more
or less be justified or saved, because he is a Jew or Grecian.

For the same Lord over all: Here is the Confirmation: All are servants to the
same Lord. It is not to be forgotten, that his Majesty's Translation has
exceedingly amended the reading in this place.

Is rich unto all: Because he powers out an exhaust treasure of goodness upon
us, well may he be said to be rich, if we consider what manner of things he
bestows, how great, with what bounty, and how many.

To all: Not hand over head: not to every particular, but to them that call on
him: Not that say Lord have mercy: but that call in Faith. Here is the
sufficiency of God: He is rich to all, and the Indigencie of man, that call
upon, or beg of Him.

Many collect here two Arguments, to prove there is no difference; but indeed
there are three. The first, There is the same Lord. The second, He is rich to
all. The Jews need not grutch the coming in of the Gentiles, they shall not
have the less, for GOD is able to enrich all: as the Sun, though it every
day give his light, and men and other creatures partake of it: yet neither has
It, or We the less; so though thousands from one end of the earth to the
other, flock to the receiving of Mercy, yet God has store, and the fountain
is above our Thirst. Fons vincit sitientem.


The third Argument is drawn from the equal condition propounded to all;
(viz.) if they call on him: which if the Gentile do, the gate of mercy was
open and free to him as to the Jew.

The favors of God concerning Justification and Salvation, are dispensed
without any respect of persons, to them which believe and call upon him, Act.
10.34. Romans 3.29,30. Gal. 3.28.

Use 1.
In this world for the most part the poor are contemned: If there be any
favor, it falls into the rich man's mouth. If there be any danger, the rich man
gets through, when the poor is taken in the Net of the Law. The poor is
scanted in the things of this earth; but in the favor of God and heavenly
things he shareth with the best. The rich cannot bribe for these. God
respected the low estate of Mary his Hand-maiden, yea Lazarus went to heaven,
when Dives went to hell.

Use 2.
If thou be rich, be humble, and do not so disdainfully ouer-looke thy
poor neighbor, as not worthy to wipe thy shoes. He is heir of the same
Grace, serves the same Master, and it may be, in as great favor with him as
thy self. I am sure the rich and poor are all one by Creation; there is the
same entrance into the world, and the same way to depart to them both; unless
the Rich man's fullness open more doors of death, then the emptiness of the
Poor man.

In the worst things, as sin and corruption, the richest is equal with the
poorest; In the best things, as Justification and Eternal life, the poorest is
equal with the richest.

Use 3.
There is no difference between the Rich and the Poor; but remember in
spiritual things: In civil there is great difference, even by Gods ordinance.
For the Gospel abolisheth not order; bringing in Anabaptisticall paritie and
community. We must honor our betters and superiors, acknowledging a
difference. We may not say in stomach, Wherein is he better then I? We all come
of Adam. When the Counters are put up into the bag, there is no difference
between them, but while the account is casting, there is great difference. One
stands for a pound, another for a penny: so at the day of Judgment, and in
Christ there is no difference; but while we here live; there is difference,
and it is to be acknowledged.

Use 4.
Be at Unity: for there is the same Lord. We are all servants to one Master:
he will prefer us all: we need not envy one another. We are all of a Family,
and wear all one Liuerie, and the badge or Cognizance is Love. Will any man
endure that his servants or children shall be quarrelling, or snarling one at
another? Indeed, if we served diverse Masters, there might sometimes naked
swords be seen; but now contentions must needs be odious.

Alas, for the Divisions in the Church of England! Surely, the Authors, and
Fautors of her division, have much to answer for before God. This is the bane
of the Church, and that the Devil knows well enough. Division in Doctrine is
Heresy: this is not found among us. Division in Rites is Schism: This is our
disease. Let such remember who break the peace of our Church, that an
inueterate Schism is Heresy. For the obstinate Schismatike, at length
obtrudeth his fancy for an Article of the Faith.

A Church in division, is like an house on Fire. Quench, and increase not this
flame by thy brainelesse opinions. It is like Rebecca, troubled in her womb,
with the striuings of two children, of contrary dispositions: Pity the pains
of thy Mother. This sin is so great, (specially authority being resisted)
that some have confidently avouched it not to be expiated by Martyrdom.
Chrysostom.


If Constantine justly blamed Alexander, Socrates Schol. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 4.
for eager opposing Arrius, whom he did confute, much more may our Constantine
find fault with them, which blame that which they can neither amend, nor
confutes.

Use 5.
The way to be rich in all grace, is to ask it. Ask, and you shall have: he
is rich to all that call upon him: he gives bountifully, and casts no man in
the teeth: plead not thine own deseruings: thou must sue in forma Pauperis.
Beggars obtain: the rich are sent empty away.

Use 6.
Every man desires to serve a liberal Master, that he may be preferred. Serve
God, and thou shall be made rich. Why do thou by Swearing, Lying, Whoring,
etc. serve that beggarly master the Devil, that has nothing to give his
followers, but hell, and everlasting torments? If God be thy Master, thou art
made for ever. No marvel that Paul breaks out into such a Patheticall
thanksgiving, because God entertained him into his service. 1. Tim. 1.
For as there is no fishing to the Sea: so no service to Gods and the Kings.

Get into Gods service, and when thou art in, keep thee there. Deserve not to
be cast out, as Cain was, lest thou sing the Prodigals Song, How many hired
servants in my Fathers house have bread enough, and I dye for hunger! There are
two things to be done, that we may keep our service. First, to know our
Masters will. 2. To do it: and then as God was rich to Abraham for his Faith,
to David, for his zeal, to Steven, for his constancy, so will he be rich to
thee.

As God is rich in mercy to the good, so in judgments, plagues, woes, curses,
is he rich to all ungodly and wicked men.

VERSE 13. Joel. 2.32. Act. 2.21.
For whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.


THat God is rich unto all that call on him, is here confirmed by a Testimony
out of Joel.

The occasion of Ioels speech was this: There was a great famine in Iewry: the
Cause, their sins: the means; First, a great rain presently after Seed
time: after that a wonderderful drought. Also God sent Grasshoppers and
Caterpillars, etc. which devoured the little increase which the earth afforded.
Farther, he threatens them with foreign enemies, and upon this, exhorts them
to Repentance, telling them that whosoever shall call on the Name of God shall
be safe. For in Zion, that is, the Church of God, shall be deliverance.

Paul's Argument is thus framed: If whosoever call on God shall be saved: then
is God rich to all that call on him, for no riches are comparable to salvation.
But the first is true. Therefore the last.

In this verse are two things. First, the Duty. Secondly, the Event. The Duty,
Calling upon God. The event, Salvation.

Whosoever, as before, verse 11.

Shall call upon: By this is meant Prayer, which sometimes is taken for the
whole worship of God. Inuocare, quasi ^tus, aut in se vocare. Anselm.
Prayer is called Invocation in Latin, because it must be performed with the
Inmost affections; or, as to call God into us: Or, as the Greek word
signifies, to call upon another for help in extremity. And therefore
Chrysostom well expounds it by Confession, joined with Prayer. For he which
beggeth help of another, confesses his own weakness and want.

The Name of the Lord. That is, God himself, whose infinite perfections no
name can comprehend. Yet God has by certain Names and Appellations notified
himself unto us, so far as was fit for ability to understand. Some here
understand Christ, the Name, express Image and Character of his Father, by
whom we know God, as we know things by their names.

Shall be saved. Not that our prayers deserve Salvation, but because Salvation
follows faithful praying by the promise of God.

God will save all such which call upon him, Act. 2.21. Psalm. 50.15. and 145.18.

Use 1.
God is infinitely good, who propounds conditions of salvation, as easy to the
poor, as to the rich. If he had offered salvation on these terms, as to
build Churches, Hospitals, and to endow them, etc. Alas, what should have
become of poor men! But if thou be not rich, nor eloquent, etc. Yet if thou
call on the Name of the Lord, thou shall be saved.

Use 2.
Whosoever calls upon the name (not of our Lady) but of the Lord. How then
comes it to pass, that the Papists so much strive for Invocation of Saints?

There is no example, nor promise, nor commandment for it in the Bible. No
threatening to them which omit it: neither do the Saints departed know our
particular necessities or our hearts.

The Heathen Philosophers conceived one chief god, and diverse inferior and
Vnder-gods, as mediators, by whom they might come to the chief God, as by
Noble men we come to the King. This is one of their best arguments, which
Ambrose on the Romans excellently propounds and confutes. Amb. comment. in 1.
cap. Epist. ad Romans


A certain man, Chemnitius exem. Decr. Conc. Trid. par. 3. de Inuo. Sanctorum.
having used the help of some Noble men, in a cause to his King, and being
maruellously delayed, hearing by occasion a Bishop preach that we must go to
God, by the mediation of Saints. Alas, says he, if it be in the Court of
Heaven, as it is in the Courts of Princes, we shall all have but a cold suite
of it. We do many times request particular men and Churches on earth to pray
for us: because we have commandment, example and promise for it in the Word,
it being a ministry appointed for the Militant Church. But that from hence I
should pray to Angels or Saints departed, follows not. For first, I do not
invoke these as the Papists do their Saints: neither do I desire that
office, unless either face to face, or by Letter or Messenger, I acquaint them
with my desire: but there is no such intercourse between us and the Virgin
Mary, or other Saints.

Ob. But they pray not to Saints to fulfill, but to impetrate their desires.

A. This also is unlawful, it being a part of the Office of our Mediator, as
Saint Paul teaches to Timothy, where he (speaking of Prayer) says, 1. Tim.
2.5.
We have but one Mediator between God and us, even Jesus Christ. Farther,
though they teach this in the Schools, yet (which is much to be blamed) they
direct their people to practice otherwise, and to pray to Saints, for the
fulfilling of their desires. As I could show in diverse of their prayers, which
I have seen, and most blasphemously appears in their Ladies Psalter.
Concerning which, it is to be understood, that the common sort of Papists, are
taught upon Beads to say over certain Aue Mary's and Pater nosters: to ten
Aue Mary's, one Pater noster, which being five times said over, make one
Rosary (as they call it.) And that they might not be deceived in their tale,
they say that S. Dominick (it may be one of our Ladies Chaplains) found out
the use of Beads for that purpose. From hence comes our Ladies Psalter, which
consists of three Rosaries: Of which Psalter there is a peculiar Fraternity,
endowed with many Indulgences by diverse Popes.

Unto this Psalter, are added diverse prayers to the blessed Virgin, specially
the Versuall Salutations, in imitation of David's Psalms, which some say was
done by Bonauenture. In which, I may be bold to say, are many obominable
things; wherein they pray in the same manner and words to the Virgin Mary, in
which David prays to God, and not according to the sense of their School
distinction.

Use 3.
He says not, Every one that prays, shall have that which he desires, but
shall be saved. Thou shall have all thy desires, if they stand with Gods glory
and thy good, otherwise it is not good for thee to desire to have them. Paul
prayed for the remouall of a temptation, and it was not removed, for Gods and
Paul's greater glory in ouercomming. Ask for necessary grace and salvation, and
thou shall be sure to receive it. A certain vvidow desired of Saint Austen
direction so to pray as she might be heard; and he wishes her to pray for a
blessed life. If he be compelled to give, which is un willingly wakened by the
suitor, how much more bountifully will he give, which needs no waking, but
wakens us, that we may ask him Aug. ep. 121. ad orobam de orando Deo.
?

Use 4.
Prayer is a singular refuge in trouble. In war, Moses did more good with his
prayers against Amalek, then the Soldiers did with their swords. As a strong
Castle in a commotion, so is prayer unto God in trouble.

When Christ tells of the troubles of the last days, Luke 21 36.
he advises to prayer; and accordingly himself practiced.

Prayer is the buckles of Christian Armor. The great neglect of this duty, is
the cause that we are so often overcome in temptation, and overtaken with foul
enormities. He that sanctifies himself in the morning with prayer, is the
stronger to resist tentations all the day after; for as when the Lion roares,
the beasts hide themselves, so there is nothing that sooner puts the devil
to flight, then faithful prayer. Not to pray, is a note of a wretch, and such
lie open to all the plagues of God.

Use 5.
Not every saying, Lord, Lord, shall obtain salvation, but that Invocation
which has Faith for the root, and Obedience for the fruit: For we shall not
receive, if either we believe that God will not give our asking, or if we
glorify him not with a godly life. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me, says David. Psalm. 66.18.
Let every one that calls one Christ, depart from iniquity, says Paul. 2 Timothy 2.19.
The prayer of a righteous man avails much, says James. Iaco. 5.15.
As the Serpent going to drink, lays down his poison; so do thou lay aside
thy sins when thou go to prayer.

If a man having murdered his neighbors child, should come with his hands
reeking with the blood to entreat a kindness, should he obtain? So never make
account to be graciously heard, when thou presentest thy self before the Lord,
with the tokens of thy pride on thy body, or in the steame of thy wine and
strong drink, etc.

VERSE 14. How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher?

15. And how shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written, Esaias
52.7. Naum. 1.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them, that preach the Gospel of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things?

16. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel: For Esayas says, Esaias 53.1. John
12.38.
Lord, who has believed our Or Preaching. Gr. the hearing of us.
report?

17. So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.


SAint Paul has before spoken of Faith, and the righteousness of it: and some
think that here his purpose is to show the means to come to Faith, which is,
by hearing the Word. This is true, but the whole co^text in my opinion shows,
that Paul has another drift in these verses: namely, to prove that the Gospel
must be preached to the Gentiles, which the Jews could not abide to hear of.

The Apostle said, that whosoever, Jew or Gentile calls upon God, shall be
saved. Hence he infers that the Gospel must be preached to the Gentiles.
The Argument is thus: It is the will of God that the Gentiles should be saved.
But without the Gospel they cannot be saved, Therefore the Gospel must be
preached unto them.


The first Proposition is avouched before; the Minor is in these verses proved,
where we have the Argument it self, verse 14. and part of the 15. with the
17. The other part of the 15. and the 16. verse, are an Amplification of the
Argument. The Minor is proved by a heap of Arguments Sorites.
clapped together, from the first to the last, thus; Those that call on the Name
of the Lord, shall be saved.

But none can call, except they believe, nor believe, except they hear; nor
hear but by a Preacher; nor preach, except sent.

Therefore, Faith comes by hearing, verse 17. that is, Preaching, and preaching
by the Word, that is, by the Commandment of God.

The Argument follows backward and backward, Affirmatively and Negatiuely.

The words are familiar, which he sets down by Interrogations, which are
equivalent to strong Negations.

How shall they call, etc. That is, They cannot call on him in whom they
believe not.

True Prayer, is the effect of true Faith.

How shall they believe, etc. That is, they cannot believe without hearing,
which is the ordinary and highway to Faith. For Faith presupposes knowledge.
Knowledge instruction: Instruction hearing, which is the sense of learning. We
have seen blind men learned, but never deaf men so borne. He that is borne
deaf, is also borne dumb. The reason, because we learn to speak. Deaf men
are barred from Faith and salvation, to be attained by hearing, but not simply
and absolutely, because God when he pleases, can extraordinarily work Faith
without the senses. We have some Notions of God left in Nature; but to know
God in Christ, and things to be believed unto salvation, comes from without,
and requires Instruction.

How can they hear, etc.? That is, they cannot hear to faith, without a
Preacher; Preaching and Hearing are Relatiues.

How can they preach, except they be sent? That is, None can Preach, except
they be sent. A man unsent may debate or discourse of matters, but not as the
Ambassadors of God, to the begetting of Faith, except they be sent of God.

If a man take upon him to preach not being sent, he were as good hold his
peace. As a private man's doings running on an Embassy of his own head, are not
approved of the King: so good works only with them whom he sends. He that
begets Faith in any, is sent of God.

Sending, is External or Internal. We speak of external, which is, by
Ecclesiastike ordination from those who themselves have been first ordained,
and derive their power successively from the Apostles, and so from our Savior
Christ.

Without the preaching of the Gospel there is (ordinarily) no salvation. The
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, not written in leaves, but preached,
Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.21. Iam. 1.18.

Use 1.
Saints are not to be inuocated, because we may not believe in them: This
service of our Faith is only due to God.

Use 2.
Faith breeds Prayer: and indeed none can pray but believers. An unbeliever
may speak and say over a form of words, but pray he cannot without Faith.
When we are persuaded of the goodness of God, and his readiness to help,
then we fall to Prayer. When Peter was in danger of drowning, if he had not
been persuaded of Christ's love, he would never so confidently have cried;
Help, Master, I perish. The Saints (whose practice herein must be our example)
for the kindling of Prayer, have used to stir up their Faith, by attributing
such Titles to God, which do manifest his Power, Mercy and Truth. As we
esteem not the cries of such which trust us not: so neither does God the words
of them which believe him not.

Use 3.
Many think, that of all other things preaching might best be spared, and that
the Ministers office is least necessary: but here we see, that Faith and the
promised good things cannot be attained without preaching. Next to Christ, it
is the greatest benefit which God has given to men: For by this we know, and
apply that to our Salvation. When Princes are crowned, they are bountiful; so
when Christ our King ascended, he gave gifts. What gifts? Some to be Pastors
and Teachers, for the gathering and edifying his Church unto salvation: Ephesians.
4.
He therefore that despises preaching, despises the bounty of Christ, and is
guilty of his own damnation: For, as our bodies cannot live without bread: so
nor our souls without the Word.

Q. Shall none be saved, but those which hear Sermons?

A. No, Ordinarily.

Q. Cannot God save men, though they hear none?

A. It is a needless Question: none denies but he can: yet when he gives
ordinary means, he shows he will save no otherwise. As a man refusing to
eat, because God can save him without meat, tempts God; so does he, who
following his pleasures, and refusing to hear, thinks to be saved. Manna is
for the wilderness, which an Israelite looks not for in Canaan, where he may
sow and reap: so, while thou live in a Church, where thou may partake of
the ordinary means, use them, if thou would be nourished in the hope of
eternal life.

God could have taught the Eunuch without Philip; converted Paul, without
Anamias; instructed Cornelius, without Peter; opened Lydias heart, without
Paul: but he used (not the Ministry of Angels, but) the ministry of men,
to teach us, that it is his will we should submit unto it, if we would be
blessed. The Ministry of the Word is by the wisdom of God, which reverence
thou, unless thou accountest thy self wiser then God.

Use 4.
The Papists from Gregory, make Images Laymens books; but God has appointed,
not by looking on an Image, but by hearing his ordinance, to instruct the
Church in the Faith.

Use 5.
None can preach till they be sent. If God send not, we go without good
speed: Therefore, Esaias, John Baptist, Christ himself, the Apostles go not
til their commissions be sealed by God.

Q. How may a man know who is sent of God?

A. A Minister may know that God sends him; if he find his heart moved by GOD
to desire the Calling for Gods glory; if he be competently qualified with
learning, godliness, discretion, utterance; if his gifts be allowed by the
Church, and he be sent according to the ordinary course of the Church,
wherein he is a Minister: which is not after one manner in all Churches,
neither is it necessary.

The Hearer may know that his Teacher is sent of God, if his teaching beget
Faith and Invocation. The blessing of God upon his labors, is an infallible
token of his lawful Calling: so Jeremy approues a true Prophet, Ier. 23.21,22.
and Paul his Apostleship. 2. Cor. 3.1,2.


The Separatists as they deny our Church (their mother) the name of a Church;
so they deny us to be true Ministers of Christ. But if ordinary begetting of
faith be an argument of a lawful calling: Blessed be God, we have a calling to
our comfort.

They say we are false, Idolatrous, Antichristian Ministers, even priests of
Baal. And I ask them whether ordinarily God conuerteth men to himself, and
stablisheth them in true Grace, by false, Idolatrous and Antichristian means?
Whether he follows the priests of Baal, with his abundant blessing in their
calling, or his own Ministers whom he sends himself?

And if we be sent of God, how dare they refuse to hear us, though there might
be some defect in our Calling, which I am sure is as justifiable, as the
calling in any Church upon earth? and when it is at the worst; too good, that
theirs should enter into any comparison with it. Howsoever they blaspheme our
Calling, I am sure, that if there be any grace in any of them, they are
beholding to the Ministry of the Church of England for it.

Use 6.
How can they preach, unless they be sent? Therefore wheresoever preaching
is, it is by the sending of God, and a token of his love, as where he sends it
not, it is a token of his displeasure toward the place. Apoc. 1.16.
Christ has the Ministers as Stars in his right hand, not only for their
defense, but also to make them rise or set, to several parts of the world, as
he pleases. He can make it rain on Gedeons Fleece, Judge. 6.37,38,39,40.
and no where else, and every where, save on Gedeons Fleece. If you have the
Word, thank him that sent it; if you want it, seek it from him that gives it.

VERSE 15. As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of those which preach
the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!


IN these words, and in those of the 16. verse (which are by some included in a
Parenthesis) is an amplification of the preaching of the Gospel to the
Gentiles: of which are two parts.

The first is a Confirmation of it, in these words. The second is an answering
of an objection, in the next verse.

The proof is taken out of Esaias, chap. 52.7. From the effect of the preaching
of the Gospel, which is joy and rejoicing in them which heard it. So at
Antioch there was great joy; so in Galatia, and in diverse Cities and Towns it
was entertained as with clapping of hands, which joyful embracing of it,
proves it to be of Gods sending.

This effect is set forth under a Comparison of the less; for Esaias speaks of
the Royal receiving of the Messengers of Isreal's deliverance from the
captivity of Babylon, of which when News came, they were so ravished, and
filled with laughter, that they thought it had not been a truth, but a dream.
If then the tidings of such temporal deliverance was so welcome, much more
must be welcome the glad tidings of the Gospel: and as those messengers were
from God, so much more these, it being a great deal more likely that the Jews
might be delivered from that bodily servitude, then that the world should be
delivered from the bondage of Satan, by the blood of God.

In these words are two things. First, a commendation of the Gospel; How
beautiful, etc! Locus laudatorius Sarienus.
Secondly, a Reason, because it brings peace, and good things.

How beautiful, etc! He says not simply, they are beautiful, but uses an
explanation, How beautiful! as if he were not able to express such beauty.

How beautiful are the feet! Some take feet for men: some for the
affections, being that to the soul, which feet are to the body: these
affections appearing in the Apostles, by their sweet delivery and utterance.
Some interpret the velocitie of the Apostles in converting the world. Some
their constancy and courage. Some take beauty for the holiness of the
Apostles; some for a fleshly beauty by ornaments, as slippers imbroidered with
Gold and Pearl; as this Scripture is abused to the consecrating of the Popes
toe. But the plain meaning is, that the coming of the Apostles with the glad
tidings of salvation was acceptable: he says, feet, because they are the
instruments of going; as we familiarly say of poor men. They get their living
by their fingers ends, which are the instruments of their labor.

Beautiful. Naua ab Aua, or Naua.
The Hebrew word according to the root, may signify to be desired and longed
for, or beautiful and welcome. The beauty of a thing causes it to be
desired, as the beauty of Christ makes the Church sick of love.

The Greek term comes of a root which has diverse signification: (...).
as an hour, or generally Time: but not so here.

It also signifies that part of time which is fittest for affairs, called
Season: and so some read it, How seasonable? Quam tempestiue. Tertul. lib. 5.
aduers. Mar. c. 2.
A word spoken in season, is beautiful, and so is the Gospel somewhere
called, and every thing is beautiful in his season. Many of our daintiest
meats are not, but the Gospel is always in season; in the Winter of
Adversity, in the Summer of prosperity, in the Spring of Youth, and Autumn
of Age: And therefore Paul bids Timothy to preach in season, and out of season:
not that it is at any time unseasonable, but because the world so judges it.

It also signifies the Spring: and therefore some have compared the coming of
the Apostles, and of the Preachers of the Gospel, to the Spring. For as the
fields in the Spring begin to be adorned with buds, blossoms, and sweet
flowers, in which all creatures rejoice: so the preaching of the Gospel turns
our Winter like barrenness into fruitfulness, making us to flourish with
heavenly graces and virtues.

It is also taken for ripeness, and so some have likened the coming of the
Apostles to ripe fruit. Unripe fruit is dangerous, and not so well colored,
but that which is ripe, is both well tasted, and well colored. No dainty
colored fruit, so beautiful and wholesome as the Gospel.

It signifies also comeliness; Ambr. Epist. 11.
that which we call the pride and flowers of life; also youth, wherein is that
mixture of white and red, which is called beauty. As Christ is said to be
fairer: so also is the Gospel. Psalm. 43.


The Gospel of Peace and glad tidings of good things: Here is an excess of
words: but this redundance serves to make us the more to esteem of it. It is
the Ghosts spell, a comforting and soule-sauing word.

Peace: We are by corruption of Nature, enemies to God; the Gospel reueales a
threefold peace, with God, with our selves, with men; according to the song of
the Angels at the birth of Christ, Good things. Yea, the best in the
Superlatiue degree, Celestial good things: a freedom from all evil of sin,
of punishment.

Nothing should be so welcome as the preaching and Preachers of the Gospel.
That Christ came to save sinners is a faithful saying, and worthy of the best
welcome. 1. Tim. 1.15. without this, we had been damned wretches. It is called
the Word of Life, of Salvation, the Gospel of the Kingdom. Even as one would
say, the key of heaven: for life and immortality are brought to light by the
Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.12.

Use 1.
The essential duty of a Minister, is to preach the Gospel. The Law is to be
preached also, both as an introduction to the Gospel, and for a direction how
to lead our lives, when we have received the Gospel, because sin breaks
Gods peace; but chiefly, we are sent to preach the Gospel.

Use 2.
Nor riches, nor dignities, but to preach the Gospel, is the chief honor and
beauty of a Minister, who, though highly advanced, if he preach not the
Gospel, shall be despised.

Use 3.
Some love their Ministers, because they keep hospitality, which is
commendable; some, because they gain by them in their tithes, and other
duties, which is carnal; some, because they never preach, which is abominable;
some, because themselves would be well accounted of, which is hypocritical.
But, to love them for their works sake, is conscionable, and according to the
commandment. 1. These. 5.13.


Its an argument of great corruption, to esteem basely and meanly of a
Preacher; when he that brings tidings of a good bargain, or is an instrument
of our pleasures, shall be highly welcomed and rewarded. We are earthen
vessels, but we bring a treasure more precious then all the world: we preach
the Summum bonum of man, and therefore should be esteemed.

Use 4.
If the Minister have weak gifts, yet if he preach the Gospel, thou must
account his feet beautiful: Its not the gifts of men, but the Word of God
which works the feate in our Conversion.

Use 5.
If it be the Gospel of peace, the professors are to be peaceable.

Use 6.
The great sin of this Land, is the contempt of the preaching of the Gospel,
that we account it not a precious, but a tedious thing. Never merry world (say
some) since we had so much preaching; as if the Sun shone too bright. Like the
Israelites, who stumbled at the plenty of Manna. These are a kin to those
Devils, who asked Christ if he were come to torment them. So they account the
Gospel a torment, because it crosses their profane, covetous, and
Epicure-like courses. These can spend days and nights in vanity, but an hour
at a Sermon is tedious. Bleare-eyed Leah is more comely in their eye, then
Rachel. The Onions of Egypt have a better relish in their mouths, then Manna
and Quails. They had rather live at the Hogs-trough (for what are all worldly
pleasures, but draffe in comparison?) then in their fathers house. Preferring
their pigges with the Gadarenes, before our Savior Christ. O, say they, We
cannot live by Sermons. But alas! what are all pleasures without this? even
vanity and vexation of spirit: yea, the more of these, the more torment to the
conscience at the day of death, when the Gospel of peace is worth all the world.

But what is the cause we love the Gospel no better? Surely this, we know not our
own poor estate, and so are ignorant of the worth of it. If we knew these, we
would run from East to West for it. If drunkards, and the rabble of wicked
wretches knew their fearful estate, the Minister should be as welcome to
them, as bread to the hungry, or a pardon to a Thief.

To them which are visited in their consciences, is the Gospel sweet, but to
them which are hardened, it has no savor. Poor souls! If a man in the street
cry fire, fire, every man runs; but we daily cry the fire of Hell to consume
all impenitent sinners, yet none almost are moved. What Is that fire to this?
What the burning of rotten houses, to the burning of body and soul in fire and
brimstone for ever?

If the Lord would be pleased but to show a wicked man the torments of Hell, or
to visit his conscience with the apprehension of his wrath, then the very
crummes of the Gospel would be welcome, when now they loathe the full measses
of Consolation. Then, to see the sweetness of but one sentence or line in the
Gospel, would be more acceptable then the whole riches of the world. When the
Conscience is wounded, and the Devil strongly accuses, then how beautiful
will the feet be of the now contemned Ministers of the Gospel? Sell all thy
profits, pleasures, sins, to purchase this treasure of peace which comes by
the Gospel. Many are daily cheapning, but they vnderbid for it, they would
feign have it, but are driven away with the price, because it requires a
forsaking of all to follow Christ. But indeed, Daniels fare with the Gospel, is
a royal feast: if thou accountest not so, thou have a proud, and an ignorant
heart.

VERSE 16. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel, for Esayas says, Lord,
who has believed our report?


IN this verse Paul preuents an Objection, against that which was said
concerning the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, that it was of God. As
if some Jew should say: No, Paul, God never sent you to preach to them; for if
he had, he would have sent you first to us, and have blessed your labors: but
the greater part obey you not, either of Jews or Gentiles. It may be, here and
there a few of the common sort follow you: but where are the great Rabbines,
the Pharisees? The fourth part follow you not, but persecute you. Therefore,
because this business profits not in your hands, God never sent you, but you
run of your own head.

This was a plausible Argument to the Jews, to which Paul answers by a
Concession, with a Correction annexed: as if he should say, Indeed all do not
obey the Gospel; yet you Jews are not to be offended; because, as our sending
was foretold, so your and their incredulity; and the small fruit and effect
was foretold also.

In this verse we note two parts; 1. A declaration of the success of the
preaching of the Gospel, Not all obey it. Secondly, a Confirmation of it out of
Esaias.

All have not obeyed; that is, beliued: So called, because obedience is an
inseparable effect of faith. The effect is put for the cause: so we say of the
trees in our Orchards: this is a Pear, that a plum, when they are the trees
that bear such fruit: so Faith is the tree that bears the fruit of obedience.

This obedience of Faith is twofold; First, or Reason: Secondly, of Works.

That of Reason is, when it gives place and way to the Gospel, though it
conceive it not. For the Gospel goes beyond reason, as in the point of the
Trinity, Incarnation of Christ, Justification of a sinner before God,
Resurrection, etc. Abraham believed, above or against reason; and the Gospel is
said to bring into subjection our Reason. 2. Cor. 10.5.


That of works is, when we observe the Law; for Faith works by love, and is
to be shown by our works. Gala. 5.6.


For Esaias says, By this is rendered the cause, not of the thing, but of the
Proposition. For not because Esaias foretold, did not all obey, but because all
did not obey, Esaias foretold it.

Lord: This is added by the Septuagint, for explanation.

Who has believed? The Interrogation is a forcible Negation; propounded, as
some say, by way of Admiration; that so few should believe; but that's no
wonder. Its rather a wonder that any do, considering our corruption, and the
devils subtle tentations, then that many do not. Its no wonder to see men
run into all manner of sin, as it is no vvonder to see a stone roll down
from the top of a steep hill. I think it is spoken rather by way of
complaint, that so fevv should beliue the Gospel.

Report, or hearing; that is, preaching, by an usual Hebraisme, because
nothing in the world is so worthy to be heard as it.

Our Report: which are the Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel.

Who has: that is, none have: so few, as in comparison, None. So John says,
John 3.32.
that No man receives the testimony of Christ. Did not Mary, Andrew, Peter,
etc, Yes, but in comparison of the multitude which did not, None.

When the Gospel is preached, all are not converted by it, and believe it,
John 3.32. and 12.37. Mat. 20.16. 2. These. 3.2.

Use 1.
Faith is called obedience. Obey thou in life, and make thy reason obey. No man
standing on his own reason ever believed; an unsanctified wit is a great
hinderance of Faith. The greatest Philosophers, as the Epicures and Stoiks,
most resisted Paul, Acts 17.18.
as our greatest Politicians most scoff at Religion, and at preaching of the
Word.

Use 2.
All are bound to hear, and nothing so worthy to be heard as the Gospel. Let
us say of hearing, as Paul speaks of knowing it: 1. Cor. 2.2.
viz. that he esteemed to know nothing besides.

The Nurses song does not so quiet the babe, as the preaching of the Gospel
the Conscience. Its the hand of GOD, offering us forgiveness of sins; He
therefore who has ears to hear, let him hear. He has well employed his
ears, who has reuernntly heard the Gospel; which the devil keeps many from
hearing, lest by hearing they should be converted and live.

If thou will not Now bear that which may profit thee, thou shall hear one
day that which will make thy heart to ache, even this, Go you cursed, etc. For
if any receive you not, nor hear your words, shake the dust off your feet:
truly it shall be easier for Sodom in the day of Judgment then for them. Mat.
10.14,15


Use 3.
Ministers must be affected and grieve, when they see the company of reverent
hearers so thin, and their labors so fruitless. The Prophet here complains
of this: so Christ groans for the hardness of the peoples hearts, and weeps
over the stubbornness of Jerusalem.

The shrewdest turn to be done to a Minister, is to deprive him of the joy of
his labors; and the way to rejoice them, is to embrace the Gospel they preach.
It will be unprofitable and heavy for the hearers, to have their Minister to
complain of them with grief unto God.

Use 4.
Esaias and Paul gave not over, though they had cause to complain. As the
Physician omits no point of his Art, though the recovery of his Patient be
desperate: So, though we preach to many desperate and scoffing hearers, we
must not give over, but rather use the more diligence. For whether they profit
by us, or no, we shall have our fee. Not as the husbandman loses by an ill
crop, shall I lose. If I preach, and thou repent not, it shall never repent me
of my pains. I will preach still: for though my preaching be not a sweet
savor to thee: yet even in thee I am a sweet savor to God. Thou also shall
smart for it: for if we be offended when our words are despised, much more will
God be, at the contempt of his Gospel.

Use 5.
Although faith cannot be without preaching going before it; yet preaching may
be without faith following it: as that which is to be known, may be without
the knowledge of it. The word that sounds without is not sufficient faith, if
God speak not within in the heart.

There are two things required to faith; the determination of that which is to
be believed, and the inclination and persuasion of the heart to believe.
Aquinas.
Preaching determines, but its God who persuades by preaching: God can do it
without preaching, but preaching cannot do it without God. Our voice can say,
Repent; but its God only that gives Repentance. Paul preaches to Lidiaes ear,
but God has the key of her heart.

Pray that God would open our mouths to speak; pray also that he will unlock
thy heart to believe; for as Rebecca cookt the Venison, but Isaac gave the
blessing; so we may plant and water, but its God that gives the increase. 1.
Cor. 3.7.


VERSE 18. But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, Psalm. 19.4.
their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world.


THis is spoken of the Gentiles, not of the Jews, as appears by the manner of
the next verse.

In this Paul preuents another objection, occasioned by the words before,
concerning the sending of the Gospel to the Gentiles, as if some Jew should
have said:

If you be sent to the Gentiles, why do you preach to them all, but only to
some choice Cities and Nations?

Paul answers, that they do and shall preach to them all; which he vtters by
an interrogation, and proves by a testimony out of the Psalms; as if he should
say: David tells you that all have, or might hear; for, Their sound is gone
out into all the earth.

Question is whether Paul allege this testimony, or allude unto it: In the
Psalm he speaks of works, here of the Word. Some say that Paul argues from the
less: If God teach all by the great volume of the heavens, much more will he
teach all, by the heavenly doctrine of the Gospel.

I think that under the historical narration of the heavens, and of their
sound, is hid a prophecy of the preaching of the Gospel, because the latter
part of the Psalm speaks much in the commendation of it; and Paul here so
applies it. And indeed there is a most sweet Analogy, between the heavens
sound and the Gospel. There are diverse particulars observed: I think these
are good:

The heavens are the work of Gods hand; so is the Gospel revealed by God. The
heavens show the work of God: so the Gospel, that we are Justified by the
work of God, which is faith, not by the works of man. The doctrine of the
Gospel is pure and lightsome as are the heavens. The influence of the heavens
comfort and cherishes inferior things; so does the Gospel the Conscience.
The diversity of Nations and Languages is manifold which understand not one
another; yet all understand the excellency of the heavens, and the wonderful
work of God in them. So God enabled the Apostles to teach all Nations in their
own tongues the wonderful works of God.

Into all the earth, and unto the ends of the world: The sum is, that the
Gospel was preached to all the world.

Ob. But many Nations were long after the Apostles days converted: as England
in the time of Gregory the great; the Iaponians and Americans but the other day
heard of Christ.

A. All the earth is either taken for the most part; and the ends, for
Countries very far off: or it is spoken of that which should be; or it is
meant of the 4. quarters of the world; or of the Roman Empire. And for that of
England; it is false: Indeed in Gregory's days, England by Austen the Monk,
was first brought in subjection to Rome, they before agreeing with the Greek
Church; for at the coming of that Austen there were many holy Monks in this
Land, and some have written of the conversion of it, in the days of
Eleutherius: yea, Dorotheus seems to affirm that Simon Zelotes was in
Brittany, if the place be not misprinted. And for the New discovered places may
be answered, that either they were not then inhabited, or the Gospel there
preached, but not received; or that the fame of the Gospel at the least came
thither, as the fame of the Israelites came into Canaan.

The Gospel was preached to all the world in the time of the Apostles, Mar.
16.20. Act. 1.8. Col. 1.6.

Q. But what may be thought of them which never heard of the Gospel? are they
not to be excused before God?

A. Yes: Of the sin of unbelief in the promises: but they cannot obtain
thereby an acquitall from their other sins, but shall be condemned for them.

Use 1.
That is the true Religion, which agrees with that which was preached in all
the world by the Apostles.

Use 2.
It was a miracle that the Gospel, a doctrine teaching the denial of our
selves, and bearing of the Cross, carried by poor and mean persons,
oppressed by mighty Emperors and Kings, should in despite of men and Devils,
within the space of forty years, be so published in all the world. Let all
enemies cease to oppose it by the remembrance hereof.

Use 3.
Obey the Gospel, lest He which sent it, take it away, and remove our
Candle-sticke for our unbelief and contempt of it. For this cause Turcisme and
Papisme possess many places, which have been heretofore famous for the
Gospel.

Has the grace of God shined to thee in despite of the Devil? Make much of
this light, and walk in it: Have thou heard the sound of it? Why do thou
live in lewd practices, as if thou had never heard any inkling of it? If thou
be a blasphemer, drunken, unclean, proud, covetous, etc. what could a Jew,
or a Turk do more then thou do? Thou have not received it. Where sin
bears rule, there is not the Gospel received.

In those Marian times, the Gospel made men forsake goods and life: and can it
not now make thee leave thy vile and bad courses? He that caused the Gospel to
be brought with the blood of his servants, will require the blood of all the
contemners of it. Be you careful, that as in all the world, so the Gospel may
have a free passage among you, and be glorified; which shall be, when you
suffer it to subdue your vile and rebellious affections.

VERSE 19. But I say, did not Israel know? First, Moses says, Deuteronomy. 32.31.
I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish
Nation I will anger you.


THe Apostle has in the verses before soundly proved, that the Gospel is by
the will and counsel of God to be preached to the Gentiles.

The Jew is mute, and has nothing farther to object against that point, but
falls to excuse his opposition against the preaching of the Gospel to them, by
pleading ignorance, that he did not know it: was the will of God so to have
it.

To this Paul answers: What (says he) did not Israel know? Did ye not know
This? Why, Moses and Esaias affirm it, in whom you are conversant. And so falls
into a plain declaration of the Abiection of the Jews, and receiving of the
Gentiles, as before he had done in the 9. Chapter.

Here then are two things. First, a taking away of the excuse, ( viz.
ignorance) which the Jews made to cover their malice against the preaching of
the Gospel to the Gentiles, by a reprehensarie declaration, that they were not
ignorant. Secondly, this he proves by the Testimony of the Prophets.

Did not Israel know? The Geneua Translation supplieth (God.) without any
sense, which is exceedingly well observed in His Majesty's Translation, and
there left out: For that which they pretended not to know, was not God, but
the will of God, in the matter before spoken of: As if he should say, You may
be ashamed to say you are ignorant, you know it well enough, or might or ought
to know it.

The corruption of our hearts leads us to the practice of those things which
we know to be sin, Romans 1.31. Jude 10.

Use 1.
Abstain from all sin, specially from sin of knowledge. A regenerate man
may through infirmity, or in the violence of tentation sin against
knowledge, as David and Peter; but beware of cold blood: and continuing in
known sin. Antecedent Ignorance will not save a man, much more will
consequent Ignorance condemn him. Ignorantia mollit non tollit rationem
peccati. Scientia non mollit peccatum, sed tollit excusatione^ peccati.
Ignorance takes not away sin, but knowledge takes away all excuse of
sin. Now I have spoken to them (says Christ) they have no Ioh. 15.22.
color for their sin. To withold the known truth in unrighteousness,
provoke the Romans 1.18.
wrath of God. Do thou not know that drunkenness, whoredom, etc. are
abominable sins? And yet thou practisest them. Alas, what hope can thou have?
A willing practice of known sin, and Repentance, can nouer stand together:
nay, it is the high way to a reprobate mind, and to that unpardonable offense.

Though thou can not but sin in these days of thy frailety, yet beware of
two things. First, of being willingly ignorant of that which God gives thee
the means to know, for this is the mark of a wretch. 2. Pet. 3.5.
Secondly, of doing contrary to knowledge: For he that knows to do well,
and does it not, and by proportion to avoid ill, and shunnes it not, to him it
is sin, that is, his knowledge aggrauates his faults. Iac. 4. vlt.


Use 2.
The Jews sinned against their knowledge: What was the cause? Even their Envy
that the Gentiles should be admitted to the prerogative of Grace. This made
them deliver Christ to be crucified. This caused the stoning of Stephen: this
the persecution of Paul. Beware of Envy, which is a devilish sin; the rotting
of the bones, which makes a man twice miserable: For the envious man is
cruciated both with his own evils, and with the good things of his Neighbor.
The way to avoid envy for worldly matters, is to despise the world, and the
folly of it, and to love heavenly things; and the way to avoid envy for the
grace of God showed on another, is to love the glory of God, which is set forth
by my neighbor, as well as by my self.

The proof is, from the testimony of two famous Prophets; Moses, in the rest
of this 19. verse, and Esaias, verse 20.21.

First Moses: Moses is called the first, not because of a second Moses, but
first in time or dignity: or first in this allegation.

The Testimony is out of Deuteronomie, containing a threatening of Reiection to
the Jews, for their vile dealing against God: wherein are two things to be
considered; 1. The phrase wherein this Reiection is set down. 2. The
Amplification of it.

I will provoke you to jealousy, and I will anger you. This is the phrase.

The Amplification is twofold; 1. From the Author, which is God: who does not
cause envy, but cause it to come to light, being in the heart before: nor is
the Author of jealousy as a sin, but as its a punishment, doing that for
punishment, which would stir up their corrupt hearts to jealousy. 2. From the
Instruments which God uses to anger and provoke them withal: Namely, No
people: A foolish Nation. That is, the Gentiles; whom the Jews accounted
beasts, and not men, even dogs.

As a man diuorcing an adulterous wife, and in her face taking her bondmaid to
be his wife, and adorning her with the garments and jewels of his former wife,
must needs make her pine with envy and jealousy: So God threatens the Jews,
who^ he had chosen to be his Spouse, that he would cast them off for their
wickedness, and bestow their privileges on the Gentiles. Or as a Mother,
sometimes for a fault done by her little one, thrusts it from her, and says it
shall be her child no longer, taking up a strangers child into her lap: so does
God threaten the Jews. Here Is the difference, we do it not seriously, but God
does.

This is then as if the Lord should say, You have chosen another husband; I
will choose another wife: You another God, even your Idols; I another people,
even the Gentiles: You have angered me, giving my honor to Idols; and I will
anger you, giving your prerogatives to the Gentiles.

God will forsake them, which forsake him. 2. Chro. 15.2. Iam. 4.8.

Use 1.
To be out of the Covenant, is to be of no account. The Gentiles in regard
thereof are said to be No people, and a foolish Nation. If a King have an Army
of many thou-sand dead men, or cripples, there is no reckoning to be made of
them: So, no reckoning of men unconverted; for they are dead in their sins,
very beasts without reason, till they be enlightened.

Ob. But are not many unregenerate men great Politicians?

A. Yes, they are: but in the account of God they are very fools and beasts.
The Gentiles had many learned Philosophers and wise men for government, before
their Calling; yet God says they were a foolish Nation. The beginning of
wisdom is the fear of God. Prou. 1.7.


Use 2.
There are many that despise and scoff the children of God for their
simplicity, and holy profession: let such remember, that even by those who^
they jest at, God will anger them, either in this life, or at the day of
Judgment. The time shall come, that thou shall gnash with thy teeth, to see
them saved, thy self damned, them carried to heaven, thy self haled to hell.
As thou have laughed them to scorn, so shall they laugh at thy destruction.

Use 3.
Live, England, according to thy knowledge, and bring forth fruit worthy of the
Gospel, which thou enioyest, and thou shall live long; else God will cast thee
off, and anger thee. Now we are the people of God, let us obey him, lest he
make us no people.

As a Master deals with a naughty servant, plucking his Livery over his ears,
and turning him out of doors: so God will take from us his Word and Sacraments,
our Liuerie and cognizance, if we reverently profit not by them, but despise
them. Now God honors us above many, nay, above any Nation. O what grief,
envy, anger, jealousy, must it needs breed, if ever the day should come, that
we should see the Turks, or other Infidels, possessors of these favors, and
our selves turned off! There would be no grief to this.

The Gentiles got the kingdom of the Jews, and all their wealth: but for all
this, they envied not them so much, as that God should be the God of the
Gentiles, and not of the Jews. The losing of their Temporalties, was not so
much unto them, as the losing of their Spiritualties. Thus he dealt with the
Jews, and thus will he deal with us, if we despise his Gospel, not believing
nor obeying it. But if we forsake not God, he will never forsake us: it can
never be showed by any observation, that God began first.

VERSE 20. But Esayas is very bold, and says; Esaias. 65.1.
I was found of them that sought me not: I was made manifest unto them that
asked not after me.


HEre he brings the Testimony of Esaias, a great Prophet, of the blood royal,
whom the Jews greatly honored. This Testimony in effect, is the same with that
of Moses: it only differs in words. In it are to be considered two things:
First, The manner of the Testimony. Secondly, The matter of it. The manner is,
that Esaias witnesses boldly, or audaciously; this being to be taken in the
better part, not as a fault. It was not safe to preach as Esaias did; for the
Jews were not patient to hear their downe-fall, and of the advancement of the
Gentiles: therefore he had need be of a bold spirit: and this boldness (like
enough) cost him his life. For by the commandment of Manasses, he was put to a
cruel death, being (as it is said) Hierom. li. 15 in Esai. in fine.
sawne asunder with a wooden saw.

Ministers are boldly to preach the truth. Paul requires so to be prayed for,
Ephe. 6.19. And so he enioynes Titus, 2.13.

Use 1.
Ministers may not fear the faces of men, lest God destroy them. They may not
be timorous, nor clawbacks: neither of these can be faithful. They must be men
of courage, to stand for God and the truth, against all opposites, though they
have John Baptists reward for their labor.

Art thou opposed in thy ministry? Tu contra audentior ito, be the more bold
with discretion and wisdom, and let not thy very life be dear unto thee, to
fulfill the ministration thou have received of the Lord. Acts 20.24.


Use. 2.
As it is our parts boldly to preach, so it is your parts meekly to hear, and
cheerfully to follow that which is taught. Iam. 1.21.


The matter of the Testimony is twofold. First, of the Calling of the Gentiles
in the rest of this verse. Secondly, the Reiection of the Jews, verse 21.

In these words are two things. First, a description of the Calling of the
Gentiles. Secondly, an amplification of it.

The description; I have been found and made manifest.

To find God, is to know him, to find favor with him, to have him, and enjoy
him as our portion, which they do which believe and repent.

I have been made manifest, that is, not declared in shadows and Ceremonies,
but plainly. These are set down in the time past, for the future, because it
was then as sure to be done, as it is now done.

The Amplification, is from the denial of the cause of finding. They sought
not: They asked not, or minded him not. For we read of the wisest of the
Gentiles (as Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, etc.) that they traveled and sought
into every corner of the world for Philosophy, and to talk with learned men:
but we never read that they came into Jury to seek God. And yet God was
found, though not of them in particular, yet afterward of the Gent^es in
general.

Or here is a description of the Gentiles. A Gentile is such a one, who seeks
not after God. This is our glass; for we are Gentiles.

Our conversion and calling, is not from our own wisdom, merit, labor, but
from the mercy of God. 2. Tim. 1.9. Iam. 1.18.

Use 1.
We are well taught in our Liturgy to confess, that we have gone astray like
lost sheep. Christ is compared to a Shepherd, we to lost sheep: He to a woman
having lost her groat; we to the lost groat. The groat seeks not the woman,
nor the sheep the Shepherd: so nor we Christ; its he man, nor the sheep the
Shepherd: so nor we Christ; its he that seeks us, or we must be lost for
ever. Luke 15.


Abraham dwelt in Vr of the Chaldees, and was (as is probably gathered) an
Idolater, and had so been to his dying day, if God had not called him. We are
described to be as a child cast out and forsaken. Ezech. 16.
Were thou seeking God when thou were called? No, thou were seeking another,
nay a contrary thing. What was Paul doing when he was called? was he seeking
Christ? Yea that he was, but to persecute him in his Saints, not to believe in
him. So if thou well remembrest thy self, were thou following thy own lusts,
when God called thee, having neither fore cast to seek, nor a heart to be
willing to be found when God sought thee, unless God had bowed and inclined
it. Even as Adam ran from God, when he came to seek him, and was feign to
dragge him from behind the bushes: So, if God had not dealt with thee in like
manner, thou had been a lost sheep even to this day: Praise God for finding
thee out.

Use 2.
A Heathen is one that seeks not after God; then have we swarms of heathens
among us: for, though many be baptized, and come to our Assemblies; yet their
hearts seek not God, but the fulfilling of their own abominable desires. Such
with men may be in the account of Christians; but in the day of separation, God
will range then among the number of Heathens. A Convert is such a one to whom
God has manifested himself, giving him Faith and Repentance; and such are
happy.

Q. How is God to be found?

Use 3.
A. Three things are to be observed for the finding of God. 1. The time. 2. The
place. 3. The manner.

For the time, we must seek God first: Mat. 6.33.
First seek the Kingdom of God. First our profit and pleasure, and then God,
is no good Method. Many make the seeking of God an Aftercare, a work of their
Age. Its a hundred to one, that he which seeks the Devil in his best age,
shall never find God in his worst age; when the days come, in which he shall
say that he has no pleasure in them. Give the first of thy time, and of every
day to God, or else thou may despair to find him in the rest of thy time and
day. Seek God early.

The place. God is every where, but not every where to be found ordinarily. The
ordinary place is the Congregation of his Saints, where his name is called
upon, and his Word preached, for there he has promised his presence. Mat.
18.20. Psalm. 105.4.
Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his strength evermore. The meetings of
the Saints are called the face of God, because there he manifests himself,
dispensing his favors and blessings. Where should we seek for a man but at
his house? The Church is the house of the living God. 1. Tim. 3.15.
Seek him there, for at Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling at Sion. The
Church is directed for the finding of Christ, to get her forth by the footsteps
of the flock, Cant. 1.7.
toward the Tents of the Shepherds, that is, to resort with the people of God,
to the hearing of the Word.

When then shall our Recusants find God, with such as will not vouchsafe to
step over their Threshold to hear his Word? There is a time when they shall
find him, but to their cost, as a Judge to punish them for their contempt.

The manner: In holiness: not in hypocrisy and profaneness. Who (says
David) Psalm. 15.
shall ascend into Gods hill, and stand before him? Even he that has clean
hands, and a pure heart, etc. This is the generation of them that seek him;
that seek thy face, O God of Jacob. Psalm. 24.6.
The pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5.8.
and without holiness none shall see him. Heb. 12.14.
Away therefore with Drunkenness, Pride, Uncleanness, and beast-like living.
This generation shall not find God. He blesses them who seek him in
goodness.

Use 4.
Have thou found GOD, when thou soughtest him not? Seek him then, and thou
shall more find him. The heart of them shall rejoice which seek him, much
more the heart of them which find him. Psalm. 105.3.


Examine then thy heart, whether thou can find God there: Thou shall know
his presence, by thy joy, thy care, thy fear.

1. Art thou more glad of Faith and Repentance, then of all the world? Of
mercy showed to thy Conscience, then if thou were an Emperor? Is thy desire to
God, and his Word, above all pleasures? God is in thy heart, or else there
could not be such joy.

2. Have thou a care to keep God, in a godly conversation? Thou have him. He
that has a Treasure, has a care to keep it: and that is not a man's, treasure
which he casts at his heels.

3. Art thou afraid to lose GOD, or to do any thing to grieve him? Art thou
humbled, if thou feel any absence, or emptiness of his Grace? and art thou
stirred up with the Church in the Canticles to seek him whom thy soul
loves? Thou have a good heart: and thy God dwells in thee.

VERSE 21. But to Israel he says, Esaias. 65.2.
All day long I have stretched out my hands to a disobedient and gainesaying
people.


IN this verse is the other part of the Testimony of Esaias, concerning the
reiection of the Jews, which is set down and amplified.

It is set down in these words, A disobedient and gainsaying people, that is,
a rejected people, or a people cast off: The cause being put for the effect.

The amplification is from the cause of the contrary, viz. the love and goodness
of GOD calling them, which should have bred in them no such effect. This
calling is set forth: First, by a similitude; I have stretched out my hands.
Secondly, by the time: All day long.

All day long. Some apply this to the time of Christ's crucifying, and his
spreading out his hands there. Some to the time of his teaching. Some to the
time of the Law and the Prophets: but it is best to be understood of all the
time from their first calling to their dissipation. The whole time of Grace, is
called the day of Salvation. Vniuersum retro. tempus quod praeterierat. Chrysostom.


I have stretched out my hands: As the Hen clockes her Chickens to her, puts
forth her wings, and spreads her feathers to cherish them with her warmth: or
as a Mother calls her child, and holds forth her arms to embrace it in tender
affection: so did God deal with the Jews, seeking to gather them into the
bosom of his love.

Unto a disobedient and gainesaying people. The word signifies such a one, as
will not be persuaded, but is incorrigible. Not every disobedience is here
meant, but when neither fair means, nor foul, will bring us to a better
course.

Gainesaying: This is a farther Rise of sin; signifying not only such a one
as refuses to obey, but being reproved, thwarteth, mocketh and persecuteth
their reprouers. Of this Steven accused the Jews. Act. 7.51.
Esaias has but one word for both these, but such is the force of it, that both
these will scarcely express it. Socer.
It is attributed to the stubborn son that was to be stoned to death. Deuteronomy.
21.18.
Me thinks David makes a Commentary of it in the 78. Psalm. The Jews are
there called a rebellious generation, in Esays word. Dor. Socer.
What a one is that? A generation (as it follows) that set not their heart
aright, whose spirit was not faithful to God, that kept not the Covenant of
God; that he refused to walk in his Law, that forgate his works, that tempted
God, that spoke against God, etc. Such were the Israelites, as Esaias says, that
provoked him to his face.

Disobedience joined with contradiction and persecution of Gods Messengers, was
the cause of the reiection of the Jews, 2. Chro. 36.16. Mat. 23.37. Mat. 21.

Use 1.
If we be damned, the cause is in our selves, refusing the salvation which God
offers to us. To whom has not God offered mercy? What drunkard or wicked
person is there among us, to whom God has not sent his Ministers, or some
godly man or other, to tell him that if he repent not, he shall be damned?

Use 2.
Gods Patience is infinite. As a Nurse bears with her crying froward Child: so
did God bear with the Jews, even many hundred years, and did not cast them
off, though they many thousand times deserved it. Had not the Lord been God,
he could not have holden his hands off them, they were so rebellious. This
patience God uses toward us: by this we are saved: for if God has not long
waited for us, we had been ere this swept away by his fearful judgments, as
the doung of the earth. Therefore let us be thankful.

Use 3.
Is God so patient toward Rebels? O how merciful and loving will he be to
them which with contrite hearts seek unto him!

Use 4.
The Ministry of the Word, is the stretching forth of Gods arms: when thou
resortest unto it, thou runnest into the arms, into the very bosom of God.

Use 5.
Rebels, and gainesayers, are in continual danger to be rejected of God: they
are even at the pits brinke. Search your bosoms whether you be such, or no. If
thou mockest and contemnest admonitions, stubbornly walking on in wickedness,
thou art such a one. Many when they hear of Predestination, of the necessity
of preaching, of purity of life, etc. they cavil, mock, and blaspheme. Is it
not equal that such profane mouths should be stopped? Such a profane heart
punished? Such contempt revenged? Let us obey in all holy submission, lest the
hand that is stretched forth to receive us, be lifted up to strike us, and to
throw us to hell.

CHAP. XI.
VERSE. 1. I say then, Has God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am
an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.


IN this chapter the Apostle remoues the third maine objection: which follows
upon these things delivered before: For if Justification be by faith in Christ,
on whom the Jews believe not, and their righteousness avails nothing, but for
all that, they are accounted rebels and traitors, and the Gentiles brought in
because of their faith; then God has cast away his people: But he will never
cast away his people: Therefore, etc.

To this objection Paul answers in this Chapter; showing that the reiection of
the Jews is neither total nor final; and therefore God still is most
constant, though he cast away and punish such unbelieving and disobedient
rebels.

The drift of this passage, is to comfort the believing Jews, and to admonish
the Gentiles, who (though Christians) yet insulted over the Jews, and hated
them; so that among us, even at this day, the name of a Jew is grown into a
proverb, to note one that is hated. Now that the Gentiles might not be proud
of their standing, nor the Jews utterly despair; and that they might
entertain a more charitable opinion each of other, Paul shows that the
reiection of the Jews is not of every mothers son, nor for ever; but as some
of them in all ages of the Church have been converted, so before the end of the
world the thousands of Israel shall be gathered.

The wrath of God lies not upon all, neither shall it always on the multitude
of them; but euem the multitude before the end, shall come thick and threefold
unto Christ, whom they now blaspheme and persecute: And in the midst of these
things he digresseth into a special admonition to the Gentiles to be humble.

In this Chapter are two parts. First, the principal matter, to ver. 33.
Secondly, the conclusion, ver. 33. and so to the end of the Chapter.

The principal matter is twofold: First, that the reiection of the Jews is
not total, to verse 11. Secondly, nor final, in the rest of the verses.

The first part is handled by way of disputation: Paul enters into the
schools, propounds his position. His adversary appears and opposes. Paul
takes his argument, answers it, and plainly makes good his answer by Scripture.

The position is, that Moses and Esaias have fore-prophecied the reiection of the
Jews, as in the tenth Chap. ver. 19.20.21.

The Repliers argument (suppose a Jew) is this: If they be so to be understood,
then God has cast away his people. But the last is false, therefore the first.

This argument is in these words, I demand then, Has God cast away his
people? propounded by way of question.

Paul's answer to the question, is in all the rest of the words, to verse 11.
First, by a strong negation. Secondly, by a special instance. Thirdly, by an
accurate distinction. Fourthly, by an elegant similitude. Fifthly, by a grave
determination, fortified by evident Scriptures, which he always has in a
readiness as a sacred anchor to stay us from being carried about with every
wind or wave of doctrine.

The two first parts of this answer are in the first verse. The first is in the
negation, in these words, God forbid. Paul denies with indignation and
defiance; as if he should say: Far be it from me to teach that God should
cast away his people wholly; or that all the Jews, or that a Jew, because a
Jew, should be rejected of God.

All the Jews are not cast away from the hope of salvation, though their
Temple be ruintaed, their sacrifices ceased, their land in the hands of
Infidels, and their multitude dispersed. For Peter and Paul converted many: and
Peter and James principally wrote their Epistles to believing Jews dispersed,
and some are still converted, Tremellius.
as one of late years has taken great pains in helping to translate the
Bible.

Use 1.
In Gods cause Paul cannot forbear, but must needs earnestly tell cauillers of
it to their faces; do thou likewise, but in the spirit and wisdom of Paul.

Use 2.
Paul before had shamed the Jews, put them to silence, and given them a sore
blow, telling them of their stubburnnesse and disobedience, and of their
casting off: he does not always harp upon that string, nor trample upon them
being down, but now like a wise teacher he comfort them. He leaves not the
matter so, but declares that (nevertheless) there is a door of mercy open to
all of them that will believe: as if he should say: It is true, God is angry
with the Jews, and has cast them away, but let none despair; for so many as
repent, ceassing to blaspheme Christ, and shall believe in him, shall be saved.
This course of Paul, must be a pattern for Ministers: they must preach
judgments, and denounce the curse against sinners, 2. Cor. 13 10.
but they must not leave men under the curse to despair; for God has not
appointed us to destroy men, but when we have humbled them and reproved them,
we are to set open the gate of mercy upon their repentance, by preaching the
glad tidings of the Gospel. This is the special duty of our office.

To preach always the curse and damnation, is a butcherly kind of preaching:
otherwise does the butcher consider the sheep, otherwise the shepherd: the
butcher to kill it, the shepherd to keep and save it. Now we are shepherds.
The Law must be preached, but principally the Gospel. Omne tulit punctum qui
miscuit, etc. He which wisely mingleth these two, is the best preacher.

VERSE 2. For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of
Benjamin.


THis is the second part of Paul's answer, by a special instance of himself.
God has not cast away the Jews wholly: not every individual; for, says,
Paul, I my self am a Jew, and I am not rejected, but am assured that I am the
child of God through faith in Christ. Therefore the reiection of the Jews is
not total. God casts away no Jews but rebels, and receives no Gentiles but
believers, If all are cast away, then I: But not I: Therefore not all.

An Israelite: that is, a Jew: but he uses the term Israelite, because more
ancient and more honorable, the name Jew at that time being very odious.

Of the seed of Abraham; because many became Proselites, and so were numbered
with the Jews, which were not so borne.

Of the tribe of Benjamin: this is added because he might have been of the seed
of Abraham by Ismael. Hereby therefore he shows that he came of the promised
and blessed seed, and was of no obscure, but of one of the most worthy Tribes.
Something is here to be supplied, which must necessarily be understood: as But
I am not cast away, but elect, or such like.

Paul is first a Jew, secondly an elect, thirdly and knows it. A Jew, 2. Cor.
11.22. Phil. 3.5. Act. 22.2. Elect, this is manifest by his conversion, Act. 9.
he was received to mercy, 1. Tim. 1.16. he knew he was elect^; else his
arguments from himself were of no force. Also his confident writing of
himself, shows it, Romans 8.2. Gal. 2.20. Rom 8.38. 2. Tim. 1.12. and 4 7,8,17.

Use 1.
Paul was sure of his estate, and knew it; so may all: for we have the same
Spirit and faith, though not in the same measure. The Papists say, it is
presumption to say we are sure, (not what we are) but that we shall so
continue: but all are sure also to persevere. The excellent things which God
has prepared for them that love him, the Spirit reueales unto us. And we have
received the Spirit of God, that we might know the things which are given us of
God. 1. Cor. 2.10. 1. Cor. 2.12.
And perseverance is one of those things: therefore we may be sure to persevere.

Ob. But Paul knew it by special extraordinary revelation.

Ans. I deny it: let them show that. He had his assurance no other way then
all may have it; namely by his faith and obedience. I live, says Paul (in
assurance of salvation) by faith, Gal. 2.20. And henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness. How know you that Paul? I have fought (says
he) a good fight of faith, etc. 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
By which way we also know it, and therefore it follows, And not for me
only, but for them that love the appearance of Christ.

Indeed I marvel not, that the Papists teach, we cannot be sure, when they
rely upon Traditions as well as Scriptures, and hold all are justified morally
by inherent righteousness: and therefore because of the mutabilitie of our
wills, their assurance must needs be but moral, which may be otherwise. Their
doctrine is most uncomfortable. He that calls upon God, shall be saved; but
he that prays doubting, obtains nothing. The Papists pray for salvation,
and doubt: how then can they have it? I am. 1.6.7. by which place it manifestly
appears, that a doubting faith is not a saving faith. We read often in the
Psalms, Blessed are they which trust in the Lord; never, Blessed are they
which doubt.

No marvel though many also among us cavil at this doctrine: alas, they
speak out of their own feeling. In regard of their naughty living they have
just cause to doubt, and therefore they think none can be sure. To live
wickedly, and to have a profane heart, contemning all goodness, makes men
sure indeed, but of damnation: but he which believes and repents, is as sure
even now of salvation, as if even now hewere reigning with Christ in heaven.

Use 2.
When we believe and repent, we are perfectly reconciled to God: who retains
not the least memory of our iniquities. Of this Paul is an example.

Quest. What was Paul before his conversion?

Answ. Let himself tell you. I was says Paul, a blasphemer, a persecutor, an
oppresser, imprisoning the Saints: and when they were put to death I gave
sentence. I punished them in all the Synagogues, compelling them to blaspheme,
and being more mad persecuted them to strange Cities etc. 1. Tim. 1.13. Act.
22.4.5. Act. 26.10.11.


Such a notorious wretch was Paul, and yet behold the infinite goodness of our
God; even Paul is received to grace: and not only to grace to be pardoned and
converted, but presently he is advanced to the highest dignity in the Church:
of a persecuter made an Apostle. God says not to him: Well Paul, I will
receive thee to favor, but look for no great preferment or privilege: but he
aduanceth him, as though from his cradle he had crept on hands and knees to
please him.

O the sweet mercy of our God, who when he receives sinners, never comes in
within odd items and back reckonings, but forgiueth and forgets our sins
as if they never had been done; nay uses us as if we had been the best children
that could be. So when the prodigal child returns to himself and to his
father, does his father say, Ah sir have you spent all. etc. Well I am
content to receive you, but as long as I live I Will think on you? No, no. But he
falls on his neck, and weeps for joy, Luc. 15.
with O my son, O this my son was lost but now is found, was dead, but now
is aline. Bring out the best raiment, the shoes, the ring, theiewells, kill the
fat calfe, make a feast, send for music that we may rejoice. All is fogotten.
Have thou been a drunkard, a blasphemer, an unclean person etc. If thou
repentest and turnest to God, even so will he use thee. He will never vpbraid
thee with what thou have been; he will remember thy sins no more. Heb. 8.12.


Paul in this is an example to all sinners, propounded by God himself to us,
1. Tim. 1.16.
that from the experience of his dealing with him, all might be ambitious of
his favor, and be excited to come unto him.

If a Surgeon should come among us and undertaking to cure some desperately
diseased person, should make him fish whole (as we say) and as sound as ever he
was, and that freely: Consule Agust; sermon. 9. et 10. de veibis Apost et Ansel^m
in loc. Tim.
this would allure others to resort to him for the recovery of their pains; or
as a Physician, desiring to get a fame, would look out some person even at
deaths door and cure him, that by such experiment, be might get a name, and
come into practice: So Christ desires fame and glory, he would have all our
custom; he would all sick consciences should come unto him for cure: and for
this purpose he takes Paul, in the eye of man sick of incurable desease, he
physickes him, heales him and highly preferres him, receiving nothing, but
giving all good things to his patients. for he seeks nothing but glory.

Then consider; have thou any old can kerd soar about thee? Art thou a soul
leaper, or have thou any or many loath some diseases? Yea thou have. And as the
woman in the gospel, could not be cured by any Physician, though she had spent
her whole estate that way, so no men nor Angels can cure thee: Its only
Christ can do it: and he is most gentle to all that come to him, freely
healing them, and advancing them to glory. Why then do thou defer to come
unto him for saving health? Why do thou rather choose to perish and rot in
thy sins? He that has received Paul and Mary Magdalene to mercy, will not
reject thee if thou repentest.

VERSE. 2. God has not cast away his people which he foreknew.


Here is the third part of Paul's answer which is an accurat distinction. The
Jews are cast away, and are the people of God: and yet Paul said verse 1. God
forbid that God should cast away his people. How can these things agree?
Therefore Paul distinguishes of this term (his people) which is taken two
ways: ae quiuocally, in a large sense; and univocally, in a more restrained
sense: people which are not fore-knowne, and people which are fore-knowne: that
is not elect, and elect. The first God casts away: the second he never will
cast away.

This then is Paul's meaning. Whosoever are borne in the Church, outwardly
submitting themselves to the word and sacraments, are in a general sense the
people of God; of whom some only seem to believe, but do not: these God
casts away. Others do truly believe, these God never casts away. Though the
Jews in regard of the outward things of the covenant, were counted the people
of God, yet he acknowledges not those which believe not; neither purposes to
save them. A Jew not believing is as far from salvation (in regard of having
it) as an Infidel.

Which he foreknew: There is a knowledge attributed to God, whereby he knows
all things, even such things which never shall be. This is called naked
knowledge, which is order of nature, though not of time, is before the decree:
this is not here meant, for thus he knows the Reprobates as well as the Elect.

There is a knowledge also which is joined with his decree, and that either
going before it, or following it. Things are from the first: the second is from
things. The first is the of things, the second is the effect. Of the second is
to be understood the saying; That the praescience of God causes not things to
be: for in this foreknowledge, things are, and therefore they are foreseen. I
know the sun will rise; not because I know it does the sun rise, but
contrarily. As our remembrance of things past, is not the cause that they are
past: so Gods foreknowledg of things to come in this second sense is not the
cause that they shall come. This is nor here meant.

The foreknowledge joined with the decree, but going before it, Act. 2.23.
is the cause of things: and this is either largely taken, for the providence:
by which foreknowledg Christ was delivered or more narrowly forelection; and so
foreknowledge is here to be understood; and therefore Saint Austine read it,
whom he predestined, and so Anselme expounds it: so does the word implye, by
an Hebraisme, signifiing knowledge with love and care; God knows his (says
Paul) and our Savior to the wicked, I know you not. He knows them well
enough, but not so as to open Heaven gates for them.

Whom he foreknew. The relative is causally put here, and the argument from
the efficient cause.

Quest. But how can they be said to be the people of God whom he casts away?

Answ. Reprobates in regard of their being borne in the pale of the Church, and
their fellowship with the children of God in the outward things of the
covenant, have this denomination, the people of God. Even as the chafe, while
it is growing in the field, is raind upon, fenced in, and kept as well as the
corn, and all is called corn.

Those that are forknowne, that is, elected, shall never be cast away Mat:
24:24. Reu: 8:33. 2. Tim: 2:19.

Paul showed that the Jews are rejected, and then he says that not those
which are foreknowne threatenings of Judgment though in regard of
thepromulgation and notice taking belong to the whole Church: yet in regard of
execution, they are to be understood only of rebels. As promises are to be
restrained to believers so threatenings to unbelievers.

Is a judgment threatened? what art? An unbeliever? a rebel? that's thy part:
take it to thee. But if thou repentest, its notment to thee. Indeed we deserve
to hear and have nothing but the curse. But God frees them which repent for
his son Jesus Christ

Use.
An elect can never be turned or turn reprobate. None of the elected number
can perish or be deminished, because God cannot be deceived. For when he
decreed to save them, he foresaw all impediments, as our sins; our frailty;
the power of ill example, company; the malice and policy of satan; which not
withstanding he determined and decreed to save us. Therefore God must fail if
we fail in salvation. This is worth all the world; the ground of our comfort,
which cheareth in all crosses. Thy house is burnt over thy head; thy freindes
turned foes. Comfort thy self: Gods love can never fail toward thee, satan
has tempted thee, and foiled thee, by some particular sin and now he persuades
thee that thou shall be dan^ed; surely so thou have deserved. But if thou be
foreknowne, God will not finally forsake thee, but give thee repentance that
thou may be saved. Hence note that David, Peter, etc though committing
greeuious sins yet perished not.

Divide an elect from the decree of God, he may be damned. In sensu diuiso non
in sensu composi. Aquin. sum. 1. p. q. 23. artic. 3. Math. 4.
But considering the decree he cannot. Many, as the spider gather poison from
this, arguing thus: If I be foreknowne, God will not cast me away; therefore
I Will live as I list: this is the devils logic. So says he to Christ: If thou
be the son of God cast thy self down, God will never suffer thee to perish.
God teaches us not so to conclude, but contrarily. Neither did ever any godly
man so collect. No man that has his wits will trust his body on these terms,
and yet there are ten thousand such fools in the world that thus hazard their
souls. Let profaine beasts say what they will: do thou say thus: God has
elected me to salvation by faith and repentance: therefore I will endeavor to
repent and believe, that so I may be saved according to his election.

Use 2.
Those which are elect shall never be cast away: examine whether thou be elect
or no: there is a judgment hereof to be gathered out of our own hearts: a man's
own conscience will tell him; in all that are elect and of years of
discretion, there are two infallibles, marks and effects of election. Faith
and repentance. The Apostle says elsewhere that, 2. Tim. 2,19.
the Lord knows who are his, yea God knows, but how shall we know? Even
thus: they which call on the name of the Lord, there is faith: and which depart
from iniquity, there is repentance. These are as a ticket whereby we pass
from earth to heaven; he that can show these he is sure to pass for an elect.

Has God given thee a new heart? Does he give thee power to believe? Does he
renew his image in thee? etc. If thou were not an elect, God would never bestow
this cost on thee. As a man bestows not lace and trimming on a filthy ragge,
but throws it on the dunghill; or as a man rubs and sets up a sound vessel,
but he beats a pieces for the fire one that is rotten; so God will not bestow
such cost on reprobates, as to work their hearts to believe and repent, but
will suffer them to rot in their sins, for they are but for hell fire, and
there they will serve well enough. Thou art careful to make thy land sure, but
Saint Peter bids thee to make sure thy election. 2 Pet. 1.10.


Ob. I have examined my self, and I find not these notes of my election, what
would you advise me to do?

Answ. I will not bid thee despair. But this I say. O that thou could
repent, and that thou would submit thy self to the ministry of the word.
How possible then might it be that thou might be saved? Which word, while
some neglect and despise, they riuet themselves in their sins to damnation.
Suppose a man loose a ring by the way, and sends two of his servants to seek
it. One of them lights a candle, stoopes to the ground and searches every
step where his Master went: the other seeks not at all, but goes to the
alehouse and spends his time there, which of the two is most likely to find the
ring? He which takes such pains using the means to find it: so verily he
which diligently attends upon the word, is in a fair possibility to attain
says and repentance, and by them salvation, when he that is negligent and
contemnes the means is sure to be damned.

Use 3.
The Jews though in regard of outward perogatiues the people of God, yet for
their infidelity are cast off: look then to thy faith: though thou be
baptized and live and dyest in the Church, yet thou may be damned. Its a
lamentable thing to see one who has had the reputation of an honest man, to
stand forth among thieves, and murderers, and witches at the Assizes: how much
more to see men to have borne the honorable name of Christians, to be among
the devils at the day of judgment. How will this make the devils to blaspheme,
when such shall be turned over to them to be tormented?

If thou live profanely, thou had as good have been an infidel as a
Christian, nay it may be better, as its a further degree of misery to starve in
the midst, then in the want of means. Indeed what are a great many of us but
infidels in practice. What can an infidel do worse, then forswear, lie,
slander, steal, murder, be unclean, be drunk, despise religion etc. This is
the fashion of many; they have the very manners of infidels.

VERSE 2. Wot you not what the scripture says of Elias? How be makes
intercession to GOD against Israel, saying.

3 Lord they have killed thy prophets, and dug down thine Alters, and I am
left alone, and they seek my life.

4 But what says the answer of God unto him. I have reserved to my self 7000
men who have not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal.


NOw follows the fourth part of Paul's answer, taken from an instance of the
like case in the days of Elias: he brings a book case for it. In the days of
Elias the ten Tribes did generally revolt from God, and followed Ieroboams
Idols, so as in the prophets eye, as far as he could see, God had quite
forsaken them as they had forsaken him. Yet 7000 remained in those desperate
times; so also now though ^d has deservedly cast off the Jewish nation, yet
there are 7000 that belong unto him, and by consequence their reiection is not
total.

In this instance are two things. 1. a preface. 2. The example instanced.


First of the preface, which is in these words. Wot you not what the scripture
says of Elias? Being a rhetorical communication wherein Paul conuinceth them
by their own knowledge.

Wot you not what the Scripture says of Elias? Or in Elias, that is in the
story of Elias, or in the book of Elias; for some have holden that Elias wrote
that book of the Kings, as if he should say, you cannot I am sure but remember
Elias his story very well; you are not, or should not be ignorant of it.

Its very profitable to be acquainted with the histories of the Bible, and to
make use of them. Our Savior and Paul approve, his by their practice: Mat:
12.3.5. 1. Cor 10.1 etc. Have you not read says Christ, do you not know says
Paul. So also: practiced, James, Peter, Jude, John, as in their Epistles
appears.

Use.
We must study stories: for beside the pleasantness of such study, it is
exceeding profitable, being pictures or glasses wherein we may discern both
what is good and bad, and what we may expect as a reward either of our vices
or virtues.

There was never any man of note for wisdom who was a staunger in story. And
indeed state policy in a great part consists in observation of former
histories: Eccles. 1.
for there is no new thing under the sun. The counsel of the ancient for
their long experience is of great reckoning: but history is of more, in as
much as diuturnitie of time comprehends more then the length of one man's age.
That famous Alphonsus King of Arragon, was wont to say that the dead were to be
consulted with all, meaning the writings and examples of such who are in
ancient story commended unto us, which was the way whereby Zeno the wise
Philosopher obtained so great reputation of worthiness: Ioh. Jacob. Beur.
Saccing, in Synop. histor.
This study is profitable to Magistrates for government, to Ministers for
exhortation, to all for ordering their lives with befitting moderation. Be then
conversant diligently in story, specially of the Church contained in the Bible
and ecclesiastical writers. And remember that the life of story is use and
application for godliness, otherwise I may say of knowledge, as Solomon of
Riches, I have seen knowledge, served to the hurt of the owner.

The example of Abraham, Moses, David etc. are as stars in whose light if we
walk we shall through faith and patience inherit the promises. On the
otherside, Cain, Sodom, Judas, are as warning-peeces to avoid their sins, as
Lots wife was for this end turned into a pillar of salt to season after-commers
by her example.

Thou see thieves and murderers yearly come to open punishment and shame.
Beware thou also of the revenging hand of God: thou hear of unclean persons
and drunkards, how some fail into beggary, some into lothesome diseases some
into sudden death in the midst of their cups, most into hardness of heart.
Me thinks it should affright the drunkard when he goes out of his doors to
the alehouse, to remember that some have so gone, who never have returned home
again. The old poisonous viper, is at length taken and made into treacle to be
a preservative against poison. So God will take thee, thou viper, thou
abominable sinner, and make treacle of thee, that because thou will not profit
by the example of others, others may profit themselves by thy example. This is
that which God laid to Ierusalems charge by the Prophet She profits not by
Sodomes example: Ezech. 16.56.
this also is charged upon Balshazzar, who was punished the more, and the
sooner, because he profited not by that domestical and pregnant example of
Gods judgment on his grandfather Nabuchadnezzar: Dan. 5.18.
sin is not made less by tract of time but greater; because in such
continuance there are extant the more examples of Gods judgments against
sinners.

VERSE. 2. How he makes intercession to God against Israel saying.


THe example it self is in these words, and so to the end of the 6 verse. In
which are two things. First The proposition. ver. 2.3.4. Secondly the Reddition
or Application. ver. 5.6.

The proposition, has two things. First the complaint of Elias: ver. 2.3.
Secondly the answer of God. ver. 4.

The Complaint is set down two ways. First generally ver. 2 Secondly more
particularly. ve. 3. In the general are 4. things

First the person complaining. Which is Elias: a most famous prophet, and in
the account of the Jews next to Moses; of whom at this day they make such
reckoning, that at circumcision they set two chaires: the fairest of which is
empty, reserved for Elias, who they say much rauoreth that action.

Secondly. The person against whom Elias complains: that is the ten Tribes to
whom principally he was a Prophet.

Thirdly, the word which is used to express this complaining, by some
translated conferreth or talks with God, here makes intercession against;
howsoever, the meaning is, he complains: for directly he did not pray that
they might be plagued, but accuses them of their stubburnesse and rebellion.

Fourthly, the manner or zeal of this complaint, noted in this word, How, that
is, with what zeal, which zeal we shall know if we take a brief survey of
the noble story of Elias, beginning at the 17. Chapter of the first book of
Kings. Gryneus.


Elias was a notable Prophet raised up by God in the days of Ahab and Iesabel,
for the reforming of the Church of the ten Tribes. God reueales to him, that it
should not rain in that country for the space of three years and six
months. Elias prophecieth this to Ahab, and it falls out accordingly, whose
tongue for this was called by some, The bridle of heaven.

When he had thus prophesied, he is appointed by God to go to the river
Cherith, where the Ravens feed him, and thence to Sarepta, where he is
miraculously sustained at a widows house, whose son he raises up to life,
which the Jews hold to be Jonas the Prophet. In the third year he is bid to
show himself to Ahab, and so he did: whom he advises for remedy of present
troubles to summon a parliament. Hieronim.
The King, his Nobles and Commons are assembled to mount Carmel. Elias puts up
a bill, whether the Lord or Baal be God. The Parliament concludes nothing.
Eliah shows that the truth may be found by sacrifice. The Priests of Baal are
willed to prepare a sacrifice, but to bring no fire. Elias the Prophet of the
Lord does likewise: and it is agreed, that the God which answers by fire, is
the true God. Eliahs sacrifice is consumed with fire from heaven. Upon this it
is concluded, The Lord is God, The Lord is God. This is the voice of the whole
house. Then Eliah causes the Priests of Baal and of the groves to be slain;
and in approbation of this, and for the further confirmation of religion, the
Lord sends a desired rain.

Now Elias thinks all is well and sure for religion. But Iesabel sends him
word, and vowed it by her gods, that she would make the life of Eliah like one
of the Priests whom he had slain. Upon this Eliah flies into the wilderness
for safety, and considering that all he had done, had such ill success,
grows into a vehement passion, and in some impatience desires to die. God
ministers to him by an Angel, which feeds him, and sends him to Horeb: he
goes for more safety, and to meet with the Lord. There passes by him a
mighty wind, an earthquake, and fire (representations of Eliahs zeal:) But
God was not in them. Then comes a still voice (to teach Eliah patience) saying,
What do thou here Eliah? Eliah answered, Lord, I have been jealous for the
Lord of hoasts; complaining according to the words here used by Paul, verse 3.

In this story it appears that Eliah was a man subject to infirmities, as
other men are, being ouerheate in his passion, his life being in danger by
Iesabel, yet his zeal in regard of the cause of it, is exceeding commendable,
and for our imitation.

We are to be zealous for the Lord. So was Elias, Moses, Samuel, David, as
appears in their stories.

Use.
When thou see God dishonored and religion trodden under foot, be not
senseless. Would it not move a man to see altars thrown down, prophets
killed, miracles take no effect, as in Eliahs time? James 5.^7.
Or now, to see the Sabbath profaned, the preaching of the Gospel contemned,
and many (notwithstanding daily admonitions) to run out some to drunkenness,
some to whoredom, some to pride, etc? Surely we want an Eliah. Whosoever has
but a dram of his spirit, these things to him are as a dagger at his heart.
Meekness in our own causes, but in Gods, zeal and earnestness become us.
Yet be not over zealous: few I confess are sick of this disease; ^et Elias
was, and we may be also: for we are more sure we have his passions then his
grace. Excess of zeal is intolerable: yea it has been found less dangerous
to the Church, when men have come short of the due proportion of zeal, then
when they have exceeded. Auda Bishop in Persia, in an excess of zeal throwing
down a Temple of the Pagans, was the cause that the King thereby insensed,
threw down all the Temples of the Christians. Theod. lib. 5.


There are two things whereby we may discern whether our zeal exceed due
limits and bounds or no: 1 If thou make thy self a party, so much is it in
the wrong. Elias was the more hot, because his own life was in danger: So if
there be a disordered person who has provoked us, then we cry its pity but
he should be presented, indicted, punished. But when under a color of zeal
against sin, we revenge our own wrongs; its more passion then zeal.

Secondly. Zeal should consume the faults not the persons of offenders, if
thine feeds on the persons not on the faults, its naught. Quench it against the
person, inflame it against the fault. James and John would have had the wicked
Samaritans by and by to be consumed with fire from heaven: but they are
reproved by our Savior. Luc. 9.53.
And here Elias was somewhat faulty: coming short of Moses and Samuel, who
made intercession for, not against their people.

Eliah makes intercession against his people: Moses and Samuel for them. These
rather then Eliah, are to be imitated of Ministers.

Its a lamentable thing to see a father wringing of his hands over his child
and complaining of his stubbornness, wishing he had never been borne. So it is
very greeuious to hear an Eliah complain to God of the stubbornness of his
people. We are your fathers: so live you, that we may have no cause to sue
against you, either in the court of heaven or earth, but rather to rejoice
oueryou, which we shall do with much cheerefullnes praying for you if you
forsake your sins, and turn unto God, obeying his word. If we in our prayers
have cause to complain of you, it will be unprofitable to you: for what
followed Eliah his complaint? The Lord speaks to him as if he should say:
Eliah I see thou art in a mood; well: go annoint Hazael King of Aram, Iehu
King of Israel, and Elisha Prophet in thy room: him that scapeth the sword of
Hazaell shall Iehu slay, and him that escapes Iehu, shall Elisha slay. Of such
force are the complaints of the Prophets and Ministers of God against their
stubborn people, as also are their prayers effectual, on the behalf of such
as believe and obey. Now I beseech you, presently to reform your lives, that
we may mutually join together to bless God, you for us, and we for you, that
we may be all crowned together at the coming of Christ.

VERSE 3. Lord they have killed thy Prophets, and dug down thine Altars;
and I am left alone, and they seek my life.


IN these words is set down the complaint of Eliah more particularly: in which
are two things. First, the person to whom he complains, Lord. Secondly, the
matter of the complaint, which is twofold. First, The killing of the Prophets.
Secondly, The digging down of Altars. Both these aggrauated from the miserable
estate of Eliah, which appeared two ways, first, He is left alone, (in his
own opinion) secondly, They seek his life also.

They: not only bellua multorum capitum, the vulgar: but Ahab, Iesabel,
Nobles, Commons and all, from the highest to the lowest: Especially Iesabel, a
devilish and wicked woman, who added to the Idolatry of the Israelites the
abomination of the Sydonians, and whose hatred against true religion was so
great, that it came into a proverb, such being called Iesabels. Apoc. 2.


Thy Prophets. Thy is added for more detestation of the fact. The Ambassadors
of a mean Prince are not to be wronged; but they have killed Thy Prophets.

Thine Altars. An Altar was a building or Instrument, of earth, stone, or other
stuff, reared up for the offering of Sacrifices.

Quest. But what Altars means he? God commanded that there should be no Altar
(in ordinary) after the building of the Temple, but at Jerusalem, where only
Sacrifices were to be offered, which is the cause that now the Jews offer no
sacrifices, because they want their Temple: Ahab could not come by the Altar at
Jerusalem, being out of his Kingdom: What Alter then means Ahab?

Answ. Some say that the sign is put for the thing signified, and by Altars
meant Religion, which was by Ahab and Iesabel abolished. But as the killing of
the Prophets was a matter of fact, so also I take this to be, rather then of
signification only. They threw down material Altars, built in Abraham's,
Isaaks, Jacobs, Iosuahs, and Samuels time, before the Temple was builded, and
the Altars which were by Elias himself and other Prophets, by special
commandment after the building of the Temple set up: which were called
afterward high Places, and the good Kings of Judah commended for pulling them
down. 1. Kin. 18.4.22.


Object. Why should Eliah complain of the doing of that by Ahab, which done by
others is commended?

Answ. Those Altars remained as monuments of Gods worship, and Elias complains
not simply against their demolishing, but because it was done in despite of
true Religion, that no foot-step thereof might remain to put the people in
mind of the true God, which if it had bin done in faith and reverence, would
have been commended. A Turk is plagued for stamping a Crucifix under his feet,
not that God approues such Images, but to reprove their vile mind therein
showed against Christ. Julian (as Ecclesiastical histories mention) plucked
down an Image of brass, made to resemble Christ, at the foot whereof was the
figure of the woman with the bloody issue kneeling: in the room of that Image
of Christ, did the Apostate place his own Image, which was by thunder and
lightning overthrown and broken in pieces, not that God was pleased with such
Images, but displeased with the wicked and spiteful heart of Julian, thereby
appearing.

And I am left alone. Not a Prophet alone, but a professor alone, as appears
in Gods answer, who tells him, there were seven thousand left, not Prophets,
but men.

Heereout arise two Doctrines: the one concerning the state of the Church, in
regard of the enemies of it: the other concerning the nature of such enemies.

God suffers sometimes the enemies of his Church to prevail against it, as
Cain against Abel: the Moabites, Ammorites, Philistims, etc. against Israel:
the High Priests, Scribes and pharisees against Christ: the Heathen Emperors
against the Christians: The Arrians for the space of fourscore years against
the Orthodoxall professors: the Pope and Papists against the Protestants, as
our forefathers have felt in this Land.

Use 1.
Prosperity is no certain note of the true Church.

Use 2.
Though we have enjoyed an uninterrupted peace this many years (which the Lord
continue) yet God may suffer enemies to prevail over us, and we have great
reason to fear it.

First, because iniquity, as Pride, Drunkenness, etc. seem to have got the
upper hand.

Secondly, we have seen and felt many Judgments already: the Pestilence,
Inundations of waters, devouring fires in many the principal Towns of the
Kingdom; yet what reformation follows? Because we amend not by these, we have
cause to fear the killing of our Prophets, and digging down our Altars.

Thirdly, because of our fearful hypocrisy, ever being much in show and
nothing in substance. God usually makes true Christians manifest, and discouers
Hypocrites by such trials. These reasons show that we are in danger, and
therefore should not be secure, but provide for such a time; for as he who is
provided to die, is the fitter to live, so the forethinking of such things, may
(howsoever) much better us in grace. Religion has cost some their goods, their
liberty, lives; why may it not us? This is our day, our Summer; it may have a
night and Winter following, against which it is wisdom to provide.

Julius.
who flinging his keys into Tiber, said, If Peter's keys cannot, Paul's sword
shall.

Use 1.
Art thou an enemy to the gospel, and to the preachers of it and to them who
live godly? Thou art like Iesabell, whom God met withal well enough, for even
the dogs did ease Iesabell though a Queen. 2. King. 9.35.


Use. 2.
As an army without a General, a ship without a Pilot, sheep without a
Shepherd, so is a congregation without a Minister: as Philip desired the
Athenians to send him their Orators, who persuaded the people not to render up
their City, so the devil most spiteth the Ministers of the word, as the
greatest enemies to his kingdom, because they call the people to repentance.

I would chronicle that minister (if faithful) as a miracle which (even in the
days of peace) suffered not some persecuti' on by the malice of the devil.
Esteem thy teacher for the hazard he endures for thy sake.

Use 3.
If thou be persecuted, so was Eliah; do as Eliah did: fly to God by prayer,
for he prayed and was preserved. Under the Juniper tree, Eliah sung a heavy
note, but he is not a halfpenny the worse; Iesabell could not hinder him from
riding to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, and we find him afterward coming down
on mount Tabor in a most glorious manner. Luther continued 30 years preaching
the gospel yet dyed peaceably in his bed; though the Pope hunted him and would
have given a good part of his tripple crown to have got him. God will either
deliver thee or glorify himself in thy constant enduring.

Use 4.
The enemies of the Church hold together for the overthrow of religion, let us
unite our affections and forces for the maintaining it. The want of holy love
and fellowship among Christians, gives the diuill great advantage. We help not
one another; we rejoice not at the returning of Prodigals: when the Scribe had
answered discreetly, Christ encouraged him, and when the young man manifested a
conscience in keeping the law, Christ looked upon him and loved him. But if we
see any beginning to fear God, we encourage him not, but rather give him gall
and vinegar to drink. Mat. 12.39 Mat. 10.21.
Drunkards hang on a string, Swearers shake hands, Adulterours make a league,
Prodigalls are sworn brethren, Papists hold together, much more let us which
hold Christ stand to one another, helping and encouraging to godliness.

Use. 5.
Eliah complains not of the whoredom, drunkenness, pride etc. of the people,
though no doubt these sins were rife among them, but of breaking Alters, and
killing Prophets: the most greeuious indictment that can be put in against any
man is that he is an enemy to religion. Its a man's greatest honor to be
religious and a worshipper of God as the contrary will most of all other
sins, shame and confound us at the last day.

VERSE. 4. But what says the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to my
self 7000 men who have not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal.


IN these words is the answer of God to Eliah his complaint, wherein are two
things. First a preface. Secondly the substance of the answer.

The preface is in these words. But what says the answer of God unto him?
This preface is an elegant transition, (set down by way of interrogation) from
Eliahs complaint to Gods answer; as if Paul should have said. You have heard
of Eliahs complaint, now you shall hear how God answers him. The word
translated answer, signifies a divine answer accuratly set down.

All doubts in matters of religion, are to be decided by the word of God. Ioh.
5.39. Mar. 12.24. Eliah erred because he spoke without his book, that is, Gods
word.

Use.
In all matters controuerted, remember this: but what says the answer of God.
Its questioned whether images be to be worshipped, Angels and Saints prayed to.
etc. who shall resolve us? The Papists say yea: but what says the answer of
God? We are to take no man's word, not the word of Eliah for a matter of faith;
though such a preacher, such a great scholar, Eliah hold this or that, our
plea must be, but what says the scripture? For men may err, but the answer
of God is according to truth.

Remember this for matters of practice also. If it be questioned, whether thou
shall break the Sabbath, commit whoredom, drunkenness, deceive thy neighbor
etc. Thy companions it may be, and thine own heart will intise thee to do
such things: but what says the scripture? It teaches thee another lesson,
namely, that they which do such things shall be damned. Follow the advice of
the scripture, or else it will torment thee on thy death bed,

VERSE. 4. I have reserved to my self 7000 men who have not bowed the knee to
the Image of Baal.


IN these words is the substance of Gods answer: Gods whole answer is not set
down but only so much as might confute Eliah his paralogisme, which serves
Paul's purpose. Eliah did thus argue.

The Church which is not quite extinguished, has marks whereby it might be
discerned.

But I (says Eliah) discern no such in Israel: therefore.

Thou do not Eliah: what art thou? But I do (says the Lord) know the
heart, and who are Jews within. I have reserved 7000 as good as thy self, who
have not bowed their knees to Baal.

7000. Some curiously speak of this number: but a number certain is put for
an uncertain. By 7000 says one, the perfect sum of these who dealt worthily
in not consenting to idolatry is expressed.

Seven thousand men, that is, men and women noted by the more worthy sex.

I have reserved to my self. That is: though I have suffered many to fall
away, yet I have reserved to my own use seven thousand. I have reserved: he
says not, here are left me some, by chance or at a venture, or by Ahabs,
Iesabels, and the devils courtesy. Nor some have reserved themselves; but I
have reserved: as ver. 5. A reservation is made, not a few, but seven thousand:
not some, which were then Idolaters, and after to be converted, or Infants that
had no reason, but men that have not bowed to Baal, but sincerely worshipped me.

Who have not bowed the knee, that is (by a figure) worshipped in the least
sign, as making a leg. It is added in the book of Kigns, nor blessed him; by
which it appears, that the Israelites when they came to their Images, did both
bow, and kiss their Images; as the Papists when they come by a Cross or
Crucifix, put off their hats, make a leg, and also kiss some part of their
Idols, besides the Popes toe. Thus in Hosee the Idolaters say, Hos. 13.2.
Let them kiss the Calves: so Job says, Job. 31.26.27.
When I beheld the Sun or Moon, if my mouth did kiss my hand, etc. as the
Heathen which worshipped the Sun, because they could not kiss it, kissed
their hand, which was abominable Idolatry. Kiss the Son, says David, Psalm.
2.12.
that is, worship him. So Emperors have their knees, Kings their hands kissed
in token of subjection.

To Baal: that is, To the Image of Baal. So was the god of the Sydonians
called. The word is good in the signification, for it is as much as Lord, or
Husband; so they that worshipped it, declared thereby that, that they were
vassals, and bound to subjection to it, as the wife to the husband: and
therefore is Idolatry called fornication. Baal is of the Masculine gender, and
the Article preposed is of the Feminine, implying the Image, as it is here
well supplied. And here we may find the Papists tardie, making many Baals
masculine and feminine, and bowing to their Images, which hence appears to be
flat Idolatry.

Now in these words two things are to be considered, the Sum of them, and
the Circumstances: who are two. First, the Author of this Reservation.
Secondly, a description of the Reserved.

Doct. out of the sum.
The Church of God shall never be brought to such an exigent in the most
difficult times, but that there shall be many thousands which shall worship
God in Spirit and truth. It can never fail, Matthew. 16.18. and 28. verse. last,
I am with you to the end of the world. If to the end there should not be true
worshippers, this could not be true.

Use 1.
The best on earth may err, as Elias, much more the Pope; who is the worst of
Cardinals, who are the worst of Priests, who are the worst of Papists, who are
the worst of Christians. Eliah came into this error by a passion of anger and
fear: Order your passions by the law of grace, for if they be ungoverned they
blind the mind, and as unruly horses draw the chariot of our judgment into
the by-pathes of error.

Use. 2.
Eliah erred in his censure concerning true worshippers: Be not then rash in
censuring, thou may err. I would our Brownists would consider this, who are
quick-sighted abroad and blind at home. It is rashness to censure particular
men, much more whole Churches to be Idolatrous, Antichristian, no Church:
without God etc. God accepts of us, and of our devotions, and blessed be his
name, crowns our public worship of his name with unspeakable comfort: why
then do thou condemn us, holding us abominable in that wherein God accounts
of us. Art thou more just and pure then the Lord? How dare thou refuse
communion with them who have communion with Christ? Repent of thy separation.

Use 3.
Nor multitude, nor visibility are certain notes of the true Church: for then
there had been no Church in Eliah his time in Israel: for the multitude was
with Ahab and Iesabel, and Eliah could not discern one beside himself, yet
there were seven thousand.

The Papists say the Church was always actually visible to man's eye. Nay, they
say that the Catholic Church is always visible: but the Creed confuteth them;
for we believe the holy Catholic Church. It is believed, therefore not seen;
discerned by faith, not by sense But they answer that the Holiness is
invisible, not the Catholikenesse. Indeed the holiness of their Church cannot
be seen; neither can the Catholikenesse, qua talis, no more then the
substances of things can be discerned with the eye.

If they had said that particular Churches are always visible, they had said
somewhat, and yet here, some cautions are to be remembered: It is always
visible potentia, but not actu. It is simply in it self visible, though in
some respect it may be invisible, which respect is threefold. First, of place:
As the Sun is always visible, but to us then only, when it arises in our
Hemisphere. So at Jerusalem the Church is not to be seen, when it removed to
Pella. Secondly, of the Time, as of persecution, as in Eliah his time, and in
Queen Mary's days, when the Church was feign to fly into the wilderness. As
the Sun, behind a cloud in some respect is invisible, so may it be said of a
Church. Thirdly, of persons which should discern it, for a Church is sometimes
invisible, not through the fault of the Church, but of men's eyes, which are
either weak eyes, as of Eliah, or blind eyes, as of them which hate the
Church. If Eliah had rubbed his eyes, and cleared them from their dimnesse,
occasioned by fear and anger, he might have discerned seven thousand. And it
is the nature of hatred to put out the eyes of them which are possessed with
it, that they can no more discern any good thing in their opposites, then a
blind man can see the Sun.

The Papists say, that the Church is as a house set upon a hill: True, but the
top of the hill may be covered with a cloud, and so a while unseen, and
though the cloud be gone, yet every eye cannot discern it. He that cannot see
the hill, can much less see the house on the top of it.

The Circumstances are two. First, from the Author of this Reservation, which
is God; I have reserved to my self.

Those which in dangerous times are preserved in grace, are so preserved
merely by the power and goodness of God. 1. Sam. 25.39. 2 Thessalonians. 5.23. 2.
Tim. 4.18. Jude 24.

Use 1.
Though Iesabel search every corner of the Land, yet God reserueth seven
thousand which bow not the knees to Baal. God can keep us from our enemies: let
persecutors cease their malicious practices, and let us serve God without fear.

Use 2.
In regard of the preaching of the Gospel, these are golden days, but in
regard of the ouerflowing of iniquity, as Drunkenness, Pride, Covetousness,
Uncleanness, etc. these are perilous times. Art thou preserved from these
sins? glorify God. It is not thy goodness, that thou do not as others,
but the goodness of God. It was Christ that saved Peter from drowning not his
own skill or actiuitie. He had infidelity enough to have drowned him, if
Christ had not been merciful; so we have enough within us to east us away, if
God reserve us not: namely a profane heart, which is as inclined to take the
worst part, as gunpowder to flash on a fire. And if we look without us. What
examples of great ones, which strike as thunderbolts, of the multitude, which
beat down all as thick hayle, what occasions of evil, from ill company, the
flourishing of the wicked, and the great disgrace cast upon such as are most
religious: many among us are sick of the Italian bocth. In Italy an Idiot or
Asse-head is called il baon Christiano, so he that fears an oath, that is
temperate, continent, a lover of the word, is counted mere curious, silly. How
weak also are we to resist? When Eve saw the beauty of the apple, and Achan
the golden wedge, they had not power to keep their hands off. When mighty
victorious David saw Bathsheba, how soon is he overcome? When Peter heard the
voice of the Damsel, how easily he failed? so that if these things be
considered it can be no less a miracle of grace to be reserved.

The deliverance of Lot and the three children, is accounted (as it is indeed)
wonderful, so if in these times thou be not tainted with sin, thy
preservation is no less, then to be in the midst of the sea, and not to be
drowned, as Peter: or in the midst of Sodom and not perish as Lot, or in the
midst of fire and not be burnt as the three men.

Use 3.
Be admonished of two things. First presume not of thine own strength: Peter
bragd of his courage, and yet played the coward, so many say they would be
ashamed to do as such and such do, when alas, it is not in their power to
abstain. 2. Kin. 8.12 13. 2. Kin. 13.7.22
Hazael thought great scorn ever to do as Elisha foretold to him, and yet
afterward he did such things.

Be not secure and careless. God reserueth some, but those which use the
means to persevere in weldoing. Which while some refuse to do, its easy to
observe, how thick and threfold men fall away: some to covetousness; some to
pride etc many to a fearful deadness and hardness of heart. If thou would
be preserved, hear the word, receive the sacraments, and pray lest thou be
made a pray to the devil.

The second circumstance is from a description of true worshippers reserved;
who are such which have not bowed their knees to the image of Baal.

Sincere worshippers of God, must not in the least manner worship an Idol.
Psalm. 16.4. Ephe. 5.3.

Use.
Many take liberty for their outward behavior, so long as they keep their
heart: though they hear no sermons, nor can talk of religion, nor make such
show as others do; yet they have as good a heart to God as the best. Here Is a
subtle devil; because some make show of that is not in them, to persuade that
though there be no outward show of appearance of godliness in word or deed
yet there may be a good heart, which is as impossible as the sun to be
without light, and the sea without water. For according to the heart, are all
parts and senses of the body ordered.

Use.
Walk accurately, yield not the breadth of a nail, to idolatry or any sin:
for a man serves Idols, not only when he offers Sacrifice unto them, but when
he sins; for sin is the worship of the devil. Hate therefore the very
garment spotted with the flesh. Some take liberty to unhallow the Saboth, and
then say, is this so much? An inch breaks no square. The beginninges of all
sin are shamefast, but yield to a little, and the devil will easily draw you
to the mickle. As the seepent if he get in his head, will easily wind in his
whole body, so is it the nature of sin. We discipline our children, telling
them that first a pin, then a point, and then a penny, and then a horse, and so
to the gallows, so will sin increase by degrees, if we give intertainment to
it at first in a little. As Eliah his cloud, was no bigger at first then as a
man's hand, and afterward darkened the whole sky. So he that makes no
conscience of little sins, will easily be brought at last to commit any
sin. If thou makes not conscience of a spot on thy knee, thou will not be
persuaded to the highest degree of Idolatry.

Remember how Moses would not yield to Pharaoh in a hoof: nor the orthodoxall
Christians to the Arrians in a letter. One Marcus Bishop of Arathusa, old in
years, but young in strength to endure, chose rather to endure most grievous
torments, then to give a farthing to the building of an Idolatrous Temple,
which he had demolished. True worshippers will not yield in any thing to the
dishonor of God.

VERSE 5. Even so at this present time also there is a remnant, according to
the election of Grace.


IN this verse is the application of the former example, which also is
amplified in the sixth verse.

In the time of the general defection in the days of Eliah, there were seven
thousand reserved, so also now. The like times of the Church are wisely to be
compared. But the present estate of the Jews is the same with that of the
Israelites, therefore as then, so now a reservation is made, and by
consequence, their reiection not total.

Here we have two things. 1. A Proposition. 2. An Amplification.

The Proposition, that in the time of Paul, though the Jews were generally
cast off, yet there was and is a reservation.

Observation.
When thou hear of persecution, and of killing up the Prophets and
professors, be of good-comfort, God will save seven thousand. He will reserve
one Eliah, as in the days of Ahab: one Athanasius, as in the time of the
Arrian Heresy: one Wicliffe, one Husse, one Luther, in the most darksome and
hideous times of Antichrist.

The Amplification, is from the cause of this Reservation, which is Election,
set forth also by the eause of it, which is Grace.

Through the Election of Grace; not actiuely to be understood on man's part, as
Chrysostom; but actiuely on Gods part, and passiuely on ours: nor is Election
to be here expounded faith, the seal of it, as some; but the decree, called
election of Grace, that is, gracious or free election.

The cause why some are reserved in dangerous times is their Election. For as
says, so perseverance is proper to the Elect, Act. 13.48. and 20.21.

Use 1.
As to be preserved from Idolatry, when true Religion is abolished and
persecuted, so in these days to be kept from sin, and to stand, when a
thousand fall on one hand, and ten thousand on another, is a comfortable note
of Election. Iniquity abounds. Neglect not so fair an occasion of making thy
Election sure. If God bestow his grace on thee, stop thee in the way of
sin, make thy heart bleed for the transgressions of the time, and preserve
thee in his fear thou art elected: for if thou were a reprobate, he would not
have such care of thee, but give thee quite over to follow the swinge of thine
own lusts unto perdition. Therefore by thy life thou may know; for God has
not elected us to serve the Devil, but himself.

Use. 2.
If persecution come, sear not, many suffered constantly in the days of
Iesabel, and seven thousand could not be found, being hidden as a treasure, by
God. So in Queen Mary's days, many were taken and burned; and many were
sought after, and could not be found, for God covered them with his hand, and
smote the eyes of them which sought their lives, as he smote the Sodomites
sometimes, when they sought the door of Lots house. Resolve thus, If such fiery
times should come, and God should call thee out, and suffer thee to be found,
he will also so strengthen thee, that thou shall glorify him in thy
sufferings: If God give thee not such strength, he will so hide thee from thy
persecutors, that though Iesabel her self search all the corners of the Land
for thee, as narrowly as Laban searched Jacobs stuff, yet she shall not find
thee.

VERSE. 6. And if by Grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise Grace were
no more Grace? But if it be of works, then is it no more grace, otherwise
work is no more work.


THese words (as was before said) are an amplificatio^ of the sum of the 5.
verse. namely, that the Reservation is according to election of Grace: from
whence this Consectary takes place. If by election of grace, then not by works.

Though this do not much pertain to Paul's Argument in hand, yet by the
direction of the Spirit he takes that little occasion offered, to speak
something in commendation of Grace, because he had to deal with the Jews,
which stood greatly upon their own Righteousness; which indeed was one of
their maine diseases; and therefore he neglects not by the way to touch this
sort, and to give them a iog for remembrance, that we are saved by grace, not
by works.

Paul's example must teach Ministers a point of wisdom; which is, to take
notice of the special sins of their Auditors, and in the course of their
teaching, if any occasion offer, though it lie not so plain in their way, to
give them a memento.

Paul breaks out here into a new question, that he might meet with the Jews
in every corner. When Ministers speak against the sins of their Auditors: O,
say they, he finds not that in his text; but we know, by the direction of Gods
Spirit, and by the warrant of Paul's example, if we find such in you, how to
find it in our text to reprove you for it, and yet not to be guilty of rouing
or digressing.

But to the Consectary. If election and preservation be of grace, it is not of
works. This is proved by the nature of grace and works, which are contrary,
and destroy one another. And it is set down with inuersion of the terms. That
which is of grace, is not of works; else grace were not grace (that is, free:)
That which is of works, is not of grace; else works were not works, that is,
did not make indebted.

The mystery in this verse plainly appears, if we understand what is meant by
grace, and what by works.

The Schoolmen and Jesuits distinguish grace, into grace making gracious, and
grace freely given. Aqin. Sum. p. 2. q. 111. art. 1.
The first, they say, is charity, a grace whereby we are conjoined to God: the
second is faith, and the rest of Christian virtues. But first, both these are
coincident, for charity also is a grace freely given. Secondly, they make this
grace to be in man; they know no other: and therefore Bellarmine, and the rest,
when they write of this subject, they write de gratia hominis, of the grace of
man: but the Scripture only speaks of the grace of God, and of the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Grace is taken three ways: First, for the free favor of God, the alone cause
of our election, which is subiectiuely in God, one of the imminent virtues of
the Deity, being his essence. This is meant here.

Secondly, for the energie, operation and working of this grace, which Austen
calls the moving of mercy: Motum miseric. Aust. lib. 3. Hyp.
the lesuites call it, an help, or grace preventing, or following: of grace
preventing, is that place, Ephesians. 2.8. of following 1. Cor. 15.10. of both
together, 2. Cor. 12.9.

Thirdly, for the gifts of grace, which have a different appellation ordinarily
in Paul's Epistles, as faith, hope, love, patience; and this is distributed into
habitual grace and actual. This in no wise is here to be understood, nor
either of the parts before spoken of from the School. For charity and faith
are works; but we must have a grace opposite to works.

Works are either good or bad: bad works not here understood, but good.

Ob. But grace and good works are agreeing as the cause and the effect.

Ans. To speak properly, the anger of God is contrary to his grace: and unto
works, are no works, or bad works contrary. So that the contrariety here to
be holden is not simply, but in the case of justification and salvation.
Understand not here, works themselves, but the merit of works. and yet not
the merit of all works, (as Christ's) but of Our works. And then the rule of
contraries here takes place, that one being put, the other is taken away. The
nature of grace is to be free, the nature of works to be of due debt: so that
if it be free, it is not of debt, else were grace no grace: if it be of due
debt, it is not free, else were works no more works.

The legerdemaine of the Papists is here to be noted, who leave and wipe out
the last half of this verse, And if of works, then not of grace, else works
are no more works, blasphemously saying that it is superfluuos. But we can
easily spy out the reason of this their doing, namely because their doctrine
of merit is hereby ingulated. As they have dealt with the books of other
writers, so have they attempted here, purging and curtailing off that which
makes against them. And then they would make us believe that their absurd
vulgar Translation is perfecter then the original Greek text it self. As if
a man having but one eye or oneleg, should think all others deformed that had
two eyes or legs.

The sum is, that, what is of grace, is not of works; and e diuerso.

Election and salvation are of grace, not of merit, Act. 15.11. Ephesians. 2.8.9.
Tit. 3.5. and this, that God might have all the glory, but if it be of merit
then corrupt flesh will boast.

Use 1.
The Popish conceit of Merit, of their works of congruitie, which (they say)
it is fit that God should reward, and of condignity and supererogation, which
it is just that God should reward, is by this text like chafe, blown away and
blasted: The finite creature cannot merit of the infinite Creator. The Papists
have three shifts for this.

1. They say that Paul is to be understood of the works of Nature, not of
grace: If so: then the Pharisee (also the Pelagian) is not to be blamed, for he
acknowledged his goodness in which he trusted, to be a gift of God, Luke 18.11.
I thank thee Lord that I am not etc. And all merit is contrary to grace:
Besides, our Savior bids his disciples, Luke 17.10.
when they have done all they can, to think themselves unprofitable servants.
I trow they will not deny that the Apostles were in the state of Grace.

2 Their second evasion is, that salvation is of grace indeed, but also of
works, making a mingle-mangle of grace and works, which is as if a man should
attempt to make fire and water agree. But Saint Augustine takes away this in a
word: Grace (says he) is grace no way, if it be not free every way: It is all
of grace, or no whit at all of grace. This golden saying is dug out of this
mine.

3 They exclaim against us that we are enemies to good works: Why do they
so? Not because we do those evil works, which they avoid; but because we
doing good works which they neglect, yet ascribe our salvation only to grace.
They deal with us, as the Pharisees with Christ: He tells them that Harlots
shall go before them into the kingdom of heaven, and they presently say, that
he is a friend of Publicans and sinners, and an enemy to good works.

Concerning good works, this we hold, that they are necessary to salvation,
not by a necessity of efficiency, but of presence, and that in three respects.
1. Of worship, for God is served by doing them. 2. Of good conscience, which is
lost by the neglect of good works. 3. Of duty to our neighbors, who is hereby
to be won to God: we must do good works if we will be saved, but we must not
look to be saved by their merit.

Use 2.
Many ignorant souls, say they hope to be saved by their serving God, and
their good prayers. They know no other Divinity but this, which is Popish and
natural. These are not past grace, they are not yet come at it. Alas, if there
were no other way to come to heaven but this, no flesh should be saved, but
only the humanity of our Lord Jesus.

The Devils prime desire is to draw thee to abominable courses; if he cannot
prevail this way, but thou will be doing good works; this will please him, if
thou will be conceited of meriting thereby. For a trust in thine own
righteousness will bring thee to hell, as well as unrighteous living. Trust
perfectly on the grace of God, says Peter, 1. Pet. 1.13.
if we trust to any thing else, it will lay us in the dust, and be as a broken
reed, which if a man lean upon it, the shiuers run into his hand.

Use 3.
Gods children only, discern a world of wickedness in themselves, for which
they are much cast down: comfort thy self, God elected thee freely to
salvation, and not for thy worthiness: If we were to be saved for our works,
then we had cause to doubt because of their defects. This must be well learned:
it is soon said, but not so soon practiced: if a man have fruit of his own
planting, he thinks there is no fruit like to his. So by nature we are
opinionated of our own goodness.

Hence is it that God suffers many times, even his dear children foully to fall,
to cure them of this pride as Peter, or to suffer them to be sore tempted and
buffeted, that they may give God the glory, as Paul.

Use 4.
This teaches us humility, because all is given of mere grace.

Use 5.
The grace of God teaches to be gracious, not graceless: because of the
mercies of God, we must offer up our selves to his service. Romans 12.1.
Then conclude thy self to be of the number of the saved, when thy
conversation is godly. If you say, thou hopest to be saved by Gods grace,
and yet live in vile sins: thou art a presumptuous and blasphemous Atheist.
Presumptuous, because thou look to be saved in an estate to which is
threatened damnation; blasphemous, because thou deniest God in thy life, whose
grace thou would seem to implore.

VERSE. 7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for, but
the election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. Or hardened.



IN these words, and so to the end of the 10. verse is the last part of Paul's
answer, which is the determination of the question in hand, namely, that God
has cast away only the reprobate Jews, but the Elect obtain the promises:
God casts away the chafe, but loses not one kernel of good corn.

Paul enters upon this in this 7. verse, by a Prolepsis; for thus some Jew
might object. If God cast not away the Elect, and yet they obtain salvation;
not by works, but only by free grace: Then Paul, you make a fair hand; what,
I pray you, shall become of all our zeal and study in the Law? Paul answers,
as if he should say, I will tell you what becomes of it: it is not al worth a
rush, for Israel has not obtained that which he sought, but the Elect have
obtained.

Ob. Why then, do you think all Israel damned?

Ans. No, says Paul, Israel is taken equiuocally. Elect Israel is saved,
Reprobate Israel is damned.

Here are two parts. 1. A proposition, Israel has not obtained that which he
sought.

2. The explication of the term Israel: this is taken two ways, as the name
Christian, there are some elect, some reprobate, some real, some nominall:
those have obtained, these are cast way.

What then? that is, what shall we say then? namely this: Israel has not
obtained, etc. Israel, the people of God: not so indeed, but outwardly and in
show.

Has not obtained that which he sought: What is that? Justification in the
sight of God, and salvation: Why has he not obtained? Because he sought these
things in and by his own righteousness. Though he sought busily, again and
again; as the word imports, yet his labor was lost.

Has not obtained: (...)
the word signifies has not hit the mark: he aimed at the mark but shot
wide: put himself to a great deal of pains to no purpose.

The election has obtained: (...)
has hit the mark and got the prize, which is justification.

The election: that is, the elect: the abstract for the concrete; as seeing a
proud man, we say, there goes pride it self. So circumcision for a Jew etc. He
those to speak thus to note a secret: namely that whosoever are saved, obtain
it not by any thing but by the mere grace of God. For election, which is the
foundation of justification and salvation, is of grace.

The rest were blinded or hardened. The rest, that is the reprobate: were
blinded in the passive; to note the suffering of the just judgment of God: for
beside their natural hardness, God casts another hardness upon them as a
punishment of their natural, leaving them to themselves and giving them up to
the devil to be blinded. The Antithesis requires that he should have said,
the rest have not obtained, but he speaks this of purpose to show the cause of
their not obtaining: which is their hardness or blindness of mind.
Reprobation is not the cause of damnation, as election is of salvation: nor a
cause at all, unless you say a deficient cause, as the sun is the cause of
night. Damnation follows reprobation, but the cause of it is sin not Gods
decree.

The Jews then are cast away not all, but only the reprobate.

No elect cast away, no reprobate but cast away. Romans 11.2. Ioh. 6.37.39. Ioh.
17.9. 2 These. 2.13. Reu. 21. vlt.

Use 1.
There is election, and reprobation.

Use 2.
Certainty of salvation follows election.

Use 3.
A man may be the Israel of God in some sense, and yet be damned: examine thy
standing.

Use 4.
As the Jews are distinguished into elect and reprobate, so is all mankind:
there is not a third to be found. There are two Captains; God and the devil:
two armies; the elect and the reprobate: two Cities; heaven and hell: two
manner of weapons, righteousness and unrighteousness: two kinds of wages,
salvation and damnation: see thou be on the cunning side, which is Gods.

Use 5.
A man may have a desire to be saved, seek it, use means and yet be damned,
as here it is said of Israel.

Object. But Christ says seek and you shall find.

Answ. True, if thou take Christ's meaning, that is seek well, or as I direct
you: otherwise a man may seek and miss. This word (well) is but a few
letters, but of great operation; for it is the form of all arts. As Rhetoric
is the art of speaking well, Logike the art of disputing well, Magistracy the
art of governing well, Christianity the art of living well: not every
Magistrate gouernes well, nor every Christian lives well, nor every seeker
seeks well and therefore many (as the Jews) take great pains and find
nothing, as Peter fisht all night and took nothing. Every seeking then, and
desire shall not obtain.

There is in every man a natural desire of salvation: the veriest reprobate
when he dies, had rather goy to heaven then to hell. Content not thy self with
a bare desire of saluations thou must desire and seek it by the means and in
the way that God has appointed. Many ask and have not, because they ask
amiss. And every one that strives for maisteries, is not crowned, except he
strive lawfully. So many seek salvation, and are not saved; not because they
seek, but because they seek amiss. To seek that we may find, four things
are to be observed. First the time. Secondly the place. Thirdly the pains.
Fourthly the continuance.

1 Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness. If thou seek it not
first but at all leasures, its a thousand to one thou shall never find it.
Usually men post off this to their age: in their youths they may not hear of
religion, for dulling their wits; then nothing but pleasures: old men's heads
must not be set on young men's shoulders: but when they come to be old and ly
upon their death bed, then send for the minister. Is this enough? I should
marvel, if God should be content with the branne and dregs of thy life, when
the devil has had the flower, and first broaching of the Gospel, There Is an
old saying. He that neglects the occasion, the occasion will neglect him; as
it appears by the example of the five foolish Virgins. To them which neglect
the time is that spoken. You shall seek me, but you shall not find me, and
where I am can you not come

He that has lost a ring, and seeks a mile from the place where he lost it,
is not like to find it. Observe the place, and seek salvation where it is to
be found: that is in Christ, in whom are all treasures. The Jews sought it in
themselves and missed of it. Beware Papist. But where is Christ to be found?
Resort thou to the house of God; If Christ be any where to be found, its there,
not in an alehouse, and the meetings of profane men.

3 Seek painful, not ouerly, as the woman for her groat. Luc. 15.
Seek as for silver; search as for gold. prove. 2.4.
The mine of gold lies not in the first spade: it lies deeper: its well if
after all pains, we find it at the last.

4 Continue seeking: he that continues to the end shall be saved: its worth
all our pains though all should seek a thousand years: give not over till
thou have found.

Israel sought for salvation, in the obedience of the law, but found it not:
what shall then become of our wicked profane wretches which seek not at all?
What shall become of them which seek only vanities? Which fly not, but seek
the corruption which is in the world: that care for nothing but back and
belly: if God reject the righteousness and will of the Jews, what hope can
thou have which never think of God but to blaspheme him? Which delightest
only to wallow in abominable sins? I must tell thee that ten thousand thy
betters are in hell. Even such which have rapt hard at heaven gates, which have
bestowed many hours in prayers, much money upon the poor etc. If such as
seek, miss, for seeking amiss, much more those which seek not at all, or
the contrary.

VERSE 8. According as it is written, Esaias 29.10.
God has given them the spirit of slumber, or remorse.
eyes that they should not see, Esaias. 6.9.
and ears that they should not hear unto this day.


THe latter part of the seventh verse, that the rest were blinded is proved by
a double testimony. The one of Eliah in this verse; the other of David. In the
two next verses.

That which the scripture testifies is true.

But it testifies that the multitude of the Jews are blinded. Ergo.

This first testimony is taken out of two places in Esaias. The first part out of
Esaias. 29.10. The latter part, which is an exposition of the spirit of slumber
out of Esaias. 6.9.

Use 1.
The authority of the scriptures; the ground of truth.

Use 2.
Scripture the best interpreter of it self.

In this testimony are two things. First. The Judgment. Secondly, the
Amplification. The Judgment forethreatned is Slumber. If I understand our own
tongue, slumber is a kind of unquiet sleep, either in the beginning or end of
our rest, when every little thing will awake us. This cannot be the meaning;
but rather a heavy dead sleep is here understood, translated by Beza, Sopor,
as death is called by the Poet Perpetuus Sopor, the Hebrew word is translated
by some (...). Horat. Aquila.
The sleep here meant may be likened to Adams when his rib was taken out.

Quest. But is it a judgment to be cast into such a sleep? Many desire it.

Answ. Here is not meant the sleep of the body, but of the mind Blindness of
mind and hardness, is so called by a metaphore, as if you would say, a
spiritual lethargy, when neither the thundering noise of the Law, nor the
sweet sound of the Gospel can awake us.

The Greek word used by Paul, (...).
from the Septuagint, signifies another thing, namely, pricking and
compunction, as if a man had a nail or bodkin in his sides. Now because Esayes
word signifies dead ^leepe, Beza translates Paul's word, (...).
though anciently, and properly it has been translated Compunction, as is
partly expressed in the margin. There is a word in Greek, very like this here
used, which signifies sleep, being derived from a root, that signifies Night.
But this word in no wise does so signify. Saint Luke who well understood the
Greek tongue, uses it for Compunction in the second of the Acts 5. (...).
Act. 2.37.


The natural meaning may well be retained: Dead sleep being called
Compunction by a figure, the effect for the cause, because much or no
Compunction can awake it, or rather of the cause for the effect, because
Compunction is the cause of dead sleep (not in the body, but) in the mind.

There is a double Compunction of mind; one coming from sorrow for sin, as
that, Act. 2.37. another coming from Envy and Malice, which was in the Jews,
because the Gospel of Christ, whom they crucified, was preached and received
in the world: this was as a dagger at their hearts. This Compunction of Envy
is here meant, which is the cause of such a deadness of mind, that as a man
in a dead sleep hears and understands nothing: so a mind possessed with Envy,
is not patient to hear or conceive any thing, for its good. Excess of grief
brings a failing of the mind: Now envy is a gnawing of the heart against our
neighbor. When Stephen preached, Act. 7.
the Jews gnash their teeth, stop their ears, their hearts being ready to
burst for anger and rage. And when Paul preaches at Antiochia, Act. 13.48.
the Jews rail, contradict, and stir up persecution, so that a man had as
good speak to a wall or a dead man, as unto them. Chrysostom expounds it, as a
nayling to their passion, whereby they are immovable in their perfidiousnesse.
Theodotian.
Some translate it Exstasie, for envy makes a man beside himself, capable of
no good instruction. Cyprian calls it Transpunction: Cypr. l. 1. ep. 3.
as a vessel having a hole stricken through the bottom, holds not the liquor
put in it: so whatsoever was preached to the Jews, their hearts so aked with
envy, that they were incapable of good counsel and doctrine, being as
senseless of all good things, as if they were dead.

This Judgment is amplified by four Arguments. 1. The Cause. 2. The Effect,
3. The Subject. 4. The Adiunct.

1. The Cause is twofold, first Principal, God the Author of this Compunction,
not as it is a sin, but as it is a judgment: secondly, Isntrumental, Satan:
therefore Paul says, The spirit of slumber: not as God works grace in his
own, does he work this blindness in the reprobate, but grace by himsefe,
blindness by Satan: to whom concerning some Reprobate, God speaks as it were
thus: Satan, is such a one so wretched, that he enuies the Gospel, and spets
at it? Take him to thee, torment him for it, harden him more, that his
condemnation may be the greater. God is the Judge: Satan the tormentor,: by the
spirit of slumber is also meant the forcible working of Satan upon our corrupt
nature, as if a man being upon the top of an hill, and purposing to run
down, the Devil should stand at his back and push him forward.

2. The Effect, Eyes that they should not see, etc. Blindness of mind, not to
be capable of saving knowledge, is an effect of malice against the truth.

3. The Subject, The Jews, a wise and learned people in the Law.

4. The Adiunct, To this Day, which may be referred to the seventh verse,
Hardened, or blinded to this day: it is all one; the meaning, not for ever, but
to this day. The veil unto this day is laid over their hearts, but it shall be
taken away. 2. Cor. 3.16.


God in his just judgment gives over such as are enemies to the Gospel, to
the devil, to be blinded, that they cannot convert. Ioh. 9.39. 2. Cor. 4.3.

Use 1.
Many, in worldly things, are witty and of great apprehension, and judgment,
and yet as blind as beetles, very blocks in religion. Eyes they have, see they
do, they are no fools, yet they perceive not the things belonging to their
peace. As Bats and Owls see best in the night, so their chiefest understanding
is of worldly matters. As a Moule within the ground is nimble and quick, but
above the ground can make little shift: so talk or deal with these men of
earthly matters, they are cunning, but speak of Religion, and you pose them as
with a strange language. Achitophel, a great Statesman, goes home in a dudgeon,
and in a sullen yet hangs himself. Could any Idiot have done more foolishly?
Pray that thy wit may be sanctified, otherwise thou may prove an enemy, and
be besotted with the worst folly.

Envy and malice toward the Gospel, makes worldly wise men, spiritual fools:
which is the reason, that, when a worldly wiseman hears the Word, and
receives no benefit, some plain man that loves it, is edified by it to
salvation. He that would grow by the word, must cast away envy and malice. 1.
Pet. 2.1.2.


It is a fearful estate to envy the Gospel, such are given over to the
Devil to be blinded, and what will not the devil bring such unto? Needs must
he go whom the devil drives: as he tumbled the swine into the sea, so will he
thrust such into all iniquity. Tell some swearer of his swearing, and he will
swear the more to spite you: this were not possible, if men were not given
over to the devil: as the Devil tyrannized over Job, when God has given him
license; so will he rage in thy conscience. Pray with David: Psalm. 51.11. Pal.
143.10.
Lord take not thy holy spirit from me, and let thy good spirit lead me into
the land of righteousness.

Use. 2.
To have eyes and not to see, to know the truth and to have no power to apply
it to our consciences is fearful. It is uncomfortable to be borne bodily
blind; much more is spiritual blindness uncomfortable.

When Christ came nigh Jerusalem, he wept over it: what was the cause? even the
blindness of the Jews; Luk 19.41. Ioh 11.33.
O that thou had known the things belonging to thy peace, but now they are
hid from thine eyes; thou art blinded. When he raised Lazarus, he groned in the
spirit. Why? for the hardness of their hearts. A grievous plague must
blindness of mind be, when Christ so wept and groned for them which were
stiken with it, when he never cried Oh, for all his own bodily sufferings and
bitter passions. Repent of thy malice to the word, that thou may see.

VERSE 9. And David says Psalm. 69.22.
Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block, and a
recompense unto them.

10. Psalm. 69.23.
Let their eyes be darkened that they may not see, and bow down their back
always.


HEre is the other testimony, which is David's, where it is avouched that the
multitude of the Jews are hardened, and blinded, and by consequence cast off.

David prophesies of this in the 69 Psalm, ver. 21, 22, 23. Paul ties not
himself to the very words of the Psalm, but being guided by the same Spirit
by which David wrote, adds and alters some words, without diminishing of the
sense.

David began that Psalm with grievous complaints against his own enemies: but
the Spirit turns his meditations upon the enemies of Christ, whom he curses;
foretelling what cruelty and outrage they should commit, and what they should
suffer for it.

These two verses contain an imprecation, where we have three things: first,
the matter of it: secondly, the persons: thirdly, the cause.

The matter is twofold: first, he curses them in good things, ver. 9. Secondly,
he wishes evil things unto them, ver. 10.

Their good things are set down in this word, Their Table, Table signifies all
creatures provided for their nourishment, meat and drink. Ansel. Caieta.
Some say, by Table is meant the Scriptures, which are the Manna of our souls.
Peter calls them 1. Pet. 2.2.
the sincere milk of the word. Some understand the passover, which was made a
snare unto them, when they being assembled to eat it at Jerusalem, were there
besieged and taken by the Romans. All these are good, and to be comprehended.
As if he had said: Let all such things, which it is a blessing to enjoy, turn
to their bane, and be their ruin and destruction.

This is delivered by three metaphors, a snare, a trap, a stumbling. As birds
are enticed by a shrap laid for them, and so taken; or as a mouse is taken in a
trap, or as drunkards stumble at every stone, and fall, so let them not receive
a blessing in any thing they have, but let their good things ensnare them to
their destruction.

The imprecation of evil things, is of all evil, temporal and spiritual, set
down in two phrases:

First, Let their eyes (not of body but of mind) be darkened: as if he should
say: Take away their judgment and understanding, give them a reprobate mind,
that they may not discern between good and evil, that so they may run and
fall in final impenitencie.

Secondly, Bow down their back. This is diversely expounded. Piscator.
Aquinas. Cornel. Corn. O curuae in terras animae et caelestium inanes.
Some, according to the words of the Psalm, Make their loins tremble,
terrify and affright their consciences. Some, Incline their wills to evil,
that they may never be able to do good, though they discern it. Some, Let
them be always like swine, groueling upon the earth, having no affection to
heavenly things. Let their minds be upon their money, as they are the greatest
usurers in the world. The minds of such are bowed and crookned to the earth.
Some understand it of the captivity and slavery they now endure: Let them be
in perpetual captivity, vagabonds and slaves over the face of the earth, a
reproach in the world; and as slaves have their backs made crooked by carrying
heavy burdens, so let them suffer extreme bondage. All these expositions are
good, and to be comprehended: for David curses them in body and soul. Heavy
curses are they.

Secondly, the persons are two. First, cursing, David no wicked man, but a
Prophet. Secondly, cursed, the people of the Jews, David's own nation.

Thirdly, the cause: David a holy man curses his own people in this direful
manner, surely there must be some great cause. The cause is noted ver. 9. to be
a recompense unto them. why what did they? David foresaw that they would
persecute Christ, speting upon him, crowning him with thorns: and (having
beaten him with their fists) watching the whole night, making him to carry his
cross, till he faint under it, piercing his hands and feet with nails, his
side with a spear, giving him gall and vinegar to drink, dealing worse with
him the son of God then with thieves. Therefore David wishes: Lord as they
will serve my Lord Christ, so let them be served. As when Christ shall come to
enlighten them, they will choose darkness, so let their eyes be darkened: as
they will give him gall and vinegar, so let their table be their snare: as they
bowed his back, so evermore bow down their backs. This is the law of retalion.
Just it is with God that it should be so.

Persecutors of Christ and his Gospel, are justly accursed of God. Deuteronomy.
18.19. Ier. 26.4. Mat. 21. vlt. Heb. 2.1.2.

Object. We are forbidden to curse, by our Savior Christ, how does David's
practice agree with Christ's precept?

Answ. They are not prayers but prophesies, not that they might be so, but that
they shall be so. We must never curse our enemies; but there may be a time when
we may curse Gods enemies: (not such as are curable, for them we must pray, as
Steven, whose prayer was effectual for conversion of Paul:) but such as are
incurable. If we know any such, though we must condole with them as men, yet
we must curse them as the enemies of God. In the general, every man may and
must say, 1. Cor. 16.22.
Let him that loves not the Lord Jesus be accursed. We must rejoice in the
judgment of God, and subscribe unto it: 1. Cor. 6.2.
For the Saints shall judge the world.

But here must be two cautions. 1. That we mingle not private spleen and
turbulent affections with such imprecations. 2. That we never follow David, or
any other holy men herein, unless we be sure we have the same spirit. 1. Pet.
3.9.
This therefore can be no cloak for wicked men, who use to curse and banne
their cattle, neighbors, servants, wife, children, and whatsoever comes in
their way; a most hideous sin, for we be heirs of blessing, we may not
curse.

Use 1.
The Jews are cast off to this day for the crucifying of Christ; though they
be no Idolaters, as they were in Egypt and Babylon, neither have any Prophet,
as they had then, yet they are so blinded, that they will not acknowledge it;
yea many of them complain on their deathbeds, that our Jesus torments them,
and yet they cannot see the cause of their misery, O Lord open their eyes.
Gualter. hom. 62. in epist. ad Romans


Use. 2.
As an ill stomach turns good meat into bad humors, so even good things prove
hurtful to wicked men, specially contemners of the Gospel. Eccle. 5.12.
I have seen riches reserved to the hurt of the owner (says Solomon). Make a
wicked man rich, he will be proud, covetous, profane. Make Saul a King, he will
run from God to the Devil: make Judas an Apostle, it will be a snare a rope
unto him. In prosperity a wicked man will forget God, in adversity he will
blaspheme him. Neither envy the prosperity of the wicked, nor be greedy of the
riches of the world; unless they are blessed, they are dangerous snares, and
it were better to be as poor as Lazarus, then to possess wealth, without
wisdom and grace to use it: Wisdom is good with an inheritance, but an
inheritance without wisdom is a snare.

Use 3.
Esaias says, Eccle. 7.
Let them have eyes to see and not see. They had eyes, and would not see. What
then? Then put out their eyes, says David, Let their eyes be darkened. O
remember this, thou that live in the Church, and hear the doctrine of
salvation, and yet will neither believe nor obey it.

Will thou not see? well then, thou shall not. Have thou a talent? Occupy to
thy Masters advantage, and thou shall have another: if thou use it not, it is
pity thou hadest it; take it from him. He that has the understanding of a man,
and yet is as ignorant as a beast; make a beast of him, as Nabuchadnezzar.
Prou. 17.16.
Why is there a price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom, and he has none
heart? If having understanding, thou will not believe, God will so smite thee,
that from henceforth thou shall not be able to believe.

Use. 4.
The Jews are recompensed with curses, for crucifying Christ, so shall thou be
which contemnest his Gospel, and dishonorest him by thy wicked life: this is
even to crucify Christ again. Nay in some respect this sin is greater then
the sin of the Jews: for they crucified him when he walked upon the earth
appearing in weakness, but thou dispisest him being now in heaven at the right
hand of glory. Leave thy scoffing, and be a reverent hearer, and obey: to
scoff at the word, is to give gall an vinegar to Christ, which he will
revenge at his second coming with flaming fire: and in the mean time with
vinegar and gall too, that is, horror and anguish of mind through despair.
When thou lie upon thy death bed, and cryest in the bitterness of thy soul,
then as thou have laughed at the Gospel, so will God mock and laugh at thy
destruction.

VERSE 11. I say then; Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid,
but rather through their fall salvation is come to the Gentiles, to prouke them
to Idolatry.


IN the former part of this Chapter hitherto, Paul has showed that the
Reiection of the Jews is not total; now he proves to verse 33. that such
their Reiection is not final, but that the multitude, (I say not, every
Individual) shall be generally called before the end of the world, that Jews
and Gentiles may make one sheepe-fold and one flock, under one Shepherd Jesus
Christ.

To prove this point, diverse arguments are brought by Paul, who alone plainly
handles this secret, in which he insisteth the longer, (which is our advantage
also in the understanding of it) for the comfort of the poor Jews, and for
the admonition of the Gentiles, as was touched in the beginning of the Chapter.

So have we in this passage two things: first, arguments to prove the general
calling of the Jews before the end of the world: and an admonition to the
Gentiles not to insult, interserted at ver. 17. to verse. 23.

I confess that a very learned man, makes all the verses to the 17. to be
arguments of admonition to the Gentiles, and that the Apostle comes not
professedly to the point of the calling of the Jews, till the 23 verse. In
effect it is all one. For if the Gentiles out of that reason ought not to
insult, then it must be taken for granted that the Jews shall be called. But
this in my opinion is more natural and plain.

The first argument is in this 11 verse. From the end of Gods casting off the
Jews, which is set down two ways: first, negatiuely: secondly, affirmatively.

The negative end is in these words. I say then: have they stumbled that they
should fall? God forbid. And it is set down by a Question and an Answer to
it: the more familiarly to take away all scruple out of the mind of the Jews,
who might have run mad at the hearing of those direful curses out of Esaias
and David. For from thence they might say; if we be thus accursed by those
holy Prophets, then there is no hope left for us to recover the favor of God
and be saved. O says Paul despare not. God has not cast you off to that end;
he has not made you stumble that you should fall and never rise again (for to
fall is to be understood, finally to fall.) This Negation is set down with
great earnestness, as is usual with Paul, God forbid. God purposed no such
thing, but he propounded some other end to himself.

Quest. What is that? An. viz. That through their fall salvation might come to
the Gentiles, to provoke them to Ielousy.

Here are two ends; one issuing out of an other. The 1. That salvation might
come to the Gentiles, amplified by mentioning the occasion of it: which is the
fall of the Jews.

Quest. God it semes reiects the Jews that the Gentiles might be called in:
may evil be done that good may come of it?

Answ. No. And the reiection of the Jews is not evil but good: an effect of
Justice: a punishment of their rebellion.

Quest. Could not God have saved the Gentiles, if the Jews had not been cast
off?

Answ. Doubtless he could, but he pleased not so to do. The Jews would not
themselves receive Christ; nor were they content the Gentiles should; being
herein like the dog in the manger; it was fit this dog should be driven away,
that the Gentiles might be intromitted and let in at Heaven gates.

The end beyond this: to provoke them to Ielousy; that is, to an earnest
emulation, to recover the love of God their husband.

The reiection of the Jews begets the calling of the Gentiles and this, the
emulation of the Jews.

To provoke them to Jealousy. The Greek word translated to provoke to Ielousy,
cannot be expressed in any one english word which I can call to mind. It was
before translated; to provoked to follow: both which translations, will make up
the sense, Ielousy being here taken, for emulation as it is rendered. ver. 14.

The root from whence the word in the text is derived, signifies: either envy
or emulation. Which though they be sometime confounded, yet they differ greatly.

Envy is a grief of mind conceived at the good of our neighbor, with a
desire and endeavor to diminish it, being persuaded that our excellency is
thereby obscured. Thus Caesar and Pompey envied one another. Stimulos dedit
aemula virtus Nec quenquam iam far potest Caesarve priore^ Pompeiuus ve parem.
Thus did diverse Preachers envy Paul, seeking to eclipse his fame. This is
not meant here.

Emulation is also a grief of mind for the good of our neighbor. But here is
the difference: not because that good is in him, but because it is not in us;
not because he is so good, but because our selves are no better. When a man
beholding the graces in his neighbor, and his own backwardness and wants, is
grieved at himself, and provoked to use means to attain such graces. This is
emulation. And this emulation shall the calling of the Gentiles at length breed
in the Jews, whereby they shall not be grieved that the Gentiles are saved,
but that themselves have been such beasts, and are so far behind the
Gentiles, whom they shall be stirred up with a holy zeal to overtake. God
deals with the Jews, as a schoole-maister with some one scholar, in whom he
would feign breed a love of learning and diligence at his book; he praises
another before his face, and aduanceth him, to set his teeth on edge, that
seeing another praised and preferred, he might be provoked to plie his book,
to obtain the like commendation.

The argument then you see is most artificially and cunningly framed thus: If
this be the end of Gods rejecting the Jews to call the Gentiles, that
themselves might be provoked to follow the Gentiles; then the Jews shall be
called: but the first is true, as in the text: therefore the last. Consule
epist. Hierom ad laetae de institutione filioe. Ratio argutissima Melancthon.


The proposition is cleared from this, that the end spoken of is Gods end. If
the Jews never do imitate the Gentiles in receiving the Gospel: Then God
fails of his end. But this cannot be. Therefore the Jews shall receive the
Gospel.

Here are two general doctrines.

The Jews are rejected that the Gentiles might be called. Math. 21.43. Act.
13.45. experience also proves this.

Use 1
God delights not in the death of a sinner, neither is that the chief end of
his decree, though it follow it. He propounds his own glory, which is fit
should be set forth in their punishment, who will not glorify him in their
obedience.

God, when the Jews contemn his favors, does not refuse to be favorable to
any, but then bestows them on the Gentiles. This is contrary to our practice
and words. If we have done good to one that has rewarded us ill, then we vow
never to do the like for any. This is corruption: and nothing else but an
excuse for the spare of our purses. God does not so: imitate him.

When the Jews refuse the Gospel, God gives it to the Gentiles. He is not
tied to any nation. Think of this O England, which deseruest to be stripped of
the sweet blessings thou enioyest. God has a nation in store, to put into the
possession of the favors thou hold of him, if thou bring not forth
fruits worthy of the Gospel thou have. He that used not his talent well, had
it taken from him, and given to another before his face. When Saul behaved not
himself well in his kingdom, it is given to David. Hold that thou have, O
England, lest another take thy crown.

The vocation of the Gentiles is the provocation of the Jew. Deuter. 32.20. and
ver. 15. following.

Use 1.
God is in finitely good, who out of the greatest evil, the sin of the
Jews, can bring so great good as the salvation of the Gentiles and Jews. He
makes treacle of our poison: and never would suffer any evil to be, if he knew
not how to bring good out of it. Our very enemies who seek to mischief us,
shall thereby promote our good: as in the example of Joseph. So have I seen
some man's reputation shine the more being envied. For envy diminishes not,
but increases our praise. Some have grieved that they have not been envied,
and others have wished this as a great plague unto a man, not to be envied,
because envy has been holden a true mark of virtue in the party who is
envied. Themistocles. Qui ducis vultus et non legis ista libenter, Omnibus
inuideas, Inuide, nemo tibi. Martial.


The Jews shall be provoked to embrace the Gospel, by the faith of the
Gentiles. Learn what use to make of the good gifts thou see in others.
Praise God for the virtues of thy neighbor, and pray to have the like in rhy
self. Look upon thy wants by the glass of his goodness, and say, Father
bless me also. Let it stir thee up to a holy emulation and strife to do as
well, nay better: as Peter and John strove to outrunne one another to the
sepulcher. Let us consider one another, and provoke to good works.

Use. 2.
There are three sorts of men offending herein. 1. Such as never regard good or
bad men, all are alike unto them. They after a stupid manner, consider not a
man's gifts, but a gay coat or a gold ring: they walk without observation.

2. Some will consider their neighbor and their gifts, how they are qualified
and spend their lives, but as the devil considers the servants of God, to
mischief them. These are envious persons, most grievous sinners. Envy is noted
by the Fathers to be the worst of all sins, and therefore one of them says,
Greg. Mag. li. 5. cap. 34.
that indeed, in other sins the Devil powers his poison into men; but when
he works upon an envious man, he shakes his bowels, as when we would have
dregs and all, we shagge and shake the vessel up and down. Beware of this
sin, it seldom obtains pardon. As it is the worst of sins, so the
iustest, as a Viper eating out the bowels where it is bred. Hieron. in cap. 5.
epist. ad Galat.


3. Some consider the good, but not those which are better then themselves:
only looking at their inferiors: as the Pharisee pickes out the Publican for
comparison. This consideration breeds not a striving unto more godliness, but
a spiritual sloth. If thou be a Magistrate or Minister, or common Christian,
it may be there are some inferior unto thee in good abilities: but look thou
upon the best, and strive to attain to them. If benevolence be to be gathered
for the poor, follow not him that gives least, but weighing thy ability,
proportion them who are most liberal. Occupat extremum scabies.
It is a shame to be in the lagge, strive to be foremost: As the light of the
Sun draws men out to their labor and business; so if thou have a neighbor
shinning as a star in grace, let his light draw thee to please God.

VERSE 12. Now if the fall of them be the Riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them, Or decay, or loss.
the riches of the Gentiles: How much more their fullness?


IN this verse, is the second Argument to prove the calling of the Jews, taken
from the effect of such their calling, namely, the profit and benefit coming
thereby to the world.

If the fall: The word signifies Fault as well as Fall, and so read the Vulgar
and the Ancient: expounding Fall infidelity; and then the meaning is: If their
infidelity, much more their faith: there is no difference in the sense, if you
say Fault; but Fall or Ruin is better, so is it the same with Diminishing:
their fall, that is, from their excellent estate, their Casheering as you may
say.

The Riches: Not Temporal, but Spiritual, as the Gospel, Faith, Repentance,
etc.

Of the World: By World is meant all Nations beside the Jews: for when the
Jewish Church stood, there could no stone be hewed for a Spiritual Temple, but
in Jury, nor any pearl found but at Jerusalem: but now God casts his bounty
over all the world, which was before, in comparison of Iewry, a waste
wilderness.

The Diminishing: Not the paucity of believers, meaning the Apostles, as though
when they shall be called, they should be all Preachers with Enoch and Elias,
for the conversion of the world; for that shall not need, in as much as the
Jews shall not be called till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in: but,
their inferiority, their abasing, they being thrust, as we may say, into the
lowest form; their lessening in account with God.

Of the Gentiles: the same with World as before.

Their fullness: That is, abundance, multitude, (in comparison of their present
fewness recei^ing the Gospel) as when much of a thing is in a vessel, we say
it is full,

The Argument is thus framed and conceived, as Calvin observes. Whatsoever is
profitable for the world or Church, God will do: but the conversion of the
Jews Nation will be exceeding profitable.

The Proposition is grounded upon the exceeding goodness of God: the Minor is
proved in the text, from the less to the greater, thus, If their casting out
be profitable, much more their calling home: for, if that which is evil and
works by accident do good: then that which is good, will much more, working
naturally and by it self. But the first is true, as experience has proved:
therefore the second.

The general calling of the Jews, shall be the enriching of the world. Which
so much the more appears by Paul's manner of setting it down. How much more?
as if he admired it, and were not able to express or conceive. Some learned
men apply hither, Esaias 24.21. Ezech. 38.8. and Revel. 21. I confess I can
bring no plain place to back this: But Paul's own authority is sufficient,
because we know he wrote by the Spirit.

Use 1.
God makes all mutations and changes of States and Kingdoms to serve to the
good of the Elect: If the Jews stand, it is good: so is it, if they fall; and
shall be in their rising again. The prosperity of Egypt shall serve the good
of Abraham: the Destruction of Egypt, the good of his children. All his ways
are good to such as keep his Testimonies. Psalm. 25.10.


Use. 2.
The Conversion of the Jews shall be the riches of the world: The more
receive of the treasures of Gods grace, the greater is every ones part: so is
it not in the treasure of Princes: If the King bestow a thousand pound upon one
man, it is a great gift: if upon two it is the less to each by half, if upon
a thousand, it is but a small matter to every one. But in Gods treasures,
multitude of partakers, diminish not, but increase another part. The more
drink of the waters of life, the more flows the fountain: the more the
merrier. Where two or three are gathered together, there is Christ; but where
more, there he is the more graciously. If thou be alone, thou shall not want
grace; but thou shall have more, if the number increase. The prayer of one
avails much, how much more the prayers of many righteous? Vis vnita fortior
Force united is the stronger. Many streams make a great river, many drops a
great flood, many sparks a great flame. How might we prevail with God, if
our whole people would join with one mind and affection in the service of God?

If our Brownists would leave their corners (where some few silly ones of them
meet) and join with us, we might both be bettered. Grieve not to see the
number of professors and hearers of the Word increase: it is no man's loss, but
every man's advantage: Help and further the conversion of others: so shall we
have the more to give counsel and good example; to pray for one another, and
to provoke unto godliness. Company often times draws us on to do that
cheerfully, which alone we have no courage to meddle with all. When we have
no stomach, company oft-times sets us on feeding: even a jade, which is dull
alone, goes cheerfully in company.

Use 3.
The Gospel, Faith, Repentance, etc. are true riches: gold, silver, etc. but
shadows to these: therefore the man that had his barnes full, and his
conscience empty, not being rich in God, is called Fool. We say in a proverb,
He is poor whom God hates: true, none so poor as the wicked, none so rich as
the Righteous. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, says
Solomon. Prou. 12.26.
Have thou the world at will? but thou have not heaven at will. Have thou
silver and gold? But if thou have not faith and a good conscience, thou art
miserable: and whatsoever thou think of thy self, the poorest man that
fears God will not change states with thee: for a good conscience is a
continual feast: pray for this, and say as Abraham for a son: Lord what will thou give me, seeing I want the true riches, thy favor, and a good
conscience. Lord make me rich in these.

Use. 4.
The conversion of the Jews shall be our riches; it should make us think
long, for their calling: Gain is pleasing to hear of, but more to have it;
we shall be gainers by their conversion. Knowledge shall then increase upon
us, as the waters that cover the Sea, the light of the Moon shall be as the
Sun, and the light of the Sun seuen-fold. Zeal and all good graces shall
increase: A great light is now risen, but a greater shall arise.

Blessed are the eyes of them which shall behold that time, blessed shall our
posterity be, in whose days these things shall come to pass: Let us pray and
long for the revealing of such riches, and in the mean time mourn for the
hardness of the Jews, and cry unto God in their behalf, saying, O Lord, how
long? Return, O Lord; and visit thy Ancient people with thy salvation.

Use 5.
The casting off of the Jews, was our Calling; but the Calling of the Jews
shall not be our casting off, but our greater enriching in grace, and that two
ways: First, in regard of the company of belieuers, when the thousands of
Israel shall come in, which shall doubtless cause many Gentiles, which now lie
in ignorance, error and doubt, receive the Gospel and join with them. The
world shall then be a golden world, rich in golden men, says Ambrose.
Secondly, in respect of the graces, which shall then in more abundance be
rained down upon the Church. There shall be more good, and they shall be also
more good.

VERSE. 13. For I speak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of the
Gentiles, I magnify mine office.

14. If by any means I may provoke to emulation, them which are my flesh, and
might save some of them.


A Third Argument is in these words, taken from Paul's intention in preaching
the Gospel, as if he should say, I do cheerfully travel over all the world
to teach the Gentiles; as for other reasons, so also for this, because I know
the state of the Jews is not desperate, but that they shall be brought home
again.

For the attaining of the meaning of these two verses, Calvin has supplied
some words, which indeed have inuolued them in more obscurity. Beza reads a
great part of the thirteenth verse in a parenthesis: but His Majesty's
Translation using no insertion of words, or parenthesis, is plainest and best.

In these words we have two parts, the Argument and the Confirmation of it.

The Argument is in these words, I magnify mine office, If by any means, etc.
The Confirmation in the precedent words of the thirteenth verse.

I magnify mine office: I make my Apostleship (that is, his office) honorable
and famous, that is, I preach diligently, the effect being put for the cause:
For that which makes a Preacher famous, is his painfulnesse and diligence in
his office. Paul's preaching is not to be understood of his preaching to the
Jews, which he was not bound to do, as some expound; (performing therein a
work of supererogation, which might be a sign of the conversion of the Jews,
or else Paul would not preach unto them.) But, of his preaching to the
Gentiles: because the faith of the Gentiles should be by Gods appointment, the
occasion, or a means to bring the Jews forward to Christ. The end of Paul's
preaching is, verse. 14. which is double: The nearer: To provoke them of his
flesh, Psalm. 3.8. 1. Cor. 3.9.
that is, the Jews, to follow them, that is, the Gentiles. The remote end,
that some of the Jews might be saved: that I might save some of them. 1. Tim.
4.16.
Salvation belongs to the Lord, as to the Author: but he has given us
Ministers to be instruments of it; from whence we are called, fellow workers
with God: So Paul exhorts Timothy to ply his book, and follow his study,
that he may save himself and his hearers.

The Argument may be thus framed. One end of Paul's diligent preaching to the
Gentiles, is, that the Jews may be called and saved, therefore they shall be
converted and saved. Or thus, The end of Paul in his preaching, shall obtain
or come to pass: but the calling of the Jews is Paul's end. Therefore the
Jews shall be called.

The Confirmation of the Mayor, is in the thirteenth verse, in these words: I
speak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles: which
words contain a solemn auouchment, Gryn.
that Paul's end in preaching to the Gentiles is the calling of the Jews, as if
he should say, In the word of an Apostle, or, As I am an Apostle to you
Gentiles, I do solemnly testify, that the end of my great labors in
preaching over the world, is not only my obedience to God, and to save you, but
to save the Jews also. This Confirmation may be put into form thus:

The end which Paul entends as an Apostle, shall come to pass: But the end
before named he avouches in the word of an Apostle. Ergo.

Also it might be confirmed out of the eleventh verse, thus. Gods end cannot
fail, but Paul's end, is the same with Gods end. Ergo. If such a calling were
not to come, Paul's labor in a great part were lost.

The way for a Minister to make his office glorious, is to be diligent in
preaching. So Paul speaks for himself, 1. Cor. 15.10. and commends
himself for this, 2. Cor. 11.22. and so to the end of the Chapter.

Use 1.
Paul challenges credice to that he speaks, because of his calling: 1. Cor.
4.1.
It is very material that hearers should have a reverent opinion of the calling
and office of their Teachers. Let a man esteem us, as the ministers of Christ?
Then will the word work in us when we hear it not as the word of man, but as
indeed it is, the word of the living God. Hear thy Teacher preaching the
truth, with such reverence as thou would hear Christ, if he were upon the
earth. 1. These. 3.13.


Use. 2.
Our principal office is to save men: which reproues them which intrude
themselves, being no way fit to save men; and those which being fit, by their
silence and negligence suffer men to perish.

Use 3.
Paul has a great desire to save them of his own flesh: ordinate charity
first regards ones own. So every man, first for his own family: and every
Minister, first for the flock committed unto him.

Use 4.
The glory of a Minister is principally in his learned and painful preaching.
Maintenance, degrees, dignities, make not a Minister honorable, but are badges
of such: our Church and state, appointing these as rewards of them who deserve
to be honored for their learning and worthiness; 1. Tim. 5.17.
being a part of that double honor allotted for them by the Spirit of God.

There is a great deal of contempt cast upon the ministry, and every base
fellow can be eloquent enough in disgracing the Clergy. The way to redeem our
function from the scorn of men, is painfulnesse in our calling, and
sufficiency of holy gifts for ministerial emploiments: without these,
preferments will not do it. As a gold ring in a swines snout, and beauty in a
woman without discretion, so is dignity conferred upon a man unlearned and
negligent.

Paul was, both for person and means, very mean, yet when the Galathians heard
him preach, they esteemed him as an Angel, and held him so dear, that they
would have plucked out their eyes to have done him good. As the honor of a King
is in the multitude of his subjects, so the glory of a Minister in the
multitude of them he conuerts. As the credit of a schoolmaster is to send many
to the Universities, and of a Physician to heal many patients, so is it the
fame of a Minister spiritually to cure many, and to send them to heaven.

Let us therefore spend the candle of our life for the enlightening of others
this will credit us; for we ought to be had in singular estimation for our
works sake.

Use 5.
There are three ends of a Minister in his preaching: first, to obey Gods
commandment and the Churches who have called him forth to preach. Secondly, to
save the souls of his hearers. Thirdly, that their hearers thriuing under
their labors in faith and godly life, may be a provocation to others to follow
them. In aiming at, and attaining these three, we glorify God.

These also must be the ends of hearers in hearing, that they may set forth
Gods glory: first, to obey Gods commandment: secondly, to save their souls:
thirdly, to provoke others by their example, and so to save them. Art thou
seasoned with grace by hearing? live so, that thou may relish and season
others, that those which will not be won by the word, may be won to the word
by thy good conversation.

Examine thy conscience, have thou done thus? or rather when thou have come
from a sermon, have thou not by swearing, lying, backbiting, false dealing,
quarrelling, drinking, etc. caused profane men and women to blaspheme Christ
and his Gospel, and to wound them through thy sides? If it be thus, it were
better that a millstone were hanged about thy neck, and thou thrown into the
bottom of the sea. Is this to gain Jews and other profane men to the faith?
Nay, it is to make Jews, Turks and Infidels to renounce Christianity; and
those which are profane among us, to hate the profession and preaching of the
Gospel the more. What a blessing shall it be to thy soul, if thy godly, just
and good conversation, living according to thy profession, bring others on to
love and hear the word, and so to be saved. I testify to thee in the word of
a Minister, that thou ought so to live as thou may bring credit to the
Gospel, and provoke others to the faith.

VERSE 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world,
what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?


IN this verse also is contained an argument to prove the general calling of
the Jews to come not a new one, but that (...) son their former life shall not
come into remembrance. They shall live more. And all this is delivered by an
Interrogation, to show that such happiness and beauty shall then come to the
world, as we cannot imagine.

The calling of the Jews shall be a new life and happiness to the world: so
before verse. 12. It is the judgment of Peter Martyr a very learned man,
besides others, that many things are spoken by the Prophets of the calling of
the Jews, and of the happiness of the Church, which are not yet fulfilled, and
therefore are to be expected at that time.

Use 1
Fellowship in grace, is no hinderance to them which have received grace, as
before.

Use 2.
Again, here we are to be put in mind, to pray for the calling of the
Jews, which shall bring so much good to the world: as the sisters sent to
Christ in the behalf of their brother Lazarus; John 11.
so let us Gentiles importune the Lord for our brethren the Jews: My spirit
rejoices at the remembrance of that day. O, how will the Jew put on, as being
ashamed to be ouergone by the Gentile? How eagerly will he follow? not a
snailes pace, which is the fashion now; but even flying with the wings of
knowledge and zeal: we have now the start of them, let us set the best foot
forward and keep it.

Use 3.
Till we be converted, we are enemies, and in open hostility with God: the
regenerate are Gods friends: he will save his friends, but as for his enemies
they shall be slain before his face.

Nay till we be called, we are dead, stark dead: The father said of the
prodigal child being returned: This my son was dead, but now is alive: Luke
15.29.31
Dead, though not bodily, yet spiritually, which is the very suburbs of hell.
Such as live in pleasure are dead. 1. Tim. 5.6.
So much difference between unconverted men and converted, as between dead
and living men. As the countenance of a dead man is ghastly, and his carkas
proves soon unsavory, so unregenerate men are odious in the sight of God and
men; notwithstanding their outward ornaments and odours, which is nothing else,
but the perfuming of a piece of carrion. He that keeps company with the
wicked, is like the spirit that haunted the graves; as thou hopest to be
separated from them at the day of judgment, so now stand up from the dead,
that thou may receive light. Ephesians. 5.14.


The ministry of the word, is the voice of God calling us from death to life,
from hell to heaven; those which contemn it, must needs be swallowed up of
death, If God has breathed into thee the life here spoken of by this means,
manifest it by thy love to the word, and by the actions of life. Drunkenness,
uncleanness, etc. are dead works, Hebr. 9.14.
so called, because they bring death, and are performed by them which are
spiritually dead: But godliness has the promises of this life, and of that
which is to come. 1. Tim. 4.8.


VERSE 16. For if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the
root be holy, so are the branches.


Here is another Argument taken from the relation of the Jews, to the
covenant made with their fathers: thus, A holy people shall not be finally
rejected: But the Jews are a holy people: Ergo. The Minor is proved by the
likeness of the effect with the procreant cause, thus: That whose procreant
cause is holy: is holy: But the procreant cause of the Jews is holy: namely,
Abraham, Isaak and Jacob. Ergo.

The proposition of the last Syllogism is here avouched by Paul, under two
elegant similitudes. First, from the law of Ceremonies in the first part of the
verse. Secondly, from the law of Nature, in the last.

The Patriarchs are compared to the first fruits and root: the people of the
Jews, to the lump and branches. The Jews then descending from those
Patriarchs, to whom and their seed for ever the Covenant is made, are still in
the Covenant, and therefore their state not desperate.

If the first fruits: This has commonly been rendered by a word which
signifies an Assay or Taste: as when a Cook by tasting a spoone full of his
prepared broth, knows how the whole mess tastes. This taste they make to be
the Apostles: but this does eneruate the Argument, and is not to the purpose.
It is better translated first fruits, having reference to the Patriarchs, to
whom the Covenant was made.

Concerning these first fruits the law is set down, Leuit. 23. where the
people may not put sickle into their corn, till they have offered a sheafe to
the Lord, and then it was lawful for them to reap it, and hereby they had
assurance, safely to Inn their whole croppe. Hence by allusion is our Savior
called the first fruits of them that sleep, because our Resurrection depends
upon, and is assured by his. Also when they had their corn in, and made ready
of it for their use, they might not eat of it, till they had offered two loaves
to the Lord and then was their whole lump sanctified and made lawful for them
to eat.

Quest. Why did God command these ceremonies?

Answ. To teach the Jews hereby, that they received all blessings from the
Lord. So that as Princes and Nobles, when they bestow Manors upon deserving
servants, make reservation of some fealty, service rent, or such like; only
to show that they hold of them. So God required this of the Jews, that they
might know they held in chief of him. This law in regard of the Ceremony is
abolished, but the moral part is perpetual, namely, that we ought to be
thankful to God for his benefits: A thing that the wisest Heathens observed,
which may the more shame many of us, who day and night partake of Gods good
blessings, and yet make none or a slender acknowledgement for the same.

But to return to our matter: The sanctification of Abraham, Isaak and Iaacob,
to be the people of God, sanctifies outwardly all their posterity: As when the
two loaves were offered, not only that lump or batch of dow, from whence they
were taken: but every kernel was sanctified to the nourishment of them and
theirs: so the very last man, that shall be borne of that Nation, has right
to the Covenant.

The same is the sense of the other similitude: The branches follow the Nature
of the root, so do the Jews the state of of those holy Patriarchs in regard
of the outward things of the Covenant.

Object. I, the next Generation.

Answ. Nay, even as not only the lowest boughs which are next the root partake
of the nature of the root, but the highest twigg that is farthest of from the
same; so not only the next generation partake of the benefit of the covenant to
be the people of God; or those which returned out of Egiptian or Babilonian
bondage; or those which lived in Christ's time, but every Jew to the end of the
world. They are still to be acknowledged a holy people and in the covenant in
regard of right, though not in regard of possession. For the covenant was not
limited for any term, but is everlasting.

Concerning the holiness here spoken of; Aquin.
some distinguish it into actual, and potentiall, denying the first and
granting the second: But potentially any Nation is holy as well as the Jews;
God can make them so: But here is meant a present holiness, which is only in
regard of the Covenant, and their right unto the promises by the same.

The Jews are still a holy people. This appears by their evidence and their
letters paten^s, the tenor of the first grant running thus: The God of Abraham,
and of his seed after him, in their generations by an everlasting Covenant,
Genesis 17.7. So read Act. 2.38.39. and 3.25. They are called the children of the
Covenant, being for ever separated in the loins of their Fathers, unto the
Lord. And though some of them, for their particular have forfeited their
estate, yet s me particulars cannot forfeit the privilege granted to the whole
Nation.

Ob. The Nation of the Jews is before called Rebellious: how then can it now
be called holy?

Ans. There is a double holiness: First, of Regeneration. Secondly, of the
Covenant: in regard of the first they are rebellious; in regard of the second,
they are holy.

Ob. We are by nature the children of wrath as Paul acknowledges of himself
being a Jew. Ephesians. 2.3.
How then can the Jews be holy by nature or birth?

Ans. Both these may be in one subject because they are not in the same
respect: The former definition of holiness makes it plain. In regard of the
first, Children of wrath: in regard guard of the second, Holy by nature. The
first cannot be conveyed by parents to posterity: The second is, as for
example, A Gentleman is chosen to some great office, whereby he is a great
Lord: he begets a son; this son is a Gentleman by birth, but not a Lord:
because the honor of his father was not invested in his blood, but a special
grace conferred on his person. Individual and personal accidents, are never
derived, but common are; as to be the people of God: So we beget children, who
though they are borne in original sin, yet also within the Covenant. As a
son of a Freeman of London, is borne free, though lame or deformed: so are
our children, free of the Church, though originally polluted. The same person
may be the child of wrath by the common condition of Nature in Adam. And yet
holy by the common condition of the Covenant in Abraham.

Use 1
The children of Christians, are borne Christians and holy: by virtue of the
Covenant having right to the initiating seal of the Covenant, which is
Baptism: which right, if they were not borne Christians, they could not have.
Before Baptism our children, are either Heathen or Christians: But not
heathens: for then they might not be baptized till they had made confession of
Christ with their own mouth. Therefore they are borne Christians. Baptism
makes not a Christian, but signifies. As there are Jews by nature, so
Christians. If any allege that of Hierome, Hieron. aduersus vigil.
we are not borne, but reborne Christians,: the answer is ready: we are not
borne regenerate Christians, but to be regenerate. The saying must be so
understood, or else it is false: we beget Christians, not Believers.

Use 2.
The children of Christians dying before Baptism, dye not as Heathens and
Turks, but as Christians, therefore they have hope, and their parents may be
comforted over them. The Doctrine of the Papists, teaching that children dying
unbaptized are damned, is a cruel doctrine, without ground in the Scripture.

Quest. But what is to be thought of such children which die unbaptized, whose
parents die without repentance?

Ans. The sin of the next parents cannot bar the privilege of the child:
who may make claim from some others of his Ancestors who have believed. And by
such parents making profession outwardly, such a child may have a right to the
outward things of the Covenant; yet parents would be admonished, to deliver
over their evidence and charter to their children as fast as they have received
the same. For though the title of children whose parents are wicked is good to
the sacrament; yet it is more comfortably derived, from next parents believing.

Use 3.
Thou shall never have comfort that thou art born a Christian, til thou
beleeuest as a Christian should do. He that is free borne, and will use his
freedom, must observe some ceremony, and receive some instrument testifiing
the same: so though we be borne of Christian parents, yet there is something to
be done on our parts, we must believe and repent; the sin of the father
preiudiceth not the believing; nor the righteousness of the father saves the
vnbeeleeuing child.

Its a credit to be borne of religious parents if we be religious. If a man
have a thousand pound land a year left him, and spend it all in riotous
living, what credit is it for him to brag that his friends left him such an
estate? nay it is a shame to him: so if the virtues of our parents live in us,
its a grace to us, otherwise, the contrary. Its better to be religious, and
the son of wicked parents, then being the son of godly parents to be
wicked. He is truly noble that is good, but a wicked and vicious man, though he
came of a worthyer father then Abraham, is to be accounted base. Walk in the
steps of thy godly parents, and if they were not godly, redeem the baseness
of thy family, by thy holiness and virtues.

Use 4.
Art thou borne a Christian? Why then live thou like a Turk or heathen, in
all manner of vitiousnesse and profaneness? If thou be free borne, why
beco^mest thou by thy wickedness the devils slave? As thou bear the name of
Christ so live like him. When young Tobit, married her, whose seven former
husbands were slain for their vitiousnesse, he speaks to her the first night,
being in the bed chamber, after this manner: sister let us pray unto God; for
we may not come together as the heathen, for we are the children of the Saints.
So when thou art tempted to evil, think and say thus. I am a Christian borne,
God forbid that I should defile my self with heathenish and wicked manners.

VERSE. 17. And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild
olive tree, were graffed in a among them. And with them partakest of the root
and fatnes of the olive tree.

18. Boast not thy self against the branches: but if thou boast thou bear
not the root, but the root thee.


IN these verses and so to the 23, Paul digresseth, stepping a side to call
upon the Gentile, admonishing them not to despise and insult over the Jews,
notwithstanding their reiection, and their endowment with their priu^ledges:
for as the Jews hated the Christians for their admittance to the grace of the
gospel, so the gentiles specially of these times contemned the Jews. So that
the very name of a Jew is of odious account, though indeed, we ought to account
it a name of honor.

Paul ^als into this discourse purposely; but takes occasion from the 16 verse;
from whence some Gentile might or did say. We acknowledge the root of the
Jewish nation to be holy; but what good does the holiness of the root to them:
they being reprobated of God forlorn, vagabons, rebels, having crucified the
Lord of life?

Unto this Paul answers. ver. 17.18. As if he should say, I grant that some
of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild olive art graffed into
that stock and root: yet (remembering thine own original) boast not thy
self, despise not, nor vex the branches; for if thou be puffed up, thou
bear not the root; but the root thee.

Here are two parts: 1. An admonition: 2. the reason.

The admonition is in these words. Boast not thy self against the branches.

Boast not thy self: the word signifies such a carriage, whereby we show
disdain, in scornful looks, and words.

Against the branches: that is the Jews, whether remaining in the olive, or
broken off.

The reason is two fold: the 1 ver. 17. the other ver. 18.

The first reason is from a comparison of the estate of the gentiles before
their calling with their present. Their former estate was an estate of wrath:
their present estate of mercy. The force of the reason is this: those which
being in a forlorn estate; are of mere grace advanced, may not boast
themselves against others. But the gentiles being in such estate were of mere
grace advanced: Ergo.

This estate of the Gentiles past, and present, is set down under a most
elegant similitude.

In their first estate, they are compared, to a wild olive which is a tree
growing in the wast wilderness, unfruitful, with exceeding bitter leaves,
Ier. 11.16.
which the husbandman makes little reckoning of but to hew down and lay at the
fires back. This estate is amplified by the Antithesis of the natural estate
of the Jews, which is compared to a sweet or garden olive, fair, green, and
flourishing.

Their present estate is, that they are graffed into the natural and sweet
olive, which is the Church of the Jews: they are not made Jews, Romans 6.5.
but brought into the fellowship of that Church by the calling of the gospel,
for graffing in, signifies effectual calling and conversion to God.

This graffing in, is amplified two ways: 1 from the occasion of it, which is
the breaking off of some of the branches, that is casting away some of the
Jews for their unbelief: all were not cast away; for all were not
vnbeeleuers: we are graft in among them which remained; or for them (as some
read) which were cut off.

Secondly, from the effect of this ingraffing: which is a partaking of the
juice and fatness of the natural olive. An Olive is of a iuycie and oily
nature. The grace promised in the covenant, is called fatness: because it is
as wholesome to the soul, as oil is to the body. A like phrase is in the
Psalms, My soul, says David, Psalm. 63.6.
shall be satisfied with marrow and fatness. The favor of God shall be to
David as marrow and farnesse to an Epicure. The grace also which we receive
from Christ (for of his fullness we receive) John 1.16.
is called oil of gladness, Hebr. 1.9.
because it gladdeth the conscience of sinners. We partake of this fatness by
incision into the stock, which is the Church of the Jews. This effect is set
forth by an adiunct: we partake, not alone, but with them, that is the Jews,
remaining unbroken off: so that by what grace the Jew is nourished and saved,
by the same grace are we.

The sum: The Church of the Jews is the stock or body of a sweet olive.
The root is Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with relation to Christ, who fills both
root and body with oil and fatness. Out of this body sprout many natural
branches: some prove unfruitful, which the husbandman, which is God, breaks
off: and because he has respect to the beauty of his tree, not delighting to
see it mangled, he goes into the wilderness (the rest of the world out of the
pale of Iewry) and gathers of the wild olive tree (that is the Gentiles)
impes which he grafteth in the room of them which are broken off, and among
them which stand; whereby these wild impes grow into the natural olive, and
partake of her fatness with the rest of the natural branches.

The second reason is verse. 18. taken from the relation between the root and
the branches: as if he should say: Despise not a Jew, for he is a branch of
that body and root which bears thee: he is a natural child of Abraham, who in
some degree is despised (which is unreasonable, in as much as he is the root
that bears thee) when his children are despised.

The Gentiles may not despise the Jews. They which are advanced by grace, are
not to boast against them which are in misery. Psalm 41.1. Exodus 23.9.
Deutreon. 10.19. 1. Corinthians. 13.4.5. The Pharisee disdained the Publican as
a varlet or base fellow, with, This Publican. But the Publican disdaines not
him, nor is disdained of God, as the Pharisee was.

The use of this is either in respect of the Jew, or of the Gentile.

In respect of the Jew:

Use 1.
Some of the Gentiles are broken off, some not at all. The Church of the Jews
was never cast away; only the unbelievers. are broken Putata est oliua non
amputata. Ansel.
The olive tree is pruned, but not stocked up. The body and some of the
branches remain, into which and among whom we are graffed.

We are graffed in among them, and reciue of the fatness with them. The Church
of the Jews, not of Rome, is properly our mother Church. We must be the seed
of Abraham, if we will have the promises, and therefore believing Gentiles are
called the children of Abraham, not natural, but by incision. We bring nothing
to the Jews, but receive all from them: for salvation is of the Jews. Ioh.
4.22.
The Gentiles are not called to make a several Church by themselves, neither
do they so: for there is but one Church. But they are called to be members of
the Church of the Jews, as Christ says: Ioh. 10.16.
I have other sheep (says he) which are not of this fold. What sheep? what
fold? Sheep, that is, elect among the Gentiles. This fold, that is, the Church
of the Jews, Them must I also bring: whither? to the fold of the Jews, that
there may be one fold or Church, and one Shepherd.

In regard of the Gentiles.

Use 1.
Thou art made partaker of the fatness. The same fatness nourishes the
natural and ingraffed branches. The Jew is saved by faith in Christ, so are
we. Act. 15.11.
There is no difference between the way of salvation in the old and new
Testament, but as this: In graffing, there is clay and binding about. The Jew
is bound about with a red ligature in regard of circumcision; we with a white,
in regard of Baptism and the white garments then used.

Let us not then boast our selves against the branches: for though they deserve
the contempt that is cast upon them, yet woe be to them which are instruments
to vex them. Assure the rod of Gods wrath to that people is cast into the fire;
Esa. 10.12 etc.
and shame covers Edom for ever for his cruelty to the captiued Jews.
Obediah.
Let us love them as we have good cause for the roots sake. There is no name of
any nation that is named under heaven it not in contempt. The life of this
application we want, because the wisdom of our laws has for their outrages
long ago banished them out of this kingdom. But whenever thou think of
them, think honorably, pity and pray for them.

Use 2.
We are here taught also three things to consider of 1. What we were before
this grace received wherein we stand. 2. How to carry our selves in this state
of grace. 3. How to know whether we have received true grace, be ingraffed into
the natural olive or no.

1. We were before our ingraffing, wild olives. Even as the cursed heath in the
wilderness, without Christ, without God, strangers from the common wealth of
Israel, Ier. 17.6.
from the promises and from the life of God, very caytifes: this Paul bids all
Gentiles to remember, Ephesians. 2.11.12.
that we may praise God for his mercy.

2. Having received grace, carry thy self without boasting against them that
want grace: when thou see a profane wretch disdain him not, but mourn for
him, and say, Lord look mercifully upon him and turn his heart. Considering
thy self, and remembering thy former estate have compassion on thy neighbor.

3. Those which partake of the fatness of the olive, are ingraffed; this
fatness is the grace given to the root, which is double: the grace of
justification, and sanctification. If justified and sanctified: then ingraffed.

1. For justification: oil is good for medecin, healing wounds, and asswaging
pain, also it makes the countenance cheerful: Psalm. 104.15.
so the grace of our Lord Jesus, which is called the oil of gladness, makes
the righteous merry and joyful. Feel thou the mercy of God in the pardon of
thy sins, and have peace with God? This is the fatness of the olive; thou
art ingraffed, and become the child of Abraham, the child of God.

2. Sanctification may be known by effects and properties of it. The effects
are three. 1. In the heart. 2. In the tongue. 3. In the life.

1. If thou be graffed in: then thou have the heart of Abraham: thou love
goodness and hate evil: thou art upright and sincere: The wood of the olive
will not rott; Cariem vetustatemque non sentit. Ioh Bapt. Neap. vil. l. 6. c 9.
This notes soundness. The nature also of the oil, is not to be mixed with
other things: if you mix it with wine or water it will be uppermost: you may
as soon mix light and darkness, as grace and sin. An Hypocrite is no
branch of this tree. Farther the nature of oil is to keep mettalls from
rusting: so the virtue of this grace, preserues the conscience from sin,
which otherwise would eat in, and perish the soul. If thou have a cankard
heart, rusted with the love of sin, and of the vanities of the world, thou
have none of this fatness, and by consequence art not graffed in.

2. Thy words will be suitable to thy engraffing. Flores Oliuae suauiter
redolent. Frater Johannes a S: Gemimano. lib. 3. qui est de vegetabilibus et
plantis. c. 37.
The blossom of the olive is wonderful sweet, so if thou be of this tree,
thy speech will be sauoury and gatious to the hearers. If thou be a blasphemer,
a liar, etc. Thou art not graffed into this olive. The sweet olive yields
another manner of sent. A dead man's grave, does not more annoy men, then thy
filthy and rotten communication. Iam. 1.
Its a vain thing for a man to seem religious, if he refrain not his tongue.

3. If thu be ingraffed thou will bring forth much fruit: for the olive is
exceeding fruitful. The fruit of the olive is both for God and man. 1. For
God. Oil was consecrate to the Lord, was used in sacrifice, and for the holy
lamps, for it is a nourisher of light; so thou will be religious, a keeper of
the sabbath, a worshipper of God, a favorer of the Gospel. 2. For man. It is
both for medicine and meat. Kings, Priests and Prophets were anointed with
it. Our lives must be fruitful and profitable to the Church; we must not be
for nothing, or only to spend stouer, as they say. Let ours, says Paul,
learn to show forth good works, for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful. Tit. 3.14.
If we live without doing good we are no olive branches. Our obedience must be
to God and man: to the first and second table of the law.

The properties of our obedience, are four, according to such properties of
the olive. That is. 1. Speedy. 2. Peaceable. 3. continual. 4, cheerful.
Cito comprehendit et fructificat. Ioh. Bap. Por. Nea. vil. l. 6. c. 5.


1. The olive is a quick bearer: so we must bring forth fruit quickly: like the
Almond rod of Aaron that presently budded and brought forth ripe Almonds. The
theife upon the cross presently showed the fatness he had rceiued by
confession, prayer, etc.

2. Our fruit must be peaceable. An olive branch was a token of peace, as a
palm of victory. James says that the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace: Iam. 3.17.
pride, disdain; quarreling and contending with our neighbors, is a note of a
bramble, not of an Olive branch. If you power out water, it makes a noise,
dasheth, and besprinkleth you. But the pouring out of oil, is without noise
falling down softly and with great silence. So the servants of God must be
peaceable.

3. Our obedience must be continual, once and always to bear fruit. The
Olive always flourishes, is always green, and never castes the leaves:
noting the constant tenor we should keep in our obedience: David says,
Psalm. 92.14.
That they which be planted in Gods house, still bring forth fruit, and
flourish in their age. If thy obedience be not continual, it is not sound.

4 Our obedience must be cheerful, thy love to thy neighbor must be free.
Anointing with oil, makes us lithe and nimble, so if we have received hereof,
we will not come to the Church as though we were stiff in the joints, like a
bear to the stake, but with David we will run in the ways of the
Commandments: The Olive requires no great cost to make it fruitful: nor a man
truly sanctified, great entreaty to persuade him to do good. As the Sun
naturally gives light so a true Christian ingraffed into the natural Olive,
willingly and cheerfully is exercised in Gods service.

VERSE. 19. Thou will say then, the branches were broken off, that I might be
grafted in.

20 Well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by
faith: Be not high minded, but fear.


THe Admonition is here repeated in other words, upon the occasion of an
insolent objection of a Christian Gentile, which objection is set down verse.
19. and is the first part of these words: The second part is Paul's answer,
verse. 20.

The Gentile taking in some scorn, that Paul in the 17. v. had avouched the
Jew to be the natural Olive, and the Gentile a wild Olive, obiecteth, as if
he had said, Tell not me, Paul, of these things: let the Jew be what he will,
I am as I am; yet (by your leave) he is broken off, that I might be graffed in,
which shows that God saw more worthiness in me, then in the Jew: The
merchant parts not with his present fraught, but for better lading: neither
will any man suffer an incision or scarifying in his arms or feet, but for
preservation of a more noble member, as the eye or head.

His Argument may be framed in an Enthymeme, thus, They are broken off, that I
might be grafted in; Therefore I may boast.

To this Paul answers, verse. 20. which his answer is either to the
Antecedent: Well, because of unbelief they are broken off, thou stand by
faith: or to the consequence, Be not high minded, but fear.

His answer to the Antecedent has two parts: 1. A Co^cession, Well: 2. A
correction, in the rest of the words.

Well: Some take this word ironically and by way of increpation, as we much use
it in our English tongue, saying, Ansel.
well, well, when we mean that it is not well. But here it is taken for a
Concession, Paul grants the thing: viz. That the Jews are broken off, that the
Gentiles might come in: But he adds a prouiso, always remembered, that the
proper cause of the breaking off of the Jew was his infidelity, not the
coming in of the Gentile: For this came to pass by a second and accide^tal
consideration: and the proper cause of the coming in and standing of the
Gentiles, is faith, that is, the grace of God. The Gentile then understood not
himself, being like a foolish servant that runs away without his errand: for
if he had taken all with him, he would have discerned cause of humiliation, not
of boasting herein.

The Gentiles Argument is a mere paralogisme, alleging that which is not the
cause, for that which is. The unbelief of the Jew, being the cause of their
breaking off, not the letting in of the Gentiles. So that Paul answers, as if
he should say, Learn (thou Gentile) to distinguish between the cause and the
event. It fell out, that the Jew being cast out, thou were received in: but
this was not the cause of that, neither is thy goodness the cause of thy
standing in the Olive, which were wont to stand among the briars in the
wilderness. God could have brought thee in, without breaking off the Jews,
but he would not; but has done thee good out of their evil, and has brought
thee in, that thou might be the cause of their bringing in again.

The proper cause of the breaking off of the Jew, his infidelity: of the
standing of the Gentile, Gods grace.

Faith is the gift of God, whereby we know, apprehend and apply the promises,
relying upon them. Infidelity is a fruit of corruption, whereby we know not the
promises, or knowing, believe them not, or believing them to be true, make them
not our confidence.

Standing notes an estate wherein a man has the favor of God to justification
and salvation: Breaking off, the contrary.

Standing is a manifestation of Election, by faith, here: by salvation,
hereafter.

Breaking off, is a manifestation of Gods Judgment: in this world, by taking
away from a people, the Word and Sacraments, the tokens of his love, and
cognizance of his people, so are the Jews, and also those famous Churches of
Asia, broken off: and by giving particular persons to hardness of heart. After
this world, by separating such from Angels and Saints, and by throwing them
into hell.

Object. It seems then that a man may be a branch and yet broken off?

Ans. Similitudes are not to be pressed too far: Branches are to be
distinguished: some that have only an outward fellowship with the Olive, these
may be broken off: some that have an inward, partaking of the sap and
fatness of the Olive, these cannot. So that there are Infidels out of the
Church and Infidels in the Church. The first Infidelity is called Negative,
the second, Privative.

Yet it is to be understood that faith is not so the cause of standing, as
infidelity is of breaking off: for infidelity is the meritorious cause of
breaking off, and faith but the instrument or staff whereby we stand.

Our standing is by faith, our breaking off by infidelity, 2. Cor. 1.24. Heb.
3.12. In this place to the Hebrews, there is the same name given to an
unbelieving heart, which is given to that naughtie-packe the Devil. And Heb.
11.1. Faith is the ground of things hoped for: or (as Sanit Augustine) Aug.
tract. 79. sup. Ioh.
of persons hoping: God has given faith to uphold us, not as a reed that may
deceive, but as a pillar; well translated ground, being as the immovable earth
which we stand on: we have good footing by faith: The Israelites were destroyed
for their infidelity Jude 5.

Use.
Believers are truly happy, unbelievers truly miserable. He stands in Gods
favor: This is thrown away as a withered branch into unquenchable fire. Cain
sins, believes not, hence he is tormented in conscience, afraid of his own
shadow, thinking the Devil should meet him in every corner: a picture of the
misery of an unbeliever.

He that believes is the son of God; John 1.12.
what a prerogative is this? What is he then that believes not? Even the child
of the Devil. Can there be any thing worse?

He that believes, says God, is true: He that believes not, says God, is a
liar, should not this be plagued? Ioh 3. Ioh. 5.10.


Christ dwells in the heart of a believer, as in his Temple; Gal. 3.17.
But the heart of an unbeliever is the Devil shop, in which he forgeth, and
his anuile on which he hammereth all villainies, his stye, his stable, and
whatsoever can be said that is more base.

Nay, an unbeliever is a Devil. Have not I (says Christ) Ioh. 6.69.70.
chosen twelve, and one of you is a Devil: see how Christ accounts of Judas
for his infidelity and treason.

Did I say a Devil? nay worse then a Devil: Iam. 2.19.
The Devils believe and tremble: but many among us, believe not, and many that
believe there is a God, and that he is a hater and revenger of iniquity; yet
when they are admonished of their pride, drunkenness, breaking of the Sabbath,
etc. move no more then the stones in the wall.

What shall I say to make thee sensible of thy misery? If thou beleeuest not,
the wrath of God dwells upon thee. The devil works effectually in thy
heart: as he possesses thee here, so thou shall possess him hereafter for
ever.

This consideration should move us to three things: First, to seek faith:
Secondly, to examine whether we believe or no: Thirdly, to mourn for
infidelity.

1. Above all things labor for faith, sell all for this: let the fools of the
world, drudge and droyle for a penny; let us seek for faith, and whatsoever we
want, let not us want this, by which we stand, and without which we fall
eternally.

2. Many persuade themselves that they have faith, which will be found Infidels
at the day of Judgment: Be thou of good ground that thou beleeuest. The five
foolish Virgins thought they should do as well as the other five, but they
were deceived. Thou shall know whether thy persuasion be true saving faith or
no, by three things.

1. By the means whereby it is wrought, which is the preaching of the Gospel.
If it arise from a conceit of thine own brain: it is but a mocke-faith, and
will not stead thee.

2. By the manner how it is wrought: first, there is in every true believer, a
sight of sin: Secondly, Humiliation for it: Thirdly, a change of the heart:
Fourthly, a hungring after righteousness, then comes faith.

3. By the fruits: faith works by love: As the fruit shows the tree, so
obedience shows faith. Many show plainly they have no faith, for when
prosperity comes they fear not God, and when adversity, they run from God
to the Creature, to Wizards, to the Devil for help, as if there were no God
in Israel. Herein they are like a dog; hold up a crust he comes fawning; hold
up a cudgel, and he runs away: so many, let them thrive, then God is a good
God. But let God lay his hand upon them; then they are gone to seek a new
master, the Devil: yea if it be but for the saving a pigge or a cow, what are
such but Infidels?

Faith purifyeth the heart; it will not suffer a man to be an Hypocrite: to be
one thing without, and another within: one thing before men, and another in
secret: He that believes Christ died and shed his blood for him, cannot but
die to sin, and delight to live righteously.

3 Mourn for infidelity: even for the least motion to it: and the rather
because it is the fashion of most, to mourn for other things, and not for
this. If a man be robbed, or his house be burnt; he cries out I am undone. But
who is heard to cry, woe is me for want of faith, I am undone for my unbelief?
If we hear of a thief, we cry, hang him, and perhaps we will cry shame on a
drunkard; but there are few cry shame of themselves for infidelity, that maine
mother sin.

Infidelity is the bar of all goodness: if a man hear the word without faith
it profits him not: Heb. 4.
as a bottle being stopped though it be thrown into the midst of the sea,
remains empty, so an unbeliever, under the best means, remains unblessed
for the want of faith. Labor to be sensible of this want. Think what weeping
and gnashing of teeth it will work in thee at the day of judgment, when thou
shall see many who have heard the word with thee, to be received into heaven
because they believed, and thy self thrust down to hell for thy infidelity:
remember that good man in the gospel who cried with watery cheeks Lord I
believe, help my unbelief: Mar. 9.24.
pray thou in like manner.

VERSE. 20. -- Be not high minded but fear.


Here Paul answers to the consequence of the Gentiles objection: because the
Jew is broken off that they may be received in; therefore they thought they
might boast: it follows not says Paul, showing in these words, both what
should not follow: viz. High-mindednesse: and what should: namely fear.

Be not high-minded: the word is significant: think not, conceive not highly
of your self. He said before boast not: here he uses an other word of
purpose, by which he strikes at the root of pride, poynting at the padde,
where the mystery of this iniquity is couched.

Faith shuts out boasting. Romans 3.27. Ephesians: 4.1.2. Ioh. 5.44 Phil. 2.3. Hab
2.4,5.

At every turn remember this saying. Be not high minded. Has God given thee a
liberal portion of riches, wit, beauty etc? Let this sentence always sound in
thine ears: have thou knowledge, and utterance? Hear thou any say; few have
the knowledge you have, or can speak as you do? Let this sentence stand
sentinel to keep thee from pride. Let no grace puff thee up: God loves we
should acknowledge his gifts, and give him the praise.

God resists the proud. Iam. 4.6.
All other sinners fly from God. The proud man, as though he were of the race
of the old Giants, resists him. God gives grace to the lowly: Psalm. 25 9.
The rain stays not on the tops of the mountains, but the valleys are watered
and made fruitful.

God teaches the humble. The proud man is empty, there is little grace in him.
Height weakens a thing: Altitudo nonest valida Chrisost. hom. 20. in epist. ad
Romans
and an empty vessel, makes the lowdest sound. They which brag most, have
least in them. In the fan, the good corn goes to the bosom, and bottom; the
flighty, to the mouth and is uppermost. The chafe is above the corn, not
because it is best, but because it is lightest. There Is nothing in a proud man,
or if any good, it is marred by pride, as the Prophets pottage was by the
bitter herb, or the precious ointment by a dead fly. The grace of our graces is
humility. There Is no difference between a mad man and a proud man, but this:
we pity him that is mad, we hate, (nay God hates) him that is proud. If thou
would have comfort of thy gifts be humble.

Use. 2.
Observe. First. The signs. Secondly. the remedy of high mindedness.

1. The signs of pride are many: Esaias notes the daughters of Jerusalem for
pride, because of their fantastical apparel, but we are to enquire the signs
of spiritual pride; which are specially four.

1. Impatience of admonition; to be deaf on that ear is a plain token of
pride. Ioh. 9.39.40.
The pharisees who were proud, take it in great scorn, that Christ reproves
them of blindness, when indeed they were beetle blind. Proud Zidkiah cannot
endure Micaiah his admonition. 2. chron. 18.23
He that swells when he is told of his fault, has a proud heart.

2. Disgracing and diminishing the gifts of others with boasting of our own,
declares a high mind. The proud pharisee abased the publican and exalted
himself, Do thou impute unto others that they are cold, covetous etc.
saying, thou would be ashamed if thou were no better then they, never
looking at thine own infidelity, pride, hypocrisy, etc. Verily thou have a
proud heart.

3. Meddling with things above our understanding or measure, notes pride also:
many presently upon their supposed conversion, enter into controversies,
censure particular men, yea whole Churches, as if they were ignorant of
nothing, when indeed they know nothing, as they ought to know: they rush into
matters beyond the age of their Christianity. David approved his humility,
Psalm. 131.
by not meddling with things which were too high for him.

4. Contention also argues pride, as Solomon says: Prou. 13.10.
What is the cause that in our Church many put quarrels, and urge with much
violence their own conceits, as if they were undoubted Articles of the Faith?
Surely it is our pride that makes our good Rebecca complain of our striving.

2. The second part of this use is for remedy, where we have three things:
First the place to which the remedy is to be applied: Secondly, the remedy it
self: Thirdly the persons that need it.

1. The place is the heart as Peter advises, Deck your selves inwardly with
lowliness of mind. There may be an abatement of pride outwardly, and yet
nevertheless within: according to our saying: There may be as much pride
under a leather Iacket as under a velvet gown: who seemed more humble then
Diogenes in his tubbe? and yet there was scarce any thing more proud, as wise
Plato could observe. A man would think that nothing could be more lowly and
meek then a Monk or Friar, in his Cell, and under his Cowle, but the less
p^ide is in their habit, the more is in their heart: Their Masters Title is a
very lowly one, Seruus seruorum; but if a man should say that he were proud,
he need never to come under confession for it.

2. The remedy consists of many particulars (we cannot have too much against
this foul evil) which used with prayer will be of force to keep our hearts
from swelling.

1. The first thing I commend to be used: is a continual remembrance of these
and the like Scriptures: Be not high minded: God resists the proud, etc. Draw
forth these as a sword to take down this Peacocke.

2. Remember the example and monition of Christ: Learn of me, (not to walk
upon the sea, or to make a world) but to be humble and lowly in spirit: Is
Christ humble, then be thou ashamed to be proud?

3. Consider how God has judged the proud. Pride thrust Angels out of heaven;
our first Parents out of Paradise; hanged up Haman upon his own gallows, made
Nebuchadnezzar a beast, etc. Take heed by these examples.

4. Consider, that if thou have any excellency, it is the gift of God: 1. Cor.
4.6.7.
What have thou which thou have not received? It is an Ass that will be proud
of a Lions skin, which is not his own. And God can take away thy knowledge,
and make thee an Idiot, or strike thee with madness; and if thou be rich,
in the turning of an hand, he can make thee as poor as Lazarus.

5. Does thy heart tickle thee, because of thy knowledge, faith, patience, etc?
Sit down and cast thy account, thou shall find upon thy reckoning that thy
wants are more then thy receipts: for one thing thou know thou art ignorant
of ten: If thou have one good thought, thou have a thousand ill ones, which
arise out of thy heart, as the smoke out of the bottomless pit. As Goliath is
bigger then David, so for the term of this life, corruption is more then
grace. Look upon thy dullness in prayer, thy wandering thoughts, thy
hypocrisy, etc. Hold thy self to this task, and thou shall find more cause
of mourning then of Pride. As ballast is to the ship, so will this meditation
be to thee, that thou shall not be turned about with the waves of
self-conceit. Pliny records a secret of the Be, Plin. Not. hist. lib. 11.
cap. 10.
that in a storm, it gets up a little stone, by the weight of it to fly
the more steadily, and to get home in safety. If thou be in danger to be
blown away with pride, let the thoughts of thy wants be to thee as this little
stone.

3. The parties that stand in need of these remedies, are all men, specially
those which are extraordinarily graced by God, even such as are truly
sanctified: all other sins are in evil, this is in that which is good, and
therefore the harder to be avoided. Themistocles.
We are all of his mind, who being asked what song he delighted most to hear,
said, that wherein his praises were set forth: when we pass the streets, how
does it please to hear the people say, There he goes, a very worthy man; it is
incredible, how this steals upon Gods best and most sanctified children. Even
Paul having received extraordinary revelations, must be taken down with the
buffettings of Satan, lest he be proud. Hierom that lived a retired and
mortified life, said, that he could hardlier be brought to want arrogance, then
gold or silver. Study and pray for Humility, the honor of a Christian. It is
the first, second and third thing to be sought for of a Christian, as
pronuntiation is of Demosthenes his Orator. Moses face shone when he had talked
with God, Exodus 34.19.
and he wist not. And excellent degree of grace is it, to be excellent, and not
to take notice of it. As boughs the more laden with fruit, are the more lowly,
and as when the Sun is at the highest, our shadows are at the shortest; so
the more grace would be adorned with the more humility.

The Devil will tempt thee to all vitiousnesse; if he cannot prevail that
way, he will tempt thee to be proud of thy goodness; yea to be proud, because
thou art not proud. In the midst of grace, pray for an humble heart.

VERSE 20. -- But fear.


THere is a worldly fear, and a fear that has respect to God, which is
Servile, or Filial: this, Initiall or more perfect. The filial fear is here
meant, which makes us careful not to displease God our Father.

Fear: that is, look to thy standing: for fear brings forth care: and they
that fear not, are careless.

He that believes fears God, 1. Pet. 1.17. If you call him Father (there is
faith) then, as it follows, pass your time in fear, 1. Cor. 10.12 He that
thinks he stands (there is faith) let him take heed he fall not (there is
fear) Phil. 2.12.

The Papists from this and the like places teach, that we are uncertain, and
must doubt of our salvation. He that fears doubts (say they) but he that
believes, fears. Ergo. We deny the Mayor, being understood of filial fear,
as it must be in this place, for filial fear causes not doubting, but more
sure standing.

Blessed is the man that always fears, says the Spirit, Prou. 28.14.
but always to doubt were no blessing, but a rack to the conscience. I will
put my fear in their hearts, says God, Ier. 32.39.
that they shall never depart from me. So then there is a fear of assurance,
(this is filial:) as well as a fear of doubting, (this is slavish:) He that
is in the top of a tree, if he fear to fall, will claspe the better hold. He
that is careless has no firm security, but he that fears may be secure.

Use. 2.
This fear manifests faith; for where there is faith, there is a grace
whereby we are afraid to do any thing which may offend God, and weaken our
faith. Art not afraid of drunkenness, whoredom, blasphemy etc. then have
thou no faith?

He that has a charge of money upon the way, how careful is he? how often is
his hand upon his sword? his eye is busy at every corner and cross way, to
discern dangers: and when he comes home, is careful to lock it up, and the
more his treasure is the more is his care: but a man that has no treasure in
his house, leaves open his doors, and fears nothing. So the want of fear
argues the want of faith. Remember the pretiousnesse of Gods favor, and of the
blood of Christ, whereby thou art redeemed, and be ashamed of thy
carelessenesse, whereby thou squandrest away that which is so dearly bought.

VERSE 21. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also
spare not thee.


IN the 20. verse, the Apostle admonished the Gentile, thus: Be not high
minded, but fear: In this verse is a reason of that Admonition, and in the 22.
ver. the Conclusion of this whole Digression.

The reason is taken from the effect of the contrary: If they be high minded
and fear not, God will punish them; as if he should say, Thou stand on the
top, thou must not hane high conceits, lest thou come tumbling down. A man
that is on the top of a tree, bragges not of his height, but looks to his
hold: so do thou (says Paul) or else thou shall fall.

This is confirmed by an argument a Maiori, thus, If God spared not the
natural branches, much less will he spare thee. This reason is doubly
amplified: First from a caution, Take heed: Secondly, by an Antithesis between
the natural branches (the Jew) and the ingraffed (the Gentile). That which is
natural is surer then that which is ingraffed; As a natural child is more
affectionately beloved then an adopted: If the Jews were cast off, which were
borne of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and who had many privileges, much more the
Gentiles, if they take not heed, which are sublimed with no commendation.
Nullae commendaetione sublimatur. Amb.


All without respect which continue not in grace, shall be broken off, Luke
13.3.5. Revel. 2.

Use.
God is not moved with outward privileges to spare any, or to tolerate in his
orchard those which are fruitless, and only cumber the ground: Thou art
planted in the Church, which is Paradise, and art watered with those Rivers of
God, the word and Sacraments; If thou bring forth no fruit, though Christ
himself had come of thy stock, thou shall be broken off, and thrown away.

Use 2.
Here is a good Take-heed or Item for many,

1. For England, Germany, all Reformed Chuches: The Jews were the famous
people of God, and yet cast away for their faithlessenesse: where are those
renowned Churches of Asia, of Greece? Let us be warned by their harms: If we
continue not to bring forth fruit, we must look for the same measure which God
has meated out to them.

2. For profane persons: If judgment begin at Gods own house, how shall
the wicked escape? If an Israelite go to the pot, what should a Canaanite, an
Hypocrite, a Rebel look for? The Scribes and Pharisees, the great obseruers
of the Law, whom the world could not challenge of drunkenness, whoredom, etc.
are for all that damned in hell, because they received not the Gospel: If
thou, besides horrible irreligious profaneness, be oppressed with all
unrighteousness, how shall thou escape damnation.

3. For the children of God: Art thou one of these? walk according to thy
profession; if thou growest cold as others, take heed. Have thou faith? keep
it. Have thou a good conscience, better the peace of it every day by righteous
living. Hold that thou have. It is worth thy care, and thou have a dangerous
enemy.

Remember what is come to the Jews: when thou see thy neighbors house on
fire, it is time to provide water to save thine own. When two ships set forth,
if the foremost run upon a rock and split, her confort that follows will be
warned. Thou see covetousness to be the destruction of this man, pride of
that, whoredom of another; pray thou against these sins, and all other, and
be careful.

He that is the child of God cannot be damned, but he may so wound his
conscience, that he shall think the torments of hell not equal to that which
he feels: though we cannot lose true grace totally, yet it may be so abated,
that it may breed us woe unspeakable David ceased not to be the child of God by
his sin, but he received such a wound, and was so shaken, that he lost for a
time all feeling of Gods favor, and I make question whether he received his
former glorious feelings to his dying day. Thou know when David failed,
where Demas fell, why the Jews were broken off: watch and pray lest thou also
fall into temptation, and approve thy self a fruitful branch, lest thou be
broken off.

VERSE. 22. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God; on them which
fell, severity: but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness:
otherwise thou also shall be cut off.


THIS verse is the conclusion of the former admonition, showing to us Gentiles,
the use we should make of the judgments of God to the Jew, and his mercy to
us. This he propounds by way of counsel and advice, directing us how to
spell out a good lesson for our selves out of these things.

In this verse are two things: First an Exhortation: Secondly, an Amplification.

The Exhortation in these words, Behold the goodness and severity of God: on
them which fell, severity: but toward thee goodness: The Amplification in the
rest of the words.

In the Exhortation, are two things to be considered: First, the Manner:
Secondly, the Matter of it.

The Manner is in this word, Behold, which is not the aduerbe, but the verb, to
note a narrow looking into the point: as in that, Behold the Lamb of God: Ioh.
1.29.
as if John should have said, Look well on him: eye him: mark him well.

The matter to be considered: Goodness and severity. both these determined by
their proper subjects. Severity, generally to all, personally to the Jew:
Goodness personally to the Gentile, To thee, speaking to us face to face, and
generally to all.

Goodness, The word signifies the propensitie of God to do good: Taste and see
how good and gracious God is, Psalm. 34.
taste the sweetness of his nature. If so be you have tasted, says Peter, 1.
Pet. 2.3.
how gracious the Lord is. The sweetness of the nature of our God: who is not
froward and tyrannous, but most ready to bestow grace and goodness, and to
receive sinners.

This sweetness, if you please so to call it, is to be distinguished from the
effects of it, which are Love, Mercy, Salvation. Tit. 3.4.5.
Salvation is the effect of Gods mercy, mercy of his love, love, of his
special goodness.

Severity: The word signifies such a severity as notes a cutting off: which
word Paul uses the more to set forth Gods goodness to us. Most sweetly has
God dealt with us, and most bitterly with the Jews, searching and sifting out
all their ungodliness. As a Judge cuttes the matter in pieces, pondering all
reasons and circumstances before he give sentence, or as a Justice strictly
examineth and presses the suspected malefactor brought before him: or as in an
Anatomy, every sinew and vein is laid open; or as Paul bad Titus to reprove
the Cretians, sharply, Tit. 1:
as if one should say, rippe up their consciences, speak home to them, touch
them to the quick; so God dealt with the Jew.

These two are attributed to God, whence the fathers confuted the dotage of the
Manichees concerning two beginnings.

These are not opposite in God, who is a simple essence. They are not two
things in God, much less two opposite things: they are the same in God,
opposed not formally, but in regard of the effect, as it is the same heat of
the sun, which hardens the clay, and softens the wax.

It is the duty of all, for their better stirring up to thankefullnes and
humility, diligently to keep a note-booke of the mercies of God to
themselves, and his judgments to others. Concerning judgments. 1. Cor. 10.6.11.
2. Pet. 2.6. And for his goodness David had his tables or book of
remembrance. Psalm. 66.16. And so had Paul 1 Timothy 1.

Use 1.
He says not, behold thy goodness, but Gods: if thou be saved, the praise is
Gods; if thou be damned, the fault is thine own.

Use. 2.
His goodness and severity. Separate not these things which God has joined:
he has revealed himself to be both merciful and just. Jointly consider of
them, and it will help against two dangerous tentations, namely despair and
presumption, which are as the two arms of the devil whereby he gathers us up
for himself.

1. For despair. Sinners despair, because they cannot be persuaded of mercy,
only veiwing the severity of God, and poring upon that: have thou offended God
and therefore art afflicted in conscience? Alas thou have deserved to be a
firebrand of hell; but yet consider the sweet goodness of God: he is just to
damn stubborn sinners that repent not: but to such as humble themselves, and
with penitent hearts beg for mercy, he is a sweet God. Witness Manasses,
Mary Magdalene, Paul; these upon their repentance were pardoned their odious
sins: whatsoever therefore thy sins have been, despair not; there is mercy
with the Lord, who is more merciful, then thou art sinful, and can pardon
more sins then thou can commit. Only believe it, and repent.

2. For presumption. As the act of seeing, is hindered both by no light and by
too much: so the light and comfort of conscience is hindered, either by no
seeing of mercy, which causes despair; or by seeing nothing else but mercy,
which causes presumption. Satan will tell thee, thou may take thy liberty,
follow thy pleasures, need not be so precise, for God is merciful. Thy
remedy is to consider not only the mercy, but the severity of God also. He
is as just as merciful. Remember how severely he has dealt with the Jews;
they have been almost this 1600. years vagabonds for their rebellion against
Christ and his Gospel. Forget not his severity to David for the matter of
Vriah: how he not only visited David's conscience, but took him up, and made
him an example to all the world, plaguing him in his Amnon, Absolon, Adoniah.
Think of Moses that meek man, whom God calls his friend, yet for one fault,
(and that so secret, as by reading the story we can scarce find it out) for
striking the rock, when he should only have only spoken to it in confidence,
was barred entrance into the land of Canaan. O severity.

How dare thou then dream of mercy under many sins, when thou remembrest
how severely God has dealt with his own children for some one weakness which
they have showed? If therefore the devil tell thee that God is merciful: tell
him again, that he is most just and severe also. The rather consider seriously
hereof, because a thousand perish this way, to one that perishes by
desperation. Desperation is a course that Satan takes but with a few, because
it is tedious to flesh and blood, and often proves the occasion of a man's
conversion, and so the devil is ouershot in his own bow. But presumption is
pleasing. To live as we list, to enjoy our pleasures, and then go to heaven
when we have done, what can be more pleasing to flesh and blood? By this bait
the devil catches most: let us therefore be the more wary, praying with
David, Psalm. 19.
Lord keep me from presumptuous sins.

Use 3.
Goodness and severity. Who have goodness? and who severity? I will tell
thee: if thou repentest and obeyest the Gospel, go thy way, thou art a happy
man. The sweetness of God and his goodness is to thee. But if thou be a
profane, unbelieving, impenitent wretch, and die in this estate, the most
just God will in his great severity hurl thee into hell, as out of the middle
of a sling.

Use. 4.
That thou may value thy mercy and the goodness of God to thee the more,
consider the judgments that fall upon the wicked. See thy happiness O
England: look upon Turkey, where Mahomet; upon Italy, where the Pope
tyrannizeth: look upon France and the Low countries, how they are fired with
contentions, swim in blood, while thou singest of peace. Long may thou
sing: and shall, if thou can thankfully say, God has not dealt so with any
nation. Blessed be his Name.

Let every one in particular apply this. Would thou see the blessing of
health, liberty, competencie of maintenance? look upon the diseased, the
prisoners, the poor, who cry in the streets and high ways for relief. Thou
in regard of nature art no better then they, not a hair to choose between thee
and them. Why is it then thus? Because of the goodness of God to thee, and his
severity to them. Cain and Judas despair, but thou beleeuest, and have
assurance of heaven. Fear God for his severity, and love and praise him for
his sweetness to thee, which thou have not deserved.

2. The amplification of these two properties thus determined, is by a several
correction to either of them. Concerning the Gentile, in the latter end of this
verse: concerning the Jew in the next verse, where Paul cunningly resumes his
former business, from the which he has thus digressed.

The first correction: To thee bountifulness, if thou continuest in his
bountifulness, that is, Faith, the cause for the effect, as mercy is taken
ver. 31. Ansel.
This is confirmed by a reason: Else thou shall be cut off. Some observe the
change of the word: The Jew is broken off: the Gentile cut off. To the Jew
remains a hope of reingraffing: but if the Gentiles continue not they shall
be stocked up by the roots. As the famous Churches of the East; the very seed
of these ancient Christians is utterly extirpated: so is it notwith the Jews.
Continue O England in his goodness.

Perseuerane is a necessary condition of true saving faith. Heb. 3.14. 2. Ioh.
9.

The Papists from this conditional (If thou continuest) collect that none can
be sure to continue. We deny the collection or consequence. 1. Paul speaks to
the whole Church of the Gentiles, among whom were many Hypocrites at whom he
aims. 2. He speaks thus to the elect, not that they can finally fall away,
but to provoke them carefully to look over their evidence that they may be
sure. 3. Its absurd to infer an absolute proposition, from a conditional. As
if one should thus collect in an other case: if the sun rise not to morrow it
will be dark: therefore it will be dark to morrow. The course of nature
appointed by God, holding, the sun shall rise, and so. the power and truth of
God holding, (which cannot fail) the elect shall continue: so Arminius but
weakly concludes, that there needs nothing to the conversion of men, but the
bare propounding of the scripture, because it is say: that the Tyrians and
Sydonians would long ago have repented, if the great works which Christ did
among the Jews, had been done amongst them. Which manner of reasoning is as if
one should collect a power of speaking to be in stones, because our Savior
somewhere says, Luke 19.40.
that if these hold their peace, the very stones would cry out.

Use 2.
See thou continue, or else thou shall not taste of the sweetness of God in
the salvation of thy foul. Be not like a waning but like a new moon that is
increasing: like the morning light which grows brighter and brighter to
perfect day. Be not like Nabuchadnezzars image, whose head was of gold, and
whose feet were of dirt. Many begin gloriously, but end shamefully: our end
must be best.

Faith saves if it be kept to the end: if with Paul thou can say, I have
kept the faith, thou shall wear an immortal crown with Paul. The end tries
all, before which a man cannot be said and known to others to be happy.
Flowers that are fresh and sweet, we delight to wear, but when they fade and
wither, we throw them away. So fading professors shall be cut off. If thou
returnest with the dog and swine, to the vomit and mire of thy former sins,
it had been better thou had never known the way of righteousness, for as
the Lord lives who cast off the Jews, so he shall also cast off thee. Pray
for perseverance, and look to thy self, that thou loosest not the things
which thou have done, but that thou may receive a full reward.

VERSE. 23. And they also if they bide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed
in, for God is able to graffe them in again.


HEre is the other correction, on the part of the Jew, by which Paul mitigates
and allayes, the severity of his speech which he used of them ver. 22. The
speech was, that Gods severity is on the Jew, the correction is here, If they
continue in their unbelief; but if they continue not in it, they shall be
graffed in again. This is proved by a reason from the power of God: God is
able to do it.

Thus these words, pertain to the former exhortation, and with all the Apostle
in them falls into his former argument to prove the reiection of the Jews not
to be final: and so we will consider of this verse, viz. as it belongs to
those things which follow.

In this verse and those which follow, the Apostle shows three things
concerning the general calling of the Jews before the end of the world.
First, that it is possible. Secondly, that it is probable. Thirly, that it is
certain. The first in this verse: the second in verse. 24: the third from ver.
25. to the 33. In this verse we have two things: first a proposition, The Jew
if he continue not in his unbelief, shall be graffed in. Secondly, a reason
from the power of God, For God is able to graffe him in again.

The Apostle here speaks of the multitude of the Jews, of whose calling the
Gentiles despaired, as of a thing impossible: but Paul tells them it is
possible, by the almighty power of God.

Object. But from the possibility to the being of a thing, is no certain
conclusion.

Answ. Paul proves not here directly it shall be so, but that it is possible,
which is enough against the Gentiles, in this, that they held it to be
impossible. But if we be certain of the will of God, then from his power is a
certain Argument. Now a Quere may be here made, whether that there be not
always in things of this nature, a secret supposall of the will of God, as where
Paul exhorts the Corinthians to almesgiuing, lest any man should grudge and
say, Here is such calling for alms, such taxes and collectio^s every Sabbath
that if we should give to every one, we and ours must want: lest, I say, any
man should thus oppose; O, says Paul, 2. Cor. 9.8.
let no man argue thus, for God is able to make you abound in all sufficiency:
where Paul reasons not only from Gods power, (as I take it) but from his will
also supposed, or else, me thinks, Paul's argument should not be perswasiue.
But howsoever, it is most safe to follow Interpreters which say, that here
Paul proves only that the calling of the Jews is possible.

Quest. But cannot God do more then he will?

Ans. In regard of us there is a difference, between the Wisdom, the Will and
the power of God. The first being the directing, the second, the commanding,
the third, the executing beginning of things: but in God these differ not. And
yet it is true, he can do more then he will do, but not then he can will to
do. He actually does no more, then he actually will do: but whatsoever he
can do, he can also will to do, if he please.

The power and will of God are of equal latitude and extent, if we euenly
examine them, viz. his actual will, with his actual power, and his potentiall
will, as I may so term it, with the power answerable thereto.

Yet here observe a difference between the Creator and the Creature: Man
cannot do all that he actually wills: God can do more then he actually
wills. It is not fit that the power of man should be equal to his will,
because he is evil: but it is fit that Gods will should be more then his
actual power, because he is infinitely good.

The Doctrine in the Hypothesis.
The Jews if they continue not in their unbelief, shall be graffed in again.
Luke 1.37. Matthew. 19.26.

The Doctrine in the Thesis.
Whatsoever sinner believes and repents, it is possible he should be saved,
Ezekiel. 18 21.

Use 1.
If they continue not in their unbelief: The chiefest bar to a man's
salvation is an unbelieving heart. Many will say of our civil men and women;
if they go not to heaven, Lord have mercy upon us: and yet our Savior told
the Pharisees, who exceeded all men in civil Justice, that publicans and
Harlots should go before them into the Kingdom of heaven: why? because they
believed not. Civil righteousness is not in it self evil, but good, but not
good enough to save a man. It may be without faith, but faith cannot be without
it.

Moralities without faith, are like a goodly picture, which is fair to look
upon, but a man can have no society with it, because it wants life; so a civil
man is good to live by, but his Justice is but painting. Consider a Jew, he
lives ciuilly, yet is he accounted an odious creature, and thou would not
be in his estate. What makes him odious? his Infidelity. Labor therefore for
faith, which is the soul of obedience, and will save thy soul.

Use. 2.
Here is a singular comfort to poor afflicted consciences, distressed for
their abominable sins committed. Art thou such a one? Thus far thou may
be comforted: God is able to save thee, and will, if thou continuest not in thy
sins and unbelief. It is a comfort to a sick man, if the Physician tell him
his disease, though dangerous, is yet curable, if it be not driven too long
before remedies be applied. So God is able to save thee, if thou deferrest not
thy repentance.

If we look only to our selves, there is nothing but impossibilities and
desperation: but if we look up to heaven, to see what God can and is ready to
do: (only staying for our believing and repenting) there is great hope. Even
thou Jew, which have crucified and blasphemed Christ, if thou can cease from
unbelief, thou shall be saved. For as all the promises in the world so the
threatenings are conditional. The King of Nineueh said, Jonas 39.
Let us repent, for who can tell if God will turn away his fierce wrath: but
if thou repentest, I can tell thee on good assurance, that God will turn his
wrath from thee, though thou were one of them which crucified his Son. How
should this break our hearts, and move us to repentance.

Use 3.
Despair not of the salvation of any, neither finally censure any though never
so wicked: for God is able to turn the heart of a Jew: He that converted thee,
can convert thy neighbor also.

But say not when thou art reproved for thy lewdness; Why? I may be saved as
well as you: True, thou may: but yet I can say this unto thee (be it spoken
with reverence) that if thou continuest in thy wickedness and repentest not,
God cannot save thee; because he cannot deny his word, wherein he has revealed
that he will save none, but such as believe and repent. Use the means
therefore that thou may have experience of the power of God in thy salvation.

Use. 4.
God is able to save, so is he able to destroy. Let his power make thee wary
how thou live: Art thou stronger then he, that thou should dare, by thy
abominable sins daily to provoke him? Can any man carry it away from God? Our
God is to be feared more then all gods.

VERSE. 24. For if thou were cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by
nature, and were graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive tree: how much
more shall these which be the Natural branches be graffed, into their tree?


IN this verse Paul shows that the calling of the Jews is probable: The
Argument is a fortiore, from the comparison of the less likely to the more
likely.

This is not to be referred to the last clause of the former verse, but to the
first, that the Jews shall be graft in, if they continue not in unbelief.
This is probable: why? because he has graffed in the Gentiles, which is less
likely to be done, therefore it is probable, that he will reingraffe the Jews,
which is more likely.

He proves that it is more likely for the Jews, then it was for us, from the
natural condition of both.

We are branches of the wild Olive, they of the right Olive: it is contrary to
nature, to graffe a wild Olive branch into a right Olive: but natural to
graffe into it a natural branch. A man cuts off the boughs of a tree in his
Orchard, purposing to graffe it: he goes not to the field to gather Imps of a
crabbe: but rather if he have no choice, he will take an Impe of the own,
which is more likely to bear good fruit. There is a nearer disposition,
sympathy, proportion, affinity of the natural branch to the stock, then of a
wild one. The Jew is natural in regard of us, and we against nature. Contrary
to nature.

Quest. Does God any thing contrary to nature?

Ans. No: Gods creation is the nature of things: whatsoever he does in the
creature is natural; though contrary to the present nature of the thing, yet
according to the nature of God. For that is natural which is done by an Agent,
to whom the patient is naturally subject, as all creatures are to God. Aquin.


Quest. Is not a Jew a child of wrath by nature, as well as a Gentile?

Ans. Yes, but Paul here speaks of Gentiles, as coming from Adam, Jews, as
commong from Abraham. Consider a Jew, as coming from Adam, and he is al one
with the Gentile; but as coming from Abraham, and then he has the start of
us, by reason of the Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, they being chosen
to be Gods people, and the rest of the world neglected: The special grace of
the Covenant, and the common condition of nature are to be distinguished.

That the Gentile then is saved, is by the King of Kings prerogative, as we may
say.

The Doctrine is double. First, on the part of the Jew. Secondly, on the part
of the Gentile.

It is probable the Jews shall be called. 2. Sam. 7.24.

Use 1.
Absolutely to deny the calling of the Jews, is rashness, when Paul says it
is probable. A tree is not dead, because it buds not in winter, This is the
Jews Winter, there is yet hope of a Summer, wherein they may yield fruit. The
Jew is often compared to a Fig Tree, wherein may be a mystery: It is the nature
of a Fig Tree to bud first, but it is the last whose fruit is ripe. The Jews
budded before us, the time of their ripe fruit is at hand.

Use 2.
Speak honorably of a Jew, for whatsoever he is in regard of his unbelief,
yet Paul calls it a natural branch.

Use 3.
The Church is called the Jews own Olive. There is but one Church, and that
is the Jews into whom we are graffed: and when they shall be called, they
shall not be graffed into us, but into their own stock.

The Gentile has not so great (though as sure) a prerogative and right to the
promise as the Jew, Act. 3.25. Romans 1.16. Salvation is to the Jew first, and
also to the Grecian, so Rom 2.10.

Use 1.
Our natural condition, being Gentiles, is most miserable: we should have
been even as Turks, Infidels, worshipping Mahomet, yea the Devil, and as
savage as they if God had not given us his special grace. It is contrary to
our nature to be in the right Olive, to be worshippers of God, to please him:
we had rather in our corrupt nature, please and serve the Devil in an hundred
things, then God in one. We delight in good, as a fish to be out of the water:
to be at a Sermon, at prayer among good company, is tedious to us, we hang down
our heads, we are out of our element, but among evil company we can be
Iouiall, and pass the time in as much merriment and glee as may be.

If any think I speak too hardly of our nature, let him descend into his own
heart, and note the vile motions, the pride, covetousness, hypocrisy, and
though regenerate, he will be ashamed, and cry out with Paul, O wretch that I
am, who shall deliver me from this abominable corruption. If the remainder of
corruption, in the Regenerate who daily mortify it and in whom it is abated,
be so strong: O how filthy is the heart of him, that is wholly in his natural
corrupt estate. Be wail thy corruption, and pray with David, Lord create in
me a new heart.

Use 2.
The error of the Papists, in advancing so much the power of free will is
hereby confuted: for goodness is contrary to our nature, and therefore the
self cooperation of nature with grace which they dream of is a fable. Also
Arminius, who held that we are borne in the state of grace, and that original
corruption in Infants, has not the nature of sin, but of a punishment (as
though God punishes them that have no sin) and that we are able to believe
as much and when we will, is hereby overthrown. Goodness, and to be converted
to God, is contrary to our nature and desire, as Paul here teaches, and
therefore Arminius in this is a false teacher.

Use 3.
By Creation goodness was as natural to us, as now evil is natural, and
goodness supernatural. We delight to possess the Ancient Inheritance of our
Progenitors: if there be any dram of spiritual wisdom and courage in us,
let us strive to recover that stock of grace, which our first Parents spent by
the subtlety of the Devil.

Use. 4.
Our Conversion is contrary to our present nature: God will inuert the nature
and course of things for the salvation of his Elect. This also shows that we
are converted by the omnipotent power of GOD, which Arminius stiffely deny.

Use. 5.
The state of Nature and Grace is easily discerned: He that despises the
Gospel and lives wickedly is a natural wretch, but to believe and repent is a
state of grace.

Use 6.
Contrary to Nature: keep diligent watch over thine heart, which is not as
yet wholly and perfectly changed: Be daily renewing thy repentance, or else
Nature will soon run after her old course and byas. Natural inclinations
are forcible. Bend the bough of a tree downward; when thou let it go, it
will strive upward by and by: Matthew. 23.37.
water-fowles hatched under a land foul, will quickly to the water by nature.
So though by the warmth of the spirit, we be hatched under the Word, and become
Gods chickens, as Christ compares us; yet we will be drawing to corruption,
if we daily mortify it not.

By nature boats go down the stream, but by the force of wind and oars they
be got up the stream, and if such means cease, they go faster downward then
they were forced upward: so to proceed in grace, is against the stream of
nature* If Gods Spirit like a good wind blow not a prosperous gal^ upon us,
and we labor in the means of grace, we are easily carried down the stream
of our corruption, into the pit of perdition, as the fishes of Jordan into the
dead sea.

VERSE 25. For I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery,
left you should be wise in your own conceits, that blindness or hardness.
in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

26. And so all Israel shall be saved.


IN these words the Apostle proves the certainty of the calling of the Jews,
and he takes his argument from a revelation of this secret unto him by the
Spirit of God, to be made known to the Gentiles; so that this Scripture is a
prophecy, and is of the nature of a demonstration.

Here, and so to the 33. verse, are three things: first, the preface: secondly,
the prophecy: thirdly, the proof.

The preface is in these words, I would not brethren that you should be
ignorant of this mystery, lest you should be wise in your own conceits. Where
are two things: first, the nature of this prophecy: secondly, an admonition
concerning it. The nature of it is set down in this word mystery. Mysteries
are of two sorts: first, when some spiritual thing is shadowed under visible
signs, so the Sacraments are called mysteries, improperly: secondly, when some
sacred thing is revealed by special illumination, or by the event, which could
never be understood by study, but by the Spirit of God: so the doctrine of the
Trinity of persons in the unity of the Godhead; the personal union of the
two natures in Christ, the mystical union of Christ and his Church, the
resurrection of the dead, the calling of the Gentiles, the recalling of the
Jews, of which we speak. This is a great secret, and in Paul's time more
secret to the Gentile then to the Jew, for these had a glimmering of a
deliverance to come; but how, what, and when, they knew not.

In the admonition are three things: first the persons admonished, which are
the Gentiles, whom Paul a Jew calls brethren. The profession of the Gospel
makes all professors brethren. Therefore we should all live in unity.

Secondly, the admonition, which is, that the Gentiles should not be ignorant
of this secret. How well do they follow Paul, who contradict this as false.
Again, this mystery is necessary to be known, much more other mysteries.

Thirdly, the use of the knowledge of this secret, that the Gentiles should not
be arrogant in themselves, that their pride in which they contemned the Jews,
might be curbed. Paul touched them for this before, v. 18.20. here also he
meets with them for it: so profitable is it for us, often to be admonished of
that vice to which we are most inclined.

The second general thing, is the prophecy it self, in these words,
Blindness is partly come to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be come
in, and so all Israel shall be saved. Here are two things: first, a description
of the present estate of the Jews, Blindness in part is happened to Israel.
Secondly, a revealing of some secret things concerning this estate: which are
two: first, how long this blindness is to endure; namely till the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in. This is one secret. Secondly, what shall become of them
when this fullness is come in; then all Israel shall be saved, ver. 26.

In the description of their present estate, are four things: first, the
persons, Israel: secondly, the thing, blindness: thirdly the manner, is
happened: fourthly the degree, in part

1. The persons, Israel: this term is three ways taken: first for a name of
Jacob the Patriarch; not so here: secondly figuratively for all the elect; nor
so here, because of the opposition between Israel and Gentile: thirdly for the
people of the Jews which are the carnal seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; so
it is here to be taken, which is confirmed from the thing it self, which
speaks as much, namely the present blindness of that people,

2. The thing, blindness of mind, which is the cause of their reiection, the
cause put for the effect.

3. The manner is happened, not at adventure, but is cast upon them by the just
judgment of God: a judicial hardness, beside their natural.

4. The degree, in part: this word either notes the time, or is added to the
thing or to the persons. Ambrose referres it to the time, which (and may be
very well) is received of many. Calvin referres it to the thing, as if Paul
should say, mitigating the matter: They are become blind after a sort or in
some part. But this I take it cannot be: first because Paul has before
aggrauated their hardness, and here to unsay it, agrees not with the Spirit by
which Paul wrote: secondly, all experience shows that the Jews are not after a
sort in a small measure, but in a wonderful high degree hardened, still railing
at and bl^spheming Christ and his Gospel; neither is their punishment light,
which for such blindness is inflicted. The best, in my opinion is to attribute
it to the persons: In part, that is, not all, not to every individual amongst
them, but to some: and so it agrees with the sense of the first part of the
Chapter, that the reiectio^ of the Jews is not total: also with that 17.
verse, Some of the branches are broken off: and with ver. 26. And so all Israel
shall be saved. Israel in part, and all Israel, seem to be terms aptly
opposing themselves.

The two secrets follow: the first, how long this blindness shall contiue,
viz. Till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

Until: not, that the fullness of the Gentiles might come in, as some: for
first, it agrees not with the words: secondly, it was no secret to the
Gentile, neither were they ignorant that the Jews were cast off that they
might enter: thirdly, the word is to be taken in his proper sense, in as much
as it agrees with the place, and with other Scriptures.

Fullness of the Gentiles, a full and plentiful propagation of the Gospel,
whereby many of all nations shall be converted to God.

Quest. Is this fulnsse past or to come?

Answ. Beza et Gualter in locum.
Some think it is past, because of the decay of the love of the Gospel among
the Gentiles, quarrels arise, zeal is cooled, etc. which deserve, that as when
the Gentiles came in, but few of the Jews believed, so when the Jews return,
but few of the Gentiles should believe. The state of the Gentiles being now
like a vessel at the tilt, and therefore their goodness greatly failing: and
so for this, the conversion of the Jews not to be far off.

But I take it that this fullness is to come; and that the Gentiles shall more
zealously profess the Gospel then heretofore. My reasons: first, because the
faith of the Gentiles shall provoke the Jews, ver. 11. Secondly, if it were
come, the Jews should cease to be obstinate and blind: but yet they are as
obstinate and blind as ever: therefore etc. Some think that the nations now
professing the Gospel should fall away, though others be added; but hereof I
see no reason: rather the contrary: for the conversion of the Jews shall bring
riches to the Gentiles.

The second secret: what shall become of the Jews when the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in; namely, all Israel shall be saved. Where we have first the
thing, secondly the persons.

The thing, shall be saved, that is converted by the preaching of the Gospel;
the effect put for the isntrumental cause, or the consequent for the
antecedent; Piscator.
unless some should say, that the Jews should be saved and not converted,
which were absurd.

The persons are set down by name, Israel, with a note of universality, all
Israel: and so the secret is this, that when the fullness of the Gentiles is
come in, there shall be a famous, notorious, universal calling of the Jews.

Some oppose this, auerring that Israel is here taken for the elect of the
Jews and Gentiles. I confess that Israel is sometime so taken, but here it
cannot: and they which affirm it, bring no shadow of reason for their saying,
but their bare word. But many things make it plain, that by Israel must be
understood only the nation of the Jews.

1. It is to be taken here, as it is before throughout this argument; but it is
to be taken for the nation, ver. 1, 2, 3. Against th^se do David and Esaias
denounce the curses, ver. 8, 9, 10. and not against the elect: and ver. 14.
Paul expounds Israel to be them of his own flesh.

2. The perpetual opposition so often iterated from v. 11. to the 33. euince,
that here also it is to be taken oppositiuely to the Gentile, and so of the Jew.

3. Many things in the text plainly show it.

First, Paul says that he would not have the Gentiles ignorant: of what? that
all the elect should be saved. Who ever doubted of it? but of the calling of
the Jews, there was a doubt.

Secondly, he calls it a secret or mystery: but that all the elect should be
saved, is no secret.

Thirdly, that you should not be wise in your own conceits. But if he here had
only declared that the fullness of the Gentiles should come in, and that all
the elect amongst them should be saved, this would have made them more
conceited: but Paul's drift is here to commend the Jews, not the Gentiles.

Fourthly, and so, the coherence binds, that Israel is to be understood as
before ver. 25.

Fifthly, Israel is called Jacob, ver. 26. which term I remember not, so much
as once to be (certainly) taken for the elect of Jew and Gentile.

Sixthly, the prophecies v. 26, 27. are necessarily to be understood of the
Jews, as the opposition continued in the verses following plainly shows.

Object. But there is no mention of this term Jews in this Chapter.

Answ. The Jews are called Israelites, as by the more ancient, general, and
honorable name, and also because the prophecies in the 9, 10, and this Chapter
runs in this term Israel. And by Israel there is nothing more evident then
that the Jews are understood as Math. 10.5. so also c. 9. v. 24. there is
mention made of Jews, who ver. 27. are called Israel. So in this Chapter, Paul
says, that he is an Israelite: and in another place he says he is a Jew: so
Act. 2.14. and 22. Jews and Israelites are taken for the same people.

Therefore there is no color that any man should avouch all Israel, to be
taken otherwise then for the nation of the Jews.

Before the end of the world the Jews in regard of their multitude shall be
called. It is Peter Martyrs opinion that many places in Esaias aim at this. Beza
says, It is very often delivered in the Prophets. Origin proves it out of Hos.
2.7. Aquinas out of Hos. 1.4. and Micah 7. from the 15. ver. to the end of the
chapter. Oleuian out of Esa. 27.9. Ezekiel. 11.17. and 37.22. which place Beza
also alleges, Math. 1.27. Luke 1.33. Pareus out of Revel. 7.

To these I think may be added two pregnant places of the new Testament, as
Luke 2.32. where Christ is called the glory of his people Israel, which must
be understood of their salvation. He is not the glory only of a few, but of
the people and multitude. But as yet Simeons prophecy has not taken effect,
for the people have not glorified Christ.

Also Act. 1.6,7. the Apostles expected the restoring of Israel: they ask our
Savior of the time; who answers, that it is not for them to know the times
which the Father has put in his own hand. In which answer, Christ denies not
that there should be such a time, but, as to me appears, secretly confesses
it.

Besides, they wonderfully increase in all places where they are suffered, as
writers and travelers report. Wherein is yet fulfilled that part of the
promise to Abraham, that his seed should be as the stars in heaven. If this
promise be yet of force to them, why not the principal promise, that God
should be their God?

Farther, the providence of God wonderfully appears in preserving them to be
yet a distinct people, known in all places from other nations, continuing a
nation, though they be hated and oppressed in all kingdoms, and kept under by
most severe laws. It is not for nothing that God thus preserues them, whereas
in much shorter time many other nations are quite extirpated.

Use 1.
The calling of the Jews is a mystery: seek not further then is revealed,
and believe that. If thou ask how? and when? I know not, because I find not
revealed. God knows, which satisfies me. It is the opinion of Lyra, in his
commentary upon this Chapter, and so generally of the Papists, that the Jews
shall be called presently upon the discovery of the falsitie of Antichrist:
which (if you understand of a more notorious discovery then yet has been) may
have some correspondence with the truth: always provided, that you seek not
for Antichrist at Rome, lest you find him with a triple crown on his head: And
therefore the Jesuit direct us to seek for Antichrist among the Jews, in the
Tribe of Dau, at Jerusalem: wherein they are like such birds, who commonly draw
us away from their neasts, by their fluttering and noise, for the safety of
their young: For their fable of Antichrist, and of Enocks and Elias his
preaching and death, as the occasion of the calling of the Jews, cannot stand
with this of Paul, who affirms that the faith of the Gentiles shall occasion
their Conversion. But it is not safe to be too bold in things not revealed. He
that too earnestly looks upon the Sun, comes in the end to see nothing: and
he that stands too near fire, may burn himself in stead of warming him.
Secret things are for the Lord, but things revealed for us and our children for
ever.

Use 2.
The end of the world shall not be, till the Jews are called, and how long
after that none yet can tell. There are certain foolish prophesies dispersed,
that the world shall end within these twenty years: count such like the
drunken prophesies of Merlin. In all ages of the Church there have been such
fantastical people: in Paul's time there were such, and they would have
fathered their brainlesse toys upon Paul: 2. These. 2.1.2.
so also from Paul's time to this day, many have attempted to find out (not the
day and hour) but the year of the last Judgment, which must needs be a note
of great folly and rashness: First, because there are no plain Scriptures for
it, but against it: Secondly, because the grounds of their conceit are
uncertain, idle and frivolous: as from Peter's saying, that a thousand years
is but as a day, and from the collection of one Elias (not the Prophet)
concerning the division of the term of the world, two thousand years before
the Law, two thousand years under the Law, and two thousand years after the
Law, and from diverse mystical numbers in Daniel, and the Revelation. At these
Saint Augustine laughes, saying, Aug. lib. 18. de Ciuit, Dei, cap. 53. 54.
That the place in the Acts 1.6.7. has bred the gout in the fingers of our
Pythagorean Count-casters. Thirdly, if the last day be unknown (as all
acknowledge) then the day before the last, and so by consequence the last
week, month, year, age. 1. John 20.
Fourthly all the Diuiners, and Coniecturers about this point have been
hitherto shamed: such therefore that shall yet attempt it, must expect the same
measure which their fellows have had, as a just recompense of their madness.

It is not possible to know, nor lawful to enquire: if it had been for the
Churches profit to have known it, I am out of doubt that God would have
revealed it before now; for no reason can be alleged why it should be now
more necessary to be known, then forty years ago.

Whenever the time comes, it shall come well for Gods children, prepare for
it that it may be a joyful and not a black and dismal time unto thee. If God
should now this very day come to Judgment: How ready art thou? Set thy self
as before the Judge. If thou have not repented, in what a miseble case were
thou, if this were the day: and though this be not that day, yet it may be
the day of thy death; which as it leaves thee, so shall the last Judgment
find thee.

Wait for the coming of thy Master: To live in drunkenness and riotousnesse,
is to deny his coming at all. What shall become of thee at that day, when at
the voice of the trumpet thou shall peep out of thy grave, and see the world
on fire, the Judge coming in glory in the clouds and the Devil ready to
torment thee? Repent, repent, that at that day when the Judge shall appear,
thou may not hide thy head for shame, but have boldness before him.

Use. 3.
Till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in: yet there is an emptiness among
the Gentiles, both in regard of number, and in respect of grace, which last
emptiness is a great impediment to the calling of the Jews. The great
Idolatry of the Romanists, and profaneness among other Christians, is a
stumbling block unto them. Let us remove it, so behauing our selves according
to our profession, that we may make a passage for their calling.

Use. 4.
Come in, whither? into the Church, which is the house of the living God. All
they which believe are within; without are unbelievers It is our Fathers house,
where is bread enough; without is nothing but hogs meat. Out of the circle of
the Church raines nothing but fire and brimstone. Examine how thou art within,
whether as Cham in the Ark, as Judas among the Apostles, as chafe in the
floor; for in respect of their bodies many are within, who in respect of faith
and obedience are without. It is all one to be without, and to deserve to be
without.

Use. 5.
Blindness or obstinacy is in part come to Israel, but in the end all Israel
shall be saved. The comparing of these together, Obstinacy and Salvation, show
that an obstinate man, qua talis, is not in the state of grace and salvation.
Who have this obstinate heart? Surely the Jews, as we see, but we need not
seek a Jew to find it; among our selves is this judgment fallen. Concerning
which, we will at this time note these four things: First, the misery of an
obstinate heart: Secondly, the means whereby we come into such an estate:
Thirdly, the effects of it: Fourthly the signs of it.

1. Jobs estate was miserable when he underwent all the misery the Devil
could devise; yet all that is nothing to a blind obstinate heart, this is
worse, only hell worse then it. There are two estates of the heart most
fearful: to feel sin too much; and to be past feeling. In the first were
Cham and Judas, whose ends were desperate: But the second estate is more
fearful, pray against it: if you say a damnable, devilish, hellish heart, of
any heart, it is true of the obstinate heart. The soft repenting heart, is a
heavenly heart: there is a natural hardness which is in all, but the
Judicial is a forerunner of damnation.

2. A man comes not to the height of this obstinacy at the first, but it is
some time a working by certain means: The means cooperating with the Devil
in our hardening are two: First, Custom in sinning: even as a path is hardened
by the continual trampling of the passengers, so by custom in evil, is the
conscience by little and little crushed and made insensible. At the first there
is shame and trembling; but being habited in evil, men scorn reproves, as
the Leuiathan laugheth at the shaking of the spear. Stories record of one who,
through custom, made poison so familiar to him, that he drank it without
danger; Mithridates,
so wicked men by custom, make blasphemies, whoredoms, drunkenness, and all
profaneness so familiar, that their stomachs are never offended with them.
The second means, is neglect of the means of grace offered. This shut up the
Jews in obstinacy; and ordinarily for this is this judgment of God inflicted
upon men.

3. The effects of this hardness are two. 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3.
1. A departing from the faith, broaching the doctrines of devils, denying
manifest truth, and holding and seeming any thing to obtain our own ends.
Ephesians. 4.18.
As when men will be Papists, Protestants, neuters, any thing, nothing, as they
see it best serve their politic plots.

2. Committing uncleanness, and other abominable sins with greediness,
delighting in nothing but in besotting voluptuousness.

4. This hardness is two ways discerned. 1. When no Judgment. 2. When no
mercy can move to remorse. When the word, which is a hammer, a sword, and water
can neither by the thundering of judgment, bruise, or make any dint into our
hearts, nor by the pleasing sound of mercy, mollify us and make us relent;
there is hardness unspeakable. The diuill trembles at judgment: the hard
heart trembles not. He that can read the bitter passion of our blessed Savior
for us wretches, and can consider, how by his precious bleeding heart he
entreats us to be reconciled, offering us mercy; and relents not must needs
have a heart as hard as the nether millstone.

VERSE. 26. As it is written, Esaias. 59 20.
then shall come out of Syon the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness
from Jacob.

27 For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.


PAul had this doctrine of the calling of the Jews by revelation, which is
sufficient for our faith: but yet he farther proves it, both by scripture, in
these words, and by undeniable reasons, in the other verses to 33.

As it is written: Obs. Who so obtrudes any opinion to the Church without
warrant from the Scripture is a deceiuer.

This scripture is taken out of Esaias, who prophesies of deliverance to the
Jews, which Paul interprets of this deliverance we speak of.

In this testimony are five things. 1. The person delivering. 2. The person
delivered. 3. The deliverance. 4. The confirmation. 5. The means.

1. The deliverer shall come out of Syon. The person delivering is Christ
described here by his office, and by his original.

His office, the deliverer; the word which Paul uses signifies delivering by
strong hand, to rescue by force, as David delivered the Lamb out of the Lions
paw.

This word is used in the Lords prayer, but deliver us from evil. And in other
places. Esayes word signifies a kinsman, Ruth. 4.
and has respect to the law mentioned. Leuit. 25.25. Of which is an example
about the marriage of Booz and Ruth. So Christ is our Joel or next kinsman, to
whom belongs the right of our redemption and therefore Job calls Christ by that
name, Job. 19.25.
I know my redeemer lives. In Christ there is lawful redemption. He has
right as Esayes word; and power as Paul's word imports; and both these are
needful; for the prisoner that wrongfully escapes is in more danger.

The devil is the strong man: Christ the stronger: we the spoils recovered
and redeemed.

His original: shall come out of Syon: De* Veniet hum^natus. Aqu.
Syon the church of the Jews, the meaning, shall come in the flesh of the
Jews: the Septuagint, for Syons sake: Esaias to Syon. But Paul out of Syon,
writing by the same spirit, to show the greater probability of the Jews
deliverance: for if we have comfort because he took the nature of man; the
Jews must have more, because he took the seed of Abraham.

2. The person delivered. Jacob: that is Jacobs posterity. The Jews.

3. The deliverance, shall come and turn away iniquities so is their
conversion described; for when God forgiues sin, he gives the grace of true
conversion.

4. 5. The confirmation is ver. 27. That this is Gods covenant: which is then
fullfilled when God calls them of which Esaias speaks. Or this latter part is
taken out of Jeremy: and then it is the substance of the covenant.

Howsoever, the argument strongly conuinceth the calling of the Jews, thus.
Those who shall be pardoned their sins, shall be effectually called. But the
Jews shall be pardoned: therefore.


The minor is proved; because that God has couenanted to pardon them: This is
my Covenant unto them. This covenant concerning the pardon of their sins, and
deliverance by Christ is not yet fulfilled; therefore for the truth of God,
certainly to be expected.

Ob. Christ shall come says the Prophet: and he came in his incarnation.

Answ. Christ's coming is to be, according to his covenant: which implies a
coming in regard of his merit and effecacy. In regard of his merit, he came,
when he took flesh of the Virgin Mary: but in regard of his effecacy,
effecting that by his spirit in their hearts, which he has effected by his
merit on the cross, he is not yet come. For then are we said to reap the
benefit of the covenant, when we feel the effecacy of it, sealing to our
consciences, the pardon of sin, and turning our hearts to serve God according
to his gospel. Both these are comprehended by Peter when he said, Act. 3.25.
that the Jews are the children of the covenant, for whose blessing, and
turning away from their sins God sent and raised up Jesus Christ: which is
not yet performed, but must be, for the covenant.

Ob. Some of the Jews are converted.

An. But the covenant wins to the people, nation, house of Jacob: if two or
three english men get much wealth; we say not: the whole nation is enriched,
this implies the multitude and body of that nation.

Not only some now and then, but the people of the Jews shall be called.
Christ shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever: Luke 1.33. which yet he
does not: for they yet acknowledge him not, but defy him. But this must come
to pass, because the scripture cannot be loosed.

Use 1.
Will Christ yet come, and forgive the Jews? What the Jews? who fill up the
measure of their fathers iniquity by blaspheming him daily? Will he come a
Savior to these? O infinite proportion of mercy, who shall now despair?
Whatsoever thy sins are, if thou can repent, doubt not of his mercy, who
will graciously receive a Jew.

Use. 2.
Redemption is a taking away of sin, by justification and sanctification.
Such as are in their sins are vnredeemed, and remain under the power of the
devil, who holds the^, though not by a visible possession which is fearful,
yet by an invisible operation, which is worse.

Many say, they defy the devil, who by consenting to his suggestions, worship
him in their lives: for as true obedience is a worshipping of God, so sin and
disobedience is the worship of the devil, as Paul shows, saying, Romans 6.16.
His servants ye are to whom ye obey. God says, swear not; the devil says,
swear and ease thy stomach. God says, be sober; the devil says, be drunken.
To whom do thou yield? If thou refusest to do Gods will, and obeyest the
fiend, thou art Gods enemy, and the devils slave.

VERSE 28. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but as
touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers sakes.


HEre Paul proves by reason, that the Jews shall be pardoned, and so called.
The reason is taken from the love of God; and follows thus: Those whom Gods
loves, he will pardon and call. But God loves the Jews. Ergo.


The argument is brought in by a prolepsis. What, the Jews (might some say)
pardoned and called? Gods enemy? whom God hates? Yes, says Paul, even the
Jews: for though in some respect they are hated, yet in other they are beloved
of God.

Here are two things avouched of the Jews: first, that they are enemies:
secondly, that they are beloved.

They are enemies: whose? Paul's; but not so here: but Gods enemies, hated of
God. This is amplified two ways: first from the meritorious cause, for the
Gospel, namely because they refuse and persecute it: secondly, from the end,
for your sake, for your benefit, that is the Gentiles.

The hatred of the Jews to the Gospel, is deadly: as appeared in the
crucifying of Christ, in their persecuting the Apostles, and their extreme
malice to Christians of all times; being a chief cause, and principal agents
in the tormenting of poor Christians, as Tertullian reports of his times; and
their dealings with Polycarpus do testify, mentioned by Eusebius. Iudaeorum
Synagogae sontes perse eutionum. Pertul scorp. adnersus Gent.


Hierome reports, that in his time the Jews used to curse Christ and
Christians, under the name of Nazarens.

In the days of Philip the long, a King of France, they hired certain leapers
to poison all the fountains in that kingdom.

In this our land they committed many outrages, by crucifying children to death
on Good friday, for which as they deservedly many of them suffered, so they
were at length wholly banished out of this kingdom. Robert. Gagnanus lib. 7.
hist. Franco.


They were also for such like things expelled Spain, circa an. 1290.
giving occasion of the beginning of the bloody Inquisition, circa an. 1493.
which afterward was turned against the Protestants.

In two Councels it was provided, that at Easter, two days before and two
after, they should not be permitted to come abroad, because of their
insolences offered to Christians at that time, which is yet observed in all
Christian cities where they are suffered. Aurelianeuse 3. et Matisconense 1.
circa an. 537 et 575.


For this hatred of the Gospel they are hated of God, and that for our good,
as ver. 11. It is in the power of wicked men to sin; but by their sin to
effect this or that good, is not in their power, but in his who deuides the
darkness and orders it. August. lib. 1. de praedest cap. 16.


2. They are beloved. loco Aug. modo citat.
They are hated, and yet beloved: which may well be, because they are not in
the same respect time, or particular subject. These to be understood of the
nation (as Austin says) of whom some belong to Jacobs halting some to the
blessing he received.

Beloved of God, in two respects, first of election, secondly of the fathers.

Election signifies the grace whereby they were chosen to be the people of God:
by which it comes to pass that many of them belong to Gods secret election.
For where God has his Church, there is the treasury of his Election.

Fathers sake: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: not because of their merits, but of
the covenant made with them.

The Jews are beloved of God, Esaias 1.1. etc. They were beloved: and Gods love
is to the end.

Use.
The certainty of the calling of the Jews, hereby is manifest, yet some have
gone about (absurdely) to take away the subject of the question, denying there
are any Jews in the world, because there are none in England, or because they
live not in a country by themselves; which are filly shifts to allege against
so manifest a truth.

Have all learned men agreed to befoole the world? Do Christian Magistrates
make laws against shadows? Do all Travelers consent together to belly
themselves, who say they have seen and talked with Jews? What Countrymen are
they, which in Italy, Venice, and diverse free Cities, are upon penalties
distinguished by their habit from other Christian? themselves say they are
Jews: Are they not? Is the profession of a Jew in such account and esteem,
that men should counterfeit themselves Jews, which are not? Surely this is not
worth the answering.

There is a place to the Thessalonians, 1. These. 2.14.
which these accute disputers have not observed which has more validity
against the calling of the Jews, then all which they have alleged. Paul
says; That the wrath of God is come on the Jews: (...), which some have
translated, for ever; but it is better translated, to the uttermost, noting the
extremity of punishment, not of time; or if of time, then to be applied to
Paul's persecutors, and those of that time, which wrath they endured at the
destruction of Jerusalem.

Use 2.
Many speak and account loosely of the Gospel: but for such doing God hated
the Jews.

Use 3.
Thou know a Papist or profane person, though thou be an enemy to him
for his sin, yet thou must love him for the Election, because for ought thou
know he may be the elect child of God.

Use 4.
Good fathers are a great blessing to their children. Solomon continues Prince
all his days, and one Tribe is reserved for his son, for David's sake: let us
fear God even for our childrens sake, that the blessing of God do not
determine in us. 2. King. 11.34.35.36.


Use 5.
Thou love the remembrance of Abraham, then love a Jew: as many times we show
favor to one that is lewd, for his good fathers sake: nay, though we be glad
for our own sakes, yet we must love them for Gods sake: we must love them
whom God loves: woe unto them who have no other cause of hating their
neighbor, but because he is religious and beloved of God: such are of the
line of Cain, who hated his brother for his goodness: or rather of the seed of
the Serpent, who hates them most, whom God loves most.

Use 6.
The Elect are beloved, the reprobate are hated of God, and the tokens of Gods
love, are putting away and pardoning iniquity, and effectual calling. Examine
thy self, does God love thee? Then will he give thee faith and repentance,
which are Gods love tokens, as we give tokens to them we love. Art thou
profane, and think God loves thee? Ephesians. 5.25.26.27.
Thou art deceived, for if Christ love his Church, it is to cleanse it from
sin, and alspots and wrinckles. If thou love thy house, thou will be
repairing and beautifying it: if thou have a garden, thou will be weeding it,
and planting it with the best herbs and flowers. So if God love thee, and
delight in thee, he will not suffer the stinking weeds of sin to ouergrow thy
heart, but will give thee repentance and grace to a holy life.

If thou love thy child, will thou suffer it to starve for want of bread? or
if it fall into the water or fire, will thou let it lie and perish? No, no, we
need not to be bidden run if our beloved child be in danger. So if God
suffer thee to be in want of saving knowledge, and to run on into abominable
sins, whereby thou art in danger to fall into hell, he loves thee not.

VERSE 29. For the gifts and calling of God, are without repentance.


THe Jews shall be pardoned their obstinacy, verse 26.27. because they are
beloved of God, verse 28. and they are beloved, because of Election, and for
their Fathers sake, verse. 28. for the Nature of Gods love is unchangeable: once
loved, and ever loved.

Some of the Gentiles might say, what if their Fathers were beloved? what is
that to stubborn and obstinate children, that walk not in their fathers
ways? Unto this Paul answers, that whatsoever they are; yet the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance.

The gifts, that is, of Gods special love, not ordinary or common gifts, but
choice ones, which come of special grace, and make us gracious.

And calling, that is, to saving knowledge, to obedience, and that both outward
and inward.

The gifts and calling: not the gifts of calling, but distinguished, concluding
election and calling with all the effects of both.

The gifts and calling: that is those gifts, and that calling are without
repentance, for some gifts are with repentance.

Without repentance. Usually Repentance is taken for that grace whereby our
hearts are changed, and we turn from our sins to God: but not so here. It
is not spoken here as a thing in us, but in God for our understanding: the
fained cause, being put for the true effect. It is spoken after the manner of
men, but must be understood after the manner of God.

Repentance is not properly in God: It is attributed to him secundum modum,
according to the manner, but not secundum rem, according to the thing. When God
seems to do that which men do indeed: then that which is the cause of such
doing in men, is attributed to God, and so on the contrary.

Men use to revenge when they are angry: Therefore when God auengeth himself
upon sinners, Anger is attributed to him; not indeed, but by similitude, for
that which in men proproceeds of Anger, in God comes from his most quiet
justice: so when men change that which they have done, they are said to repent,
and when they change not, they are said not to repent of their doing. So the
constancy and truth of God is called not repenting, and when he alters that
which he has done, repentance is attributed unto him, as of making man, and
of making Saul King. Yet this is to be remembered, that when God changes
things, the change is in the things, not in God, who determined the change of
such things before the foundation of the world.

The meaning then is, that God never repents him of the giving of saving grace
to them whom he loves, and of electing them at the first, he holds his gifts
well bestowed, he gives not to day, and takes away to morrow. According to this
is that of Esau, who sought repentance with tears, but found no place for it.
which is not meant of his own repentance for sin, but of his fathers repentance
concerning the blessing: He would have had his father have changed his mind
and made a new will, but his father would not.

There are three things which cause men to repent of their doings, and to alter
their purposes, none of which are in God.

1. Mutabilitie of mind, but there is no variableness with God, but he is ever
the same.

2. Error through ignorance, which causes new consultations, some things being
mistaken, or some impediments happening not foreseen, but in God is neither
error nor ignorance.

3 Impotencie, when we are not able to bring to effect, our purposed
intendments: but God is almighty, therefore his gifts and calling are without
repentance, and by consequence having elected and called the Jews to be his
people; salvation and a time of conversion must needs be laid up in store for
them.

God repents not of his gifts and calling* 1. Sam. 15.29, Number. 23.19. Esaias
46.10. Matthew. 3.6.

Use 1.
The Jews shall be called. Object. But they have continued long in this their
unbelief. Ans. True, yet this excludes not their hope: as the continuance of
some particular man in his sin, twenty, or forty, or threescore year,
absolutely excludes him not from grace. God never yet said of the Jews, It
repents me of their election and calling, therefore they have hope.

Use 2.
The graces of vocation and election are not debts, but free gifts, both in
their first bestowing, and also in their increase, and continuance.

Use 3
The covenant of God expressed, verse 27. and Election, verse. 28. are expressed
here, by gifts and calling. By our effectual calling then, we may discern of
our being in the Covenant, and of our election. Examine then: thou hear what
the Ministers of God say to thee, calling upon thee to repent, believe and
obey. What say thou to them? do thou so? If when thou art called to
account of thy sins, thou yet live in them, thou art not in the eye of any
mortal creature elected.

Alas will some say, what then shall become of me who have heard the Word along
time, and my self called to repentance, but I have not repented? Is not my
estate fearful? Yes indeed, but yet I advise thee to hear still; if thou
belongest to God, thou shall hear something at last, which will do thee good
on thy deaths bed.

Use 4.
We love to day and hate to morrow, using friends as flowers, which when they
are fresh we wear them, but when they fade we throw them on the dunghill. But
the strength of Israel is not as man, variable; but he is the unchangeable God,
if he once wear us, he will never cast us way, but renew our freshness. This
is our comfort against our great guiltiness and manifold infirmities, he
repents not of his love to us, but keeps us with watch and ward, as under
lock and key to salvation. He finisheth the good work he begins. If he
keep not the City, the watchman watches in vain; if he keep the City,
the enemy watches in vain.

Use 5.
There are three sorts of men go to hell: 1. Such as continue in sin; a man
need no great skill to read their doom. 2. The second are such, who have
only a show of Religion, these are hypocrites. 3. Such who have true grace,
but it is temporary and continues not. A man may have true grace without
salvation, but not true saving grace. True grace is then saving when it
continues.

This distinction of grace is gathered out of the Hebrews, where Paul says,
Heb. 6.
That a man may be enlightened, partake of the holy Ghost, and taste of the good
word of God, and of the powers of the life to come, and yet be a castaway. Now
such graces were true, but temporary: so the stony and thornie ground had true
grace, but not continuing, which is the note of good ground.

Examine then the grace thou have. Thou have true joy and sorrow: as at a
Sermon thou art truly affected with that which thou hear, being moved to
joy at the hearing of the promises, and it may be to mourning, at the hearing
of the threatenings against thy sins Do these things continue? or art thou
Sermon-sicke, as a man is sea-sicke: sick at sea, and well at shore? a
penitent within the Church, and profane without? If these continue not, they
are no saving graces.

Thou have true fear: as in the time of thunder or other danger: but it may be
thy fear is ouerblowne with the cloud: thou were truly afraid, but it must
continue if a saving grace.

In prosperity many believe in God, and in adversity fly to the Devil. This
may be true faith but is not saving. Saving faith is like a true friend who
fails not in adversity, which makes a man say, Though he kill me, I will
trust in him.

Thou have true love, as to the world and to godliness in godly folk: but it
may be thou love these as Saul loved David. David must be sent for, and who
but David? How long? till the evil spirit come upon Saul: so many love these
things till the ill spirit come upon them, and then they show that they have
not saving grace.

Many have true resolution, as in time of sickness to amend their lives: they
will speak so well then, as a man would think they spoke as they meant, and so
they do, as they mean then; but their meaning changes, and when they are
recovered, their mind is altered, therefore such resolutions though true, yet
are not saving. We love stuff in our garments that will last, and metal in a
horse that will last: some horse will at first setting out stand upon no
ground, and yet be stark tired before noone; we like not such a horse, nor
does God like such professors, whose graces do not continue.

VERSE. 30. For as ye in times past, have not believed Or obeyed.
God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief.

31. Even so have these also now not believed, Or obeyed.
that through your mercy, they also may obtain mercy.


Here is the last Argument to prove the Conversion and general calling of the
Jews, which is furrher confirmed, verse 32.

The Argument is taken from the like dealing of God with the Gentiles: God
after a long time of infidelity received the Gentiles to mercy: therefore
will he also at last receive the Jews; for (according to the rule) of things
like, there is the same judgment. The impiety of the Gentiles was no
impediment to their mercy: neither shall the infidelity of the Jews to theirs.

One accounts this Argument probable, not necessary, Piscator.
but the Confirmation, verse. 32. makes it very necessary.

In these verses, as in all similitudes, are two parts, First, A proposition,
verse 30. Secondly, A reddition or application, verse 31.

In the Proposition are three things. 1. The state the Gentiles were in, in
times past: They have not believed God. There is a double infidelity Natural,
Judicial, the Gentiles were under both. Infidelity may also be considered as
opposed to Christianity: so we Christians are not unbelievers: or as opposed
to faith, and so we are borne unbelievers.

2. Their present estate, Terminus ad quem. They have now obtained mercy, that
is, Faith, which he should have spoken, but he rather chose to say mercy;
both because faith is of mercy, as of the cause, and also because the proper
act of Faith is to receive mercy.

3. The means whereby we come out of an unbelieving estate to a believing,
namely the unbelief of the Jews. Which was medium occasionale, the occasion,
not given but taken by the goodness of God.

The Gentiles were Infidells. Ephesians. 2.12. but by the unbelief of the Jews they
are received to mercy and converted, as appears in our experience.

Use 1.
Forget not what thou were in times past, an unbeliever, a profane wretch, for
we have all run the race of the Prodigal son. It is Gods grace if it be
otherwise with thee now. Be thankful. It may be within these few years thou
were a drunkard, a blasphemer, an unclean person: How if God had taken thee
away in thy sins, who has suffered others not so greeuious sinners as thy
self to perish in their iniquities? Let this bind thee to thy good behavior
for ever, and spurr thee on to more godliness: If now thou should live as
those which have received no mercy, it must be a foul shame to thee.

Saint Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.15.
this a faithful saying and worthy of all men to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners. O its a sweet saying indeed, for
else we had been all damned. This is picked out to be read at the receiving of
the Lords supper, for the comfort of penitent sinners: a sentence worthy to be
written in letters of gold: write it up in thy heart. And remember that Paul
says also, Tit. 3.8.
this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all affirmation, that they which
believe in God should be careful to show forth good works. As that is a
faithful saying, so is this a faithful. As thou desire the sweetness of
the former, so see thou performest the duty of the latter, for as the former
comforts the conscience, so this latter directs the life.

Use 2.
Faith is a sweet mercy, so is the word of God, the means of that faith: alas
for the poor Indians, who know not God in Christ, who are without the word, who
worship the devil, how wretchedly do they live, how desperately do they die.
we account them miserable, as they are indeed. But do you think that we may
not find some among our selves, for whom we may say ten thousand times more
alas? Yes certainly: namely for them which having the means of faith which is
the word, yet contemn the same, alas, alas for them, for their estate is
more desperate: Turn not this grace into wantonness, it will increase thy
torments.

Use 3
Sin breeds sorrow, and many times sorrow killes the sin which bred it, as a
worm breeding in timber consumes it. So the sin of the Jews works, to the
good of the Gentiles by the goodness of God. One calls the sin of Adam
happy, Greg. Mag.
because it was the occasion of the revealing of Christ, so in some sort may
we say of the sin and unbelief of the Jews.

Quest. But are not men execused, if good come of their sins?

Ans. No, because they intend not the good, neither are our actions to be
censured by the good coming of them, but by the law of God. Therefore it was a
vile part of that strumpet-Nunne, who was the mother of Lumbard the Master of
the Sentences, and of Gratian, ^he Compiler of the Decrees, that being
admonished to repent of her uncleanness, answered she would not, affirming
that she had merited thereby much, in bringing two such lights into the world
as they were.

Use. 4.
The Jews are in a miserable state for our sakes: God forbid that we should
lightly esteem of the grace God offers us, it coming unto us at so dear a
rate as is the casting off of Gods dear people the Jews. A Heathen King
caused a corrupt Judge to be flayne, and the seat of Justice to be covered
with the skin, that the sight thereof might admonish succeeding Judges to
beware of bribes. So me thinks we should never see, hear, read, meditate of
a Jew, but we should lay our hand upon our heart, and say, Thus are these poor
wretches dealt withal for my sake; what manner of person therefore ought I to
be?

Use. 5.
When we were infidels, God showed us mercy, much more will he be merciful to
us now we believe.

VERSE 31. Even so have these also now not believed, Or obeyed.
that through your mercy they also might obtain mercy.


THere have been many questions about the meaning of these words, arising from
the differing pointing of it: as whether the Incisum, be to follow believed, or
your mercy, and so whether (through your mercy) be to be read to the first
clause of the verse, or the second.

They that have read it to the first: Coment. Hieron. ascrip.
have some of them expounded your mercy, of Christ, called our mercy as he is
our peace, because the author of these things: but this cannot be the meaning
because of the terms of the similitude; and it agrees not with the words.

Others expound that because god showed the Gentiles mercy therefore the Jews
believed not but this is false, Erasmus.
for first they refused to believe, and then the Gentiles were called.

Others give this meaning, Aquin.
that the Jews believed not, that the Gentiles might obtain mercy: but this
was said before ver. 30. And therefore not the same must here be meant, but
something to answer unto it.

To avoid these impertinent expositions, the right is, to read it according to
his Majesty's translation, where there is a necessary trajection of this word
(that) which word if it be referred to the Jews, notes the event: but if to
the counsel of God, as is best, here it notes the end.

Here there are three things of the Jews; answerable to the three things spoken
of the Gentiles ver. 3. 1. The Gentiles were in an estate of unbelief, the
Jews are in such an estate. 2. The Gentiles have received mercy. The Jews
shall. 3. The Gentiles received mercy, by the unbelief of the Jews; the
Jews shall receive mercy, by the mercy showed to the Gentiles.

So the argument is, that as God has dealt with the Gentile, so will he deal
with the Jew, and this is brought in to abate the pride of the Gentiles, who
despised the Jews, as if there were no mercy for such wretches. Now (says
Paul) consider thy self thou Gentile, what were thou before thou were called?
were thou not a worshipper of devils, in a grievous estate of sin? If then
there was mercy for thee, why not for them? Why should their infidelity be a
greater impediment to them, then thine was to thee? Nay, there is more
likelihood of their calling then was of thine, in regard of the occasional
means; for thou came in by their unbelief: they shall come in by thy faith,
which is more effectual for the bringing of such a thing to pass.

The Jews are now in an estate of unbelief, but they shall be received to
mercy. Esa. 46.4. and Ier 24.6.7. If the reiection of the Jews be final, how
are they carried to old age, and not rooted out and destroyed, contrary to these
prophesies. And their receiving shall be occasioned by the mercy showed to the
Gentile. v. 11.

Use 1.
There is yet mercy for the Jews, by the example of the like mercy to the
Gentiles.

Ob. But it is now almost sixteen hundred years ago since they were cast off,
is it likely that after so long time they should be called?

Ans. Yes: for the Gentiles lay longer under their infidelity, and yet at last
received grace, and were called: for from the time of Abraham's calling to the
destruction of Jerusalem, is about two thousand years, therefore the Jews may
be yet called notwithstanding this long time, though it were not this hundred
or two hundred years. Surely the preservation of that people in the providence
of God (notwithstanding all their affliction) to be a people distinguished, not
only in name and apparel, but in customs, ceremonies, religion, from all
other nations, argues, that God has some good purpose to them; because we see
the Trojans, Vandals, Hunns, and diverse other nations to be quite entinguished,
especially for their destinction from other people. Therefore if thy
authorities and reasons against the general calling of the Jews be not of
more force then the authorities and reasons alleged for such calling from the
11. ver. hitherto: at least cease to contradict it whosoever thou art.

Use 2.
Faith is not in the power of man, nor can any means effect it without Gods
blessing: one would think that this long affliction of the Jews might make
them cry peccaui, beside other means God has affoorded them; but yet they
are obstinate. When therefore thou art visited with trouble, pray it may be
sanctified to thy profit. When thou come to the word, pray also for a
blessing, else it will be unprofitable, though the preacher were a son of
thunder.

Use. 3.
Carry thy self meekly toward a Jew, and toward unbelievers among our selves,
and that considering thy self, who were sometime in the same condemnation.
Judge not thy neighbor for damned, though he be now a wretch: he that
converted thee, can in his good time convert him also. Remember how thou had
thy time of infidelity, and (it may be) accompanied with whoredom,
drunkenness, blaspheming Gods name, etc. which God has winked at and pardoned.

In the sense of this step to thy wicked neighbor, be severe against his
sin, but have compassion on his person: and as when thou visitest thy friend
sick of a disease, out of which thou have recovered, thou art prescribing
medicines upon thy experience: so play the physician to thy neighbors soul:
show him of the mercy thou have received, that he also may be stirred up to
seek to him who is merciful.

The conversion of the Gentiles shall occasion the conversion of the Jews: so
do thou use the grace which thou have received, to win others to grace. God
gave Paul consolation in distress, that he might comfort others: so if he give
thee knowledge, faith, etc. use them in like manner.

Use 4.
Who then is the better for thy gifts? have thou occupied them to thy masters
advantage? The Jew compasses sea and land to make a Proselite. The Jesuits
wind themselves like serpents into every place to make a Papist. Drunkards and
other ungodly persons seek to draw others to their practices: labor thou much
more to gain others to become zealous and true Christians; else thou shatlt be
called an unprofitable servant; how much more, all such which are causes and
occasions, by their wicked examples and counsels, to pervert men and to make
them worse by their acquaintance.

Use 5.
Let the Jew follow the faith of the Gentile, so do thou the example of good
Christians among whom thou live. It is a great furtherance to godliness to
have an example to the rule. It is a help to the scholar, to have a coppie to
write by, but a greater furtherance to his profiting to see his master make the
letters.

By Gods providence it comes to pass, that good men and women dwell not all in
one town; but God has scattered them some in one town, some in an other,
setting them up as lights, that by the light of their lives, we might be
directed, in the way of godliness. Have thou a godly man dwelling by thee? Why
has God given thee such a neighbor? not that thou should wrong him, but
that thou should be bettered by his example. Look thou profitest by him,
for as the contempt of the word, so by proportion the contempt of good examples
makes us subject to Gods wrath.

VERSE. 32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, Or shut them all up
together.
that he might have mercy on all.


SAint Paul in the two former verses, brought a similitude to prove the calling
of the Jews: now because similitudes do more illustrate then prove, therefore
he in this verse confirms the parity of Gods dealing with the Jew, as with the
Gentile, from the end of Gods purpose in the same.

The end of Gods concluding Gentiles and Jews in infidelity was not to
destroy them, but to show mercy on them. Therefore if the Gentiles obtain this
end so a so shall the Jew: and thus he concludes this matter as he began it,
that Gods end in casting off the Jews, is not their destruction, but the
salvation both of Gentile, and also of Jew, as verse. 11.

In this verse are two things. 1. A Proposition, God has concluded all in
unbelief.

2. The Amplification from the end: That he might have mercy on all.

In the Proposition are, first the Action, secondly, the Persons.

The Action, Concluding in unbelief, a metaphorical speaking, where unbelief
is compared to a chain, or rather a prison, in the which men are concluded,
till it please God to have mercy on them, giving them faith.

The persons are twofold: 1. Committing: 2. Committed.

The person committing or concluding, is God most just, and most merciful.

Quest. But is not God hereby made guilty of their Infidelity.

Answ. No: no more then a Judge committing a malefactor to prison is guilty of
his fault. God makes them not unbelievers, but finding them so, punishes them
with continuance in that estate during his pleasure.

The parties committed: Them all, that is, Jews and Gentiles; Jews as well as
Gentiles, and Gentiles as well as Jews.

Here is an elegant similitude. Men unconverted are prisoners, God the Judge,
Unbelief the prison, the Devil the jailer, the Law the Sergeant or the
Mittimus, and natural corruption the fetters, in regard of our indisposition
to goodness, and disposition only to evil.

God has shut up all in unbelief. This is the common condition of all men,
Romans 3 9.19 23. Gal. 3.22.

Use 1.
Saint Paul has in the passage of this business, ten times told us of our
miserable condition by nature: Here we are poor prisoners, it is our part to
take knowledge of our corrupt nature.

Use. 2.
Great is the misery that accompanies imprisonment, restraint of liberty,
hunger, cold, baseness, shame, chains, fetters etc. but no dungeon more
loathsome then an unbelieving heart, though a man should stand up to the knees
in mire among toads and snakes. O that we could be sensible of it, that we
might sigh to God for deliverance, as once did the Israelites from their
bondage in Egypt. When a man is arrested, and to be carried to the jail, what
lamenting among his friends: but our very souls are imprisoned in the worst of
prisons, under the worst of gaolors, and yet we are merry and iocound, as
though it were but a trifle.

Alas, what heart can a condemned wretch have to be merry, that tarries but
for the dismal hour, wherein he is to be made a ruefull example So if
unbelievers knew their present misery, and the damnation following, they would
surely cry for mercy to be repriued, that they might repent and believe.

Use. 3.
We may know whether we be yet in this prison, by two things: First, by faith
in God: Secondly, by faith in his Word.

1. Do thou believe there is a God? If thou do not, there needs no Jury
to go on thee, to find thee guilty or not: guilty: thou art in the very
bottom of the dungeon. But thou say there is a God. Do thou believe also
that he is just, Almighty, present every where, knowing all things? for as
good to say there is no God, as not such a God.

Thou art indicted of unbelief; How will thou be tried? Even by thy life shall
thou, the best trial in the world. What is thy life? Thou do not openly
steal, commit whoredom, so that all the world shall see thee: but if it be in
secret, thou will make no conscience. Lo thou art an unbeliever; for if thou
did believe as thou should, thou would be as afraid to commit these
things in thy secret chamber, as in the market place, in the dark as in the
light, because the eye of God pierces into every place, and through all
impediments. It must needs argue extreme impudency for a wife to prostitute
her self in the eye of her husband.

2. He is an Infidel that believes not the Scriptures. Are there any so vile
(will thou say) that believe not the Bible? yea thousands in the Church: for
the Scripture threatens ungodly men with the plagues of God, and promises
eternal life to the godly. Did men believe this, durst they so run on in all
profaneness? No verily, hereby they proclaim to the world, that they believe
not the word of God.

VERSE 32. -- That he might have mercy on all.


THis is the Amplification, from the end (not of Infidelity, but) of the
counsel of God, in concluding men therein. The full meaning of this will
appear in answering two or three Questions.

Quest. 1. Does infidelity move God to show mercy?

Ans. Noe: There is no sin that does more provoke him: God is not moved hereby
to be merciful, but he so dispenses salvation, that he awhile detaineth men
in unbelief, for the more manifestation of his mercy in their salvation.

God could have saved both Gentile and Jew, without this long imprisonment: but
then had not his mercy so clearly been manifested, as now it is, by the
coming between of such a time of unbelief. The Jew has this 1600. years
been working his justification by his own righteousness, and cannot attain
it, therefore it will appear when they are called, that it is of mere mercy.

Quest. 2. Shall none be damned? for he will have mercy upon all?

Ans. The greatest part shall be damned, for there are but few (in comparison)
that find the way of life. All is not to be understood of particular men, but
in general of Jew and Gentile.

Quest. 3. But does not this general (All) show that it is Gods purpose to
save all, as other Scriptures also import.

Answer. Indeed so held the Pelagians; so do the Papists partly; so do the
Latherans and Arminians, but God never purposed to save all, and therefore to
this Scripture and others of like sound may be answered diverse ways.

1. That, All, is to be understood of the kinds of singulars, not of the
singulars of every kind.

2. That God will all should be saved, viz. that shall be saved, as we say,
All, go into this house by the door, not that all the world go that way, or
into the house, but all that go into the house go that way. Aug. lib. cont.
Iul. cap. 12.


3. All, that is, all the Elect.

4. All, that is, in regard of the sufficiency, not efficiencie of the
sufferings of Christ, which are of an infinite price to save all: but only
such are saved by them, for whom it was appointed. In regard of the greatness
of the price, not in regard of the propriety of Redemption, says Saint
Augustine. Aug. resp. ad art. falso fibi impos.


5. Or God will that All shall be saved, by his revealed will, in regard of
offering and giving the means, and inuiting and commanding all to believe, but
not in regard of his secret will.

6. He takes away the sins of the world: that is, of the reconciled world,
not of the damned, as Saint Augustine distinguishes, or of Jews and Gentiles,
into which the world is usually distributed. Aug. tract. 56. in Joan.


7. He is the propitiation, not for our sins only, but for the sins of
the whole world, that is, not of the sins of the Apostles only, or of such as
lived in those times, but of all to the end of the world, which believe in
Christ.

God has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all, Gal.
3.22.

Use 1.
Our salvation is of mere mercy, but it is a hard thing to be brought to
acknowledge it. The Gentiles were two thousand years before they could take
forth this lesson, and the Jews have been sixteen hundred years about it,
and yet have not learned it: yea there are many amongst us that cannot say this
lesson right.

If a man that has lived an honest civil life be on his deathbed, fools will
be ready to flatter him, that he shall be one of the first that shall be
saved, or else (say they) we were all in a poor case. Most men hope to be
saved by their prayers and good serving God: we are loath to lose the
commendation of our own goodness; and sure the praise that many have of their
civil carriage, is a very judgment of God upon them, whereby they are kept
from the acknowledgement of their unworthiness, and from seeking to Christ for
the salvation of their souls.

Could all the world have driven Paul from the opinion of his pharisaicall
righteousness? No I warrant you: Christ is saine to take him in hand, showing
him his sinful estate by the commandment, and giving him power to believe,
and then he accounts basely of his own righteousness, and himself only
happy in the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ.

Use. 2.
Jews and Gentiles should live together, seeing they are both prisoners in one
prison, for one end, and set free by one and the same mercy.

Use. 3.
If any be set free, it is by the mercy of God, who has the key of our
unbelieving hearts, does open and shut them at his pleasure. As a man committed
by the King, can be set free by none but the King. So God committed us, and
none can set us free but himself.

Cry therefore to the Lord for mercy, and say, O the Iron is entered even
unto my soul, have mercy, Lord, have mercy.

Our freedom in this life is not absolute, but we carry about us, not the
prison it self, but the Kings Irons, as a token of the remainder of unbelief
in our hearts, to humble us for our spiritual pride, and to call still unto
him for mercy, who in the end (being only able) will knock off our Irons, and
quite set us free.

Use 4.
There are two notes whereby we may discern, whether we be released out of the
prison or no.

1. Our joy, A man that has been long in prison, so soon as he can get out
of the doors, he leapes and dances, so as no ground will hold him: so birds
and beasts escaping from their restraint, skudde and fly about, as sensible of
the sweetness of liberty. How cheerfully does David praise God for this
liberty, Psalm. 103.1,2.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name;
and my soul praise the Lord, as if he knew not when to make an end, such was
his joy for the mercy of God in forgiving and delivering him.

2. If a man be delivered from the misery of imprisonment, he will ever be
careful not to commit any thing that may bring him into such bondage. So he
that believes the pardon of sin, will for ever hate sin and iniquity. For
the most part prisoners are of wicked behavior, so if thy conversation be
lewd, it is a manifest sign, thou art not yet delivered.

VERSE 33. O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

34. Esaias 40.13. Wisd. 9.13. 1. Cor. 2.16.
For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?

35. Or who has first given him, and it shall be recompensed him again?


IN these three verses, and in the last, is a solemn conclusion of the things
before delivered, in the ninth, tenth, and this Chapter.

He has spoken of many difficult points, as Election, Reprobation, Reiection
of the Jews, calling of the Gentiles, Recalling of the Jews; he has answered
many questions, prouented many cauils, satisfied many doubts: here he
religiously makes a stop, admiring the wisdom of God.

And high time was it for Paul so to do: for in the 32 ver. he had delivered a
secret enough to have swallowed up any created understanding: and therefore
there he breaks of, putting in a bar, against all further quarrels which might
be made falling into admiration of the infinite wisdom of God in the
administration of things. As a man wading into the sea, when he comes up to the
neck, and feels the water begin to heave him up, and his feet to fail him,
cries out, O the depth and goes back, so it fares with Paul in this place; and
it is as if he should have said thus.

O you Romans, and my countrymen the Jews, I have writ unto you of these
things as far as I can; for the rest I am swallowed up, being more unable to
pass farther into this bottomless, then to wade through the depth of the sea.
Cease therefore to put more questions, and admire with me the depth of the
wisdom of God.

In these words are two things. 1. A proposition. 2. A reason. The proposition
is in the latter end of the 33 verse. How unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past finding out, set down with admiration, how unsearchable, which
being plainly delivered is this. The Judgments and ways of God are most
unsearchable. The words are significant as can be, but because the matter cannot
be contained in any words, therefore he admires, How unsearchable. A greater
depth then can be sadomed with man's reason, or expressed in any words.

The judgments: Judgments are usually taken for the works of God vindicatiue
Justice and severity whereby he punishes sinners: but here for Gods whole
providence, ruling or ordering the affairs of the world, called judgments,
because to judge is a principal action of a Ruler. The administration of
things whether God show Justice or mercy, is thus called often in the Psalms.

Unsearchable: That is so deeply hid, that no man can find out or understand,
farther then God reueales, and then to comprehend the reason impossible. As it
is not possible for us to find those things which are about the Center of the
earth, so a thousand times farther are these things from us.

His ways, Sometimes his commandments are so called, but such are found out
in his word. Ways therefore of God, are not the ways the creature walks
toward the Creator, but the ways of the Creator toward the creature. Here
the same thing I take it is meant by ways, which before by judgments, by an
Ingemination familiar to the Hebrews, though some (and that diversely) do
curiously distinguish them.

Past finding out: A metaphor from quick-sented Hounds, who are at a loss,
having neither foot-step nor sent left, of the game they pursue. None can trace
the Lord, and find out the way and reason of his doings. As none can line out
the way of a Serpent over a stone, or of a ship on the waves, or of an arrow
in the air: so neither find the ways which God walks in, in the government
of things.

This proposition is confirmed by reason, which is twofold; First, from the
excellency of God, verse 33. Secondly. From the deficiencie of man, verse.
34.35.

The first is set down with exclamation. O the depth of the riches, of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! as if he should say, his wisdom is infinite.
Arguiug thus: whose wisdom is infinite, his ways are unsearchable: But Gods
wisdom is infinite: Ergo.

The three Genitiues, are by some applied to three Divine properties, Mercy,
Justice, and knowledge. But I take it that the first Genitive (of the riches)
is added to (the depth) by an excess of speaking, signifying the same thing in
effect, which exceedingly becomes that matter, which no words can sufficiently
signify.

By Deph, is infiniteness, and abstrusenesse not to be attained, as the
bottom of the vaste Ocean. By Riches meant, an infiniteness of excellency
not to be numbered, counted valued.

Wisdom and knowledge, as they differ not in God, so here they may be safely
taken for the same, remembering this, that all the divine properties are of the
same extent of excellency: of every of which it may be said, O the depth of
the riches!

Wisdom and knowledge of God, actiuely, not passiuely to be understood; which
are otherwise in God, then wisdom and knowledge in us. In us they are
separable, we receive them by gift, and have them by communication; not so in
God: He deriues his knowledge from none, but is the fountain of all wisdom in
himself and in his creatures; it is his Essence.

We know but little, and that by degrees taking out one lesson after another:
But God knows himself, the Trinity, his creatures, all things past, present,
and to come; open, secret, certain, contingent; that that shall be, that which
never shall be; and these perfectly, not by species and relation, but by
himself, not per prius and posterius, by collection, discourse, but in an
instant, etc.

The second Argument is taken from the Deficiencie of man, which is double,
First, of Knowledge, verse. 34. Secondly, of righteousness, verse. 35.

The first, None has known his mind: He has not called any man to counsel,
either to ask or communicate counsels. This is taken out of Esaias 40.13.14. Nor
man, nor Angel is admitted hereunto.

The second Deficiencie is of Justice: Who has given him first, and it shall
be recompensed: that is, None can challenge God that he is indebted to him:
were God beholding to a man, then it might be tolerated that such a man might
ask a reason why God does this or that: but God owes us nothing more then he
please to promise of his own mere goodness: and therefore he never need or
ask us leave or render a reason of his ways and government of the world.
Learned men point us here to Job 41.2. and I think he may as well allege
Job 35.7. if any thing in that book.

These two are set down by Interrogation, so much the more to convince man of
his paruitie and nothingnesse in comparison of God.

This Reason in these two branches of it, confirms the proposition thus: For
men to search the reason of Gods judgments, is for blind men to Judge of
colors: and for men to find fault or question Gods doings, is as though God
were beholding to man: But men fail in knowledge, and God is not indebted to
them, therefore it is neither possible nor lawful to search the hidden ways
of God.

It is neither lawful for man to search, nor possible to find the hidden
ways of God, Psalm. 30.6. and 147.5. Esaias 40.28. 1. Tim. 6.16. and 1. Cor.
2.11.16.

Object. David says he has declared the judgments of Gods mouth: Psalm.
119.13.
and Paul says elsewhere, 1 Cor. 2.16.
he knows, nay all Christians know: We know, says he, the mind of christ: It
seems Paul and David knew.

Answ. They knew that which was revealed to them: The Spirit, says Paul, has
revealed: and David says, That he has declared, judicia oris, the judgments
of his mouth, that is, which God has spoken unto him.

Use. 1.
Wade not too far in the searching of hidden things: where God speaks not,
let not thine ear itch to hear: and above all things chamber thy tongue, that
thou censure not, nor cavil at that which thou art not able to understand, nor
to conceive the reason of, if it were told thee.

When the calling of the Jews is preached: some say it is not possible, some
say it is not likely: some, why did the Lord thus to the Gentiles, thus to the
Jews? Also when the Doctrine of Predestination is taught; some say, that then
a man may live as he list, etc. Take heed: Believe that which is revealed:
search not into this darkness without a light. Praise God for that which thou
understand; and in it, as also in that which thou do not understand, cry
out with Paul, O the depth! So also in the obscurity of the Trinity and
Unity, of the personal union of the two Natures in Christ, of the Mystical
union of Christ and his Church, of the Resurrection etc. search not, ask not a
reason: it is not for our waxen wings to soar so high: but cry out, O the
Depth!

To be searching and inquiring further then is revealed, or the reason of such
mysteries, is not profitable.

It is reported, that Saint Augustine on a time walking by the sea side, and
beating his head to find out a reason of the Trinity, lift up his eyes and
spied a child, with a spoone keeching water out of the sea into a little hole:
Saint Augustine asks the child why he did so; he answered, to empty the sea
into that hole: at which Saint Augustine smiled, telling him it could not be
done. So, good father, says the child, you busy your brains about the
Trinity, and though you take more pains then I, yet your success shall be
alike. The wisdom of man is no more able to comprehend the Judgments and
ways of God, then the skull of man is able to hold in it the whole water of
the sea. To state earnestly upon the Sun, is the way to lose our sight, not to
increase it, not to see more, but not to see at all. So the way to understand
and to attain wisdom, is not to be too busy in searching, but to content our
selves with that which is revealed. Pius pulsator pierunque inuenit quod
temerarius scrutator inuenire non potest. Bern.


Some think it a great degree of accutenesse to be searching into hidden
things, and into the reason of the counsels of God: but indeed it is
childishness. At another man's house, a child will be questioning why is this?
and what is that? but a wise man will hold his peace, knowing it to be good
manners to rest contented with that which is done by the Master of the house,
whose mind he understands not. So in this world, which is Gods house,
childishly inquire not why God does so and so, who owes thee nothing, that
either thou should meddle with his doings, or he be bound to render a reason
thereof unto thee. Paul says, 1. Tim. 6.4.
If any man consent not to the doctrine according to godliness, he doteth
about questions: we think it wisdom, but Paul calls it dotage: when men fall
to questioning, and apply not themselves to believe, they begin to dote, or to
be sick upon questions, as the word also signifies. Noson peri zeteseis.
As sick stomachs long for every thing they hear of, and when they have it,
they can take no profit by it. Quando animae cogitationu^ vincitur febre etc.
tunc quaerit, cum vero sana est, non quaerit, sed fideliter credit. Chrysostom.
hom. in loc. Tim.
So it is an argument of a weak mind, to be questioning of that, which to
know, would not be profitable. When the mind is sick, then it is questioning,
Why? How? Wherefore? but when it is sound, then it questioneth not, but
believes.

Might not our Kings Majesty be justly angry, if every loose peasant should
be talking or examining his doings? So no doubt is God angry with the curious
examiners of his ways. When Peter asked about John, Ioh. 21.21.22.
that which concerned him not to know, he had a sharp rebuke; and when the
Disciples asked of another secret, Act. 1.6.7.
they were reproved. Take thou example, and account it no Imputation to be
ignorant of things not revealed. This is learned ignorance.

If we consider but the flies and worms, God appears admirable in them? How
much more in the administration of things? Let us resolve that all things are
most justly and wisly brought to pass though all understand not the reason;
remembering that it is God, not man, that gouernes the world; and when we fail
in apprehending, let us by our failing, learn to say, O the depth!

Use. 2.
We know but in part: not the hundredth part, of that which we shall know, let
us long to be translated out of darkness, into the fulness of Gods mavelous
light.

Use. 3.
Gods goodness is wonderful to us, that he has revealed those things which are
necessary to salvation: which all the wisemen in the world could never have
found out, if God had not revealed them: learn and study these things, and if
thou know Christ, bless God for this his wisdom; and eternal life.

Men talk of wisdom: but he is wise that knows this, and he is a very fool
that knows it not, though in Physics he have Salomons, and in Politics, the
wisdom and knowledge of Achytophell.

Paul desired to know nothing but Christ and him crucified: 1 Cor. 2.2.
study thou this and how to live well. All thy life is to short to learn this
as thou should: therefore trouble not thy mind with things not revealed, and
too high for the measure of thy capacity; but pass them all over with O the
depth. The Philosopher while he gazed on the heavens fell into a pit on awares
he that walks plainly walks surely. Pro. 10.9


Use 4.
God knows the sighs, the groans, the tears of his children; they shall not
loose the reward of their least obedience. So he knows the ways, the words,
the thoughts of wicked men, and will set them in order before the^ at the day
of judgment. He knows all things: thy heart, with what mind thou prayest,
hear, more by thee, then thou know by thy self. Thou may walk in a
cloud before men, thou can not before God. Beware the hypocrite.

Use. 5.
God is of infinite knowledge and power, fear him. Thou art asrayd, to offend
or provoke, or jest at a wise man that is skillful in the law; but with a
simple man thou art bold. And dare thou provoke God whose wisdom is
infinite? And also his Justice and power? This is Atheism. For did thou
think there were a God, and that he were wise and just, and able to plague
thee, thou durst not offend him. Will a man keep a servant, who always angers
his Master, and laugheth him to scorn? So shall thou be turned into hell, if
thou dare despise our infinite God, or his word.

VERSE 36. For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to whom be
glory for ever. Amen.


THis verse is a proof of the infinite wisdom of God: and that being most
sufficient to and in himself, he needs not the counsel, nor the gifts of
any creature; but gives all things to all, whereby they are, and are sustained:
and ordaynes all things to and for himself.

In these words are two things. 1. A proposition. All things are of God, and
through God, and to God. 2. An amplification. To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

The Ancients from hence prove the Trinity, applying the three propositions,
to the three persons, and it is likely, that from hence, that Ancient depologie
had original, which we use in our liturgy. Which Ierom Hier. ep. ad Damasum.
desired to be said in all Churches at the end of every psalm. Basil reports
Basilius lib. de spi sanct. ca. 7.27.29.
it as a form of thanksgiving to have been in use from the time of the
Apostles unto the which for the more confutation of the Arrians and
Macedonians, was added by the Counsel of Nice that other versute. As it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Cassianus who lived in Chrysostomes days, reports, Cassianus Monasti.
Institut. lib. 2. qui est de canon. Noctur. orat. et psalm. mod. cap. 8.
that it was an ancient custom in the East Churches, for that prayer, as he
calls it, to be said at the end of the psalm, by him that sung the psalm, with
the silence of the people: but in the West Churches that the people standing up
did usually with a loud voice repeat the same. Which I thought good to show
that it might appear, that this use in our liturgy is from sound antiquity,
and universal prescript of the East and Western Church.

All things are of him, as of the Creator and giver: all things of nature and
grace, all good things: not sin, but as it has entity. For sin is not a
thing separate, having a being and existence by it self as the creature; but
it is in the creature, and a privation: and therefore though the Creature which
is evil is from God as from the cause, yet the euilnesse and sin of the
creature is not.

Through him: preferring all things in their estate.

To him: to be referred to him, that is to his glory as to their chief end.

This proposition is amplified with a comprecation. To whom be glory for ever:
Amen. Wherein we have 1. The thing glory. 2. The subject to whom it is given,
God. 3. The duration, for ever 4. The affection with which it is given,
testified in this word, Amen.

This word, Amen, is Hebrew, grown familiar in all languages: it comes of a
root that signifies belief. It was used of ancient time in the end of
prayers. Our Savior so concludes that divine form of prayer, which he taught
his Apostles. Deuteronomy. 27.15 and seq. Nehe. 8.6. 1 Cor. 14 16.


It was the wont of the people in ancient times, to answer Amen, at the end
of prayers and praises so loud, that it was a noise like thunder which may
reprove our fashion, (arguing great coldness) who some one man excepted (qui
supplet locum idiotae) can scarce be heard to pronounce the same. Hieron in
prol. lib. 2. in Ep. ad Galat.


Tertullian Tertul. lib. de spectac. prope sinem.
uses this as an argument why it should not be lawful for a Christian to
applaud Idolatrous plays, because it is not fit to honor such things with
that mouth, which has said Amen, in the service of God.

This word may be taken three ways. 1 as a Nowne. 2 as a Verb. 3 as an
Aduerbe.

As a Nowne: so is it a name of Christ. Revel. 3.14.


As an Aduerb so is it used either in the beginning of our speech, for
confirmation of that which is to be said, signifiing verily, as our Savior
often used it: or in the end of our spech, as in prayer wherein we ask
something of God, and then, as the speaking of it notes our consent to that
which is craved, so the substantial meaning is to show our faith, in believing
to receive that which we have prayed for: where upon some have said that this
one word, is more excellent then the prayer it self, as our faith is more
excellent then our desire, and yet I see not, but that faith it self is
expressly contained in the prayer, otherwise how could we say, Our Father:
Porf. in exporat. Dom.
as a verb, and so it is as much as So be it, having the nature of a prayer;
being in this sense, principally to be understood, at the end of praises and
thankesg uings, as in this place, noting an affectionate desire, that God may
be glorified.

God is of all his creatures, specially of his Church, to be praised and
glorified, so Psalm 92.1.2. and 95.2. and 96. through the whole Psalm, so
Psalm. 148. and 150. So Christ concludes his prayer: For thine is the Kingdom,
Power and Glory. So Paul often, Ephesians. 3.20.21. etc.

Use. 1.
Thy being and preservation is from God, and he has appointed thee to glorify
him: Glorify him then in thy body and soul by a sober and holy carriage, and
as thou have received thy nature from him, so seek grace also from his hands,
from whom all good gifts do descend, otherwise the ox and ass are as near
heaven as thy self.

Use. 2.
Glory not in thy self, nor in any good thing thou have: for thou have
received it from him, who though he has granted thee the use, yet reserues
the glory for himself. Art thou rich, beautiful? these are his gifts. Art
thou holy? it is the Spirit that sanctifies. Art thou wise and eloquent? It is
God who gives wisdom to the heart and utterance to the mouth. If thou were
equal to Eliah, Paul, Apollos, thou might not be proud, but must give the
glory to God.

As the commendation of the brightness of the Sun-beame is not to be ascribed
to the wall, on which it strikes: nor the words of wisdom to the teeth and
lips of the speaker: nor the fairness of the picture to the pencill; so nor
the praise of any good thing to us, in as much as it is from God, as the
Author, and we but the instruments of the same.

Use. 3.
Glorify Gods name: The first grace which Christ teaches us to beg of God,
is this, and it ought to be the chiefest aim of our whole life.

We ought to prefer the glory of God before our lives, yea before the
salvation of our souls, much more ought we so to institute and lead our
lives, that God may be honored by us. God has endued thee with life and many
good gifts; what glory have thou brought to God or his Gospel? If none, it had
been better thou hadest not been borne.

Be you careful hereof, you professors of the Gospel: It is your profession.
Be ware you commit nothing which may cause God or his Gospel to be blasphemed.
If you should be covetous, proud, etc. as other men, it were as if the Sun
should be darkened, and the Moon withdraw her light. Every little aberration
in a professor is noted: Even as, though a thousand of the lesser stars be
eclypsed, none takes knowledge of it, but if the Sun be eclypsed, every man
speaks of it: So that which is not accounted of, in a profane man, from whom
no goodness is expected; is intolerable in you, whose calling it is to set
forth the praises of God.

Be you affected with the glory of your heavenly father, as his true and dear
children; and be you sensible of the dishonor which is offered to his name. Put
on the affections of Phinees, David, Eliah, and of that holy woman, who died
for sorrow, because of the dishonor which came to God and his Arc. 1. Sam.
4.21.22


It was good Hezekiah his sault not to render according to that which he
received: 2. Chro. 32.25
for which God was angry, and punished it. See that thy praises be
proportionable to the causes God gives thee of praising him. It is a sign of
emptiness of grace, to be a niggard of our praises to God, who is our Creator,
Preserver, Redeemer.

Account no time long enough for this exercise. I mitate the Nightingale, who
spends the night in praising the Creator, as if the day were not sufficient.
Let thy heart, thy tongue, thy life praise God. It is he who has given thee
life, health, food, raiment, yea his own Son and holy Spirit. To him
therefore, that is, to the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, one God and
three Persons, be all glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

