A BRIEF DISCOURSE containing certain REASONS WHY Catholics refuse to go to
Church.

WRITTEN BY A LEARNED AND virtuous man, to a friend of his in England. AND
Dedicated by I. H. to the Queens most excellent Majesty.

IHS


Imprinted at Doway by John Lion.

1580.

WITH PRIVELEGE.

TO THE MOST HIGH and Mighty Princess ELIZABETH by the grace of God, Queen
of England France and Irland etc. John Howlet wishes al abundance of grace
and spiritual gifts, with true felicitye in Jesus Christ.
MY MOST Excellent and soueraygne dread Lady and Princess: two causes induced
me, to direct unto your royal person, and most gracious Two causes of
dedication.
Majesty, this present Treatise, after I had read and considered the same. The
one, for that it seemed to me, both conceued and penned, with such modesty and
humility of spirit together with all dutiful respect, to your highness, to your
honorable Lords of the Counsel, and to the whole estate of your noble
Realm, (contrary to the spirit and proceedings of al (...):) as none might
justly be offended therewith, but only, in respect of the writers zeal and
opinion in religion: which notwithstanding, having been from time to time, the
common received religion of universal Christendom: can not be so soon
abandoned by the disfavor of any one country, nor lack men to speak or
write in defense of the same, as long as there is, either head or hand
remaining loose in the world.

The other cause was, for that it seemed to me, to contain matter of great and
weighty consideration, and much important, not only to the cause of God, but
also to your Majesty's soul, estate, and Realm, and unto the state of many a
thousand of your graces most loving, faithful, and dutiful subjects: who being
now afflicted for their consciences, and brought to such extremity, as never
was hard of in England before, have no other means to redress and ease their
miseries, but only as confident children to run unto the mercy and clemency
of your Highness their Mo there, and borne sovereign Princess: before whom, as
before the substitute and Angel of God, they lay down their greefes, disclose
their miseries, and unfold their pitiful afflicted case, brought into such
distress at this time, as either they must renounce God by doing that, which
in judgment and conscience they do condemn: or else sustain such
intolerable molestations, as they can not bear. Which your Majesty by that
which follows, more at large, may please to understand.

There are at this day in this your Four religions.
Majesty's Realm, four known religions, and the professors thereof, distinct
both in name, spirit, and doctrine: that is to say, the Catholics, the
Protestants, the Puritanes, and the howsholders of Love. Besides al other petye
sects, newly borne, and yet grouelinge on the ground. Of these four sorts of
men, as the Catholics are the first, the auncientest, the more (...) number,
and the most beneficial to all the rest (having begotten and bred up the other,
and delivered to them this Realm, conserved by Catholic religion, these
thousand years and more:) so did they always hope to receive more favor
then the rest, or at least wise, equal tolleration with other religions
disalowed by the state. But God knows, it has fallen out quite contrary.
For other religions, have been permitted to put out their heads, to grow, to
advance them selves in common speech, to mount to pulpites, with little or not
controlement. But the Catholic religion, has been so beaten in, with the
terror of laws, and the rigorous execution of the same, as the very suspicion
thereof, has not escaped unpunished.

The Law made by Protestants, prohibitinge the practice of other religions
Straitnes to Catholics.
besides there own, allotteth out the same punishment to all them, that do
any way varye from the public communion book, or otherwise say service then
is appointed there, as it does to the Catholics for hearing or saying of a
Mass. And although the world knows, that the order set down in that
book, be commonly broken by every minister at his pleasure, and observed
almost nowhere: yet small punishment has ever ensewed thereof. But for
hearing of a Mass, were it never so secret, or uttered by never so weak
means: what imprisoninge, what arrayninge, what condemning has there been?
The examples are lamentable, and many fresh in memory, and in diverse families
will be to all posteritye miserable.

To this now if we add the extreme penalties, laid upon the practice of
certain particulers in the Catholic religion, as imprisonment perpetual,
loss of goods and lands, and life also, for refusal of an oath against my
religion: death for reco^ciling my self to God by my ghostly father: death,
for giving the supreme Pasfor supreme authority in causes of the Church:
death, for bringing in a crucifix in remembrance of the crucified: death, for
bringing in a seely pair of beads, a medal, or an agnus dei, in devotion of
the Lamb that took away my sins: which penalties have not been laid upon
the practice of other religions: your Majesty shall easelye find to be true,
so much as I have said, which is, that the Catholic religion, wherein we were
borne, baptized, and bread up, and our forefathers lived and dyed most holyly
in the same, has found less favor and tolleration, then any other newer
sect or religion what so ever.

And albeit the world does know, how that the great mercy and clemency of
your Majesty, has stayed often times, and restrained these penalties, from
their execution, and from the ouerthrowinge of (...) men, whom otherwise they
might and would have oppressed: yet notwithstanding (as I have said) there
want not very pitiful examples abroad, which would move greatly, and make to
bleed that Princely and compassionable heart of your Highness, if their miseries
in particular were known to the same: especially it being in such subjects,
as loved and do love most tenderly your Majesty: and for such a cause, as
lyethe not in them to remove, that is, for their conscience and judgment in
religion.

But now, these afflictions, how grievous and heavy so ever they were, yet
were they hythertoe more tolerable, because they were not common, nor fell not
out upon every General crosses of Catholics.
man: and if there were any common cross laid upon them, (as there wanted
not) they bare it out with patience: as their discredit in their countries,
who were borne to credyte and countenance in the same: distrustefull dealinge
with all of that relygion, notwithstanding their resolute redines, to spend
their lives in your Majesty's service, and other the like afflictions: which
they shifted out with, as they might. But at this time present, and for
certain months past, the tempeste has been so terrible upon these kind of
men, and their persecutions so universal, as the like was never felt, nor
feared before. For besides the general Particular extremities.
molestation, and castinge into geales, both of men, women, and children, of
that religion, through out all parts of your Maiestyes Realms: there are
certain particulers reported here, which make the matter more afflictiue. As
the disioyning of man and wife in sondrye prisons: The compelling of such to
dye As M. Dimmock was by M. Couper.
in prison, which could not stand or go in their own houses: The sendinge of
virgins to Brydewell for As young Mais tres Tomson was by M. Elmer.
their consciences: The rackinge and tormentinge of diverse, which was never
hard of before in any country for religion. And that which above all other
things is most grievous, injurious, and intolerable, is, the geuinge out
publiquelye, that all Catholics are enemies and traitors to your Royal
Majesty: and this not only to utter in speech, but also to let it pass in
print, to the vewe of the world, and to the rentinge of Catholics hearts,
which are preuye of their own truth and dutiful affection toward your
Highenes, estate, and person. This was written and putt in printe this John
Field in his epistle dedicatorye of Philip of Mor neis book to the Earl of
Leycester.
Summer paste, to a Noble man of your Majesty's preuye Counsel, for the
excitinge of him to the persecution of all Catholics, by a strange
braynesicke fellow, whom Newegate possessed a long time, for his fantastical
opinions: wherein he is so pregnant (if men report truly,) as he can deuyse
any new religion, upon a weeks warninge given him at any time. This Fellow
affirms there, that al Papists (as he terms them) are enemies to God, and
to your Roial Majesty. The which in his meaning, touches so near, so many
thousand good subiaes in this Land, as I marvel that either his audacitie
served him to write it, or M. Elmers officers would allow to printe it. But it
seems that Catholics at this day, are made according to the Philosophers
proverb. Praeda Mysorum. That is, laid open to every Arist. li. 1.
man's injury, a pray for every one to Rethor.
bayte upon: and a common place for every rayler to ruffle on, and to rub
his cankered tongue in their slander. In all which great wrongs they have no
appeal but unto God, and to your Majesty as Uicegerent in his place: before
whom they desire, above all other things, to clear themselves, from this
grievous objected crime of dissoyaltie, by protesting, and calling, the
omnipotent knowledge of our great God and Savior to witness, that they are
deeply slaundered in this point, and that they are as ready, to spend their
goods, lands, liuinges, and life, with all other worldly commodities
whatsoever, in the service of your Majesty and their Country, as their
auncitours have been to your Noble progenitors before this, and as dutiful
subjects are bound to do unto their sovereign Princess and Queen: only
craving pardon, for not yielding to such conformity in matters of religion, as
is demanded at their hands: which they cannot do, but by offense of their
consciences, induced by those reasons, which more at large are declared in this
Treatise following.

And that the Catholic religyon The Catholic faith teaches obedience more
then other religions.
in general, (for I meddle with no man's particular fact,) is unjustly towched
by any sect of our time, for teaching disobedience, or rebellion against
their Princes: it may appear plainly, by the different doctrine which each
part delyuereth Con. Constable Sess 8. Cocleus.
unto his folowers. First John Wikliffe, one of their progenitors, teaches.
That a Prince if he rule evil or fall into mortal sin, is no longer Li. 1.
and. 3. Hist. Huss. Wicklif. li. 4. trial. ca. 3.
Prince, but that his subjects may rise against him and punish him at their
pleasures. Secondly, Martin Luther following the same sreppes, teaches. In
Bulla Le on. 10. and. in asser. art. ibi damnat.
That Christians are free and exempted from al Princes laws. Whereof followed
immediately that famous rebellion of the countriemen against Cocleus in. vita.
Luth. and. Sur. in. hist. huius. anni.
their Lords in Germanye in the year 1525. and in the same, two hundred
thousand slain in one day. Thirdly, John Calvin not dissenting from the rest,
teaches. That Princes Lib. 4. inst. cap. 10.
laws bind not subjects to obedience in conscience, but only for external
and temporal respect. Whereof enseweth, that if by any occasion, this external
fear, (for the which only the subject obeys,) be taken away: as when he
were able to make his party so strong, as he feared not his Prince: then he
should not sin in rebelling against Lib. 3. insti. cap. 19.
him. And in an other place, holding plainlye the doctrine of Luther, he
says. That the consciences of the faithful, are exempted from the power of
all men, by reason of the liberty given them by Christ. Lastly Goodman.
the writing against the regiment of Gilbye.
Women in Queen Maryes time, for that the government then, lyked them not, all
men can remember. Romans 13.
Which errors all, the Catholic Church utterly condemns: teachinge her
children, together with the Apostle, true obedience to their Vide om.
Princes, for Conscience sake, even Doct. 2. 2. a. quest. 90. de Leg.
as unto God him self, whose room they do possess, and to whom they are
bound, under the pain of mortal Aug. in ps. 70.
sin, and eternal damnation, patiently to obey, how hardly soever Crysosto.
and Ambro. in. cap. 13. ad Romans
they deal with them in their government otherwise. By the which your Majesty
may perceive, how falslye the Catholic religion is charged by her enemies, of
the (...) crime.

Besides this, if your (...) wisdom shall but enter into a (...) consideration,
of the (...) of Catholics, and of other of newer relygions, toward their
Princes, this day in Europe: it shall easelye appear, which of them are of the
quieter spirits, and (...) in obedience. I will not make mention of greater
matters: but only, to quite this before said puritance, which so falslye has
infamed us. I (...) set (...) here certain propositions, gathered out of two
sermons of two of his preachers, by a minister present there, in Stamforde at
the general fast this last summer. Which fast being prohibited, with the
preachings at the same, by the express letters of the Lord Superintendent of
(...), bearing date the 5. of September, to the Alderman and Comburgeses of the
said Lowne: the preachers would not obey, but stepping up into the pulpit,
uttered as follows. The first Pren cher.


1. In such actions as may further the public fast, flesh and blood must not
be called to counsel, to do the Lords commandment, but they must be
undertaken without such warrant. 2. The religion that Jonas preached, did not
(as ours now does) depend and hang upon Acts of Parliament. For we, when
we go about such actions, as God is to be glorified in, do first enquire,
whether there be any Act of Parliament, to warrant our doings, or no. 3. It is
the manner of her officers and Counsailers now a days, to reform matters by
Acts of Parliament, and by polycies, and not by Jonas his preachinges. 4. Her
Counsailers never inquire, what news at Poules sermon, but what reports are a
broad, that if any dislyking thing should come to the Kings ear, they might
stopp it from thence.
1. He is of no spirit, that will not The Second Preacher.
promote that which God commaundethe, though al Edicts be contrary for we
must not obey flesh and blood. 2. They that are ruled by the Edictes of men will
change their religion with the Prince, and they are of noe conscience, though
they be never so much grounded in divinity. 3. What if nether the Queen,
Counsel, nor Bishop, have been present at the Fast, nor allowed thereof? yet
we ought to undertake it. Put case, it is not in the Queens chapel: what then?
4. This Fast has been hindered, by certain profane and carnal wreches.
Here lo, your Majesty may see, with what temperate spirit these men do
proceed, and what they would teach or do, if they should be contraried in
great matters, seeinge they boult out such doctrine against their Magistrates,
for crossinge their appetites in so small a matter, as is a little fantastical
rage of fasting, sodainlye come upon them, for a desire they have, to hear
them selves speak ten or twelve hours together, after their continual
raylinge against fasting for these twenty one years past. But this is their
spirit, to rushe into every thing with inordinate violence, and to like of
nothing that order and obedience layethe down unto them. The which your
Majesty's great wisdom considering, together with the quiet and modest
proceedings of the Catholic part, shall, I doubt not, easily perceive, what
danger it were to permit much to such kind of spirits: and to bereave this
your Realm, of so important a stay as Catholics are in every of your
countries, against the perilous innouations of these and the like men, whose
final end is (as their doctrine declares) to have noe governor or ruler at
al.

And this may be one great Motive unto your Majesty, in rerespect of the
safety and quietness of your whole Realm, to extend some A Weightye motive.
more mercy and favor, to your trusty and afflicted subjects the
Catholics. Who, as they were most redye at the beginning (according to
their bounden duties) to place your Highness in that Royal room, wherein now by
the favor of God you stand: So are they, and will be always in like sort
redye, with the uttermost drop of their blood, to defend the same in all
safety, peace, and quietness unto the end. In consideration of which good will
and service, they can not imagine to ask of your Majesty, any so great gift,
recompense, or benefit in this world, as should be to them, some favorable
tolleration with their consciences in religion, the which consciences,
dependinge of judgment and understanding, and not of affect and will: can not
be framed by them at their pleasures, nor consequently reduced always to such
conformity, as is prescribed to them by their Superiors: and yet this
nothing deminisheth their dutiful love toward the same Superiors, seeinge
conscience (as I have said) depends of judgment, and not of will.

Now because as the Philosopher says, that is only good unto every man,
which each man's understanding Arist. lib. 1. Rhet.
tells him, to be good: unto the which the Scripture and Divines agree, when
they say: that we shall be 2. Cor. 1.
judged at the last day, according to 1. Joan. 3.
the testimony of our conscience: hereof it follows, that what soever we Aug.
li. 3. de doct. Chri. ca. 10. and lib. 1. ca. 40.
do contrary to our judgment and conscience, is (according to the Apostle)
damnable. Because we decerne it (to be evil) and yet do it. So that, Romans 14.
how good so ever the action in it self were, (as for example, if a Gentile
should for fear, say or swear that there were a Messiah,) yet unto the doer,
it should be a damnable sin, because it seemed naught in his judgment and
conscience: and therefore to him, it shall be so accounted at the last day.
Which thing, has made al good men from time to time, to stand very
scrupulously in defense of their conscience, and not to commit any thing,
against the sentence and approbation of the same. Al Princes also, and
Potentates of the world, have abstayned from the beginning, for the very same
consideration, from Acts of religion not to be enforced.
enforcinge men to acts against their conscience, especially in religion: as
the Histories both before Christ and since, do declare. And amongst the very
Turks at this day, no man is compelled to any act of their religion, except
he renounce first his own. And in the Indies and other far parts of the
world, where infinite Infidels are under the government of Christian Princes,
it was never Vide Di. Tho. and o^es. doct. 2. 2. q. de fide.
yet practiced, nor ever thought lawful by the Catholic Church, that such men
should be enforced to any one act of our religion. And the reason is: for
that, if the doing of such acts should be sin unto the doers: because they
do them against their conscience, then must needs the enforcement of such
acts be much more grievous and damnable sin, to the Heretics may be
enforced.
enforcers. Marye notwithstanding this, when a man has received once the
Christian Catholic religion, and will by new devises and singularity,
corrupt the same, by runninge out and making dissension in Christ Cy. de
ExMart. ca. 5. Ieron. in ca. 5. ad Ephe. Optat. li. 3. con. Dona. Augu. lib. 1.
cont. Parm. ca. 7.
his body, (as al Heretics do:) then, for the conservation of unity in the
Church, and for restraint of this ma^s furye and pride, the Church has always
from the beginning allowed, that the civil magistrate should recall such a
fellow, by temporal punishment to the unity of the whole body again, as all the holy Fathers write Leo ep. 67. and 91. Greg. lib. 1. ep. 32.
to be most necessary, especially such, as had most to do with such men, as
Cyprian, Jerome, Optatus, Augustine, Bern. ser. 66. in cant.
Leo, Gregory, and Bernard. And S. Austin in diverse places, recalleth back
again his opinion, which he some times held to the contrary. Aug. lib. 2.
So that we, keeping still our Retract. ea. 5. and episto, 48. and 50.
old religion, and having not gone out from the Protestants, but they from
us: we cannot be enforced, by any justice, to do any act of their relygion.

Besides this, as no wise Noble man, after many Ages of quiet possession,
would suffer another to recover his Barronie, without showing of very good
(...): so we, in reason are not to be blamed, if we, (having held the
possession of the Catholic Church in England for these thousand years, by
our adversaries confession): do stand with them yet and require some
evidence, before we consent to give up the same. Hitherto they have showed us
none, but only words and forgery: they entered Lawles proceeding.
into possession, without trial of the title: they thrust us out, before
sentence or proof: we cry out of the riot, and complain of the wrong, and
desire still that the matter may come to lawful pleading. And even now of
late since our new persecution begane, we have made unto the^ diverse offers
with great odds, not pretending thereby any recovery of our losses, (for that
we suppose to be impossible,) but only for the justifying of our cause,
wheruppon the honor of God depends, and wherein we know we cannot be
vanquished.

And to tell your Majesty more in particular, there has been diverse earnest
means made, and most humble petitions exhibited by the Catholics: that,
seeing those men, which first challenged at Poules Cross, all the learned of
our side that might be found, either to writing, or disputing: afterward
procured your Majesty's prohibition by proclamation, that no books should be
written or read of that part in England: their petition was (I say) that at
the least, there might some public disputation be admitted, whereby men's
doubts might be resolved. This petition, has been exhibited by diverse men, in
the name of the whole, both in writing and in printe, and they have been urged
by sondrye means, by all kind of friendship that we could make, by humble
request, by earnest letterrs to diverse preachers to further the matter: and (if
I be not deceived) to my Lord of London him self, for the bringinge of the
matter to your Majesty's understanding, and to the consideration of the Lords
of your Highness preuie Counsel. And if by any mischaunce, these former
supplycations, came not to light, or expressed not fully the Catholics
plain and simple meaninges: I beseech your An humble demand of disputation.
most gracious Majesty, yt this may serve, either for a replication, or
explanation of the same: wherein I, in their names, most humbly on my knees,
even for Gods cause, and the love of his truth, ask at your Majesty's hands,
that some such indifferent trial may be had, by pulique disputation or
otherwise.

And as for the particulers, we shall easily agree with them. For we, Three
ways of Conference offered.
offer al these three ways, both jointly: and severally: that is, either by
trying out the truth by brief scolasticall arguments: or by continual
speech for a certain space to be allotted out, and the other part presently, or
upon study, to answer the same: or finally, by preaching before your
Majesty, or where else your Majesty shall appoint. And for our saftyes we ask
nothing else, but only your Majesty's word set down unto us, in no ampler
manner, then the Counsel of Trent made the safconduct to our adversaries,
which they notwithstanding refused to accept. But I hope they shall see, that
we will not refuse or mistrust your Majesty's word, if we may once see it
set down by proclamation, or otherwise by letters patents, for our safety,
but that within 80. days after, by the grace of God, we shall appear before
your Highness, with what danger soever to our lives other, wise, for the trial
of Gods truth, which we make no dout but to be clear on our side.

If our adversaries refuse this offer, they shall show to much distrust in
their own cause: for it is with great labor, peril, and disaduauntage on
our parts, and on their sides nothing at all. I would they durst make but
half the like offer, for their coming hither on this side the Seas, it should
be most thankfully taken, and they with great safety and all gentile entreaty
disputed withal, and made to see as I presume their own weakness. But seeing
this is not to be hoped, we rely upon the other: beseeching your Majesty
most humblye and instantlye, that our just demand may be granted, for the
trial of Gods truth, most necessary for us all to our eternal salvation.

And now to leave all these things to the holy providence of God, and to the
high wisdom of your most excellent Majesty to consider of: we are humblye to
crave at this time, and most instantlye to request, that your Highness will not
take in evil part, this our boulde recourse unto your Royal Person, in
these our afflictions, and passing great calamyties. You are borne our
sovereign Princess and mother, and we your natural subjects and children.
Whether then should Great cause of recourse to her Majesty.
children ro^ne in their afflictions, but unto the love and tender care of
their dear mother, especially she being such a mother, as her power is
sufficient to relieve them in all points, her good will testified by infinite
benefits, and her noble and merciful disposition known and renouned thorough
out the world?

If your Majesty were abroad in many parts of your Realm to understand the
miseries, hear the cries, see the lifting up of hands to heaven, for the
present afflictions, which this persecution has brought: I know your Majesty
would be much moved, as all men are here by the only report of the same: I
could touch certain particulers of importance to that effect. But I will keep
the law of Areopagus: I will say nothing to move my Judge, whose wisdom The
law of Arcopagus.
I well know, and whose goodness Arist. lib. 1. Reto.
I nothing at all mistrust.

If your highness were of that disposition (from which you are most furre of) as
to take pleasure in (...) afflictions, delight and comfort in our calamities:
we could be content to bear this, and ten tunes more in so good a cause as
we suffer for. And if there be any other of such cruel appetite, whom your
Majesty should think good to be satisfied with blood: there want not
Catholics both there and here, which would most willyngly offer them
selves, to purchase quietness unto the rest. Diverse are in bonds there, most
ready (I am sure) to accept such an offer: and if that number will not
suffice, let the word be but spoken, and many more shall most ioyfullye
present them selves from hence, having reserved our selves to no other end, if
God would make us woorthye of that: and that by our deaths, we might give
testimonye to the Catholic cause, and redeem the pityfull veration, of so
many thousand aflicted people at this day in England.

JESUS Christ, in abundance The conclusion.
of mercy, bless your Majesty, to whom (as he knows) I wyshe as much good
as to mine own soul: perswadinge my self, that all good Catholics in
England do the same. And they which go about to insinuate the contrary, are,
in mine opinyon, but appointed instruments by the common enemy, to dispoyle
your Majesty of your strongest pillar and best right hand, as (soon after
their purpose had) it would appear, and shall be more manifest before the last
tribunal seat, where we all shall be presented shortly, without difference of
persons, and where the cogitations of al hearts shall be reveled and examined,
and in justice of judgment, rightfully rewarded. Now matters are craftily
clowded up, and false visards put on, upon every action. Then all shall
appear in sincerity and truth, and nothing avail but only the testimony
of a good conscience. The which Catholics by suffering, do seek to retain,
and which God of his infinite goodness, inspire your Majesty, graciously without
enforcement, to permit unto them still.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient subject. I. Howlet.

THE ANSWER OF A VERTVOVSAND Learned Man to A Gentleman in England, towching the
late imprisonment of Catholics there.
THE VIEW of your late letters (my dear and worship full frind) brought unto me
some sorrow and much comfort, The sorrow proceeded of the woe full and aflicted
case of my pore country so pityfullye set down by yeure penn unto mine eye,
wherein (as you writ) so many great Gentlemen of worshipp are imprisoned for
there co^ science and relygion of late, so many good howses broken up, so mani
hows A pitiful desscription of England at this day.
holders dispersed and fled away, so many young Gentlemen and servants
unprovided, so many pore people destitute, so many wives disioyned from there
husbands, so many children berefte of there parents, such flying, such
runninge, such shuttinge up in prisons, such pitiful abidinge hunger, thirst,
and cold in prison, as you describe, doleful for us to hear here, but more
rufull for you to behold there, and all this for different opinions in religion,
a misery not accustomed to fall in our fathers days, upon that noble (...).

But as these were causes of some sorrow, so was it no mean comfort unto me,
to consider that in these wicked and loosse times of ours, wherein there is no
feelinge or sense of virtue least, but all men enwrapped in the love of Gods
professed enemy the world, followinge with all force, and full sail, the
vanities and ambition of the same: that their should be fownde in Ingland so
many gentlemen A rare matter of comfort.
both for their years, liuinges, and other habilities, as fit to be as vain
as the rest, yet so precyse in matters of religion, and so respective to their
consciences, as that they will prefer their soul before there body, and gods
cause before their own ease, na that they will rather venture both body and
goods, life, lands, liberty and all, then they will do any thing contrary
to their consciences whereby they must be judged at the last day. This is
such a thing, as it must needs bring comfort to all men, and can justly grieve
none, except the common enemy the devil him self. For as for strangers, they
must needs be (...) therewith: as for Inglish men, they must needs be
incoraged thereby. And as for the Princes her self, she ca^net but be
comforted therein, assuringe her self that if these men, do (...) so firmly
unto their consciences and faith sworn unto God in their (...) of baptism:
then will they as (...) for the same conscience, stik unto (...) Majesty, if
occasion should serve, in keepinge their secondary faith and allegiance,
sworn unto her Highness as to the substitute of God. Their adversaries also and
persecutors, it can not in any reason mislyke, for that the contrary religion
were to have them as constant and faithful in that, if it were possible to win
them to the same

But notwithstanding, seeing you write that there is both great dislyke, and
displesure also taken of it, as though their constancy were obstinacy, and
their conscience mere will: (which most of all greeueth (as you write) their
obedient and well meaning minds) albeit otherwise the pressure it self be so
heavy as the burden thereof is sore and grievous to bear: for these causes,
and for the geeuinge of some more light to the whole matter, I will (as you seem
to desire) most briefly towch three things in this letter, whereby I doubt not
but that you shall account your self fullye and sufficientlye answered The
division of the whole Treatise.


1. The first point shall be, what cause or reason the Catholics have to stand,
as they do, in the refusal of things offered them, and especially of going
to the Church. Secondly, what way or means they may use to remedy or ease
themselves of this afliction now laid upon them for their consciences. Thirdly,
if that way or means do not prevail, then how they ought to bear and
indewre the same.
The first part.
THAT the Quens most excellent Majesty, the honorable Lords of her preuy
Counsel, and other the learned and wise of Inglande, may see that the refusal
of going to the church of so mani thou sand Catholics at this day in that
Realm, is not upon disloyalty or stubburne obstinacy, as their adversaries
give it out, but upon conscience and great reason, and for the auoydinge of
manifest peril of eternal damnation, which they should incurr in yealdinge to
that which is demauuded at their hands: I have put down some causes and
reasons here folowinge, referringe the Reader to more larger discourses made
by diverse learned men of our time, in soundrye parts of their works (this
being shufled up in have), and namelye to a peculier Tretise not long agone
published to wching this matter. A necessary Supposition.


But first of all it is to be noted, that my reasons (to thend they may
convince) are to be supposed to proceed, from a Catholic mind (that is) from a
man, which in his conscience is thoroughly persuaded that only the Catholycke
Roman Relygion is truth, and that al other new doctrines, and religions, are
false religions, as Two Sorts of Catholics.
all new gods are false gods. Now of these Catholics there are two sorts, in
Ingland, the one which in their consciences do judge, that as all other
religions besides their own are false, so all participation with them either in
deed, or in show, by oath, by Sacraments, by going unto their prayers and
service or otherwise, is naught, forbidden and unlawful and yet either for fear,
or favor, or (...) other worldly cause, they are content to comunicate with them
in all or some of ye foresaid things: and of those men (albe What a (...) it is
to (...) against a man's own conscience
it they be very many in Ingland) I mean not to entreat, their case be ing
aparantly both to the^ selves and to al other men, wicked, and out of al doubt
damnable. For as S. Austin says Aug in psa. 54.
He that knows the things to be il that he does, and yet does the^, he goes
down quick unto hell. As though he would say: Albeit he be yet quick upon the
carthe, yet is he, in the providence of God, dead, and damned in hell. And S.
Paul talking of this sin, never layth less punishment upon it, then
judgment and damnation, although it be committed in things of them selves
indifferent or lawful: for albe it (as he says) meats offered to Idols be of
them selves lawful to be eaten, to him that knowth an Idol to nothing: Yet, If
a man should decerne (...). 14.
or judge it to be unlawful and yet eat (...). (...). (...).
of it, he is damned for it, because he (...) expo. (...). Tho. 1. 2. Q. 19.
and (...). DD. (...).
does not according to his conscience or knowledge. And the reason is that
which S. Paul has immediatelye folowinge, saying. All that which is done by
us not according to our knoledge Romans 14.
or conscience, is sin. And S. Cap. 4.
(...) confirms the same, saying. He that knows good and does it Romans 14.
not, sins. Wherefore S. Paul cries Mark this reason.
out a little before, thus. Blessed is he that judges not, or condemnethe not
him self, in doing contrary to Three kynds of Sin.
that he best allows. And the cause why this sin against a man's own Math.
26.
conscience is so damnable, is this. Some 1. Timo. 1.
do sin of human frailty, as did Peter, and this is called a sin
against Vide D. Tho. in 2. 2. Q. 14. and Greg. li. 25. Mor. ca. 16.
the father, who is called Power. Some do sin of ignorance, as did Paul,
and this is called a sin against the son, who is called Wisdo^e. Some do
sin of mere will and malice, choosing to sin although they know it to be
sin, and this is the sin (...) the holy Ghost to whom is (...)
particulerlye grace and Syn agaiust ye holy Ghost.
goodness, the which a man most wikedly co^temneth and rejects when he
sins wilfully against his own Conscience: and therefore Christ says,
that a man shall be forgeeuen a sin against the father and against the senne, as
we do see it was in Math. 12.
Peter and Paul. But he that sins Mar. 3. Luc. 12.
against the holy Ghost, shall never be forgeuen nether in this world, nether in
the world to come. As for example the Pharisees were not: which did many Ioh.
15.
things against Christ, malitiosly, Act. 9.
and contrary to their own knowledge and consciences. If this be true (as it is,
if God be not untrue) then in what a miserable case stands many a man in
Ingland, at this day The pitiful case of dissem ling Schismatickes.
which take oaths, receive sacraments, go to church, and commit many a like
act directly against their own consciences, and against their own knowledge:
nay, what a case do they stand in which know such things to be directlye
against other men's (...), and yet do compel them to do it: As to receive
against their will, to swear against their will, and the like: Surely, as I am
now minded I would not for ten thousand worlds, compel a Jew, to swear that
their wear a blessed Trinity. For albeit the thing be never so true, yet
should he be damned sor swearinge against his conscience, and I, for compelling
him to commit so heyneus and grievous a sin. But of this sort of Catholics,
this is enough, and to much except they wear better. For they are to be
accounted (according to S. Paul) damned men in this life, and therefore noe
Christians, and much less, Catholics.

There are an other sort of Catholics, A Second sort of Catholics for who^
this Treatise is made.
that albeit they do judge al other religions besides their own, false and
erroneous, and damnable: yet do they not think, but that for some worldly
respect, as for sauinge their offices, dignities, liberties, credytes or the
like, they may in some of the former things, at the least wise in going to
Church, (for as for swearinge, and receauinge, I think noe Catholic this
day in Europe thincketh it less then damnable) show them selves conformable
men to the proceedinges of them of the contrary religion: and do also think
others too scrupulous which do stand in the refusal of the same. But to show
that these men are in a wrong, and perilous persuasion, builded only on their
own fantasy, and therefore to be reformed: and that the other men are the
only true Catholics, and bound to do so much as they do, upon pain of the
high displeasure of God, and eternal damage of their own souls: I have put
down here these reasons ye follow, which may serve for ye iustifiing of the one
parties conscience, and for the dew reforming of the other.

The first Reason.
The first reason why I being a Catholic 1. Peril of infection.
in mind, may not go to the Churches or service of the contrary relygion,
is, because I persuading my self their doctrine to be false doctrine, and
consequently venomous unto the hearer, I may not venture my soul to be infected
with the same. For as it is damnable for a man to Note the Simi (...).
to kill him self, and consequentlye deadly sine (without just cause) to put
his body in probable danger of death: so is it much more offensive to God,
to put my soul ten thowsa^d times of more valewe then my body, in danger to
the deadly stroke of false doctrine and heresy, espetially seeing I have no
warrant of security or scaping, but rather I hear God Eccle. 3.
crying to the contrary. He that loves danger shall perish in the same.
Nether is it (...) for me to think that I am sure enough from being infected,
for that I am grounded enough, I am learned suffitiently. For what if God take
his grace from the, and let thee fall, because thou have not followed his
counsel which is, If thou will not be bitte with the snake Eccle. 3.
not to sleep neighe the hedge. If thou will not be spotted, the^ not to touch
Eccle. 3.
the Pitche. Wherefore S. Paul to as good a man, as learned, as strong, as I am,
gave a general rule: to avoid and file an heretical man. The like precepte Tit.
3.
he gave to Tymothie being a Byshope, to avoid a certain heritique 2. Tim. 4.
by name Alexander: and more vehemetly yet he coniureth as it were the
Thessalonians in the name of Jesus 2. These. 3.
Christ, that they should withdraw them selves, from like fellows. Romans 16.
The same he repeateath again to ye Romans beseching them to note and 1. Tim.
2.
to decline from such me^. The reason of this, S. Paul vttreth to Timothe.
Romans 16.
Because there speech crepeth like a ca^ker and they have subverted the faith of
certain. Again he says to the Romans of the same men: By sweet words and
gaye blessings they seduce the hearts of the Innocent. And S. Peter 2. Pet. 2.
says of them, that they do allure unto them unconstant sowlles. Here now I
see the scripture carefully counsailing, and commanding me to avoid the
company, and speech of false teachers: it puts down also the peril, if I
do it not, which is as (...) as the (...) of my soul. And on the contrary
side, I have noe warrant of (...), nor example of good men to (...) the same.
For I do read this written of far my betters. The Apostles and their
scholars were so warye and circumspect in Niceph. li. 3. cap. 30.
this case (in (...)) that they would not so mnch as once reason the matter
with any of them, who endeavored by their lyinges or new devices, to corrupt
the truth. Furthermor I am sure, I can never take good by hearing them, but I
am in (...) possibility to take evil, as many more learned men then I, in
old time have done. As Dionisius Alexandrinus, confesses of him self: and
Eusebius. his. ec. 67. cap. 6.
of Origin and (...) it is known: and many men in England can be witnesies,
which both to them selves and also to other me^, seemed (the time was) so
firm and grounded in religion, as nothing could move the^: and yet now they
have proved otherwise. Wherefore it cannot be but great sinin (...)
(notwithstanding all this) if I shall put my soul in such danger, by
aduenturing to their company, to their service, to their sermons, to reading
their books, or the like, whereby in any wise I may be corupted. The which
adventure, what a sin it was counted in the primative Church, it may apere by
the sever laws, made both by the clergy and temporaltie forth prohibiting,
and punishing of Vide Gre. li. 5. ep. 64.
the same in that time, as is to be seen in the councels and fathers and in the
decrees of the good christian Sozo. li. 2. cap. 31. and li. 1. cap. 20
Emperors Martian and Justinian, and espetialy of the noble and zealous first
christian Emperor, Constantine, which made it death, after the condemnation of
Arius by the general council of Nyce, for any man more to read his books and
thereby to adventure to be poisoned with his heresies: And reason, For if David
had not ventured 2. Reg. 11.
to behold (...), he had not been entrapped (...) love, and so had not
committed (...) horrible sins Genesis 3.
that ensewed. (...) if Dame (...) had not presumed to hear the Serpent talk,
she had not beue beguiled, and if when Luther first began to teach new
doctrine, the Catholics, at that time had not vouchsafed to give him the
hearing, but had avoided his prechings and preuy conuenticles, there had not
been now in the world, either Lutheran, Swinglian, Caluenist, Purita^,
Anabaptist, Trinetarie, Famelie of love, Adamite, or the like: whereof now
there are so many thowsands abroad, all springing of that first sect, and
troubling at this day the whole world, with the eternal damnation of
infinite souls, the which souls at the day of judgment shallbe scuselesse,
and receive that heavy sentence of everlasting fire, for that they had not
avoided the danger of infection.

The Second Reason.
THE second reason why a Catholic 2. Scandale,
cannot yield to go to Church, is, because he cannot go without Leu. 4. Nu.
31. 2. Reg. 12. 1. Esd. 8.
scandale, which is a sin more mentioned, more forwarned, (...) forbidden,
more detested, more (...) Prou. 18.
in the Scripture, then any sin else 2. Match 6. Math. (...) and 18. Mar. 9.
mentioned in the same, except it be Idolatry. But in the new testament
nothing so much exaggerated, or with Luc. 17.
such vehement speeches prohibyted: Romans 14. 15.
Christ signifying, that the most part 1. Cor. 8. and 10. 2. Cor. 6.
of the world to be damned, were to be damned for this sin, when he cries 1.
These. 5.
out with that co^passionable voice of his, saying. Woe be to the world Math.
18.
by reason of scandals. Wherefore pronouncing as pityful a sentence, upon ye
author of these sca^dals he says. Woe be Ibid.
tothat man by whom come these sca^dales. And deuysing with himself (as it were)
how to express unto our capacities, the intolerable greatness of this man's
torment in hell, for scandalizing of other men: he utters it in this sort. It
were better for (...) Mar. 9.
man that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were (...) cast
into the sea. Which saying so terrified S. Paul that rather then he wonld
scandalize any man in eating 1. Corin. 8.
a piece of meat (a thing of it self lawful as he says) he protested that he
would never eat flesh in his life.

Now this heinous sin of scandale Three points wherein scandale is committed.
consists properlye in these three points. First to induce an other man by any
means to sin: whether it be by life, or doctrine: and this was the scandale
of the Preistes in the old law, by their noughty life, alluring the people to
commit the same sins. This was the scandale of the Leu. 4.
daughters of Moabe, who by their speeches and examples brought the Nu. 25. and
31.
Israelites to sacrifice with them to Idols. Whereof also (as of the like to
them) Christ spoke against with great disdain in the Apocalipse, saying. Apoc.
2.
Thou have their certain which hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught
Balaac how to give a sca^dale. (that is, an occation) for the children of
Israel to sin. I will fight against those men with the sword of my mouth. And
in this point is the proper The proper signification of scandalum.
signification of (Scandalum) seen, which imports as much, as a stumbling
block, whereby a man makes an other to fall, especially the fall of deadlye
sin: whereby a man breaks the neck of his soul. As if a man should induce
an other by his example, or otherwise, to commit adulterye, to take an oath
against his conscience, or the like: and as Jeroboam did by his example, make
the ten tribes forsake the unity of the Church of Jerusalem, which sin of
his, is so much noted in the scripture, with this title of scandale, (For that
he made Israel to finne,) as nothing 3. Reg. 12.
more. And in revenge of the same, God fortold him by Amos ye Prophet, yt he
Amos. 7.
would destroy his whole house, and (...) afterward performed the same, as it
3. Reg. 25.
apereth in the third book (...). And this first point of (...), which is to
induce other (...) to sin, is so large and reaches so far, (because it may
be done, by life, example, words, works, (...), permssion, and the like,) as
men had need to look better about them then they do. It were to long to give
examples in all: one ont of the ancient D. and martyr of Christ S. Cyprian shall
serve for all: for by that, the rest may be gessed. He talks of parents, which
either by their evil examples had drawn their children to herisic or schism,
or at the least wise had not sufficiently instructhem, of the true church, and
of the Sacraments and true service of God in the same. Whereupon these children,
An example for schismatiquesin England to note.
being damned, shall most pitefullye bewayl there misery (says S. Ciprian) and
the creweltie of their parents at the day of judgment, saying thus. We have
done nothing of our selves, nether forsaking the meat and the Ciprian. de
lapsis.
cupp of our lord (the blessed Sacrament) have we of our own accord hastened to
profane contagions (of schism or heresy.) The perfidyousnes or infidelytie of
other me^ has undone us, we have felt our own parents to be murderers unto us.
They have denied unto us the Church, which is our mother, and God which is our
father, and we being young and not foreseing the danger of so heinous an
offense, were content to join our selves with others in the society or
participatio^ of the crime, and so by other men's fraud we were deceived. This
yt S. Cipryan affirms of children, in respect of their parents, we may apply
to wives, brethern, sisters, kinsefolks, acquaintance, scholars, servants,
subjects, tenants, or the like: in respect of any whose words, life, or
example, has, or shall do them hurt, by giving the^ a scandale, that is, by
inducing them to sin.

The second point of scandale is, The Second point of Scan dale.
not only if I do induce an other man to sin by doing or saying naught my
self, but further, if I do offend an other man's conscience, in a thing of it
self lawful: that is, if I do make an other man think that I do an unlawful
thing, albeit either I do it not, or yt the thing be lawful in it self, yet I
commit sca^dale. As for example, if a priest should haunt dishonest or
suspected howses, albeit he meant never so honestly. And this is, that great
scandal Romans 14. 15.
wherabout S. Paul makes so much 1. Cor. 8. 10.
ado, as concerning the eating of meats offered to Idols: the which, albeit it
be lawful in it self (as S. Paul disscourseth) to him that has knowledge, and
thereby can judge that no meat of his own nature is unclean before God: and that
an Idol is nothing: and consequently, that such meats offered to Idols are
nothing spotted or made unlawful thereby. Yet to eat it in such place or
presence as the lookers on, being weak and simple, may think that thou art
an idolater, because thou eatest the flesh offered up to the idols: or that
they by thine example be edesied or induced to eat the same meats with an
evil conscience: this is damnable, says S. Paul, and a most horrible 1. Cor.
8.
sin against Christ him self, and such a sin as S. Paul him self says,
that he would never eat flesh while he lived, rather then by eating, so to
scandalize any man. Upon the which discourse of S. Paul, the learned father S.
Austen, sayethethus. By this, Aug. ep. 154
it is evident, that we are not only forbidden, to use any thing in the honor
of strange gods (as the eating of meats offered to them might seem to be) but
also to do anything whereby we may be thought to honor the^, doing it in such
sort, as that although in heart we despise them, yet we edefie or induce those
that know not our hearts, in deed, to honor the same. This was also the
scandale that the worthy old Eleazarus in the book of machabies 2. Match. 6.
so much detested and resisted, yt he chose rather to dye most cruelly, then to
co^mittit For whereas the Tyrant did com maund him to eat of the sacrifized
meats, and he refused the same, the under officers of the Tyrant being moved
with unjust compassion (as the scripture terms it) offered him secretly
other flesh not offered to Idols, and of the which he was not forbidden by his
law to eat: meaning A notable example of a plain and vndissem bling Consci
ence.
thereby to deliver him, and to give out that he had now satisfied the Prince
his coma^undement. But the good old man considering what other men might
think of it, and what Scandale there might ensew of it, 2. Match. 6.
answered thus, as the Scripture says: That he would first be sent down
unto hell, before he would do it: for (says he) yt is not convenient for our
age to feign, whereby perchance many young men, thinking that Eliazarus, now of
nintie years old has past over to the life of the Gentiles, may through my
dissimulation be deceived. This therefore is the second point of scandale which
S. Paul forbids when he says. Keep your self from al show of evil.

The third point of scandale is, in The third point of Scan dale.
respect of the enemy, that is, when although I do not induce any man to siune
or offend any man's conscience, yet I do disedefie the enemy, and do that
thing whereby the enemy is scandalized and takes an occasion to blaspheme God
his truth, his cause, his law, or the like. Whereof S. Paul speaks to the
Corinthians 1. Cor. 10.
Be you without offense or scandale to the Jews and also to the Gentiles. And
2. Cor. 6.
in an other place. Geauing offense or scandale to no man, to the end that our
function or ministry be not blamed thereby. And this is that great scandale
that David being a King and a Prophet, gave to Gods enemies by his fall, and for
the which he was sore 2. Reg. 12.
punished, as it appears by the words of the Scripture, which are these. And
David said to Nathan the Prophet: I have sinned against my Lord: and Nathan
said to David, God has taken away thy sin: but yet because thou have made
the enemies of God to blaspheme: for this cause, the son which is borne to
the, shall dye the death. This also is the scandale that Esdras coming out of
Persia, toward Jerusalem with his countrymen the Jews, was affeard to give
to the king of Persia, by causing him to think basely of God, as not able to
help and defend his servants, if he should have asked him aid to conducte
himself and his company to 1. Esd. 8.
Jerusalem: for so he says. I was ashamed to ask of the King aid and
horsemen to defend us from our enemies in the way: because we had said to the
King before, that the hand or defense of our God is over al them that seek him
in honesty, and that his empire, and strength, and furye, is upon all them
that forsake him. Finallye, of this scandale meant S. Paul and S. Peter also
when they Romans 2.
said, that the word of God was blasphemed 1. Timo. 6.
or spoken evil of by the adversary 2. Pet. 2.
part, for the evil life of certain A Catholic by goeing to church falls
into all the three points of Scandale.
noughtie Christians. Now, that a Catholic going to the Churches, service,
or prayers of them of the contrary relygion, cannot but commit this great sin
of scandale in the highest degree, that is, in all these three points before
rehearsed, it is evident to all the world. For touching the first point: if he be
a man of any calling, his example shall induce some other, as wife, children,
friends, servants, or the like, to do the same. And howsoever he escape him
self, they may be infected and so damned, and their blood laid upon his
soul: but much more if he should exhort or constrayne any man to do the
same: as commonly many Sysmatyques do use. And touchiing the second point,
he cannot but offend many men's Conscyences: for they that do know him
inwardelye to be a Catholyque, will think him to sin against against his
own conscience, and perhapps be induced to do the like. And they who know him
not, must needs presume him to go of conscience, and as a fauorer of that
religion, and so be brought to like the better of that religion, and the worse
of the Catholic, Mark this point.
by his example. And as concerning the third and last point, their is no enemy
of the Catholic religion in the world, whether he be Gentile, Turk, Jew, or
heretic, but that he must both think, and speak the worse of the said
religion, seeing the professors of the same, are content for worldly pollycie
to dissemble it, and leaving their own Churches, to present them selves to the
Churches of their open and professed enemies.

To conclude, in this matter of An important admonition.
scandale: men must not flatter and deceive them selves, thincking that they
walk in a net and are not seen, when they give scandale to all the world,
which fixes his eyes upon them, if not for their own cause, yet for the
religions sake. God is not Gala. 6.
to be mocked. The godly and learned Father S. Ambrose did accuse Ualentinian
Ambros. epist. 30.
the Emperor for giving a publyke scandale to the world, because he did but
permit certain aulters to the Gentiles: saying, that men would think that he
preuilye favored them. And his scholar S. Augustine thincketh it a scandale,
if a man should hear a Donatist but Aug. Li. de pasto. ca. 7.
speak, and he to hold his peace: for that the hearer might think that if
this were evil which the Donatist says, the other would reprove him. But if
S. Ambrose had seen the Emperor to have gone to the Panims Temples, or S.
Augustine the other to frequent the Donatistes Churches, what then would they
have said? What excuse then would they have received? and this is our very
case.

The Third Reason.
The Third reason why a Catholic may not come to Church, is, for that going
or not goeyng to the Church, 3. A sign distinctiue betwixt religion and
religion
is made a sign now in England distinctiue, betwixt religion, and religion,
that is, betwyxt a Catholic, and a Schismatyke. So that a Catholic by going
thither, does directlye deny his religion. For the better understanding
whereof, we must note that the professor of any religion may be known by three
ways: first, by 3. ways of pro fessing a man's religion.
words: professing him self to be of that religion: secondly, by works, or
deeds proper to that religion: thyrdly, by some sign or mark appointed to
signify that religion. As for example, In Italy a Jew may be known, First, by
his words, if he would profess him self to be of that religion. Secondlye,
by works proper to Iudaysme, as by keaping the Saturday holy day, by
circumcysinge his children, and the like. Thirdly, by a notorious sign
appointed to distinguishe that religion from al others, which is, to wear on
his head a yealow capp. Now, as these three are ways to profess this
religion, so if a (...) of an other religion, (for example) a Christian,
should yeald to use any of these things, he should sin greauouslye, and in
effect deny his faith. And as for the first, if he should profess him self to
be a Jew, it is evident that he denies thereby his christianitye. And as for
the other two ways, it cannot be denied: for the circumcysinge of thy
children, and the wearinge of a yeallow cappe, does as plainly in that
country tell men that thou art a Jew, as if thou did proclaim it at the
market: even as the bush at the tavern door, Mark this ex ample.
does tell the goeers by, that there is wine to be sold within.

But now, that the goeinge to Church is in the realm of England a plain and
an apparaunt sign of a Schysmatyque, that is to say, of a conformable man (as
they call him) to the protesrants proccdings: it is manyfestly to be (...).
First, Why goeing to the Church is a denying of the Catholic religion.
by the commandment to go to Church every holyday, to here service, and by
the (...) of the same commandment. For (that it is the commanders meaning,
by that act, as by a proper sign, to have men show themselves comfortable to
that relygion): it cannot be denied. For otherwise, to what end are they
commanded upon such days, and at such a certain time, and for such a
purpose to go thither. Again, it is proved by the exaction of this law: For
when a Catholic does come before the Commissioners, there is nothing asked of
him, but when he was at Church, and if he will promise to go to Church,
commonly they account him a sufficient conformable man, (yt is to have yielded
sufficiently unto them.) Furthermore, the multitude of the^, which have of long
time abydden imprisonment, and now in greter number do for this only thing,
in the sight and knowledge, not only of Ingland, but also of al Christendom,
and of the enemies of the same in the world besides, does make this abstayninge
from Church to be a proper and peculier sign (...) a true Catholque, now, if
it were not before: and the yealding in the same, (especially if a man be
called to public trial about it) to be a flat and Mark this Reason.
evident denyinge of God, and of his faith. For what does make a thing to be a
proper and peculier sign, but the judgment and opinion of men? The bush of the
tavern, is a sign of wine, because men commonly take it so. In like manner
the yelow bonet of a Jew: the yelow torbant, of a Turk: and the like. Even
so, seeing the whole world, at this day, does take the absteyning from
protesta^tes Churches, to be the only external sign of a true Catholic: and
seeing the protesta^tes them selves do make it so: also, seeing that the going
to Church is the contrary sign, it follows, that if going to Church were of
it self before lawful, it were now made by this, a peculier sign distinctiue
betwixt religion and religion, and so, utterly unlawful.

I will put an example of the Primative Church, wherein the wearing of a garland
was lawful for all soldiers, until the Emperors, and the common opinion of
men, had abrydged it only to infidel soldiers, to distinguish them thereby,
in honor, from Christian soldiers. And then, after that (as Tertullian
prouethe) Tert. lib. de Cor. mili.
it was noe longer lawful for Christian soldiers to wear them, for that the
wearing thereof, was a denial of An example to ye purpose.
the Christian faith. Whereupon, we read that a certain Christian soldier
offered him self rather to suffer death, then to wear one of them: as
appears in the same book of Tertullian. Bnt now, much more is the thing
vnlawfnl in our case. For that the going to the Protestants Churches (which a
Catholic must presume to be heretical) was never a thing of it self lawful,
(as I will hereafter prove) which the wearing of a garland was: and therefore
much less now to be tolerated, seeing besides this, it is also made a sign
distinctiue as I have alredye proved.

The Fourth Reason.
THE fourth cause, why a Catholic 4. Schism.
may not go to the Church is, because it is Schism, and breaking of the
unity of the Catholic church: The which, how perilous and Vide Aug. tom. de
Fi. and simb. ca. 10.
dreadefull a thing it is, all Catholics do sufficientlye know. For as
they firmelye believe, that to oppugn the visible known Church of Christ (as
all (...) contynuallye do) is a very wicked and damnable sin: Even so in
like manner they believe, that to break the Unitiye of the same Church, and to
make any rent or disunion in the same (which is the proper fault of
Schismatykes,) is also damnable. For the which cause, S. Paul does so
diligently request the Corinthians to 1. Cor. 1.
avoid Schisms, saying. I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that you al say one thing and that there be no schisms amongst you: And
to the (...), Be you Ephesians. 4.
careful to keep unity of spirit in the bond of peace. The which Unity,
Christ him self expresses more particulerly, and more distinctly, when he
(...) of his Father, That his Christians might be one, as he and his Joan. 17.
father were one: that is to say, that as he, and his father, did agree in all
their actions: and what soever the one did, the other also did: So in his
Church there should be one only form of belief, Ephesians. 2. 4.
one form of service, one form of Sacraments, and the like: even as there is
(according to Paul) one Baptism, 1. Cor. 10. 12
on bread, on faith, one Church, 1. Timo. 2.
one Christ, one Lord, one body, one Heaven, on hope of reward, the breaking of
which unity of the Church of God, has been always accounted a most greauous,
and damnable offense. For, as Ireneus a most Ancient, Irene. li. 4. cap. 43.
and godly father says. They which cut, and disseuer the Unity of the
Church, shall have the same punnishment that Jeroboam had. This punishment, we
know to have been the utter destruction and extirpation 3. Reg. 4.
of him and al his name. But other Fathers, do eraggerrate this sin farther:
For S. Augustine in his book which he made of the Unitye of the Church, says
thus. Who soeeuer August. de Unit. Eccle. cap. 4.
do agree, to all the holy Scriptures towching the head of the church (which is
Christ) and yet do not communicate with the Unity of the Church, they are not
in the Church. And a little after, he expouudethe How grevous the sin of
scisme is.
what he means by communicating with the Unitye of the Church, which is. That
their communion be with the whole body of Christ his Church, dispersed over
the whole world, and not with any one part separate, or else it is manifest,
that they are not (says he) in the Catholic Church.

Now, S. Cyprian in his book Cvp. de. sim pli. Prel.
of the Simplicytie of prelates, or unity of the Church, goes further, for
he proves that if a man did live never so virtuously otherwise, nay, if he
should give his life and shedd his blood, for Christ: yet if he were out of
the unity of the Church, he could not be saved: for that as he says. This
spot or sin (the breakinge of the unity of the Church) can not be washed
away with any blood. The which saying of S. Cyprian, the learned father S.
Chrysostom after Cypryans death, doethe repete and confiirme. Addinge these
worddes. Chris. ho. 11 in epist. ad Ephesians.


There is nothing does so prouocke God as the division of the Church. And
albeit we should do innumerable good deeds, yet notwithstanding we shall be
punished as greuouslye as they were which did rende Christ his own flesh
and body, if we disseuer in pieces the full integrytie and unity of the
Church. And finallye he concludes thus. I do here, say, and proteste,
that it is no less sin See more of the greatness of this sin.
to cut and break the unity of the Church, then it is to fall into heresy.
And thus much I thought good to Aug. ep. 50. 152. Ser. 181 de. Tem. in. psalm.
88.
say, (leuing infinyte other things that might be said,) touching the
greeuousnes of this sin of schism, whereby many of our bad Catholics
Fulg. li. de. Fi. ca. 37. 38. 39. Greg. lib 14. Mor.
in Ingland, may see in some part, the miserable dangerous case wherein they
stand, by sleeping so careless as they do, in this sin.

But now that this act of goinge to the protestants Churches and prayers, is
a schismatycall act, and such a one, as deuydeth from That goinge to church
is schism.
the unity of the Church: it is easy to be proved for that schism is,
according to Saynnte Augustine to S. Austen, A separation of them Lib. 2.
cont. Cresco. ca. 3
that think the same thing. That is, a different kind of service of God in
The defini tion of Scisme
those men that do not differ in opinion in relygion. The which thing, he
expresses more plainly in an other Aug. q. 11. in. Mat.
place, putting the difference betwixt heretics and (...), saying.
Schismatiques are made, not by difference The differrence betwixt an heretic
and a Schisma tique.
in faith, or belefe, but by the breaking of the society, or unity of
Communion. Now, the Communion or unity of the Church, consists in these
three things: to wit, Unity of the Church stand eth in three things especi
allye.
that al Christians have one sacrifice: one and the self same (...): also one
and the self same service of of God. But they whch go to the protestants
Churches, have no sacrifice at al: nether have they any more then two of seven
sacraments: and those two also so mangled, that of the two, scarce one is a
sacrament, as they use them. And as for their service, it has no part of the
Catholic service, as I will show herafter He therefore, that goes to this
service, and willingly seperateth him self from the Catholic service and
Communion, breketh the unity of Communion of the Church, and consequentlye,
commits schism.

But some man perhapes will An objection of could Catholics, with the answer.
say, I do it not willinglye, but I go to Church by constraynte of the
publyque laws of my Realm? I answer, that here is some kind of constraynte
external, bnt not somuche Arist. lib. 3. Ethico.
as may take away the liberty of thy will, which is internal, as the
Philosopher wislye disscourceth. For, this constraynte, is but conditional:
That is, either to do that which is commanded: (for example, to go to the
Church) or else, to abide this or that punishment that the law appoynteth.
The which penaltye, if thou will suffer, thy will is free, to do what thou
will. Nether can any mortal power constrayne it further. So that, such an
action as I have talked of Actions extorted bye fear are simply fre actions,
and only violent in part.
(for example, going to the Church for the avoiding of temporal loss,) is
called both by the Philosophers and Deuins. Inuoluntaria secundum quid,
simpliciter autem voluntaria. That is: in part or in some respect,
vnuoluntarie. But absolutely, and simplye it is to be accounted voluntarye. And
therefore, they are to be esteemed good or badd, punyshable or rewardeable, even
as other free actions are: for otherwise, no sin should be punisheable.
Seeinge every noughtie action commonly has some kind of compulsion in it,
but yet it may not be excused Mark these absurdities.
thereby. As for example the murderer may say that he did it not willyngely,
for that he was compelled thereunto by rage of anger. And the lecherer may
say, his flesh compelled him to sin: and to take fitter example for our
purpose: all those that denied Christ in time of persecution for fear of
torments, might by your objection, say that they did it not willynglye but
by compulsion of torments, and therefore were not to be damned for it. But yet
Christ said, that he would take it as done voluntarylye, and therefore damn
them for it, by denyinge them openly before his Father, and his Angels, at the
Mat. 10.
day of judgment. And yet to Luc. 12.
give an other example nearer to our matter: Saint John says of the noble
men and gentilemen Io. 12.
of Jurye in his time. Many of the princypall men did believe in Christ, but
they did not confess him outwardlye for fear of the Pharisees lest they
should be cast out of the Synagoge, for they did love more the glory of men
then the glory of God.

Here we see the act of these noble men and Gentyle men: also the compulsion
to the act, the cause of their compulsio^ and lastly S. John's judgment upon ye
act. The act, whereof they are accused is only houlding their peace, and not
confessing Christ openly, according as they did inwardlye believe of him: The
cause or excuse that they had to lay for them selves, was, the fear of the
Pharisees or Magistrates which compelled them against their will so to do. Now,
what punishment they feared at the Pharisees hands S. John expresses, saying,
that it was. Lest they should be cast out of their Synagoge. The which
punishment What a great matter it is amongst the Ie was to be cast out of the
Sinagogue.
was then, and is now at this day, amongst the Jews, the greatest punishment,
besides death, that can be devised. For he loses thereby al offices,
dignities, and credit whatsoever: noe man may buy or sell with him: noe man may
visit him, or talk with him, or salute him in the streates. Finally, it is a
death upon earth (a great and sufficient excuse a man would think) to answer
for a man's silence only. For I see many a one in England, not only to
conceal their own consciences, but also to speak against the same for a
less cause. But what is Saint John's judgment upon the matter? for sooth he
accepts not the excuse, but condemns them in a damnable mortal A severe
judge meant geeuen by S. Ihon against dissemblers for the time,
sin against the first commandment, for doing the same, saying. That by
this silence of there is they did put the glory of God behynd the glory of men,
and thereby showed that they loved men, better then God, Noe doubt but to their
everlasting damnation, except they hartelye repented them. The which I would
have those unwise and fond noble men and gentle men in England to consider,
which persuade both them selves and other men that in these troublesome times,
a man may without offense keep his conscience to him self: but especially
those that do not only hold their peace, but also do against their
conscience, what soever is commanded them, saying, that al which is done
amiss shall not be laid upon them, at the day of judgment, but upon the
Prince and A bad shift of dissemblers.
the Magistrates, which compel them to do the same against their own wills.
But what compulsion this is, and how furre it shall excuse their doings, I have
now declared. Wherefore hereafer let noe man say, that he goes to Church
against his will, thincking thereby to excuse him self from schism.

Besides this, to prove it schism, yea, and that obstinate and rebellious
schism, it were sufficient to know that the meaning, will, and commandment,
of the general and universal Catholic Church at this day, is, that Catholic
men should not present them selves to Protestants Churches, or conuenticles,
seeing they are denounced open enemies to the foresaid Church, and their
religion has been as orderlye condemned in the last general Council of Trent,
As the doctrine of Arrius was, in the first general Conucel of Nice. And albeit
the Council of Trent made noe particular decree of this matter, yet is their
noe cause, why any man should take any hold thereat: seeing the reason there
of was Can. Apost 63. 44. 45. apud Eus. li. 7. caq. 9.
because such a decree was needles: for the Church having alredye condemned
from the beginning al prayinge with Heretykes, or reparing to their
conuenticles: it was sufficient for the council only to condemn the
Protestants for such men, without any what the Cou^ cel of Trent determined
about goinge to church.
further particular prohibitinge of others to come to their Churches, and
service, seeing their conuenticles being once pronounced to be heretical, the
other was to be presupposed. And this is the true meaning of the concel, what
soever others say, to shadow their imperfections.

Howbeit, some doubt being at that time, moved by certain of the Nobilitye of
England: whether they might not lawfully without offense to Church to do some
mere temporal act (as, to bear the sword before her Majesty or the like):
it was debated by. xii. learned men there, at the Councels appointment, and
determination then genen, that only for such a cause, they might go to
Church. As for example, if her Majesty should appoint certain Catholyckes,
to meet at Poules, to entreat of matters of the state, and that at such time
as service were said there: and this was Naaman 4. Reg. 5.
Syrus his case, flat: who was permitted, (as most men take it,) for a time, to
go with his King and hold him up upon his shoulder, when he went to the
temples of the Idols. Now, that there has been The case of Naaman Sims.
a general custom, rule, and Canon of the Church, prohibiting to go to the
Churches and conuenticles of heretics, it is plain, by the testimony of al
antiquity. The Apostles Can. Apost 63.
them selves in their threescore and third Canon, say thus. If any man either
of the clergy, or laitye, The old Ca non forbidding the going to heretical
Churches.
do go into the Synagogue of the Jews or into conuenticles of heretics to
pray, let him be deposed, and excomunicated. This Canon of the Church, was
exactly afterward kept, and is mentioned very often, by the Fathers and
councels, by occasion of the like matter. As for example, when Origin was by a
certain necessity, compelled The example of Origin.
to dwell in house together with one Paul, an heretic, to whom there
resorted often, not only heretics, but some simple Catholyques also for the
fame of his excelente eloquence: yet they writ of Orygen. That he could never
be induced, by any means to be present at prayers where Paul was. And the
Eusebius. li. 6. hist. ca. 3.
reason is put down by them to be this. For that Orygen even from his Nicep.
li. 5. capit. 4.
youth had kept and observed most dilygentlye the Canon of the Church. Here
we see, what accounte was made in those days, of this Canon of the Church.

Furthermore S. (...) Alexandrinus a learned Father, talkinge The example of
Heraclas.
of one Heraclas Byshope of Alexandria, and scholar of the aforesaid Drigen,
and shewinge how the said Drigen, had excomunicated and (...) out of the
Church certain Christyans, for that they were accused to have used much the
company Eusebius. li. 6. capit. 12. and Li. 7. cap. 6.
of a certain heretic: he adds this saying. This Canon, and this example,
have I received of our holy father Heraclas. The like observation of this Canon
is noted in Athanasius: whose coming to Antioche, fled the common and public
Sozo. li. 3. capit. 9.
Churches which were usurped then, by one Leontius, an Arian Bishope, and his
clergy: and seeking out the Catholics that were in the City, The example of
Athanasius
which then by contempt were called Eustathians, because they held of the
Communion of their Catholic deposed Bishope, named Eustathius, (as
Catholics now in Inglande are contemptiously called Papists, for houlding
of the Communion of ye Bishope of Rome,) and finding them out did secretly
communicate with them, as says the history. Conuentu in aedibus priuatis
peracto. That is. making their assembly or Church, in their pryuate howses.
How like is this case, to our state now adays Theo. li. 1. capit. 14.
in Ingland? The like respect to this Canon of the Church, had Alexander
Bishop of Constantinople, who wished rather to dye, then to remain in the
Church, when Arius the heretyque, should come in to the same. To this Canon
had also respect, the The example of the People of Alexandria
people of Alexandria, so much commended by Athanasius him self, who would
rather pray together by Theo. li. 2. capit. 14.
them selves in the Church yard without cover, then enter into the Church to
pray, where George the Of the People of Samosatum.
Aryan Byshope was. The like consideration had also the people of Samosatum,
who after the depryuation of their virtuous and Catholic Byshope Eusebius,
and the thrusting into his place by the Arians of an heretical Bishop called
Eunomius: they would no more, come at the Church: of whom Theodorete writes
thus. None of the inhabitants there, poor or rich, servant Theo. li. 4.
capit. 14.
or artificer, husbandman or grafter, man or woman, young or oulde, would come
to the Church, but the Bishop was there alone, for no man would either come to
his sight, or talk with him, albeit he was reported to have used him self,
very modestlye, and quietly amongst them. Nay yet further then this, the
people of Rome having their true Catholic The example of the People of Rome.
Byshope deposed by the Aryans, and an other (...) Felyx, thruste upon them,
(...) an heretiqne, but a schismatique, (for the history says, that he was
sound in faith and held soundly the relygion set down in the Council of
Nyce,) yet because he was a schismatique, and was content to take holy orders
of the Arian Byshopes, and to communicate Theo. li. 2. capit. 17.
with them: the whole people (as I said) did (...) him, and as the history
says. None of the inhabytants of Rome, would enter into the Church, so
long, as he was within. Thus we see, the scrupulositie of christyan
Catholics in those days, and that, (as they thought) upon good cause, for
the auoydinge of schism. If any man can shelve me a warrant since that time,
for the enlarginge of our consciences now a days, I would gladlye see it.

You have heard in the beginning The conclusion of this Reason.
of this reason, the opinyons of our fore fathers, in the primative Church.,
what a great and heinous sin it is, to break the unity of the Church, or
to dysobeye the same. Again, it is certain, that the Church tells us, (if
the voices of all the Byshopes and learned men in Christendom and of the
supreme Pastor too, be the voice of the Church) that goeinge to protestants
Churches, is forbidden us, what excuse then, shall those men have from obstinate
schism, that not withstandinge all this, will yet think it lawful: especialy,
the thing being now in practice, and so many meu suffering for the same?
Assuredly they can look for no other account to be made of them, but as Christ
wills us. If he hear not the Math. 18.
Church, let him be to the as an heathen, and as a publicane. The which
words S. Austen says. Are more Aug. li. 1. co^ tra aduers. leg and. prophe
ca. 17.
grievous and terrible, then if he had said let him be strooke^ with a sword,
let him be consumed with the flames of fire, let him be deuowred of wild
beasts.

And a little after, talking of the band where with the Church Math. 16.
may bind a man's sins by authorytie given unto her of Christ, The
dreadful Sword of the Church c.
he says. A man is bound more bytterlye, and more infortunately, by the
keys of the Church, then by any other most grievous and hard bands, albeit
they were of iron, or of Adamante stone. Let could Catholics in Inglande
mark this, and not think they are free, when they are in these bands: nor
think they are Christians, when in deed, they are Heathens, and Publicanes. It
is a natural infirmity of ours, to think willingly to well of our own case:
and passion permiteth us not, to judge An important cousideration for
Schismatiques.
indifferently in these matters. Let us therefore consider of other men's cases,
and by them (...) of our own. If in S. John Crisostome his time, when there
was an Arryan Church, and a Catholic Church, known in Constantinople, and
both of these Churches, calling people unto them, and the Emperor fauourynge
more the Arrians then the Caholiques: Note this supposition.
if (I say) in that case, some Catholics leuing S. Chrisostomes Church,
should have gone to the Arrians Churches to service, upon obedience to the
Emperor: what would we think of the^ now? would we esteem schismatiques or not,
If theye had dyed so, Consideringe their disobedience to the bishope, and
their perfidious betrainge of Gods catholic cause in that time of trial? I
think yes. Then let us not deceue our selves, for this is our case now. And
if in all men's judgments, that act would have seemed Schism (for disobeing
one particular and private Bishope, and breaking from his com munion) what shall
we say for disobeyinge the general Pastor of al? and breakinge from his
communion? Of whom, the noble martyr of Christ S. Ciprian, above fiftene
hundred years agone, said thus. Heresies and schisms Cip. ep. 55. ad Cornel.
have sprung of none other cause, then for that men do not obey Gods Pre A
notable discourse of S. Ciprian for obeing one general Pastor.
is it, and for that they do not think or consider that there is one only
Priest who is Judge in Christ's stead for the time: Unto whom if all the
universal brotherhood would obey in divine functions, no man would move any
thing against the college of Preistes, nether after the judgment of God, the
suffrage of the people, the bishops consent once put down, in any matter,
would any man dare to make him self a judge of the Bishop, and consequently
of God: nor by breakinge Unity, tear and rent the Church of Christ.

The Fifte Reason.
The fifte reason, wherefore a Catholic 5. Participation.
may not go to the Church of those of the contrary religion, is, for fear
lest his presence may be interpreted by God to be consent unto their doing: and
so he be made partaker of their punishment. Concerning which we must
understand, that of all the enemies that God has in this world, there is none
in so high displeasure with him, as he who once knowinge the truth, and
being received into his house (the Catholic Church) runs out again, and
by 1. Timo. 3.
new devised doctrines, vexes and molesteth the same, being not only 2.
Cor. 11.
the house (as I have said) of Christ, Ephe. 5.
but also his spouse, nay, his own body. 1. Cor. 12.
Which sort of men, the scripture Colos. 1.
calls, Heretyckes: whose curse and reprobation in this life, is more
greauous then any other sin whatsoever: and the damnation for the time How
grievous a sin (...) is.
to come more intolerable. For that as S. Peter says, It had been better for
them never to have known the way of righteousness, then after they knew it, to
turn back again. And 2. Pet. 2.
these are those men, of whom Christ said, that one devil goeinge forth in
their first coming to the faith by Baptism, he afterward entered again
with seven other devils worse Luc. 11.
then him self: and so made the end of that man, worse then his beginning.
And Saint Paul gives a marvelous severe judgment upon them, when he says,
That Heretyckes, are subverted, and do sin, and are damned by their own
judgments. First Tit. 3.
he says, that they are subverted, or overthrown, because they are blotted
S. Paul's descri ption of an Heretic expounded.
out of the book of life: Secondly, that their whole life, is sin upon
(...): because they are utterly deprived of God his grace, without the which
we can do nothing but sin. Thyrdlye he says, they are damned by their own
judgments, either for that they chose wittingly, to leave the Catholic
Church: (out of the which they knew their was noe salvation) or else because,
the most of them do know that they do amiss, and yet for pride they will not
come back. So that every way, their case is very pitiful and lamentable.

This point the holy Fathers of the Church do often times handle very
seriouslye aod grauclye, proving, that Heretyckes more offend God, and are in
furre worse state, then any offender else in the world: and namelye, more then
either Jew or Ge^tile. For ye which cause, they note that the new Testament
bids us Vide Aug in psalm. 54. Cyp. ep. 76. Amb. li. de incar. ca. 2.
not to beware of Jews and Gentiles, but of Heretics in many places. The
reason is, for that they are those wolves, which Christ foretold us should
come in sheep skins: Romans 16.
which as S. Augustine says, shall Matt. 7.
pretend to be very good sheep, and friends to Christ and to his sheepefould:
2. Timo. 2.
and yet with Christ his own Aug. in psa. 39.
words, they shall teach you to deny Christ, to tear the sheepefould in
pieces, and to disperse the sheep. Nay, they shall sleye more souls with the
word, then ever Tyrants did with the sword. Again, S. Austin proves Aug. Li.
2. cont. aduer. cap. 12.
at large in an other place, that Heretics are those Antechristes, of whom S.
John spoke when he said. That many Antichrists are now gonne 1. Ioh. 2.
out: meaning of Simon Magus, Cerinthus, and other Heretics of his time. Of
which Antichrists he says, that S. Paul did pronounce that terrible saying,
that they wear. The 2. These. 2.
men of Sin, the Children of destruction. As who would say, that albeit all
other noughtye men wear inwrapped with the guilt of sin, and of their own
destruction: yet those men above al others, for there emine^t wickedness, were
properlye to be called the men of sin: and in respect of their heinous sin
of slayeinge of souls, and the heavy sentence abiding them for the same, they
were peculierlye to be called, the Children of perdition and damnation.

This therefore being so, that the deep displeasure of God, and his heavy
hand hangs more over the heads of Heretics and Schismatics, then over any
other people in the world: it is noe small danger, for a man to join him
self with them, especially in the act, wherein principallye they Heretics
offend God most in thet service.
offend God: which is, in their assemblyes, Services, false teachinges and
prechinges: at which times God his curse is like most abundantlye to descend
upon them, and upon those also that do assiste them. For as S. Paul says,
They are worthy of Romans 1.
death, not only that do evil, but they also which do consent unto them. And
A vain excuse of Schismatickes confuted.
that thou may not excuse thy self, and say: I am there in body, but I
consent not to them in heart: S. John expresses Ioh. 2.
farther, what it is to consent unto them, or to communicate with them in their
works, saying. He that says as much as God speed them does communicate (or
participate) with them in their noughtye works. Which thing the Prophet David
knew well, and therefore said, that he would not so much as sit down Psalm.
25.
with such men, and obiecteth the contrary fault to a wicked man, saying. When
thou saw a thief thou wast Psalm. 49.
content to run with him: He does not accuse him, you see, for stealinge with
him, but for goeing or running with him, and for keeping him company, albeit
he consented not to his robbery. And Saint Paul commanded Tymothye, not to
consent to Alexander 2. Tim. 4.
the Heretycke, but to avoid him. Likewise, he commanded the Romans, not to
consent to other To. 6.
such (...) fellows, but to declyne or turn away from them.

Finallye, Saint Paul's words are Tit. 3.
general and plain of all such men, when he says. Hereticum hominem deuita.
Avoid an Heretical man: He says not, (go to Church with him) but believe
him not, or consent not to him in thy heart. This is our interpretation foysted
in, thereby to boulster up our own dissimulation, wherein we presume farther,
then we shall be able one day to justify: As that foolish Prophet did, 3.
Reg. 13
which being sent to preach in Schismatic Samaria (but not to eat with
them) ventured farther then his commission, and by persuasion did eat with
one, who said him self to be as good a Prophet of God as the other (as the
Protestants do say them selves to be good Catholics) but this venturous
Prophet was slain by God for his labor. It is very perilous tobe amongst the
enemies of God. If Lot he had Genesis 19.
stayed but two hours longer in Sodom, he had dyed with the rest. The
terrible death of al them which were The company of heretics how dangerous
it is.
in company with those three rebellious schismatiques, Chore, Dathan, and
Abyron, ought to move us much: of which number, it is to be thought, many were
simple and ignorant men and had little part of the malice and noughtie
meaning, of their ringe leders: but yet for companies sake, al perished
together. The which example, S. Cyprian applies to our Cyp. ep. 76.
purpose, asking of us, if these men so perished for being only in company
with those schismatiques? Are A notable say inge against our Schisma tiques.
not we affrayde to be much more punyshed (says he) assistinge and
furthering (by our presence) heretical oblations, prayers, sermons, and
errors.

S. John the deerly beloved of S. John afraid of the company of an hery tique.
our Savior, had as much cause to presume of his masters favor, as we have:
and yet he durst not, so Eusebius. li. 3. capit. 22.
much as stay in the bath, to wash together with Cerinthus the heretyque.
For so he says. Let us flee from hence, lest the bathe fall upon us, in the
which Cerinthus the enemy, of truth is. Mark, how he was not only affrayde,
lest the bath would fall: but also, lest it should fall upon him for keeping
the other company. What if Note this supposition.
any Prince should have willed S. John to have come to Cerinthus his service,
prayers, and sermons? If the histories report that the Apostles and Niceph.
li. 3. capit. 30
their Disciples would not, so much as talk or reasone the matter with any
of the heretics of their time, but fled their company for fear, lest some
part of their punishment, should light upon them: what wise man now, will dare
to go to their prayers, and assemblies? To conclude, I would wish every man
to consider the admonytion of the Angel of God to Christians, talking of all
wicked co^gregatio^s under the name of Babylon. And I hard an other voice Apoc.
18.
from heaven, saying, go out my people from her, to the end that you be not
partakers of her sins: and to the end you do not receive of her scorges:
because her sins are come up to heaven, and God has now remembered her
wickedness. Mark, how he says. To the end that you do not receive of her
scourges. And yet, it is certain, that the people of God did not co^sente in
heart, to the wickedness of this place, which they are bidden here to flee: but
only were present there, and yet we see, how dangerous it was to them to be
partakers of the punishmente, if God of his goodness had not removed them out.

THE Syxth Reason.
THE Sixth cause, why a Catholic 6. Dissimulation.
may not come to Church, is, because he cannot come without dissimulation. The
which, in matters of Conscience and religion, is treachery to God almighty,
and a very dangerous matter. For as the worthy Father S. Ambrose says. It
may Ambro. li. 2 offi. cap. 24
be lawful sometimes in a monye matter, to hold thy peace, but in Gods cause,
where there is danger in comunicating with his enemies, to dissemble only, is
no small sin. The reason where of, is that sore saying of Christ's Math. 22.
own mouth. He that is not with me, is against me. As though he had said. He
that dissembleth, and knowing me and my cause to be opressed, houldeth his
peace, and defends me not, I will houlde him in the number of my enemies,
that are against me. According to the which rule of Christ, S. John John. 12.
(which well knew the inward and secret meaning of Christ,) speaking of
certain Noble men and Gentle men of Iurye. (The which did believe in Christ,
but durst not confess him openly for fear of the Jews.) Conde^ neth them of
a great and damnable mortal sin against the first co^mandemente, forth
same: saying, that by this act, they showed that they loved the glory of men,
more then the glory of God. By the which example, we see, wilfully dishonor
God, and consequently commit damnable treason against him, when we do for any
fear Dissemblinge in Religion is treson against God.
or other temporal respect, dissemble our faith, and hold our peace against
our consciences. The which thing S. Paul consideringe, he lays down unto us
a general rule. Ore fit confessio Romans 10.
ad salutem. To be saved we must needs confess our faith by mouth, or open
speech: Upon the which words S. Austin says. We can not be saved Aug. de Fi.
and sim. ca. 1.
out of this wicked and malignant world, except we endeavoring to save our
neighbors (besides believing) do also profess our faith by mouth, which we
bear in our hearts, the which faith of ours, we must provide by godly and warye
watchfulnes, that it be not in any respect hurt or violated, by the craftye
subtletye of Heretics. Note his admonition, let it not be in any respect
violated with craftye subtiltye. The subtiltye of Heretics.
As for example, by causing a man to yield a little against his conscience to
go once to Church, to stay but a little there, to have Service in his own
house, or the like: In the which, if a man might say (as co^monlye they do say
in evil meats) that a little, will do but a little hurt, it were more
tolerable. But seeing the matter stands as it does, in poisons, whereof
every little dra^me will be thy bane: No marvel though men show them selves
more scrupulous. Hear the judgment of a whole cleargye in the Primative
Church, and alleged by S. Cypria^ ye Martyr of Christ. Whereas Cler. Romans apud
Cyp. epist. 31.
the whole mystery of faith, is understood to consist in the confessing of the
name of Christ, he that has sought false sleightes for excuse thereof, has
now denied it: and he that will seem to have fulfilled such statutes and laws,
as are set fourth against the gospel, in so doing he has obeyed the^ in very
deed: For as much, as he would have it seem that he has obeyed them. Here
you Who dissembleth his faith denies it.
see now, al dissemblinge of our faith taken, for denying our faith: and al
seeminge, to be condemned, for doing. The which that old valiant champio^ 2.
Match. 6.
of God Eliazarus, full well knew, when he rather chose to dye, then to seem to
eat a piece of flesh (albeit he did it not in deed) contrary to the law of
God. And the reason he geaueth for it, is this, It is not fit for our age to
feign. O good Eliazarus, if it were not fit for thy age, to feign or dissemble
in matters of religion, what shall we say of our age, wherein, for many
respects, we are more bound to confess our Lord, and master, and his
Catholic religion, then thou werte? For that, we have received more benefits
at his hands, and have seen how he confessed us before his enemies and ours,
and could not be brought by any fear or torment to deny us. But well, there will
be wicked Luc. 11.
men, and dissembling Christians still: Yet notwithstanding, Gods law must
Blushynge at Christ's cause is damnable.
stand, set down by Christ his own mouth. He that shall blush or be ashamed
of me and my sayings, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he shall
come in his majesty, and in the majesty of his Father, and of his holy
Angels. He does not only say, if we do deny him, but if we do blush, or be
ashamed to confess him: which co^side ration made the Apostles, and other
servants of Christ, so peremptorily to proceed in confessinge openly their
faith, with what danger soever it were. And S. Paul geeueth a reason 1. Corin.
9.
of it, when he says, Woe be unto me except I do preach the gospel. That is,
except I confess it, except I let it forth, what danger bodily soever come
thereof. And in the acts of the Act. 4.
Apostles, the high Priests and magistrates commanded not the Apostles to be of
their religion, nor yet to come to their service, in their sinagogues, but
only to hold their peace. And that they should not speak or teach any more
in the name of Jesus. But yt Apostles utterly denied to obey yt commandment,
and in yt chapter following, being taken again for not obeing, were asked in open
judgment by yt magistrates We comanded you straightly to teach no more in this
name, and how chanseth it, that you have filled al Jerusalem with this
doctrine. And Pecter Act. 5.
answered with the rest of the Apostles, We must rather obey God, then men. As
who should say, that if they should have granted to dissemble and not to
speak openly, they should have denied God, in obeying men more then him.

What if the high Priests and Mark this supposition and apply it to our time.
Magistrates should have said unto them: well, we are content that you live
with your Conscience, so you keep it to your selves, and trouble not the
state, and so that you will, (for obedience sake) some time come to onre
Sinagogues showing your selves, conformable men to our procedinges. Nay, what
if they should have said: Some of you also, for outward show, (keeping always
your Consciences to your selves) must flee this odious name of Christians, and
seem to communicate now and then with us, in our Sacrifices and cerymonies: we
are content also, that so^e of you shall be our officers and Justices of peace,
Cou^cellers and the like, The manner of dissembleinge Schismatiques liuelye
expressed.
so that you will sometimes, (for orders sake) punish some of those indiscreete
fellows of your religion, which cannot be content to keep their Consciences to
them selves: so you will also give some pretye, sharp charge in your
circuites, sessions and assemblies, (always keeping your Consciences O damnable
dissemlinge: this is done by many in Inglande.
to your selves) and if some of you also will some times step up into the
pulpet, and speak three or four ernest words against this religion, it shall
be very gratful unto us, espetially if you will affirm it with an oath which we
have devised for the same Living to a man's own conscience, by leauinge him
self no conscience.
purpose: and this doing, we assure you, that you shall live quietly to your
own Consciences, and we shall account you for good subjects. If, I say, the
Magistrates of Iurye at that time should have given to the Apostels and other
Christians this sweet charm: you think that they could have abidden to hear
it al out, whose hearts did rise and swel at two words only that they spooke,
for the entreating of them to hold their peace? And yet many a thousand now in
England, being as thoroughly persuaded in heart of, yt truth of the Catholic
relygion as the Apostles and other Christians at yt time were of theirs, are
content notwithstanding, to hear, digest, admit, and execute, al, or most
part of these things recited, contrary to the said religion. And yet besides
all this (which is more to be wondered at) they are not ashamed to persuade the^
selves that they shall one day come to that glory where Desperate Pre sumption.
in the Apostles now are. But this is desperate presu^ption. And therefore we see
what a just cause this is, for a Catholic to resuse to come to the churches
of the contrary religion.

THE Seventh Reason.
THE Seventh Reason, why a Catholic Noughty service
may not yield to come the pro testantes churches is, because the service which
they use, is naught and dishonerable to God, and therefore, no man can come to
it, or hear it, or seem to allow of it by his presence, without great offense
to God. Nether is it sufficient to say (as commonly they use to say to beguile
simple people withal) that it is the Scripture, taken out of the Gospels,
Epistles, Psalms, and the like. For by that argument, the Jews service were
good at this day, which is taken out of the old Testement: and al heretics
service thateuer was, seemed to be nothing but Scriptures. For, as S. Austen in
diverse places notes, Aug. to. 6. cont. Max. li. 1. initio. and iter. verse. fi.
it was always ye fashion of heretics to have Scripture in their mouth, and
to cleue only to Scriptures, and to refuse traditions as inventions of men. And
we read of the arian heretics, how they were wont to singe Al heretics
vaunte Scripture.
Psalms in the streets of Constantinople, thereby to allure the people to them.
And yet we may not say, that their service was good: like as we cannot say that
the devils talk was good with Christ Math. 4.
albeit it were decked with allegation of scripture, and other sweet words.
Although therefore their service be full of scripture, it is noe good argument
Hier. in ca. 4. and 8. Ose.
that it is therefore infallible good. For as S. Jerome says of al Heretics.
What soever they speak, or think that they do speak in the praise of God,
it is the howling of woolues, and the bellowinge noise of mad bullocks: The
reason whereof is that, which the scholar of the Apostles S. Ignat. ep. 2.
Ignatius says. No man can call him good, or say he does well, that does
mingle evil with good. Wherefore S. Augustine says of the Donatistes,
schismatickes, and Heretics, of his time, that albeit they did sound out
Aug. in ps. 54.
Alleluia with as lusty a voice as the Catholics did, and in many things else
did agree in Service with them (more then now the Protestants do A little cuil
marreth agret deal of good
with us) yet their service was impious, and auayled them nothing. And a little
after, upon the words of God, uttered by the Prophet, saying. In many
things they were with me. etc. S. Austin says thus. God grants In psalm. 54.
that Heretyckes in many things are with him, as in Sacraments, Ceremonies,
and the like: But yet for all that they are not with me (says God in all
things. For in that they are in schism, they are not with me: in that they
are in heresy, they are not with me: and therefore, for these few things in
the which they are not with me, those other many things in the which they are
with me, shall profit them nothing. To come nerer to our purpose, their own
Apostle, and second Elias Luthers opini on of our Pro testantes service
(as they (...) him) Luther, condemns al their whole seruise, for the denying
only of the real presence, saying. The Cop. dial. 6. ca. 15.
Sacramentaries do in vain believe in God the father, in God the son, and
in the holy Ghost, and in Christ our Savior: all this does avail them
nothing, seeing they do deny this one Article, as false, of the real
presence. Where as Christ does say, This is my body. Lo here this Prophet
with the same spirit wherewith he condemns the Popes, he condemns the
Protestants, why should we believe him more in the one, then in the other?

But now to show wherein the Protestants Where in the Protestants ser uice is
evil, in particular.
service is evil, it were sufficient to say, that it is devised of them selves,
and altogether different from all the service of Christendom besides: and
therefore not to be received by Catholics, with whom they deal too
chyldishelye, when they say, their 1. Devised by them selves di fferent from ye
rest.
service differs in nothing from the old Catholic service, but only
because it is in English: thereby thinckinge to make the simple people, to have
the less scruple to come to it. The which how false it is, it shall appear by
that which I will say hereafter. I might also bring the opinion of all the
hotter forte of Protestants, 2. Condemned by ye Puritains
called the Puritayns, who in wrytinge, sermons, and private speech, do
utterly condemn, the service which now Protestants have, and thereupon do
refrain from it, as much as Catholics. But I will give more particular
reasons, as follows.

First the scripture is read there in 3. False transstions of scripture.
false and shameless translations, containing manifest and wilful corruptions,
to draw it to their own purposes, as has been showed in particular, by many
learned men in their worckes: and is like to be (shortly) more plainly by the
grace of God. As for example, through out the scripture, where Idols are
forbidden, they translate it Images, as in Saint John they read. Children 1.
Ioh. 5.
keep your selves from Images.

Whereas the scripture says Idols: And this is, to make simple men believe,
that Idols and Images are al one, which is absurd. For then, where Moses
sayethe: That God Genesis 1. 3.
made man according to his own Image. We should consequently say: God made
man according to his own Idol. Again, where in contrary manner S. Paul
says. That Ephe. 5.
a covetous man makes his money his Idol. We should say, that he makes it,
his Image. The which how foolish it is, every man seethe, and it can not
stand with any sense of the Scripture. The like absurd translations they
have, in infinite other things, which I cannot stand to rehearse. Let some
man read the latter end of the xy. chapter of the second book of the
Machabies, where he shall see what labor their Inglishe translatour takes to
shifte over the words of the Scripture, which talk 2Macha. 12.
of oblatio^s and prayers for the dead: and by that one place, let every man
judge of his fidelity in the rest. For See the English Bible de dycated to
King Henry.
I am sure, that if a Boy should so corrupt Tullies epistles, in
translatinge them in a Grammar Scoole, he should be breeched for his labor.
The Scripture therefore, being read there, in false translations, it must
needs seem to be false, which is blasphemis against the holy Ghost the indyter
of them. So that by this, it appears, that, that part of their service which
they pretend to be Scripture, is no Scripture, because it is by the malice of
the interpretour false, the which Scripture can not be.

Secondly, the service that Christians 4. Said by lay men.
ought only to go to, should be said, as also the Sacraments administered, by
Priests and such as have Ig. ad Hier. Chri. li. 3. and 6. de. Sacer. and hom.
60 Hier. ep. ad Helio. and ep. 85. ad Eua. Ambro. in Ephesians. 4.
received the Sacrament of holy orders, as all the general Councels and Fathers
of the Church, show unto us. And S. Paul when he says. That no man may
take unto him this honor, but he that is called as Aaron was. Wherefore the
same Paul advises the Bishope Timothy, not to give this dignytie unto any man
Heb. 5.
but upon great consideration, saying. Do not lay thy hands rashlye upon
any man. But now that either 1. Tim. 5.
all, or the most part of mynisters of England, be mere lay men, and noe
preistes, and consequentlye have noe authority in these things, Con. 4. Car.
can. 6. and Co ncil. Laod. can. 24.
it is euidente for many causes: as well for that they have not received the
under Orders, which they should have done before (...), (as appears Igna. ep.
ad Anti. Areo. ca. 3.
by the ancient Council of Carthage, wherein Saint Augustine was himself,) and
by all the Fathers both before and since: as also because they are not
ordained by such a Bishop and Priest, as the Catholic Church has put in
that aucthoritye: Can. Ap. 1. and 2. and 68.
which admits noe man for Bishop, which is not ordained by imposicion of
three or two Catholic Bishops hands at the least. Of al which things none
are to be found amongst the Protestants

Thyrdlye, their service is naught, 5. Falsehoode and blasphemy in there service
because they have diverse false, and blasphemous things therein: and that
which is yet worse, they so place those things, as they may seem to the
simple, to be very Scripture. As for example, In the end of a certain Geneua
Psalm. They pray to God to keep them, from Pope, In the end of their Geneua
Psalter.
Lurcks, and Papistrye, which is blasphemous. First, for ioyninge the supreme
minister and substytute of Christ, with the known and professed enemy of
Christ, and speaking so contumelyouslye of him, of whom al antiquitye in
Christ his Church, has thought, and spoken so reverently, Cyp. de sim. pre.
and Chr. li. 2. de Sa. Cyp. ep. 46. Chr. li. 2. de sa. Inno. ep. 93. ap. Au.
and Leo. ep. 84. Sy. Alex. 4. apud Atha. Theod. li. 2. hist. ca. 4.
calling him. The high Priest of the Church. The Bishop of the Universal
Church. The Pastor of the Church. The judge of matters of faith. The repurger of
heresies. The examiner of all bishopps causes. And finallye the great Priest,
in obeying whom all Unity consists, and by disobeyinge of whom, all Heresies
and Schisms arise.

Secondlye, it is blasphemous, for that they pray to be delivered from Cy. ep.
55.
Papistrye: meaning thereby, the Catholic and only true religion, by the
which all men are to be saved. Thirdlye, because they singe it, and make other
simple men to singe it, in the beginning of sermons, and otherwise: as though
it were scripture it self, and one of David's psalms.

Fourthly, albeit the Protestants (...) of neces sarye things which it should
have in it
service had not all this evil in it, as it has: yet were it naught, because it
has not in it, those good things which Christian service should have. For
service may be evil, as well for having too little, as for having to much. As
the service of the Arrians was, for singing, Glory to the Father, and not
singinge the same to the Son; And as if a man should recyte his Creed, and
leave out one article (as in effect the Protestants do the article of
discention into hell) all the whole Creed were naught thereby. Now, how many
things do want in the Protestants service, which should be in Christian
service, it were to long in every point to rehearse: yet will I (for examples
sake) name two or three things. First therefore, they have left out the
cheifest, and Dion. Ariop hier. ca. 3. Ign. ep. ad Smyrn. Justin. dial. tri
pho. Ter. li. de orat. Au. li. 20. contr. Faust. ca. 23 Chry. hom. 17. ad Heb.
Gre. li. 4. di. ca. 57.
heyghest things of al: which is the blessed (...) of Christ his Body and
Blood appointed by Christ, to be offered up every day for thanks geuinge to
God, for obtayninge of grace, and avoiding of al evil, and for the remission of
sins both of quick and dead: as with one consent the Fathers of the
Primative Church do affirm. The which Sacrifice being away, noe Christian
service can be said to be there: For so much as, Hiero. ep. 1. ad Helio.
for this cause were ordained priests, nether can there any be called Priest
Chry. li: 2. de Sacerd: Cyp: ep: 54 and li: 1. ep: 2. Au. ser: 25 2: de tempo.
but in respect of this Sacrifice: Also in respect of this sacrifice were
Christian Churches called temples, for this Sacrifice were made Aulters: for an
Altar is the place of Sacrifice, even as an armorye is the place Optat. li: 6.
cont: Dona: Au. in psa: 113. conci: 2. and Posid. in vita Au. ca. 24.
where armor is. For this Sacrifice was Preistes apparel made: Uestments,
Sensors, Frankensence, and the like, in the Prymatyue Church. Whereof all the
Fathers, Counsels, and historyes do speak so much.

The second thing, which the Council. flor and constant. sesio. 15.
Protestants service leaves out, is, noe less then six, of the seven
Sacraments, which the Catholic Six Sacraments
service of God does use: (for as for their communion it can be no Sacrament as
they do use it.) The commodity of which Sacraments, in Aug. li. 19. cont.
faust. cap. 11. and 16.
the Church saint Augustine says. That it is greater, then can be expressed,
and therefore the contempt of them is nolesse then sacrilege, because (says
he) that, can not be contemned without impiety, without the help of which, no
man can have piety. And for this cause in an other Aug. su leuit. que. 84.
place he says. That the contemnours of visible Sacraments, can by no menes,
inuisiblye be sanctified. The third thing that the Protestants Ceremonies.
service leaves out, is, all the ceremonies of the Catholic Church, of the
which the old ancient Fathers and Councels do say these Tertulia. de corona.
three things. First, that they are to be Bas. li. de sp. 5. cap. 27.
had in great reverence, and to be contemned of no man. Secondlye, Epipha.
heresi. 71.
that they are to be learned by tradition, and that many of them are Council
trid ca. 7. and. 13. Cip. ep. 66. Chri. ho: 41 vide Aug. li 2. doct crist. Cyp:
ser. de. ora. dom.
received by the tradition of the Apostles. Lastly, that they which do either
condemn, despise, or wilfullye omyt these ceremonies, are excomunicated. I
might here add many other things, as leauinge out prayers for the dead,
being (as the Fathers hold) one of the cheifest Isodo: li: de: diu: off.
functions of a Priest. Also for having their service in an other order and
language Council: Tol. 4. cap. 2.
then ye vniuarsal church uses: But this is sufficient. For if they Bed: li:
hist. capit. 1.
leave out of their service, both Sacryfice, Sacraments, and all
ecclesiastical In which authors you shall see in what tongue service was in
their days in all countries.
cerymonics: I know not what good thing they have left, besides a few bare
words of Scripture, evil translated, and worse applied, which they read
there. Saying therefore their service is such, it is a sufficient cause to make
al Catholics to avoid it.

THE Eight Reason.
THE Eight Reason of refusal 8. Loosing the benefit of Catholic religion.
which may now be yielded, why a Catholyque may not come to the Protestants
Churches, is, because by going thither, he shall lose all the benefit of his own
religion, nether shall he take any more commoditye thereby, then if he were not
of that religion at al. This is a very great, wayghtie, and most sufficient
reason to be yielded by Catholics in England to their Princes for their
refusal of coming to Church, and such a one as being sufficiently conceived
by her Majesty, cannot but satysfie her Highness, and greatly draw her to
compassion of the pyttifull A pityful necessity.
case of so many thowsands of her louinge subjects, who being, as I have
said Catholics in hearts by goinge to Protestants Churches, must needs be
brought either to flat athisme, that is, to leave of all conscience, and to care
for no relygion at all, (as many thousand seem to be resolved to do:) or
else, to live in contynuall torment of mind, and almost desperation,
considering that by their goinge to these Churches, they lose utterly all use
and practice of their own relygion, being held as schismatiques, and
excomunicate persons of the same: and their case such, that if they should dye
in the same state, they were sure to receive no part of benefit of that
relygion no more then if they had been protestants. The which, what a danger
it is, all true Christian men do both know, and fear.

But yet, that the simpler sort, may better understand it, and the wyser,
better consider of it: I will in particular repeat some of the abouesayde
dommages.

First therefore a Catholic, by going to the Protestants Churches, loses all
participation of that blessed The loss of partycipation of the Sacrifice how
great a loss.
Sacrifice, of the body and blood of our Savior, appointed by the said
Savior (as I have showed before) to be offered up daily in the oblation of
the Mass, for the commodity of the whole world, quick and dead: and for that
cause (as the godly and learned, saint John Chrysostom. hom 47. in ep. 1. ad cor.
Chrysostom says.) Called the common Sacrifice of the whole world. The which
action of offering of this sacred Hosre, (the Son of God to his Father,) is
of such dignitye, excellency, and merit, not only to the Priest, but also to
the standers by (...) him: as all the other good works which a man can do in
his life, are not to be compared with it, seeing that the very Angels of
heaven do come down at that time, to adore (after the The Angels present at
the elevation.
(...)) that sacred Body, and to offer the same up with us, to God the father
for the whole world. As all the holy Fathers of the primative Church did both
believe Gre. li. 4. di al. cap. 58.
and teach. Of the which, it shall be enough at this time, to aledge one or two.
Saint Gregory therefore the first, says thus. What faithful man can doubt
but that in the very hour of immolation or sacryfice, the heavens do open at
the Priests voice, and that the (...) of Angels, be present there, in that
mystery of Jesus Christ? And saint Chrysostom, handeling the same, Chris.
lib. 6. de sacerdo.
says. At that time, (the time of consecration in the Mass) the Angels
stand by the Priest, and the universal orders of the celestial powers, do
cry out, and the place nygh to the altar, is full of quires of Angels in the
honor of him who is there sacrifised. And immediatlye after, he tells two
visions Two visions of the presence of Angels at the mass.
of holy men, whose eyes were by the power of God (as he says) opened, and
they in those visions saw the Angels present at the time of consecration. And
in an other place, he yet more at large explycateth Chry. ho: 3: cont. Ano:
the same, saying. At that time dear brother (at the time of consecration and
elevation) not only men do give out that dreadful cry, (saying, we adore the O
Lord) etct. but also the Angels do bow their knees to our Lord, and the
Archangels do beseech him: for they accounte that a fit time, having that
sacred oblation in their favor. A fit Similitude of S. Chri sostome.
And therefore as men arc wont to move Princes the more, if they bear olive
bows in their hands: (because by bearinge that kind of wood they bring into
the Princes minds mercy and gentleness:) so, the Angels at that time,
(houlding out in their hands, the very self same body of our Lord) What
playner testimony can there be then this.
they do entreat for all mankind, as though they said, We do entreat O
Lord, for the men of the world, whom thou have so looued, that for their
salvation thou wast content to dye, and in the Cross, to breathe out thine
own soul. For these men we make supplication, for the which thou have geeuen
thy own blood: for these men we pray, for the which thou have sacrificed this
body of thine. If this be so, then the hearing of Mass, is not only worth
the venturynge of an hundred Marckes, or six monnethes The hearing of a Mass
hou well worth a hundred marks.
imprisonment, but also of an hundrede thousand lives, if a man could loose
every one for that cause six times. And an hundred times miserable is that
man, which for any worldly respect does depryue hlm self of so great a
benifite, as the participation of this sacrifice is. Secondlye, they loose by
goeynge to The loss of ye grace of 6. Sa crame^ts what a loss.
Church, the fruit and grace of six Sacraments: as the grace of Confirmation
by the Bishop, whereby the Holy Ghost was geeuen in the Prymatyue Church,
(as Saint Luke says) and now in our time, Act. 8. and 19
as Saint Cypryan proves, are bestowed upon us by the same, the seven gifts
of the holy Ghost. Set out by Esaye the Prophet in his eleuenthe Cypr. li. de
vnct. chris. Esa: 11:
chapter. They loose also the grace of Preisthood, so greatly commended by S.
Paul to Tymothye, when he charge him so earnestlye, 2. Timo. 1.
not to neglect the said grace. Also the grace of Matrimony, which S. Paul so
much extolleth, when he calls Ephesians. 5.
this sacrament, a great sacrament. Also the grace of extreme Unction, which is
so great, as S. James says, besides the healing many times of Iaco. 5.
the body, it also remitteth the sick man's sins: And so in like manner the
grace of the other two sacraments, of Penance, and the Altar, whereof I will
say a word or two immediately. Al these graces they loose, being cut of (by
their going to the Protestants churches) from these sacraments, which are
nothing else, but co^duits of grace. The which loss, of what value it is, a
man may guess by that, which al deuines The value of grace.
with on accord do prove, yt on drop of grace is more worth, then al ye
world esteemed in it self besides. Thirdly, they loose by going to church all the benifit of yt keys of the church, What the be nefyte of the keys of the
Church is.
or of the auctority of binding and loosing of sins, granted by Christ to yt
governors of the same Church. For the explication of the which, we must
understand, that Christ having newlye made the marriage betweext his dear
spouse and him self, (I mean the Church): and having now sealed the same,
with his own blood: and being enforced to depart from the said new married
spouse of his, towching his visible presence for a time: he devised how to show
unto her, how greatly he loved her, and to leave some notable pledge and
testimony of his singular great affection toward her. The which he finally
resolved, could be by noe other means better expressed, then if he should
leave al his authority with her, the which he had received of his Father,
with making publyque proclamation to all the world, that What so ever she
should forgive in earth, towchyng sin, the same should be forgeuen in
heaven: (...). 20.
and what soever sin, the Church A proclamation of the tribunal for sin in
earth.
should retain or not forgive in earth the same should never be forgeuen in
heaven. And again: that with what authority God his Father sent him, Joan. 6.
with the same he sent her governors, Mat. 18.
the Apostles, and their successors. And again: he that should not here Aug.
ho. 49 et 50. and ho 41. ibid.
and obey the Church, should be accounted as a heathen and publicane. By the
which speeches of Christ, our Cip. li. 1. ep. 2:
fore fathers have always understood, that Christ gave unto the Amb. lib. 1.
ca. 2. de Pae. and in psa. 38 Atha. sermon. cont. her.
Church a visible tribunal seat in earth, for the forgeuing or retayning of
sins, unto the which al Christians must resort by submission and humble
confession of their sins, if Chris. lib. 3 de sacer.
they think ever to receive forgeuenes of the same at Christ's his hands Hill.
in ca. 18 Mat.
in heaven. For so we read, that in the primative Church they confessed Hie.
in cap 18. Mat.
their sins unto the Apostels: of whom saint Luke writes thus. Many of the
faithful came (to the Actor. 19.
Apostles) confessing and reueling their own acts. And three hundred years
after that, S. Austen testefieth of his time, saying. Do you such Aug. hom.
41. 49. 50. cap. 10. 11. 16 ex 50. hom.
penance, as is wont to be done in the Church, that the Church may pray for
you. Let no man say, I do it secretly, I do it with God alone, God which
has to pardon me, knows well how that I do repent in my heart. What therefore,
with out cause was it said (to the Priests) that which Joan. 20.
you loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven? therefore in vain were the Aug.
li. 2. de Visita. infir. cap. 4.
keys given to the Church? And in an other place again more neerlye touching
the humor of our men now a days, he says. There are some which think it
sufficient for their salvation, if they do confess their sins only to God,
to whom nothing is hidden, and to whom no man's conscience is unknown. For they
will not, or else they are ashamed, or else they disdain, to show them selves
unto the Priests, whom not withstanding God (by Moses his lawegeuer) did
apoint to discern or judge between leprye, and leprye. But I Leu. 13. 14.
would not that thou should be deceived, The necessity of Confession.
with that opinion, in such fort, that thou should either by noughty shame,
or obstinate disdain, refrain to confess, before the substitute, or
Vicegerent of our Lord. For, whom our Lord did not disdain to make his
substiute, his judgment must thou be content also to stand to. This benifit
therefore of the keys of the Church, and of receiving remission of their
sins by the same, (which Catholics do think to be the greatest benifit
of their religion) do they loose, that go to the Protestants Churches, besides
all the good instructions, wholesome councels, and virtuous admonitions, which
Catholics do receive in confession, at their ghostly fathers hands, then the
which things, they find nothing more forcible to bring them to good life:
especially, if they frequente it often, as all (...) Catholics in the world
now do.

Fourthlye, they loose the infinite The loss of not receiving the blessed Sa
crament.
benefit of receuing the blessed sacrament of the altar, (the precious Body
and Blood of Christ) being the food of our souls, and as Christ says. The
bread that came down from heaven to give life unto the world: To Joan. 6.
the worthy eating of which heavenly bread, Christ promises infinite reward,
saying. He that eats my flesh Ibidem.
and drincketh my blood, has life everlasting, and I will raise him again at
the last day. And again: He that Vide Ciril. lib. 3. in Joan. cap. 37.
eats me, shall live through me. Upon which promises of Christ, our forfathers
of the Primative church, have Basil. ad Ce sar. patric.
always most earnestlye exhorted al men, to the often receauinge of this Amb.
lib. 5. de Sacra, ca. 4.
blessed sacrament, alleging innumerable commodities of ye same, and proving
by experience, that the freque^ting Chris. hom. 61. ad. pop. Antioch.
of this Sacrament, is the cheefeste means to come to al grace, zeal,
feelinge, and life in spiritual matters. And on the contrary part, that the
abstayninge from the same, is the right way to al spiritual miserye, and for
the soul of man to wyther away, dry up, and starve: even as the plant does,
that lacks moisture. The which we see now by experience, in many a
thousand, who for lack of the food, of this blessed Fountain of grace, are
as dead, in all spiritual cogitations, and deeds, as a starued stake in the
hadge, from bearing of flowers: and their minds so ouergrowen, The state of a
carnal man.
with the rank weeds of Carnalitye, that there is noe difference betwixt
them, and a brute bullock: for, as much the one follows his passions, as the
other. Whereby we see, what a loss it is, to depryue them selves from the use
of this Sacrament. The loss of al merit for good works.


Fiftlye, they loose all the merit of their good deeds what soever. For as Mat.
20.
S. Gregory says, Even as, none received Greg. li. 35.
their penny in the Gospel, but they only which had labored within Mor. ca. 5.
the compass of the Vineyarde: so no man shall receive any reward, for any
good deed of his, except he have done it, within the unity of the Church. So
that, if a man should do never so many good deeds, give never Cip. de sim.
prel.
so many alms, nay, as S. Cyprian proves, if a man should suffer never so
many things for Christ, yea death Chri. ho. 11. ad. Ephesians.
it self, yet if he were out of the unity of the Catholic Church, he shall
have no reward therefore. And not only this, but if a man be in any mortal
Vi, D. Tho 1. 2. and o^es DD. 15. qu. 119.
sin what soever, as long as he abides in the same without repentance, and
confession, al deuines hold, that he loses the reward of al his good
deeds. And the reason is, because noe work can be meritorious of it self,
but only by reason of the grace from whence it proceeds: but by every mortal
sin which a man commits, he losseth grace, and much more by goeinge out of
the unity of the Church. And therefore, in such men until they repent, there
can be noe hope of any reward, for any good work which they shall do.

Sixthely, they lose the benefit of The loss of the communi on of Saints.
Communion of Saints, which we protest to believe in our Creed. That is, they
have no part of the Sacrifices, oblations, prayers, fastinges, alms, and
other good woorks, done within the Catholic Church, which all other
Catholics have. Finallye, they being cut of, and divided from the unity of
the other members, they Note this simi litude.
take part of no influence, which comes from the head to the body, that
is, from Christ to the Church: no more, then a man's hand once cut of, does
take blood, norishment, spirit, or life, from the arm, from which it is now
separated, as most learnedly Aug. epist 50. ad Boni facium.
S. Austen does discourse. Wherefore they must needs wither away, and make
dry wood for hell fire: and as good for them it were, in effect, to be of any
other relygion, as of that, whereof they take not one jot of commoditye. And
to all these myseries they are driven, only by going to the protestants
Churches.

THE Nynthe Reason.
THE Nynthe Reason which Example of In fidels and heri tikes.
Catholics may yield, for their refusal of going to the Church, may be, the
example of all men, from the beginning, which have had any care or Conscience
toward their own religion: not only good men, (of whom I have given diverse
examples before) but also al others, how false and erroneous soever their
religion were, yet did they always procure to separate them selves, from them
of the contrary religion, in the act of prayer: and from the Templs,
Sinagogues, Churches, Dratories, and conuenticles Lact. li. 4. and 5. diu.
inst. Cur. Sec. de. hist. Maho. Chro. Wolfan. Drisl.
of (...) same. So we read of the Gentiles which thought it to be a great
sin and polution, to enter into the Jews Synagogues, or Christians Chnrches.
The like we read also, of the Turks at this day. So al heretics from the
beginning, as soon as they had framed any new relygion: eftsons they erected
new oratories to them selves, and refused to come to those of other relygions,
as the Arians, Denatists, and the rest, had their Churches and places of prayer
dstincte from the Catholics, whose Churches they Eus. lib. 3. and 4.
detested and avoided, together with their doctrine. And so the Anabaptists
Aug. lib. de Unit. Eccle. and lib2. co^tr. Petil.
at this day, refuse to go to the Lutherans Church, and the Lutherans to the
Trinitaries. In like wise the Puritans of our time in England refuse to come to
the Protestants churches. And the Protestants in oother countries, do utterly
deny to present them selves to Catholic The Protestan tes are Recu santes
also in other contres.
Churches: alleginge their consciencs for the same, and affirming it to be
danmable hypocrisy, in them that for fear, or for any other temporal repect,
do yield to do the same against their faith and conscience. Whereby it
apeareth, that they go quit against their own docttrine and example in
England, which object the same to Catholics as disobedience, obstinacy, and
rebellious dealing, which in other countries they them selves both teach and
practice. I will for mor manifestation of this matter, put down here the very
words of one An. Dom. 1578.
of them, translated out of french, and printed in England and dedicated to yt
Lord Tresurour, by John Brook. the authors name is John Gardener, a
Protestant, who in his Cathechisme, or, as he calls it, Confession of Art.
86.
his faith, makes it a great heinous sin, for Protestants to present the^
selves to our Catholic Churches, which he (according to their blasphemous
spirit,) calls, idolatrous. His words are these.

I believe and confess, that it is not lawful, for any Christian, to be
assistant, nether in spirit nor body, at the Sacrifices of idolatours, nor also
to enter into their Temples, whilst they are doing their idolatries and
Sacrifices, except it be to rebuke them, in shewinge them their abuses, and to
teach them the truth, as the holy Apostles and Prophets have done, and not for
to dissemble as hipocrites. For if the body be a creature of God, (as it is) as
the soul is the temple of the holy Ghost, and member of the mistical body of
Christ: and if it must one day rise again, and possess the eternal life with
the soul: It must also necessarily be, that it be altogether given unto the
service of God, in this world, with the soul and spirit: otherwise they can
not be joined together after the general resurrection: but being separated, the
one should be in heaven with God, whom he loved, and the other in hell, with the
devil whom he served, the which is an impossible thing. Therefore I say, al
those dissimulations to be a very renouncinge of Christ, and of his Ghospel.
And in like manner: I believe and confess, that all those feigned and false
shows, by which, the veritye of the Ghospel is hidden, and the word of God
despised, or by which, the ignorant and infidel is confirmed in his error, or
by which the weak is offended, are not of God, but of Satan, altogether
contrary unto the truth of the word. Therefore, we must not halt of both
sides, but go vpryghtlye before that great God, which seethe, behouldeth, and
knows, all things, even before they are begone.

Loeheere, We see the sentence of their Doctors to the contrary, who press
us so much to go to their Churches, against our consciences. If error find
such zeal, what zeal ought truth to have? If these fellows, each of them,
for the defense of their pryuate fond fancies, be content most willyngelye, to
adventure any danger or extremity what so ever, rather then to come to the
true Catholic Church, wherein they were borne, and to the which in Baptism
they swore obedience: why should such blame be laid upon us, for standing in
defense of our consciences, We, not born nor bred up in the Protest ants
church.
and for refusinge to go to their churches, wherein we were nether borne nor
bred up, nor ever persuaded, that they had any truth, or holiness in them? This
reason only, may suffice any reasonable man, especially the Protestant, except
he will mislike with his own doctrine, which condemns me of hypocrisy,
dissimulation, and renouncinge of Christ, and his Gospel, If I present but my
only body, to the churches of them, whose religion I am not persuaded to be
true. The which saying of his in a sense, has good reason: albeit the words
and meaning be wicked. For One only Re ligion true and al other false.
if there be no man, either so foolish, or impious in the world, but must needs
think that one only religion amongst Christians, is true, and al other
false: And if every man which has any religion, and is resolved therein,
must needs presuppose this only truth, to be in his own religion: then it
follows necessarily, that he must likewise persuade him self, that all other
religions besides his own, are false and erroneous, and consequently al
assemblies, conuenticles, and public acts of the same, to be wicked,
damnable, dishonorable to God, contumelious to Christ, and therefore to his
conscience (which thinks so) detestable. Now then suppose the case thus. Note
this case


I know in England certain places, where, at certain times and days,
assemblies are made, by certain men, in show, to honor and commend, but in
my conceate, to dishonor, dispraise, and impugn, the majesty of my most dread
sovereign Lady the Queen: And I am invited thither to hear the same, by my
parents, kinsmen, and acquaintance: nay, I am enforced thither by the greatest
authority, that under her majesty may command me: Tell me now: If I should
go thither under any pretense whatsoever, of gratefiinge my friends, or by
commandment of any her inferior powers: can her Majesty take it well, or
accounte of me, better then of a traiterous catyue, for yelding my self, to
stay there, to hear them: to countenance their doings with my presence: to
hold my peace when they speak evil of her: to hold my hands whiles they
slander her: and finallye, to say nothing whiles they induce other men to
forsake her, and A Very certain consequente.
her cause? And if her Majesty, or any other Prince in the World, could not
bear at their subjects hands, any such dissimulation, trecherye, or
treason: how much less shall the omnipotent Majesty of God, (who requires,
and deserves, much more exact service at our hands,) bear this
dissimulation, and traiterous dealing of ours, if we be content, for temporal
respects, and for satisfaction of any mortal power, less then him self, to
present our selves to such places and assemblies, where we shall hear his
Majesty dishonored, his Son sla^dered, The things that a man must hear at
Church.
his holy Word falsified, his Church impugned, his Saints and Martirs
discredited, his Byshopes and Pastors reuyled: and all the whole
Ecclesiastical Ierarchye rent, broken, disseuered, and turned vpsydowne: and
his people (purchased with his Blood, and dearer unto him, then his own life,)
excited and sturred up against him and his ministers: and by sweet words, and
gaye benedictio^s, slocked away to the slaughter Romans 16.
house of heresy?

What Noble man is there in the world, which could take it well, if he should
see his friend, and muchmore his Son, in the company of his professed
enemy, at such time A Very fit comparison.
principallye, as he knows, that his enemy abuses him in speech, and
seeks most, his discredit and dishonor: but especially, if he should see
him come in open assemblye of the world, to the bar, against him, in
company with his adversary, when his said adversary comes of set purpose
to deface him, (as heretics do to their churches and pulpets to dishonor
God,) I think (I say) he could hardly bear it. And shall such disdain be
taken by a mortal man, for a little injury and discurtesie showed: and shall not
the justice of God, be revenged upon our treachery and dissimulation in his
cause?

If I give my servant but forty An example to confound us.
shillinges a year, yet, I think him bound to defend me in all points and
causes, to be frind to my frindes, enemy to my adversaries, to vphoulde my
credit, maintayn my honor, to resift my detractors, and to revenge him self
upon my euilwillers: and if he can be content to hold his peace hearing me
evil spoken of, and to put up my flander without opening his mouth: I will
account him unworthy to wear my clothe: how much more inexcusable shall we be,
at the dreadful day of Indgment, if The great pay in God his set uice.
we, receiving at our Lord and masters hands, such extraordinary pay for our
service in this life, and expecting further and above this, all that himself
is worth, for the eternity of the life to come: his kingdom, his glory, and
his everlasting joy, with his riches and tresures unspeakable, which nether
ear ever heard, nor 1. Cor. 2.
eye saw, nor heart of man conceived, how great they are: how scusles (I say)
shall we be, at that terrible rekoning day, and how confounded, by the examples
of servants in this life, (so zealous for their masters, upon so small wages)
if we, notwith standing al our rewards both present and to come, shall be yet
key could in our master his service, present at his injuries, and silent at
his slanders?

Nether suffices it to say, that An answer to an objection.
these suppositions are false, and that there are not such things committed
against God, at the Protestants Churches and services: for howsoever that be
(whereof I dispute not now) yet I being in my heart of an other religion, must
needs think not only them, but also al other religions whatsoever to commit
the same, as I know, they do also think of mine. Wherefore, how good and holy
souer they were, yea if they were Angels, yet should I be condemned for going
amongst them: for that in my sight, judgment, and Conscience, (by which only
I must be judged) they must needs seem enemies to God, being of the contrary
religion. By this it may appear, how grievously Heinous sin to enforce an other
man to do against his conscience.
they sin daily in England, and cause other to sin with them, which compel
men by terror, to do acts of religion against their Consciences: as to take
oaths, receive Sacraments, go to Churches, and the like: which being done, (as
I have said) with repugnant Consciences, is horible mortal sin, (as has
been alredye proved) and conseqently, damnable both to the doers, and to the
enforcers thereof. The which, I beseech God to give his grace, both to the one
and the other part, dutifully to consider: that either these may leave of to
enforce, or those learn to sustain, as they ought, their enforsment. And thus
now we may see what great and waightye Reasons yt Catholics have, to lay for
their refusal of coming to the Churches of Protestants. The which if they were
well conceived by the Prince, and Magistrates, it is not likly, that they would
press them to the yelding to such inco^ueniences against the health of their
own souls: but if they should, yet ought the other, to bear any pressure
whatsoever, rather then to fall into far worse dangers. And of this that I
have said here before, there may be gathered these conclusions following, not
vnnecessarye to be noted, for better perspicuities sake, to the unlearned.

First, it follows of the premises, The first Con clusion.
that this goeing to the Protestants Churches, is forbidden not only by the
positive laws of the Church, dispensable by the Church again: but also by
Gods law, and the law of Nature, as the consideration of most of the reasons,
does declare. For albeit, it be prohibited by the Church, yet not only by
the Church: saying that a thing may be prohibited by the Canons of the Church
(for more plain explycations sake,) which was forbiden before by the law both
of nature and of God also: as Aoulterye, Uiolence, Simonie, and the like. Even
so, albeit going to heretical asse^blies be prohibyted by the Church: yet
because it has in it, or necessarily (...) to it, diverse things which are
prohibited by the law of God and Nature, (as peril of infection, Scandal,
denying of our faith when it is made a sign distinctiue, or commandment,
dissemblinge in Gods cause, honoring Gods enemies, dishonouring the Catholic
Church, and the like,) therefore, the whole act of going to Church, is said to
be prohibited also. Iure diuino, et naturali. That is, by the law of God and
Nature. And her of it follows, that no A notable de uise.
power upon earth can dispense with the same. Wherefore, that which has been
given out (as is said by some great men) that the Pope by his letters to her
Majesty, did offer to confirm the service of England, upon condition that
the title of Supremacy might be restored him again, is impossible to be so:
so that, if any such letters came to her Majesty's hands, they must needs
be feigned and false.

Secondly, it follows of the premises, The 2. Conclusion.
yt this going to Church is not only unlawful, Ratione Scandali. by reason of
Scandal, (as some will have it.) For albeit Scandal be one reason, why it is
unlawful, and that in such sort, as is almost impossible to be avoided: yet you
see, that I have given diverse other causes besides Scandal, which make it
unlawful. Whereof it follows, that a man cannot go to their Churches, albeit
he might go in such secret manner, or otherwise have their service in his
house so priuelye, as no Scandal should follow thereof, or any man know
thereof, (which is notwithstanding impossible to do) but if it could be, yet
were the thing unlawful, especially for the. 1. 4. 5. 6. 7. reasons before
alleged.

Thirdely it follows, that a The 3. Conclusion.
man may not go to Church under any vain pretense, as pretending that he
goes only for obedience, and not for any lyking he has to their service:
yea, although he should proteste the same openly. For that protestation should
rather agrauate then diminishe the sin. Seeing by this protestation, he
should testify unto the whole world, that he did a thing against his
Conscience. As if a man should proteste, that he did think A protestation will
not serve.
that to rail against the Pope, at Pouls Cross, were naught, and yet for
obedience sake, (being so commanded) would do it. The which was Pilates
case, who protested first, that he thought Christ Math. 27.
innocent, and therefore sought to deliver him: but in the end (fearing Pilates
Case
the displeasure of the Jews, and their complaynte to the Emperor) washed his
hands, and so condemned him: thinking by that protestation to have washed of
the sin, and to have laid it on the Jews necks, which compelled him thereto.
But (I think) by this time he has felt, that he was deceived. For when a thing
in it self is naught, noe protestation can make it lawful, but rather makes
the doing of it a greter offense, by adding to the unlawfulness of the Mark
this ob iection, (...) going to the material Church.
thing the repugna^ce of the doers conscience. But you will perhapes say: to
go to the material Church, is not a thing evil of it self. I answer and that
it is true. But you must not single out the matter so. For in this How many
things contay ned in goinge to Church.
one action of goeing to Church, there be many things contained, whereof the
whole action is compounded. As for example, there is the material Church: the
possession of the same by the enemy of the Catholic religion: the service
and sermons in reproof of the same religion: the days and hours appointed
for the same: the bell ringing and publicly calling al men thither: the Princes
commandment for the Catholics to go to the same: the end of the
commandment in general, that they, by goeing, should pray with them, allow of
their service, and by their presence honor it. Then is there the peril of
infection: the scandale whereby I offend other men's consciences: and perhaps
bring diverse others to be corrupted by my means: the dishonoring of God his
cause: the honoringe of his enemies cause: hearing God blasphemed, and houlding
my peace: Semblably there is the conscience of the Catholic, that thinks he
does naught: the explication of the Church, that it is not lawful: the matter
now in trial: and the unlawfulness of it, defended both by word and wrytinges
of learned men, and by imprisonment of many other: the controversy now known
to all the world, and many thousand men's eyes fixed upon them, that are called
in question for it: the Protestant, whereas he esteemed nothing of goeing to
Church before, yet now so desirous to obtain it, that he thincketh the
yelding in that one point, to be a sufficient yelding to al his desirs: the
which thing on the other side, is so detested of the true Catholics, that,
who so ever yeldeth to this, they think him a flat Scismatycke, and so
abhor him. And by this means the matter is made a sign distinctiue betwixt
religion and religion: whereof agiane it follows, that if the thing were much
less then it is, (as for example, the houldinge up of a finger) yet because it
is made, Tessera, a mark, token, or sign, of yelding to their proceedings in
religion, it were utterly unlawful. As if a man should but lift up a straw to
the devil, in token of obedience, it were as much, as if he did, word by
word, deny his Creed. These points, and many more that might be thought of,
being put together, and one entyer action made of them, the question is,
whether this entyre action of goeinge to Church, with these anneres, be of it
self unlawful or (...) and every wise man will think it is. Nether, if you
could by some devise, pluck from this actio^ one or two of these things, must
we think that by and by the action were lawful. As for example, if by a
protestation you could signify that your mind were not in goeinge thither, to
consent to their service: as also, that the Princess mind to you in
particular, were only that you should go for temporal obedience sake, yet
were not by this all the matter amended. For if a piece of meat were venomous
for ten causes concurringe together, if you should take away two of them, and
so eat it, you might for all yt be poisoned therewith.

One only thing there is, which as In what sort a man may go to Church, with
4. qualifications.
the Deuines judge, might make going to Church lawful: which is, if a man did
go thither for some mere, partyculer, known, temporal business: as to bear
the sword before the Prince to the chapel: to consult of matters of war at
Poules by the Princess appoi tme^t: albeit it were in the time of service, and
the like. But here is to be noted, that I say first, for The 1. Qualification.
mere temporal business. For if a man should go partly for service, and partly
for temporal business, as to talk with yt church warde^s in yt Church after
service, it will not serve. Secondly I say: The 2. Qualification.
for particular temporal business. For it is not enough for ye Prince to say in
general I will have you go only for obedience, which is a temporal respect,
without assigning any particular business to be done. For that was the saying of
al Princes to the Martyrs in the Primative Church, that they would have them
conform themselves in exterious actions, to other men: and that for obedience
sake, how soever they meant inwardly. Thirdly I say, for some known The 3.
Quali fication.
business: For if the business were not known, men might think that they went
of conscience to service: and therefore to take away this scandale, they ought
to protest, for what business they go. To these three qualifications, add this
fourth, which is, The 4. Quali fication.
that a man that should thus go, might not give any sign of reverence or
honor to their service: as by kneeling, putting of his hat, or the like, more
then he would do, if the service were not there. And that it is lawful to go
to any Church of theirs observing these four points, it is evident. For this
is as much to say, as not to go to Church at al: Seeing he goes in this
case, to their mere material Church, that is, to that material house or
buyldinge, which is their Church: nether goes he to it as to a Church, but as
to a house to do his business in. And this was the case 4. Reg. 5.
of Naaman the Syrian, who being upon a sudden converted from Idolatrye, The
case of Naaman Sy rus
promised, that he would never sacrifise or offer more to Idols: how beit,
because his office was to stay up the King of Syria with his hands, when he
went to adore the Idols in the temple Remnon, and because he could not do
that, except he bowed himself down, when the King bowed down, who used to
lean upon him: for this cause he desired the Prophet Elizeus, to pray to God
for him, that it might be pardoned him: and the Prophet answered him, Depart in
peace. Which words can importe noe more, but a grantinge to his request: which
was, to pray to God that he would pardon him, if he went so to Church: or at
the uttermost (as some will enforce it) a tolleration with him, being yet a
Proselite or a new gotten man, to do this temporal service unto his King: (for
he went not upon commandment to show his religion as our men do)
especially, it being in such a country, as noe scandale could follow thereof.
And that many things are tolerated with nouices, which afterward are taken
away, it appears by S. Paul, who circumsised Timothye for satisfiynge the
weak Jews, and yet afterward he condemned in all men al circumsision. Nether
makes it any matter although he say. Si adorauero in templo Remnon, adorante
rege in eodem loco, vt ignoscat mihi Dominus pro hac re. That is. If I shall
adore in the temple Remnon, when the King does adore in the same place, that
God will pardon me for this thing. As though he should ask pardon for to adore
the Adoring is ta ken in ye Scrip ture for bowing down.
Idols with the King. This kind of speech (I say) imports nothing. For
nether does he ask pardon to commit Idolatrye thereby, seeinge immediatelye
before he said, that he would never commit it more:) nor if he had asked
such leave, could the Prophet have lycensed him, or would God have pardoned
hem: But his meaning was only, to have pardon for his seruinge the King in
that place, and bowinge down with him, for the better staying of him up, when
he did adore. For the same word which we translate here adore, does both in
Hebrewe, Breeke, and Latin, n^gnifie often times only bowinge down, without
any Genesis 32.
deuyne adoration. As when Iacobe addored his brother Esawe seven times, that
is, bowed down to him seven times. And David adored Ionathas 1. Reg. 20.
King Saul his son three times. Abigaile also adored David 1. Reg. 25.
twyse. And the like in other places of Scripture, where adoringe, is taken for
bowynge down only, without any divine adoration at al, as here it is in
this place.

Fourthely and lastly, it follows The 4, Conclusion.
of that which is spoken before, that seeing this going to Church is so
forbidden by Gods law, as it is, and has so many great inconveniences in it
as has been showed: that a man may not yield in any one little point in the
same: as for example, to come to Church once a year, to have service in his
house, to show him self present at a piece of service, or the like. For most
certain it is, that if all be not lawful, then noe part of it, is lawful. And
Christ says, that he will not have one jot of his law Mat. 5.
to be paste over vnkepte: and who soever shall break one of the least of his
commandementes, shall have least part in the kingdom of heaven. The which
words of Christ, Saint James explicating, says. He that Jacob. 2.
keeps all the whole law, and does offend but in one thing only, yet is he
guilty in all the rest. And Christ him Apoc. 2.
self in the Apocalipes commends much the Angel of Ephesus, for his good
works, labor, patience, and for many things besides, there recited: but
yet, for being imperfect in some things, (contrary to the will of Math. 5.
Christ which would have us perfect,) he is commanded to repent quickly, under
the pain of leesing his candelsticke, that is, of leesing his vocation, and
his place in the book of life: so God will have us parfit.
unspotted will God have our service to be. In prefiguration whereof, al
Sacrifices of the old Testament, Leui. 3.
were commanded to be of unspotted Number. 28.
creatures, of one color, of one age, Ezeh. 43.
without maime or deformity, whereby is signified, that God accepts no
partition, no maime in our service, but either al or none must be his. For 1.
Cor. 5.
a little leven sowreth a great deal of dowe, and a small spott dissigureth a
fair garment. Which S. Paul urges far, by the example of Christ, when he
says. That Christ dyed for Colos. 1.
us, to thend we should exhibit our sell ues holy and unspotted, and
irreprehensible in his sight. As though he should say: Christ spared nothing,
no not his own life for us, that by his example we might be provoked to give
our selves wholye to him and his service, without limitation or reservation at
all, and thereby show our selves unspotted servants and irreprehensible.
Which thing the Noble champion of Christ S. Basile The noble co rage of Saint
Basile.
well considered, when being required by the Emperors leefetenaunt, to
conform him self in some small Theod. li. 4 capit. 17.
things to the Emperors request, and thereby purchase quietness to the whole
Church, rather then by obstinacy (as he termed it) to exasperats things
worse: he answered, that persuasion to be fit for children and not for him:
who was redye to suffer any kind of death or torment rather then to betraye
any one syllable of Gods divine truth: adding further, that he esteemed much
and desired the Emperors frendshipe if it might be joined with godlynes, but
if not, he must needs contemn it, as pernicious. So resolute servants had
God in those days, and the like desires to have now.

Hereof also follows an other We may not procute others to say falslye for
us.
thing which I had almost passed over untouched, that a Catholic, may not
procure any other to affirm or swear for him falsely, that he has been at
Church, received the Communion, or the like: nor accept the same, if any would
offer such service: but if others did it, without his procurement, he may
hold his peace, and use their sin to his own quietness, except Scandale
should ensewe thereof, and then were he bound to disclose the truth. For as I
have noted before, out of S. Ciprian, In Ep. cler. romans apud. Cyp. epi. 31.
he which seeks (...) in excuse of his faith denies the same, and the
seeming to obey laws, made and published against true religion, is taken by
God for obeying in deed, and so punished for the fact it self. The which
most worthy and excellent saying of Christ his holy martyr God grant we may
all well bear in mind, and execute, as Gods cause and glory shall require:
especially those, which are by peculier prerogative, called to the public
trial of the same. Whom God of his mercy so strengthen with his grace, as
his holy name may be gloryfied in them, and their persecutours molyfied, by
their constant, mild, and sober behavior.

And thus (my dear good friend) The conclusion of this first part.
I make an end of the first point, which I promised to handle, concerning the
reasons which Catholics have, to stand in the refusal, of going to the Church
against their Consciences: having said much less, then might be said in this
matter, and yet more, then I purposed at the beginning. But I am to crave most
earnestlye at your hands, and of all them that shall chance to see this
Treatise, to have charitable consideration of my great haste in writing of the
same, which was such, as I had not time to suruew, or read any part of it,
over again. Wherefore, if any thing be in it, whereby you may be edefied, or
any way instructed: I am glad, and to Gods glory only be it. If not, yet
surely my The first part of the authors meaning.
meaning was good, and to no man's offense: only coveting herby, to give some
satisfaction to them in England, especially to her Majesty and the right
honorable her Counsel, touching the principles which Catholics have, to
refuse that confor mitie, which is demanded at their hands, the which as I
have proved they can not admit, (remaining in Conscience of the contrary
relygion) without evident danger of their own Souls. Whereof, if her Majesty,
and there Honors may in time be made capable: the^ howsoever things pass
otherwise, yet shall Catholics retain still, their deserved opinion, of
honest and true subjects, which they most desire, and the displeasure taken
against them, for this refusal, be deminished, when it shall be manifest, that
the same proceeds not of will, but of conscience, and judgment in religion,
which is not in an honest man's hands to frame at his own pleasure.

Moreover, my meaning was to give some information, towchinge The second part
of the au thors mening.
the quality of this sin of goinge to the Church of a contrary religion,
and his circumstances, for them, that either remained doubtful in the same, or
not rightelye persuaded. Of the which two effects, if any one follow, I shall be
most glad: if not, yet I serve (as I trust) such a master, as rewards the
affecte, as well as the effect, and the will, noe less then the work it self.
Wherefore, to his holy hands I commit the whole: assuringe my self, that, as
this cause of his Catholic Church, importethe him more, then it does us: so
his peculier care of the same, furre surmounteth any care of man, and therefore
what soever shall become of this, or any other labor taken for the same: yet
he will never cease to raise up men, for the defense of it, against all
enemies to the worlds end.

To the Reader towchinge the omission of the Second and Third Part promised
at the beginning.
THE writer of this Treatise, having ended this first part and being well
entered into the second, was partlye by evil disposition of body, and partlye
by other sudden business falling upon him, enforced to leave the place, wherein
he wrote this. Whereupon the messager hastinge away into England, and the
other not able, as be desired, so spedely to dispatche him with the whole: was
content to impart to him, for his friend, this which he had ended, promising
hereafter, (if his health and leisure should permit him) to finish also the
other two parts and in the one of them, to show, how The contents of the 2.
part of this Tretise promised.
the only way, which Catholics have of remedy or easement in these their
afflictions, is instant and fervent prayer to almightye God, and humble
recourse unto the good nature mercy, and wisdom, of the Queens most
excellent majesty: confutinge, and utterly condemning the custom Luther. in
asserti. art. dam. in Bull. Leon. 10. and Wiklif. Co^. Constant. Sess. 8. and
li. 4. trialo. ca. (...). Calvin. 4. inst. ca. (...).. 5.
of al Heretics, and sectaries of our time, which in every country, where
they are contraried, seek to disturb, and molest by rebellion, their Lords
and Princes, teaching the same to be lawful: the one of them saying: That
Christians are bound to noe Princes laws, and therefore it is lawful for the
subjects to rise against there Princes, and punish them at their pleasure if
they rule amiss: and the other, that how soever the Prince rules well or evil,
yet his laws bynd not the subjects to obey in conscience, but only for fear
of temporal punishment: so that, if the subject were of abilitye to resist his
Prince, he might without sin do the same. Which erroneous and seditious
doctrines, the Catholic Church, has alwyaes condemned, Vrde D.
and taught her children, that Tho. 2. (...) q. 90. and o^m. doct. ibid.
how hardly so ever there Prince should deal with them: yet are they bound to
bear it patiently, and to obey him Au. in psalm. 70. Chri. and Amb. in ca. 13.
ad Romans
for conscience sake, as substitute of God, and placed in that rowine for their
punishment if he rule not well, which appartayneth not to the subject to judge
of. This (I say) is the doctrine of the Catholic Church, and has been
always. And therefore to this point means the autour of this Treatise, to
exhort Catholics in England, and to make humble supplication to there
sovereign Lady and Princess, for some more favorable tolleration with them
for there consciences. For the better obtayninge whereof, he means to lay down
certain reasons, or motives, whereby her Majesty may be the sooner induced,
both in respect of God, her self, and her whole Realm, to grant the same.

But notwithstanding, because The contents of the third part of this Treatise
promsed.
Princes hearts are peculierly in the hands of God, and the euentes of such
matters as this is, depend altogether of his high providence, which oftene
times, for a better end, disposes otherwise, then our hope or expectation is:
therefore, if either by this holy providence of God, (for causes best known to
him self,) or by the subtlety of the adversary, there should not follow from
her Majesty that effect of mercy and clemency, which we have great cause to
hope there will: yet I say, in that case, not to leave Catholics altogether
desolate or comfortles, he promises to handle in the other part, certain
considerations, whereby they may be relieved, a midst their gretest miseryes,
and be encoraged also, to bear patiently, and with contentation, or rather
with joy and consolation, what so ever pressure shall be laid upon them, for
Christ, and this his Catholic cause: shewinge unto them, what great priuelege
and prerogative, they have in the love of Christ, in that they are admitted to
suffer with him, in this his glorious cause, for the which he suffered him
self, and for the mayntenance whereof, he cease not to have everlasting
care, and perpetual cogitation: and consequentlye, can not but most louinglye
assist them, with his holy grace, and sweet comfort, which endure adversity
for the same: as he has both promised and sworn to do, and has not failed
to perform his promise, with ouerplussage, to al those, yt ever have suffered
for that quarrel: strengthening them, for ye present short time, and soon
after, to ye co^fusio^ of there enemies, reco^pensing there labors, with
everlasting glory, both in this life, and in ye life to come. In hope of which
reward, (from which no aduersitye can bar us long) he means to exhort all
Catholics, quietly and with patience, to repose them selves, and to bear out
with Christian courage, what tempests soever shall storm upon them: assuring
them that this is the best and only way, to please God, and to save their
own Souls: to advance also, the Catholic faith, and to molyfie or confound
their enemies and detractours: and finallye to move the great goodness of God,
for the inspiration of her Majesty when time shall be, to deal more fauorablye
with them, and to have some more mild and merciful consideration, of so many
thousands of her true, louinge, and obedient subjects.

FINIS.

